Geography Rectified: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD, In all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes,
Ports; Their Ancient and Present Names, Inhabitants, Situations, Histories,
Customs, Governments, etc.

As also their Commodities, Coins, Weights, and Measures, Compared with those
at LONDON.

Illustrated with Seventy six MAPS.

The Second Edition, Enlarged with above Thirty Sheets more in the Description,
and about Twenty New MAPS.

The whole Work performed according to the more Accurate Observations and
Discoveries of Modern Authors.

By ROBERT MORDEN.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Morden and Thomas Cockerill, at the Atlas in
Cornhill, and at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, over against the
Stocks-Market. MDCLXXXVIII.

E. A. Rouse.

EASTWAY.

A Catalogue of the Maps in this Book.
1 WOrld. Fol. 2 EVROPE 10 3 England, Scotland, and Ireland 14 4 England 17 5
Wales 26 6 Scotland 30 7 Ireland 36 8 Denmark 42 9 Sweden and Norway 54 10
Muscovia, etc. 60 11 Poland 68 12 Tartary in Europe 76 13 Moldavia, Valachia,
Transylvania 81 14 Hungaria 85 15 Germany 99 16 The United Provinces 140 17 The
Spanish Provinces 148 18 France 156 19 Spain 168 20 Portugal 186 21 Italy 190
22 Helvetia, or Schwitzerland 193 23 Savoy and Piedmont 201 24 Sicily 221 25
Sclavon. Croatia, Dalmatia, etc. 225 26 Servia, Bulgaria, etc. 231 27 Greece
234 28 ASIA 321 29 The Turkish Empire in Asia 325 30 Canaan, or the Holy Land
338 31 Cyprus, the Isles of Asia Minor 353 32 Turkish Empire in general 362 33
Arabia 366 34 Persia 372 35 Tartaria in Asia 387 36 Empire of the Great Mogul
395 37 India on this side Ganges 403 38 India beyond Ganges 411 39 China 416 40
Japan 420 41 Maldives Islands 428 42 Ceylon 430 43 The Isles of Sonde 434 44
The Philippine Island 436 45 The Molucca Islands 438 46 AFRICA 441 47 Barbary
448 48 Fez and Morocco 450 49 Algier 460 50 Egypt 469 51 Biledulgerid, Zaara,
Guiny, etc. 483 52 Ethiopia, or Habessinia 489 53 Congo, etc. 492 54 Cafferia
and Monomotapa 494 55 Zanguebar 497 56 The Isles of Azores 499 57 The
Canary-Islands 501 58 Cape Verde Islands 504 59 Madagascar, etc. 507 60 Malta
510 61 AMERICA 512 62 Magellanica 516 63 Chili and Paraguay 520 64 Brasil 523
65 Amazone, Peru, Guyana, Castella del Or, etc. 526 66 The Western Islands 534
67 Jamaica 537 68 Barbados 541 69 New Spain 546 70 New Mexico 555 71 Florida,
and the Lakes of Canada 557 72 Carolina 559 73 Virginia and Maryland 561 74
Pensilvania, and New Jersey 567 75 New England, and New York 576 76 Northw.
part of America 589
TO HIS Most Worthy and most Honored Friend, Mr. THOMAS GODDARD OF LONDON,
Merchant.
SIR,
HAVING made many Considerable Improvements and Additions to my Geography in
this Second Edition, I have all the reason in the world to shelter it once more
under the Patronage of your Name, whose Affairs abroad have not only given You
a better Knowledge and Experience of Foreign Parts; but whose Encouragement and
Bounty, next to Divine Goodness, have only contributed to its Production, which
otherwise with its poor Author, must have for ever lain latent under the
Horizon of unknown Obscurity, and irresistible Poverty. The declining therefore
the Imputation of Ingratitude, is my only Plea; and though it may not be
pleasing to You, yet not to have done it in my Circumstances, would have been
my just Crime. I humbly therefore beg your Goodness will be pleased to add to
your former Kindnesses that of passing by the Imperfections of what is offered.
In excuse of which I can only say, That as it is not the Industry of one Age
that can rectify and complete the Ataxie of Geography; Nor the work of any one
man that of Coins, Weights and Measures; so a well meaning Essay toward both,
I hope will find a Courteous Entertainment from the more judicious and
unprejudiced Reader: For I have this, I will not say to justify, but to excuse
at least my boldness and forwardness, that if I had known these things to have
been but tolerably performed by others, I had neither troubled my Reader, nor
misspent my own time about the Rectification of them; wherein although I have
again made many Corrections and Amendments, yet that I have made good some men's
Expectations, and freed them from all defects and oversights, neither my fears
nor my modesty will permit me to be confident of; so that knowing this work
which I have undertaken, is liable to common Censure, I am bold to shroud it
under your Protection, humbly imploring your kind Reception and Pardon for this
my presumption; for which, and for the excess of many Favors, I shall ever
pray for the prosperity of You and yours; And for ever acknowledge my self,

Your Most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obliged Servant, Robert Morden.

To the Reader.
SO great was the attempt of my first Essay, in the publishing of my Geography
Rectified; that for my heedless presumption, I can alledg no excuse, unless
that the zeal of my love for its Truth, so transported my senses, as I
considered not the weight I undertook. And therefore I again crave pardon for
the audacity of that attempt. Humbly acknowledging a Work of that concernment
and difficulty in it self, did well deserve the conjunction of many heads and
hands; and surely more advantageous had it been unto Geography to have fallen
into the Endeavors of some able Advancers, that might have performed it unto
the life, and added Authority thereto. For I am not ignorant of the
discouragement of contradiction, of the difficulty of Disswasion from radicated
beliefs, of what cold requitals some have found in their Redemptions of Truth,
and how ingenious Discoveries have been dismissed with obliquity, and censured
with singularity: But the kind Reception it found from several Worthy and
Learned Gentlemen, more especially that Influence that it received from the two
most Learned Universities of the World, Oxford and Cambridg, has once more
drawn me upon the Horizon of public View, not as a Master, but as a poor
Labourer, carrying the Carved Stones, and the polished Pillars of the more
skilful Architects to set them in my mean Fabric. I have indeed laid my
building upon other men's foundations; for who in this Subject can do otherways?
Nor do I hold it a Plagiary to say I have used their Richest Jewels to adorn
this Work. In excuse whereof give me leave to plead, That in all Arguments and
Subjects which have been written upon from the infancy of Learning, to this
Age, there has been a continual strife and emulation amongst Writers to mend,
supply, or methodize whatsoever has been done before. It would be too tedious
to reckon up the several Authors on some one Subject, being a Truth so obvious
as not to need much proof; nor is it less apparent that still the latter must
needs have a great advantage beyond the former, by adding the experience of his
own times to the perusal of what was formerly attained unto; more especially in
History and Geography; for tho in the Axioms, Theorems and Propositions of
Logic, Philosophy, Mathematics, etc. that which was once Truth remains so for
ever; yet in History there is a necessity of Continuation, and in Geography of
alteration from time to time; so that as it is no presumption to write upon this
Subject, tho treated of by others famous for Learning and Parts; so it is a
boldness justifiable by truth, to affirm that all former Geographies diligently
compared with the more accurate Observations and Discoveries of late years, are
greatly defective, and strangely Erroneous. And that I may not be thought to be
singular in my assertion, see what the Industrious Mr. Wright said in his
Correction of Errors in Navigation; where he tells us, That the Longitude of
Places would well deserve both Labor and Cost. And tho the Rectification of
them were more a busy and expensive work, than profitable; yet most worthy and
necessary to be labored in, as without which all Charts, Maps, Globes, and all
other Hydrographical and Geographical Descriptions cannot be freed from many
intricate absurdities wherewith they are now every where pestered and
perplexed: And who that loves Truth, says he, can patiently endure the
Mariners common and constant complaint of 150 or 200 Leagues error in the
distance between the Bay of Mexico and the Azores (or that which is more
intolerable and monstrous) of 600 Leagues difference in the distance between
Cape Mendosino, and Cape California? And in another place he tells us, that the
best Hydrographers of that Age found such difficulties in laboring to bring
their Marine Descriptions to some correspondence of truth, that tired herewith,
in the end they have holden it impossible; wherein notwithstanding, says he,
they err in holding that to be simply impossible, which cannot be done by such
ways and means as they know and use.

And the Ingenious Mr. Hally tells us in one of his Philosophical Transactions,
That the Dutch Maps were out more than 10 Degrees. But Sansons 18 Degrees in
distance between London and Balasore. And in truth as to all the Dutch and
French Maps that I have seen, they were so false and imperfect that as I was
obliged in my first Edition to alter many places in Europe 3 Degr. of Latitude,
and more than 5 in Longitude: To make Asia and America wholly new, and to
rectify Africa more than 10 Degrees. So also in this second Impression I have
inserted more than 20 New Maps of Countries, some yet never extant in any
Geography before; As also many Cities, Towns, Islands, Rivers, with the Ancient
and Modern Names, with many other Improvements, which were omitted in the
former; so that it is in truth a New Geography. And yet I know this wants the
Helps and Advantages of a more Learned Pen; and indeed it ought to have been
freed from those frequent avocations and disturbances that attend a public
Shop and Trade. These were in truth too great disadvantages for the rendering a
Book of this nature so complete and perfect, and of so constant and regular a
style as might be expected from others, whose quiet doors, and unmolested hours
afford no such Distractions. However in the composing of this, I have taken a
due regard and greater care in the choice of Authors; nor have I been less
studious in avoiding weak and frivolous Relations, but to present plainly the
Truth of Geography and History from its first beginning so far as it is made
known to us by the most approved Writers. And all this after many years
experienre, not only in making and projecting of Globes, Maps, etc. but also in
examining and comparing of the Relations, Discoveries, Observations, Draughts,
Journals and Writings, as well of the Ancient as Modern Geographers,
Travelers, Mariners, etc. wherein I have taken much pains, and spent much
time; tho to my own profit I have done nothing: Only may this be but useful and
acceptable to the young Gentry and Scholars of England, and I am sure of this
one Advantage that I shall have many an idle hour the less to account for.

Some may yet think the Maps too small, and the Discourse too short, and indeed
so do I; but then be pleased to consider, that my Design was Brevity, wherein I
rather consulted your Advantage, by rendering the Book both more Portable, and
less Chargeable; so that I was often times more sollicitous and concerned to
consider what, than what not to write: Yet have industriously endeavored by
Insertion of the most important Observables, that nothing material either in
the Maps or Descriptions may be wanting, to present you with such a
satisfactory view of the Earthly Globe, and its respective parts, as may make
good our Title: For without vanity it may be affirmed, that as compendious as
it is, yet you have therein now summed up, the Reverend Observations of the
Ancient Strabo, Pliny and Ptolomy; the choice Rarities of the Nubian
Geographer; the unwearied Industry of Mercator and Munster; the Great World of
Ortelius and Maginus; the stately Volumes of Bleau and Johnson; the Modern and
Applauded Maps of Du Val and Sanson; nay, the Quintessence of the
Chorographies, Topographies, Relations, Journals and Travels of most Authors
extant. So that if not large enough for the Readings of the most Curious and
much at Leisure, yet may serve as a helpful Introduction to their more
Voluminous Tracts; and to others, I hope, fully satisfactory. At least I am
Confident it may be sufficient to demonstrate the great Errors of the Old Maps,
and the necessity of New and Larger; but this is not to be performed without a
greater Stock than I am Steward of. And the Encouraging Gentry of England have
been so often imposed upon by pretenders to Mapping, that I despair of making
any Proposals, and consequently of ever doing of them. And indeed it is now time
for me to provide for a future Estate, where there will be better Rewards for
the true and faithful Service of

Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, ROBERT MORDEN.

An Advertisement concerning the Projection and Uses of General and Particular
Maps.
ALthough the Description of the Earth upon the Globe be most proper to the
Understanding, and Commensurable to Nature; yet there are several ways to
project it in a Plane or Flat.

Two especially are now in use, one by Parallelogram, the other by Planisphere.

Of the Description by Parallelogram.
This used to be divided into the midst by a Line drawn from North to South,
representing the great Meridian; Cross to this at right Angles another Line was
drawn from East to West for the Equator. The Meridians equally distant, and the
Parallels also equally extended, and strait Lines; and this way of Projection,
though utterly against the Original Nature and Constitution of the Globe, yet
the plain Charts are bound to follow; and indeed it is strange to me that this
Sea-Chart, being one of the most principal Instruments that the Mariners have
for their direction in Sailing, and known to be so greatly and dangerously
erroneous, yet is still made use of, by those that would be accounted Excellent.

Of the Description by the Planisphere.
This other way of Projection, represents the face of the Earth upon a Plane in
its own proper figure Spherically, as upon the Globe, the Gibbosity only
allowed for, and this is twofold.

Of the Section by the Equator.
Suppose the Terrestrial Globe flatted upon the Plane of the Equator, and you
have this way of Projection, dividing the Earth into two Hemispheres, North and
South, where the Pole is the Center, the Equator is the Circumference, the
Oblique Semicircle from Aries to Libra, is the North half of the Ecliptic;
the Parallels are whole Circles, and the Meridians are straight Lines.

Of the Section by the Meridian.
Suppose the Terrestrial Globe flatted upon the Plane of the Meridian, and you
have this way of Projection; the Equator is here a straight Line, the great
Meridian is a whole Circle, and the lesser Meridians are more Circular, as they
come near to the great, only that which passes through the midst of the
Hemisphere, dividing it into two equal parts, is a straight Line; so that the
Meridians do not equally in distance concur, the Parallels are not Parallels
indeed, and the Degrees are unequal, However this way is that which is now most
in Fashion: it is described by those two great Circles that take up the
following Map.

A NEW MAP of ye WORLD by Robt. Morden
A General Map of the Earth.



Of Particular Maps.
Particular Maps are but Limbs of the Globe; and therefore, though they are
drawn asunder, yet they are to be made with that proportion, as a Remembering
Eye may suddenly acknowledge and join them to the whole Body.

They are most commonly described upon a Parallelogram; but it ought to be with
such Consideration, that being but Parts and Members severed from the whole,
they yet might make as great an Appearance of Integrity and Truth as can be
allowed: and ought to consist of such proportions of Meridians and Parallels,
as they consisted of in the Globe it self. And because no Country is exactly
square, so much of the bordering Territories are usually put in, as may show
the Bounds and fill up the square also.

The true Projection of Maps chiefly consists or depends upon the fore-knowledg
of the true Longitude and Latitude of the place; which having been so Notorious
False, it is strange to me how the Maps can be true. The Longitude is to be
expressed by Meridians from East to West. The Latitude by Parallels from North
to South: both which may be Circles or straight Lines. I have so projected all
these Maps, that the Top and Bottom of the square are always North and South,
the right and left sides East and West; so that you see each Country and place
in its true Situation, as in the Globe or general Map; And have made the
Parallels and Meridians both straight Lines, so that the Longitude and Latitude
are given by Inspection, only the Meridians are inclining and Concurring
toward the Poles, to agree to the Nature of the whole, whereof they are such
parts. And here give me leave to Advertise, that although in these small Maps
the Error is not very discernable; yet certainly some Foreign Geographers,
whose Maps are now the Fondlings of this Age, did not understand the Projection
of the Sphere; for to me it would have been a great shame to have exposed the
parts of the World so large, upon so false a Basis; which must needs render
them intollerably false in the Distances of Places, had the Longitudes and
Latitudes been never so well adjusted; which indeed are as false as the
Distances are.

As to the Graduation of these Maps, the Degrees of Latitude are divided upon
the East and West Side: The Degrees of Longitude upon the North and South. The
South Figures upon the Maps are the Longitudes from the first Meridian,
beginning at the Pike of Teneriff, and reckoned round upon the Globe to 360
Degrees. The Northern Figures are the Difference of Longitudes from London, and
are reckoned East or West, according as the Situation of the place is East or
West from London.

For from whence to reckon the Longitude in all Maps, is a fault of most
Geographers, that I am not the first that have complained of; and though there
be a Graduation, yet you are uncertain where their first Meridian begins.

It will not therefore be amiss, if I tell you the several Meridians observed,
and the Distance of Longitude between these Meridia s, and their difference
from London, viz. Ptolomies Meridian was Junonia Major, Plin. Heras. and Helii,
Ptol. Madera, test Nigro and Ortelio; rather Forteventura, test Baud.
Herbania, Sans. Junonia Minor, now Lancerotta test Sansone. This Junonia was
from London 20 degr.

The Meridian of the Arabian Geographer is something dubious; for Herculis
Columnae is a Town in Frisiae, between Groeningen and Coverden, called
Duvelseutz, test Ortelio. The Spaniards tell us they are in the Isle Gaditana,
now Cales or Cadez, where are two Towers so called, Columnas de Hercoles.

Others make the two Mountains Abila and Calpe, on both sides of the Herculeum
Fretum, now Estrechio de Gibralter, to be the Pillars of Hercules. That of
Abila is in Mauritania, now Mons Almina, test Clusio, Mont des Singes, Gallis.
Scheminckelberg, Belgis. Calpe Mons, now Gibralter, Clusio, a Mountain and City
in Spain over against Abila, and about 18 miles distant; now near to, if not
the same with Ceuta, or Zeuta; Latinis Septa, Grecis Septon, Mauris Benimaras
test Marmolio. But forasmuch as it was but 10 Degrees from London, and that it
passed by the utmost point of the Western Shore, it must rather be from
Herculeum Promontorium, not Hartland Point in Devonshire, but Cabo Cantin in
Morocco, which is from London about 10 Degrees.

The Dutch Meridian is the Pike of Teneriff, the Nivaria, Plin. test Sanson.
But by the Bishop of Girone and Andrea Bacio, Gomera is the ancient Nivaria.
However it is the most noted place, and indeed the best if all were well agreed,
for the first Meridian, and according to the best Observations that have been
made it is from London 18 Degrees.

Isola del Ferro, (the Pluitalia, Ptol. the Pluvialia, Plin. test Andrea
Bacchio. But Niger tells us Gomera is the Pluvitalia of old) now L'Isle de Fer.
Gallis; Isla de Hierro, Hispanis; the French Meridian, is distant from London
20 Degrees.

Corvo and Flores, the Meridian of many Writers and Map-makers, is from London
33 Degrees.

Pico, the Meridian of Dudlaeus Sea-Charts, is 31 Degrees.

That of Graciosa, the English Hydrographer, is about 30 Degrees.

By this Table you may easily know from whence most Geographers begin their
Longitudes; and also know how near to truth, by adding or substracting the
proper Numbers in the Table, to or from the Number found in their Maps.

As to the Scale in particular Maps, it depends upon the Degrees of a great
Circle, and the proportion of Miles in each Country to such a Degree, which I
have discoursed of in the Introduction Page 5. to which I refer you, only take
Notice, That therefore I have made no Scales to the Maps; for the Distance of
any two places taken with your Compasses, and applied either to the East or
West Side of your Map, which is the Scale of Latitude, gives you the Number of
Degrees that those two places are distant one from the other, which multiplied
by 73, gives you the Number of Geometrical or Italian Miles, by 69 for English
Statute Miles, by 25 for French common Leives, by 17 for the Spanish Miles, by
15 for the common German, Dutch, Denmark, and Great Poland Miles, by 10 for
Hungarian Miles, by 12 for Suedish Miles, by 80 for the Muscovian Verstes or
Vorest, by 480 for the Grecian Stadia, or 450 according to Mr. Greaves, by 20
for the Persian, Arabian, and Egyptian Parasanga, now called Farsach, by 24 for
the Mogul or Indian Cos, according to Sanson, by 250 for the Chinian Stades, by
400 for the Ikins of Japan; as for the Turks, they have no distinction of their
Ways by Miles, nor Days by Hours.

Robert Morden.

AN Introduction TO GEOGRAPHY.
GEOGRAPHY is a Science which Teaches the Description and Dimension of all the
Earth, as it does together with the Water, compose that round Body, which from
its form is called the Orb or Globe of the Earth; Describing the Scituations,
and Measuring the Distances of all its parts.

The Earth is placed in respect of the other Orbs or Stars of the Universe,
according to Ptolomy and Tycho, in the Center; but according to Copernicus,
between the Orbs of Mars and Venus.

The Globe of the Earth is variously Described by Geographers into Lines and
Parts, which are either Real or Imaginary.

Real, are such as agree to the Terrestrial Globe, by Nature. Imaginary, are
such as agree to it by virtue of our understanding.

The Real parts of the Terrestrial Globe are Earth and Water. The Imaginary
parts are certain Lines, which are not materially, but for the better
understanding of this Science, are supposed to be on the Earth.

These Lines are either Strait, or Circular. The Axis is a strait line passing
through the midst or Center of the Earth, which is the Diameter of the whole
World: the extreme points or ends whereof, are called the Poles, upon which the
Universe is supposed to move; the one Point is called the Artick, or
North Pole, the other the Antartick, or South-Pole.

The Circular Lines are divided into the greater and the lesser: The greater
Circles are such as divide the Globe into two equal parts, and are three in
Number, Meridian, Horizon, Equator: And these are either fixed, as the Equator,
or movable with the mutation of places, as the Meridian, and Horizon.

The Meridian is a Circle drawn through the Poles of the Earth, and the
Vertical or Zenith point of our place, crossing the Equator at right Angles,
cutting the Earth into two equal parts; the one East, the other West: And is so
called, because when the Sun comes to the Meridian of any place, it is Noon or
Midday; infinite in Number, because all places from East to West, have several
Meridians.

Among these, one is of special Note and Use, which Geographers call the first
or Chief Meridian: This first Meridian is that from which the Longitudes of
places are reckoned, and is variously placed by Geographers.

The Horizon is a Circle, comprehending all that space of the Earth which is
visible; and distinguishing it from the rest which lies under, and is
invisible: This Horizon is either Sensible or Rational.

The Sensible Horizon is that apparent Circle which divides the visible part of
Heaven from the invisible; extending it self into a strait line, from the
Superficies of the Earth every way round about that place you stand upon;
dividing the Heavens into two unequal parts, which is designed out by the
sight, and is sometimes greater or lesser, according to the condition of the
place.

The Rational Horizon is a great Circle dividing that part of the Heavens which
is above us, from that part which is under us, exactly into two equal parts,
passing through the Center of the Earth, whose Poles are the Zenith and Nadir:
By this Circle our Days and Nights are Measured, and the diverse Risings and
Settings of the Sun, Moon, and Stars appear.

The Equator, or Line under the Equinoctial, is a great Circle encompassing the
very middle of the Earth between the two Poles, dividing it into two equal
parts from North to South; and it is divided, as all great Circles are, into
360 equal parts or degrees. It is called Equator, either because it is equally
distant from the Poles of the World, or rather because when the Sun comes to
this Line, which is twice in the Year, viz. in its entrance into Aries, which
is about the 10th or 11th of March; and again in Libra about the 12th or 13th
of September, he makes equality of Days and Nights throughout the World; and
from it are the Latitudes of places numbered, either North or South.

The Lesser Circles or Lines are Named with particular Names, as Tropicks and
Polar Circles.

The Tropicks are parallel Circles to the Equator, distant from it 23 Degrees
and a half: That on the North-side of the Equator, is called the Tropic of
Cancer, where the Sun has the greatest North declination, and makes our
longest Day, and shortest Night, which is about the 11th or 12th of June: The
other on the South Side is called the Tropic of Capricorn, in which point the
Sun has its greatest South declination, making our shortest Day, and longest
Night, which is about the 11th or 12th of December.

The Polar Circles are parallels, compassing the Poles of the World at 23
Degrees and an half distance: that about the North Pole is called the Artick
Circle, the other the Antartick Circle, because opposite to it.

These Tropic and Polar Circles divide the Earth into five parts, called by
the Greeks, Zones; of these five Zones, three were accounted by the Ancients to
be so intemperate as to be uninhabitable; one of them by reason of the Suns
beams continually darting upon the same; and this they called the Torrid Zone,
terminated by the Tropicks on each side: The other two, the one comprehended
within the Artick Circle, and the other compassed by the Antartick; by reason
of the extreme Cold, they thought uninhabitable, as being so remote from the
Suns Beams: But only the remaining two were accounted Temperate, and therefore
Habitable; the one lying between the Artick Circle, and the Tropic of Cancer,
and the other between the Antartick and the Tropic of Capricorn.

Thus much of the General Geography: The Special is that which sets forth
the Description of the Terrestrial Globe, so far forth as it is divided into
distinct parts or places; and is either, 1. The Description of some great
integrating part of the Earth. 2. Or of some one Region, and so it is properly
called Chorography. 3. Or of some particular place in a Region or Country,
which is Topography.

According to the greater integrating parts thereof the Ancients divided the
whole Earth into three great parts, viz. Europe, Asia, and Africa, to which is
now added a fourth, viz. America: these are again divided into Provinces,
Countries, Kingdoms, etc. And each of these are again subdivided into Earldoms,
Baronies, Lordships, etc. These three kind or parts make up the perfect Subject
of Geography.

Again, every part and place of the Earth is considered in its self, or
according to its Adjuncts, and so it is either Continent or Island.

A Continent is a great quantity of Land, in which many great Kingdoms and
Countries are conjoined together, and not separated one from another by any
Sea, as Europe, Asia, etc.

An Island is a part of the Earth compassed and environed round about with
Water, as Great Britain and Ireland.

These again are observable parts, both of Continents and Islands, viz.
Peninsula, Isthmus, Promontorium.

Peninsula quasi pene Insula, is a part of Land, which being almost environed
and encompassed round with Water, is yet joined to the firm Land by some little
Isthmus, as Africa is joined to Asia, or Morea to Greece.

An Isthmus is a narrow neck of Land betwixt two Seas, joining the Peninsula to
the Continent, as that of Darien in America, or Corinth in Greece.

A Promontory is a high Hill or Mountain, lying out as an elbow of Land into
the Sea, the utmost end of which is called a Cape, as the Cape of Good Hope,
and Cape Verde.

The Adjuncts of a place are either such as respect the Earth it self, or the
Heavens: Those that agree to a place in respect of the Earth are three in
number, viz. the Magnitude or Extent of a Country, the Bounds or Limits, the
Quality.

The Magnitude comprehends the length and breadth of a place.

The Bounds of a Country is a Line terminating it round about, distinguishing
it from the bordering Lands or Waters.

The Quality of a place is the Natural Temper and Disposition thereof.

A Place in regard of the Heavens is either East, West, North, or South.

Those places are properly East which lie in the Eastern Hemisphere,
(terminated by the first Meridian) or where the Sun rises.

Those are West which lie Westerly of the said Meridian, or toward the setting
of the Sun.

Those places are properly North which lie betwixt the Equator and Artick-Pole.

Those South which are betwixt the Equator and the Antartick Pole.

The Ancients did also distinguish the Inhabitants of the Earth from the
diversity of shadows of Bodies into three sorts, viz. Periscii, Heteroscii, and
Amphiscii: the Inhabitants of the Frigid Zone (if any such are) were termed
Periscii, because the shadow of Bodies have there a Circular motion in 24
hours, the Sun neither rising nor setting but in a greater portion of time.

The Inhabitants of the Temperate Zones they called Heteroscii, because the
Meridian shadows bend toward either Pole, toward the North among those that
dwell within the Tropic of Cancer and the Artick Circle; toward the South
amongst those that dwell within the Tropic of Capricorn and the Antartick
Circle.

The Inhabitants of the Torrid Zone they called Amphiscii, because the Noon or
Midday shadow, according to the time of Year, does sometimes fall toward the
North, sometimes toward the South: when the Sun is in the Northern Signs, it
falls toward the South: and toward the North, when in the Southern Signs.
And because of the different site of opposite Habitations, the Ancients have
divided the Inhabitants of the Earth into Periaeci, Antaeci, and Antipodes.

The Periaeci are such as live under the same parallel, being equally distant
from the Equator, but in opposite points of the same parallel.

The Antaeci are such as have the same Meridian and parallel equally distant
from the Equator, but the one North, and the other South.

The Antipodes are such as Inhabit two places of the Earth which are
Diametrically opposite one to the other.

The Ancients did also divide the Earth into Climates and Parallels.

A Climate is a space of Earth comprehended betwixt any two places, whose
longest day differ in quantity half an hour.

A Parallel is a space of Earth, wherein the days increase in length a quarter
of an hour: so that every Climate contains two Parallels.

These Climates and Parallels are not of equal quantity, for the first is
longer than the second, and the second likewise greater than the third, etc. At
the Latitude, where the longest days are increased half an hour longer than at
the Equator, viz. longer than 12 hours, The first Climate begins, which is at
the Latitude of 8 degrees, 34 minutes; and in the Latitude of 16 degrees, 43
minutes, where the days are increased an hour longer than at the Equator. The
second Climate begins, and so onwards. But because the Ancients, and also
Ptolomy, supposed that part of the Earth which lies under the Equator to be
inhabitable, therefore they placed the first Climate at the Latitude of 12
degrees, 43 minutes, where the longest day is 12 hours long; and the second
Climate to begin at the Latitude of 20 degrees, 34 minutes, where the longest
day is 13 hours and long, etc. It Is needless indeed to take any more notice of
them, than thus much only, that they that describe the Situation of places by
Climes and Parallels, had as good say nothing.

The Terraqueous Globe is but an Imaginary point compared to the vast expansion
of the Universe, though of it self of great Magnitude; for Geographers divide
it into 360 parts or degrees, and each degree into 60 minutes, which are so
many Italian Miles, so that the Circumference thereof is 21600 miles, and the
Diameter or Axis is 6875 miles, and its Superficies in square miles, is
Reckoned to amount to 148510584 of the same measure.

It Is a common Opinion, that 5 of our English feet make a Geometrical pace,
1000 of these paces make an Italian mile, and 60 of these miles in any great
Circle upon the Spherical surface of the Earth or Sea make a degree; so that a
degree of the Heavens contains upon the surface of the Earth, according to this
account 60 Italian miles, 20 French or Dutch Leagues, 15 German miles, 17
Spanish Leagues.

But according to several Experiments made, the quantity of a degree is thus
variously found to be: By Albazard the Arabian, 73; by Fernilius 68, by
Withrordus 70, by Gassendus 73, by Picard 73 Italian miles, and by Norwood 69
English miles, which is much as the same of 73 Italian miles, and is the
nearest measure yet found by these Experiments to answer to a degree of the
Heavens; so that the circumference of the Earth then is 26280 miles, the
Diameter 8365, and 184 parts. Or supposing 1000 paces, or 5000 English Feet to
a mile, then 73 such miles are exactly equal to a Degree.

I shall here note, that no Country does in all parts of its Territories make
use of the same extent in measuring: The Germans have their great, little, and
ordinary miles; the Leagues of France and Spain are of different lengths, and
so are the miles in our own Country.

The Earth (as was said before) is encompassed about with the Water, which
washing and surrounding the dry Land, cuts out and shapes so many winding Bays,
Creeks, and meandring Inlets, and seems no where so much confined and penned as
in the Straits of Magellan, from whence again expatiating, it spreads its self
into two immense, and almost boundless Oceans, which give Terminaries to the
four Regions of the Earth, and extending it self round them all, is but one
continued Ocean.

The Water is either Ocean, Seas, Straits, Creeks, Lakes, or Rivers.

The Ocean is a general Collection or Rendezvous of all Waters.

The Sea is a part of the Ocean, and is either exterior, lying open to the
shore, as the British or Arabian Seas; or interior, lying within the Land, to
which you must pass through some Strait, as the Mediterranean, or Baltic Seas.

A Strait is a narrow part or Arm of the Ocean, lying betwixt two Shores, and
opening a way into the Sea, as the Straits of Gibralter, the Hellespont, etc.

A Creek is a small narrow part of the Sea that goes up but a little way into
the Land, otherwise called a Bay, a Station, or Road for Ships.

A Lake is that which continually retains and keeps Water in it, as the Lakes
Nicurgua in America, and Zaire in Africa.

A River is a small Branch of the Sea flowing into the Land, courting the Banks
whilst they their Arms display, to embrace her silver waves.

Of the Names of the Ocean.
According to the four Quarters it had four Names: From the East it was called
the Eastern or Oriental Ocean; from the West the Western, or Occidental Ocean;
from the North the Northern, or Septentrional, and from the South the Southern,
or Meridional Ocean: But besides these more general Names, it has other
particular Appellations, according to the Countries it boundeth upon, and the
Nature of the Sea: As it lies extended toward the East, it is called the
Chinean Sea, from the adjacent Country of China: Toward the South it is called
Oceanus Indicus, or the Indian Sea, because upon it lies the Indians: Where it
touches the Coast of Persia, it is called Mare Persicum: So also Mare Arabicum,
from Arabia: So toward the West is the Ethiopian Sea. Then the Atlantic
Ocean, from Atlas, a Mountain or Promontory in Africa; but more Westward near
to America, it is called by the Spaniards, Mar del Nort; and on the other side
of America, it is called Mar del Zur, or Mare Pacificum. Where it touches upon
Spain it is called Oceanus Hispanicus, by the English the Bay of Biscay: The
Sea between England and France is called the Channel; between England and
Ireland the Irish Sea: Between England and Holland it is called by some the
German, or rather the British Ocean: Beyond Scotland it is called Mare
Caledonium, higher toward the North it is called the Hyperborean, or Frozen
Sea; more Eastward, upon the Coast of Tartary, the Tartarian Sea, or Scythian
Ocean, etc.

The Names of the Inland Seas are, 1. The Baltic Sea, by the Dutch called the
Oast Zee, by the Inhabitants Die Belth, lying between Denmark and Sweden, the
chief Entrance whereof is called the Sound.

2. Pontus Euxinus, or the Black Sea; to which joins Me^tis Palus, now Mar de
Zabacke.

The third is the Caspian or Hircanian Sea.

The fourth is the Arabian Gulf, Mare Erythaeum, Mare Rubeum, or the Red Sea.

The fifth is the Persian Gulf, or the Gulf de Elcatif.

The sixth is Mare Mediterraneum, by the English the Straits, by the Spaniards,
Mar de Levant; the beginning or entrance of it is called the Straits of
Gibralter, rather Gibal-Tarif.

Now that all Places, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Lakes, etc. may be readily
found out upon the Globe, or Map, all Geographers do, or should place them
according to their Longitude and Latitude; the use of which in the absolute
sense is to make out the position of any Place in respect of the whole Globe,
or to show the Situation and distance of one place from, and in respect of any
other.

Longitude is the distance of a place from the first Meridian reckoned in the
degrees of the Equator, beginning by some at the Canaries, by others at the
Azores, by reason of which Confusion, I have made the Longitudes in this
English Geography to begin from London, and are reckoned Eastward and Westward,
according as they are situated from London on the top of the Map. And have also
added the Longitude from the Tenerif round about the Globe of the Earth at the
bottom of the Map, as usually in the Dutch Maps, that so you may by inspection
only, see the Truth or Error if you compare them with the Tables or Maps
formerly Extant.

The Latitude of a place is the distance of the Equator from that place,
reckoned in the degrees of the great Meridian, and is either North or South,
according as it lies between the North and South-Poles of the Equator.

EVROPE is divided into these Kingdoms or Estates.
Cities Modern. Cities Old. Northwards The Isles of Great Britain, or England
Scotland Wales and Ireland, etc.
London Londinium Edinburgh Alata Castra Welshpool. Trillinum Dublin Eblana
Scandinavia, contains the Kingdoms of Denmark Norway Sweden
Copenhagen Haphnia Berghen Bergae Stockholm Holmia The several Kingdoms of
Russia, or Moscovia
L'Arcangel Archangelopolis Moskow Moscha The Estates of the Kingdom of Poland
Cracow, and Cracovia Dantzick Gedanum In the Middle The Northern Estates of
Turkey in Europe, Tartaria Europa Walachia Moldavia Transylvania Hungaria
Caffa Theodosia Tarvis Targoviscum Jassy Jassium Weissemburg Alba Julia Buda
Sicambia The Empire of Germany Vienna Ala Flaviana The Estates, or Republics
of Switzerland 7 United Provinces 10 Spanish Provinc.
Zurick Tigurium Amsterdam Amsterodamum Antwerpen Andoverpum Kingdom, or 12
Gover. of France Paris Lutetia Southwards Kingdoms and Principal. of Spain
Madrid Madritum The Kingdom of Portugal Lisbon Olysippo Estates of the Duke of
Savoy, etc. Chambery Cameriacum Kingdoms and Estates in Italy Rome Roma The
Kingdom and Isle of Sicily Messina Messana The Southern Estates of Turkey in
Europe, Sclavonia Croatia Dalmatia Ragusa Bosnia Servia Bulgaria Romania
Zagrab Sisopa Vihitz Vihitza Zara Jadera Ragusa Epidaurus Bosna Serai Jayeza
Belgrade Alba Graeca Sophia Sardica Constantinople Byzantium The Estates of
Greece Athini Athaenae The Islands of Negropont Candia Sardinia,
etc. Negropont Eubaea Candia Matium Cagliari Calaris

Of Europe.
map of Europe EVROPE by Robt. Morden


EVROPE, one of the four great Parts of the World, is also the most
considerable in Respect of the Beauty of her Kingdoms and Commonwealths, the
Politeness of her Inhabitants, the Excellent Government of her Cities; as also
in Regard of its Excellency in her Traffic and Commerce, the goodness of her
Air, and general Fertility. It is the least Part of all, yet has produced the
great Alexanders and Caesar's of the Universe; contains within its Bounds the
principal Part of the Roman and Grecian Monarchies; and, which to this day
furnishes the other parts of the World with Colonies. Its Situation is all in
the Northern Temperate Zone, which free the Inhatants from the insupportable
Heats of Africa, and from those which also parch the more Southern Climes of
Asia: The Air is generally sweet and temperate, unless in the remotest
Countries of the North: The Soil affords all sorts of Grain and Fruit, of which
the other Parts of the World are often in Want: But her highest Glory and
Prerogative is that she is not only Europe, but Christendom, and has embraced
the true Religion. But alas the strange Schisms, the shameful vices, the
lamentable dissentions, the unchristian divisions about Ceremonies and Opinions
are fatal Eclipses of her brightness and splendour, who otherwise might justly
have been styled, The Temple of Religion: The Court of Policy and Government:
The Academy of Learning: The Mistress of Arts and Sciences: The Magazine of
Trade: The Nurse of Victorious and famous people: And the Paradise of humane
felicity.

The length of Europe is variously set down by Geographers, Cluverius says
from the Cape of St. Vincent unto the mouth of the River Oby is 900 German, or
3600 Italian miles: I find that the true distance cannot be more than 50
degrees, which multiplied by 73, for so many miles are found to be in a degree,
makes 3650 Geometrical or Italian miles. Sansons Map of Europe makes the
distance to be 55 degrees, which multiplied by 73, makes 4015, which is 365
miles more than the greatest distance can be. But the Great New Atlas tells us
it is 71 degrees of the Equator, which multiplied by 73 makes 5183, which is but
1533 miles, too large in the length of Europe.

Maginus tells us that the distance from Lisbon to Constantinople is 600
German, or 2400 Italian miles. The true distance I find cannot be more than 32,
which multiplied by 73 makes 2352 miles. But Sansons Map makes the Distance to
be 36, which makes 276 miles too much.

Heylin tells us that Europe is in length 2800 miles, in breadth 1200 miles,
but from whence he begins, or what miles he means, the Reader cannot tell, so
that I think he had as good have said nothing.

The Breadth by Cluverius from Cape Matrapan of the Morea to the North Cape is
reckoned to be 550 German, or 2200 Italian miles. Maginus makes it to be almost
600 German, or 2400 Italian miles. The true distance or difference of Latitude
is 35 degr. of the Equator, which multiplied by 73 makes 2555 miles. Sanson's
Map makes it 38 degrees, which makes 2774 miles which is 209 miles too much.
But the great Atlas tells us it contains about 44 degrees, which makes 3212
miles, 657 miles too large.

Toward the North, Europe is bounded by the Northern Ocean, otherwise called
the Frozen Sea, by reason of the continual Ice which incommodes those Parts:
Toward the West, it is limited by the Western, or Atlantic Ocean; by the
Mediterranean Sea toward the South; and beyond that Sea, by part of Africa. As
for the Eastern Bounds, from the Mediterranean Sea to the North, they are
these: The Archipelago, or White Sea, anciently called the Aegean Sea. 2. The
Straight of Gallipoli, or the Dardanells, otherwise called the Arm of St.
George, and formerly the Hellespont. 3. By Mar di, Marmora, formerly Mare
Propontis. 4. By the Straight of Constantinople, or the Canal of Mar Maggiore,
formerly the Thracian Bosphorus. 5. By the Black, or Mar Maggiore, formerly
Pontus Euxinus. 6. By the Straight of Caffa, or Vespero, otherwise the Mouth of
St. John, formerly the Cimmerian Bosphorus. 7. By Mare Limen, otherwise the Sea
of Zabaique and Tanais, formerly Palus Moeotis. 8. By the River Donn, or Tana,
formerly Tanais. 9. By a Line drawn from the most Eastern Winding of Donn to
the Northern Ocean near Obi: Some there are that draw this Line more to the
West, from the Sources of Donn to the White Sea, which is in Muscovy, making
Europe much less than it is. Others enclose within the Limits of Europe all the
Conquest of the Great Duke of Muscovie, which are in the Asiatick Tartary.

Europe is divided into Continent and Islands, which contain these Kingdoms or
Estates, viz. Toward the North, the Isles of Great Britain, containing the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the Principality of Wales, with
many Islands dependant upon them.

2ly, Scandinavia, containing the Kingdoms of, 1. Denmark with Norway, and
Sweden. 3ly, The several Kingdoms, Dutchies, etc. of the Grand Czar of Russia
and Muscovia. 4. The Kingdom, Estates, etc. of Poland and Lithuania.

Toward the Middle, 1. The Northern Estates of Turkey in Europe, viz. 1.
Tartaria Europa, Walachia, Moldavia, Transylvania, and Hungaria: 2. The Empire
of Germania, with its eight Electorates. 3ly, The Estates of the Republic of
Switzerland. The Seven United Provinces. The Ten Spanish Provinces. 4. The
Kingdoms of France, with its Twelve Governments, and late Acquisitions.

Toward the South: 1. The Kingdoms and Principalities of Spain: 2. The Kingdom
of Portugal. The Kingdoms and Estates in Italy. The Estates and Dukedom of
Savoy, Piemont, etc. The Kingdoms and Isles of Sicily, Sardinia, and Majorca,
etc. The Southern Estates of Turkey in Europe, viz. Sclavonia, Croatia,
Dalmatia, Ragusa, Bosnia, Servia, Bulgaria. The Country of Greece, containing
the Kingdoms and parts of Romania, or Thracia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Albania,
Epirus, and Graecia, or Achaia, and Peloponnesus, or the Morea, with the Isle
of Negropont, etc.

The Islands of Europe are seated, either in the Ocean, the Mediterranean, or
Baltic Seas. The Islands lying in the Ocean, are, the British Isles aforesaid;
Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica and Candy, are the biggest Islands in the
Mediterranean. The Islands of the Baltic Sea we shall speak of in the
Description of Denmark.

We may consider the Estates of Europe according to their Titles, without
Regard to their Dignity, and say that there is, 1. The Estate of the Church or
Pope in Italy. 2. Two Empires, Germany, and Turkey. The first, half Monarchy,
half Commonwealth: The latter only Monarchical. 3. Seven Kingdoms, every one
Governed by their own Kings, that acknowledge no Superior, viz. England, France,
Spain, Portugal, Swedeland, Denmark, and Poland. That of France is most
perfect, and descends only to the Heirs Male ever since the Salique-Law. The
five other admit the Female. All are Hereditary, only Poland, which is
Elective. There are moreover in Europe other lesser Kingdoms comprehended under
these, as those of Bohemia and Hungary, under the Emperor of Germany. That of
Navarr under the King of France. That of Naples in Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, and
Majorca, under the Crown of Spain. And those of Scotland and Ireland under the
King of England. 4. Eight Electorates, Mayence, Treves, Cologn, Bohemia,
Bavaria, Saxony, Brandenburgh, and the Palatinate of the Rhine. 5. One
Archduke, the Duke of Austria. 6. Two Great Dukes, of Moscovy and Toscany. The
Prince of the first assumes the Title of Emperor, and indeed it is a Dukedom on
which depends thirty other Dutchies, and three Kingdoms. This Duke is absolute
over his Subjects, and is called by the general Name of Gran Czar. 7. Six
Sovereign Dukedoms, besides those, that are under the Empire, Savoy, Lorrain,
Mantua, Modena, Parma, and Curland. 8. Four Principalities that depend upon the
Turks, Transylvania, Walachia, Moldavia, and the lesser Tartary. 9. Seven
Commonwealths, the Seven United Provinces, Switzerland, Venice, Genoa, Geneva,
Luca, and Ragusa. To which some add the Commonwealth of Marine in Italy.
Lastly, A great number of Principalities and Imperial Free Towns, enjoying a
Sovereignty in their Territories, but yet they acknowledge a Superior Power.

The Ecclesiastical Government of Europe in general, is either Papal, owning
the Pope as Supreme; or Episcopal, owning the King as Supreme in all Cases, and
Archbishops and Bishops under him. Or Superintendant, which is a kind of
Episcopal among the Lutherans, but yet owning no Head of the Church on Earth,
neither Pope nor King, nor Civil Magistrate. There is also the Presbyterian, or
Synodical, owning a Presbytery, a Synod, or Lay Elders, etc. as Supreme, but no
Bishops or Superintendants.

There are four Principal Languages reckoned to be spoken in this Part of the
World; Tutonick, Latin, Greek, and Sclavonian. The Tutonick is of three sorts:
High Dutch in Germany, Saxon in England and Scotland, Danish in Denmark,
Sweden, Norway and Ireland. The Latin is corrupted into Italian, French, and
Spanish. The Greek had formerly four Dialects, the Attick, Ionick, Dorick, and
Aeolick. The Sclavonian Language runs through all Sclavonia, Bohemia, Poland
and Moscovy, and all the Turkish Empire in Europe. There are also seven other
Languages of less Note, which are used in Europe: The Albanian, or Epirotick in
Epirus and Macedonia. The Cosack or Tartarian in part of Poland and Tartary.
The Hungarian, or Bulgarian in Servia, Bosnia, Bulgaria, and Hungary, etc. the
Finick in Finmark and Lapland, Irish in Ireland and Scotland. The British is
spoken in Wales, Cornwall, and in Britany in France. Biscayn is spoken only in
Biscany near to the Cantabrian Ocean, or Bay of Biscay.

map of England, Scotland, and Ireland ENGLAND SCOTLAND and IRELAND by Robt.
Morden


Of the British Isles.
UNDER this Title are Comprehended several distinct and famous Islands, the
whole Dominion whereof (now United) is under the Command of the King of Great
Britain, etc. Bounded on the North and West with the Hyperborean and
Ducalidonean Ocean, on the South divided from France with the English Channel,
on the East separated from Denmark and Belgia with the British (by some called
the German) Ocean: But on all sides environed with Turbulent Seas, guarded with
Dangerous Rocks and Sands, defended with strong Forts, and walled with a Potent
and Royal Navy; Of these Islands one is very large, formerly called Albion, now
Great Britain, comprehending two Kingdoms, England and Scotland: The other of
lesser extent makes one Kingdom called Ireland: The other smaller adjacent
Isles are comprehended under one or other of these three Kingdoms, according to
the Situation and Congruity with them. Many are the Changes and Alterations
that these Islands have received in their Governments since their Original
discovery; they were first possessed by diverse People, independent one upon the
other, supposed to be the Britains descended from the Gauls; for at the
Entrance of the Romans, the Island of Great Britain was divided into several
Nations, each Governed by its own King and particular Princes, different in
their Ends and Counsels, and so the more easily subdued by the United Roman
Force.

After the Romans, the English Saxons were called in by the Britains, to aid
them against the Picts. The Inhabitants of Scotland (who, after the common
manner of foreign Auxiliaries, soon seized the better Part for themselves, and
established Seven Kingdoms, commonly called the Saxon Heptarchy) Forcing the
Britains, the Ancient Proprietors, to retire, some into Britain in France (from
whence some think they first came) but most of them into the Western and
Mountainous Part, called by the Saxons, Walish Land, now Wales; where their
Posterity still remains.

The State of England in the time of Ptolomy living in the Reign of the Emperor
Antoninus Pius about the year of Rome 892, and about 95 years since the
Conquest thereof by the Emperor Claudius Caesar. Also a Table of the Saxon
Heptarchy.
Ancient Inhabitants. Counties Names. Ancient Names of the Towns. The present
Names. Saxon Heptarchy The Cantii of Kent Durovernum Rutupiae, or, Ritupis
Canterbury Richborough, vulgo Rochester Kingdom of Kent The Rhegni, or, Rhegini
of Surry Sussex Naeomagus, or; Noviomagus Vindonis Woodcot-Hill, near Wimbleton
Wilchelsey Kingdom of the South Saxons The Iceni, or Simeni of Norfolk Suffolk
Cambridgshire, and Huntingtonshire Venta Icenorum Villa Faustini Caster St.
Edmondsbury Kingdom of the East Angles The Trinobantes, or Trinoantes.
Middlesex Essex Hartfordshire Part Londinium Camudolanum, or, Camulodunum, or,
Camalodunum London Maldon in Essex Kingdom of the East Saxons The Brigantes The
Otalini, or, Otadenii. York shire Cumberland Lancashire Durham Westmerland
Northumberland Isurium Eboracum Olicana Camulodunum Epiacum Rhigodunum Vinovium
Caturactonium Calatum Curia Bremenium Aldburrow York Inkley Almondbury
Papcastle Riblechester Binchester Catarick in Richm. Wheallep Castle Corbridg
Rochester The Kingdom of the Northumbers which was divided into two Kingdoms.
viz. Deira and Bernicia Catvellani, or, Catyeuchlani, Coritani, or, Coritavi
Dobuni, or, Dodunni Cornavii Part of the Silures Bedfordshire Buckinghamshire
Part of Hartfordshire Lincolnshire Leicestershire Rutlandshire Northamptonshire
Nottinghamshire Darbyshire Glocestershire Oxfordshire Cheshire Shropshire
Staffordshire Worcestershire Warwickshire Herefordshire Salenae Lactodurum
Verolamium Lindum Ragae, or Ratis Bennaventa Corinium Deva, or Devana
Viroconium Brannogenium Manduessedum Ariconium Sanday Stonystratford Verulam
Lincoln Leicester Wedon Cirenchester Westchester Wroxcester Worcester
Manchester Kenchester The Kingdom of Mercia. Dummonii Belgae Durotriges
Atrebati Cornwall Devonshire Somersetshire Wiltshire Hantshire Dorsetshire
Barkshire Uxela, or Uzela Voliba Isca Augusta Aquae Calidae Venta Belgarum
Dunium, or Durnovaria Nalcaea, or Caleva Lystwithiel Falmouth Exceter Bath
Winchester Dorchester Wallingford The kingdom of the West Saxons.

After this the Danes broke in, like a Violent flood upon the Northumbers; and
though often vanquished, yet being as often victorious, they at last seized on
the Monarchy of England, which was sometimes held by the Danes, sometimes by
the Saxons; till William Duke of Normandy took it from Harold, and established
the Monarchy; which has ever since continued in a Succession of Seven and
twenty Princes, down to our Present Gracious Sovereign, King James the Second.

Of ENGLAND.
map of England ENGLAND by Ro^^ Morden.


A Table containing the Counties or Shires, their Titles, Cities and Towns,
their Latitude, computed distance, and Measured distance from London. The
number of Market Towns, of Parliament Men, of Parishes in each County, and
their ancient Name.
Title. Counties or Shires. Titles Cities and Towns. Latitude. Com Did Me.
Did M T. P. M Par. Con. Old Names. Bedfordshire E. Bedford 51 8 40 94 9 4 116
Bedfordia E. Barkshire Reading 41 23 32 60 1^ 9 140 Readingum. B^ckinghamsa.
D.M. Buckingham 52 00 44 40 15 4 185 Buckingamia Cambridgshire E. Cambridg * 52
15 44 52 7 6 163 Camboritum Ely, B. C. 52 26 57 68 Eli^ Cheshire C. P. Chester,
B. C. 53 17 140 182 1^ 4 68 Deva D. Cor^wal Launceston 50 49 175 210 ^^ 44 161
Lanstaphadonia Tr^ro 50 27 211 263 D. Cumberland E. Carlisle, B. C. 54 59 229
^01 16 6 58 Luguvallum D^^byshire S. ^arby 52 58 98 1^^ 12 4 106 Derbia E.
Devonshire E. Exeter, B. C. 50 4^ 140 172 Isca Dami^^orum Z. Plymou^^ 50 ^^ 184
^1^ 4^ ^^ 35^ (...) E. Dorsetshire ^ Dorchester ^^ 41 100 1^3 ^^ ^^ ^^ D^^^n
D^^ham Darnam, B. C. 54 49 20^ ^^ ^ ^ 6^ D^^l^^n E. Essex V. C Colchester 51 ^^
44 ^^ ^^ ^ 415 Colonia Chelmsford 51 47 25 ^^ Canoni^m Glocesters^ D.
Gloucester, B.C. 51 54 ^3 1^5 ^^ 8 180 Cleram Hartfordshire Hartford 51 49 20 21
1^ ^ 1^^ Hartford^ E. St. Albons 51 45 20 21 Ver^l^mi^ Hampshire M. Winchester
C. B. 51 3 54 67 20 26 24^ Venta P^l^^rum ^ Southampton 50 5^ ^2 ^5 Clau^^n^^a
Hereford^hire V. C. Hereford, B C. 51 8 102 130 8 8 176 Herefordia E.
Hantingto^^^ E. Hentington 52 10 48 5^ 6 4 71 Hantingdonia E. Kent A. B.
Canterbury, C. ^^ 19 4^ ^7 28 ^0 ^^^ Daro^ernam E. Rochester, B. 51 24 2^ ^^
R^fa Lancashire C. P. Lancaster, ^4 27 187 2^2 2^ 14 61 Longo^^is E. Manchester
^^ 35 1^7 1^^ Mancunium Leicestershire E. Leicester 52 40 7^ 9^ 1^ 4 2^0 Rhagae
Lincolnshire E. Lincoln 53 15 102 1^^ ^1 12 631 Lindum E. Middlesex London B.
C. 51 31 0 0 5 8 73 Londinum Westminster 51 ^0 1 1 Vestmonasteri^m D. Monmouth
Monmouth 51 52 100 127 7 3 156 Monumetia D. Norfolk Norwich, B. C. 52 42 90 108
34 12 625 Nor^^um E. Yarmouth 52 44 100 122 Gariann^rum E. Northampton E.
Peterborough BC 52 35 62 76 13 9 326 Petroburgum F. Northampton 52 10 54 66
Antona Borealis D. Northand^^and D M E Newcastle 55 1 212 276 11 8 40
Gabrosentum E. Nottingham E. Nottingham 52 59 96 112 9 8 168 Nottinghamia
Oxfordshire F. Oxford, B. C. 51 46 47 59 12 10 208 Oxonium F. Rutland O^^h^m 52
42 74 94 2 12 47 Uxocona Shropshire F. Shrewsbury 52 46 124 157 Salopia Ludlow
52 27 105 136 16 12 170 Ludlo^ D. Somersetshire E Bristol, C. B. 51 28 94 115
Bristolium E. Bath, B. C. 51 23 87 96 34 18 385 A^p^e Calidae E. Staffordshire
F. Litchfield B.C. 52 45 94 118 19 9 1^0 Lichf^ldia E. Stafford 52 53 104 133
Staffordia Suffolk V. C. Ipswich 52 10 60 68 30 15 464 Gippevicum E. Bary 52 20
60 66 Villa Fa^stini Sur^y F. Guilford 51 12 25 30 11 14 140 Neomagus E.
Kingston 50 23 10 12 Regiopolis E. Sussex E. Chichester, B. C. 50 48 50 63 17
26 312 Cicestria Warwickshire E. Warwick 52 20 67 90 15 6 158 Praesidium E.
Coventry, B. C. 52 28 74 92 Conventria E. Westmorland Kendal 54 23 203 258 8 ^
26 Concangium W^^ashire E. Salisbury, B. C. 51 3 70 8^ 21 34 804 Sorbiodunum
Wilton 51 4 73 86 Worcestershire M.E. Worcester, B.C. 52 18 85 112 11 9 152
Bannogenium Yorkshire D. York, A B. C. 53 58 150 192 58 30 563 Eboracum D.
Richmond 54 24 185 40 Richmondia

THE better Part of the best Island in the whole Earth (anciently, together
with Scotland, as was said before, called Great Britain, and sometimes Albion)
was by Egbert the 18th King of the West Saxon; advanced to the Honor of an
entire Monarchy, who having with prosperous Arms subdued the principal Kingdoms
of the Saxon Heptarchy, styled himself the first Monarch; and commanded this
South Part of Britain should be called Angle, or Engle-l^nd, from the Angles a
people of the lower Saxons, of whom he was descended; by the French,
Angleterre; by the Germans, Englandt; and by the Inhabitants, England.

It is in length (from Berwick in the North, to the Isle of Wight in the South)
375 Miles; and from Dover in the East, to the Lands-End in Cornwall in the
West, about 328 of the same Miles; whereof 73 make a Degree: In Compass about
1300 Miles; in Shape, Triangular; and by computation contains about 30 Millions
of Acres, being about the Thousandth part of the Globe; and the Three hundred
thirty third Part of the habitable Earth.

England was, in the time of the Romans, divided into Britania Prima, Britania
Secunda, and Maxima Caesariensis; the first of these contained the South Part
of England, the second all the Western Part, now called Wales; and the third,
the Northern parts beyond Trent. After the Britans had received the Christian
Faith, they divided the same into three Provinces, or Archbishopricks, viz. of
London, which contained that of Britania Prima; of York, which contained that
of Maxima Caesariensis; of Caerlion, under which was Britania Secunda: But
afterward the Saxons divided it into Seven Kingdoms, as aforesaid.

At present, England, according to its Respect of Church and State, is subject
to a fourfold division: First into two Provinces, or Archbishopricks,
Canterbury and York; and under these are 22 Bishops, or Episcopal Diocesses, of
which Canterbury has 21, therefore called the Primate and Metropolitan of all
England; and that of York, three: Then there are Deanries 60, Arch- Deanries,
Prebendaries, and other Dignities 544, with 9725 Parochial Benefices, and
Vicaridges besides, of good Competency for the Encouragement of the Clergy,
who, for ability of Learning are not to be paralleled in the World.

A Catalogue of the Archbishopricks and Bishoprics of England and Wales, with
what Counties are under their Jurisdictions, and the Number of Parishes and
Impropriations that are in each Diocese.
Archbishopricks, and Bishoprics. Countries under each of their Jurisdictions.
Par. in Dioces Imp. Dioc Canterbury Has Canterbury, and part of Kent, besides
peculiar in the Diocese of Canterbury. 257 140 57 14 York Has Yorkshire, and
Nottinghamshire. 581 336 London Essex, Middlesex and part of Hartfordshire. 623
189 Durham Durham, Northumberland, and the Isle of Man. 135 87 Winchester
Hampshire, Surry, Isle of Wight, Gernsey, and Jersey, and Alderny. 362 131 Bath
and Wells Somersetshire 385 160 Oxford Oxfordshire. 195 88 Bangor
Carnarvanshire, Anglesey, Merionethshire, and part of Denbighshire. 107 36
Rochester Part of Kent. 98 36 Ely Cambridgshire, and part of Ely. 141 75
Chichester Sussex, and part of Hartfordshire 250 112 Salisbury Wiltshire and
Barkshire. 248 109 Worcester Worcestershire, part of Warwickshire. 241 76
Lincoln Lincoln, Leicester, Bedford, Huntington, Buckingham, and part of
Hartfordshire. 1255 577 St. Asaph Part of Flintshire, and part of Denbighshire.
121 19 St. David's Pembrokeshire, and Carmarthenshire. 308 120 Peterborough
Northampton, and Rutlandshire. 293 19 Landaff Glamorganshire, Monmouth,
Brecknock and part of Radnorshire. 177 98 Carlisle Cumberland, and part of
Westmerland. 93 18 Exeter Devonshire and Cornwall 604 239 Chester Cheshire,
part of Yorkshire, Lancashire, part of Flint, and part of Cumberland. 256 101
Bristol Dorsetshire 236 64 Norwich Norfolk and Suffolk 1121 385 Gloucester
Glocestershire 267 125 Hereford Herefordshire, Shropshire, part of
Worcestershire, and part of Radnorshire. 313 166 Lichfield Staffordshire,
Darbyshire, part of Warwickshire, part of Shropshire. 557 250

The second Division was by King Henry the Second into six Circuits, appointed
to the Itinerary Judges; who are twice in a year in the chief Town of each
County in their respective Circuit, to determine Causes, and administer Justice
for the Ease of the People.

The third is the Military Division, for the Raising of Horse and Foot for the
Kings Service: It is also divided by the Kings Justices in Air of the Forest;
and by the King of Arms into North and South of Trent.

The last Division is, that of Shires or Counties, first ordained by King
Alford, which are subdivided into Hundreds or Wapentakes, and those again into
Tythings. He also appointed a Vice-compt or Sheriff, whose Office was to look
after the Peace and Welfare of the Shire; To Execute the Kings Writs and
Precepts, and perform several other duties necessary for the Execution of
Justice, and Welfare of the People: And these Sheriffs are generally chosen out
of the chiefest of the Gentry. King Edward the Third ordained in every Shire,
certain Civil Magistrates, entitled Justices of the Peace, whose Duties are,
to look after the Disorders that arise in the Shire, or Hundred in which they
reside, and to punish Offenders.

There are in all England 25 Cities, 680 Great Towns, called Market Towns; 9725
Parishes, and in many of which are contained several Hamlets or Villages as big
as ordinary Parishes.

England is blessed with a sweet and temperate Air, the Cold in Winter being less
Sharp than in some parts of France and Italy, which yet are seated far more
Southernly; And the Heat in Summer is less scorching than in some Parts of the
Continent, that lie much more Northward;

For as in Summer, the Gentle Winds, and Frequent Showers, qualify all violent
Heats and Droughts; so in Winter the Frosts do only meliorate the Cultivated
Soil, and the Snow keeps warm the tender Plants.

The whole Country is exceeding Fertile, abounding with all sorts of Grain,
Rich in Pasture, containing innumerable quantities of Cattle, yielding great
plenty of all sorts of Fowl, Wild and Tame; Its Seas and Rivers infinitely
stored with all variety of excellent Fish: In its Bowels are found Rich Mines
of Lead, Tinn, Iron, Copper and Coal, as useful as advantageous to the Nation:
Nor does it want Mines of Silver, though rare, and but in small quantities: It
has excellent H t Baths, and diverse Medicinal Springs: It is bravely furnished
with Variety of pleasant Orchards and Gardens; luxuriant with all sorts of
excellent Fruits, Plants and Flowers.

The English are Governed by several Laws, viz. Common Law, Statute Law, Civil
Law, Canon Law, and Martial Law, besides particular Customs and Bylaws.

The Common Law of England is a Collection of the General Common Custom, and
Usages of the Kingdom, which have by length of time and immemorial
Prescription, obtained the Force of Laws; for Customs bind not the people till
they have been tried and approved time out of mind. These Laws were first
reduced all into one body, by King Edward the Elder, about the year 900;
revived by King Edward the Confessor; William the Conqueror added some of the
Customs of Normandy, since which Edward the First did settle diverse fundamental
Laws, ever since practiced in this Nation.

Where the Common Law is silent, there we have excellent Statute-Laws made by
the several Kings of England, by and with the advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of England; by their Representatives the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses duly Elected in Parliament.

Where Common and Statute Law take no Cognizance, As in matters transacted
beyond the Seas, and relating to the Admiralty, etc. Use is made of the Civil
Law, which ought to be the Product of the Common Reason and Wisdom of all
Mankind, and fitted for the Interest and Welfare, not only of one Nation, but
taking Care for the general Affairs of all people.

The Canon Law, is the many ancient General Councils of National and Provincial
Synods, the diverse Decrees and Judgments of the Ancient Fathers, etc. received
by the Church of England; by which she proceeds in her Jurisdiction; as chiefly
for the Reforming of the inward man, and matters accounted of a spiritual
Nature, as Cases Matrimonial, Testamentary, Scandals, Offenses against good
Manners, etc.

Forest-Laws are, for regulating offenses committed in, or relating unto some
Forest or Chase, for preservation of the Game, etc.

Martial Law extends only to Soldiers and Mariners, and is not to be practiced
in times of Peace, but only in War, and then and there, where the Kings Army is
afoot.

The Doctrine of the Church of England is Apostolical, contained either in
Express words of the Holy Scripture, or in the 39 Articles, and the Book of
Homilies in all things agreeable thereunto; the Worship and Discipline is in
the Liturgy and Book of Canons: By all which it will appear to impartial Eyes,
that the Church of England is the most exact and perfect Pattern of all the
Reformed Churches in the World. Let Italy glory in this, that she is the Garden
of the Earth; it may truly be said of England, that it is the Court, and
Presence Chamber of the Great Jehovah; which should engage us the more by Holy
Lives to walk suitable to such Mercies, and not to forfeit those inestimable
Privileges by our crying sins; for how can we expect that God should always
continue so Gracious to us, if we continually turn his Grace into Wantonness?

England is a Free, Hereditary, Paternal Monarchy, Governed by one Supreme,
Independent and Undeposeable Head, according to the known Laws and Customs of
the Kingdom: A Monarchy, that without Interruption has been continued 1000
years; in a word, a Government of a perfect and happy composition, wherein the
King has his full Prerogative, the Nobility and Gentry Civil and due Respect;
and the People in general, Masters of the Estates they can get by their Labors
and Endeavors, a Blessing that few Countries can boast of: O happy and blessed
England! Thy Valleys are like Eden, Thy Hills like Lebanon, Thy Springs as
Shiloe, and thy Rivers as Jordan; a Paradise of Pleasure, and the Garden of
God, enriched with all the Blessings of Heaven and Earth.

Her chief Cities are London, Londicium of Ptolomy, Ant. and Tac. Lunden Ger.
Londra, I^^. Londres Gal. the Epitome of England, the Seat of our British
Empire, the Chamber of the King, and the chiefest Emporium (or seat of
Traffic) in the World: To describe all things in this City worthy to be known,
would take up a whole Volume. I shall only say, seated she is in an Excellent
Air, in a Fertile Soil, and on the famous Navigable River Thomas, about 60
miles from the Sea, in 51 degr. 30 min. North Latitude.

In Length from East to West seven English miles and a half; and from North to
South two miles and a half: But of late years so increased and still
multiplying in Building, in all her parts, that there can no Bounds or Limits
be set to her Circumference. The Buildings fair and stately; for large
Piazza's, for spacious strait Streets, and stately Uniform Building, she has
not any Rival in Europe.

It had 130 Parish-Churches, besides Chapels; the Mother Church is that of St.
Paul, the only Cathedral of that Name in Europe: It was a Structure for length
690 foot; in breadth 130, in height 102 foot; and contained about three Acres
and a half of Ground: Built in the form of a perfect Cross, in the midst
whereof was raised a Tower of stone 260 foot high; and on that a Spire of
Timber, covered with Lead, 260 foot more. This stately Monument of England, and
Glory of the City of London, was Ruined by the late Dreadful Conflagration in
1666. Yet since our late Gracious Sovereign, Charles the Second, like another
Solomon, laid a New Foundation of such a Fabric, as for Magnificence,
Splendour, Figure, and Excellent Architecture, the World never saw the like: The
Model whereof was Designed by that Incomparable Architect, Sir Christopher Wren.

And here I cannot but give a short Account of the vast Damage and Spoil done
by th forementioned Fire: It has been computed that there were ^rnt wi hin the
Walls of the City 12000 Houses, and without 1000; Valued at three Millions, and
nine hundred thousand pounds Ster ing.

Besides 87 P ris^-Churches, the aforementioned Cathedral, the Royal Exchange,
the Magni icent Guild-Hal, the Cu^m-House, the many Halls of Compa i^, the
Gates, with other Public ^uildings, valued at two Millions. The War-Houses,
Stuffs, Money, and Goods lost and spoiled, were estimated to two Millions of
pounds. The Money spent in Removing of ^o^ds and Wares* in the Hi^ of Carts,
B^ats, Porters, etc. mod^ly compu^d, at the l^ast two hundred thousand pounds:
The whole Damage amounting at the least to Nine Millions, nine hundred thousand
pounds. And what is most Remarkable, that notwithstanding these excessive
Losses by Fire, the Devouring Pestilence but the Year before, and the
Chargeable War against three Potent Nations at the same time depending* yet
within four or five Years the City was Rebuilt, diverse stately Halls and
Churches erected; all infinitely more Beautiful, more Commodious, and more
Solid than before; for which all praise and glory be given to God by us and
Posterity.

The vast Traffic and Commerce of this City may be guessed at, by its Customs;
which, though moderate, compared with the Impositions of other Countries, did
formerly amount to about 300000 l. per Annum, and now are increased by Report
to a much greater Value.

Time would fail me here, to speak of its Antiquity, Stately Palaces, Streets,
Exchanges, Number of Inhabitants, Trade, and Government; of its well-fortified
Tower (the Grand Arsenal of the Kingdom:) Its incomparable Bridge, Public
Colleges, Schools, Hospitals, Workhouses, etc. I shall therefore only add,
London is a huge Magazine of Men, Money, Ships, and all sorts of Commodities;
the Mighty Rendezvous of Nobility, Gentry, Courtiers, Divines, Lawyers,
Physicians, Ladies, Merchants, Seamen, and all kind of Excellent Artificers, of
the most Refined Wits, and the most Excellent Beauties in the World.

Of the Universities, Oxford: Oxonium Lat. Calleva Ant. Oxenford Sax. Rhidichin
or Rhydychen Brit. And Cambridge: Camboricum Ant. Cantabrigia Beda. Granchester
Sax.
IN the beautiful Body of the Kingdom of England, the two Eyes are the two
Universities; those Renowned Nurseries of Learning and Religion, which for
number of Magnificent and Richly Endowed Colleges, for liberal Stipends to all
sorts of public Professors, for number of well furnished Libraries, for Number
and Quality of Students, exact Discipline and Order, are not to be Paralleled
in the whole World.

So famous beyond the Seas, and so much surpassing all other in Foreign parts,
that they deserve a far worthier Pen than mine to Blazon their Excellency. I
shall therefore only say, that nothing was ever devised more singularly
advantageous to Gods Church and Man's Happiness, than these Universities; from
whence men of Excellent parts, after seasonable time in Study, are called forth
to serve both in Church and State.

York, Eboracum Ant. Eburacum Ptol. Caerfrock vel Caer-Efroc Brit. is a City of
great Antiquity, esteemed the second of England; Famous for its Cathedral, for
the Birthplace of Constantine the Great, and the Burial-place of Severus the
Emperor; it is the Title of the Kings second Son, and an Archbishopric.

Canterbury, Durovernum, Darvenum Ant. and Ptol. Durovernia Beda, is remarkable
for being the Seat of an Archbishop who is Primate of all England.

Bristol, Bristolium, Famous for its Trade and Commerce, and for its Situation
in two Counties.

Norwich, Norvicum, for its Industry in Woollen Manufactures.

Salisbury, Sarum, for its rare Cathedral, wherein there are as many Doors as
Months, as many Windows as Days, and as many Pillars as Hours in the Year.

Windsor, Windlesora, pleasantly seated on the side of the Thames, and is
famous for its stately Castle, and Royal Palace of his Majesty Jam. II.

Gloucester is the Title of the Third Son of Great Britain, seated upon the
Severn, near the Isle Aldney, where was fought the Combat between Edmund
Iron-side, King of the English Saxons, and Canutus the Dane.

I had purposed to have given a more particular description of all the rest of
the principal Cities in England, but must defer it for a Treatise of England,
wherein each County is drawn for a Pocket-Volume after a more new and
compendious way than ever yet extant, I shall therefore here say no more of
England.

Of Wales.
map of Wales WALES by Rob Morden.


WALES is a Principality adjoining to, and annexed in Government with England;
Inhabited by the Posterity of the Ancient Britans, who being driven out of the
rest of the Land by the intruding Saxons, whom they sent for over to Assist
them against the Incursions of the Scots and Picts, sheltered themselves in
those Mountainous parts, and to this day retain their Primitive Language, which
has the least mixture of Exotic words of any now used in Europe, but by
reason of its many Consonants is l^ss pleasing to the Ear: The People are
Faithful, and very loving to one another in a strange Country, and to strangers
in their own. Their Gentry brave and Hospital, but generally subject to Choler,
suddenly moved to Anger, and as quickly pacified; and value themselves very
much upon their Pedigrees and Families. The Eldest Son and Heir Apparent of our
Kings of England is always Qualified, during the Life of his Father, with the
Title of Prince of Wales.

It Is bounded on all sides by the Sea, except toward England from which it was
once separated by a great Ditch called Offa's Dike, in many places yet to be
seen, which Dike began from the Influx of the River Wye, in the Severn, and
reached unto Chester, about 85 Miles. Most Writers tell us it is now divided by
the River Dee, and a Line drawn to the River Wye. But Monmouth being taken from
it, and added to England, its present Limits are the River Dee, and a Line
drawn to the small River Rumpney near Cardiff.

The Country is generally Mountainous, yet not without its fertile Valleys,
which bears good Corn, and breeds abundance of Cattle; Butter and Cheese.
Other Commodities are,

Welsh Freezes, Cottons, Bays, Herrings, White and Red, Hides, Calves-skins,
Honey, Wax. It has Mines of Lead, Lead-ore, Coals. It is well-stored with
Quarries of Free-stones, and Milstones.

It once contained three Kingdoms, viz. Gwineth, Venedotia, or North Wales.
Deheubarth, Demetia, or South Wales. And Powisland, or Mathraval.

It Is now according to an Act of Parliament in the Reign of King Henry the
Eighth, severed into two parts, viz. North Wales, and South Wales, each of
these contain six Counties, viz. in the North Anglesey, Mona Tac. Caernarvon,
Denbigh, Flint, Merioneth, and Montgomery. In the South, Brecknock, Cardigan,
Carmarthen, Glamorgan, Pembroke, and Radnor. Whose chief Towns are,

Beaumarish al Beaumorish. Bellomariscus, of old the chief of Anglesey, seated
upon the Menai River, founded by King Edward the first.

Aberfraw was the Royal Seat of the Kings of Gwineth, or North Wales. And,

Holy-Head, or Caergubi of the Welsh, a noted Promontory and passage into
Ireland. In this Island was the ancient Seat of the Dr^ids, brought under the
Roman Scepter by Julius Agricola.

Caernarvon, Arvonia of old, the best Town of that Shire, strong by Nature and
Art, founded by King Edward the First. In the Castle whereof Edward the Second
the first Prince of Wales was born.

Bangor, or Banch^r Bangoria Lat. Dignified with a Bishops See.

Aberconway raised out of the ruins of the Banonium of Ant. Canovijostium.

Denbish, Denbighia Lat. seated on the River Cluyd, once fortified with a
strong Castle and Wall.

Ruthin, seated in the Strat Cluyd. Wrexham, plenty in Lead.

Ll^ns^inan, a small Village, is famous for its Cave in the side of a Rock,
known by the Name of Arthur's round Table.

St. Asaph Llan-Elwy Welsh. Fannum St. Asaphi, an ancient Episcopal See,
founded by Kentigern a Scotch Bishop of Glasco, in Anno 560.

Flint, which gives Name to the County. Not far from Cajeruis is the famous
Well of St. Winnifrid, in English Holy-well, a place of great note, and much
resorted unto for the Cure of several Diseases.

In this County of Flint are yet seen some Ruins of the Bonium of Ant. lying
upon both sides of the Dee, turned afterward into a Monastery, and named
Bancornabury by Bid, and Banchor by Malmesbury; the first of the Britans,
containing 2100 persons.

Harlech had a strong Castle mounted upon a steep Rock, but reduced to ruins,
it is the place of Assizes for Merionethshire, and the chief Market of the
Mountaniers.

Bala seated near Llin-tegid, or Pimblemeer through which the Dee is said to
run and not to mingle with its waters.

Montgomery the Shire-Town is so called from Roger of Montgomery Earl of
Shrewsbury in the reign of the Conqueror.

Lanvethlin, or Llanvilling, is thought to be the Mediolanium of Ptolomy and
Ant.

Trellin, or Welshpool, seated on the Severn, and in a rich Vale, is the
greatest and best built Town in the County; and its Castle called Powis-Castle,
is a large and stately building.

Machleneth the Maglona of the Notitia.

Mathraval the Seat sometimes of the Princes of Powis.

Brecknock Brichinia Lat seated at the meeting of the Rivers Hodney and Vsk
over which it has a Stone Bridge. It contains three Parish-Churches, and was
once strengthened with a strong Castle.

Built Bu^ the Bul^um of Ant. pleasantly seated among the Woods on the Banks of
the Wie.

New Radnor thus distinguished from the old, the Magnae of Ant. and Magae of
the Notitia, seated near the Springhead of the Somergil, and in a pleasant
Valley.

At Prestaine seated on the Lug, are the Assizes kept.

Knighton is a well built Burrough-Town. The west-part of this County of Radnor
is very Rocky and Mountainous, the strong refuge of Vortigern King of the
Britains when pursued by the Saxons, and the fear and hate of his own Subjects.

Snowden-Hill was the safe retreat of Owen Glendor.

Cardigan Aber tyvi Welsh, Cevetica Lat. seated on a Rock on the Bank of Tywy
River near the Influx into the Sea, is the Shire Town, and governed by a Mayor.

Llan-beder has a Market on Tuesdays. Aber-y-stwith seated at the mouth of the
Rivers Ystwith and Ridol descending from the foot of the Philimon Mountain, as
does also the Teme, and Wye-River.

Llanbadernvaur, is a well built Town, graced with a fair Church, formerly an
Episcopal Sea, now the Parish Church of Aberystwith.

Caermarden, the Maridunum of Ptolomy, upon the River Tovy, over which it has
a fair Stone-Bridg, and it is a Town Corporate, governed by a Mayor, two
Sheriffs, and sixteen Burgesses, all clad in Scarlet, and is also famous for
the Birthplace of Merlin the British Prophet* Higher upon the top of a Hill
under which runs the Tovy, stood Dinevour Castle, the seat of the Prince of
South Wales.

Newcastle on the edg of Cardiganshire on the River Tyvi, thought to be the
Coventinum of Ptolomy, but Lyn Savatan near Brecknock is the Loventinam, or
Luentium. Camb.

In Glamorganshire, the chief Towns are Landaff, Fanum ad Tattam, seated on the
River Tavy or Taff, having ^ large Cathedral, a Bishops See, otherwise scarce
comparable to an indifferent Town, occasioned by its vicinity to Cardiff the
fairest Town in all South Wales. Containing two Parishes, and one Church. A
strong stately Castle. It Is governed by a Constable and twelve Aldermen, etc.
It Is the place of the Assizes, and the best Market in the Country.

Neath the Nidum of Ptolomy, is much frequented for Coals.

Swansey, or Aber-taw, is an ancient Port Reve Town, of a good Trade, by reason
of its Coal-pits, and industry of its Inhabitants. Boverton not far from
Cowbridg is the Bovium of Ant.

Loghar upon the River so called, is the Leuearum of Ant.

Pembroke the chief Shire-Town, seated on Milferd Haven, so large and capacious
that it may safely contain a 1000 sail of Ships, over which it has two fair
Bridges, a place of good strength, fortified with a Wall and a strong Castle
seated on a Rock.

St. David's, Menevia and Fanum Davidis, once a City of good account, now only
notable in that it is a Bishops See, and a fair Cathedral.

Haverfordwest is the Town where the Assizes are kept.

Tenby is seated upon a Rock, having a commodious Road for Ships.

Fishgard is the Abergwaine of the Welsh.

The Description of SCOTLAND.
map of Scotland SCOTIAE Nova Description per. Robert Morden


SCOTLAND is separated from England by the Rivers Tweed and Solway, and the
Cheviot Hills: The Ancient Inhabitants were the Britains, divided by Ptolomy
into many lesser Names, by Dion and Xiphilinus into two only general, viz. the
Calidonii and Meatae: Afterward called the Picts toward the wain of the Roman
Empire, from their Paintings, and for their better distinction from the civil
and clothed Britains, distinguished by Am. Marcellinus into the Picts
Ducalidoniae, and the Vecturiones: The Scots a Colony of the bordering Irish
intruding amongst and conquering the Picts, or Britains, all other Names worn
out, the whole are now accounted Scots.

The Length of Scotland I find set down by Heylin, to be 480 Miles, but the
breadth in no place more than 60 Miles; the truth of which will appear, if you
consider the Latitude of Solway-Frith, near Carlisle, the most Southern part of
Scotland; and Straitsby-head, the most Northern; you will find the greatest
length can be but 260 English Miles; and the breadth in the broadest place more
than 160 Miles, as you will easily see by the Map.

Scotland, according to its Situation, may be divided by the River Tay into two
parts, viz. North and South, commonly distinguished by the Names of Highland,
and Lowland. The first was the Ancient Kingdom of the Scots: The other the Old
Habitation of the Picts. The People of the former are by Nature and Disposition
rude and uncivil: The Inhabitants of the latter, in Disposition, Civility,
Language, and Habit, are much resembling the English, and are thought to be
Descended of the Saxons.

On the West part of Scotland are many Woods, Mountains, and Lakes: Toward the
East it is more Fruitful in Corn, especially Barley and Oats: Their Fruits are
not very Excellent, nor plentiful: but they have abundance of Fish and Fowl,
not much Cattle, nor big. Their chief Commodities are, Coarse Clothes, Freezes,
Fish, Lead, Oar, Feathers, Allows, Iron, Saltpeter, Linen cloth, Train-Oyl,
some Hides, and Tallow.

The Kingdom of Scotland consists of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons: These
with the Lords Spiritual Assemble together in Parliament, when called by Writ
from the King of Great Britain: who, by Reason of his Residence in England,
constituteth and appoints a Viceroy to Act under him at the said Session of
Parliament, called Lord Commissioner, who at present is William Duke of
Queensbury.

As to their Courts of Judicature, they have several: the Chief is the Session,
or College of Justice: consisting of a President, fourteen Senators, (seven of
the Clergy, and as many of the Laisy) whereunto is now added the Chancellor,
who is chief: and four Lords of the Nobility: besides as many Advocates and
Clerks as the Senators see convenient. These sit and administer Justice every
day, from nine to twelve, except Sundays and Mondays, from the first of
November to Christmas-Eve: and from the first of January to the last of
February: and from Trinity-Sunday to the first day of August: But now by Act of
Parliament the Summer-Sessions are taken away, and instead thereof they are to
be kept in March.

This Court is of great state and order, the Clerks write all the Material
heads that are pleaded at the Bar. And after the parties are removed, the
Senators consider the Arguments, and give sentence, and the major part carries
it. Their final Sentence or Decrees determines all business, there being no
appeal, only to the Parliament, who may receive and repeal their decisive
sentence.

The next supreme Court is the Justice-Court, where all Criminals are tried: it
consists of a Lord Justice General, and of a Lord Justice Clark, who is his
assistant. This Order was changed Anno 1669, and by Act of Parliament four
Judges were appointed to sit in this Court with the Lord Justice General, etc.
The Jury is made up of fifteen, the major part determines the matter. Besides
this Court, there are in every Shire or County Inferior Civil Judicatories, or
Courts kept, wherein the Sheriff of the Shire, or his Deputy decideth
Controversies and Lawsuits: but from these there are Appeals to the Sessions,
or Higher Court of Equity. There are likewise Judicatories, called
Commissarials, for Ecclesiastical Affairs.

The Shires of Scotland are, viz. Edinburg, Barwick, Peeblis, Selkirk, Roxburg,
Dumfreis, Wightown, Air, Renfrew, Lanrick, or Lanock, Dumbritton, or Dunbarton,
Boot, Inner, Ara, Perth, Striveling, or Sterling, Linlithgow, Clackmanan,
Kinros, Couper, and Fife, Forfar, Kinkardin and Marrischals, Aberdeen, Bamf and
Errols, Elgin, Nairn, Innerness and Ross, Cromarty, Tayn, Dornock, Weik,
Orkney. The Constabulary of Haddington. The Stewartries of Strath-yern,
Monteith, Annannaile, Kirkubright. The Baileries of Kyle, Carriek and
Cunningham.

Scotland is also divided into several Counties or Parts, Lothien, Merch,
Teifidal, or Tiviotdale, Eskdale, Easkdale, Liddesdale, Annandale, Nithisdale,
Galloway, Carrick, Kyle, Cunningham, Clidesdale, Lennox, Striveling or
Sterling, Mentieth, Fife, Strathern, Argile, Lorn, Cantire, Arran. Albany or
Braid, Albin, Perth, Athol, Anguis, Mernis, Buquihan or Buchan, Mar, Marray,
Lochabyr, Rosse, Southerland, Strathnavern and Cathnes.

The Government whereof is divided into two Arch-Bishopricks, Saint Andrews and
Glasco, under whom are several Suffragan Bishops.

Its chief places are, 1. Edinburgh, the Metropolitan City of this Kingdom,
Situate in a high and wholesome Air, and a Fertile Soil, consisting chiefly of
one Street about a Mile in length, out of which runs many smaller Lanes and
Streets. It Is strongly begirt with a Wall, and Fortified by a fair and strong
Castle, seated on the top of a Rock: a place Adorned with many fair Edifices,
Dignified with the Courts of Judicature, High Court of Parliament, and a
University.

2. St. Andrews, of Old, Fanum Reguli, has a fair Prospect toward the Sea,
near the fall of the Ethan: Fortified with a fair and strong Castle, Dignified
with an Archbishops See.

3. Glasco, pleasantly seated on the River Cluyd, over which it has a fair
Bridge: A place of good Account, Dignified with an Archbishops See, and a
University. Glasquum. Script. Scot.

4. Sterling, a place of good strength, and Fortified with a strong Castle.
Strivilingum vel Strevelinum seu Sterlinga.

5. Dunbritton, a place of great strength, having the strongest Castle in all
Scotland, both by Nature and Art. Castrum Britonum.

6. Falkland, pleasantly seated for Hunting.

7. Perth, or St. John's Town, a place of good Account, pleasantly seated at the
Mouth of the River Tay, between two Greens.

8. Aberdeen, situate on the Mouth of the River Don, and dignified with an
Episcopal See and a University. Aberdonia olim Devana.

9. Coldingham, Coldana Beda, Colania Ptol. famous for its choice Nuns. Peblis
and Selkirk, are Sherifdoms for the Valleys.

Jedburg and Roxburg are Sherifdoms, the last fatal to the Scots by the death
of King James the second, slain in that siege by the English.

Annan and Castle-Maban, are the two chief Towns, near Solway Frith, the Ituna
Aestivariam of the Ancients. Abercon, gives title of Earldom to the Duke
Hamilton. Dunbar Bara Ptol. or Vara. and Dumbarum, is memorable for the Battle
of 1650, Sept. 23.

Dunfreis is a rich and well traded Emporie upon the River Nith. Nobius of
Ptol. and at the mouth is Caerlaver^ck Castle, Cor^antorigum of old was the
House of the Lord Maxwels. Higher up the River is Morton, naming the Earls
Morton of the Name of Douglas. Higher is Sanghuar-Castle, whereof are entitled
the Lord Sanghuer, of the House or Name of the Creichtons. A little remote from
the River is seated Glencarne, the Earls whereof are of the House of the
Cuninghams. Kircoubright is a commodious Haven. Wighton a Sherifdom. Whithern
is the Leucopibia of Ptol. and Candida Casa of Beda.

Bargeny is the Berigonium of Ant. Cassil. Cast. the Seat of the Earls of the
House of the Kennedyes. Air is a Sherifdom, and a noted Port and Empory. Ji^win
a small Port. Eglington-Castle gives the Title to the Montgomeries. Douglas
upon the River Douglas in Douglas-Dale, names the ancient and Noble Families of
the Douglasses. Lanric Lanarcum, a Sherifdom at the Confluence of the Douglas
and Cluyd. Hamilton Castle upon the Cluyd, the Clata or Glota of Ptol. naming
the House and Marquesses of Hamilton. Bothwel, an Earldom upon the Cluyd, as is
also Crawford of the Clune of Lindley. Renfrew Vanduara, is a Sherifdom and
Barony Hereditary to the Lord Sempits. Dunblane, a Bishops See upon the Taich.
Lower down at the mouth of the Faith of Ferth, lie the Sherifdoms of
Clackmannan and Kinros. Aberneth, Victaria, at the fall of the River Ern into
the Tay, was the chief Seat of the Kings of Picts. Arrol upon the Tay, the Seat
of the Earls of Arrol. Athol was sometimes part of the Calidonian Wood, strong
Fastnesses of Picts and Northern Britons. Forfar, Orrhea of old is the Seat of
the Sherifs. Dundee, Alectum and Dei Donum, a rich and noted Port at the mouth
of the Tay. Brechin upon the Eske, is a Bishops See. Montross gives name to the
Earls of Montross. Dunnotyr-Castle in Mern, seated upon a steep and
inaccessible Rock, is the Seat of the Sherif. Between Loquabuir and Mar rises
the high Country of Badgenoth. In Buquhan lie the small Countries and
Prefect^res of Bamfsraith^ogye, and Boyn, places of Note; in Murray are Rothes
Castle, giving Names to the Earls of Rothes. Elgin, Forres, Nirn, are
Sherifdoms about the Lake Ness, and part of the M. Grampius of Tac. extending
to the Lake Lomond. In Rosse is the Country of Ardmeanuch, which gives Title
to the second Sons of the Kings of Scotland. Ch^n^ury is the seat of the
Bishop. Cromerty is a Sherifd m. Dun Robin Castle the seat sometimes of the
Earls of Sunderland. (Rosmarcheum of old.) Girnego Castle the seat of the Earls
of Cathenes. Dur^ ck and Wick, the seats of the Bishops. Vara or Varar
Aestuarium, is Murry-^rth.

In this Realm of Scotland there are two Famous and Wonderful Loughs, Nessa and
Lomond: the first never freezeth in the extremest Cold, and the Waters of the
second rage in the calmest Weather.

The Islands adjacent and belonging to Scotland are, 1. The H^brides, lying on
the West Side thereof, and are 44 in Number: the chief whereof are, Illa Jona,
Mula, Lewis, etc. Plentiful of Wood, Corn, Salmons, Herrings, Conies, Deer,
Sheep, in some with, in others without Owners.

2. The Orcades of Tac. or the Islands of Orkney in Number 31, lying from the
North and North-East point of Scotland: The greatest and chiefest Island is now
called Mainland, formerly Pom^nia: well stored with Lead and Tin, whose Chief
Town is Kirkwall, fortified with two Castles, and dignified with the Sea of a
Bishop: the Inhabitants commonly called Red-shanks.

3. Shotland Islands, or Schetland, the Thule, or Thyle of the Ancients, lying
about 20 Leagues Northwards from the Orkney, being many in Number: the chief of
which is called Shotland, being about 60 miles in length: The Inhabitants are
partly Scots, and partly a mixed People of Danes and Scots. Their Commodities
are Ling and Cod.

Toward North Barwick, near the shore, lies Bas Island, which appears to be a
High craggy Rock, and is Remarkable for the great number of Soland-Geese, by
some called Barnacles, and vulgarly thought to be engendered by the Fruit of
certain Trees dropped into the Water. But the Hollanders report, that the
Barnacles which they call Rot-Gausen, are bred in the Northern parts, and that
they couple together, lay, and hatch their Eggs. And Gerard de Veeo in his
third Navigation to Greenland, affirms that with his Companions they have
driven them from their Nests, and taken and eaten of their Eggs.

Besides, Anatomy discovers in their bodies where the differences of Sexes do
visibly appear, the Males having all the same parts as the common Drakes, and
the Females having their Ovaria as other Birds.

Between the Islands of Orkney and Shotland lie two Islands: one called
Fair-Hill, the other Fulo: about ten Leagues one from the other.

Thus much, in brief, as to the Situation, Length, Breadth, Division,
Fertility, People, Government, Chief Towns, and Islands of Scotland.

Of Ireland.
map of Ireland IRELAND. By Rob. Morden.


THE first Inhabitants (to omit the Fables of the Irish Chronicles) upon
probable Circumstances, were the Britans, together with the mixed Nations of the
Goths, Gauls, Africans, etc. though most Geographers are of Opinion, that its
first People came wholly out of Britain, being the nighest to it.

Ireland lies betwixt the 51 and 56 degrees of Northern Latitude, or betwixt
the middle parallel of the eighth Clime, where the longest day has 16 hours
and a half, and the 24th parallel, or end of the 10th Clime, where the same
has 17 hours and an half.

The first Inhabitants the Irish (for more ancient we find not) were by Ptolomy
distinguished into sundry lesser People and Names: The Rhobognii, Darnii,
Voluntii, Vennienii, and Erdinii, now containing Vlster. The Auteri, Gangani,
and Nagnatae, inhabiting C^naught. The Veli^ori, Vterni, Vodiae, and Coriondi,
now Munster. The Menapii, C^uei, B^ii, and Brigantes, now Leinster: whose
Cities were Rhigia, Rheba, Macolicum, Dunum, Laberus, Juernis, Nagnata, Regia
altera, Manapia, Wexford, and Eblana, Dublin, whose Interpretations, unless the
two last, we let pass as very uncertain. Toward the wain of the Roman Empire
they are named Scots (the occasion or reason hereof we find not) subduing the
neighboring Picts and Caledonians, and giving the Name of Scotland to the
Northern part of the British Continent. Leaving there this new affected name,
they lastly resume, and return here unto their first, and more wonted name of
Irish.

The first Onset it received, by way of Invasion, was by the Saxon Monarchs,
who made themselves Masters of some places, but could not long continue in
possession of them.

The next that in Hostile manner Visited it, were, the Northern Nations, Danes,
Swedes, and Normans: who scowring along the Seacoasts, by way of Piracy, and
afterward finding the weakness of the Island, made an Absolute Conquest of it,
under the Conduct of one Tung^sus: but were soon routed out by the Policy of
the King of Mead. After this, the petty Princes enjoyed their former
Dominions, till the Year 1172: at what time, the King of Leinster, having
forced the Wife of the King of Mead, was driven by him out of this Kingdom:
who applying himself to Henry the Second of England, for uccour, received Aid,
under the Leading of Richard de Clare, Surnamed Strongbow, Earl of Pembroke: by
whose good Success, and the Kings presence, the p^tty Kings, or great Lords,
submitted themselves, promising to pay him Tribute, and acknowledge him their
Chief, and Sovereign Lord.

But as the Conquest was but slight and superficial, so the Irish submissions
were but weak and fickle Assurances to hold in Obedience so considerable a
Kingdom, though the Charter was confirmed by Pope Hadrian.

So that it was not till the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign that the
same was wholly subjugated, and the Foundation laid of a lasting Peace with
Ireland, which soon after was very far proceeded in by King James, and fully
perfected, according to all Humane appearance, by our Gracious Sovereign King
Charles the Second: So that now Ireland is a Flourishing Island, Civil in its
self, and a good additional strength to the British Empire.

Ireland (called by the Latins, Hibernia: by the Greeks, Irnia: by Pomponius
and S^linus, called Juverna: by Ptolomy Juernia: by Orpheus, Aristotle, Strab^,
Stephanus and Claudianus, Jerna: by Eustathius, Vernia: by Diodorus, Irim: by
the Welsh, Yverdhon: by the Inhabitants Eryn. Irlandt Germanis, Irlanda Italis,
Irlande Gallis. Is in length 300, and in breadth 130 miles: about half as big
as England, and was Anciently Divided into five Provinces, each one a Kingdom
in its self, viz. 1. Leinster. 2. Mead. 3. Vlster. 4. Connaught. And 5.
Munster. But now the Province of Mead is reckoned for a Member or part of
Leinster.

These four Provinces compose that Kingdom: as beautiful and sweet a Country as
any under Heaven: being stored with many goodly Rivers, Replenished with
abundance of all sorts of Fish, sprinkled with brave Islands and goodly Lakes;
adorned with goodly Woods, full of very good Forts and Havens: The Soil most
Fertile, and the Heavens most mild and temperate, but not so clear and subtle
as the Air in England; and therefore not so favorable for the Ripening of Corn
and Fruits, as to the Grass, for all kind of Cattle. And in the Winter more
subject to Wind, Clouds, and Rain, than Snow or Frost.

It is an Island of great strength, as well by Nature as Art, by reason of its
Situation in such dangerous Seas; and the several Fortificaons and Castles that
the English have built since they were Masters of it.

Its chief Rivers are the spacious Shannon, the rolling Liffie, the sandy
Slany, the pleasant Boyne, the Fishy Banne, swift Awiduffe or Blackwater, sad
Trowis, wide Mayre, now Bantry Bay, the Woody Barrow, the spreading Lee, the
Baleful Our, or Shoure. Besides these Rivers, there are several Lakes, of
which Lough Erne is the greatest, being about 30 miles in length, and 15 in
breadth; and this, as all other of its Lakes, are well stored with Fish.

The Irish have had the Character of being Religious, (by which, perhaps, some
understand Superstitious) Amorous, Patient of Labor, Excellent Horsemen, and
the meaner sort extremely Barbarous, till Civilized by the Neighborhood and
intermixture of the English; yet still the wild Irish retain several of their
absurd and ridiculous Customs, accounting ease and idleness their greatest
liberty and riches.

The Ecclesiastical Government of Ireland is committed to the care of four
Archbishops, under whom are 19 Suffragan-Bishops: The Temporal Government is
now by one Supreme Officer, sent over by the King of England, who is called the
Lord Lieutenant, or Lord Deputy of Ireland; who, for Majesty, State, and Power,
is not inferior to any Viceroy in Europe. The present Lord Deputy is the Earl
of Tyrconnel.

Their Laws are correspondent with those of England, and they have their
several Courts of Justice; as Chancery, Common Pleas, King's Bench, Exchequer,
Courts of Parliament, and Justices of the Peace in every County.

The Commodities of this Island, are, Cattle, Hides, Tallow, Butter, Cheese,
Honey, Wax, Furs, Salt, Hemp, Linen Cloth, Pipe-staves, Wool, of which they
make Cloth, and several Manufactures, as Freezes, Ruggs, Mantles, etc. Its Seas
yield great plenty of C d-fish, Herrings, Pilchers, and other Fish: The Bowels
of the Earth afford Mines of Lead, Tin, and Iron.

The Province of Leinster, by the Natives called Leighingh, contains the
Counties of Kilkenny, Caterlough, Queens-County, Kings-County, Kildare,
East-Meath, VVest-Meath, VVestford, VVicklo, and Dublin; in which are
comprehended 926 Parishes, whereof 47 are Towns of Note, 102 Castles, well
Fortified by the English.

Vlster, being the largest Province of all Ireland, called by the Irish, Cui
Guilly, is divided into the Counties of, 1. Lough. 2. Cavan. 3. Fermanagh. 4.
Down. 5. Monaghan. 6. Armagh. 7. Colvane. 8. Dunna^l, or Tyrc^nnel. 9. Tir-Oen.
And, 10. Antrim: In which are comprehended 214 Parishes, whereof 14 are Towns
of Note, for Commerce and Traffic, and 30 Castles, for defense of the Country.

Connaught, by the Irish, Conaughly, is divided into these five Shires, or
Counties: 1. I^trim. 2. Roscommon. 3. Majo. 4. Mego. 5. Galloway. 6. Thomond,
or Clare-Country, in which are comprehended but eight Towns of any consequence
for Commerce and Traffic; and aabout 24 Cas les of old Erection, besides
Fortresses as have been raised in its later Troubles; the whole contains 366
Parishes.

Munster is now distinguished into the Counties of, 1. Lim^rick. 2. Kery. 3.
Cork. 4. Waterford. 5. Tipperary. And in these Counties are comprehended 24
Towns of Note and Trading, 66 Castles of old Erection, including in the whole
80 Parishes.

Its chief places are, 1. Dublin; a City Rich and Populous, as being the
Metropolis of all the Island; the Seat of the Lord-Deputy, an Archbishops See,
and an University. Adorned with many fair Buildings, viz. the Castle, the
Cathedral, the Church, the Archbishops Palace, the Collegiate Church, called
Christ-Church, the Town Hall, the College, etc.

2. Waterford, the chief City of Munster, on the River Sho^r; a well Traded
Port, a Bishops See, and the second City of the Kingdom; endowed with many
ample Privileges: Being safe and commodiously seated for the Use of Shipping
(for though a good distance from the Sea, yet Ships of the greatest Burden may
safely Sail to, and ride at Anchor before the Key;) and also for the
convenience of sending Commodities in smaller Vessels to several Towns in the
adjacent Countries.

3. Galloway, the principal City of the Province of Connaught; a Bishops ee,
and the third City of Ireland, for Beauty, Bigness, and Strength; Situate near
the Fall of the great Lake or River Corbles, in the Western Ocean: a noted
Emporie, well Inhabited, and of a good Trade, by reason of its commodious Haven
or Road for Ships.

4. Limrick, the second Principal of the Province of Munster, and the fourth in
Estimation of all Ir land; Situate in an Island compassed about with the River
Shannon, well Fortified with a strong Castle, a Bishops See, and well
frequented; distant from the Main Ocean about 60 miles, yet the River so large
and Navigable, that Ships of Burden come up close to the very Wall. Beautified
with a Cathedral Church, and a fair Stone-Bridg.

5. Kingsale, upon the Mouth of the River Bany; a Commodious Port, being the
only s fe and ready Port in all Ireland, for our English Ships and others to
Victual at, and Refresh themselves, when Bound for, and returning from the
West Indies, and other parts of the World.

6. Cork, a Bishops See, well Walled, and fitted with a commodious Haven;
Inhabited by a W althy and Industrious People, generally English; the
Shire-Town, and the only Through-fare of all English Goods and Commodities s nt
this way most commonly out of England for the two Remarkable Towns of ^imrick
and Galloway.

Armagh, Dublin, Cassil and Tuam, are the four Arch-Bishopricks.

VVicklow, seated on the Sea, whose Castle is a strong Rock.

Newcastle is guarded by its Sands.

Trim on the River Boyne.

Longford is the title of an Earldom.

Kildare, a Bishops See much celebrated in the Infancy of the Irish Church for
the Holy Virgin St. Brigid.

Wexford the Menapa of Ptol. seated at the mouth of the River Slane, is a fair
Town and a good Haven.

Inish Corthy is a Borough and Town Corporate.

Kilk nny on the Nure is a fair and wealthy Town, and honored with the Sea of
the Bishop of Ossery.

Londonderry is a fair and well built Town.

Dunagan gives its name to the County.

St. Patricks Purgatory is a Vault or narrow Cave in the ground, of which
strange stories are reported by the Irish.

Cloghar, dignified with the Sea of a Bishop. Dungannon the ancient residence
of the O-neals. Antrim gives name to the County. Knock-fergus, or Carikfergus,
seated on a large Bay the Vinderius of Ptolomy, not far from which once stood
the famous Monastry of Magio, so much commended by Bid. Down and Conner are
dignified with an Episcopal See.

Tredath or Droghdagh with its good Haven is a well frequented Town.

Carlingfort is a well frequented Port-Town. Owen Maugh the ancient Seat of the
Kings of Vlster, is near to Armagh, the Archbishopric and Primate of all
Ireland. Craven is seated on the Lake Cane. Kilmore on the Lake Navity.
Belturbet and Inish Killing on the Lake Earne.

Clare gives Title to an Earldom. Kylaloe is dignified with an Episcopal See,
near the Lake Derg on the Shannon. Roscommon not far from Loegh Ree. Elphen is
honored with the Sea of a Bishop. Athlone on the Lake Ree under the Curlew
Hills is defended by a Castle, and beautified with a Stone Bridge.

Letrim seated in a fertile soil near the L. Alyne.

Cassile is an Archbishopric, by Eugenius the third Bisho^ of Rome.

Holy Cross on the River Shoure, once a place much frequented by Pilgrims.

The North part of Tipperary bears the Name of Ormond, and is Honored in
giving Title to James Butler, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Ormond, Earl of
Brecknock, and Ossery, etc. Dingle has a commodious Port. Ardfart, or Ardart
is a Bishops See. Yoghil on the River Broadwater, is well fortified, and has a
good Haven, as also is Dungannon.

Of Denmark.
map of Denmark DENMARK by Robt. Morden at ye Atlas in Cornhil LONDON


DENMARK is a Monarchy which in former times was very formidable both to France
and England; and tho the English for many years have minded no other Interest
in this Country but that of the Baltic and North Trade, yet since these two
Crowns are now come to a closer Union, it may be worth our while to look back
and consider the State of that Monarchy, wherein the English has so great an
Interest by the late Marriage of George Prince of Denmark with the Princess Ann.

Concerning the Original of the Dane, we read not in any of the more ancient
Greek and Latin Authors, excepting Jornandes and Venantius Fortunatus, who yet
but slightly mention them. In the French and English Histories they are often
remembered, first in the reign of Theodorick King of Austrasia, about the year
516, under their King Cochliarius, foraging upon the Seacoast of Gaul-Belgick;
slain in their return by Theodebert, Son to Theoderick. After this in the reign
of Charles the Great, under their Prince Gotricus, or Godfrey, then warring
upon the Obertriti, the Inhabitants about Rostock test Krantzio; and Invading
Freisland with a Fleet of 200 Sail; threatening the Neighboring Saxons with
Subjection, and much endangering the Empire of the French, if the death of
Godfrey, and the Quarrels about Succession had not prevented.

Afterward their mention is very frequent and famous during the race of the
French Kings of the Caroline Line, and of the Monarchy of the English Saxons,
with sundry Fleets and Armies unresistible, invading France and England,
conquering and subduing the English Saxon Nation, and giving the Name of
Normandy to part of France, for by that common Name of Normans, the Danes, as
well as the Norweeis and Swethes were then called.

The word Dane, Saxo Gramaticus, Krantzius, and others fabulously derived from
one Dan, a King hereof, about the year of the World 2898. Becanus from Henen or
Denen, signifying a Cock in the Danish Language, the Arms of the Alani their
Progenitors. But how they got thither is very uncertain. Andreas Velleius in
Cambden, from the Dahi, a people of Asia, and Marck signifying a border.
Ethelwardus from Donia, a Town sometimes since seated herein. Montanus, from
Aha; signifying water, in regard, of the Situation of the Country. The more
Judicious fetch their Name from the Bay or Strait of the Sea called by Mela,
Sinus Codanus, about which Strait, and in the Islands adjacent, these people
since their first being known, have to this day inhabited. From this Name has
the Country been called Denmark. A Nation famous a long time for Arms, and
their many and great Victories achieved abroad. Themselves (never conquered by
foreign power) Lords sometimes of England and Swethland. Yet such is the
Vicissitude of Kingdoms, that Denmark was in the compass of four years, viz.
1657, 58, 59, and 1660, almost conquered by the Swedes, the History of which
Wars are well written by Sir Roger Manley; there you will find the King of
Sweden fighting with a wonderful resolution, and continued Successes, the King
of Denmark with an undaunted and indefatigable courage endeavors to check his
Career, till by the Mediation of the Dutch and English the Treaty of Roschilt
in Feb. 1658 was concluded, and the two Kings had a friendly Interview; Yet
soon after this the War broke out again, for the King of Sweden upon pretense
of nonperformance of Articles, with much secrecy got before Copenhagen in Aug.
1658, so that the Fate of Denmark depended upon the Invincible Courage and
Conduct of King Frederick, who defended Copenhagen with a Royal Magnanimity
till the death of the King of Sweden, when was concluded a second Peace upon
the Basis of the former Treaty. Not to mention the late Wars wherein these two
Northern Crowns were again imbrued in blood, where the Swedes were overcome
frequently in Field-fights, and in Sieges, as well as at Sea. They lost Wismar
in Mecklemburg, and several places in Schonen. And the Danes had made, as well
as Brandenburg, brave acquisitions and revenges, had not the French King forced
them to a Restitution.

The Monarchy of Denmark, as it is now united and incorporated, contains two
Kingdoms, Denmark and Norway; to which we may add Groenland, and the Islands of
Iseland, Schetland and Ferro. Denmark is situate between the Ocean and the
Baltic Sea, composed of a Peninsula, contiguous to Germany, a Coast adjoining
to Sweden, and of diverse Isles which are between the Peninsula and the Coast,
with some others further distant. Containing five more general parts or names
of 1 Jutland, 2. The Islands of the Sound, or Sundt. 3. Haland. 4. Schonen. 5.
Bleking.

Of Jutia.
THE Peninsula called Jutland, was once the Cimbria Chersonesus of Ptol. from
the Cimbrians its ancient Inhabitants; who were followed by the Juites, Saxons,
and Angles: after these came the Danes, by whom it is now possessed, being
divided into two parts, North and South; the South part is divided also into
two Dukedoms, viz. Ducatus Holsatia or Holstein, and Slesaicensis Ducatus, or
Sleswick.

Of the Dukedom of Holstein.
THis is a Woody, low and Marshy Country, and contains the Provinces of
D^tmarsia, Stormaria, Holsatia, and Wagria, properly and strictly so called,
Stormaria has for its chief places Hamburgh, Marionis Ptol. test Cluver, a
free Imperial City, and a Hans-Town of great strength, as well by Nature as
Art, adorned with fair and beautiful Structures, viz. the Council-House,
Exchange, and nine Churches; a place of great Trade, and well resorted to by
Merchants and Factors of several Nations. Anno 1374. this Town was adjudged to
belong to the Earls of Holstein, and that determination ratified by Charles the
Fourth. And it is said that the Hamburghers took the Oath of Allegiance to
Christiern Earl of Oldenburg, the first King of Denmark of that House, as Earl
of Holstein; but since they live as a free State; and being jealous of their
Liberty, or their Guilt, they are always in a posture of defense, and can upon
all occasion raise 1500 Citizens well armed, besides their constant Garrison,
and the promised assistance of the rest of the Hans-Towns. 5. Krempe, a Strong
and well Fortified Town, reckoned one of the Keys of the Kingdom. Gluckstadt,
which commands the passage up the Elbe. 6. Pinnenberg, a Strong place, and of
great consequence. 7. Bredenberg, one of the best Towns in the Country,
remarkable for the stout resistance it made against Walestein, 1628.

Wagre, has for its chief places Lubeca, Lubeck, the Treva of Ptol. test
Merc. Sans. and Brietio, an Imperial Free City, and a Hans-Town, and Bishops
See, built upon a rising Hill, on the summit whereof is placed the Cathedral
Church, called St. Mary's: besides which, it has nine others. The Streets are
strait and fair; it is Fortified with a Ditch and double Wall, in circuit about
six miles, and enjoys a good Trade. Heylin tells us there is not a City of
Germany which can equalize it, either for the Beauty and uniformity of the
Houses, the pleasant Gardens, fair Streets, and delightful Walks without the
Walls: seated upon the River Trave, which runs through the midst of it about
eight English miles from the Baltic. Guarded at the Rivers mouth by the Fort
Travemund, and is in a strict Alliance with the States General of the
United-Provinces, ever since Anno 1648. The other Towns are Newstadt, Ploen,
upon a Lake Fortified with a Castle, and belonging to a Prince of the House of
Holstein called Holstein Ploen. Oldenberg. Segebert the Lirimiris of Ptol. and
Oldeslee. Ditmarsh has for its chief places Meldrop the prime Town of the
Province. Lunden, and Heide. Holstein is the last member of this Estate, though
giving name to the whole, the chief places in it are Kiel, alias Chilonium,
Seated upon the Baltic Sea, a well traded Town, with a large Haven, and store
of Shipping. 2. Rensberg, the best Fortified, and Itzehoa on the River Stoer.

Adolph of Schaumberg in the Year 1114 (by Lotharius Emperor and Duke of
Saxony) was made the first Earl of Holstein. Adolph the last Earl; of which
House dying without Issue, the whole Estate fell to Christiern Son of
Theodorick Earl of Oldenberg, who being made King of Denmark, prevailed with
Frederick the third Emperor to have the whole Estate erected into a Dukedom,
1474. and by this means united to the Crown of Denmark, the Kings thereof as
Dukes of Holstein being counted Princes of the Empire; tho they neither send to
the Imperial Diets, nor contribute to the public Taxes, nor acknowledge any
Subjection more than Titular: Yet since this uniting of these two Estates, the
Title of Duke of Holstein, and a good part of the Country, was in a manner
dismembered from the Crown, and given to Adolph, Brother of Christiern the
third. Afterward another part of this Country was bestowed upon John, Younger
Brother to Frederick the Second. So that now the House of Holstein is divided
into three principal Branches, whereof the King of Denmark is the Head, and
standing Protector of the first Branch: The other two Branches are that of
Holstein Gottorp, and that of Holstein Sunderburg, which is divided into four
Branches; so that the Dukes of Holstein are now increased to a great Number: of
which the Duke of Holstein Gottorp is the most considerable; yet was greater
before he lost the King of Denmark his Brother in Laws favor, by engaging too
far with the Swedes, whereby he lost to the King his Rights of Sovereignty over
the Dukedom of Sleswick, and has little or nothing there left besides his
Castle at Gottorp. And in Holstein his Subjects are under Contribution, whilst
himself resides at Hamburg, his place of refuge.

Slesvicensis Ducatus, or Hertzogthumb Sleswick Incolis.
THIS is that part of Jutland which lies next to Holstein, and was first
erected a Dukedom by King Eric of Denmark, who gave it to Waldemar; but
Male-issue failing, it returned to the Crown, and was by Margaret Queen of
Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, conferred upon Getrard Earl of Holstein.
Afterward it fell, together with Holstein, to Christiern of Oldenburg King of
Denmark, by whom it was with Holstein Incorporated in that Crown. A Country
which once in three or four years the Inhabitants let the Pools overflow the
Land, where they catch plenty of Fish, and the mud inriches the Soil. Its chief
Towns are Schleswyck, Slesuicum, and Heideba, test Crantzio, an Episcopal See,
and Head of the Dukedom, Seated on the River Slay, which falls into the Baltic
Sea; where it has a commodious Haven. 2. Husum, Seated on the River Eyder,
Fortified with a Castle. 3. Haders-leben, Fortified with the Strong Castle
Hansberg. 4. Flensberg, with its commodious and deep Port. Between Flensberg
and Sleswick is a Country that goes by the name of Angelen, from whence England
had its first denomination ever since King Egbert. 5. The Port of
Christian-pries, now Fortified by the Fort Frederick. 6. Gortop, a trong Fort
or Castle, the Residence of the Duke of Holstein. 7. Frederick-stadt upon the
Eyder, built by one of the late Dukes, intending to have set up a Trade of Silk
there: to which purpose in the year 1633, he sent a splendid Embassy into
Muscovy and Persia, whose Travails are described by Olearius.

Of North-Juitland.
NOrth-Juitland, is divided into four Diocesses, Ripen, Arthusen, Albourg, and
Wibourg.

The Diocese of Ripen, contains seven Walled Towns, and ten Castles; its chief
places are Ripen, an Episcopal Sea, Fortified with a Castle. 2. Kolding, the
place where Toll is paid for the Cattle that passes that way. 3. Frederick Ode,
or Frederica, lies in a situation of that importance, that Charles Gustavus
having taken it in the late Wars 1657, opened himself a way to pass his Army
over the Ice into all the Neighboring Islands, and to alarm Copenhagen: an
Action both bold and unheard of; for he marched his Cavalry and his Carriages
over a great Arm of the Sea, where before a single footman was afraid to expose
his life.

The Diocese of Artbusia, or Arthusen, contains seven Cities, and five Castles;
its chief places are Arthusen, a well frequented Port. Kalla a Strong place,
Horsens and Renderen.

The Diocese of Aelbourg, Aelburgum, has for its chief places Albourg, at the
mouth of Limford-Bay. Nicoping, Hirring, Wansyssel, Thysted and Scagen, or the
Scaw, the northermost part of Juitland.

The Diocese of Wibourg has three Castles, and three Walled Towns; the chief
is Wibourg, where are the Courts of Judicature for all Juitland.

The chief Islands belonging to Denmark, that lie dispersed in the Baltic See
are, Zeland, Fionia or Funen, Alsen, Arroe or Aria, Langland, Laland, Falster,
Moan, Huen or Ween-Island, and Bornholm.

Of the Baltic Sea.
THIS is the Sinus Codanus of the Ancients, otherwise called Sucvicum M^re seu
Balticum. Die B^lth, or Oostzee, Belgis, La Mar Baltique Gallis, Warezkovie
More, Russis. It has three several passages into it from the Ocean, all of
them under the command of the King of Denmark, the safest and most usual is
that famous Strait called the Fr^tum Sundicum, Le Sund, Gallis. Straet Van
Sund. Batavis, Oresund Danis. The Sound, Anglis. So great a passage, that there
often sails 200, sometimes 300 Ships through in one day, and is not above four
miles over in the narrowest place. The second passage or Inlet lies between the
Islands of Zeland and Funen, and is about 16 miles over, and is called
B^ltsound, or the great Belt. The third passage is between Funen and Jutland,
not above eight miles over, and is called the lesser Belt.

Of Zeland.
ZEland, of old Codanonia, the greatest Island of the Baltic Seas, is situate
near the Main Land of Schonen, from which it is separated by a narrow Straight,
abou four miles over; which is called the Sound: through which all Ships must
pass that have any Trade or Commerce in these Seas, and pay a Toll or
Imposition to the King, according to their bigness, or Bills of Lading; by
which arises his greatest Revenue; And for the security of this passage, there
are built two very strong Castles, the one in this Isle called Cronenburg, the
most delightful Seat in the World, affording a profitable and pleasant Prospect
of all Ships that Sail through the Sound; the other in Schonen, or Scandia,
called Elsenburg. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth our Eastland-Fleet was by the
King of Denmark threatened to be sunk in case they passed this Sound or Straits
of Elsenour, yet they made the Adventure, having only one Man of War, viz. the
Minion, and kept their course, maugre all opposition, without any wound
received forwards and back again.

The chief City of this Island is Haphnia Kiobenhaven, Danis. Koppenhagen Ger.
Kopenhaven Belg. Copenhage Gal. Copenhagen Angl. the Met opolis of the whole
Kingdom, sometime the Residence of the King, a University, Seated near the Sea,
with a good Port, and safe Road for Ships; Fortified with a Strong Castle,
containing one of the Fairest Arsenals in Europe; wherein is a Celestial Globe
six foot Diameter.

Christiern the Fourth having laid the foundation of a New City in the little
Island of Armager, joined it to the old by a Bridge, and called it by the Name
of Christierns Haven; so that now it is divided into two parts; in the New Town
is the Royal Castle, the Mint, the Exchange, and the Arsenal before mentioned.
This City was taken by Frederick Anno 1522, and in the year 1536 after a years
Siege it was surrendered to Christiern the 3d. The Citizens now enjoy the
greatest privilege of any City in Europe.

Roschildt is the Burying place of the Danish Kings. Elsenour is near to the
strong Castle and Palace of Cronenberg, the Fortifications whereof was and is
the Key of the Baltic Sea, enlarged into the Sea with incredible charge and
pains by Frederick the 2d. The Surrender of this Castle to the Swedes by a
Stratagem, Sept. the sixth 1658, was like to have lost Copenhagen, and
consequently the whole Kingdom.

Fredericksberg is a Fortress built in a pleasant Plain, oftentimes the place
of the Kings retirement; but most famous for that solemn Interview and
Entertainment that happened between the late Kings of Sweden and Denmark upon
the Conclusion and Ratification of the Roschildt Treaty. Other places are
Kallenburg, Rinstead, Koge. Korsoer is the place where K. Charles of Sweden
landed his Army in his Second Expedition against Denmark, Aug. 8. 1658, five
Months after the aforesaid Interview of the two Kings at Frederixburg.
Nestwood, Waringburg was the first place where the King of Sweden set his Foot
in Zeland in his first Expedition. In this Island are reckoned 340 Villages.

The Island of Fionia or Funen, is the assignment of the Prince of Denmark;
it is Seated between Zeland and Juitland, separated from the first by a narrow
passage called the Belt, from the last by a narrower, called Midle-far-sound.
It Is a fertile Soil, and pleasant situation.

Its chief place is the well Traded Odensee, an Episcopal See, formerly the
Seat of the General Assemblies of the Kingdom, now kept at Copenhagen: adorned
with two fair Churches, and neat buildings; near this place Count Guldenlew the
Viceroy of Norway was overtaken in his Coach by Charles King of Sweden in his
first Expedition. Other Towns, are Midlefare, Swinberg, with several other good
Towns, four Royal Castles, and 264 Villages, besides Gentlemen's Houses.

Alsen is a small Island belonging to the Dukedom of Sleswick, whose chief
place is the Castle of Sunderberg, giving Name to a Branch of the Royal Family,
the Duke of Holstein Sunderberg.

Arroe or Aria, is a small Island belonging also to the Duke of Sleswick.

Langland and Laland, the first is the largest, the other the most plentiful in
Corn and Chestnuts; whose chief place is Naskow a Town well Fortified.

Falster, is a small Island fertile in Corn, its chief place is Nicopin, of a
pleasant situation, called the Naples of Denmark.

Moan Isle is about twelve Miles long, and six broad, the chief place is Stekoo
where the Swedish Forces found a greater resistance than in any of the other
Islands.

Huen or Ween is remarkable for the observations of that famous Astronomer
Tycho Brahe.

The Island of Bornholm was granted to the Crown of Sweden by the late Treaty
of Peace; but since, the Danes have exchanged it for an equivolent propriety of
certain Lands in Schonen.

Cross we now over the Sound, and take notice of the other part of this
Kingdom, which lies on the East Continent, called Scandia, under which general
Name it contains the whole Kingdom of Norway, the greater part of the Kingdom
of Sweden, and some part of Denmark. That which belongs to Denmark is divided
into three Provinces, Haland, Schonen and Bleking, now under the King of
Sweden, by the Roschilt Treaty; yet here mentioned, because the places in the
Map are more plainly seen than in the Map of Sweden.

Haland, is a Province for fertility of Soil, sweetness of Air, store of Fish,
plenty of Lead and Brass Mines, scarce inferior to any; its chief places are
Wansbourg, Laholm, Helmstat, Falkenburg, and Torkow.

Schonen, is the pleasantest Country in all Denmark, most abundant in fruits,
and shoals of Herrings; its chief places are Lunden, the Metropolitan
Archbishopric of Denmark, with its famous Dial, where the Year, Month, Week,
Day and Hour throughout the Year, as also the Motions of the Sun and Moon
through each Degree of the Zodiac, the movable and fixed Feasts, etc. are
distinctly seen, being finely adorned and set forth in variety of delightful
Colors. Other places are Goburgam, or Elsinberg, Fortified with an impregnable
Castle, and one of the Forts defending the Sound over against Cronenburg,
Lanscroon, Corona-Scaniae, Malmogia, or Elbogen, Tillburg, Vdsted, Walleburg,
Simmers-haven, and Christiernstadt, or Christiern-dorp.

Bleking, is Mountainous and barren; its chiefest places are Christian^ple,
Ahuys, Selborg, Ellholm, Rotenby, and Carels-haven, often mentioned in the late
Wars.

It has been an Hereditary Kingdom ever since the year 1660, for before it was
Elective; so the Nobility do not enjoy those Privileges which they did before.

The King styles himself, Earl of Oldenburg and Delmenherst, as being the
Eighth King of that House to which the Crown of Denmark fell in the year 1448,
by the Election of Christiern the first; and is to this day in their possession.

The opinion of Luther has been entertained in Denmark ever since the Reign of
Frederick the First, who was Elected Anno 1523, so that there are two
Archbishops, and thirteen Bishops for Denmark.

The Forces of this Kingdom may be known by their former, and now late
Undertakings against the Swedes; by which it appears, that they can raise a
strong power at Sea, and make good Levies at Land, for defense of their own
Dominions.

The Revenue of this King consists chiefly in the great Impost laid upon all
Ships which pass through the Sound, which is the Key of the Baltic; also in
some Crown Lands, a great yearly Toll made of the Cattle; as also of the Fish
transported into other Countries.

The Danes are generally of good Stature, clear of Complexion, and healthful;
crafty and provident in their affairs, peremptory in their assertions, and
opinionated of their Actions; Religious, Just in their Words and Contracts,
good Soldiers both at Sea and Land. The Women are fair, discreet, and
courteous, fruitful of Children. The Danish Ladies love hunting, and more
freely entertain at their Tables, than in their Beds, those that come to visit
them.

For great Captains and men of War, it is famous; for Godfrey or Gotricus, who
endangered the Empire of France; for Sweno and Canutus the Conquerours of
England. For men of Learning, Tycho Brahe the Prince of Astronomers, Hemingius
a Learned Divine, Bertholinus a Physician and Philosopher, John Cleverius, the
Historian and Geographer.

Of the KINGDOM of NORWAY.
NOrvegia, Lat. Nerigos Plin. Norway, Angl. contains the Western part of the
Peninsula of Scandinavia; the Eastern part being part of Swedeland. A long ridg
of Mountains making the separation, leaving Norway toward the Ocean, and
Swedeland toward the Baltic Sea. From hence are transported Train-Oyl, Pitch,
Stock Fish, Masts for Ships, Deal-boards. The Coast of Norway, though of a
large extent, has few good Ports by reason of the small Islands and Rocks that
inviron it, and the Gulf of Maelstroom which swallows and endangers all the
Ships that come nigh it. Herbinius tells us, that this Northern Charybdis or
Vorago, by the Inhabitants Moskestroom, is forty miles in extent. Kircher says
it is thirteen miles in Circumference; that it has a motion ascending and
descending six Hours, by sucking in waters, and as many throwing them forth
again. That part which lies toward the Pole, is full of Forests and Mountains,
wherein there are some few Mines of Copper and Iron. In the year 1646, was
discovered near Opslow or Anslo, a Mine of very good Gold, which gave the
Inhabitants occasion to say that they had got the Northern Indies. But that
Boast endured no longer than the Mine, which presently vanished for fear of
being ri^ed.

Opslo, Ansloye Galis, the Ansloga of old, it was burnt down in the time of
Christiern the Fourth King of Denmark, and since called Christiana; it is a
Bishops See. Aggerhad is a Castle near to it full North from Seagen, the most
Northern point of Jutland. Stafanger is a Sea-Town, with a good Port, near
which is the Fort Doeswick. There is the Herb Ossifraga of Norway which sna s
the bones of Cattle that tread upon it. East of Drontheim lies the Country of
Jemperland, formerly part of Norway, but was by the Treaty of Bromsbroo Anno
1645, yielded to the Swedes, to whom it is still subject.

This Kingdom has five Governments, with as many Castles, Bahus, Aggerhus,
Berghen-hus, Dronthem-hus, and Ward-hus. That of Bahus, with a Castle of the
same name upon a Rock, was delivered to the Swedes by the Treaty of Roschilt,
Berghen is the better City, the Seat of the Viceroy, with a new Fort called
Fredericksburg; and a Port into which Vessels have an easier entrance, and
where they are safe from the Winds, by reason of the high Mountains which
inviron it: the Merchants of the Hans-Towns have there a House and a Magazine.
Dronthem, in Latin Nidrosia, the Court of the ancient Kings of Norway, is very
much fallen to decay, yet it still ^tains the Title of an Archbishopric, and
the Remains of one of the fairest and most magnificent Churches of the North:
Ships ride s^f^ ^e Harbor, but they must have very good Pilots to carry them
in. Here the People make a kind of Bread of Barly-Meal, and Oats, which they
bake between two hollow Flint-stones, which Bread ke ps thirty or forty years.
The Norwegians are little subject to sickness, and of such a Constitution, that
when they are in a Fever, one slice of Bacon does them more good than a potched
Egg: their great inclination to Sorcery, makes them have the reputation of
Selling the Winds to the Seamen.

Finmark, which makes part of Lapland, advances into the Frigid Zone, so that
day or night continues alternately for several Months together. The Inhabitants
claim nothing of Property, but take the first place that pleases them, here to
day, in another place to morrow. They live upon Fish, and Hunting, and only pay
an acknowledgment of certain Skins to the King of Denmark, and carry their Fish
to Berghen. The Castle of Wardhus, with a Borough of 300 Houses, the most
Northernly of the whole Continent, is in the middle of a little Island, where
it serves only to force the payment of certain duties from those that Traffic
to Archangel in Moscovy. The Haven is in the Western part of the Island, which
is separated from the Land by an arm of the Sea, about a Quarter of a League
broad, through which the Ships make Sail, and the places adjoining are not so
subject to the Ice, as other parts of the same Sea.

As for the Norwegians, we have not read of them in any ancient Author; both
Name and Country seem more lately to have been given from their Northern
Situation; uniting with the Danes and Swedes, they were better known in the
time of the French Empire, by the name of Normans; under which appellation in
the time of Charles the Simple they got the Province of Normandy, conferred on
Rollo the first Duke thereof, Anno 912; afterward settling in their own
Country, they were called Norwegians, from their Northern Situation, Governed
by their own Kings till their final Subjugation by the Danes, which was by
means of the Marriage of Haquin the last Prince of N^rway unto Margaret Queen
of Denmark, Norway and Sweden, a second Semi^amis in the History of those
times; who having once got sooting in Norway so assured themselves of it, that
they have ever since possessed it as a Tributary Kingdom, so that now Norway
and Denmark are both fellow Subjects under the same King.

Of Swedeland.
map of Sweden and Norway SWEDEN and NORWAY by Robt. Morden


THE Monarchy of Sueovonia, or Suecia Lat. Sweden Incolis, Suede Gal. Suetia
Ital. is the most ancient in Europe, if it be true, that it has had above a
hundred and fifty Kings; and that the first among them was the Son of Japhet,
one of the Sons of Noah. Perhaps for this reason it was, that at the Council of
Basil a Swedish Bishop had the Confidence to demand of the Presidents the
precedence before all the Bishops of Christendom. Some Historians begin to
reckon the Kings of Sweden from Jermanicus; and demonstrate to us, that the
Kingdom was Elective till the Reign of Gustavus de Vasa, or Ericus, who made it
Hereditary to his Family in the year 1544; and at the same time put down the
Roman Catholic Religion, to Embrace the Lutheran Doctrine; under this pretense
of Religion Charles the Ninth of Sudermania, deprived his Nephew Sigismund of
his Crown, who had been the 13th Elective King of Poland of that Name. In the
Reign of the Emperor Charles the Great, we find them to have been a Free State
different from that of the Danes, entertaining then Harioldus and Ragenfridus
Kings of that Nation, driven out by the Sons of Gotericus. In the Reign of
Sweno the First, and Canutus the Great, they were subject to the Danes. By
Queen Margaret about the year 1387, they were again subdued to the Danish yoke;
after long Wars sundry defections and recoveries, not fully delivered until the
year 1525, freed by Gustavus aforesaid, and ever since commanded by Princes of
their own Nation. The ancient Inhabitants of this Nation are supposed to be the
Suiones, or Sitones of Tacitus. Inhabiting the greater Scandia of Ptol. by
Aimonius called the Sueones, in his 48 and 101 Chap. By Jornandes de Rebus
Geticis, the Suethici, at this day by long corruption the Sueci, giving Name to
the Country now called Suetia, or Swedeland, extended for a great space of Land
betwixt the Baltic and the Frozen Seas.

The King of Swedeland styles himself King of the Swedes, Goths, Vandals, Great
Prince of Finland, Duke of Estonia, and Carelia, Lord of Ingria; and bears in
his Arms three Crowns. The present King is Charles the Eleventh, of the Family
of the Palatine of Deux Ponts. The Goths and Vandals are famous in History for
their Conquests: So have the Swedes been in the last Age through the valor of
their late Kings, and the conquests they have made upon their Neighbors, which
had made them almost Masters of the Baltic.

The Peace at Bromsbroo near Christianople, Anno 1645, obliged the King of
Denmark to restore Jempterland and Herendall to the Swedes, and to surrender
him the Isl^nds of Gotland and Oesel to perpetuity, with the Province of
Halland for thirty years.

The Peace of Roskil near Copenhagen 1658, surrendered Halland wholly to the
Swedes, together with Schonen, Bl^king, and the Island of Bornholm, (which
afterward returned to the Danes by exchange of other Lands) the Fortress of
Bahus, and the Bailywick of Drenth^m.

The Peace at Copenhagen 1660, confirms the Treaty of Roskil, except for the
Bailywick of Dronthem; and acquires the Island of Ween.

The Acquisitions of the Swede from the Empire by the Peace of Munster, were
the Duchy of Lower Pomerania, and in the Vpper-Stetin, Gartz, Da^ and Golnau,
the Island and Principality of Rugen, the Isles and Mouths of Oder; the
Dukedoms of Bremen and Ferden; The City Signiore and part of Wismar, Wildhusen
in Westphalia, the privilege to attempt the rest of Pomerania, and the new
Marquisate of Brandenburgh.

The Treaty of Oliva near Dantzick 1660, was so advantageous to this Kingdom,
that the King of Poland there utterly renounced the Title of King of Swedeland
for the future; and consented that Livonia from thenceforth should be
Hereditary to the Crown of Sweden. This was intended of Livonia upon the North
of the River Duna, where only Dun^mburgh was reserved to the Crown of Poland,
according to the Truce made at Stumsdorf for 26 years, Anno 1635.

The Peace with Muscovy restored to Sweden all that the Grand Duke had taken in
Livonia.

The King of ^weden pretends to the Succession of Cleves and Juliers, by Title
from his Great Grandfather, John Duke of Deux Ponts, who Married Magdalene,
the thirteenth Sister to Duke John-William.

In the Estates of this Kingdom, the Countrymen make a Corporation, or Body,
as well as the other Orders.

Swedeland contains that part of Scandinavia, which is the best, as lying
toward the East. The cold Weather is there very long, and sometimes very
bitter; however the Inhabitants do not so much make Use of Furs, as they do in
Germany; they only wear Night-Caps, Woollen-Gloves, Just-a-corps, and make
great Fires of Wood, with which they are well stored.

There are so few Sick People among them, that Physicians and Apothecaries have
little or no Practice. The Inhabitants are equally Rich, and their greatest
Revenue consists in Copper, whence the most part of the Europeans fetch it, to
make their small Money, their Cannon, and their Bells. The City of Stockholm
alone has in the Castle above 800 Pieces of Great Artillery; and it is
believed, that in all the Kingdom, there are above 80000. Upon review of the
Militia made 1661, fourscore thousand Men were Mustered in Arms.

This Country being so full of Mountains and Woods, afford very little Corn; so
that in times of Scarcity, the Poor are forced to eat very bad Bread. The
Commodities of the Country, besides Copper, are Butter, Tallow, Hides, Skins,
Pitch, Rosin, Timber, and Boards. The Cities are very subject to Fire, in
regard the Houses are all built of Wood. The Lakes and Gulfs are more
considerable than the Rivers: Nor is there any Trade but upon the Coasts, where
there is no venturing without a Pilot, because of the great number of Rocks.
The Ice there is so thick, that Wagons go safely upon it. In other places, the
Snow affords them the Convenience of Traveling in Sledges. The Horses are fit
for War; for, besides that they are easily kept, and rarely sick; they are well
used to the Road; they carry their Rider swimming, they readily take wide
Ditches, they are Courageous and Nimble; and will Assail the Enemy of their
Rider with their Heels and Teeth both together.

Under the Name of Sweden are comprehended the Countries of Gothia, Suecia,
Lapponia, Finlandia, Ingria, and Livonia: wherein is contained 35 Provinces
(besides the Acquisitions ^foresaid) wherein Bertius reckons 1400 Parishes:
The two first toward the West, and the three last toward the East; the Gulf of
Finland between them both.

Gothland, whether so called from the G^s, or falsely affecting that more
Glorious Name, cannot well be known; is divided into Ostre-Gothland, and
Westro-Gothland: And those that Conquered Spain were called Visgoths. Calmar is
a strong City, and the place where the Swedes usually set Sail for Germany: The
Citadel is as highly esteemed in the Northern parts, as that of Millain in the
South. Norkoping is full of Copper-Forges, for which reason most of the
Europeans fetch Cannons from thence. Link^ping a Bishops See, where Olaus
Magnus was Born, is Remarkable for the Victory of Charles of Sudermania,
afterward King of Sweden. There are several other Cities, whose Names
terminate in Koping: that is the Marketplace. ^mburg, where King Charles the
Ninth died, is a new Town, with a Port upon the Ocean, Lodusia Sans. Daleburg
is a fair Town, well f^rt^ed with a s rong Castle.

Swedeland communicates its Name to other Provinces of this Kingdom; of which,
Stockholm, or ^i^, is the Capital City, accommodated with a Royal Castle, and a
Seaport at the Mouth of the Lake M ler, which they formerly had a Design to
have cut into the Wener-Lake, to have joined the Baltic and the Ocean
together, so to spoil the Passage of the Sound. This Wener Lake is said to
receive 24 Rivers* and disburden its self at one mouth with such noise and
fury, that it is called the Devils-mouth. This City is far better ^urni^h'd
than it was before the War with Germany. In the Year 1641, they began to
streighten the Streets, and build their Houses Uniform. The Harbor is very
Secure, so that a Ship may Ride there without an Anchor. It has three Channels,
which carry the Vessels between certain Islands and Rocks. The Kings Ships lie
at Elsenape: Vpsal, Defended by a great Castle, where is the Metropolitan
Church, where the Kings are usually Crowned, and where formerly they kept their
Courts. The City is adorned with an University, and the most ^ble Mar^s in all
thos^ Quarters. The Cathedral has been a St^ ^ilding, as they say, lined* or,
as it were, W^d within w^old, and cov^d with Copper. Car^l^ta^ upon the Wener,
is not^ ^or its abundance of ^rass. Strongues is a Bishops S^* Ar sia, now W
^erus, was rich in Silver Mines.

L^ni contain no Citi s: It has only certai^ Habitations divided into five
Countries that bear the Names of their Rivers. The Laponers are very small, the
tall^st ^t being above four foot hig^; nevertheless, formerly six hundr d of
them put to the Rout above an hundred thousand M^s^ites that came to In^d^
them. They wear no other Habit but Ski^; and when they are Young, they so inure
themselves to the Cold, that afterward ^ey easily endure it, without any
Clothes. They have neither Woollen nor Linen; only they have pieces of Copper,
which they call Chippans, which they exchange for Necessaries. They have
neither Bread, nor Corn, nor Fruit, nor Herbs, nor Wine, nor Cattle, nor
Butter, nor Eggs, nor Milk, nor other Supports of life. But they have no want
of Water: And they have a kind of Wild Deer, which are very swift, the Flesh
whereof they live upon. There is a second part of Laponia in Denmark, and a
third in Muscovy. The Mount Enaraki has three Apartments of Lodging for the
Deputies of the three Nations.

Finnonia seu Finnia, Finland is a Duchy, which some Kings of Swedeland were
wont to Assign for their Brothers Portion. The Chief Cities whereof are, A^o, a
Bishopric; and Viburgh, or Viborch a chargeable Fortress. There is one
particular place in this Province near Razeburg, where Needles being touched,
turn continually. Biorneburg, Cajenbourg, with other places you will find in
the Map; and Kexholm taken by Pontus de l^ Guard.

Ingria, vulgo Ingermanland, by the Russians, Isera, was taken from the
Muscovites by a Treaty in the Year 1617. It is but small, but considerable for
the Chase of Elkes, and for the Situation of the strong Fort of Noteburgh, in
the midst of a great River at the Mouth of the Lake ^adoga. Carald ^d by the
Russes. This Garrison was taken by the Swedes, all the Soldiers within being
destroyed by a Distemper that took them in the Mouth, and hindered them from
eating.

The Mountains that part Norway and Sweden, are by Ortelius called the Doss^
Montes, Sevo Montes of Plin. accounted 300 miles in length, and now in various
places have diverse Names, not much material here to mention.

The Commod^es of this Country are Copper, Lead, Brass, and Iron, Ox-Hides,
Goats and Buckskins, Tallow, Furs, Honey, Allom, and Corn.

The Inhabitants naturally strong, active and stout Soldiers, industrious,
laborious, ingenious and courteous to Strangers. The Women discreet and modest.

The Christian Faith was first planted here by Ausgarius Archbishop of Bremen,
the general Apostle of the North.

The Forces of Sweden are very powerful, being able to put to Sea more then 100
Sail of Ships, and into the Field forty or fifty thousand of Horse and Foot.

And for deciding of Controversies, etc. every Territory has its Viscount,
every Province its L^n, every Parish its Lanas-man, or Consul; and there l^eth
an appeal from the Consul to the Laymen, and from the Laymen to the Viscount,
and from the Viscount to the King, who alone decideth the same. Test Sanson.

Livonia, Germ. or List^ndt, is divided into two parts, viz. Esth^nia, or Eften
on the North. and Litlandia, Leithland, or (...) on the South, was entirely
Surrendered by the Polander, except Dunembergh: Formerly the Order of
Carry-Sword Knights Resided there; but in the time of Gregory the Ninth, that
Order was United to the Teutonick. Afterward the Polanders and Muscovites
enjoyed it. Riga is the Capital City of Livonia: The Germans, English, and
Hollanders drive a great Trade there in the Summer, while the Sea is open: In
the Winter the Natives Trade into Muscovy upon their Sledges. It stands upon a
Plain, upon the River Duna, which in that place is about a quarter of a League
over. The Fortifications thereof consist of six Regular Bastions, several
Half-moons, and Pallisado'd Counterscarps.

In the Year 1656, an Army of an hundred thousand Muscovites came to catch cold
before this City, which Valiantly Repulsed them. Pernaw is a well Fortified
place: And Derpt, in Latin Tu^atum, Situate on the Beck; taken by J. Basilius
the Great Duke of Muscovy* as was also Felin, a strong Town. Dunabourg, an
Impregnable Fortress, eight miles from Riga, well Garisoned by the Poles. Revel
directs the Trade from Livonia into Musco^y: It Is a Bishops See, and a well
Traded Port. Nerva is a strong place, from whence the Neighboring River
derives its Name, where the Brave Pontus de la Gardia was Drowned. By the last
Treaties between the Crowns of Sweden and Poland, the Exercise of the
Protestant as well as the Catholic Religion is permitted in Livonia, as also
in Curland and Prussia.

The Island of Gothland is the biggest in the Baltic Sea, for therein there
are five or six Ports belonging to the Swede: In several of the Rocks there
still remain the Ancient Gothish Characters. And the City of Wisby still
preserves certain pieces of Marble, and Houses that have Gates of Iron or
Brass, Gilded or Silvered over, which testify the great Antiquity of the
place. This City first Established the Law for Navigation in the Baltic, and
began the Sea-cards. Other Islands are Dagho and Oesel upon the Coast of
Livonia, belonging to the Swedes.

Of Muscovy, etc.
map of Russia MOSCOVIE or RVSSIE


Of Muscovy, etc.

MVSCOVY is properly but the name of a Province so called, of which Moscow is
the chief City, which has communicated its Name to all the Provinces under the
Dominion of the Grand Czar, or Tzar. This Country is part of the European
Sarma^i^, or S^ythia; called also Russia Alba, or the Great Russia, whose
ancient Inhabitants were the Rhuteni, or the Roxolani of Ptol. the Rossi, of
Cedren. The Basternae Tacit. test Willich. From thence some think it called
Russia, others tell us it is called Russia from the color of the Snow which
colors the Fields for almost three Quarters of a year. It Is the Vastest
Country in Europe: A Territory so large, that were it Peopled answerable to
some other parts of the World, would either make it too great for one Prince,
or that Prince too powerful for his Neighbors: But the Eastern parts thereof
are vexed with the Asiatique Tartars, who, like Aesop's Dog, will neither dwell
there, nor suffer the Muscovites. The Western parts almost as much harassed by
the Swedes and Poles: The Southern by the Turks and European Tartars; and the
Northern pinched by the coldness of the Air: This excess of cold in the Air was
so vehement, that in the Year 1598, of 70000 Turks that made an Inrode into
Muscovy, 40000 were frozen to death; and water, thrown up into the Air, will
turn to Ice before it falls to the Ground: Nor is it an extraordinary thing for
the Inhabitants to have their Noses, Ears, and Feet frozen off; such is their
Winter. Nor is their Summer less Miraculous; for the heaps of frozen Snow,
which covered the Surface of the Country, at the first approach of the Sun, are
suddenly Dissolved, the Waters dried up, the Earth dressed in her gaudy
Apparel; such a mature Growth of Fruits, such flourishing of Herbs, such
chirping of Birds, as if there were a perpetual Spring: And though they Sow but
in June, yet the Heats of July and August strangely quicken their Harvest.

The whole Country generally is overspread with Woods and Lakes: and is in a
manner a continual Forest, irrigated by several Lakes and Rivers. Here grow the
goodliest and tallest Trees in the World, affording shelter to multitudes of
Cattle and Wild Beasts* whose Skins ^re better than their Bodies; and here is
the inexhaustible Fountain of Wax and Honey, as likewise all kinds of Fowl, and
small Birds in great plenty; most sorts of Fish, excellent Fruits and Roots:
especially Onions and Garlic: Here is the Corn of Rhezan and Volodimira, the
Hides and Leather of J^rousl^u, the Wax and Honey of Plesow, the Tallow of
Wol^gda, the Oil and Cavayer about Volga, the Linen and Hemp of great
Novogrodt, the Pitch and Rosin of Duvin^z, the Salt of Asr^acan and Rostof, the
^rmins and Sables, and black Foxes Furs of Siberia, where the Hunters have the
Art to hit only the Noses of the Beasts, preserving their Skins whole and clean.

The Muscovites are naturally ingenious enough, yet not addicted to Arts or
Sciences; they do not trouble themselves with the height of the Heavens, or the
Magnitude of the Earth; they amuse not themselves with Syllogisms, nor wrangle
whether Logic be an Art or Science. And the plainness and paucity of their
Laws makes Atturnies and Sollicitors as useless there as Philosophers. Nor are
they much addicted to Traffic and Husbandry, being naturally lazy, it must be
force or necessity that compels them to labor. Drunkenness is very familiar
with them, and Aqua-vitae or Tobacco, like the Liquor of Circe, turns them into
Swine. They are great liars, treacherous, crafty, malicious and revengeful,
quarelsome, tho the height of their fury is Kicking; their Houses mean and
ill-furnished, their Lodging is hard, and their Diet homely; born to slavery,
and brought up in hardship.

They are for the most part fat and corpulent, strong of Body, and of good
proportion, only great Bellies, and great Beards are in fashion; and the Women,
though indifferent handsome, yet make use of Paint. They are much retired, and
seldom in public, very respectful to their Husbands, who look upon them as a
necessary evil, beat them often, and treat them as slaves.

They only teach their Children to write and read; which suffices them, though
they presume to be Doctors. They take for their Surname, the proper name of
their Father. They write upon Rolls of Paper, cut into long scrowles, and glu d
(for 25 or 30 Else) together; They wear long Robes, under which they have close
Coats down to their knees, but they tie their Girdles under their Bellies: they
make their Collations with spie'd Bread, Aqua-vitae, and Hydromel, that is,
Wat^r and Honey mixed.

There are two things remarkable amongst the Muscovites, one is, that they
begin the day at the rising of the Sun, and end it at the Sunsetting, so that
their Night begins at the Suns-setting, and ends at its rising. The other is,
they begin their year the first day of September, allowing no other Epoche than
from the Creation of the world, which they think to be in Autumn, and they
reckon 5508 years from the Creation of the World to the Nativity of our
Savior, whereas most of our Chronologers account but 3969.

As for their Armies, they generally consist of a 100000 or 200000, but then
you must count the Beasts. Botis Frederowitz Grand Duke of Moscovy, toward the
beginning of this Age, appeared with an Army of 300000 Men. Alexis Michaelowitz
after the defeat of Stephen Radzin, had an Army no less numerous, when the
dispute was about stopping the Turks Progress into Poland. Infantry is better
esteemed by them than Cavalry, being more able to sustain a Siege, and
patiently to endure all imaginable hardships, rather than yield; as they did in
our times at the Castle of Vilna, and in the Fortress of Notebourg. As to the
forming a Siege, the Muscovites understand little, as they made appear before
Smolensko 1633, before Riga 1656, and before Azac 1673. Their Forts are
generally of Wood or Earth, upon the windings of Rivers, or else in Lakes. The
chiefest strength of the Kingdom consists in Foreign Forces, to whom they give
good allowances in time of War. The Prince bears the Title of Grand Duke, he
boasts himself descended from Augustus, and styles himself Grand Czar, or
Tzaar, that is to say, Caesar. The habits which he is said to wear, make him
look like a Priest: they that treat with his Ambassadors have the greatest
trouble in the world to give him his Titles, because of their so extraordinary
pretensions. In the year 1654, to the end he might make War in Poland, and
uphold the Cossacks; the Great Duke pretended, that some of the Polish Lords
had not given him his due Titles; and that they had Printed Books in Poland in
derogation of his Honor. One of his Predecessors was so cruel, that he caused
the Hat of a French Ambassador to be nailed to his head, because he refused to
be uncovered in his presence. He commands absolutely, and the Muscovites call
themselves his Slaves; and he calls them in contempt by a diminutive name,
Jammot Pierrot. His will is a Law to his Subjects, who hold it for an
undeniable truth, that the will of God and the Great Duke are immutable. His
Treasure is very large, for he heaps up all the Gold and Silver he can lay his
hands on, in his Castles of Diolikzen and V^l^gda, and never makes his Presents
or his Payments but in Skins or in Fish, or else in some few Hides, or Pieces
of Cloth of Gold.

The Religion of the Muscovites differs little from that of the Greeks: For
they follow their Faith, their Rites and their Ceremonies. The principal part
of their Devotion after they are Baptized, consists in the Invocation of their
Saints, for every house has its Saint Pictured, and hung up against the wall
with a small Wax-candle before it, which they light when they say their
Prayers. The Pictures of the Virgin Mary, and of St. Nicholas their Patron, are
in great Veneration amongst them. And the sign of the Cross is the ordinary
Preface to all their Civil Actions. On Sundays and their Festival Days, they go
three times to Church, Morning, Noon, and Evening, and are standing, and
uncovered at the time of Divine Service. Besides their Ordinary Fasts on
Wednesdays, Fridays, and the Eves before Holidays, they have four Lents every
year during which they eat neither Butter, Eggs, nor Milk, only the first week
of their chief Lent serves them as a Carnaval, but after this the most strict
of them eat no Fish but on Sundays, and drink nothing but Quaz or fair water.

They commonly take the Communion on a Fasting-day, at Noon-service, and if any
one receives it on a Sunday, he must not eat Flesh that day. It Is administered
in both kinds with Leavened Bread, and Wine mingled with warm water. They
believe no Transubstantiation, nor reckon no Adultery but marrying another man's
Wife. They believe no Purgatory, but hold two distinct places where the Souls
remain that are separated from the Bodies. Yet allow Prayers for the Dead. They
hold Baptism of great Importance. And admit Children of seven years old to come
to the Sacrament. All their Images are in flat Painting. They never feast but
upon the Annunciation of the Virgin. They have a Patriarch at Musco, the chief
of their Religion. Three Archbishops or Metropolitans at Rosthou, at Susdal,
and at Grand Novogrode: Bishops at Wologda, at Resan, at Susdal, at Twer, at
Toboleska, at A^^racan, at Casan, at Plescou, at Colomna; and almost in all the
Provinces of the Great Duke, being all chosen out of the body of their Monks.
They have this good quality, that they force no man's Conscience; they hate the
Roman Catholics for the exorbitances committed by them, when the Polander's
became Masters of Musco, in the year 1611. But there are likewise some
Idolaters of them toward the North.

Muscovy is divided into two parts, the Southern and the Northern; that toward
the River Volga, this toward Duvina. Volga, it was the The of Ptol. Tertaris,
Thamar Armenis, the greatest River in Europe, throws it self into the Caspian
Sea, after it has rolled above seven hundred Leagues. The Duvine, after it has
run by the Cities of most Trade in Muscovy, by six mouths empties it self into
the Gulf, or St. Nicholas, which is called the White Sea, because of the now
that environs it.

The Donn, which separates Europe from Asia, begins not above a hundred Leagues
from the place where it ends, and yet it winds above six hundred miles, first
toward the East, and then toward the West, formerly a conjunction of these
three Rivers was designed, to the end the principal Seas of our Continent might
have participated one with another, to facilitate the Trade of the Ocean,
Mediterranean and Caspian, but the contrivance failed. There are few good
Cities in these parts, none or very few being paved, and those that be, are
paved with Wood; very few Fortified or Walled, but have tilled Land between the
Streets. The Houses are low and made of Wood and Loine, a Man may go to Market
and buy one of these Houses ready built, and so to be carried away; great fires
happen oft'times, by reason both of their Timber buildings, and for that the
combustible matter is easily set on fire by the great quantity of Tapers which
they light before their Images, and which the Muscovites, who are very apt to
be drunk, take no care to put out.

Musco, which is the Capital City, and the Residence of the Grand Duke, seems
rather to be a huge heap of Hamlets, than a good City. It had above 40000
Houses, but now there are far less, since it has been so often plundered by the
Lesser Tartars, and the Poles; and especially since the last fire that happened
there. It has three Walls, one of Brick, another of Stone, a third of Wood,
separating the four Quarters of the Town. The greatest Ornament of the City are
the Churches, of which St. Michael's is the chief, in which the Tombs of the
Tzars are placed; the Steeples of the Churches are covered with Copper, whose
glittering seems to redouble the brightness of the Sun, called Cremelena.

The Tzars Castle is about two miles in Circumference, and contains two fair
Palaces, one of Stone, and the other of Wood built after the Italian fashion;
besides the Imperial Court, there are several other spacious Palaces, for the
Bojor's or Nobility, as also for Priests, amongst which that of the Patriarch
is the most Magnificent, and over against the Czars Palace is a fair Church
built after the Model of the Temple of Jerusalem, from whence it is so called;
near to which is the great Market for all Wares and Merchandises. Volodimere,
the Residence of the Prince before Musco was, lies in the most fertile part of
all Muscovy, defended by a Castle. The Rivers of Musco and Occa are those
whereby the Merchants convey their Goods by Water to the Volga. Little
Novogrode is the last Village in Europe, toward the East; Pleskou is well
Fortified, as being the Bulwark against the Poles and Swedes. Novogrode the
Great, has been one of the four Magazines of the Hans Towns, and a Town so Rich
and Potent, that the Inhabitants were wont to say, Who can withstand God and
great Novogorod? But in the year 1577, the Great Duke Ivan Vasilowitz took it,
and carried away (as it is reported) a hundred Wagons laden with Gold and
Silver; yet it is still a Town of great Trade; in the year 1611 it was taken by
the Swedish General Pontus de la Gardie; and in the year 1613, redelivered to
the Tzar of Muscovy upon the Articles of Peace. Archangel is the Staple of all
Muscovy, by reason of its Haven: The Duties paid at coming in and going out,
amount to above six hundred thousand Crowns a year. The English were the first
that began to send their Ships thither; since they have been followed by other
Nations of Europe. Formerly the Trade of Muscovy was driven by passing through
the Sound, and putting in at Nerva, but the great Impositions put upon the
Merchandises, by the Princes through whose Countries they were to pass, made
them forsake that place. Rezan was the place that held out when the Tartars had
taken Muscow; the Governor whereof when he had got the Original of the
Articles of the Treaty Signed by the Grand Czar from the Tartarian General,
refused to surrender the Town, or deliver back the Schedule, which was the
occasion of the Tartars overthrow, and the recovery of Moscovy, and the taking
of Casan, Astracan, etc. St. Nicholas also drives a great Trade at the entry of
the Duvine. These are the only places that belong to the Grand Duke upon the
Ocean. Troitza near Muscow, is the most beautiful Convent in all Muscovia,
whether the Grand Tzars do usually go in Pilgrimage twice every year.
Colmogorod is renowned for the Fairs that are kept there in Winter time: The
Duvine bears great Vessels to that place so called. Oustioug is in the middle,
of the Country, where it drives a good Trade, as being Seated in a place where
two Rivers meet. Besides the White Sea is full of Shoals and Rocks at the entry
into it and then the Snows melting, and the Torrents swelling in the
Springtime, carry the Water with such an impetuosity, that Ships can hardly
get in; however there is great store of Salmon caught there. Kola and Pitzora
in Lapland receive Trading Vessels.

As for the Conquests of the Great Duke in Asiatic Tartary, the principal
places we Astracan and Casan, which bear the Title of Kingdoms, besides
Zavolha, and Nagaia. Then Casan is a great City, with Walls and Towers of wood,
seated upon a Hill. It Is Inhabited by Russians and Tartars, but the Citadel is
Walled with Stone, and kept only by Russians; Astracan was formerly the Seat of
the Nagayan Tartars, it lies at the mouth of the River Volga in the Island
Delgoy 50 Dutch Leagues from the Caspian Sea; it is environed with a strong
Stone-wall, upon which are seated 500 Brass Cannon, besides a strong Garrison.
Its many Towers and lofty Piles of Buildings makes a noble prospect. It Is a
place of great Traffic, especially for Silk. In this Country grows the Plant
Zoophyte, that resembles a Lamb, it devours all the Herbs round about the Root;
and if it be cut, it yields a liquor as red as blood: the Wolves devour it as
greedily as if it were Mutton. Locomoria toward the Obi, is inhabited by
People, who, they say, are Frozen up six months in the year, because they live
in Tents environed with Snow, and never stir forth till it be melted. They are
broad faced, with little Eyes, their Heads on one side, and bigger than the
proportion of their Bodies requires; short Legs, and Feet extremely big. Thus
they appear clad in Skins, with a piece of wood instead of Shoes, these Skins
they wear in the Winter, with the hairy side inward; in Summer, with the hair
outward: to sew them, they make use of the small bones of Fish, and the Nerves
of Beasts instead of Needles and Thread; they are the best Archers in the world.
The Fingoeses express their thoughts better by their throats than by their
tongues. These Countries go all under the Name of Siberia, a Province which
affords the fairest and the richest Furrs, and whither the Lords in disgrace
are banished. The River Pesida bounds it, for no man dares go beyond it, though
Horses and several other things have been seen, which make us believe that it
is as considerable as Cathay, which cannot be far from it.

Of Poland.
map of Poland POLAND by Robt. Morden


POLONIA, or Poland, which was formerly but a part of Sarmatia, is now a
Kingdom of as large extent as any in Europe. It is an aggregate Body,
consisting of many distinct Provinces, United into one Estate, of which Poland
the Chief, has given Name to the rest. It is 800 miles in length, and the
breadth comprehending Livonia, is almost as much.

According to the Polish and Bohemian Historians, they were with the Bohemians
Originally Croatians, descended from the Sclaves, and brought into these parts
by Zechus and Lechus, two Brethren banished out of their own Country. But this
is refuted by Cromerus. The more general opinion, is that they were Sarmatians,
who upon the departure of the German Nation toward the Roman Frontiers,
flocked hither, and by reason of their common Langave or mixture with the
Sclaves of Illyricum, thus accounted; and being united in the common Name of
Sclaves, settled in that part which we now call Poland; the Estate hereof being
much improved by the Conquest of many Sarmatian Counties. But whether Zechus
and Lechus the Founders of the two Nations, by all Historians, were Strangers
or Native Inhabitants, is uncertain, since all ancient History is silent
herein. The time when these should arrive here, according to Historian reports,
was Anno 649 under Lechus, a time indeed near unto the general flittings of the
Barbarous and Northern Nations, and therefore the more probable. In Anno 963
they Received the Gospel; Anno 1001, they had the Title of King conferred upon
them by Otho the Emperor. His Revenue is computed to be 600000 Crowns per
Annum, arising from Salt, and Tin, and Silver Mines: His Household Expenses, and
Daughters Portions being at the Public Charge. Nor do the Wars at any time
exhaust his Treasure. It is very Fertile in Rye, Wax and Honey. Other
Commodities are, Flax, Masts, Cordage, Boards, Wainscots, Timber, Rosin, Tar,
Pitch, Match, Iron, Potashes, and Brimstone. It is well Furnished with Flesh,
Fowl, and Fish; Rich in Furrs, the fairest of which are brought thither out of
Muscovy. Near Cracovia, or Crakou, they dig Salt out of the Famous Salt Pits
that make a kind of City under Ground, and yield a great Revenue. They boil it
in Russia, but in Podolia the Sun makes it. They have the Convenience both of
the Black and Baltic Seas; but are not addicted to Traffic, neither are they
well provided with hips. The Rivers called the Vistula, and Vistillus Plin.
Istula Ptol. Visula Mela. Bisula Amin. Vulge Wixel vel Weixel. Weissel Incolis.
Vistule Gal. Vistula Ital. The Niemen, the Chronus of Ptol. Memel Ger. Niemen
Sclavis, test. Cromero and Decio. But by Rithaym. and Eras. Pergel. (...),
Sheld. And the Duina, or Duna, empty themselves into the Baltic. The
Borysthenes, Arist. etc. Naparis Herod. Dnieper Decio. Brisna Lunel. Beresina
Pucer and Eberstenio Dnester and Nester Cromero. Nieper Mr. Cluver. Briet. The
Bogg, Hypanis Arist. Herod. Plin. etc. And the Niester, the Tyras of Herod.
Ptol. Tyra of Strab. and Plin. now the Nester, or Niester, Test Cromer and
Eberstin. into the Black Sea. The Vistula runs by very fair Cities, but the
Mouths of Borysthenes under the Jurisdiction of the Turk, who, in the year
1672, took the Vkraine into his Protection, having subdued all Podolia, after
the Surrender of the Fortress Kamienick. This Kingdom is Elective, being the
only place in Europe where the People at this day freely retain and practice
the Privilege to Elect their King; yet the next of the Blood Royal commonly
succeeds.

The Government is an Aristocratical Monarchy, where the Senators have so much
Authority, that when we name the Quality of the State, we may call it the
Kingdom and Commonwealth of Poland. The Senate is composed of Archbishops,
Bishops, Palatines, Principal Catellains, and Great Officers of the Kingdom.
The Prince, like the King of Bees, or a Royal Shadow, cannot Act against his
Nobles, without the Consent of the Senators: Yet his Dignity is so far
considered, that never any one Attempted against the Life of any of his
Predecessors. Their Kings were more anciently Free and Sovereign; but by the
common calamity of Elective States now bereft of Royal Right and Prerogatives,
having limited power, Governing according to the strict Laws and Directions of
the Council and Diet, who solely have full liberty to consult of and determine
the main affairs of the Kingdom: These are of two sorts, 1. The Senate
aforesaid: 2. The General Diets which are composed of the Orders aforesaid of
the Senate or Council, and of the Delegates of each Province, and chiefer City,
sent in the name of the rest of the Nobility. These are for the more high and
important businesses of Republic Kingdoms, not determinable by the Senate.

Warsaw, or Varsovia, is usually the place of Election, and Crakow, or
Cracovia, that of the Coronation. The Archbishop of Guesna, Primate of the
Kingdom, Crowns the King, and has almost all the Authority during the
Interregnum; for then he presides in the Senate, and gives Audience to
Ambassadors. He also contests with the Cardinals for Precedence; and therefore
there are few in Poland. His Revenue is above 150000 Livres a year. The Kingdom
has three Orders; the Church, the Nobility, and the Third Estate, which
comprehends all those which are not of the Nobility.

Though all sorts of Religions are here to be found, yet the Roman Catholic is
most predominant, therefore the Clergy are next in Superiority, to the King;
and then the Palatines and Castellans. Written fixed Laws they have but a few,
if any; Custom and Temporary Edicts being the Rule both of their Government and
Obedience.

The Polanders wear long Garments, shave their Hair upon the Chin, and leave
only one tufft of Hair upon their Heads, in Remembrance of Casimir the First,
whom they fetched out of a Monastery to be their King. They are generally
handsome, tall, well Proportioned; good Soldiers, and speak the Latin Tongue
very fluently. The Gentry are more Prodigal than Liberal; Costly in their
Apparel, Delicious in their Diet; very free and liberal, but the Peasants no
better than Slaves. The Absolute Power they pretend to, and ill Usages of the
Nobles toward the Commonalty, and Feuds one with another, was certainly the
cause of the Revolt of the Cossacks, and produced all the Disorders in the
Kingdom. Their Cavalry is very considerable; insomuch, that if they were but
United, they might be able to bring into the Field above an 100000 Horse. The
Confidence they have therein, and their Fear to render a Knight or a Burgher
too Potent, has made them Neglect Fortifying their Towns. Their Horses are of a
middle size, but quick and lively; pompously Harnessed in Silk, Gold, Silver,
and Precious Stones. Their Weapons are generally a Scymitar, Sword, Battle-Ax,
Carbine, Bows and Arrows. The Cossacks had always a peculiar Discipline in War,
though they were the same Nation. At first, they were Volunteers that made
Incursions upon the Turk and Tartars. King Bathors reduced them into a Body,
and joined to them two thousand Horse, to whom he assigned the fourth part of
his Revenue. Their Habitations are in the lower parts of Volhinia and Podolia,
which they call the Vkraine; which Country is the best Peopled, and the most
Fertile in all Poland. There are other Cossacks that live in the Islands of the
Borysthenes, which is not Navigable, by Reason of the Falls, which they call
Porowis. Their Custom was formerly to put to Sea with several flight Vessels,
and to plunder the Territories of the Great Turk that lie upon the Black Sea.
Some years since, these People Revolted, notwithstanding the Lot which was
offered them of Kudack upon the Borysthenes, and began the Misfortunes of the
Kingdom; for they Leagued themselves with the lesser Tartars, and put
themselves into the Great Turks Protection: Insomuch that we may safely say,
that the Invasion of the Swedes, the Hostilities of the Muscovites, the
Irruption of the Transylvanians, the Treachery of the Cossacks, the Rebellion
of whole Armies in Poland and Lithuania, the different Factions of the Kingdom,
the Contests of the Neighboring Nations, gave a cruel Blow to this Crown, and
were the causes that moved the Great Turk to make War upon them.

Poland contains Ten great Divisions; four to the West, and upon the Vistula:
Poland, Mazovia, Cujavia, and Prussia the Royal. Six toward the East; and to
the West of Borysthenes, Lithuania, Samogitia, Polaquia, Nigra Russia,
Volhinia, and Podolia. These Provinces have been gained, for the most part,
either by Arms, or Alliances. They are divided into Palatinates, the
Palatinates into Castellains, and the Castellains into Captainships. They call
the Government of places Starosties. Besides these Provinces, there is one part
of Muscovia, which was yielded to the Muscovite in the year 1634; after that
Ladislaus the Fourth before he was King, had the year before valiantly Relieved
Smolensko, and reduced to utmost Extremity an Army of an hundred thousand
Muscovites, who were constrained to ask him Pardon to save their Lives. That
Treaty which they call the Treaty of Viasma, gained to Poland, Smolensko,
Novogrodeck, Sevierski: Czernihou, and other places. The Truce for thirteen
years, beginning February 1667, leaves the Grand Duke of Muscovy in the
Possession of Smolensko; as also of that part of the Vkraine, to the East of
Borysthenes, and regained to the Crown of Poland, Dunenbourg, Pol^czk and
Witepski. Ducal Prussia (where stands Konigsberg, or Mons Regius, a fair City,
University, and Mart) generally by our Seamen called Queenborow, belonging to
the Elector of Brandenburgh, who is absolute Sovereign of it, independent from
Poland. The City is so much the bigger, because it incloseth two others within
the same circuit of Walls. Pinau and Memel are two Forts upon the Sea, of the
greatest concernment of any in that Dominion. Curland is a Dukedom, for which
the Duke, of the House of Ketler, does Homage to the Crown: His Residence is at
Mitaw, the chief of the Province of Semigallia in Livonia; near this City
Zernesky the Polish General, and Lubermisky the great Chancellor, vanquished
the Swedish Army, and killed 14000 upon the place. And Vindaw was the Seat of
the great Master of the Teutonick Order.

Poland, the best Peopled, is Divided into Upper and Lower. In the first stands
Cracovia, or Crackow the chief City in all Poland, where the Kings and Queens
are Crowned: Inhabited by a great Number of Germans, Jews, and Italians,
encompassed with two strong Walls of Stone; on the East Side is the Kings
Castle, on the West a Chapel, where the Kings are Interred. Upon the Confines
of Silesia stands the City of Czentochow, with the Cloister of Nostre-dame of
Clermont; an extraordinary strong place, and which the Swedes Besieged in vain
twice, in the Years 1655, and 1656. Sandomiria, or Sendomierz, a Walled Town
and Castle upon a Hill. Lublin, or Lublinium, is a Walled Town, with a strong
Castle Environed with Waters and Marshes. Here are held three great Fairs at
the Feasts of Pentecost, St. Simon and Jude, and at Candlemas, and much
resorted unto by Merchants. The Lower Poland, though lesser than the Higher, is
nevertheless called Great Poland; because it is more a part of the Kingdom than
the other. The City of Guesna there Seated, in the Palatinate of Kalish, is
very Ancient, and the Seat of the first Kings; so called from an Eagles Nest,
which was found there while it was Building, and which gave Occasion to the
King of Poland to bear Gules, an Eagle Argent Crowned, Beak'd and Armed Or,
bound under the Wings with a Ribband of the same. Kalick, Calisia, is a Walled
Town upon the Prosna, naming the Country. The Province of Mazovia only has
above thirty or forty thousand Gentlemen, the most part Catholics; Warsovia,
Warsaw, is the Capital thereof, and of the whole Kingdom, in regard the General
Diets are kept there, and because its Castle is the Kings Court. In Cujavia
stands the City Wladislau, where the Houses are Built of Brick; and the Lake
Gopla out of which came the Rats that Devoured King Popiel. Posnania, or Posen,
is a Bishops See seated amongst Hills upon the River Warsa, fairly built of
Stone, subject to Inundations, chief of the Palatinate. In which is also
Miedzyrzecze, a strong Town upon the Borders of Schlesia, impregnably seated
amongst Waters and Marshes. Koscien, a double Walled Town amongst dirty
Marshes. Sivadia, Sirad, a Walled Town and Castle seated upon the River Warsa,
naming the Country; sometimes a Dukedom belonging to the second Sons of the
Kings of Poland. Lancicia, Lancitz, a Walled Town with a Castle mounted on a
Rock, upon the River Bsura. Rava, built all of Wood, with a Castle naming the
Palatinate. Plozko and Dobrzin, are two Palatinates on the other side of the
Nieper. Prussia Royal, which, belongs to the King of Poland, are several
Cities, which the Knights of the Teutonick Order Built: The Lakes and the
Seacoast afford great store of Amber. Marienburgh, Mariiburgum, is a strong
Town, where Copernicus was born; a Town of good Trade, with a fair Wooden
Bridge over the Vistula. Dantzick, Gedanum, one of the Capital Hans-Towns,
drives all the Trade of Poland, and has not its equal over all the Baltic Sea:
It is a Free Town, and is Privileged to send Deputies to the States of the
Kingdom. The King of Poland has some Rights there upon Entry of Goods, and upon
the Custom. The City of Elbing contends for Priority in the States of Prussia.
The Generous Resolution of the Townsmen to maintain the Authoriry of their
King against the Swedes, without accepting the Neutrality, was the Preservation
of the whole Kingdom.

Lithuania is the greatest Province of all those which compose the Estates of
the Crown of Poland. It received the Christian Religion 1389, United to Poland
1569. It has the Title of a Grand Dukedom, wherein there are also to this day
as many great Officers as in the Kingdom of Poland. The Country is so full of
Marshes and Sloughs, that there is no Traveling in Winter for the Ice. Vilna,
the Capital City, incloses so many sorts of Religions, that there is no City in
the World where God is Worshipped after so many different ways, unless in
Amsterdam; a Liberty too much allowed in most parts of Christendom, but rara
temporum felicitas. There are also in Lithuania eight parts or Palatinates, viz
Breslaw, M^^sco, Mscizlaw, Novogrodeck, Poloczk, Troki, Vilna and Witepsk, as
also the Duchy of Smolensko, Novogrodeck, Czernihou, with the Territories of
Rohaczow and Rzeczych and Sluckz, whose chief places bears the same name; other
chief places of Note in Lithuania you may find in the Map. Samogitia is a
Country where the Inhabitants live very poorly; it has no Palatinate, but its
chief place is Rosienne, whose houses are built of Mud, and Straw-walls, test
Sans. Polaquia communicates her Name to the Polanders, who call themselves
Polacks, as Descended from Lechus, their first Prince. Its chief places are,
Bietsk^, the strong Augustow, and the well Fortified Tycassin, or Tywckzin,
where the Kings Treasure is kept. Russia Nigra has several Names; some call it
Black Russia, by Reason of the Woods; others Red, because of the color of the
Earth; and some Meridional, because of its Situation toward the South. Leopol,
or Lemberg, an Archbishopric, is the Principal City, but Zamoski the stronger;
it contains also the Castelwicks of Chilm and Blez, and this is by most
Geographers esteemed to be in the Higher Poland. Volhinia claims for her
Capital, Kiou, Polonis. Kioff, Germanis; an Ancient City, having once 300 fair
Churches, but destroyed by the Tartars; still a Bishops See, acknowledging the
Patriarch of Moschow, and of the Communion of the Greek Church; Seated upon the
Borysthenes, where the Cossacks have often had their Retreats: It was once the
Seat of the Russian Emperors. Taken and destroyed by the Tartars 1615, and now
said to be taken by the Turks in the War 1678. In Podolia stands the well
Fortified and Impregnable Kamienick olim Clepidava test Cleaver, which has
formerly withstood the Armies of the Turks, the Lesser Tartars, the
Transylvanians, and the Walachians; but at length was forced to yield to the
Power of the Grand Signior, in the Year 1672; since re-taken by the Poles, but
by the last Treaty delivered to the Turks; as is also Oczakow the Axiace of
Strab. Plin. and Ptol. 1684. the Fortress of Jaslowic in Podolia was
surrendered, which consisted of 500 men. And Dassow at the Mouth of the
Borysthenes.

In the year 1626, the Cossacks entered the Bosphorus with 150 Sail of Saicks or
Boats, each Boat carrying 50 armed men, and have 20 Oars on a side, and two men
to an Oar; and on the Grecian-shore burnt Boyno-devi and Yenichioi, on the
Asian-side Stenia, and put Constantinople into a general Consternation.

On the Banks of the River Niester Count Esterhasi fell upon the rear of the
Turks, killed 500 on the place, took their Baggage with diverse Prisoners, and
gave liberty to many Christian slaves. The next day he charged another party,
killed a great Number, and got a considerable Booty. And afterward having got
more Recruit, he joined Battle with them, and slew 1200 on the place, gave
liberty to 1400 Christians, took diverse of their Commanders, with their Bag and
Baggage, with much Gold and Silver in Plate and Money.

1624 forty thousand Horse of Tartars enters into Podolia, and made Incursions
as far as Socal, but at Burstinow were overthrown, thirty thousand slain, and
two thousand Prisoners taken, the greatest defeat that was ever given to the
Tartars.

Upon a Hill between Tyr River and Chocin, the Turks an Tartars being 60000
under Abassa, received a great loss by Konispotzki the Polish General, with
2500 Horse 1684.

Lesser Tartary.
map of Tartary TARTARIA in EUROPE by Robt Morden


THE Lesser Tartary which lies in Europe, is so called to distinguish it from
the Grand, which makes part of Asia; it is also called Percopensis, and Crim,
from the names of the principal Cities, situated in the Peninsula; formerly
called Taurica Chersonesus. The Nogays Tartars must not be omitted, that lie
between Tanais and Volga, nor the Tartars of Ocziakou, between the mouth of
Borysthenes and the Niester; nor the Tartars of Budziack already mentioned, to
the East of Moldavia, between the mouths of the Niester and Donaw. Besides all
these, there are some that are settled also in Lithuania and the Vkraine,
adjoining to the Black Sea.

The Black Sea is very Tempestuous; so named, and so famed from the terrible
and frequent Shipwracks that happen in it, for want of skilful Pilots, and good
Havens. And the people that Inhabit about it, are naturally barbarous and
wicked, without any Religion, and under no Government.

The Circumference of this Sea was reckoned by Eratostenes, Hecataeus, Ptol.
and Ammianus, Marcellinus, to be 23000 Stadia, or 2875 miles.

The Thracian Bosphorus is certainly one of the comeliest parts of the World,
the Chanel is about 15 miles in length, and about two in breadth in most parts.
The Shores consist of rising grounds covered over with Houses of Pleasure,
Woods, Gardens, Parks, delightful Prospects, lovely Wildernesses, watered with
thousands of Springs and Fountains; upon it are seated four Castles well
fortified with great Guns, two, eight miles from the Black Sea, and the other
two near the mouth of the Chanel, built not above forty years ago to prevent
the Cossacks, etc. from making Inroads with their Barks.

Palus Maeotis is by the Turks called Baluck, Denguis, that is Mare Piscium,
for it is incredible what a number of Fish is caught in that Lake. And it is
reported that they usually take Fish there, which weigh eight or nine hundred
pounds, and of which they make three or 400 weight of Caveer. Their Fishing
lasts from October to April. The waters do not rise or fall, though it partakes
of the River Tanais, and the intercourse of the Euxine Sea.

From the Chanel of Palus Maeotis to Mingrelia it is reckoned 600 miles along
the Coast, which consist of pleasant Mountains, covered with Woods, Inhabited
by the Circassians, by the Turks called Cherks, by the Ancients Zageans, by P.
Mela, Sargacians, a Country reckoned by the Turks not worth the Conquering, nor
the charge of keeping.

The Commodities that the Turks exchange for with the Inhabitants are Slaves,
Honey, Wax, Leather, Chacal-skins, a Beast like a Fox, but bigger; and
Zerdavas, which is a Fur that resembles a Martin, with the Furs of other Beasts
that breed in the Circassan Mountains. The Cherks are a people altogether
Savage, of no Religion, unfaithful and perfidious. They live in Wooden Huts,
and go almost naked. And the women till and manure the Ground. They are sworn
enemies to those that live next to them, and make slaves one of another. They
live upon a kind of Paste made of a very small grain like to a Millet. But of
this Country little is known to us, and what is discovered is by means of the
Slaves that are brought from thence into Turkia, who are in a manner Savages,
from whom nothing of certainty is to be expected.

Crim Tartary is a Peninsula about 200 miles in length, and 50 in breadth,
wonderfully populous, and exceeding fruitful, abounding in Corn and Grass, but
Wood and Fuel is scarce.

The Towns on the Seaside are Precop, Lus lowa, Mancup, Crim, Caffa, Kers and
Arbotka, which lies between the Black and Moeotan or Ratten Seas, near to which
is a great field 50 miles long, enclosed with water, where the Tartars in
Winter do keep their Hergees or Horses.

Within the Land are Carasu, and Bakessy Seray. The Town of Astamgorod stands
upon the Neiper, in former times there dwelt in it two Brothers Ingul and
Vngul; who falling at variance, and that ending in cruel Wars, the whole
Country adjacent (though pleasant and fruitful) became a Wilderness, and now
lies waste, being a vaste Desert 500 miles over, and a thousand miles long,
from Precop unto the County of Muscovy.

Caffa, known to the Ancients by the name of Theodosia, is a great Town, and
place of good Trade, wherein are reckoned 4000 Houses, 3000 Inhabited by
Mahometans, Turks, and Tartars, about 1000 families of Armenians, and Greeks,
who have their several Bishops and Churches, that of St. Peter's is the biggest,
but fallen to decay; every Christian above 15 years of Age pays a Piaster and
half, Tribute to the Grand Signior, who is Lord of the City; which is guarded
with two Castles, the Castle upon the South Side commands all the parts; there
are Boats, and is the Residence of the Bassa. Provisions of all sorts are very
good and cheap. Their chief Trade is Salt-fish, Caveer, Corn, Butter and Salt.
Formerly possessed by the Genoese, but taken by Mahomet the Great 1574 has
since been subject to the Turks. In 1627, it was besieged and taken by the
Cossacks, 750 miles reckoned from Constantinople.

Precop, in Latin Precopia, Seated near the place where stood the Eupeterea of
the Ancients. Bakessy Serai, or Basha Serrail is the Residence or Court of the
present Kans of Tartary. Mancup is a Strong Town where the Kan is said to keep
his Treasury.

German or Crim was the ancient Seat of the Kans, supposed to be the Taphrae or
Pliny, or Taphras of Ptolomy.

Kers, stands upon the Bosphorus Cimerius, or the straight of Capha, not far
from the Panticapaeun of the Ancients. Oczakou is situated near the influx of
the great River Borysthenes, built in or near the place of Olbia.

Tanas or Tanais of Ptolomy, situate 20 miles from the mouth of that River, is
the last City in Europe now subject to the Turks, who have there a Garrison, and
by them called Azac, or Azow. 450 Miles from Caffa, and 1300 from
Constantinople. In 1637 it was besieged and taken by the Muscovites and
Cossacks. In the year 1641 it was not recovered, though with much blood and
slaughter of the Army of Sultan Ibrahim; for it cost 3000 Spahees, 7000
Janissaries, and 800 other Soldiers, besides Moldavians, Walachians, and
Tartars, and yet the Turks were forced to raise the Siege, and return home.
However the next year it was abandoned by the Cossacks, and left a sad
spectacle of despair and ruin.

The ancient Inhabitants of the European Tartary, or Sarmatia Europaea, were of
the Scythian Race; but in Chersonese it self dwelt the ancient Tauri, against
whom Darius King of Persia made his fruitless war, with an Army of 700000. In
the actions of the Greeks and Romans we hear nothing of them, unless that the
Emperor Trajan took the City Taphre. Afterward growing great, by Conquering
the Asiatique Tartars, Mahomet the Great made himself Master of Caffa and Azow,
thereby Commanding both Moentis and the Euxine Seas. And in the time of Selimus
the first, who had Married a Daughter of this Crim Tartar, the Turks and
Tartars grew into a League: And though the Kan or Prince be Elective, yet he is
Chosen out of the true Line, and confirmed by the Grand Signior, who have
always taken upon them a Power to Depose the Father, and Constitute the Son, or
next of that Lineage, when found remiss in affording their Auxiliary helps to
the War, or guilty of any disrespect, or want of Duty to the Ottoman Port.

The Tartars are Esteemed as Brothers, or near Allies with the Turks, to whom,
for want of Heirs Male in the Ottoman Line, the Turkish Empire is by an Ancient
Compact to descend; the Expectation of which does keep the Tartars in much
Observance, in hopes one day to be Lords of the World.

In the Year 1663, the Tartars, called to the Assistance of the Turks, made
such Incursions into Hungary, Moravia and Silesia, Sacking and Burning Cities
and Towns, that they carried away 160000 Captives, which they Sell to the
Turks, who go thither to Trade for this Merchandise, which is the most
profitable Commodity that Tartary affords: Young Boys and Girls are rated at
the highest price; the latter, if beautiful, are, like Jewels, held at an
unknown Value, though few of them escape the Lust of the Tartars. They live
very hardly, and feed especially on Horseflesh, which dying in their March,
they never examine his Disease, but putting the Flesh under their Saddles,
baking it between the heat of the Horse and the Man, it is judged sufficiently
prepared, a Dish fit for their Prince.

And as the Men are Nourished with a Diet of raw Flesh, Herbs, and Roots, such
as the Earth Naturally produces, without the Concoction of Fire to prepare it
for their Stomachs; so also their Horses are of a hardy Temperament, patient of
Hunger and Cold, living usually upon Roots and Leaves of Trees.

Their Towns or Villages consist of Huts rather than Houses, or Hurdles made of
sticks, and covered with a coarse Hair-cloth, of which Villages there are
accounted 200000; so that taking one Man out of every Village, they quickly
form an Army of so many Fighting men. These Portative Houses, which they call
Cantares, they put them upon Wheels, and dwell in them more in the Summer, than
in the Winter.

They never mind Sciences, but understand what they know by common sense; and
therefore it is said of them, That they have eaten their Books, and carry them
in their Stomachs.

They are said to be so much of the Nature of Dogs and Cats, that they are born
blind, and do not see clear till after five days. Their Eyes are not very
large, but very black; far asunder, but quick and piercing. They are rather
little than big, but very large Limbed: Their Breasts high and broad, their
Necks short, their Heads big, their Noses flat, their Teeth white, their Faces
round, their Complexion tanned, and their Hair black and coarse; whilst they
are young, their Mothers bathe them in Salt Water to harden their Skin.

Some of them now grown Wealthy, by the Market of their Slaves, throw off their
homely plads, to wear Sables; and some, more frugal, build Houses. Sir John
Chardin tells us at Donslow or Salinae 50 miles from Caffa, there 200 Vessels
are yearly laden with Salt, and that about a mile from that place was a
Tartarian Habitation, but not above ten or twelve Houses with a little Mosque,
only round about them were a great number of Tents round and square, very well
closed, as also several Wagons, well closed and covered, which serve instead
of Houses. He also tells us that some of their Tents were hung with Tapestry,
as also the Floors covered with the same, and the outside covered with Furs;
and every Family has one of these Tents, and two others, one for their Slaves
and Provisions, another for their Cattle. That they store up their Corn and
Forage in deep Pits or Magazines under the Ground, as do most of the Eastern
people. The Riotous and Dissolute addict themselves to Strong Water, and a
Drink called Beza, giving themselves up to a Gluttony as Brutish as that which
is Natural unto Swine, having no Use of Sauces to provoke their Appetite, but
rest delighted with the mere contentment of Idleness and a full Stomach.

I shall only add this account of Tartary by Massellini an Italian, Physician
to the Grand Vizier: I for my part found Tartary a very pleasant Country,
plentiful of all Provisions, and the people much more courteous and obliging to
strangers and Christians than the Turks are. That as to their Morals few
Nations less vicious, being extremely severe and faithful, having no Thieves,
or false Witnesses amongst them, little injustice or violence, and live
together in union and peace. And that the captive Tartars in Poland are very
faithful and just in whatsoever they promise, or are entrusted with.

Of MOLDAVIA.
map of Moldavia TRANSYLVANIA MOLDAVIA VALACHIA BVLGARIA etc by Robt. Morden


MOLDAVIA has sometimes been called Great Walachia, and Walachia on this side
the Mountains. It is very Rich in Honey and Wax, for which, the Tenths of the
Prince amount Yearly to above 200000 Crowns. You shall meet with several Heaps
of Stones, which they report to have been cast up by Darius King of Persia,
when he made War against the Scythians. The Capital Cities thereof are, Jassi,
or Jassum, the chief Town for Wealth and Trade. 2. Soczova, Soczow and Suchzow,
was the Sucidava of Ptol. Ant. the Vaivod's Seat. 3. Chotezin, Arcobadara.
Baud. a place of great strength near the Niester, and the Ordinary Magazine of
the Country; the place where the Poles were Defeated under King Sigismund
Augustus; and where King John Sobieski, a little before his Election, won the
most memorable Victory in our Age. The Eastern part, called Bessarabia, lies
upon the Black Sea, and belongs to the Grand Signior, who is Master of the
Mouth of the Danow and Niester; and who uses all ways imaginable to Subdue the
Rich Provinces of the Vkraine. Its chief places are Bialogrod, Bialogred
Moldavis, Beligrad Turcis, a strong Town near the Mouth of the River. Kilia is
the Callatia and Callacis Ant. Calatis Strab. and Plin. test Laz. But Laonicus
tells us that Callatia is now called Calliacra. And Niger says it is called
Pandalla, on the Euxine Sea. Ackerman Turcis, Moncastro Incol. is the
Hermonassa Plin. and Mel. the Hermonactus Ptol. test Nigro Nester Alba. Turcis
test Leuncl. Moncastro is the Tyras of Ptol. test Herbersti. Zothezavia,
Nigro, a strong place on the same Coast. The Plain of Budziack, 12 Leagues
long, and half as broad, is possessed by the Dobruce Tartars, who are the
greatest Robbers in those parts. They are about 15000, and lie about Bialigrod.

Of WALACHIA.
WALACHIA, which lies to the South-East of Transylvania, and extends along the
Danaw, was called Walachia Transalpina, to distinguish it from Moldavia. It is
watered by a great many Rivers. Some of the Mountains are enriched with Mines
of Gold: And for the Horses, they are the best in Europe. The Prince, who is
sometimes called Hospodar, and sometimes Waywode, that is to say, Chief of the
Troops, Resides at Terwisch, Incol. Tervis Gal. Targovisco Ital. Tergowisch
Germ. Tergovistus, or Tergoviscum. Lat. Auth. Olim Tiviscum Ptol. Taros and
Turo test Lazio. And pays to the Grand Signior 26000 Livers Annual Tribute.
Its other places are, Brailano the Piroboridava of Ptol. test Nigro, the Town
of most Trade, Situate on the Danaw, memorable for the Destruction and
Slaughter made by John the Vaivod of Moldavia.

Zorza, with its strong Castle, taken by Sigismund, Anno 1596.

Bucaresta is Remarkable for two Bridges; the one of Boats, laid by Sinan
Bassa; the other of Stone, the Work of the Emperor Trajan.

Of TRANSYLVANIA.
TRANSYLVANIA, Erdeli Hung. Siedm-grodzka. Ziemea, Sclavis, is so called, as
being Seated beyond the Woods, or rather Mountains, that separate it from
Hungary. The Germans call it Sieben burghen, by reason of the Seven Cities
which the Saxons Built there, viz. Hermanstat, Cronstat, Nosenstat, Medwich,
Schiesburg, Clausenburg, and Weissenburg. The People of this Country are of two
sorts, Cicules, or Zeklers, Saxons, or Hungarians. The Zeklers are said to come
out of Tartary, or are rather the remains of the Hunns, who quitted their
Names, that they might not be Odious to their Neighbors. They are settled
chiefly in the Northern part; at Orbay, at Kisdi, at Czick, at Girgio, at
Marous, at Arania, and Sepsi. Their Capital City is Newmark. The Saxons or
Hungarians are Originally Descended from the Germans; and call themselves the
Nobles of the Country. Hermanstadt Ger. Czeben and Zeben Hung. the Cibinium and
Hermannopolis of the Ancients, yielded by the Turks 1659, after much Slaughter
and a stout Resistance; is the Residence of the Prince, a strong City, well
Fortified both by Art and Nature. Waradin, or Wardeyn, has been extraordinarily
Fortified by the Turks, who have there made a Magazine of Arms ever since the
Year 1660. Cronstat, Kronstat Germ. Brassow vel Brassowa Hung. Brassaw Incolis,
the Patrovissa of Ptol. Stephanopolis, Corona and Praetoria Augusta, Vet. is
Remarkable for a fair Library, and a kind of Academy, and the most Noted Empory
of the Country. Nosenstadt, Germ. Bistritia and Bestercze Hung. the Nemidava
Vet. (...) in Old Manuscripts; is a pleasant and sweet Town. Clausenburg Germ.
Koloswar Hung. Claudiapolis, Vet. Zeugma Ptol. and aliis. Besieged by the
Turks, Defended by D. Retani, and Relieved by Scheniden with 6000 Men 1661. But
Lazius tells us that Zeugma is the Zazsebes Hung. or the Mulenbach Ger. three
Leagues distant from Clausenburg toward the South, seated in a pleasant Plain,
beautified with handsome Buildings, and is the Court of their Judicature.

Wassemburg, Germ. Gyula-Feieruar. Hung. Albajulia, or Alba-Giulia, the Apulum
of Ptol. was the Ordinary Residence of the Prince, or Vayvod of Transylvania.
Varhel Incolis, Gradisch Selavo, Veczol and Venecz, test Lazio, is the
Zarmigethusa, or Zarmisogethusa of Ptol. and Vlpia Trajana, Vet. Megies, or
Medgis Hung. and Megeswar, Medwisch Germ. the Pirum of Ptol. Mediesus Lat.
Segeswar Incol. Schiesburg Ger. Sciburgium is the Sandava of Ptol. test Lazio.
Janova Besieged by the Grand Vizier 1658, and taken.

The Country Naturally abounds with Wine, Corn, Fruit, and Cattle. The People
are much of the same Nature with the Hungarians, to whom they have been for a
long time subject, but are somewhat more stubborn and untractable; and speaking
the same Language, with some difference in the Dialect only.

One of the Principal Revenues of Transylvania consists in Salt, which is
chiefly made at Torda; from whence they send it into Hungary by the River
Marish. There are also Mines of Gold and Silver, and sometimes great pieces of
pure Gold are found in the Rivers, that weigh half a pound: So that the
Hungarians, when they possessed Transylvania, called it their Treasury. There
are several sorts of Religions in Transylvania; for Catholics, Lutherans, and
Calvinists had the free Exercise of their Religion there, ever since the
beginning of this Age. The two Families of Bathori, and Ragotzi, have afforded
this Country several Princes: It being made a Sovereignty in the Year 1512, by
John Zapolia, by favor of Soliman the Great. The last Ragotzi, who was slain
in Battle against the Turks, in the Year 1659, was the fourteenth Prince: He
styled himself, By the Grace of God, Prince of the Kingdom of Transylvania,
Lord of one part of Hungary, and Earl of the Ciculians. He paid Annually to the
Grand Signior a Tribute of 30000 Dollars; the Ministers of the Port have
advanced it to five hundred thousand Rix-dollars. The Emperor as King of
Hungary, pretends to have the Right of Installation of the Prince of
Transylvania: For the Emperor Rodolphus Established Botscai, upon Condition
that the Principality should return, for defect of Issue Male.

The Ancient Inhabitants were the Anartes of Caesar, the Anarte of Ptol.

Of Hungaria.
map of Hungary A New Map of HUNGARY by Robt. Morden


HVNGARIA Lat. Indiginis Maglar. Slavis Wagierska, Germanis Hungerland, Gallis
Hungry, Italis and Hispanis Ongaria, now vulgarly, but improperly called the
Pannonia of the Ancients.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Jaziges, Metanastae of Ptol. included within
the Rivers Danow and Tissa, and the Capatian Mountains: Part of the Dacii lying
East of the River Tissa, or Tibiscus. The Paones or Pannonii inhabiting beyond
the Danow, betwixt it and the Savas, afterward it was the Seat of the Huns,
Longabards and Avares, and lastly of the Hungarians. So called from the Huns
and Avares, a people known by the Rapines they committed in several parts of
Europe under Attila one of their Kings, whose mighty Acts, and numerous Forces
are very remarkable. He it was that overran most part of Germany, and great
part of Italy, that forced his way through all the Nations between him and
France, beating down all the Towns and Fortresses before him. That compelled
the Emperor Theodosius to buy his Peace at 6000 Pound-weight of Gold, and a
yearly Tribute. Sacked and burnt A^quilea and M^l^n, fought the great Battle
with Aetius the Roman General, where were ten Kings present, and 200000 slain.

Once a great and flourishing Kingdom, whose Dominions extended as far as the
Adriatic and Euxine Sea. Now divided by the Danow into the Upper Hungary,
lying North of the River; and the lower Hungary lying toward the South,
containing before the Turkish Subjection, 54 Juridicial Resorts or Counties,
Viz. Abanvivariensis, d'Abanvivar 1. Albensis, d'Ekekes-Feveruar 2. Arvensis
d'Arva 3. Barsiensis de Bars 4. Barzodiensis de Barzod 5. Bathiensis, de Bath
6. Bihoriensis, de Debreczin 7. Bistriciensis, de Bistricz 8. Bogrogensis de
Bodrogh 9. Castriferrensis, d' Sarvvar 10. Cepusiensis, de Czepuss 11.
Chonadiensis, de Chonad 12. Comariensis, de Komara 13. Gevinariensis, de
Gewinar 14. Hewesensis de Hewecz 15. Hontensis de Sag 16. Javariensis, de Gewer
17. Liptoviensis, de Lypeze 18. Moramarusiensis, de Moramaruss 19. Musoniensis,
de Muzon 20. Nitriensis de Neytracht 21. Novigradiensis, de Novigrad 22.
Orodiensis Czongrad 23. Pelysiensis Pelicz 24. Peregiensis, de Peretzaz 25.
Pestensis, de Pest 26. Ptosegiensis de Posega 27. Posoniensis, de Poson 28.
Risiensis, de Kreiss at Creutz 29. Sagoriensis, de Sellia 30. Saladiensis de
Salavvar 31. Sariensis, de Saraz 32. Semlyniensis, de Semlyn 33. Sigetensis, de
Szygeth 34. Simigiensis, de Zegzard 35. Sirmiensis, de Szerem 36. Soproniensis,
de Sopron 37. Strigoniensis, de Gran 38. Temesuensis de Temesuar 39. Toln^nsis,
de Tolna 40. Torantaliensis, de Thurtur 41. Tornensis, de Torna 42.
Transchiniensis, de Transchyn 43. Turocensis, de Owar 44. Valconiensis, de
Valpon 45. Varadiensis de Varadin 46. Varaniensis, de Baranguar 47.
Vesprimiensis, de Vesprim 48. Ugoghensis, de Ugoza 49. Unghensis, de Unghuuar
50. Zabolcensis, de Chege 51. Zagrabiensis de Zagrabia 52. Zatmariensis, de
Zatmar 53. Zolnocensis, de Zolnock 54.

First, Invaded by Amarah the second Ottoman Emperor of the Turks, with almost
incredible numbers of men, who yet found that the valiant offspring of the
once Victorious Huns were not so easily subdued, but stood as the Bulwark of
the Christian World for 300 years, putting a stop to the Turkish Conquest, and
further Invasion into the other parts of Europe, no other Nation being able to
check their unruly rage, nor set bounds to their Empire. Yet such was the
unhappy fate of that people, that after long Wars sundry Victories, and brave
Resistances, it was for the greatest part inthralled to the Turks, the rest
containing about a third part, obeyed the German Emperor of the House of
Anstria, Descended from Anne Sister to Lewis the Second, the last Native
Prince, slain by Solomon at the Battle of Mohacz.

But those that write the History of Hungary, tell us that though scruples of
Conscience, and Contests about Religion, have been the pretentions of the
Discontents and Rebellions there, yet Ambition and Sovereignty have been the
cause of the Wars and miseries of that bleeding Country. That their own
Divisions indeed contributed to their Subjection; for neither the Roman Eagle,
nor the Ottoman Crescent had waved proudly over their lofty Towers, had not the
Civil Dissentions of the Inhabitants by wounding deep each others bosoms, made
way for the enemy.

The Soil of Hungary is very fertile; the Plains, which are exceeding lovely,
bear Corn in abundance; and the little Hills produce excellent Wines; those of
Tokay are highly esteemed; the Sirmian Wines are very rich and pleasant. And
its deep Pasturages are stored with infinite Herds of large and fat Cattle.

It also exceeds most Countries of Europe, in Mines of Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead
and Copper; as also Baths and Mineral Waters, some of a strong nature, which
falling upon the ground is turned to a Stone; others again flow in Winter, and
freeze in Summer; others which falling into Ditches make a kind of mud, out of
which tried and melted they make very good Copper; and others there are that
turn Iron into Copper.

The Veins of the Copper Mine (near Newsol) are very large, and the Ore is very
rich; in a hundred pound of Ore they ordinarily find 20 l. of Copper, sometimes
30, 40 to 60 in the hundred; there are also two Springs of a Vitriolate Water,
which turns Iron into Copper in 14 days time, and the Copper thus changed, is
more ductile, maleable, and more easily melted than the other.

Three Hungarian miles from Newsol, and two from Chrenmitz, there are diverse
Hot Baths of great esteem, and much frequented; at Boinitz there are also five
natural Baths, of a gentle heat, and delightful to Bathe in, being beautified
by Count Palsi, then Palatine of Hungary.

It produces abundance of Salt, and other Provisions for human sustenance,
plenty of Deer, Hares, all sorts of Poultry, Patridges and Pheasants, great
store of Sheep, great numbers of Oxen, of which 100000 are yearly sent into
Italy and Germany.

The Hungarians are generally Warriers and good Soldiers, strong of Body, well
proportioned, and valiant; more addicted to Mars than to Minerva, cruel, and
great Eaters. Their Habits, as well as their Manners, are not far different
from those of the Turks; their Language is a kind of Sclavonian, but differing
in most places. But yet the Latin, the Turkish, and the High Dutch are in use
among them. There are two Archbishopricks, Strigonium, and Colocza, with ten
Bishoprics, the half whereof are in the hands of the Turks; Four Orders of
Persons have Liberty to sit in their General Assemblies, the Prelates, Barons,
Nobility and Burgesses. The dignity of Palatine is the most considerable, next
to that of the King, for which reason the Hungarians will admit of no King but
one of their own Nation. The Archbishop of Strigonium is Primate and Perpetual
Chancellor of the Kingdom, and Crowns the King after his Election.

The chiefest strength of the Country consists in Light Horse: The Horsemen are
there called Hussars, and the Infantry Heiduques. Besides Extraordinaries, the
Emperor draws out of what he possesses in Hungary about a Million of Livers
every Year; that is, from the Silver Mines, his Imposition upon Houses, and his
Tax upon Cattle Exported. The Grand Signior requires a Caraz from those that
are under his Jurisdiction; who pretends to all Hungary, and the Dominions
belonging to it, by virtue of the Submission made to Solymon by Sigismund, Son
to King John, Count of Cepusa; and by the Queen his Mother.

The chief Rivers of Hungary are, first the great Danubius of Polyb. Strab.
Plin. and aliis, Danubio Ital. and Hispan. Danube Gallis. Danaw and Thonaw
Germanis, which runs quite through Hungary, making a Course for above 300
miles from Presburg to Belgrade, and from thence passing by the shores of
Servia, Bulgaria, Wallachia and Moldavia, with many Mouths it enters into the
Euxine or Black Sea. Having from its first source performed a Course of above
1500 miles.

No River whatsoever, so far from its discharge into the Sea, affords more
Naval Vessels of strength and sufficiency for Fight. The Emperor has his
Vessels of War built like Galleys at Vienna, Presburg and Comorra, and an
Arsenal for Provision of more, upon occasion. The Turk once had his Vessels at
Gran, Buda and Belgrade.

Nor has any River afforded the like Signal Engagements and Encounters at this
distance from the Sea. At the Siege of Belgrade, Mahomet the Great brought 200
Ships and Galleys well stored, up the Stream. And the Hungarians sent as many
down from Buda, that after a sharp Encounter, they took twenty of the Turkish
Vessels, and forced the rest on shore, near the Camp; so that Mahomet caused
them to be set on fire to prevent the falling of them into the Enemies hand. At
the Siege of Buda the Christians had 24 Galliots, 80 small Pinnaces, and about
100 Ships of Burden, and other great Boats, when all miscarried under Co.
Regensdorff.

At the Siege of Vienna by Solomon, Wolfgangus Hodder did a good piece of
Service with his armed Vessels from Presburg, who sank the Turkish Vessels that
came from Buda with the great Ordnance to batter the Walls of Vienna.

Nor does any River afford so large and well peopled Islands; the most
considerable is the Island of Schut, or Insula Cituorum, with its several
Islands in it, containing many good Towns, besides many Villages well peopled,
and well fortified against the Incursions of the Turks and Tartars. And the
Island Raab made by the great and lesser Rivers Raab. There is also another
Island against Mohatch; another at the entrance of the Dravus; and a new Island
hard by Belgrade; fifty years since there was no face of an Island, but by the
settling of the Ouse or filth brought down by the Savus and the Danube, it is
now full of Trees, and what advantage or disadvantage this may be to Belgrade,
doubtless, a little time may show, tho the Turks once were very secure and
fearless of any forces in these parts. Between Vicegrade and Vacia there is St.
Andrews, or Vizze, a fair and large Island. A little below Buda there is
Ratzenmarckt Island, extending in length 40 miles, containing many Villages in
it. Here the Turkish Forces Encamped when they came to raise the Siege at Buda.

2. The Tibiscus, Ptol. Tibesis, Herod. Pathissus, Plin. Tisianus, Jornand.
Tissia, Laz. vulgo Teiss. Arising in the County of Moramarusius, out of the
Carpatan Mountains. At Tokay it takes in the Bodroch or Bodrogus; at Kaschaw
the Tareza, the Hewatz, Hewath, or Hernach meets, and rolling down the
Mountains, receives the Scheya and Gayo Rivers at Onoth, and a little further
they all four fall into the Teisse. At Zolnock the Zagywa, the Turna, Sarwizza
and Genges, fall into it. At Czongrad the Kalo, the Sebeskeres, the Fekierkenz
olim Chrysus R. Keureuz incol. Kraiss. Germ. At Seged, the Marisus Strab. Marus
Tac. Maros Hung. Merisch, or Marisch Germ. Marons Incolis. Lastly the Temes
River falls into it, near its own confluence into the Danube, between Petro
Varadine and Belgrade. By this River Teisse comes down the great quantity of
Natural Salt-stone taken out of the many Salt-Mines in Hungary and
Transylvania, and carried into the adjacent and neighboring Countries.

3. On the West Side of Hungary is the River Arabo Ant. Narabo Ptol. Now the
Raab rising in Styria, and falling into the Danube by Javarin or Rab, receiving
the Lauffnitz, Binca, and Gurtz. A considerable River, and famous, for in the
year 1664, Germany was much alarmed at the raising of the Siege of Canisa, and
taking the Fort Serini, much more at the Turks passage over this River Raab;
but the extraordinary valor of the Christians, especially the French, put them
to a shameful flight, so that after 8000 lost upon the place near St. Gothard,
crowding in heaps to pass the River, the Horse trampled upon the Foot, and the
Foot throwing themselves headlong into the water, together with the Horse, sunk
down and perished, so that the water was died with blood, and the whole River
covered with Men, Horse and Garments, all swimming promiscuously together; no
difference here between the valiant and the coward, the foolish and the wise,
all being involved in the same violence of calamity; so that the waters
devoured a far greater number than the Sword, whilst the Grand Vizier Achmet
standing on the other side of the River was able to afford no kind of help, and
as void of all counsel and reason, knew not where to apply a remedy; such a
defeat and dishonor since the time that the Ottoman Empire arrived to its
greatness, such a slaughter and disgrace that it suffered, no Stories to that
time make mention of; which occasioned a Truce for 29 years between the two
Empires, by which Truce the Province of Zatmar and Zabolch granted to Ragotzi,
returned again to the Emperor. That the Castle of Zachelhyd be demolished. That
Varadin and Newhausel remain to the Turks.

4. The Dravus Melae, Draus Plin. Drabus Strab. Darus Ptol. La Drava Ital. Le
Drove Gal. Drau Incol. Trab Hung. which arising among the Mountains of
Saltzburg and Carinthia, runs a long Course of about 400 miles, through
Carinthia and Hungary, falls into the Danube at Drazat over against Erdoed,
or Erdewdy, the old Teutoburgium of Ant. and Ptol. D. Brown tells us, that it
is a good stream as high as Villach, where there is a Bridge over it, and at
Clagenfart he passed over it upon two long Wooden Bridges, and an Island in the
middle between them.

5. The Savus Ptol. Saus Strab. in MS. Sheldeni (...), Sabus Solin. La Sava
Ital. Saw Germ. Le Save Gal. is a noble River, arising in the Mountains between
Carinthia and Carniola, and swelling by the accession of many Rivers, after a
Course of above 350 miles, enters the Danube at Belgrade. At Crainburg not
far distant from the Head, it was a considerable stream, which afterward so
enlarged as to make remarkable Islands, one at Sissex by Zagrabia, the other
Metubarris at the West of old Sarmium.

6. Upon the North of Hungary are the Rivers arising from the Capathian
Mountains, which divide Poland from Hungary, viz. the Gran and Ipola, which
uniting together runs into the Danube, over against Strigonium or Gran.

6. The Neytra which passing by Newhausel, enters the Danube, over against
Komara.

8. The Wagg, or Vagus, which Stuckius says, equals the Po in Italy, at
Fristat, 50 miles from its entrance into the Danube; it is a very large River,
and has a long Bridge over it. And at Trenschin it has a considerable Bridge
over it.

9. Besides these there are others esteemed Fluvii non ignobiles, viz. the
Leytha, which enters the Danube at Altemburg or Owar, and the Bounds of
Austria.

10. The Sarvitza, or Orpanus, arising near Vesprinium, and passing Alba
Regalis, runs into the Danube at Jeni, or Nova Palanka, over against
Bathmonster.

11. Curassus, or Crasso, fatal to Lewis the second King of Hungary.

12. Walpo, or Vulpanus, over which there is a Bridge at Walcovar.

13. The River Bosnath, Boswetha, or Bacunthus, which falls into the Savus,
not far from the old Surmium.

As this Country excels in Rivers, so it has many considerable and long
Bridges, not to mention the Bridge of Boats over the Danube, between Gran and
Barchan, nor of that Bridge of Boats between Buda and Pest, where the Danube is
half a mile over, which is so contrived as to open a passage for Boats and
Vessels of Burden to pass; nor shall I name those already mentioned. There is
a handsome and well contrived Bridge at Calotza. But that over the Danube at
Esseck is scarce to be paralleled by any other; Built partly over the Dravus,
and partly over the Fens, which are often overflowed, and is five miles in
length. Having Towers built upon it at the distance of every quarter of a mile,
supported by great Trees erected under it, nine or ten in a rank unto each
Arch, and handsomely Railed on each side. It cost the Turks 300000 Dollars, and
six years time to build it. That part of the Bridge which was over the Dravus
was burnt down by Count Serini in the late Turkish Wars between Leopold the
Emperor, and Sultan Mahomet 4th, and is now supplied by a Bridge of Boats,
somewhat below the former.

As Hungary abounds in Rivers, so it is not without its notable Lakes, viz.
the Lake Balaton, or Platzee, the Volcaea, of old extending a great length
between Vesprinium and the Dravus, with some strong Forts upon it; which put a
stop unto the cruelty of Solyman's Soldiers, when they destroyed all from Buda
unto this Lake.

There is also the Newsidlar Sea, by the Hungarians Terteu, by Plin. Peiso. A
pleasant Lake, seven German miles long, and three broad; in the Commotions of
Botscay 14 Villages about this Lake were burnt by the Turks, Tartars, and
Rebellious Heyducks.

The Rivers and Lakes of Hungary are abundant in Fishes. The Tibissus or Teisse
is esteemed the most Fishy River in Europe, if not in the World. It Is commonly
said, that it consists of two parts of Water, and one of Fish; and the River
Bodrack which runs into the Tibiscus as aforesaid, not far from Tokay is so
full of Fish, that in Summertime when the River is low, the people say the
Water smells of Fish, tho the River is thirty fathom broad, and eight and a
half deep. This exceeding fertility some ascribe unto the Saline Tinctures,
both of its own stream, and others accessionary unto it, which lick the many
Salt Mines under ground, and so may carry some principles of faecundity with
them. The Danube abounds with many good Fishes, as Trouts, Perches, large and
delicious Carps; a Fish called Scheyden, much exceeding a Pike. At some seasons
great store of Hausans, some 20 foot long, esteemed a good Dish, and somewhat
like Sturgeon, with many other sorts. And as the Rivers are full of Fish, so in
the Winter they are covered with many sorts of Fowls.

The most considerable Cities of Hungary, are Buda, Hung. Aquincum, or Acincum
Ptol. and Ant. test Clev. Sicambria and Curta aliis. By the Germans called
Offen, by the French Bude, by the Spaniards, Italians, and English, Buda; so
called as some tell us from Buda, the Brother of Attilla, Anno Dom. 401. Others
suppose it so called from Budini, a famous Scythian people who engaged with
Attilla in his famous Expedition. Yet others tell us it was called Bada, from
the so many Renowned Baths in it. It Is distant from Belgrade 49 German miles,
and from Vienna 54, test Baud.

First taken from the Heathen Successors of Attila by Charles the Great 791,
taken from the Hungarians by Sultan Solomon, Anno Dom. 1526. Recovered the year
following by King Ferdinand Brother to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, who was
Elected King by the four Orders of the States of the Kingdom. But in the year
1529 it was retaken by Solomon, and committed to John Zapolia Prince of
Transylvania. Ann. 1541, K. Ferdinand sent his General Roggendorf with an Army
of 40000 men, and 40 Cannon. But the Turks coming in to their Assistance with a
numerous Army, the Germans were forced to raise the Siege: Whereupon the Sultan
politickly seized upon the City, sent the young Prince Sigismund with the
Princess his Mother into Transylvania, and kept the Town in his own hands, and
made it the Seat of a Biglerbeg or Viceroy, whose authority extended over all
the Bashaws of Hungary. In the year 1542, it was besieged by Joachim Elector of
Brandenburgh, who was forced to draw off and quit the Siege. 1598 or 9, Count
Swartzenburgh besieged it, but the attempt miscarried. Anno 1602, General
Rosworm also with the Imperial Army attacked it in vain.

Whosoever shall read of the Sieges of 1684, and 1686, will find the Story of
the most famous Sieges in the World, where Blood was spilt like water, and many
brave men found their Graves; where the Assailants equalling if not surpassing
Titus storming Jerusalem, and Abdi Bashaw no less bravely obstinate in
defending his Trust, than Villerius upon the Walls of Rhodes. But upon the
second of September 1686, the same day of the year when it was taken by
Solomon; after it had groaned under the Tyrannous yoke of the Ottoman 145
years, was this great and strong City, the Capital of Hungary, reduced under
the obedience of the Emperor Leopold the First, by the Prudence, Constancy and
Conduct of the Courageous Duke of Lorrain; the Terror of the Musselmen, and the
Greatest General of this Age. The Turks have formerly experienced the Valor of
Huniades and Scanderbergh: They have feared the Courage of the Duke of Merceur:
They have trembled at the Conduct and slaughter of the Valiant Count Serini;
but much more reason have they to dread the Martial Duke of Lorrain: He it was
that near Preshurg routed the Rebellious Army of Teckley: He it was that
defeated the Turks near Calenburgh: He it was with the King of Poland that
raised the Siege of Vienna: He it was that vanquished the Enemy near Barkan,
and rescued the King of Poland when the Polish Army was in Confusion: He it was
that relieved the City of Gran, and routed the Army of Zeitan Ibraim Basha: and
lastly, He it was that whilst the Grand Vizier Soliman looked on with a potent
Army, won this Glorious Conquest, Buda.

Not far from Buda in the year 1578, was fought a Battle of so strange a
fortune between the Christians and the Turks, that the Conquerors were
conquered, and the vanquished got the Victory. Other Cities are Poson, Hungaris
Presburg, Germanis Pesonium and Pessonium, the Flexum of Ptol. and Ant. The
City is pleasant, the Castle stately, where the highly-esteemed Crown of
Hungary is kept; the Labyrinth, Fish Ponds, and Fountains are Noble, it is the
Capital of what the House of Austria possesses, ten German miles from Vienna:
Since the Loss of Alba Regalis, it is the place of Election and Coronation of
the Kings of Hungary, Cassovia, Chaschaw incolis and Caschow, lies toward the
Mountains, having the fairest Arsenal in the Country. Eperies, Eperiae, is much
frequented, by reason of the Fairs which are there kept; where also there is a
Salt-Mine about 180 Fathom deep, the veins of Salt are large, and there are
pieces of 10000 l. weight; the color of the Salt-stone is somewhat gray, but
grinded to powder, it becomes white; nor is the Salt always of one color, but
of diverse; there are some pieces so clear and hard, that they carve them into
diverse Figures.

Sabaria, of Plin. Ptol. and Amm. Stain. am Angern. Germ. Szombatel. Hung.
test Lazio, but by Cluver it is Sarwar, Hung. Rothenturn Ger. of Old, the
Metropolis of Pannonia Superior, the Birthplace of St. Martin. Some Report,
and others believe that Ovid was Buried there, in his Return toward Italy.

Nittria, Hung. Neytracht Ger. a Bishops See. Freistat, or Calgotz, Hung. a
fair large Town, but Burned by the Turks. Schemnitz, the greatest of the
Mine-Towns in Hungary, and where great quantity of Silver Ore is every day
dug. It has three fair Churches, and three Castles, and several Mines;
those of Windschacht and Trinity are the chief, the last 70 Fathom deep; the
one is much esteemed, and of a black color, covered with a white Earth.

There is also often found a Red Substance which grows to the Ore, called
Cinnaber of Silver, which being grinded with Oil, makes a Vermilion as good as
the Cinnaber made by Sublimation. There are also found in these Mines,
Crystals, Amethysts, and Amethystine mixtures; as also Vitriol Naturally
Crystalliz'd in the Earth. And as there is great variety in the Silver Ore, as
to its mixtures with Earth, Stones, Marchasite, Cinnaber, Vitriol, etc. so also
in its Richness; some holding a great Proportion of Silver, in respect of
others: A hundred pound-weight of Ore sometimes yields but half an Ounce, or an
Ounce of Silver; sometimes two Ounces, 3, 4, 5, and so to 20 Ounces; what is
Richer, is very rare.

Most of the Schemnitz Ore holds some Gold, which they separate by melting the
Silver, then granulating it, and after by dissolving it in Aquafortis made out
of a peculiar Vitriol, prepared at Chremnitz, whereby the Gold is left at the
bottom, and is afterward melted, and the Aquafortis is Distilled from the
Silver, and serves again for Use.

Chremnitz, Carpates of old, is the Oldest Mine-Town, and the Richest in Gold
of all the rest; 965 years they have Worked there: the Mine is about 10 English
miles in length, and there is one Cuniculus, or Horizontal Passage 800 Fathoms
long, and the depth is about 170 Fathoms; and the Leopold Pit is 150 Fathoms
deep.

Of the Gold Ore, some is white, some black, some red, some yellow; that with
black spots within white, is esteemed the best.

There is also a Vitriol Mine at Chremnitz about 80 Fathom deep, the Ore
whereof is reddish, and sometimes greenish. This Ore is infused in water, and
after three days the water is poured off, and boiled seven days in a Leaden
Vessel, till it comes to a thick granualated whitish Substance, which is
afterward reduced to a Calx in an Oven, and serves in the making of
Aquafortis, or the separating water used at Schremnitz.

Newsol, or Bistricia, has the greatest Copper-works in Hungary, the Copper
being very strongly united to its stone-bed, or Ore; the Separation is effected
with great labor and difficulty, it being burned and melted 14 times before it
becomes fit for Use.

At a little Village called Smalnik there is a Rivulet which changes particles
of Iron into Copper. The leaves of Oaks that are by the bank-side, falling into
the water are insensibly eaten through, and the most gross particles of this
water getting therein, it is turned into a leaf of Copper, which being exposed
to the Sun, or only to the Air, hardens, and always retains its former figure
of an Oaken leaf.

At Glas-Hitten, seven English miles from Schemnitz, there was once a rich Gold
Mine; but since the overrunning of the Country by Bethlem Gabor, it is lost.
It Is much frequented by reason of its natural hot Baths.

Eisenbach four miles English from Glas-Hitten, and five or six from Schemnitz,
is also noted for its Hot Baths, the sediment of which is red, and turns into
Stone, and it turns Wood into Stone.

At Hern-Grundt, an Hungarian mile from Newsol, in that Mine were two Springs
of a Vitriolate water, which turn Iron into Copper.

The seven chief Mine-Towns are Schemnitz, Chremnitz, Newsol, Koningsberg,
Bochantz, Libeten, and Tiln.

The strongest places belonging to the House of Austria, were, Javarin, Comara,
and Leopolstat, the Bulwarks of Christendom. Javarin, Gallis Raab, stands in
the Plain, out of sight, environed by the Danow; and Raab Germanis, Gewer
Hungaris, Giavarin Italis, Rab. Incolis, Yanick Turcis. It was the Arabo of
Ant. the Narabo of Ptol. Is Fortified with seven large Bastions covered with
Brick, and four Cavilliers, or Ravelins between. It was Besieged by Sinan
Bassa, in the time of Sultan Murat the Third, who, at one Assault lost 1200
Men; but by the Treachery of Count Herdeck, 'twas Surrendered; after recovered
by a Notable Surprise of Count Swartzenburg, and Count Palfi, with a great
Slaughter of the Turks 1606. Here also are several sorts of Warlike Engines and
Instruments.

Komora, Comora, is the Crumenum, Asaum of Ant. and Comaronium and Bragaetium,
is Moated by the Danow, and strongly Fortified. The Island of the same Name,
formerly called Schutt, contains above 300 Villages, and above 15000
Inhabitants, with the conveniences of Hunting and Fishing. Filleck, Filecum,
Tokay, Tokaeum al. Trissum, Zatmar, Zatmaria, and Kalo, have been likewise
Fortified by Order of the Emperor, who keeps hard-by several Armed Galleys.

Agria, Egar Ger. Erlaw Hung. Erla Incolis. Temeswar, and Canisia, have also
their several Bassa's, as being upon the Frontiers. The Turks call Temeswar,
The Invincible; by some thought to be the Zuro^dra, or Zurobara of Ptol.

The City of Gran, Strigonium, Laz, or Ostrogon, Bregaetium Clav. was the
Birthplace of King Stephen, the first Christian King of Hungary. Besieged vain
by John King of Hungary; taken by Solomon, August the 10th. 1542, rceovered by
Count Mansfelt; but re-taken, or basely delivered in the time of Sultan Achmet
to Aly-beg the Turkish General.

Vicegrade, Hung. Plin. Demberg Germ. the Castle of this place is Seated upon a
high Rock, where the Crown of Hungary was formerly kept: and where the Kings of
Hungary did often reside, was taken by the Imperial Army, June 16. 1684. Over
against it lies Maroz, or Fristat.

Neoseliun, Newhausel Germ. Owar Hung. which several times has bravely
withstood the furious Assaults of the Turks; but in Anno 1663, the Turkish
Power was so great, and the Magazine took fire, that it was forced to yield;
and had not some other Christian Princes joined their Assistance to the
Emperor, and so stopped the Turks Carrier, his Ambition and Success had farther
enlarged his Dominions. In August 1684, it was taken by Storm, and the Turks
Army defeated near Gran.

Albajulia Lat. Stulweissenburg G. Ekekes Feierwar Hung. Stolni Biograd
Sclavis, Albe Royale Gallis, Alba Regalis Scrip. Pann. once famous for the
Coronation and Sepulchers of the Hungarian Kings, taken by the Turks 1543, lost
again 1595, when Sir Tho. Arundel forcing the Water-Tower took the Turkish
Ensign, and for his Valor was made Count of the Empire, and Lord Arundel of
Wardour. A strong Town, betrayed by N. Keresken the Governor thereof, upon
Promise of a great Reward; but Selimus, the Son of Solomon, for his Treason,
caused him to be put into a Barrel stuck full of Nails, and to be tumbled up
and down, till he miserably died.

The Emperor Ferdinand the Second Besieged Canisia, or Canischa Ortel. when he
was Archduke, but could not take it. Nor was Leopold Ignatius more Fortunate
in the Year 1664. The Retreat of the Duke of Mercure from Canisia was one of
the Noblest Actions of our Age. Quinque Ecclesiae, Furfkirchen Germ. Otegiazac
Hung. Petschen Turcis test Leunclavio taken by the Turks 1543, by some thought
to be the Teutoburgium of Ant. and Ptol. Others tell us it is the Amantia of the
Ancients, tho some think Amantia to be Almaz, it is the place where Solomon
died, during the Siege of Zygeth, in the year 1566. Mohaez is Remarkable for
the Defeat of the Christians in the year 1525. And for that of the Turks 1687.
Pont d' Essek, Famous for the Action of Count Serini, who burnt it in View of
all the Turkish Army. And for the Campaign of 1687.

Anno 1682 Villeck was besieged by the Bassa of Buda with 25000 Turks and
Tartars, but after a brave resistance in September it was surrendered without
the Governors consent, and afterward demolished, and the Walls levelled with
the ground.

At the same time Lewentz was also abandoned and possessed by the Enemy. And
the Winter following the Turks and Hungarian Rebels seized themselves of the
Fortresses Atsol, Newsol, Schimnitz and Chremnitz. Anno 1595, diverse Hungarians
besieged Papa, and after a long Battery it was delivered to them, who sold the
Inhabitants to the Turks. But the Imperial Army advancing, many of the Rebels
fled. And some of the chief promoters of that disturbance were impaled alive.

Near Altemberg the Imperial Horse and Foot being divided in passing a River,
after a sharp dispute, the Turks seized upon the Imperial Baggage valued at
40000 Guilders, when also the Princes of Savoy and Aremberg soon after died of
their Wounds.

1684 the Castle of Vnguar was besieged by Teckley, and taken by Storm, and
most of the Garrison put to the Sword.

Upon the Hills near Vaccia the Duke of Lorain attacked a Body of 20000 Turks
commanded by the Vizier of Buda, of whom were slain 3000, 1500 taken Prisoners,
with seven Pieces of Cannon, eighteen Standards, the Vizier and two Bassas
slain, a Bassa and ten Aga's prisoners, and of the Dukes Army not a hundred men
lost.

1684 Virovitza, the Key and Entrance into Sclavonia, Capitulated, and 600
Janissaries marched out, and left it to the Imperialist after 113 years
possession.

1684 Zeben was invested by General Schuts, and surrendered upon discretion, all
the Hungarians being about 120, were by the Count D'Bargarzzi cut in pieces in
revenge of Count Teckleys Impaling alive diverse of the Garrison of Cziezuar
which was surrendered to him upon Articles.

Barthfield, a place fortified with good Walls, several Towers and Redoubts,
the Garrison consisting of about 400 men, Capitulated, and was put into the
Command of the Imperialists.

Mongatz and Tokay are two strong places, and in 1683 were in the hands of
Count Teckley.

Makowitz was Surrendered to General Schultz, October. 1684.

In the year 1663 Leventz a strong place was delivered up to the Turks.

Schinta the Magazine of the Emperors Arms and Artillery, was assaulted by the
Vizier, but being stoutly repulsed, he raised his Camp, and came before
Novigrade a Castle on a High Rock, encompassed with a Ditch of 34 foot deep,
Garisoned with 600 Soldiers, and well stored with Victuals and Ammunition, yet
resigned unto the Turks.

1663 At the shallow passages of the River Muer, Count Serini with 500 men
overthrew a party of 30000 Turks and Tartars under the Command of the Basha of
Temiswar, and so delivered Croatia from a total destruction.

In Jan. 1664. Berzenche was surrendered to Count Serini and Bakockza. And
Quinque Ecclesiae for its perfidious Act was by the Count after a furious
assault took by Storm, and in recompense of its treacherous stratagem put all
the Inhabitants to the Sword, pillaged and fired the Town, which rendered it a
horrible spectacle of Fire and Sword.

At Zigeth, consisting of an old and new Town conjoined by a Bridge which
crosses a famous Marsh or Fen. N. Serini the Great Grandfather of the
aforesaid Count Immortalized his Fame and Memory with the loss of his Life,
against Solomon the Great in the year 1565, with an Army of 600000.

Serinswar built by Count Serini, yielded to the Turks, and was demolished.
Leiva, before whose Walls C. Susa, and the Christians obtained a great Victory
against the Turks and Tartars; and assaulted Barchan a Palanka opposite to Gran.

Since the Battle between Syclos and Mohatz 1687, the chief Places belonging to
the Turks in Hungary are Agria, Hatwan, Gyulla, Great VVaradin, and Temeswar in
the Upper Hungary, Canissa, and Alb^ Regalis in the Lower Hungary.

Of Germany
map of Germany A New Map of GERMANY By Robt. Morden.


THE Name of Germans is much controverted amongst Authors, some think them so
called by the Romans, who seeing the people so like unto the Gauls, called them
Germans to the Gauls. Others derive it from Ger, signifying all; and man,
whence also came the Name of Almaine, which some fabulously derive from Alman,
whom they would have to be the 11th King of the Dutch, or Germans. Others from
the River Atmul, by later Writers called Almannus, whereunto they should
border. Others more probably from the Dutch Allensen Mann; Signifying all sorts
of men, or all hardy and valiant. The many opinions also and great differences
we have found amongst Authors in the Interpretations of the many ancient German
Nations, makes me at present not to mention them. It Is generally agreed, that
the Gomerians, or Cimbri, were the first Inhabitants of Gaul, Germany, and all
the Nations of the North and West of Europe; and that the Gauls their
Offspring under their Captain Segovesus victoriously ranged over all Germany,
from whom have sprung the ancient Inhabitants of this Country. Divided they
were into several Nations, and these also subdivided into lesser Tribes. The
first Nation of the Germans, who made the Romans as well feel their Swords, as
know their Names, were the Cimbri, Tentones, and Ambrones upon their Invasion
of Gaul and Italy, who were overcome and Destroyed by Marius.

After this, Caesar, upon his Conquest of France, having passed the Rhine, and
provoked the Germans, stirred up a tedious War; all other Adventures were easy
to the daring Romans: Nothing could give Check to Caesar's Fortune, only the
Germans; who at last, were rather Triumphed over, than Subdued by their
greatest Armies. How little was their Progress? How inconsiderable were their
Acquests, after so long a War? which continued for more Generations, than
others lasted Years: And indeed some part of Germany, viz. that beyond the Elbe
and Danube, was never so much as Attacqued. Endangered once by Drusius in the
Reign of Caesar Augustus, but freed by the Victory of Arminius, and the death
of Varus and his Legions; neglected afterward as a people unconquerable, or
not worth the conquering. Toward the wain of the Roman Empire, the Names of
the ancient Inhabitants by little and little worn out and quite extinguished
through their Fights and Butcheries amongst themselves; their Transmigrations
into foreign Countries, their affection and union into new Names, and the
Fleetings and Invasions of the Sarmatians, and more Eastern people, Germany
became confounded, and peopled with thirteen, for the most part differing
Names, of the Saxons, Almans, French, Thuringiens, Boioarians, Huns, Lombards,
Avares, Hungarians, Danes, Norwegians, Suethide or Sclaves, whose Original
fortunes, Kingdoms and States issuing from them, I must refer for a larger
Treatise of Geography, if God permit. But the fatal period of the Roman Empire
drawing on apace, the Franks, Burgundians, Almains, and other German Nations,
break through their Guards, dispossess the Romans of all Gaul, Rhetia, and
Noricum, till in the end, the French prevailing over the rest, extend their
Empire over all the Modern Germany, chiefly by the Valor of Charles the Great,
created Emperor of the West part of France and Germany. Afterward in the time
of Lodovicus Pius, the Son of Charles, the Great Empire of his Father was
parcelled out into many parts, viz. Italy, France, Burgundy, Lorrain, and
Germany, amongst his Sons and Nephews, with the Title of Kings; by which means,
the Kingdoms of Lorrain and Germany, United in the Person of Lewis the Ancient,
were aliened from the French, and possessed by the great Princes of Lorrain,
Saxony, Suabia, and Bavaria: As also by them dismembered into many
Principalities and Inferior States, all passing under the Name of Alman, or
Germans.

Germany is now bounded on the East with Poland and Hungary; on the West with
France, Switzerland, and the Seventeen Provinces; on the North with the Baltic
Sea, and Denmark; and on the South with the Alps, which part it from Italy.

The length whereof, from East to West, viz. from the Borders of Lorrain to
Poland, is 766 miles; the breadth from North to South, viz. from the Baltic
Sea, to the Southermost part of Tyrol, is 657 miles of the same Measure, viz.
73 to a degree. It Is situate in the Northern Temperate Zone; the longest day in
the Southern parts being 15 hours and an half; in the most Northern, 17 hours
and a Quarter.

It Is a spacious Country, and very Populous; the People of strong Constitution,
of a good Proportion and Complexion; very ingenious and stout, much given to
Drink, but of an Honest, Noble Nature: The poorer sort great pains-takers; and
the Nobles either stout Soldiers, or good Scholars.

The Women are of good Complexion, but corpulent; good Bearers, and fruitful
Breeders.

The Title of the Father descends to their Children; so that every Son of a
Duke is a Duke, and every Daughter of a Duchess is a Duchess; whence it
follows, that the Nobility being too much multiplied, is no less impoverished.

The Language here generally spoken, is the High Dutch; a Language very
Ancient, and has less commixture with the Latin than any which is used in
these Western parts.

No Country in the World is either better Planted with goodly Cities, or more
Pleasant and Healthful. A Country abounding with Mines of Silver and other
Metals; plentiful in Corn, Wines, Salt, Flesh, Linen, Quicksilver, Allom,
Saffron, Armor, and Iron-works.

The Germans are excellent Mechanics, eminent for Waterworks, Chemistry, and
Printing: Memorable is the story of Regiomontanus's Wooden Eagle, that flew a
quarter of a mile to meet the Emperor Maximilian; but especially famous is this
Region, for the two Grand Inventions of the latter Ages, viz. That fatal
Instrument the Gun, first found out by Bertholdus Swart a Friar. The Mystery of
Printing first discovered by a Soldier.

The Religion of this Country is divided into Papists and Protestants; the
latter again divided into Lutherans and Calvinists.

About the year 1250, the Empire being greatly distracted into many Factions,
each Faction chose a King of the Romans or Emperor. The Empire thus fluctuating
for about twenty years. The Princes met at Quidlinburg, and made a League of
Defense together; and meeting at Francfort they chose Radolphus Earl of
Hapsburg in the year 1270, who gaining Austria, and other Territories adjacent,
was the first Archduke of Austria, about 1280.

About the year 1500 the State of Burgundy, which comprehended also the
Low Countries, was by Marriage with the Heiress thereof, added to the House of
Austria.

About the same time (under Maximilian the First) the public Courts of
Judicature called the Imperial Chamber, the Supreme Tribunal and Appeal of
Justice was fixed at Spire, and the Empire divided into Ten Circles.

About 1519 Charles the Fifth, Son of Philp King of Spain, Son of Maximilian
the Emperor, succeeded his Father in his Estates of Spain, Burgundy, the
Low Countries, Austria, etc. and by Election, his Grandfather Maximilian in the
Empire also. Under whom the German Empire rose to its greatest height and
enlargement.

Under this Charles all Germany was rent into two grand Factions or parts,
Roman Catholics, and Protestants, occasioned by Martin Luther, born at Isleby
in Saxony, who first only taxed the abuses, and observed the corruptions of the
Church, after makes a general defection, Anno 1524. This was no sooner done,
but the Reformers make a new Schism, and divide between Luther and Zuinglius
1524, which rose to two grand Factions afterward, by the name of Lutherans and
Calvinists. Hence rose other Sects also, pretending higher Reformation in
Religion, so that in the year 1525 Tho. Munzer occasions the Rustic War. And
in the year 1534 succeeded the Anabaptists at Munster. And in Anno 1547 began
the Smalcaldick War in Hassia, where Caesar prevails and ruins their League,
soon after the Protestants prevail and procure the Passavian Peace, Anno 1552.
But in the year 1618 the Bohemians rejects the Emperor, and Elects the Count
Palatine King of Bohemia, and Crown him at Prague. Hence the Bohemian War
arose, and spread over all Germany, changed first into the Saxon, then into the
Swedish War, Anno 1620. The Duke of Bavaria overcoming the Bohemians, the
Palatinate was ejected out of the upper Palatinate out of the Electorship, as
well as out of the Kingdom of Bohemia. Anno 1625, the Duke of Saxony is slain.
Anno 1630, the King of Sweden enters Germany in the behalf of the Protestants,
and Princes Liberty. 1632 The King of Sweden, and Tilly the General of the
Imperialist after several Victories and Conquests both dies. 1635 The Duke of
Saxony and Brandenburg makes Peace with the Emperor: And the King of France
denounces War against the Empire. Anno 1636 the Duke of Saxony is slain, and
the Imperialists are driven out of Pomerania by the Swedes. 1639 Saxony and
Bohemia invaded. The War continues hot by several Sieges and Battles till 1648,
when Munster Treaty ensues, and so the thirty years wherein had perished about
325000 was ended. This Peace of Munster changed the Empire to that State that
it is now at. For the King of Sweden carried away the Dukedoms of Bremen and
Verdin, Lower Pomerania and Stetin, with other places in the Upper Pomerania.
The Island or Principality of Rugen. The Isle of Wollin, the River and Port of
of Odor. The Baliwick of Poel and New Closter. The Signory of Wismar and
Wildhasen in Westphalia, etc. The King of France was to have the Cities and
Bishopric of Mets, Toul, and Verdun, with Moyenvic, Pignerol, Brisac. The
Landgravedom of Alsatia the Higher, the Baliwick of Hagenaw, and the Fortress
of Philipsburg. The Palatine of the Rhine is restored to his Estate in part,
and made the Eighth Elector and high Treasurer of the Empire. And the
Protestants were asserted into full Liberty of their Religion; which Name arose
in the year 1529, at the General Assembly of Worms, when the Elector of
Saxony, the Landgrave of Hessen, the City of Norimberg and others protested
against the Decrees of Caesar, and appealed to an Universal Council.

Germany is now an Elective Empire, wherein there are several Sovereign
Estates, of which the Emperor is chief, who Governs by Diets, which are almost
like the General Estates of France. The Principal Articles of the Government
are contained in a Fundamental Law, or Original Constitution and Agreement,
called Aurea Bul^a, or, The Golden Bull; which treats of the Election of the
King of the Romans, the Duty of the Electors, of their Privileges, of the
Authority of the Emperor; and lastly, of the means to maintain the Peace and
Repose of the Empire. This Bull is a little Book, the Original whereof, being
written in Parchment, contains 24 Leaves, and 30 Chapters; and was constituted
as the perpetual and fundamental Law of the Empire, to be altered by the
Emperor, no not with the Electors consent, by Charles the Fourth 1356. The
Election of the Emperor ought, it is said, to be made at Francfort upon the
Mein, though this Order, in the last Elections, has not been Observed. Besides
the Assemblies that concern the Affairs of the Empire in General, there are
three other sorts; that of the Electors, for the Election of the Emperor: That
of the Deputies, whither the Emperor sends a Commissioner. And those of the
Circles like the Assemblies of the States in the great Provinces of France. Of
these Circles there are ten in the Empire, that is to say, of Austria, Bavaria,
Suabia, of the Upper Rhine, of the Lower Rhine, Westphalia, Vpper-Saxony,
Lower-Saxony, Franconia, Burgundy; but this last is now no more summoned. Every
Cirle has a Director Ecclesiastic, and a Secular Director, who preside
together at their Assemblies. Two or three Circles may meet when one of them is
attacqued from without, or in confusion within.

The Empire as it retains the Title, so it is almost like that of the Romans,
though it contains not so large an extent of Ground. The Princes that compose
it are of five sorts: The Emperor, who is now of the House of Austria, the
Electors, the Ecclesiastics, the Princes secular, and the Free Cities: In the
General Diets are three bodies; that of the Electors, that of the Princes, and
that of the Imperial Cities. There are reckoned above 300 Sovereignties in
Germany who do not acknowledge the Emperor, but only in point of Homage and
mutual Agreement.

The House of Austria has three sorts of Dominion; those of Austria, which are
Hereditary to him; those of Bohemia, which he now claims as his Right; and
those of Hungary, which he has by Election. Out of this House of Austria the
German Emperors have been Elected for above 400 years, ever since the time of
Hen. 4th. when the Lords of the Empire began to undervalue his Authority, and
Pope Gregory the Seventh taking occasion thereby Excommunicated him, and
Ordered the Imperial Scepter should bs given to another; Then the Germans
abolished the right of Succession, and assumed to themselves that of Electing
the Emperors.

The Emperor who is of that House, usually in his life time, causes his Son, or
his Brother, or his next Kinsman to be Crowned King of Hungary, afterwarwards
King of Bohemia: then if he finds the Princes disposed to it, he causes him to
be Elected also King of the Romans, that is, his perpetual Vicar and Successor
presumptive to the Empire.

Without the Revenue of his Hereditary Territories, he would scarce have
wherewithal to support his dignity; for under the Title of Imperial he
possesses no Land: his principal Rights are the Election and Investiture of
Feif^y, the Grant of Privileges, and the Right of Legitimation. He may make
Laws, give Letters of safe Conduct, establish Posts, make Parliaments, settle
Universities, erect Buroughs into Cities, create Offices, and outlaw Cities
by Proclamation; lastly, he may make Kings, Dukes and Marquesses, and he is
superior to all the Princes of the Empire, who for that reason have a great
Respect for him.

The Electors are Eight in all, viz. the Archbishop of Mayence,
Arch-Chancellor of Germany, the Archbishop of Treeves, Arch-Chancellor of
France, the Archbishop of Cologn, Arch-Chancellor of Italy; the King of
Bohemia, Great Cup Bearer, the Duke of Bavaria Great Steward, the Duke of
Saxony Great Marshal or Constable, the Duke of Brandenburgh Great Chamberlain,
and the Prince Palatine Great Treasurer. These Electors pretend that their
dignity makes them equal to the Kings of Europe, and, which is of greater
moment, for that they Elect and Crown the Emperor; after which the Pope, by
usurpation, pretends a Right to confirm the Election and Coronation. Four
Voices of these Electors suffices to advance any one to the Imperial Dignity:
and at present the King of Bohemia only has his Seat in the Election. The
Secular Electors may not nominate themselves. Nor can the Lands of their
Electorates be alienated. In the House of Saxony the Electorship belongs only
to the Eldest, who shares the other Seigniories with his Brothers. The Elector
of Brandenburgh is the most Landed of all the rest; next to the King of
Bohemia, his Dominions contain above two hundred German Leagues in length, but
are for the most part separated one from another; and by the late combustion,
and the Fortune of War, he is become the most considerable Prince of that
Quality in the Empire. Anno 1000 under Otho the Third, the Electors had fixed
their Electorship, which first began by permission under pretense of avoiding
confusion, and for the good of the common Interest; some tell us that the
Electors were Instituted after the death of Otho the Third. And others say, it
was in the time of Rodolph of Hapsburg. The Ecclesiastical Princes are, The
Archbishop of Saltsburg, the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order; several
Bishops, and other great Prelates, Abbots and Abbesses, who have no voice, but
embodi'd; these Princes are almost absolute over the Temporality of their
Benefices; neither has Christendom any Prelates so Potent as they. Their
Elections to their Dignities belongs to the several Chapters, wherein neither
the Pope nor the Emperor has any Right to intermeddle.

Among the Secular Princes there is the Archduke of Austria, the Princes of
the Electoral Houses, some Dukes, Marquesses, and Landgraves: there are also
some Earls and Barons who differ only in name and method of the Empire.

They have their Seat in a Body which has four Voices in the Estates of the
Empire. But they have also every one their Voices in their particular
Assemblies, and some of them Coin Money. There are some Noblemen in Franconia,
in Suabia, in the Country of the Rhine, and in the Lower Alsatia, who are as
absolute in their own particular Territories, as the most Potent Lords of the
Empire in theirs; several Principalities in Germany are possessed by one Prince
alone, and many times one Principality belongs to many. The Free Cities, which
are as so many Republiques, are of two sorts, viz. Imperial, and Hans Towns.
The Imperial bear the Eagle of the Empire in their Arms, either entire or
divided; and they have a Right to send their Deputies to the Diets of the
Empire, where their Corporation has two Voices. They exceed the number of
fourscore, and are considered either as lying upon the Seats of Suabia, or the
Seats of the Rhine; and they are thus divided from the several Seats where the
Deputies of the Cities take their places, the Deputy of the City of C^logn
takes the first place upon the Rhine-Seat, and the Deputy of Ratisbourn takes
the first place upon the Suabia-Seat: Some are governed by Noble Families,
others live under a Popular Government.

The Hans Towns are in league together, to aid one another reciprocally in time
of distress, as also for the maintenance of the liberty of their Trade, and to
preserve themselves from being overcharged with Impositions by foreign Princes;
but that League at this day is little regarded by several of these Cities,
whilst every one endeavors to stand on their own bottom, and do their own
business themselves. Of these, Lubeck, Cologn, Brunswick and Dantzick are the
four chief; Lubeck may summon all the rest together with the advice of five of
the Cities which are next adjoining to her.

The most famous Rivers in Germany are the Rhine, the Danube, the Elb, the
Odar, and the Veser, the Ems. The Rhine, Rhenus, Caesar Strab. Plin. etc. Rhyn
or Rhein Germ. Le Rhein Gallis, Rheno Italis, arises out of the Alps in two
Fountains distant about a days journey asunder, the one called the Vorder
Rhein, or Anterior Rhenus, sourceth out of the Hills of the Leponti, and
Mountain Luckmanier. The further, named the Hinder Rhein, or Posterior Rhenus,
out of the Alps, and the Mountain der Vogel. These meeting together about a
German mile from Chur or Coire of the Grisons, afterward continued in one
Channel toward the North by the Cities of Constance, Basil, Spire, Worms,
Mentz and Cologn; increased by the way with the addition of several other great
Rivers, unto the Fort Schenken-Schans; from whence it is conveyed into the
Ocean by four Branches or Channels, first of the Wael by Nimmengen, Tiel and
Bommel, until it loses its name in the Maes. 2. The Leck into which the Rhein
diverteth at Duerstede, and is carried into the Maes betwixt Dort and
Rotterdam. 3. The Rhine extended from Schenken-Schans by Huessen, Arnhem and
Wagening, unto Duerstede, where the main River being diverted by the Leck, with
a small Current, it is continued by Vtr^tcht, and through Holland unto Leyden,
where in the sandy Downs betwixt it and the Sea, it leaves its name, and under
another name of the Vlict it is turned toward the South, falling into the Maes
at Sluys over against the Bre^l. The fourth Branch is the Is^l, drawn from the
Rhine near Arnhem, and passing by Zutphen and Daventer, falls into the
Zuider, or South Sea, at Campen. The main Channels of the Rhine in the time of
Caesar were the Rhine which then fell into the Ocean, at the place where is now
Catwick in Holland. And the Vahatis or Wart, making the Island of the Batavians
of Tacitus. Chiefer Rivers received into the Rhine are the Neckar, Nicer and
Necarus, Flav. and A. Marc. arising in Silva Nigra, or Swartzwald near Rotweel,
and falls into the Rhine at Manheim near Hiedelberg. The Main Maenus Tac. out
of the Mount Fichtelberg passing the Towns of Bamberg, and Wurtzburg falls in
below Francfort. The Roer Rura. Scrip. Belgig. in Westphalia, flowing hereinto
at Duesburg, The Lip, Luppia, Tac. Lupias Strab. rising not far from
Paderborn empties it self at the Wesel. The Aar issuing out of the Alps of the
Leponti near the Hill of St. Gothard, is discharged hereinto near Waldshut. The
Ill, Ellus Flavius, out of Suntgew, after the receipt of almost infinite lesser
Rivers, falls in a little below Strasburg. The Moselle, Mosella Tac. Aus.
arising out of the Mountains of Vauge at the Confines of Lorrain, is
disburthened hereinto at Coblentz.

The Danaw Ger. le Danube Gal. Danubio Ital. and Hisp. Danow Ang. Danubius
Polyb. Strab. Plin. etc. arises in Schwartzwald, distant about two hours
journey from the head of the Neckar, and running Eastwards through Suavia,
Bavaria, Austria, Hungaria, Bulgaria, etc. after above 1000 miles course it
pours into the Euxine Sea with a great violence through six Channels,
according to Plin. through seven, according to Sol. Strab. and A. Marc. The
lower part of this River was called Ister. Strab. puts the beginning of this
Name at its Cataracts, Ptol. at the Town Axiopolis. Plin. where it arriveth at
Illiricum. Appian at the Confluence of it with the River Savus. The greater
Rivers received hereinto in Germany, are the Iser, Isara. The Leck, Lycus, Inn.
Aenus of Ptol. The Nab, or Nabas, and the Marckh or Moraus.

The Ems Germ. Amiss and Amusia Strab. Amisus and Amasus Ptol. and Plin. It
arises in Westphalia near Paderborn, and is disburthened into the German or
British Ocean.

The Weser, Visurgis Plin. Visurigis Ptol. Bisurgis Strab. Iturgis Ovid. has
its beginning in the Hilly Forest of Duringer-Waldt passing by the Towns of
Hamlen, Minden, and Bremen, and having received the Fuld, and the Aller,
flows into the German Ocean, the part toward the head is called Wierra,
Verra al. Wertz.

The Elbe, Albis of Plin. Strab. etc. rises out of the Hill Risengebirg, being
part of the Sudatae, incircling Bohemia, and passing by the Towns of Dresden,
Wittenburg, Meydburg, it falls into the German Ocean below Hambourg; toward
it beginning in Bohemia, it is called the Labe. Greater Rivers which empty
hereinto are the Muldaw, Muldavia. The Egra, the Saltza, Sala of Strab. The
Spree. Suevus of Ptol. Unto this River reached the Roman Discoveries, and the
French Conquests.

The Odor, Odera, Viadrus Ptol. This arises out of the Hill Oderberg near
Olmuntz in Moravia, passing by Breslaw, Glogaw, Francford and Stetin, with the
Rivers Neisse and Warta received thereinto; it is disburdened into the
Frisch-huff at the two Islands Vsedom and Vollin with three Mouths, Pfyn, Swine
and Diuvenow, and so into the East or Baltic Sea.

The chief Mountains of Germany were the Abnobi and Abnobae of Ptol. and Plin.
near the Heads of the River Danow, and the Neccar now called Schwartz-wald by
Scuto, and Willychio. Die Baar.

The Sudatae of Ptol. or Suditi. Vandalici Montes, Dioni, are the Hills
encircling Bohemia, covered with the Woods Gabreta and Luna, Wendenberg and
Fiechtilberg test Baud.

The Sarmatici Montes seem to be the same with Sevo of Solinus and Plin. and
Carpates of Ptol. between Poland and Hungary. Now Crapack and Tarczal, and Ben
Munch. and Wartzgarten, and Biescid and Scheneberg, Snepesi, and Bies-sciady,
Russis. Melibocus Mons, and Tatri Sclavis, Hartzwaldt, Pirkhermero.
Brockersberg Peucero. By others Vogelsburg. The Hilly Country of Hessen between
Franconia and Turingia by B. Rhenano.

Carvancas, are the Hilly Tracts of Tirol and Carinthia, now Brenner Pyramio.

The Albanus of Ptol. Albius Strabo, are the Mountains of Stiria, now
Schwanberger-Albn, or Affder Alben. Laz.

The Baebi Montes Ptol. are the Crabaten, or Krabaten Mount. in Croatia, Cetius
Mons, seu Cesius, Live. and Ptol. now Kalenberg, or Halenberg in Austria,
continued a great length between the Danow and the Dra, and distinguished into
sundry particular Names of Schneberg, Deubsperg, Herieberg, Hengsterberg or
Heustperg, Semering and Plaitz. The common bounds sometimes of the Countries
Noricum, and Pannonia.

The most famous Woods were the Hercyni Caes. Tac. and Plin. Hercina Claud. It
began after Caesar at the Rhiin, and the Confines of Helvetia, and was
continued Eastwards along the course of the Danube unto the Dacii in
Transylvania, containing then in breadth nine days journey, in length more than
sixty. Parts and remainders of this Wood were all those vast Deserts and Forest
of the Daci and Sarmatae, whose parts are Martiana Silva, were the Woods
covering the Hills Abnobi, and from their dark shades called Schwartzwald, or
the Black Wood.

The Bacenis of Caesar, the Semana Silva of Ptol. now Duringerwaldt, or Silva
Turingica, upon the Borders of Bohemia toward Bavaria.

Gabreta Silva Ptol. now Behaimer-waldt, or Silva Bohemica Mont. the Woods of
the Mount Sudaetae toward the W. and N.

Luna Sylva are the Woods of the Sudetae toward Passaw and the South.

The Chorography of this great but Heterogeneous Country, as was said, is
divided into many Estates, and those Estates absolute or independent. For the
better Survey of which, we will consider Germany in three great Parts, Viz.
First, Germany about the Rhine: Secondly, Germany about the Danube; and
Thirdly, Germany about the Elbe and Oder.

Let us begin with Germany about the Rhine; and first with the Free County of
Burgundy, now the French County, which is every where so fertile, that it is
called the Flower of France; its chief places are Besancon, Civitas
Visontiensis Ant. Vesuntio Caesar. Visontium Ptol. a fair City, of good
strength, and a University, an Archbishops See. 2. Dole, Dola Sequanorum, a
Town of great Strength, Riches, and Beauty, and Famous for its College of
Jesuits; besides, here are numbered 20 Walled Towns, and about 160 Lordships.
This Country was subject to the Princes of Austria of the House of Spain, and
under the Spanish Government, Besancon excepted, which was a Town Imperial, and
belonging immediately to the Empire. But in the year 1668 the French King,
under the pretense of his Wifes Title, with a surprising swiftness conquered it
in the midst of Winter, in less than fifteen days; one of the greatest actions
that ever was performed: It amazed all Europe, and caused the Spaniard to quit
their pretentions to the Crown of Portugal. However the Treaty of Aix la
Chapelle restored it again, but first they dismantled all the strong Places and
Holds, and would have destroyed the rich Salts-pits, had not the Interposition
of England and Holland prevented; but in the year 1674, Gray, Wesoul, and the
loss of other places began the complete Conquest of that Country by the taking
of Besancon, Dole, Saline, etc. nor could the Duke of Lorrain, and Count
Caprara relieve it, though they desperately engaged the Enemy at the Battle of
Sieren.

North of Burgundy lies the Principality or Duchy of Lorrain, Lotharingi^,
Lo^theringen, Lorreign; the Duke whereof is a Prince of the Empire, and the
Country was reckoned a Feodatory thereof. And by the Py^^nian Treaty the said
Duke was to be restored to his Duchy of Lorrain, with all the places and Towns
which h^ had possessed in Mentz, ^aul, and Verdun, surprised by Henry the
Second King of France, and since. But France after several new pretenc^s and
quarrels in 1663, Invested Marsal by the Count of G^iche, the delivery of which
by the Duke of Lorrain, tho it calmed the tempest, yet after continual
Encroachments upon his Jurisdiction, the Limits of his Territories and his
Sovereignty it self; one of the French Generals in 1668 was ordered to seize
his Person had he not preserved it by leaving his Dukedom, which now France
possesses it all.

Chief Places whereof are Metz, the Divodurum of Ptol. and Tac. Civitas Medio
matri^um of Ant. M^tae, and Metis, ali^s: The Royal Seat sometimes of the
French Kings of Austrasia or Westrick. An Imperial City seated on the Mosel, at
the Confluence of the Selna River; Besieged by Charles the Emperor with 100000
Men, Ann. 1552, but despairing of success he left it, and afterward casting
off his Empire in the Monastry of Justus, he ended his life.

2. Toul, Tulium Ptol. Cit. Lucorum and Tullo Ant. a Bishops See, and a Town
Imperial upon the River Mosel: Built by Tulius Hostilius, as the French Writers
say.

3. Nancy, Nanceium and Nasium Ptol. Seated upon the River Murra, the Residence
formerly of the Duke, once strongly Fortified, remarkable for the Disaster of
Charles Duke of Burgundy, who lost the Battle and his life near her Walls 1476.
Taken by the French Anno 1637. And Ann. 1661 her Fortifications were Dismantled.

4. Verdun, Virodunum and Verodunum Ant. a Town Imperial, and a Bishops See
upon the River Meuse.

The Estates of the Duchy of Cleveland contained whilst it was the entire
Patrimony of those Dukes, 1. The Duchy of Cleves. 2. Of Juliers. 3. Of Berg.
And 4th. the Earldom of Marck. Cleve was made an Earldom Anno 911, for want of
Heirs it devolved into the Empire 1350. Charles the Fourth gave it to Adolph
Bishop of Colen; Sigismund the Emperor made it a Dukedom 1417. Its chief Places
are Cleve, Clivia, Cleef incolis. 2. Wesel, Weselia. The Dukedom of Juliers was
United to Cleves by Marriage 1496. Its chief Places are Juliers al. Gulick,
Juliacum Ant. belonging to the Prince of Newburg. 3. Aken Flandris, Ach
Germanis, Aix la Chapelle Gallis, Aquisgrana Italis, and Aquisgranum, from its
Hot Baths. Vetera Ptol. and Ant. aliis. But Pyramius and Pighius tells us that
Stanten in the Duchy of Cleves is the Vetera of the Ancients. And Simlerus
will have it to be Berck upon the Rhine. Thermaegrani Rheginoni, destroyed by
Attila, since fan^s for being the Metropolis of the Empire of Charlemagne, and
for his ^urial-place, and also for the Tomb of the Emperor Otho the Third,
ruined by the Normans 882, destroyed by fire 1146, and again 1224 it was fired;
1624 it was taken by the Spaniards; 1656 it was again almost destroyed by fire,
viz. twenty Churches and Chapels, and about 5000 Houses. Now famous for its
Holy Relics, and much visited by Pilgrims from many parts, as also for the
Treaty of Peace 1668. Two Leagues from Aken is a Mine of Lapis Calaminaris,
which have been wrought upon for 300 years.

Montensis Ducatas, the Duchy of Mont or Berg, its chief City is Dusseldorp, a
Town and Castle, formerly the Seat of the Dukes of Cleves and Juliers, etc.
Here is also Duytsburg an Imperial City, Dispargum, Asciburgium and Disporum of
old.

In the County of Marck chief Places are Soest, or Zoest, Susatum of old, and
Dortmund, Tremonia and Dortmania, both free Cities. The Duchy of Berg, and
Earldom of Marck belongs now to the Marquis of Brandenburg, that of Cleves and
Juliers to the Duke of Newburg. Meurs is a Town honored with the Title of an
Earldom, subject to no other Prince but the Emperor.

Adjoining to these Countries are the three Electoral Arch-Bishopricks:

1. The Archbishop of Mentz, who is first in Dignity, being Chancellor of the
Sacred Empire; and has the Privilege of Crowning Caesar, except at Aix la
Chapelle, which then belongs to the Elector of Callen. His Jurisdiction and
Territories, like some of our Diocesses, lies dispersed in several Countries.
His chief places are Mentz, or Muntz Germany, Mayence Gallis, Magonza Italis,
Macantiacum Ptol. Magontiacum Tac. Mogontiacus and Mogantiacum A. Marc. Cit.
Moguntiacensis Ant. Moguntia Rheginoni, Magontia Eutropio, the Metropolis then
of the Province of Germania prima. Here is said was first Invented the Noble
Art of Printing by John Gutenburg Knight in the year 1440. It was an
Archbishops See in 745. And was taken by the King of Sweden 1631, who there
kept his Christmas. An Academy 1482. 2. Aschafenburg, or Asciburgiam,
Aschafenburg the place of the Archbishops Residence, 3. Erford in Turingia,
Bicurgium Ptol. test Pyramio Erphordia and Hercino Phordia and Erfordia,
Erfurdt Incollis, Erford Gallis, a City large, rich, and populous, accounted
amongst the chiefest in Germany, Governed in manner of a Free State, but in
1664 reduced again to the obedience of the Elector of Mentz (open Gallorum) 1392
was founded a University.

2ly, The Archbishop of Collen, a fair and goodly Country, lying upon the
left-shore of the Rhine: Its chief Places are, 1. Collen Germ. Cologn Gal^is,
Colonia Agrippinensis Plin. Agrippinensis Ptol. Colonia Agrippinensis and
Oppidum Vbiorum Tac. Colonia Agrippina and Agrippinensis Ant. The Metropolis of
the Province of Germania Secunda, and a famous Colony of the Romans brought
hither in the Reign of the Emperor Tiberius, by Agrippina Daughter to Caesar
Germanicus, and Wife to the Emperor Claudius. The Rome of Germany. An Imperial
City, but does Homage to the Archbishop. The Cathedral of St. Peter's is of
vast and stupendous greatness. Caesar's Bridge over the Rhine is one of the
antientest in Europe. Here also are said to lie the Bodies of the three Kings
that came from the East to Worship our Savior. 2. Bonne, Bona Ptol. Castra
Bonensia Tac. now the Residence of the Elector, Seated in a pleasant and
fruitful part of the Country. This Archbishop is Chancellor of Italy, and
second in Dignity. He is also Prince and Pastor of the Country and Jurisdiction
of Leidg, a Country very healthy and pleasant; where are reckoned 25 Walled
Towns, and 1700 Villages. But the description of this Country I shall refer to
that of the Spanish Provinces, being intermixed with them. And shall here only
say, that Liege is seated on the River Maez, near that Valley wherein two
Legions of Julius Caesar under Sabinus and Cotta were destroyed by Ambiorix
Captain of the Eburones.

3ly, To this succeeds the Archbishopric of Triers or Treves, Diocesis
Treverensis, extended along the course of the Moselle from the Confines of
Lorrain unto the Rhine. A Country rather pleasant than fruitful, hilly and full
of Woods, rich chiefly in Minerals of Iron and Lead: Chief Places are, 1. Trier
Germ. Treves Gallis, Treveri Italis, Colonia Treverorum Tac. Augusta Mela,
Augusta Treverorum Ptol. Augusta Libera Pliny. Treveris, Salviano, Civitas
Treverorum Ant. the Metropolis then of the first Belgica, and Residence of the
Vicar General of Gaul, seated upon the Moselle, now an Archbishops See, and
chief of the Country, whose Bishop is Chancellor of France for the Emperor.
Built and named from Trebeta Brother to Ninus King of Assyria, Anno ante
Christum 1496, test Baud. Its ancient Inhabitants were the Treviri of Caesar
and Live. the Treveri Plin. and Melae, the Triviri Ptol. 2. Cobolentz al.
Coblentz, Legio prima Trajana Ptol. Confluentes Ant. seated at the Influx of
the River Moselle and Rhine. A Town populous and well built, the Country about
it very pleasant and fertile. 3. Hermanstein, Hermanni Saxum, also Ernbretstein
or Erenbreitstein, a strong Castle, notable for its long Siege 1636, opposite
to Coblentz.

Next to these lies the Palatinate of the Rhine: Palatinus inferior Rheni
Psaltz, die Rhein, or Nder Psaltz Germanis, Palatinat du Rhin, Gallis. This
Country (before those unhappy Wars betwixt the Emperor Ferdinand the Second,
and Frederick the Fifth Count Palatine of the Rhiin (whereby it was much
ruinated) was accounted the most fruitful and pleasant through the whole
Germany, especially for its excellent Rhenish Wines. Chief Places are
Heidelburg, Heidelburga, seated on the South Side of the River Neccar in a
Bottom amongst Hills. It was a University ever since the year 1346, founded by
Rupert Count Palatine, and much frequented. In the great Church was kept that
famous Library, which was afterward carried to Rome, and added to the Vatican.
Upon the Townhouse is a Clock with diverse motions. This Elector Carolus
Ludovicus is Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Great Treasurer of
the Empire, and together with the Elector of Saxony Vicar of the Empire. By the
Treaty of Muns^er 1648 he was restored to the Lower Palatinate. In his Palace
or Castle of Heidelburg are diverse things remarkable, viz. the Grotes and
Waterworks. The Great Tun which contains about 200 Tuns. Other places are
Manheim, Manhemium, a Town and strong Fort at the Confluence of the Neccar, or
Necker and Rhine. The Bridge over the Moat of the Citadel into the Town is also
remarkable. Not far hence stands the old Castle Psaltz, whence the Palatinates
seem to have their Name of Psaltz Grave.

Within the Limits of this County, and intermingled with the Lands of this
Prince Palatine, are the Bishoprics of, 1. Spiers, Neomagus of Ptol.
Noviamagus Ant. Nemetes Caes. and Plin. test Rhenano. Spira Italis, Spire
Gallis, famous for the Imperial Chamber there kept, fixed at Francfort in the
reign of Maximilian the First, afterward at Worms, and now lastly in the year
1530 translated hither. 2. Of Worms Borbetomagus Ptol. and Bormitomagus. Cit
Vangionensis and Wormensis of Ant. Latino rec. Wormacia, famous for the many
Imperial Parliaments there formerly held as aforesaid; near which place
Adolphus Earl of Nassaw, and King of the Romans was slain in the year 1292 by
Albert Duke of Austria. There is also belonging to this Bishopric of Spire,
Odenheim, or Udenheim Ger. Philipsburg Gal. Neomagus Ptol. test J. Heroldo;
taken by the Germans from the French 1675.

West of this Palatinate, if not belonging to it is Zuueybrucken Incolis,
Deuxponts Gallis, the chief City of the Dukedom of the same Name, by others
called the Dukedom of Biponts. Charles Gustavus was Son of John Casimer, a
younger Brother to the Duke of Zuueybruck, but whether it belongs to the Swedes
or Prince of Newburg, do not certainly find, I think it was taken by the French
much about the time that the Prince of Lutzelstein received a French Garrison
1674. To this also let us add the Lantgraves of Darmstad.

Of ALSATIA.
SOuth of this Palatinate lies the Province of Alsatia, Elsass, or Elsatz Germ.
Alsace Gallis, a Country that scarce yields to the best in Germany for
pleasure and fertility, abounding with Corn, Wine, and sundry sorts of
delicious Fruits. It is divided into the Upper and Lower Alsace, to which the
French Geographers add Suntgow and Brisgaw, though all other reckon the latter
to belong to the Circle of Schwaben. Chiefer Towns in the Lower Elsatz are
Weissemborg, Alba Sebusiana, seu Wissemburgum. Hagenaw Hagenoia, once both
Imperial Towns, now subject to the French; as is Zabern, Taberna Ant. once the
chief Seat of Justice of the Bishop of Strasburg. But the chief City of all
Alsatia is Strasbourg, populous, strong, and well built The Church is one of
the Wonders of the World, for the bigness, the sumptuousness, and the
mavelous height of the Steeple, 574 foot, and the inimitable Structure. The
Arsenal is also very considerable, and well provided with all sorts of
Ammunition and Arms; yet surrendered to the French 1682. The Argentoratum, Legio
Octava Augusta Ptol. Argentoratum and Cit. Argentoracensium Ant. Argentina
Italis. A Bishops See and Imperial City. In the Higher Alsatia are Schlestat,
Sclestadium, Elcebas of Ptol. and Ant. Colmar built out of the Ruins of the
Argentuasia, of Ptol. and Ant. Destroyed by Attilas and the Huns. Ensisheim the
Uruncis of Ant. The Upper Elsatz belonged wholly to the Archdukes of Austria,
the Lower to the Bishops of Strasbourg. Both challenged the Title of
Lantgraves. But since the Treaty of Munster, the French have enjoyed the
greatest part. Chiefer Towns in Suntgow are Mulhausen, a Town Imperial,
confederate with the Switzers. Montbelliard, Mons Belligardus, Montpelgard
Germanis, stands upon the Confines of Alsatia and Burgundy, and was subject to
the Duke of Wirtemburg, until it was seized upon by the French; it is noted for
its strong Fortress, and for a Dispute between Beza and Jac. Andrea alias
Schmidliaus. Chief Towns in Brisgow, or Brisigavia beyond the Rhiin are
Friburg, Friburgium a University, built by the Duke of Zeringen 1112, now
possessed by the French; not far from whence are to be seen the Ruins of
Zeringen Castle, from whence the ancient Dukes were Entitled. Brisach, Mons
Brisiacus Ant. a Fortress then of the Romans, now of the French.

Come we now to the Estates beyond the Rhine, under which we will take in
Franconia, Hassia, and Westphalia.

Of the Circle of Franconia.
THE Circle of Franconia is divided into three parts, viz. 1. Into
Ecclesiastics, 2. L^ick, 3. Imperial Cities. So that it is governed by many
distinct Princes, some of greater, others of less power and Dominion; but the
Title of the whole is given to the Bishop of Wurtsburg. A Country hedged on all
sides with Forests and Mountains, within plain, healthy and pleasant, tolerably
fruitful with Corn and Wine. The chief of the Ecclesiastics are first the
Bishop of Wirtzburg, Bisthumb. Wurtzburg incolis, Evesche de Wurtsbourg Gallis.
Whose chief places are Wurtzburg. Herbipolis quasi Herebipolis, Wirtzburg quasi
Mustopolis, olim Marcopolis, and Paeapolis, test Irenico and Artaunum Ptol.
test Petro Apiano, seated upon the Main in a pleasant Plain, environed with
Meadows, Gardens, and Vinie Downs. 2. The Bishop of Bamberg, Gravionarum Ptol.
test P. Apiano Bamberga and Pamberga and Papeburga, in Script. German. This
City is large, fair, and entirely Catholic. The Bishop is the first of the
Empire, it acknowledges no Metropolitan, but depends immediately upon the
Pope. 3. Mergentheim, Mergetheim and Morkenthal, and Mariental, Mergethum seu
Mariae Domus, the Residence of the Great Master of the Teutonick Order. These
were some German Gentlemen who waited upon the Emperor Frederick the First in
his Expedition to the Holy Land, who took the Croisado, and were Installed at
the Church or Hospital of St. Mary Jerusalem, and called Marianites. Their
Order differed nothing from the Templers, of St. John, but in form and color
of their Cross. After the taking of Jerusalem by Saladine, these Knights went
to Ptolomais; from whence Frederick the Second sent for them into Germany to
fight against the Prussians and Livonians, who at that time were Pagans; which
War began in the year 1220. In a little while after these Knights had made
themselves Masters of a Country of very large extent, and obeyed the Order till
1525, at which time Sigismund King of Poland gave the Investiture of Prussia
unto Albert Marquis of Brandenburg. In the year 1563 the Great Master became
Secular again, and took part of the Lands subject to the Order, with the Name
of Duke of Courland.

4. The Bishopric of Eichstadt, or Aichstadt, Ala Narisca Ant. and Aureatum
test Gasp. Brocio, near the Danube. The chief of the Laics are the Marquesses
of Cullembach and Onsbach, the Counts of Holac, Wertheim and Erpach, or Erbach,
who find their Original from a Daughter of Charlemagne, who married to a
Gentleman after she had carried him upon her back through the Court of the
Palace. The Imperial Towns are, 1. Nuremberg, Norimberg, Nurnberg Germ.
Nerobergae and Noricorum Mons, Norica Caesari. A place of great Trade, and well
frequented by Merchants. The fairest, most privileged, richest, and best
Governed in Germany. Here the new chosen Emperor ought to hold his first Diet;
and here are the Ornaments used at the Coronation of the Emperors, viz. the
Royal Crown: The Dalmatick Gown: The Imperial Cloak, etc. Here was Maximilians
Wooden Eagle, that flew a quarter of a mile and back again. And here the
Burgers have power to imprison their Children, and cast them alive into the
River. Here Charles the Great designed to make a Communication of passage
between the Danube and the Rhine, by joining the Rednitz and the Atmul Rivers,
whereby there might have been a Commerce by Water from the Low Countries to
Vienna, and even unto the Euxine. But some inconveniences in the attempt, and
his Warlike diversions made him give over that Noble design.

2. Frankfort, Francfort, or Franckfurt. Francofurtum and Francphordia
Helenopotis, olim Trajectus Francorum. The passage or Ford of the Franks. A
Free City, and reckoned in the Circle of Franconia by most Geographers, though
I rather take it to be in the Circle of the Higher Rhine. It is renowned for
its Book-Fairs, or Marts, in March, and in September. For its Fortress, and for
the Election of the Emperor. It is a large and strong place, divided into two
parts, Frankfurt and Saxenhausen, by the River Maein, united by a Stone-Bridg.

Other Imperial Towns in Franconia, are 1. Schweinfurt, Suevorum Trajectus,
Swinphordia and Suvinfurtum, seated in a fruitful Soil. 2. Rotenburg al.
Tuberum, seated upon the River Tauber, which some say is like Jerusalem for its
Situation upon Hills, and for its many Turrets. 3. Weinsheim Vinisima and
Vinshemia Winshaim. 4. Altdorff a University 1623.

Of HASSIA.
ADjoining to Franconia on the North-west is the Landgravedom of Hessen, or
Hassia, of a healthy Air, and a fruitful Soil in Corn, and Pasturages. The
greatest part of the Country is now divided into two Families, the one of
Cassel, the other of Darmstat of the youngest House; chief places belonging to
the Landgraves are Cassel, Cassella and Cassilia, Castella Cattorum and
Stereontium Ptol. test Pyramio upon the River Fuld, the chief Seat of the
Landgraves. 2. Marpurg, or Martpurg, Marpurgum and Martis-burgam, Mattiacum
Ptol. test Ortel. and Amasia, Baud. upon the River Lohn, an University founded
in the year 1426 by Lewis Bishop of Munster. Here the Landgraves have a stately
and magnificent Castle, mounted upon a high Hill without the Town, enjoying a
pleasant prospect, and one of their chief places of Residence. 3. Darmstad with
its Castle, is the Seat and Inheritance of the youngest House of the
Landgraves. Part of this Country of Hessen belongs to the Abbey of Fulda, one
of the richest and most celebrious in Europe. Anno 1640. it was taken by
Bannier, and here he heard a Voice in the Air, Be gone, Bannier, be gone, for
now the time is; yet he lived to get that Victory at Homberg in Hassia, between
Fridberg and Francford: But at the Battle near the River Sale, valorously
defending a Bank, he was forced to yield, and goes to Halberstade, where
voiding much Blood and Matter through an Imposthume, or breaking of a Vein, he
put an end to his life, and to all his toil and labors. This Abbey was founded
by St. Boniface an English man: This Abbot is a Prince of the Empire, and
Arch-Chancellor of the Empress, calls himself Primate of Gallia; his County is
called Buchen, Buchovia, from the plenty of Beeches. To which we may add the
Abbey of Hirchfeld betwixt Hessen and the Rhine, and intermingled lies the
Confederation of Wetteraw, or a Combination of many Estates, viz. 1. Earls or
Counts of Nassaw, from whence the Illustrious Grave Maurice, and other Princes
of Orange are descended. 2. Solms well allied. 3. Hanaw, the Counts whereof
have large Estates, and a Justice from which their Subjects cannot appeal. 4.
To this Country belongs the Counts of Waldeck, subject to the Lantgraves. The
Barons of Limborg have a Title of Semperfre. The Counts of Swartsbourg are
great in Riches, with many others.

Of WESTPHALIA.
COntiguous on the North of Hessen lies the Circle of Westphalia; a Country
full of Woods, which nourish many Swine, which make excellent Bacon; and
abounding as plentifully in other places with Corn. This Country is divided
amongst the Ecclesiastics, Counts and Imperial Cities. The Bishops are 1.
Munster, a City seated on the River Ems, Monasterium ol. Minigrado and
Miningrade, built by Charles the Great. In the year 1533, called New Jerusalem
by the Anabaptist; and their King, John of Leyden, King of Sion, who being at
last besieged and taken, was put on the top of a Steeple in an Iron Cage, where
he was eaten up by Flies and Wasps, together with two of his Companions. 2. Of
Padeborn, or Paderborn incolis, of a miraculous Foundation. 3. Minden, Minda,
once a Bishopric, but now settled upon the Marquess of Brandenburg with the
Title of Prince, by Munster-Treaty, as also is Ferden. 4. Of Osnabruck, or
Osenbrug, Osnabrugum seu Osnabrucum so made 776. a Carolo Magno. The alternate
possession whereof is given to the Duke of Brunswick for his Cession of his
Bishopric of Halberstat.

The chief Counts of Westphalia are first of East-friezland, who in the year
1653 was raised to the Dignity of Prince, whose Seat is at Aurick, or Auricum.
2. The Counts or Prince of Oldenburg, and Delmenhorst, are totally extinguished
by the death of Anthony Gunther in the year 1656. However famous in that the
Kings of Denmark are descended from it ever since Christian Earl of Oldenburg
was chosen King of Denmark, Ann. 1448. 3. Of Schawenburg. 4. Of Benthem. 5. Of
Tecklenburg. 6. Of Ravenspurg. 7. Hoy. 8. Lingen, Lip, etc.

The free Cities are, 1. Embden, the Amasia Ptol. test Cleverio. 2. Herverden.
3. Brake. 4. Soest. 5. Dortmund in the County of Marck. 6. Lemgow in the County
of Lip. The Title of Westphalia as Ducal is usurped by the Archbishop of
Collen, ever since the proscription of Duke Henry, Surnamed the Lion.

Our second Division of Germany was that of the Danube, wherein may be
comprehended first Suevia, Italis, Schwaben, Germanis, Sovabe, Gallis.

Of the Circle of Suevia or Almaigne.
THE Circle or Dukedom of Schwaben or Almaigne, for by these two Names the
ancient Dukedom was called. The State was erected under this last Title by
Clovis King of the French. The first Dukes were but Governors under the French
during pleasure. After the division of the French Empire by the Sons of Lewis
the Godly; and that the Empire was translated to the Germans, they became
Hereditary. The first that transmitted this Honor to Posterity was Frederick
the First, created Duke of Schwaben, or Almaigne by Henry the Fourth.
Conradinus taken Prisoner in Italy in his Wars against Charles Duke of Anjou,
and afterward beheaded at Naples, without Heirs, was the last Duke of Scwaben,
and in whom ended the Succession and Family of the Fredericks. After this
Disaster the Dukedom for want of Heirs falling to the Empire, became scattered
into sundry lesser States, viz. Ecclesiastics, Laics and Imperial Cities. The
Bishops are, 1. of Ausbourg, whose Residence is at Dilling: 2. Of Constauce,
whose Residence is at Mersburg. 3. Of Coire in the Grisons. Other Grand
Prelates are, first the Abbot of Kempten: 2. The Grand Prior of the Order of
Maltha, whose Residence is at Heitersheim about two German Miles South of
Brisach and Freiburg.

The Secular Princes are, 1. The Duke of Wirtenburg, who was raised to Ducal
Dignity in a Diet held at Worms 1495. He has a Country where the Mountains
abound in Mines, Vines and Woods. The Forest of Schwartz-waldt, are well stored
with Timber Trees, Game and Venison of all kinds; the Valleys are a
continuation of Meadows, covered with Cattle, and watered with Brooks full of
Fish; the Plains are thick set with Gardens like those of the Hesperides. His
Residence is at Stutgard, Stutgardia, seated near to the Necker. There is no
where to be seen fairer Rows of Orange Trees, Grotta's better contrived and
beautified, Fountains more artificial, nor Fruits more pleasant to the sight or
taste than here. They that have been at Tubing, Tubinga^ol. Augusta, know how
many Princes, Counts, Lords, Barons, and Gentlemen have been bred in that Noble
College and University, where are excellent Professors in all Faculties,
principally in those which are worthy of Illustrious persons. In this Country
are reckoned 63 Cities, 158 great Towns, 645 Villages, 537 Water-mills, and 14
Abbeys of large Revenue. He has a fair Militia of Horse and Foot, and many
Fortresses.

2. Of the Marquisate of Baden and Durlach: The Marquess of Baden after the
death of Philip the last of the Hochbergian Branch, was united into that Anno
1503, who dying in the year 1515. His Lands were parted between his two Sons
Bernard and Ernest, who are now the Heads of two principal Branches, into which
this House is divided, viz. Baden and Dourlach, whose Country lies adjacent to
the Rhine intermingled up from Basil to Philipsburg, a Country pleasant, and
Soil fruitful; chiefer Towns are Baden, giving name to the Country, and so
called from the Hot Medicinal Baths thereof. 2. Dourlach, the Title of the
second Son.

3. Of the Counts of Hohenzolleren: The Lords of this House are Hereditary
Chamberlains to the Emperors since the time of Maximilian the First. Their
Castle of Hohenzolleren was ruined by Henrietta Countess of Wirtemberg and
Montbelliard, but reedified about the year 1480, at which time Philip Duke of
Burgundy, Albert Elector of Brandenburg, Albert Duke of Austria, and Charles
Marquis of Baden, laid the first stone of it, using a Tray, a Trowel, and a
Mallet, all of Silver.

4. The Counts of Fustemberg, who are very renowned in History, a Prince of the
Empire.

5. The Counts of Helfenstein, having flourished above 1000 years, expired some
years since.

6. The Counts of Ottinguen, or Oeting, are divided into two principal
Branches, that of Waldenstein is Catholic, that of Ottinguen Lutheran.

7. The Fuggers are not very ancient.

8. The Papenheims are very famous.

9. The Baron of Walburg is considerable. Besides these there are some parts
wholly belonging to the Empire.

10. Constance, Constantia, seated on the Bodenzee, belongs to the House of
Austria. Anno 1548, it was outlawed by Charles the Fifth; and is famous for
the Council here held, Anno 1414, where were assembled the Emperor Sigismund,
four Patriarchs, 29 Cardinals, 346 Archbishops and Bishops, 564 Abbots, and
Doctors, 16000 Secular Princes and Noblemen; 450 Harlots, 600 Barbers, 320
Minstrels and Jesters. The business was the deposing of three Popes, Gregory
the 12th at Rome, John the 23d at Bononia, and Bennet the 13th in Spain, and
setting up Martin the Fifth. And the degrading and burning of Hierome of
Prague, and John Hus without any respect to the safe conduct of the Emperor
Sigismund.

The Bodenzee by Plin. Lacus Acronius and Brigantinus, is about 8 Dutch Miles
in length, and 3 in breadth, and in its greatest depth at Mersperg about 600
yards. At the Island Meinaw in the year 1647 the Swedes digging, found a
Treasure to the value of five Millions.

The chief and Imperial Cities of Schwaben are, Ausburg, or Auspurg and
Augshurg, from Augusti Burgum, where Augustus settled a Roman Colony after
Claudius Drusius. Nero Germanicus had brought it into Subjection, Druso Magus
of old, and afterward Augusta Tiberia. Augusta Vindelicorum Ptol. and Augusta
Vindelicium Ant. famous for its Magnificence, Townhouse, for being a Bishops
See, and Imperial. 2. Vlm, Vlma, seated at the meetings of the Rivers Iler,
Blave and Danube; of great state, large, rich, and well fortified, being six
miles in compass. Here the Danube begins first to be Navigable.

Kempten Campidunum was the ordinary Residence of the ancient Dukes of Swaben,
and the native place of Hildegardis Wife to Charlemagne.

Dinkelspiel was often taken and retaken in the late Wars. Essinguen is a
pretty Town upon the Neckar under the protection of the Duke of Wirtenburg. At
Hal is made great quantity of Salt. Hailbrun is an Imperial City, yet pays the
Tenth of its Wines and Grain to the Duke of Wirtemburg.

Kaufbegeren bought its liberty for ^5000 Livres. Lindaw stands upon an Island
in the Lake Constance, and ^^joyned to the firm Land by a Bridge 290 Paces long,
belonging to the Emperor, who has given it the privilege of coining Money.
Memingam is very ancient. Mulhausen is noted for its Gardens and Mills.
Nertlingen is remarkable for the Battle which the Swedes lost 1634, where
General Bannier was slain, and Gustavus Horn taken Prisoner. Northausen for its
Imperial Assemblies and Turnament held there. Rotwiel for the loss of Martial
Guebriant 1643, for being a Retreat to the Cimbri when beaten by the Romans.
Wimpsel, or Winfelun, signifying Weibspris, for the unheard cruelties of the
Huns upon that Sex. Here Fortune triumphed over Valor, and Magnus Duke of
Wirtemburg died in the Battle 1622. Lastly to name no more, Guemund, Gaudia
mundi, noted for its Tournaments, and otherdastimes.

Of BAVARIA.
THE Circle of Bavaria, Bayern incolis, Baviere Gallis, Baviera Hisp. and
Italis. Olim Boioaria and Vindilicia, is divided into the Duchy and
Palatinate. The Dukedom is divided into three parts, the Higher, the Lower, and
the Bishopric of Saltzbourg, a district and distinct Jurisdiction of it self.
The Higher Bavaria is generally overspread with Woods, cold and barren. The
Lower somewhat more fruitful, and abundantly more pleasant. In the Upper
Bavaria chief places are, Munchen, Monachium, or Munick upon the River Iser,
the Residence of the Dukes of Bavaria, and one of the fairest Palaces in
Europe, enjoying a most sweet and happy Situation among the Woods, Gardens and
Rivers, famous also for its seizure by the King of Sweden, who found a vast
Treasury herein. In the Lower Bavaria are, 1. Ingolstat, Ingolstadium, a noted
University founded in the year 1471; and is famous for putting the first
Affront upon the King of Sweden in Germany, and forced him to raise the Siege
by Lewis Duke of Bavaria. 2. Regensperg, or Regensbergh, Ratisbona, famous for
the Diets held there, and for its long Bridge; a fair and large City beautified
with a great number of Churches, Chapels, and other places dedicated to
Religious uses. It Is a Bishops See, and Town Imperial. 3. Passaw, Patavium,
Boiodurum, Ptol. and Ant. and Batava of the Author of the Notitia, then a
Garison-Town of the Romans, the station of the Cohort of the Batavians, now a
Bishops See, seated at the meetings of the Rivers Danube, Inn and Ills, and
divided into three Towns, Passaw, Instat, and Ilstat.

Donavert was a Free City till the year 1607, at what time it incurred the
Imperial Ban or Proscription, which was executed by the Duke of Bavaria, who
brought it into Subjection, and holds it still under his Laws. Confined with^n
the Dukedom of Bavaria lies the Archbishopric of Saltzburg, of a dry Rocky and
barren Soil, some fresher Valleys excepted, rich chiefly in Minerals. The only
Town of Note is Saltzburg, Salisburgum, al. Juvaria of Ant. and Castrum
Juvaviensi of the Notitia, the Mansion then and fixed Residence of part of a
Cohort of Roman Soldiers, now an Archbishops See, whose Revenues are the
largest in all Germany, seated upon the River Saltzach, where lies Interred the
Body of Paracelsus.

The Country of the Upper Palatinate or Nortgow from the more Northern
Situation of it as to the Dukedom, is a Country rough and hilly, rich chiefly
in Minerals of Iron. Amberg, Amberga Cantiaebis, Ptol. test P. App. upon the
River Ills, enriched chiefly by the Commodity of Iron dug out of the
Neighboring Hills. The Castle of Luchtemburg mounted upon a Hill gives Name to
the Lantgraves so called. Newburg upon the Swartzach, is the place whereof are
styled the Princes Palatine of Newburg. The second Branch of the House of the
Elector of the Rhine, to whom this Palatinate did belong; but in the year 1623
the Emperor Ferdinand the Second transferred this Palatinate, with the
Electoral Dignity from Frederick the Fifth, Count Palatine, to Maximilian Duke
of Bavaria, and the Munster-Treaty conferred to Bavaria the first Electorship,
and an eight place was new erected for Charles Lewis of the Rhine, provided
that if the Gulielmine Branch happen to fail before the Rodolphine, the latter
shall re-enter into their ancient Electorship, and the new created one shall be
wholly abolished.

The only Arch-Dutchy in Europe is Austria, or Oost-reich divided into the
Upper and Lower Austria, and has united to it, as Hereditary possession of
that House, the Provinces or Dukedoms of Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, the
County of Tirol, with that of Chilly, and Marquisate of Windish-Marck.

Of AUSTRIA.
THE particular Dukedom of Austria extended on both sides of the Danube, is a
Country pleasant, healthy, and abundantly fruitful in Corn and excellent Wines.
Its chief Cities and Places are, 1. Vienna, Juliobona Ptol. Vendum Strab.
Vindibona Ant. and Vnidomana of the Author of Notitia and Ala Flaviana. Fabiana
Heyl. Wien Ger. Wetsch and Petz Turcis, and Berch test Brown. Viena Italis,
Wiedun Polonis, Widen Bohemii, Vienne Gallis, the Metropolis of Germany, seated
upon the South Side of the Danube, the greatest River in Europe. In Circuit
about 5000 Geometrical paces. It is Famous for her University, for four great
Piazza's, adorned with Marble Fountains and Statues; for its Cathedral of St.
Stephen (whose Steeple is about 465 foot high, consisting of hewn stone, and
carved into various Figures of Men, Birds, and Beasts) the Emperor's Treasury,
the Archdukes Gallery, the Treasury of the Church, and the Sepulcher of Otho.
The Arsenal, the College of the Jesuits, the Church and Convent of the
Benedictines, of the Dominicans, and of the Franciscans, are worthy of
Remarque. Within the City there was also the Hochbrug, or High Bridge, which is
made by the crossing of two Streets at equal Angles; the ground of one Street
being as high as the tops of the Houses of the other, so that to continue it
they were forced to build a Bridge or Arch in the lower Street to pass over. In
the Suburbs, the greatest Curiosities were the Favorith, or the Empresses
Garden; that of the Bishop, and of the Earl of Thaun, of the Prince of Ausburg,
and others: the Church and Monastry of the Carmelites, of the Augustines; the
Hermitage of the Capuchins, and the Spanish Monastry; Remarkable also for
plenty of Wine, of Craw-fish, and Sallets in Winter. It Is likewise accounted
the Bulwark of this Country against the Turks, being as strong, as well
Fortified; built with part of the Money obtained for the Ransom of Richard the
First, King of England, taken Prisoner in his return from Palestine by Leopold
the fifth Duke of Austria. Famous for the Repulse it gave Solomon, and the
whole power of the Turkish Empire, when of 200000 Men he brought before it, he
carried away but 118000, Anno 1529. And as Famous for this last Repulse of
September the 12th. 1683, for being closely besieged by the Prime Vizier with
200000 Turks, Tartars, Cossacks, and Hungarian Malcontents on the 12th of July
1683, and as valorously defended by that Magnanimous Hero Ernestus Rudiger
Count Starenbergh as Governor, was then manfully relieved by the Invincible
Prince, John King of Poland, the Electors of Bavaria and Saxony, the Duke of
Lorrain, Prince Waldeck, P. Salme, P. Louis of Baden, and the Marquis of
Brandenburgh, Baraith, etc. During this Siege the Turks were said to have lost
70000, and in the Battle more then 20000 men; that the Christians lost 10000 or
15000 during the Siege, and about 3 or 400 on that great and Signal Victory
when the Turks formidable Army was totally defeated, their Camp (which was
infinitely rich) their Baggage, Cannon, and Tents all taken, and Vienna happily
relieved when brought to its last extremity.

Other places in Austria are, 2. Lintz, Aradate of Ptol. the Residence of the
Emperor during the Siege of Vienna, not great but as neat and handsome a City
as most in Germany. The Houses built of white Freestone, and the Castle is of
the Modern Fortification. Here is a Bridge over the Danube; besieged by 40000
Peasants of Austria in the time of Ferdinand the Second, at last overcome by
Papenheim.

3. Ens Anisia, upon the River Anisus, or Onusus, near which stood the
Lauriacum of old, now Lorch a Roman Garrison, and afterward a Bishops See.

4. Melcke, Nomale, or Mea Dilecta, once the Seat of the Marquesses of Austria,
noted for its noble Cloister of Benedictines, which overlooks the Town, and the
Tomb of St. Colman there much honored. At Stein is a Bridge over the Danube.
Crembs is a Walled Town.

Baden about four German miles from Vienna, is a pretty Walled Town, seated
near a part of Mount Cetius, which divided Noricum from Pannonia. Most
remarkable for its Baths, which are much frequented, and are nine in Number.

Newstat is one of the chiefest Cities in Austria, it is of a square figure,
with a Piazza in the middle of it. Here was Count Peter Serini and Frangipani
Beheaded as chief Contrivers of the Hungarian Revolt.

Pretronel, or Haimburg, the same, or near to the Carnuntum of Plin. and Live.
Carnus of Ptol. a strong Hold of the Pannonians, in vain attempted by the
Romans 170 years before the Incarnation, subdued in the time of Augustus, and
made a Roman Colony. Here resided the Emperor Antonius Philosophus three years,
and died at Vindihona, now Vienna. And here Severus was Elected Emperor, ruined
in aftertimes by Attila in his Incursions into these parts.

The Marquisate of Stiria, alias Steirmarck, is a Hilly and Mountainous
Country, rich chiefly in Minerals. The Inhabitants are much troubled with a
Disease called Struma, or the King's Evil, a swelling of the Throat proceeding
from their more cold and moist Air, or from their more sharp and piercing
Waters mingled with Snow, or with the virose streams and particles of Mercury,
or other Minerals descending from off their Mountains.

Its chief Place is Gratz, Graiacum Graeciam and Savaria upon the Mur. Petaw is
the Petavium of Ptol. and the Petobio of Am. Marcel. and Paetovio Ant.
Racklespurg and Pruck, or Poreig, the Bolentium and Muri pones of the Ancients.
Seckavar, Sekou a Bishops See, and Cell, are of the greatest Pilgrimages in the
Austrian Territory.

Carinthia lies on the West of Stiria: Its chief Places are Clagenfurt, near
the Lake Werdsee, Claudia Plin. test Laz. A fair four square Walled Town, with
a fair Piazza in the middle, adorned with a Column of Marble, and a Statue of
the Virgin upon it, also with a Statue of the Emperor; also with a noble
Fountain in the middle, over which is a large prodigious Dragon of stone, and
of Hercules with his Club standing before it. At Bleyburg are Lead-mines, where
they have worked 1100 years, and the Pit is 110 fathom deep.

2. St. Veit, or St. Faith Vitopolis, seated upon the Confluence of the Rivers
Glan and Wunich, a Walled Town with six Churches, and a Piazza with a
remarkable Fountain. In sight of St. Veit are four Hills with Chapels upon
them, to all which upon one day of the year the Inhabitants go in devotion on
foot, which is near thirty English miles. Not far from St. Veit is a place
called Saal or Solva Ager Solvensis, or Zolfeldt; a place fruitful in
Antiquities, among others that of the Kings Chair used at the Installing of the
Duke of Carinthia, which among other Ceremonies whether he be King, Prince, or
Emperor, either himself or his Substitute receives a gentle box on the Ear
from a Countryman.

3. Lavemondt, or Lavanmynd, Lavanti Ostium, a Bishops See.

4. Villach Juliam Carnicum and Vacorium of Ptol. test Jovib. Sabel. upon the
Dra. And 5. Gruck a Bishops See.

The Dukedom of Carniola, by the Germans Krain, is rich in Corn, Wine and Oil:
Chiefer Towns are Laibach, or Laback, Labacum the Pamporta of Strabo, and
Nauportus of Plin. Memorable for the story of the Ship Argonauta wherein was
brought the Golden Fleece from Pontus Euxinus, stopped here by the bordering
Mountains, and carried over Land to the Adriatic Sea, and so brought back
again unto Greece. Krainburg is a very strong place. And Gorecz, Goritium near
the Adriatic upon the River Lisonze, belongs to the Archduke of Austria; as
also the Earldoms of Lilley and Windishmarck, the chief place of the first
bears the same name; the chief place of the latter is Metling, the Metallum,
or Metalum of Strab. App. Here also is the Zirchnitzer-See, or the famous
strange Lake Zirknitzer, or Zirichnitz Lugeum, or Lugae^ Palus of Strab. Palus
Liburniae, and Japodum palus, a Lake about two German miles long, and one
broad. Every year in the Month of June, the water of this Lake descends under
ground through many great holes at the bottom, and in the Month of September
returns again by the same holes, and with a speedy ascent springs up to the
height of 14 or 15 foot, and affords plenty of Fish; and when dry it yields
store of grass for Cattle. Idria about ten miles from Goritia or Noreia of old,
and is famous for its Quicksilver Mines, one of which is between 120 and 130
fathoms deep. It Is seated amongst the Mountains upon a River of the same Name
that runs into the Zisonzo, near which Odoacer King of Italy was slain in
Battle by Theodorick King of the Goths.

Trieste, Tergestum, is a Port-Town of the Emperors in the Adriatic Sea, as is
also Aquileia, once the Metropolis of the Carni, but destroyed by Attila 452,
and by the Longobards 590, so that it is now p^^r and mean, both properly are in
Italy.

Ponteba, or Pont Fella is the exact Confines between the Venetian and the
Imperial Dominions; on the one side of the Bridge live Italians subject to the
Venetians; on the other Germans, subjects to the Emperor.

West of Carinthia lies the Country of Tirol; of a fertile Soil, and in many
places, Silver Mines; whose chief places are, Inspruck, Aeniponi, seated on the
Oenus, or Inn River, which gave Name to the third Branch of Austria, where the
Archdukes have a Magnificent Palace, sometimes the seat of Charles the Fifth,
and Ferdinand the First. 2. Trent, a Bishopric seated on the River Adesis;
famous for the General Council there held by Pope Paul the Third and his
Successors, against the Doctrines of Luther and Calvin: It began in Anno 1545,
and continued off and on, for the space of eighteen years. Brixen, Brixia, is a
famous Bishopric in this Country.

Tyrol is a Castle that gives Name unto the greatest Country of Europe. Schwatz
and Stertzingen, are rich in Silver Mines.

And now we are come to our Third Division of Germany about the Elbe and Odar,
where we may consider Saxony the Higher and Lower Circle. The first
comprehending the Estates of the Dukes and Electorates of Saxony, of
Brandenburg and Pomerania. The other containing the Dutchies of Holstein, of
Bremen, of ^uneburg, of Brunswick, of Lavenburg, of Meklenburg, etc. Then the
Kingdom of Bohemia, with the Duchy of Silesia, and Marquisate of Moravia.

Of the Higher Saxony.
WE shall consider first the Estates of the Dukes and Electorate of Saxony. And
here for the better information of the Reader in a matter of much Intricacy,
and which without the general knowledge of the Saxonian History (which is too
large here to be inserted) cannot well be made plain and intelligible, we shall
therefore contrary to what other Authors of Geography have done in their
descripions of Saxony, tell you, That whether Albert the third deceasing
without issue in the year 1412, in whom ended the Dukes Electors of Saxony of
the House of Anhalt; Or whether Erick the Fifth of the House of Saxon
Lavenburgh lapsed his time of demanding the Investiture of the Electorship;
It Is certain that Frederick the First, Surnamed the Warlike, Marquis of
Missnia, and Lantgrave of Thuringia, was created Duke Elector of Saxony by the
Emperor Sigismund in the year 1423, by this means the Title and Dignity of the
Electors and Dukes of Saxony was quite removed out of the ancient and true
Saxony, and confined within Thuringia, Misnia, and the Country about
Wittemberg, called the Duchy of Saxony, or Ober Sachsen. The only possessions
of the Modern Dukes. Only by a further accumulation in the year 1583, the House
of Heneberg totally failing, that of Saxony took possession of it by virtue of
a Conferternity made between those Princes in the year 1554. And also that
since the last War of Bohemia the Emperor gave the Upper and Lower Lusatia to
John George Elector of this House, who died the 8th. of October 1656, and was
Interred the 4th. of Febr. 1657, with more then Regal pomp, there being 3500
persons in Mourning, and 24 Horses of State, covered with Black, and the
Electorate Eschucheon Embroidered thereon, every one of them led by two
Gentlemen.

This Elector bequeathed by his last Will to John George his Eldest Son, the
Lands inseparable from the Electoral Dignity, viz. the Duchy of Saxony,
together with the Upper and Lower Lusatia, with some Baliwicks about Dresden;
to Augustus, the Administrator of Magdeburg, with twelve Baliwicks about Hall,
and in Thuringia. To Christian, the Diocese of Mersbourg and some Lands in
Vortland, and in the Mountains. To Maurice, besides the Diocesses of Naumburg
and Zeitz, all that of his Electoral Highness in the Principality of Heneburg.
These are all the Princes of Saxony of the Descendents of the Elector Augustus,
Brother to Maurice Duke of Saxony of a younger House, who have their Habitation
at Hall, at Mersburg, at Naumburg, and at Dresden; for John Frederick, Surnamed
the Magnanimous, of the House of Frederick the First, Surnamed the Warlike
aforesaid, was in the Protestant Wars taken Prisoner by the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, by whom he was deprived of his Lands and Electorship, which was
given to Maurice aforesaid, his Kinsman; but after five years Captivity or
Imprisonment, his Lands but not the Electorship were restored to him again,
which his Successors now possess; which are now divided into three Branches,
viz. of 1. Altembourg and Coburg: 2. Of Weymar: 3. Of Gotta and Eisenach. To
these we may add the Principality of Anhalt, which is divided amongst many
Princes, who reside at Dessaw, at Beremborg, at Pleskaw, at Zerbst, and at
Cotsen. Intermingled with these are the Counts of Mansfield, Hohenstein,
Schwartzburg, Stolberg, etc. with two Imperial Cities, Northausen and
Mulhausen, and the University of Jena; all these Estates are contained within
Misnia, Thuringia, or Duringe, and Saxony, or Sachsen, and Lusatia, or
Lavenitz. Other chief places are, 1. Misnia, or Meissen, seated upon the Elbe,
whence the Province had its Name, a Bishops Sea, adorned with three fair
Castles or Palaces of the Bishops, Burgraves, and of the Dukes of Saxony. 2ly,
Lipsia, Leipsig, or Leipsick not very large, but wealthy and populous,
beautified with fair Buildings of Stone, viz. the Castle, and St. Nicholas
Church. It Is a rich Empory and noted University, seated upon the River Elster,
having three Marts in the year: Famous also for two great Battles fought near
unto it in the last Swedish Wars. One between Gustavus Adolphus, King of
Sweden, and Count Tilly General of the Imperialists, 1631, wherein the Swedes
obtained a great Victory: Tilly was wounded, and lived not long after. In the
other Torstenson the Swede overcame Archduke Leopoldus Gulielmus and Octavio
Piccolomini Generals of the Imperial Army. And about a mile and half from hence
at Lutzen another great Battle was fought 1632, between the King of Sweden and
the Imperial Army commanded by Wallenstein Duke of Friedland, wherein the
Swedes obtained the Victory, but the King of Sweden was slain; and on the
Imperial side that famous Godfrey Count of Pappenheim; for that Victorious King
could not die but conquering, and Pappenheim ought not to fall but in the
company of so great a Prince. But the chiefest is Dresden incolis, Dresda
Italis, the Seat and Residency of the Elector of Saxony, Grand Marshal of the
Empire, seated upon the River Elbe, over which there is a very noble
Stone-Bridg of 17 Arches; it is well fortified after the Modern way, with a
strong wall, and a large Ditch, having three Gates. Places most worth the
seeing here are the Italian Garden in the Suburbs. The Hunters House in the old
Town. The Electors Palace. His House for wild Beasts. His Stable. His Arsenal,
and his Kunstkammer, or Collection of Rarities. Here the Lutheran Women mourn
in White, and say Grace.

4. Freiberg, a noted place, with others adjacent, for its Silver Mines; a
round well walled City, with a Piazza, Castle, and five Gates. In St. Peter's
Church is the fair Monument of Duke Maurice Elector of Saxony which in October.
1632, upon the surrender of the Town, cost 80000 Dollars to save it from being
ransacked and defaced.

5. Wittenberga, Wittenburg, in ober Sachsen, in an open Plain upon the Elbe,
strongly fenced with Bulwarks, Walls, etc. a noted University for Lutheran
Divines, where also are the Sepulchers of Luther, born at Eisleben in the
Earldom of Mansfeldt; And of Melancthon.

South of Misnia, if not comprehended in it, lies a little Country called
Voitland, or Viteland, which seems to take its Name from the Juites or Vites,
who together with the Saxons and Angles conquered Britain, and gave Name to the
Isle of Wight. Its chief place now is Zwickaw, Cignea in Scrip. Germ.

Marchia Brandeburgensis.
THE Marquisate of Brandenburg is a large Country, well stored with Woods,
Lakes, and Fens, and in some places with Corn. It is generally divided into two
parts, the old and the new Marquisate. The Metropolis of the old is
Brandenburg, or Brennoburgum, a Bishops See, and the first Seat of the
Marquisses, giving Name to the Country. The Metropolis of the New is Francfurt,
Francofurtum ad Oderam, a University 1506, enjoying a pleasant Situation among
Cornfieldsd, and Viney-downs, so that Ceres and Bacchus seems both enamoured of
it. Berlin, Berlinum, seated in the midst of the Province, is the place of the
Prince Electors Residence.

Costrinum, Costriin, Custrin and Kustrin, is a very strong Fortress, said
never yet taken. Havelburg is the Seat of a Bishop. Besides this Marquisate
whereunto the Electoral Dignity is annexed, there belongs to this Prince the
Duchy of Prussia in Poland. The Duchy or moiety of Pomerania. The Reversion
of the Duchy of Magdeburg. The Duchy of Cleves and Earldom of Mark, The
Principalities of Halberstat in Brunswick, and Minden in Westphalia, which he
had in lieu of his Resignation of the Higher Pomerania to the Swede. The Duchy
of Crossen, and Lordship of Pregnitz in Silesia. The Jurisdiction of Cotbuss,
or Cotwis, and other Towns in Lusatia, or Laussnitz. The Branches of this
Family are the Marquisses of Cutembach and Onspach.

Of Pomerania, or Pomeren.
POmerania lies extended all along the shore of the Baltic Sea, divided into
the Upper and Lower Pomeren, now Royal and Ducal Pomerania, the first belonging
to the Swedes, the latter to the Elector of Brandenburg. A Country plain,
populous, and abundantly fruitful in Corn, Pasturages, Honey, Butter, Wax and
Flax.

Chief Places in Pomerania Royal are Stettin, Stetinum, memorable for its brave
Siege, and as brave defense in the year 1676. when taken from the Swedes, since
restored again.

2. Wollin, when Julinum a flourishing Emporium Anno 1170. sacked by Waldemarus
King of Denmark. 3. Gripswald, a noted University. 4. Wolgast, over against the
Isle Vsedom. 5. Straelsundt, alias Sundis, a well Traded Empory over against
the Isle Rugen.

Chief Places in Ducal Pomeran are Camin a Bishops See, over against the Isle
Wollin. Colberg at the mouth of the River Persandt. Coslin upon the River
Radnie. Newg^rten upon the Hamersbeck. Stargard upon the Ina. Rugenwal upon the
Wipper, are all considerable Towns.

This shall suffice for the Higher Saxony, or the Eighth Circle of the Empire,
come we next to that of the Lower Saxony, which contains,

Of the Duchy of Mecklenburg.
MEckelburgiensis, sive Megalopolitani Ducatus, lies next to Pomerania, along
the Coast of the Baltic Sea, of a fruitful Soil, and rich in Corn. The Princes
or Dukes whereof are now divided into two Branches; the chiefs whereof make
their Residence at Suevin, or Schwerin, and at Gusteen, or Gustrow, and have
now each of them a moiety of the Duchy* and are said to be derived from the
Vandal Princes. However in the late German Wars the Emperor made these Princes
feel the weight of his indignation, giving their Lands to Wallestein a Silesian
Gentleman, (a great Captain indeed, and renowned Soldier, who by a strange
Ingratitude, and Devilish ambition, came to a miserable end; the Duke of Biron,
and the Earl of Essex had such like designs, and as Tragical Catastrophies.)
Nevertheless they reentred into it by the Arms of the Great Gustavus their
Cousin-German 1631. And tho Munster-Treaty took Wismar, yet gave them in
Exchange the Bishoprics of Ratzeburg and Suerin, turned into Principalities.

Other chief places are Wismar, Wismaria, a Hans-Town, and noted Port upon the
Baltic, founded out of the Ruins of the great and ancient City of Mecklenburg,
or Megalopolis, Anno 1240. taken by the Elector of Brandenburg 1676, from the
Swedes, but restored again. 2. Rostock, Rosarum Vrbs and Rhodopolis, a
Hans-City, noted Port, large, rich, and well Traded, a University founded Anno
1415.

Come we next in course to Holstein, which is under the Homage and right of the
Empire, but being in possession of the House of Denmark, we shall refer its
Description to that Kingdom, and speak of the Dutchies of Brunswick and
Lunenburg.

Of the Dutchies of Brunswick and Lunenburg.
THIS was a part of the ancient Dukedom of Saxony, till the Proscription of
Henry, Surnamed the Lion, by the Emperor Frederick Barbarosa; but by the
Mediation of Henry the Second King of England, his Father-in-law, (being
reconciled unto the Emperor) had the Cities of Brunswick and Lunenburg with
their Countries, restored unto him; afterward erected into a Dukedom by the
Emperor Frederick the Second, whose posterity enjoyed these Dukedoms jointly
till the year 1430. when they were divided between William the Victorious, who
had the Title of Brunswick, and his Uncle Bernard who had the Title of
Lunenburg, and in their posterity both these Dutchies do still continue.

Of Brunswick al. Brunswigensis, Appiano. The South and East parts toward
Hessen, etc. swell with Woody Mountains and Hills, parts of the ancient
Hercinian, the Northern part more plain and fruitful in Corn, and other
Commodities.

Chief Places are, Brunswiick, al. Braunswyck and Brunsviga; the Tulisurgiam of
Ptol. test Appiano, upon the River Oacer, and one of the chief Hans-Towns,
containing about seven miles in compass, fair, populous, and strongly fortified
with a double Wall, peopled with industrious Inhabitants, jealous of their
Liberty; Governed in manner of a Free Estate, held under the right of the
Princes. Its chief Trade is in Hides and Mum. 2. Goslar, G^slaria, a Town
Imperial. 3. Wolfenbuttel, a very strong Castle, and the Residence of the Dukes
of Brunswiick, where is a famous Library; within these Territories were also
included the Principality of Halberstat, now under the Elector of Brandenburg,
and the Bishopric of Hildersheim, the Abbey Quedelnburg, whose Abbatess was
sometimes Princess of the Empire, now subject to the House of Saxony. Hannover
is the Seat and Title of another Branch of the Dukes of Brunswick, whose Duke
is a Catholic, in whose Territories are Calemburg, Grubenhagen, Gottingen, and
Hamelen, where the Inhabitants keep the Records of the famous Piper, who in
1284. drew the Boys of the Town into a Cave, who were never after heard of.

Lunaeburgensis Ducatus, Hertzogthumb Lunenbourg, incolis: Dutche de Lunebourg
Gallis. The Country is plain, the Air sharp and healthful, and the Soil
fruitful. The chief Town is Lunenburg, Lunaeburgum, upon the River Vlme, now
one of the Six Hans-Towns, large, populous, and adorned with fair Buildings,
whose chief Trade is in Salt. Cell, or Zell, is the Residence of the Dukes.

Of Bremen, Episcopatus Bremensis.
THIS Diocese or Archbishopric of Bremen is a Country whose extreme parts
along the Elbe and Weser are very fertile for Corn and Pasturages, the more
inner parts wild and barren. Bremen an Archbishops Sea, gives name to the
Country; it is seated upon the right side of the Weser, large, populous, rich,
and well Traded, and strongly fenced, and is famous for its Art of dressing
Leather, and Cloth, and for their Fish.

Stada, Stadt, a noted Hans-Town, accounted the most ancient in Saxony, and
once the Staple of the English Merchant-Adventurers, now the place where the
Ships pay Tole, strongly fortified. Bremersforde, a Castle, and Village, where
the Archbishop resides. Charlsstat, is a strong Fort built by the Swedes near
the mouth of the River Weser. This Country with the Principality of Ferden in
Westphalia now belongs to the Swedes by the Treaty of Munster.

Of Lawenburg.
THIS Duchy gives Name to the Princes of Saxon Lawenburg, who are Branches of
the same House with the Princes of Anhalt. Its chief place is Lawenburg, or
Laubenburg, upon the Elb, a fine Town, but the Castle is ruined, and the Duke
lives at Ratzeburg, though he has nothing there but the Castle, the Town
belonging, as was said, to the Duke of Mecklenburg.

Of Magdeburg, Ditio Magdeburgensis.
THIS Diocese lies extended on both sides of the Elb, betwixt Brandenburg, and
the proper Saxony. The chief Town is Magdenburg and Magdenburg, incolis.
Magdburg al. Magdeburg: antiquis monumentis Pathenopolis. Mesuium Ptol. testis
Appiano. A Burgraveship of the Empire, and Archbishops See, giving name to the
Country. Reedified by Editha Wise unto the Emperor Henry the First, and
Daughter to Edmund King of England, and thus named in Honor of her Sex. Her
Effigies in stone is in the Cathedral Church, with 19 Tuns of Gold which she
gave thereunto; though others say it was from the Worship of the Virgin Diana.
A place of great state, large and fair, and strongly fortified, once the
Metropolitan City of Germany, famous in the Protestant Wars for a whole years
years Siege against the Emperor Charles the Fifth. But sacked and burnt by
Tilly, and 36000 persons put to the Sword and destroyed 1631. and the Town
almost ruined. 'Twas also famous for the first Turnament which was in Germany,
which was performed here in the year 637. by the Emperor Henry, Surnamed the
Fowler.

These are the chief parts of the Lower Saxony, and contain the ninth Circle of
the Empire.

Of BOHEMIA.
BOiemum, Tac. Beiohemum Paterc, Bomi Ptol. Boheim Germ. Boheme Galli^, Boemia
Hispanis, Bohemia Italis. Czeskazem incolis test Brieto. This Kingdom is
environed about with Mountains and Forests, as it were with Fortifications. The
Air sharp and piercing, the Country rough and hilly, rich in Minerals, and
yielding sufficient plenty of Corn, and other necessary Provisions, Wine
excepted. First inhabited by some of the Germans, who were dispossessed by the
Boii, who gave Name unto the Country. The Boii were routed by the Marcomanni, a
people of Germany. And these were also ejected by the Sclaves under Zechus
Brother unto Lechus the Founder of the Polish Monarchy, about the year 649.
called in their own Country-language Czechi, but named from the Country they
seized upon, Boiohaemi, upon their first arrival. This people were Governed by
Dukes until about the year 1086. when Vratislaus or Vladislaus was created the
first King of Bohemia, in a Diet at Mentz by the Emperor Henry the Fourth about
the year 1199. Power was given to the States to choose their Princes, before
being Elected by the Grace of the Emperors, since which time the Kingdom
continued Elective, though most commonly enjoyed by the next of blood, until
the Royal Line being extinct, the Kingdom was devolved upon the House of
Austria.

Chief Places are, Praga Italis, Prag incolis, Prague Gallis. Marobudum Ptol.
test Sans. and Briet. the Capital and Royal City of the Kingdom of Bohemia,
seated upon the River Muldaw, by the Bohemians, Vltave; it consists of three
Towns, the Old, the New, and the Lesser. It Is an Archbishopric and
University, where in the year 1409. were reckoned above 40000 Students under
the Rectorship of John Hus. The greatest remarks are the Emperors Palace, and
Summer House. A fair Cathedral Church built 923. The Palace and Garden of
Colaredo. The Palace of Count Wallestein Duke of Freidland. The Bridge being
1700 Foot long, and 35 foot broad, with two Gates, under two High Towers of
Stone at each end. Near Prague that deciding Battle was fought, November. 8. 1620
between Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhine, Elected King of Bohemia, and
the Emperor Ferdinand the Second, where the Victory fell unto the Imperialists,
Prague forced to yield, and King Frederick and his Queen forced to fly into
Silesia.

Teutchin Broda by the River Saczua, a strong place when taken by Zisca, who
then forced the Emperor Sigismund to fly out of Bohemia.

Janikaw, where was fought that famous Battle of Febr. 24. 1643. between
Torstenson, and the Imperialists, the success gave the Swedes the advantage of
proceeding further.

Czaslaw is the place where Zisca was buried, that famous Bohemian General, who
fought when he was blind, and when dead wished his friends to make a Drum of
his Skin.

Guttenburg, or Cottenburg, is famous for its Silver Mines.

Egra is a strong City, accounted the second of Bohemia, and chief Magazine of
the Country.

The Mountains of the Giants in Bohemia, called Riphaei or Cerconossi, are
famous for three things, for their Signification and Prognostics of all
Tempests, for the rarity of Plants, Stones and Gems there growing, and for a
Spectrum called Ribenzal, which is said to walk about those Mountains in the
form of a Huntsman. Anselmus de Boot tells us that Rudolphus the second, King
of Bohemia, had a Table of Jewels which he calls the Eighth Wonder of the
World; it was wrought with uch Art that the Jewels which were set together with
invisible joints, presented a most pleasant Landscape, naturally representing
Woods, Rivers, Flowers, Clouds, Animals, etc. the like not to be found in the
World.

The Waters of Carolina al. Karsbad, found out Anno 1370. in the time of
Charles the Fourth, will in a Nights time turn Wood into a stony crust.

That the Loadstones of Bohemia will give the point of the World, but not draw
Iron, and that a Needle touched with one of those Stones never points directly
North, but decline eight or more degrees to the last.

That Mummies as good as any in Egypt have been found in Bohemia, (a whole man
of Myrrh, Amber) Bones of Giants and Unicorns horns, are dig'd out of the
Mountains. See the Hlstory of Bohemia. Bohuslao Balbino and Soc. Jes. in fol.
Prag. 1679.

Other chief Towns are Pilsen, large and Walled, Tabor upon the River Lauznitz.
Koningsgratz Ger. Hradium Reginae, Kralowikradetz Boh. Kuttenburg Ger.
Kutnahora Boh. Budereiss Ger. al. Budeiowice Boh. Leitmeritz Ger. al.
Litomierzitze Boh.

To these we may add the County of Glatz upon the Borders of Silesia.

Of Moravia, Marherin, or Mahren.
IS a Country lying open only toward Austria and the South, upon the other
sides environed with Mountains and Forests; plain within, and exceedingly
populous, pleasant, and fruitful for Corn, Wine, and Pasturage. The Air
somewhat unhealthy, being debarred from the cleansing East and Northern Winds.
Once a Kingdom, now a Marquisate, subject to the Bohemians, an Appendant of
that State since Anno 1417. when Sigismund the Emperor gave it to Albertus King
of Bohemia.

Chief Places are Olmutz, or Olmuntz Germ. and Olmuez. Olomucium and Olomuncium
Latino. Holemane Boh. the Eburum of Ptol. test Pyram. and Appiano, rather
Barouua test Laz. A University seated on the River Morava, or Marckh, which
running quite through the Country, enters the Donaw near Presburg, and gave
name to the Country; large and strongly fortified, taken by the Swedes, but
restored by the Treaty of Munster.

2. Brinnum, Brin. Ger. Brno Bohemis, the Arsicua of Ptol. Vilano, but by Sans.
it is Hradisch. Walled, and has a strong Castle, famous for the Siege of 1645.
by the Swedes, seated upon the River Schwartz.

3. Iglaw Germ. or Igla, Czihlawa Bohem. on the River so called, seated upon a
Hill on the Frontiers of Bohemia, well fortified, having a large Piazza.

4. Znoimum, Znaim, Germ. Znoymo Bohem. seated upon the River Theya, which
divides Moravia from Austria, is famous for the death of Sigismund the
Emperor, and for its Painted Houses, and for its Sieges of 1645.

The M^ravians are a plain dealing people, stout and good Soldiers.

Gradisco near Olmutz, is famous for its Myrrh and Frankincense, which contrary
to the common custom grows immedately out of the Earth; and the Frankincense
grows naturally in the shape and likeness of those parts which men and women
most conceal, test Dubravivo in his Bohemian History.

Of Silesia, Schlesingen and Schlesien.
THIS Duchy is watered in the middle by the River Oder, wholly encompassed
with Hills and Mountains, except toward the North. The Air therefore sharp and
piercing, lying open to those blustering Winds. The Country is plain, rough,
and Woody, yet abounding in Corn, the Hilly parts yield plenty of Brass, and
other Metals.

It was once subject to the King of Poland, afterward it submitted, or was
subjected to the Kings of Bohemia, and is now an Appendant of that State. The
ancient Inhabitants among others were the Quadi, against whom when M. Antonius
the Emperor made War, and being in a great strait, the Legion of Christians in
his Army by their Prayers obtained from Heaven not only Thundershot and
Artillery, which destroyed the Quadi, but gentle showers which refreshed the
faint and dying Romans. Xiphil. in his Dion.

Chief Places are Breslaw Ger. Wratzlaw Bohem. Vratislavia. The Budorgis, or
Budorigum of Ptol. Pyramio and Curio. By Ortel. Budorgis is Rattibor. A Bishops
See 970. burnt in the year 1341. now one of the fairest Cities in Germany, with
strait and open Streets. Other Places are Glogaw, Crossen, belonging to the M.
of Brandenburg. Lignitz, Schweinitz, Olaw, Opp^len, Troppaw, Ratibor, Teschen,
etc.

Thus have we surrounded Germany, and finished the Survey thereof.

As to the Revenue of the Emperor, it is not worth mentioning. It had need
therefore of some Prince, whose own Estate is sufficient to support the
Grandeur and Dignity of so august a Title.

Of Helvetia, or Schwitzerlandt.
map of Switzerland SVISSE by Rt. Morden


This Country which should have followed Germany, being misplaced in the Copy,
is therefore here inserted.
AT what time this whole Mountainous Tract, containing many several Nations, was
comprehended under the general Name of Helvetii, they were grown to so great a
Multitude, by a long Peace and want of Traffic, that the Country, being
Barren, was no longer able to maintain them; so that setting Fire to their own
Towns, they resolved to seek out new Dwellings; but their passage being stopped
by Caesar, he so wasted them by several Defeats, that they were forced to crave
leave to return into their own destroyed Country: After this, they continued
Members of the Roman Empire, till Conquered in the times of Honorius and
Valentinian, by the Burgundians and Almains, betwixt whom it was divided; after
taken by the French, it was made a part of the Kingdom of Burgundy; and at
length, by degrees, brought under the Power of the House of Austria, by the
Force of the Emperor Albert, the Son of Rodolph of Haspurg: But the People
being over-burthened by the Oppression of their Governors, taking Occasion by
the Factions of the Empire, and the Weakness of the Austrian Family, they
contracted a League Offensive and Defensive, for Preservation of their Liberty;
into which entered those of Switz, Vren and Vnderwald, 1308. more strictly
1315. To these joined Lucern 1353. Zurich, 1351. Glaris, Bearn and Zug, 1352.
Friburg and Soloturn, 1481. Basil and Schafhausen, 1501. Appenzeet 1513. called
Switz, from the name of the Village where first began this Confederacy, or
because the most Famous and most Potent of them; not all united into one
Confederation till the Year 1513. Of no great Reputation, till the War made
upon them by Charles Duke of Burgundy, whom they Defeated in three Battles at
Granson, Morat and Nancy.

This Country is in Length about 240 Miles, and 150 in Breadth; very
Mountainous, affording Deers, Wild Goats, and Bears. The lower Parts of these
Mountains afford rich Meadows, and Nourishing Pastures for Cattle, wherein
consists their greatest Wealth. In some Places they have good Wines and Corn,
if the Care and Industry of the Husbandman be not wanting. This is said to be
the Highest Country in all Europe; yet is no place more stored with Lakes, and
the Rise of more Famous Rivers, which run through all Parts thereof, viz. The
Rhine Northward, through the 17 Provinces; the Danube Eastward, through
Germany, Hungary; the Poe Southwards, through Italy; and the Rodamus Westward,
through France.

As the Soil, such are the Inhabitants; of rude and rugged Dispositions; more
fit for Arms than Civil Occupations; Serving any Prince that will Hire them. In
a word, they are tall, well proportioned, and strong; naturally Honest, Frugal
and Industrious; great lovers of their Liberty.

As for the Body of their State, it consists of three distinct Parts, viz. 1.
The Schwitzers. 2. The States which are Confederate with them. 3. The
Praefectures, which are Subjects to the Schwitzers.

The Schwitzers are comprehended in 13 Cantons, viz. Suitia Switz, Vria Vren,
Transylvania Vnderwald. Luceria Lucern, Tugium Zug, Berna Bern, Tiguriam
Zurich, Basilea Basil, Friburgum Friburg, Salodorum Soloturn' Abbatis cella
Appenzeel, Glarona Glaritz, Scaphusia Schaf hausen, these make the Body of that
Commonwealth, enjoying many Rights and Privileges, which the others do not.

The second Member is made up of the Towns and States Confederates with them
for the Preservation of their Liberties, viz. The Rhoetii or Grisons, who in
the year 1408, united in a perpetual League with Vren, Switz, Vnderwaldea,
Lucern, Zurich, Glaritz and Zug.

The Valesii, Valaise or Walisland, who in the year 1533. entered in League
with the seven Catholic Cantons.

The Town of St. Gal, in the year 1452. obtained the Protection and Confederacy
of the six Cantons of Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Switz, Zug and Glaritz. The Abbot
of St. Gal only with Zurich, Lucern, Switzt and Glaritz.

Mulhausen and Mulhusium, and Arialbinum Ant. test Simlero, in Alsatia, a Town
Imperial, joined in a perpetual League with all the Switzers, 1515.

Rotweil and Rotevilla, in Suavia, a Town Imperial not far from the head of the
Danow, united 1519. with all the Cantons.

Bienna, Bienne test Baudrand, rather Biel, upon the Bieler-Lake, was taken
into the League with Bern, 1547.

Neocomium, Naufchastal Gallis, Nowenburg Germ. with Bern, Lucern and Friburg.

Geneva, first with Friburg, then with Bern and Zurich.

As for the Prefectures of the Switzers, they are such lesser Parcels and
Adittaments as have arrived to their State, and are Subject to their Authority,
either by Gift, Purchase or War, viz. the Town and Country of Baden,
Bremgarten, Mellingen, Rapersvila or Raperchswil. The free Provinces of
Wagenthal. The Country of Tergow al. Tergea. The Country and Town of Sargans
and Walenstat. The Prefectorship of Rheineck. The Valleys of Locarn, Lugan,
Mendrisi, and Madia. The Balliages of Belinzona, Gasteren and Vlzenach. Of
Granson, Morat, and Orb, and Schwarzimburg, and the Count Verdemburg. All
which Cantons, as well as their Allies, are as so many distinct Commonwealths,
Governed by their Magistrates, and independent upon one another. They have two
sorts of Religion amongst them, the Roman Catholic, and the Protestant: The
Catholic Cantons are five, or, as some count, seven; the five Cantons are,
Vri, Switz, Vnderwald, Lucern, and Zug: They that reckon seven, add Friburg and
Soleure. But Zurich, Bern, Basil and Scasouse are Protestants; Glans and
Appenzel are Protestants and Papists mixed together: The Catholic Cantons
Assemble at Lucern, and the Protestant Cantons at Aran. The General Assemblies
are held yearly at Baden, which bears that Name from her Baths. Every Canton is
free to engage where it sees convenient. Among all these Cantons, Zurich has
the Precedence: Bern is the most Powerful. Basil has the finest City, the
Residence, and the Rendezvous of several learned Men. The Canton of Schasouse
has a City, famous for Trade; and in Solothure stands a City of the same Name,
where the most Christian King's Ambassador Resides. Vren, Switz, Vnderwald,
Glaris, and Appenzel have only Buroughs: The Order of the 13 Cantons,
according to their Precedence, is Zurich, Bern, Lucern, Vren, Switz, Vnderwald,
Zug, Glaris, Basil, Friburg, Solothure, Schafhausen and Appenzel.

Amongst the Allies of the Cantons, the Grisons are the most Powerful of all.
Their City of Coire is the place whither the Merchandises of Italy and Germany
are brought, by reason of its Situation upon the Rhine, which in that place
begins to grow Navigable.

The Chief Cities in these Cantons, are Zurich the Tigurium of Caes. and Live.
pleasantly Situate at the end of a Lake, called Zurich-Sea, or Tigurinum Lacum,
divided almost into two equal parts, by the River Ligamus, which runs out of
the Lake, but joined together by two Bridges. The Houses built of Timber and
Painted, many four or five Stories high. The Streets narrow, but paved with
Flints and Pebbles. It Is well Fortified, besides the Wall, with good
Earth-works and Trenches. It has a University. Its Citizens are Rich, given to
Merchandise, Busy and Industrious. To this belongs the Power and Authority of
summoning the General Diets, and having the first place in both Assemblies.

Near Zurich was Zuinglius Slain, aged 44 years, whose Heart remained whole in
the midst of the Fire, after his Body was consumed. As also the Heart of Bishop
Cranmer in England, as it is reported.

Below Zurich upon the Ligamus, enjoying a most happy and pleasant Situation,
lies the Town of Baden, named thus from the hot Baths thereof, beautified with
fair Buildings. The Seat of their General Diets, much frequented and resorted
to; also for its public and private Baths, not so much for Health as Pleasure.
The chiefest Virtue, is the quickening Power they have upon barren Women; for
here the Men and Women promiscuously wash together, and which is worst, in
private too.

Basil Ang. Basil Germ. Basle Gal. Basilea Ital. Basilia Mercel. The Arialbinum
of Ant. test Cluver and Sanson. A City large and fair. The Houses built of
Stone for the most part, and painted, compassed with a double Wall and Trench,
Rich and Populous. The River Rhine divides it into two parts, which are joined
together by a Bridge of fourteen Arches. In this City are said to be 600
Fountains. It gives Title to a Bishop, who is not suffered to lodge in the Town
one Night. Spantalus an English Man was the first Bishop here. It Is an
University founded by Pope Pius the 2d.

Here was Erasmus buried; and here was held that Council, where it was decreed
that a General Council was above the Pope, An. 1431.

Near hereunto is the Village Augst, where stood the City Augusta Rauracom,
Ptol. Rauriaca of Plin. and Basilia and Civitas, Basiliensium of Ant.

Bern, seated upon the Aar, with whose Streams, Island-like, it is almost round
encompassed; on that side which is not, it is strongly Fortified with Bastions
and Outworks. It Is built of Stone, and has one long Street, with narrow
Porticoes, or Cloisters on both sides. The great Church is one of the
handsomest Stone-Fabricks in all Switzerland.

Lucern is seated upon both sides of the River Russ, issuing forth of the Lake
Lucern and Waldstetten-See, a neat City, and pleasantly seated; it has four
Bridges over the Russ, one for Carts, the other foot-Bridges, one near a
quarter of a Mile long. The great Church stands without the City-wall, and is
noted for its great Organ. The City is well traded, and much frequented by
Strangers, being the ordinary Road between Italy and Gremany, and the
Rendezvous of their Merchandise passing that way.

Altrof an open Village, is the Chief of the Canton of Vren. The Village of
Switz gave Name to the Country. Stantz is the chief of the Canton of Vnderwald.
Glaris gives Name to that Canton. Zug is a walled Town upon the left Shore of
the Zugen-See. Appenzel was sometimes the Seat of the Abbots of St. Gall, then
Lords of the Country; now gives Name to the Canton. Solothurn, Solothurum of
Ant. upon the Aar, was the place of Martyrdom of Vrsus and his 66 Theban
Soldiers, in the Reign of the Emperor Dioclesian. Friburg upon the River Sana,
is a handsome Town, and Head of the Canton.

Schaf-hausen is seated upon the River Rhine, where all Boats and Flotes that
come down the River, unload, because of the Catarract, or precipitious Descent
of the Rhine at Wasserfal. Here, as at Zurich, the Citizens wear Swords when
they go abroad.

Chief Towns of the Confederate-Estates, are Geneva Caes. Genevra Ital. Gneff
Germ. is pleasantly seated at the lower end of the Lake Lemanus, now
Genfferzee, or the Lake of Geneva, divided by the River Rhoscu, into two parts,
which are joined together by two Wooden Bridges, strong and well fortified with
Ramparts and Bastions of Earth; and well governed, where Vice is
discountenanced, yet Sports and Exercises allowed upon the Lords Day; the
People Industrious in Trading, and Provisions plentiful. Losanne, Lausanna, the
Lausonium Ant. is a great Town and University upon Lacus Lamani.

Coira vel Coria Ital. Chur Incolis, Caria Ant. and Diac. is the Capital City
of the Grisons, almost environed with Mountains, a Bishops See, whose
Inhabitants are all Protestants, except the Bishop, who has nothing to do in
the Government of it, yet Coins Money which is current there. This Rhaetia, or
Country of the Grisons, is divided into three Parts. 1. Lega Della, Casa Dio,
or Foedus Domus Dei. 2. Lega Grisa. 3. Dicci Dritture, or Foedus december
Jurisdictionum.

Sion Ital. Sitten Ger. Sedunum Caes. and Plin. is the chief Town of Valesiae
or Wallislands, reaching along the Course of the Rhosne. A Bishop-See, seated
upon the Rhosne in a Plain, under a steep biforked Mountain, spiring up in
manner of two high and precipitious Rocks; upon the top of the one is the
Cathedral Church, and the Houses of the Canons upon the other, which is much
higher. The strong Castle called Thurbile, in Summertime the pleasant Recess
of the Bishops, the Key of the Country.

Martinack is the Octodurus of Caes. and Civit. Valensium Ant. St. Mauriaz
Agaunum, now St. Moritz, closed with a Castle, and two Gates upon the Bridge,
and the Mountains which shut up the Country, which is within most pleasant,
fruitful, and happy in Corn, and excellent Pasture; where is also Salt Springs
discovered, An. 1544. near Sitten. Also diverse Fountains of hot Medicinal
waters. Without, the Country is environed with a continual Wall of horrid and
steep Mountains. The surprise of it alarmed all Europe, when seized upon by the
Count Fuentes, for the King of Spain.

Mellingen, Bremgarten and Meienberg, chief Places of Wagenthal, lie upon the
Russ River. Biel appertains to the Bishops of Basil, Newenburg to the House
of Longeville in France, both confederate with Bern.

The chief Places of Targow, are St. Gal, seated amongst Mountains not far from
the Rhine, and the Lake Bodenzee, or Constance. The City is Rich and well
Governed, inhabited by an industrious People, in making Stuffs and Linen
Clothes. From the famous Monastry hereof, are named the Abbots, Princes of the
Empire, and of great Power and Reverence in this Country. Frawenfeld is the
chief belonging to the confederate Cantons.

Chief Places in the Italian Prefectures, are Locern and Lorcarnum, seated in a
pleasant and fruitful Plain, betwixt high Mountains, and the Head of the Lake
Magione, the Verbanus Lucas, Strab. and Plin. and

Of the SEVENTEEN PROVINCES, Or, the LOW COUNTRIES.
BY the Latins that Tract is called Belgium, from the Belgi, the most Potent
People heretofore of all these parts; which upon the Confusion of those Ancient
Limits of Germany and France, did contain 17 distinct Estates, or Provinces: It
is also called Germania Inferior; by the English, the Low Countries; by the
Dutch, Netherlandt; by the Italians, Spaniards, and French, Flanders; from
whence the Inhabitants were generally called Flemmings.

It Is a Country seated very low, between the Banks of the Rhine and the
Seashore, from which it is Defended by extraordinary Charge and Industry with
Banks and Ramparts. For Hubandry, it is the best cultivated; for multitude of
Towns and Villages, the best Peopled; for their neatness, the most Remarkable;
and by reason of their several Manufactures, the most Rich of any Country in
Europe.

It Is bounded on the North with the German or British Ocean, which also
separates it from Great Britain, on the West; and on the South and East it
borders upon France and Germany.

The Ancient Inhabitants were partly Subdued by L. Drusius, in the time of
Augustus Caesar; the other were before overcome by Julius Caesar: After which
subjection they remained under the Roman Empire until the Expiration of that
Empire, when they were involved in that Public Calamity, under the Victorious
French who here succeeded the Romans; the whole was contained under the Name
and Kingdom of Austrasia, or Oostinreich. After that the French Monarchy became
divided amongst the Posterity of the Emperor Lewis the Godly, this part hereof
broke into sundry new Principalities and Governments, and became divided into
17 States, or Provinces, whereof some Entitled their Governors, Dukes; others,
Earls; others, Lords.

Their Names are these: Four Dukedoms, Brabant, Limburg, Luxemburg, and
Guelderland. Seven Earldoms, Holland, Zeland, Zutphen, Flanders, Artois,
Hainault, and Namur. One Marquisate of the Holy Empire, comprehending Antwerp.
Five Signories, or Lordships, Malins, Vtrecht, Over-Yssel, Friesland, and
Gr^ningen. Two of these, Flanders and part of Artoise, appertained to the
Sovereignty of the Kings of France, quitted unto Philip the Second King of
Spain by Henry the Second, French King, in the League of Cambray. Brabant,
Flanders, part of Artois, Limberg, with Malines, and the Marquisate of the
Sacred Empire, became added to the Dominion and Family of Burgundy by Philip
the Hardy. Holland, Zealand, West-Freisland, Hainalt, Luxemburg and Namur, by
Philip the Good: Gelderland, Zutphen, Vtreicht, Over-yssel and Groningen, by
the Emperor Charles the Fifth. Since this Union they were Governed in manner of
Free Estates by their Princes and Magistrates, making a distinct Nation and
Commonwealth by themselves. Duke Charles the Fighter, Prince hereof, had an
intent to unite the parts then under his Government into one entire Kingdom by
the name of Burgundy. But the Provinces being Sovereign, and had their several
Laws, Privileges, etc. this project took no effect. In the reign of Philip the
Second King of Spain Heir of the House of Burgundy, and in the year 1566. began
those memorable Civil broils, so long afflicting those rich and flourishing
Countries, continued with the spoil and ransacking of all their chief Towns and
Cities, with the unspeakable misery and calamity of a bloody War of 48 years; a
War which cost the King of Spain the Lives of 600000 men, and 150 Millions of
Crowns, and England not fewer than 100000 men, and above a Million of Money. At
last, part of the Provinces were forced to continue under the Spanish Yoke, and
part recovered their Liberty; so that now there are in the Low Countries two
Estates, or Dominions, far differing one from another; for the one is a
Republic, or rather, several Republics United and Confederated in one, and
therefore called the United Provinces, and (commonly from the Principal
Province) Holland: The other, for the most part, did belong to the King of
Spain, as Heir to the House of Burgundy, and is called the Spanish Provinces,
or Flanders; but of the late Years the French King has Conquered most part
thereof.

As the Country is divided, so is also their Religion; for the Spaniards
strictly follow the Romish, and the States General indulg the free Use of all
Religions, but countenance only that of the Reformed Churches, according to
Calvin.

The Men for the most part, are well proportioned, unmindful of good Turns and
Injuries; of good Invention, Frugal, and of indefatigable Industry.

The Women, generally of good Complexions, Familiar, Active, Laborious, and
conversant in Affairs in the Shops and Houses.

Their Language, for the most part, is Dutch, with little difference in the
Dialect; but in the Provinces adjoining to France, they speak a corrupt and
imperfect French, from their Language called Walloons.

The Air is Temperate, and more wholesome than formerly; the Winter more long
than cold, and the Summer like the Spring in Southern Countries.

The Soil toward Germany is Woody and Hilly; but toward the Sea full of
Pasture and Meadow-ground, which breed great store of Cattle, which make Cheese
and Butter plentiful.

Of the UNITED PROVINCES, Or, Dutch Republique.
map of Dutch Republic The United PROVINCES Vulgo HOLLAND by Robert Morden


THE United Provinces are so called, because of the Union which they made
together in the Year 1579. They are Seated toward the end of the two Rivers,
the Rhine and the Meuse, in the Northern part of the Low Countries, between the
Dominions of the King of Spain in Flanders, and many principalities of the
Empire. The Princes of the Empire, which are Neighbors to them, are, the Duke
of Newburgh, in his Duchy of Juliers; the Elector of Brandenburgh, in his
Dukedom of Cleves; the Elector of Cologn, the Bishop of Munster, the Count of
Bentheim, and the Prince of East-Freezlande, in the Territories of the same
Name.

The United Provinces, which formerly acknowledged the King of Spain,
afterward became Independent; or, to speak more properly, so many
Commonwealths of themselves, which yet all together make up but one Republique,
under the Title of The United Provinces of the Low Countries; so that the
Dignity remains with the States General, but the Absolute Authority (in Matters
excepted in the Alliance) abides in the States of every Pr^^ince. The Arms of
this Commonwealth is a Lion holding a Bundle of seven Arrows close tied
together, in allusion to so many Provinces Confederated by the same Allia^^e.
And yet these Provinces have not been always so well United, but that they have
sometimes rather ^^sembled a Body with so many Heads, some of which looked one
way, and some another.

There is no Dominion in the World of so small an Ext^nt, that has so great a
number of Fortresses; and which seems to be better Defended by the Natural
Situation of the Country it self; for it is Fortified by the Sea, and several
Rivers; that is to say, the Rhine, the Meus^, the Waal, the Issel, etc.

Besides the United Provinces, and the Territories belonging to them, the
States have certain Towns in Brabant and Flanders. They have in Flanders the
Sleuce, Middleburgh, Ardemburgh, the Sass of Gaunt, Axel, and Hulst. In Brabant
Lille, Bergen-Opzoom, Breda, Boisleduc, and Grave. They had also Dalem and
Fauquemont, in the Duchy of Limburgh; and Maestricht, in the Bishopric of
Liege: but those places have been won from them by the King of France, only
Maestricht is restored, and at this present in their possession. In Germany,
they had upon the Rhine Orsoy, Wesel, Reez, Emeric, and Genep, in the Duchy of
Cleves; and Rhineberg, in the Electorate of Cologne. But those places are
returned to their right Owners. Upon the edg of Westphalia, they have a Garrison
in Embden, and in the Forts of Fideler and Leer-ort, which belongs to the
Prince of East-Friesland.

Of these United Provinces, four lie toward the West, Holland, Zeland, Vtrech,
Guelderland, and Zutphen. Three to the East, Overyssel, Friesland, and
Groningen. In their Assemblies, these Provinces have always given their Voices
in this Method, Guelders and Zutphen first; then Holland, Zeland, Vtrech,
Friesland, Over-Yssel; and lastly, Groningen, with the Ommelands.

Each Province sends their Deputies to the Hague, where they compose three
Colleges or Assemblies; the States General, the Council of State, and the
Chamber of Accounts. In the Assemblies of the States General, it behooves all
the Provinces to give their Consent in general and particular, to the
Resolutions there taken, there being no such thing among them as Plurality of
Voices. Gueldres takes place first, as being the Eldest, and because her
Plenipotentiaries first proposed the Union. The Admiralty sits in five places,
and has five Magazines; at Roterdam, Amsterdam, Horn, or Enchysen, Middleburgh,
and Harlinghen; the three first in Holland, the fourth in Zeland, and the fifth
in Friesland.

The Earldom of Holland and Zeland, together with the Neighboring Country of
VVest-Frisia was given unto Theodoric Son to S^gebert Prince of Aquitania, by
the Em^eror Charles the Bald. By Arnulph their fourth Prince, quitting the
French Allegiance, they were first made subject to the Soveraignt^ of the
German Emperors. In John the Second, became added to the House of Hainalt. In
William the Third, to the House of Bavaria. In Philip the Good, to that of
Burgundy. In Philip the Second, to that of Austria. In whose reign, after forty
years War they were acknowledged a Free Estate by his Son Philip the Third.

The Province of Holland is of most Power and Consideration, as giving Name to
all the rest: It is Situate very low, and therefore fenced with Banks and
Ramparts to keep out the Sea; it is also fenny, and full of Marshes, and
therefore trenched with innumerable Dikes and Channels, to make it fit for
Dwelling.

Remarkable indeed is the Industry and Trade of the Inhabitants; that, having
little or no Corn, yet they are always provided, not only with sufficient for
their own Use, but to supply their Neighbors. Having no Timber of their own,
they spend more in Building of Ships, and fencing their Watercourse, than any
other Country: And having no Flax or Wool, they make more Cloth of both sorts,
than all the Countries in Europe, except England and France.

The whole compass of this Earldom is not above 180 miles, but in breadth no
where above three hours Journey from the Sea: It contains 23 Walled Towns, and
400 Villages; the chief whereof are,

1. Amsterdam, Situate on the Lake, or Sea, called Tie, and the Dike or Channel
called Amstel in Latin, Amstelodamum and Amsterodamum; built upon Piles, like
Venice; and by the late Addition of the new to the old, may now vie with the
richest and fairest Cities of the World: ^amous for its great Trade to the
utmost parts of the Earth; and as (...) to some for its Toleration of all
Religions. It Is the Market or Shop, where the Rarities and Commodities of all
Countries are exposed to Sale.

Dort, Dordracum, Situated upon four Rivers, has the first Voice; as the Town
where the Earls of Holland and their Subjects reciprocally bound themselves
each to another. There it is that they Coin their Money, and their Magistrates
have the Privilege to go with one of their Guards. In the Year 1421, of a City
upon the Continent, it became an Island, through a most Dreadful Inundation,
that Drowned about 100000 People, and 80 Villages; pleasant and large. Harlem,
Harlemum, is the place where they make their finest Linen Cloth, and the
whitest in the whole Province. Famous for the Invention of Printing by Lawrence
Jans, and its Inhabitants for breaking the Pelasian Chain. The Duke of Alva
having taken it, committed very great acts of Bloody Cruelty therein. Delpht,
Delphi, Delft, is the Burying-place of the Princes of Orange, and of great
Trade for Clothing; famous for the Story of the Storks, who covering their
young ones in the fire-time, all perished in the Flames; and infamous for the
Birth of David George, who called himself King and Christ, who died in 1556 at
Basil, and three years after his Bones were taken up and burnt. Leyden,
Luddunum, Batavorum, is the Eye, or, as others will have it, the Garden of
Holland; as well for the cleanness of their Streets, as the beauty of their
Houses. It is also famous for its Antiquity, for its Library, and the Excellent
Edition of Books there Printed; as also for the entire Defeat of the Spanish
Army. In this City was born that Tailor, who, to his ruin, was made King of the
Anabaptists in Munster. Goude, Gouda, has this Advantage, to be Situated among
Springs, and where the Inhabitants enjoy the purest Air in all Holland.
Rotterdam, Roterodamum, the place where Erasmus was Born, is the best of the
twelve Cities which they call small ones, by reason of its great Trade upon the
Meuse. The Hague, Haga Comitis St. Gravenhage, la Hage, which is the Residence
of the States General, is not a Burrough-Town, but a Village, the best Built,
and as delightful a place as most in the World. The Texel, Texelia, is a Port
to the North. Famous for its Harbor. The Brill, Briela, has the same Advantage
toward the South; in the Island of Voorn the rest of the Coast is all Sands,
with some small Shelter for Fisher-boats; with the Islands Over-flac, and Gorre.

There is also the rich and daily Butter and Cheese-Market, Gorkum, Gorichemum,
on the Wale; a strong place, and one of the Keys of Holland: The fair and
commodious Haven, Schonhoven, Schonhovia. The strong and rich Goude, Gouda.
Oudwater, etc.

Elstein on the Yssel, or Fossa Drusiana al. Itala, with their Cables, Cordage,
and other Trade. The Butter and Cheese-Town, Alkmear, in the Marches. Memorable
for the defeat the Inhabitants gave T^ Alva, merely because he gave them no way
to escape. Important Enchusen, or the Zuder Sea, good and Rich Havens. Horn and
Edam, Famous for Ships and Cheese, and the Sea Nymph that learned to spin.

Zeland, Zelandia, is the Province which was first set at Liberty, and last
consented to the Peace with Spain: At this day it contains the greatest part of
the Prince of Oranges Possession. That of Vacheren, Walachria, in the Map
contains ten Dutch miles in compass, is the fairest of all in the
Low Countries, with the City of Middleburgh, the Capital City of the Province,
and the Staple for Wines; a str^^^ and large Empory. Flushing, Flissinga, the
Key of the Netherlands, is (...) a good Harbor. Once an English Garrison, and a
Cautionary Town where the Renowned Sir Philip Sidney was the first Governor,
and died in that Service. The strong Sea-Town, Vere, Veria, having many Staples
for Herring, and other Commodities: Famous for the most Noble and Illustrious
Family of the Veres, now Earls of Oxford.

The second Island is Schouwen, Scaldia, in the Map 2. containing six miles in
Circuit; its chief Town is Zerick-Zee, noted for Madder and Salt; and
Brauwershaven, inhabited by Fishermen; here was first invented the marting of
Herrings. The third is Zuiit-Bevetland, in the Map (3) whose only Town of note
is Goes. The fourth is Duueland, or Duyueland, named thus from the abundance of
Pigeons there breeding. It has no Town of Note, but is memorable for the bold
passage of the Spaniards under Mondragon cross the Sea in the year 1575. and
for that in the year 1520. it was overwhelmed with a deluge of waters. Tolen is
an Island so called from a Town of that Name, divided from Brabrant by a narrow
Creek or Arm of the Sea. The more ancient Inhabitants of these Islands were the
Mattiaci of Tacitus. They contain in all 8 Walled Towns, and about 100
Villages. The Country is low, flat, and Marshy, rich in Corn and Pasturage,
unhealthful, and subject to Inundations, being kept in and defended from the
Sea by Banks.

The Bishopric or Lordship of Vtretcht, Vtricesium Amm. was first occasioned
by one Willebrod, an English man, the Apostle of those parts, and first Bishop
hereof about the year 611. during the Regency of Pepin the Fat. The Successors
of this Willibrod by the Liberality of the French Kings and German Emperors
attained unto, as well the Temporal as the Spiritual Jurisdiction, together
with that of Overyssel unto Charles the Fifth, by the consent of Henry Count
Palatine then Bishop, seized upon the whole Temporal Dominion hereof, leaving
only the Spiritual to the Prelates, which also since by the Usurpation of the
States has likewise been taken from them. It has a Capital City of the same
Name; Inhabitd, for the most part, by the Nobility of the Country: first called
Inferius Trajectum, or Vltrajectum* Vtricesium Amm. There is also the
Thorow-fare, Rhenen, the fair and strong Amersfort; the Frontier-Town,
Montfort. Wick de Duerstede, the Batavodurum of Tac. and Ptol. They reckon
about Vtrecht 56 Cities, to the farthest whereof you may go by Water from
Vtrecht in one day.

Guelders, Gueldria. Guelders was first founded by two Brothers, Wickard and
Luppola, first made Guardians of the Country by the Inhabitants in the reign of
the Emperor Charles the Bald. It was made an Earldom by the Emperor Henry the
Third, made a Dukedom by the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria. After the decease of
Charles of Egmond, the last Duke, by composition between him and Charles the
Fifth Emperor, this Province with the Earldom of Zutphen, united for a long
time in the House of the Dukes of Gelderland, descended upon the Emperor
Charles the Fifth, and added by him to his other Provinces of the Netherlands
under Philip the Second; the greatest part shoke off the Spanish yoke, and now
with Zutphen Governed in manner of a Free Estate, confederated with the rest of
the United Provinces, a third part of Golderland excepted, where stands the
Towns of Ruremond, Guelders, Venlo, Watchtendonc, Stralo, and Grol, remaining
yet subject to the Arch-Dutchess, or Spaniards; who in the year 1627. attempted
in vain to bring the Rhine to the City of Gueldria, and into the Meuse, to
deprive the United Provinces of the Trade of Germany. Nimmegen, Noviomagus al.
Neomagus, the Capital City of the Duchy of Gueldria, Founded by Magus King of
the Gauls; taken by Prince Maurice in the year 1592. Opposite to it is that
Fort Knotsenburg, large Built by the States in the Quarter of Batavia, where
the Ancient Batavians Inhabited. Arnheim, Arenacum, in the Veluwe, the third
Capital City of Guelders, and the Ordinary Residence of the Dukes thereof.

The Town and Country of Culemberg: The strong and Martial Venlo, Venloa: The
Natural and Artificial Fortified Ruremond, Ruremunda.

The strong and encompassed Frontier Bommel, Bommelia; the Fort Voorn and
Crevecour making it Impregnable.

The Province of Zutphen bears the same Name with the Capital City, and passes
sometimes for a fourth part of the Duchy of Gelders, having no Voice in the
Assembly of the States General, but only conjoined with this Duchy. In the
Siege of which was slain that Honor of Chivalry and Mirror of Learning, Sir
Philip Sidney. In this Province also stands Groll, Grolla, and eight or nine
small Cities more.

In Over-Issel, Trans Issallania, (so called from its Situation beyond the
Issel) where the Rhine and that, share their Streams together, by means of a
Channel which Drusus formerly made; stands Deventer, Daventria and Davontria, a
Capital City; being a famous Passage over the Yssel, first taken by the Earl of
Leicester for the States. And in Drent stands Coeverden, Coverdia, one of the
most Regular Pentagons in Europe. And Zwol, the Suvolla of old.

Friesland, Frissia, affords good and strong Horses, and Cattle of an excessive
bigness. It has been Governed by Princes and Dukes; and, as they say, by Kings
too, who kept their Courts at Staveren, Stauria. Franiker, Franicheria, is an
University. Leuwarden, Levardia and Leovardum, has a Parliament; and Dockum,
Docum, the Admiralty of the Province. Schelling, Schellingia, is a small Island
upon the Coast, wherein are several Towers that give Signals to Vessels.

Groeningen, that has the last Voice in the Assembly of the States General, has
but two Cities, Groeningen, Groninga, and Dam, Damum. Groningen is of that
consequence, by reason of its Situation on the Frontiers, that the Duke of Alva
had designed a Citadel there. In the year 1672. the Bishop of Munster not able
to take that City, yet took several other Towns from the Dutch. The Province is
full of Pasturage, which affords good stuff for firing.

The chief Commodities of the Natural growth of these Provinces are Butrer and
Cheese; the rest being Manufacturies which they make out of such Materials as
they fetch out of other Countries: But the Commodity that has been of greatest
Advantage to them, is Fish; and that not caught upon their own Coast neither.
Their Herring-Trade, by computation, is worth 450000 l. per Annum: And that of
Cod-fish 150000 l. Sterling Yearly.

Generally the people are inclined to Navigation, and a Seafaring Life; and
many being Born on Shipboard, and bred up at Sea, know no other Country; so
that their Natural inclination, and necessity of employing themselves that way,
has exceedingly increased their Shipping; so that it is thought they are
Masters of more Ships and Vessels of all forts, than almost all Europe besides.

But that which is the just Admiration of all Men, these Seven Provinces are
become greater, and more potent than Seventeen, in riches and power: Nay, they
have outdone some of the greatest Princes in Europe. Their Cities are many and
splendid; and yet there are more Sects among them than Cities, and almost as
many Creeds as Heads; yet so Wise in their Meetings, as never to Discourse of
Religion. Their Country (in general for its Dimensions) is full^r of People,
Cities, Towns, Castles, Forts, Bulwarks, etc. for Military Defense, than any
one Country in Europe. Their Naval Forces prodigious, befitting Wonders rather
than Words; even a terror to the great Princes of the World. For their Trade,
it far exceeds that of the Neighboring Princes; and in the Economy of it,
much more prudently managed: To every Town they Assign some Staple Commodity;
as, to Dort, the German Wines, and Corn; to Middleburgh, the French and Spanish
Wines; to Rotterdam formerly, now to Dort, the English Cloth: To Harlem,
Knitting and Weaving, etc. which makes their Towns so equally rich and
populous.

One Miraculous Accident I must not forget, because mentioned by all Writers,
viz. That Margaret Sister to Earl Floris the 4th. being about 42 years of Age,
brought forth at one Birth 365 Children, half Males, half Females, the odd one
a Hermaphrodite; they were all Christened by Guido Suffragan to the Bishop of
Vtrecht, in two Basins, which are yet to be seen at the Church of Lasdunen, the
Males John, the Females Elizabeth's; immediately after they all died, and their
Mother also.

Of the SPANISH Netherlands.
map of Spanish Netherlands The Spanish PROVINCES vulgo FLANDERS by Robert
Mordon at ye Atlas in Cornhil


THESE Provinces are so called, because Subject to the Monarchy of Spain. It
carries also the Name of Flanders, from that Province, which is the fairest,
the richest, and the best Peopled part.

Of these Spanish Provinces, four are Frontiers of France; the Counties of
Flanders, Artois, Hainault, and the Duchy of Luxemburgh. Five in the middle,
viz. The Dukedom of Brabant, the Marquisate of the Holy Empire, the Signory of
Malines, the County of Namur, and the Duchy of Limburgh. There are also two
Feifs of the Empire; the Bishopric of Liege, and the Archbishopric of
Cambray. The Kings of Spain were once Masters of these Provinces, and for the
preservation thereof, have expended a good part of their Gold and Silver
brought from the Indies, in the Wars they maintained against the Dutch and
French.

The County of Flanders, Flandria Latinis, Vlaenderen by the Inhabitants,
Flandre French, Flandes Spaniards, and Flandra Italians, is so full of People,
that it seems to be but one great City, and the loveliest County in
Christendom. All along the Coast lie banks of Sand, that cover very Rich
places. In the Neighboring Sea are several Sands and Shelves, nevertheless
Ships Ride there safe enough. It formerly was divided into Dutch Flanders,
Gallican Flanders, and Imperial Flanders; This belonged sometimes unto the
Kingdom of West France, and held by the Princes thereof under the Fief of this
Crown; quitted unto Philip the Second King of Spain, and to the Heirs of the
House of Burgundy by Henry the Second King of France, and the League of Cambray.

In Flanders, the principal places are Gaunt, Bruges, Ipres, and Lille. Gaunt,
Gandaurum, Ghendt and Gand by the French, is one of the biggest Cities of
Europe: But though it have several Rivers that still bring a Trade to it, yet
has it not the five and thirty thousand Families that Anciently it had, when it
was able to Arm four and twenty thousand Men. It Is famous for the birth of
Charles the Fifth, and of John Duke of Lancaster, commonly called John of
Gaunt. Bruges, Brugae, is the best Built in the Province; and the Citizens are
the handsomest, and most Gentile in all the Low Countries. The Spaniards, who
had the Channel of this City stopped up by the taking of Sluice, have some few
years since made another able to receive Vessels of four hundred Tun. Ostend,
Ostenda, is a Town whose Haven they can never block up, and which was once the
Theater of War, when it held out a Siege for above three years, being Garisoned
by the English, and under Sir Horatio Vere, who was then Governor thereof, at
which Siege the Spaniards are said to have lost one hundred thousand men. Ypres
has so many Channels and conveyances of Water under ground, that it is said the
Foundations are of Lead. Lille, Insula, Gal. L'Isle. Incol Ryssel, or Ter
Issel, upon Dole, the Capital of Walloon-Flanders, is one of the best in the
Low Countries, by Reason of its Wealth and Commerce. All the other places of
Flanders are generally considerable, either for their Beauty, or for their
Fortification, for eminent Sieges, or Remarkable Battles. Tournay, Tornacum and
Dornick, Baganum of Ptol. Civit. Turnacensium of Ant. an Ancient City; is fair,
great, strong, rich, and well Peopled: This was the first Town that submitted
to the King of France, after a formal Siege, who has set up a Parliament, and
built a very strong Citadel to secure it. It is observed of Tournay, that it
was taken four several times upon St. Andrews day: 1. By Henry the VIII. King
of England. 2. By the Emperor Maximilian the First. 3. By the Emperor Charles
the Fifth. 4. By the Duke of Parma, Douay, Dracum, upon the Confines of Artois
and Haynault, is indifferent strong, the Church of Nostredam is about 1200
Years old: It is a Staple of Corn, and Honored with an University. Courtray,
Cortracum, upon the Lis; an Ancient Town, and of great Importance by reason of
its Situation; it is the best in the County next the Capital places, and the
Inhabitants are excellent Artists in Diapring Linnen-Cloaths. Dunkirk,
Dunquerea, Duinkerk, a Town of great Importance, by reason of the convenience
of the Port, and is one of the most considerable Purchases of the French King;
taken by the Duke of Orleance 1644. Graveline, Gravelinga, Grevelinghen, not
far from it; a very considerable and strong Town. Furna, and Furnes, the
Residence of Lovis the XI. during his Retirement with the Duke of Burgundy: The
Soil is so fertile, that the Low Countries, as the Natives say, would have
produced as much Riches as the Indies, had all their Territories been as
fruitful as that of Furnes. Near Niue or Neoportus was fought that memorable
Battle betwixt the Archduke Albert and the States, where by the valor of the
English, and the excellent conduct of those Noble and gallant persons Sir
Francis and Sir Horatio Vere, the Victory next under God was gained for the
States.

Artois, Artesia, United to the Crown of France by the Pyraenean Treaty, from
which it was dismembered, is a Province extraordinary fertile in Corn. Arras
Gallis, Artrebatum, the Origiacum Ptol. Atrecht Belgis, the Capital City
thereof consists of a High and Low Town, both very strong; since the last
Conquests of the French King, the River which belongs to it has been made
Navigable for Vessels to go beyond Doway. Hesdin, Hesdinum, is a Regular
Hexagon, by which the River was Navigable as far as Montrevil. Bapaume,
Bapalma, is a place that cannot well be Besieged, because there is no Water in
all the Neighborhood. Lins is famous for the Victory of the French in the year
1648. where the Prince of Ligne and the Marquis of Grana were taken with 20
Captains, 6000 and 200 common Soldiers, 40 Great Guns, and 90 Insigns. Bethune
makes excellent good Cheese: And Terroane, Tervanna, Terwin, is known by its
Ruins. St. Omers, Audomaropolis and Fannum S. Aadomari, is a strong City,
surrounded with Marshes, wherein there are Floating Islands.

Haynault, Hannona, by the Dutch Henegow, according to the Report of the
Inhabitants, and the Records of the Province, acknowledges only God and the
Sun for their Supreme Lords; however it has now two other Lords, the French
King, and the King of Spain. Mons, Montes, by the Dutch, Bergben, the Capital
City, Fortified with three Moats, is Governed by a Sovereign Council
Independent from the Parliament of Malines. It has also Canonesses that prove
their Nobility for 300 Races, and are permitted to Marry. Near Mons the valiant
Earl of Ossory did wonders, and so desperately engaged the French, that the
Duke of Luxemburg was never so roughly handled. This County of Hainault
contains four Principalities, Barbancon, Chimai, Conde and Ligne. 3
Marquisates, Aisaux, Terlon, Vergnies; and 15 Counts. The Estate is ancient,
being sometimes a part of the great Earldom of Ardenne, from which it was
divided and made a distinct Earldom by Alberick Surnamed the Orpheline, one of
the youngest Sons of Brunulph Count of Ardenne, slain by Dagobert a French
King, who had this part with title of Earl given him by Sigebert King of
Austrasia to be held under the Sovereignty of the French Kings. After long
continuance and often changes, it was by Jaqueline the last Princess (wanting
Heirs) surrendered (together with Holland, Zealand, and West-Friesland united
in Families) unto Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy her next Kinsman. In whose
House the right (but the possession in the French King) now remains, at least
the greatest part. Valentiennes, Valentiana, is a great, fair, and well
fortified place, taken by the French 1677. lying upon the Scheld. Quercetum,
Quesnoy; Landdecium, Landrecy; Avenna, Avesnes; Philippevilla, Philipville; and
Marienburgh, Mariaburgum, are strong places, all in the French Kings Power; as
also Aeth, Athum, a considerable Town, together with Binch, Binchium; Marimont,
not far from it, was one of the fairest Houses in all the Country, Mary Queen
of Hungary having omitted nothing that might adorn the Structure. The Battle of
Senef 1674. was one of the most remarkable Exploits of that exquisite General,
the Prince of Conde.

Luxemburgensis Ducatus. The Duchy of Luxemburg, Luceburgum so called from the
Image of the Sun there worshipped. It is a strong place of Defense, but
surrendered to the French 1684. It was sometimes a part of the Principality of
A^^enne. By ^^e Emperor Charles the Fourth made a Dukedom in the person of his
brother Wenceslaus. By Elizabeth the last Princess wanting Heirs, it was sold
to Philip the Good Duke of Burgoign; Has a City that bears the same Name.
Thionville, Theodonis Villa: Lewis the 14th. of France was not much advanced in
the fifth year of his Age, ere he began to triumph over his Enemies at the
memorable Battle of Rocroy 1643. and the gaining of Thionville by the Conduct
of the Duke D'Anguien. Montmedi, Mons Medius. Danvilliers, Damuill^rium, belong
to the French King: And Yuoix Yuodium, by the French Carigan. There are some
Lands in the Forest of Arden that belong to the Bishop of Liege; that is to
say, Bovilion, Bullionium, with the Title of a Duchy, and a strong Castle upon
the Rock, or high Hill, whereof was named that famous Godfry of Buil^on Duke of
Lorrain, and the first of the Latins, King of Jerusalem. St. Hubert, to whom
the Huntsmen make particular Devotions: And Rochefort, that beheld the French
Victors over the Spaniards, at the Battle of Avin, in the year 1635.

Brabant, Brabantia, in the middle of the Low Countries, has four Capital
Cities of as many Countries, Brussels, Lovaine, Breda, and Boisleduc. Brussels,
Bruxella, is a City very well Peopled; the Seat of the Governor, in whose
Palace is room enough to lodge several Kings. The Channel that runs to Antwerp
is one of the greatest Undertakings in the Low Countries, wherein there are
prodigious Sluices; for the Making whereof, Sums of Money, no less prodigious,
were expended. The Church of St. Gudula is one of the fairest in all the
Country. The Neighborhood of the Forest of Sognies lies very convenient for
Hunting. Lovaine, Lovanium, which some affirm to be the Capital City of
Brabant, is one of the biggest Cities of Europe, with a famous University,
which gives the Natives occasion to call it a City of Scholars; Brussels, a
City of Curtesans; Antwerp, a City of Merchants; and Malines, a City of
Advocates, by reason of its Parliament. Tillemont was taken by force in the
year 1635. by the French and Hollanders. Niville is made Remarkable by her
Canonesses, for the fine Linen Cloth made there; and for the fair Highways
round about it. Breda and Boisleduc, by the Dutch Hertogenbosch, Busium Ducis,
belong to the States General of the United Provinces, as also Bergen-opzoom and
Grave. Bergen-opzoom is famous for the notable resistance it made to Spinola
1622. All these places are very strong; and Boisleduc is so Naturally, as well
as Artificially Fortified, by reason of its Marshes, that before it was taken
it was thought impregnable: It belonged to the Family of Nassaw, a strong Town
of War, after a stout, long and resolute Siege taken in by the Arch-Dutchess
Isabella, afterward retaken by a few venturous Gentl^men, who hiding
themselves in a Boat covered with Turf, were conveyed into the Castle, which
they mastered, and the next day made the Prince of Orange Lord of it again. The
Brabanders claim a Privileg^ to debate of nothing out of the Limits of their
Country; of whom E^asmus's Proverb was, Brabante quo magis senescunt eo magis
stultescunt.

The Marquisate of the Holy Empire derives its Name from its Situation, lying
upon the Ancient Bounds of France, and the Empire, and whither the Emperors
were wont to send Governors, which they called Marquesses. There is only the
City of Antwerp in it, Atuacutum and Aduatacum Jou Becano, Andoverpum al.
Antuerpia, Antwerpen incolis Antwerp Ang. Anveres Hisp. Anvers Gal. Antorfi
Germ. Anversa Itali^. One of the fairest and most pleasant Cities in all the
Low Countries; for which Reason, Charles the First called it his Holy Day City:
The Importance of the Situation has caused it to be strongly fortified with
ten great Bastions, and one of the strongest Cittadels in Europe; flanked with
five great Bastions lined with Brick and Freestone. This Citadel was Built
toward the highest part of the River, that it might command the City, and be
succored from that part of the Country which was Subject to its Prince. The
Duke of Alva, who Built the Citadel, caused his Statue to be set up, which was
afterward taken down. The Jesuits in Antwerp have a Church Built all of
Marble, which is said to be the fairest which they have in the World. Formerly
this City has been reckoned to have contained above 200000 Persons, and to have
had above 2500 Ships upon the Scheld: But she has lost much of her Trade and
Grandeur ever since the Dutch became Masters of the Entrance into her River.
There is also in Brabant the Dukedom of Arschot, the Marquisate of
Bergen-opzoom, the Earldoms of Hoochstraten and Megen, the Baronies of Breda,
Die and Grimbergen.

Malines is the Residence of the Parliament of the Catholic Provinces of the
King of Spain. Her Territories are very small; consisting of about nine
Villages, yet making one of the 17 Provinces. And it is Reported that the Women
of Malines, when they are ready to Lye-in, go into Brabant to be brought to
Bed, to the end their Children may enjoy the Privileges of the Brabanders.

Namur, Namurcum, is a Town of consequence, by reason of the passage over the
Meuse, in that part where the Sambre falls into her. Marble, Slate, and
Sea-coal are thence Transported. Charleroy, Carolo-regium, upon the Sambre, is
one of the best Fortresses of the Low Countries, since it fell into the hands
of the French, restored by the Treaty of Nimeguen to the Spaniards.

Limburgh, Limburgum, has only the Town of the same Name, which is of any
Remarque, with a strong Castle upon a Rock; taken by the French King in the
year 1675. Walkemburg, Falcoburgium, and Dalem, two Earldoms, are part of this
Duchy.

The Country of Liege, belongs to its Bishop, to whom the Inhabitants formerly
gave the Title of Grace. He is Elected by the Chapter, who formerly Resided at
Tongres, or Tongeren, Civitas Tungrorum Ptol. and Advatuca Tongrorum. Here
flourished in the time of the Romans, an ancient Bishops See, after the
Invasion and spoil by Atilas and the Huns, by whom the Town was sacked and
destroyed in the year 498. It was removed by St. Savatius to Maestreich;
afterward in the year 713. by St. Hubert it was removed to Luick or Leidg,
where now it rests. The Bishopric is of a large Extent, and has many places
within the Limits of the Neighboring Provinces. Liege, Leodicum and Leod^um,
is a City of Trade; and, as they say, the Paradise of the Ecclesiastics. It is
Remarkable, that in the year 1131. there were among the Canons of the Cathedral
Church, nine Sons of Kings, 14 Sons of Dukes, 29 Sons of Earls, and 7 Sons of
Barons. The Elector of Cologne, Prince thereof, caused a Citadel to be Built
there. The Cathedal of Liege bears the Name of St. Lambert, who was Bishop of
Maestrich, murdered by Dodo, etc. about the year 622. The Citadel stands
upon a Hill, and is of great strength, built to keep the City in subjection,
since the year 1649. Maestreich, for its Fortifications, and the famous Sieges
which have been laid to it; in that of 1673. the English signalized their
Valor under the Conduct of the Duke of Monmouth. The Treaty of N^miguen
restored it to the Dutch, who now possess it. The Quarry of Stone about a
quarter of a mile from the Town is one of the noblest in the World, far
surpassing the Cave of Custoza or Cubola, said to be 500 fathoms in breadth,
and 700 in length. This is two miles in length under ground, high and stately,
no Labyrinth can be contrived more intricate, and yet all parts uniform. The
Spa is a neat Village in the Forest of Ardenna, seated in a Bottom encompassed
with Hills. A place which for the virtue of its Miniral Springs is as famous as
beneficial to Mankind. Maestreich, Trajectum ad Mosam, is composed of two
Towns, Maestreich that formerly was said to belong to the Duke of Brabant; and
Wick, that was an Appurtenance to the Bishop of Leige's Territories.

Cambreses, now almost environed by the Territories of France. The City of
Cambray, Cameracum, by the Dutch, Camarick; has two good Cittadels, the Guard
whereof was seldom committed to any other than Natural Spaniards. There is a
Sun-Dial of singular Workmanship, wrought by a Shepherd: It is a Town, which in
times of Peace yearly exposed to Sale above 60000 Pieces of fine Cloth. It was
taken by the French at the beginning of the Year 1677, though before, the Kings
of Spain, uncontradicted by the Emperor, did appropriate to themselves the
Temporal Jurisdiction of Cambray, as being of the same Nation; and the
Archbishops thereof in vain solicited for their re-establishment. Those
Prelates were called Archbishops, and Dukes of Cambray, Earls of Cambresis,
and Princes of the Holy Empire, though generally they neither had Seat or Voice
in their Diets.

The Extent of these Provinces is but small, but it is one of the best peopled,
and Richest spots of Ground in the World; more wholesome than formerly; toward
Germany Hilly and Woody, as we have said; but toward the Sea, generally
fertile and full of Pasturage. The Principal Rivers of the 17 Provinces, are
the Rhine, the Meuse, and the Scheld. The Rhine rises in Switzerland, running
chiefly through Germany. After it has divided it self at Fort Schenk, as it
enters into the Low Countries it mixes with several other Rivers, and loses
its Name in the Sand a little below Leyden in Holland. The Meuse, which falls
out of France and Lorrain, has this Advantage above the Rhine, that she retains
her Name, and preserves her Waters unmixed till she fall into the Ocean, where
she makes several good Ports. The Scheld was formerly the Limits between France
and the Empire, in the time of Charles the Bald. At Gaunt the Lis, a Navigable
River, falls into it; and before it wholly loses its Name, it divides it self
into two principal Arms; of which, the Left, which they call the Hout; and the
Right, which flows to Tolen, falls into the Meuse. Besides these Rivers, and
those that fall into them, there are Cuts, Channels, and Marshes, which serve
the Inhabitants both for Traffic* and Defense.

Of France.
map of France FRANCE


FRance Anglis, Francia Italis and Hispanis, Franckreich Germanis, Alfrangua
Turcis, Gallia Caes. Plin. etc. The first Inhabitants of France were the
Ancient Gauls, who passing the Alps, under the Conduct of Bellovesus, Conquered
the nearest parts of Italy, called Gallia Cisalpina: and under that of
Segovesus, overran the greatest part of Germany. The same Nation under the
Command of Brennus, discomfited the Romans, at the River Allia, sacked the
City, and Besieged the Capitol. These were the Men who ransacked Illyricum,
Pannonia, Thrace, and Greece; and Plundered the Temple of Delphos: But at last
were totally subdued by Julius Caesar, but not without much difficulty; for
they did not then sell their Liberty at so cheap a rate as other Nations did,
1192000 of them being slain before they would submit to the Roman Yoke; by whom
the Country was divided into four parts, viz. Narbonensis; or Bracata,
containing Languedoc, Dolphin, and part of Savoy. 2. Aquitanica, (from the City
Aqua Augusta, now D' Acque) comprehending Gascoign, Guienne, Saintonge,
Limosin, Querci, Perigort, Berry, Bourbonnois, and Aurergne. 3. Celtica,
containing the Provinces of Bretagne, Normandy, Anjou, Tourain, Maine, La
Beause, the Isle of France, part of Champagne, the Dukedom of Burgundy, and the
County of Lionoise. 4. Belgica, containing Picardy, the remainder of Champagne,
Burgundy, and the Spanish Netherlands. Long it stood not in this state, for
about the year 400 Honorius being Emperor; the Goths having overrun Spain and
Italy, sent part of their Forces and subdued Gallia Narbonensis, calling it
Langue de Goth, afterward corruptly Languedoc. Then extending their Conquest
unto the River Ligeris, now Loire, they founded a Kingdom, the principal Seat
whereof was at Toulouse.

About the same time the Burgundiones, or Burgundians, a people that Inhabited
part of the Country of the Cassubii, and part of the Country of the Marquisate
of Brandenburg, together with the Vandalls and Sueths, seized upon other parts
of France, and constituted a Kingdom called Burgundy, comprehending both the
County and Duchy of Burgundy, the County of Lionoise, Daulphine, Savoy and
Provence, whose chief City was Arelate, now Arles.

About the same time also, the Franks, a German Nation, having passed the
Rhine, seized upon the adjacent Territories of France, where founding a
Monarchy (under their first King Pharamond, al. Waramond) gave it the Name of
France.

France lies excellently compact together, between the most Flourishing States
of Christendom, and in the middle of the Northern Temperate Zone, where the
Inhabitants breathe a most serene and healthy Air. In short, it is Rich,
Fertile, and well Peopled; there being reckoned in it about 4000 good Towns and
Cities.

Its Length from Calais to Toulon is about 620 miles, 73 to a degree, the
Breadth from Breast to the Borders of Lorrain, or from Baione to Nice in
Piedmont is not more than 492 miles. I well know all other Authors falsely
makes it much more. Most of her Cities are equal to Provinces, and most of her
Provinces are equal to Kingdoms.

Her Corn, her Wine, her Salt, her Linen Cloth, her Paper, and several
Manufactures enrich the Inhabitants.

The Limits and Bounds of this Kingdom have been various; at present, says a
French Geographer, the Kings Conquests cannot be bounded, d^d^ not by the
Rhine, nor by the Ocean, nor by the Pyreneans, nor by the Alps. And those that
are not altogether strangers to the world will acknowledge that of all the
Kingdoms of Europe there are none but may be said to be inferior to France in
some respect or other. The greatness of its Territories, the populousness of i^
the number of their Nobility and Gentry, their natural Courage, with the
advantage of their Military Actions, and Warlike Exercises, the Situation of
their Country, the fruitfulness and riches of the Soil; the prodigious quantity
of all Commodities and Manufactures, and the great Revenues of their Kings.
These Advantages have in all Ages raised in them aspiring thoughts of the
Erection of a new Western Empire. And how far this present King has gone (by
his Acquisitions of late years) the rest of the Princes of Europe may consider
of.

The Kingdom is Hereditary, and by an Ancient Constitution, as they pretend,
called the Salique Law, never falls into a Female Succession. And by the Law of
Apennages the younger Sons of the King cannot have partage with the Elder. The
King's Eldest Son is called the Dauphin. The Monarchy, which has stood ever
since the year 420, has been upheld by the three Royal Races, of Marovinian,
Carolinian, and Capetine, in a Line of 65 Kings. Pepin, the short Son of
Charles Martel deposed Childerick the last of the Merovignian Line, the Pope
approving and confirming of it.

About the 918 Hugh Capet Earl of Paris outed the Caroline Family. Since this
Capetine Race has gone in three Families; first in a direct Line till 1328.
then in the House of Valois, till Henry the Fourth, of the House of Bourbon,
Anno 1589.

Among other Titles, the King has that of Most Christian, and Eldest Son of
the Church, bestowed upon him by the Pope.

The Arms have been Three Flower-de-luces Azure, in a Field Or, ever since
Charles the Sixth.

The Christian Religion was here first planted by Martialis among the Gauls;
but among the French by Remigius, in the time of Clovis the Great. At present
the people are divided, some following the Roman, others the Reformed Religion,
which have occasioned two several Massacres, viz. that of Merindol and
Chabrieres 1545. upon the Borders of France and Savoy; the other that at Paris
1572. and now this late Persecution.

The Kingdom is composed of three Orders, or Estates; the Clergy, the Nobility,
and Commons. There are 16 Archbishops, 106 Bishops, besides those of Arras,
Tournay, and Perpignan: 16 Abbats, Heads of Orders, or Congregations; about
50000 Curateships, besides many other Ecclesiastical Dignities: Several general
and particular Governments, 12 Ancient Peerships, and diverse of new Creation; a
great number of Principalities, Dukedoms, Marquisates, Earldomes, Baronies, and
other Lordships: Eleven Parliaments, eight Chambers of Accounts, 22
Generalities, or Public places of Receipt of the Kings Revenue.

There are four Principal Rivers: the Seine, whose Water is accounted the
strongest in the World, and more wholesome to drink than Fountain Water. The
Loire, King of the French Rivers; the Garonne, most Navigable; and the Rhone,
or Rosne, most rapid. By others thus Characterized; the Loire the sweetest, the
Rhone the swiftest, the Garonne the greatest, and the Seine the richest.

The Seine rises in Burgundy, watering Paris and Roan, disburdening it self
into the English Channel. The Sequana of Caesar.

The Loyre rises about the Mountains of Avergne (being the highest in France)
watering Nantes and Orleance, and augmented with 72 lesser Rivers, mingleth its
sweet Waters in the Biscain or Gascogne Sea. The Ligeris of Caesar.

The Rhone, or Rhosne, springs up about three miles from the Head of the
Rhine, watering Lions, Avignon, etc. and taking in 13 lesser Rivers, falls
into the Mediterranean Sea near Arles. The Rhodanus of Caesar.

The Garone running from the Pyrenean Hills, glideth by the Walls of Bourdeaux
and Toulouse, and with the addition of 16 other Rivers dilates it self into the
Aquitain, now Biscain Ocean. The Garumna of Caesar.

The Mountains by Ancient Authors were the Geb^nna by Caesar, Cammani Ptol. and
Ital. running along by Langued^c, Chevennes and Avergne, now les Sevennes.

The Jura Caes. Jurassus Ptol. which divides the French County from Savoy and
the Swisses, now called by several Names.

The Vogesus, almost Encircling Lorrain, and dividing it from Alsatia, and
Bourgondie, now Dauge Mons, etc.

There are several Divisions of France, which respect the Church; the Nobility,
the Courts of Justice, and the Finances. But it suffices here to say, that the
general state of the Kingdom was held, Anno 1614, after the Majesty of Lovis
the XIII; and that then all the Provinces met under 12 great Governments: Four
of these Governments lie toward the North upon the Seine, and those other
Rivers that fall into it, viz. Picardy, Normandy, the Isle of France, and
Champagne.

Toward the middle, adjoining to the Loire, Bretagne, Orlenoise, Bourgogne,
Li^nnoise. The other four, toward the South, near the Garonne, viz. Guienne,
Languedoc, Dauphine, and Provence: Under the Orlenoise is comprehended Maine,
Perch and Beauce: On this side of the Loire, Nivernois, T^uraine, and Anj^u;
above the said River, beyond it, Poiciou, Angoumois, and B^rry.

Burgundy has Breast: Under Lionnois are comprehended Lionnois, Auvergne,
Bourbonnois, and March: Under Guienne is Bearne, Gascogne and Guienne it self,
Saintonge, Perigort, Lim^sin, Querci, and Rovergue: Under Langued^c is Cevennes.

In each of these Governments are several great Cities, the chief of which I
shall speak of in Order, viz. In Picardy the Storehouse of Paris for Corn is,
1. Calais, called by Caesar, Portus Tecius; Portus Britannicus, Morinerum Plin.
and Prom. Icium Ptol. held by the English near 200 Years, being taken by Edward
the III. after eleven Months Siege, in Anno 1347. and unfortunately lost by
Queen Mary 1557. seated opposite to Dover in England, from which it is distant
about ten Leagues: A strong Town, of great Importance, and accounted the Key of
France. Not far from Calais at a place called Agincourt was the Flower of the
French Nobility taken and slain by King Henry the Fifth of England, viz. 5
Dukes, 8 Earls, 25 Lords, 8000 Knights and Gentlemen, and 15000 common Soldiers.

2. Bulloign, Cesoriacum Navale Ptol. Portus Morinorum Plin. Civit. Bononensium
Ant. Portus Gessoriacus of Caesar: a strong Frontier-Town, taken by Henry the
VIII. of England, 1544. at which time the Emperor Maximilian bore Arms under
the English Cross.

3. Amiens, Samarobrina Caes. Samarobriga. Ptol. Civit. Ambianensis Ant. a
Walled Town, seated upon the Seine; well Fortified with an Impregnable
Citadel, built by Henry the IV. But most Famous for its Cathedral, so
beautified within, and adorned without, that it is the fairest and most lovely
Structure in the West of Europe.

4. St. Quintin, Augusta Romanduorum Ptol. Civit. Veromannorum Ant.
Quinctinopolis, and Fanum St. Quinctine in Scriptis Gall. two Leagues from
Augusta Veromanduorum, now Vermand, Baud. Crecie the French Cannae, famous for
their great Overthrow, and the Victory of the English in the Reign of Philip
the Sixth. A strong Frontier-Town, Memorable for the Battle there, Anno 1557.
where King Philip the II. of Spain, with the English, under the Command of the
Earl of Pembroke, overthrew the whole Forces of the French.

Laon, a Bishops Sea, whose Bishop is one of the Twelve Peers of France,
Laudunum Ant.

Soissons, Augustata Vessonum Ptol. a Bishops See, the last place the Romans
held in Gaul, driven out by Clovis the Fifth.

5. Guise, of most Note for the Dukes of Guise; a Family that in a little time
produced two Cardinals, and six Dukes, besides many Daughters married into the
best Houses of France.

In Normandy, formerly Neustria, are, 1. Rouen, or Roan, Rothamagus Ptol.
Rotomagentium Ant. seated on the Banks of the River Seine, over which there is
a Famous Bridge of Boats. Taken by Henry the Fifth after six Months Siege,
where were famished 50000, and 12000 Starvelings turned out of the Town. An
Archbishops See, and Parliament. In the Chief Church, called Nostre-Dame, is
the Sepulcher of John Duke of Bedford: It is a place of as great a Trade as any
in France, and one of the Principal Cities where Exchanges are used.

2. Dieppe, a City of some Trade, being a common Landing-place for the English,
in their Passage into France. And is famous for its fidelity and allegiance to
Henry the Fourth when the Guisian Faction in derision called him King of Dieppe.

3. Falaise, once a strong Town; Memorable for the Story of Arlet the Skinners
Daughters, of whom Duke Robert begat William the Conqueror; in spite to whom,
and disgrace to his Mother, the English call Whores, Harlots. Here also was the
Roy d' Juidot, and Verneil when besieged by Philip the Second of France. King
Richard the First of England to keep his promise, broke through the Palace of
Westminster, and raised the Siege.

Haure de Grace, Newhaven by the English, in Latin, Franciscopolis; a
Cautionary Town to Queen Elizabeth. Portus Gratiae of old.

Auranches Ingena Ptol. Civit. Abrincantum Ant.

Constances, Constantia Ant. Cherbourg Caesaris Burgum, a strong Seacoast Town.

Bayeux Cit. Bajocassium Ant. Caen Cadomum, graced with a University founded by
King Henry the Fifth King of England; and the Abbey with the Tombs of William
the Conqueror, and Maud his Wife.

Lyseux Cit. Lexoviorum Ant. Eureux Mediolanum Ptol. etc.

The third Government is the Isle of France, whose City is Paris, formerly
Lutetia, because seated in a Clayie Soil. A City, that for its Riches, Power,
and Number of Inhabitants, may contend with any in Europe: Seated on the Seine,
and on a Soil so fertile, that no City knows such Plenty; it is Dignified with
the Ordinary Residence of the King, its Chief Ornaments are the Palace of the
Louvre, so much famed abroad: The Palaces of the Nobility, viz. That of
Luxemburg, its Palace Royal, its Church of Nostredame, its University,
containing five Colleges; the Halls of Justice, the Courts of Parliament. The
English held it for 16 years, and there Crowned King Henry the Fifth King of
France.

In this Province, about three miles from Paris, is seated St. Dennis, famous
for the Sepulchers of the French Kings: The Beautiful House of
Fountain-Belle-eau, esteemed one of the fairest Palaces in Europe. As also the
Royal Mansion of St. German, seated on the Ascent of a Hill, seven miles from
Paris down the Water. And Bois de Vincennes, in which Henry the Fifth ended his
days.

Senlis is the chief City of the Dukedom of Valois, which gave name to the
French Kings of the Second Branch of the Capets, which begun in Philip Valois,
Ann. 1328. in his Reign was fought the Battle of Crecie, Anno 1343. where was
slain John King of Bohemia, 11 Princes, 80 Barons, 120 Knights, and 30000
common Soldiers.

In Champaigne the chief City is Rheimes, Famous for being the place where the
French Kings are commonly Crowned and Anointed: Therein also is Langres,
Andomatanum of Ptol. the Seat of the Twelve Peers of France. Trois the
meeting place of Charles the Sixth, and Henry the 5th. Kings of France and
England, where the Victorious King was espoused to Katherine Daughter to King
Charles aforesaid.

Bretaigne, or Britany, of old Armorica, so called from the Britains, who flew
thither in the time of the Saxons Tyranny over them in England. Formerly the
Titles of the Earls of Richmond. Its Seaport Towns are, Breast, Vendana Portus,
seated upon a spacious Bay, the Key, the Bulwark and best Harbor in France.
St. Maloes, Aletha and Maclovium, built on a Rock; a strong, fair, and populous
City, yet often spoiled and damaged by the English. Inland Towns are, Nants,
Condivincum Ptol. Cit. Namnetum Ant. seated on the Banks of the Loyre; and
Rennes, Condate of Ptol. Cit. Rodanum Ant. the Parliament-City for this County.
Vannes, Dariorigum Ptol. Cit. Venetum Ant. (Situate on a capacious Bay) the
chief Town of the Old Veneti. Quimper Corentin, Corisopitum Ant.

Orleance, as it comprehends Maine, Perch, Beauce, Nivernois, Touraine, Anjou,
(the Title of Henry the Second King of England, and Earl of Anjou,) now the
Title of the third Son of France. Poictou, Angonnois, and Berry, has these
chief Cities.

1. Orleance, of Old, Gennabum of Caes. and Strab. Cenabum Ptol. Aurelia, Its
pleasant Situation on the Loire makes it very beautiful and delightful. Once
the Seat Royal of its own Kings, now the Title of the Second Son of France. It
long felt the force of an English Siege, where died Great Montacute Earl of
Salisbury. On the chief Bridge of this City is the Statue of Joan the Pucelle de
dieu, or Maid, so assistant to the French in Repelling the English, and raising
the Siege of Orleance, May the 12th. (1429.) Burnt alive by the English, Anno
1431. after which time the Affairs of the English grew worse and worse; for in
Anno 1435. Charles the Burgundian fell off, and in 1453. Talbot, a man of great
Valor and Conduct, was slain, and nothing was left to the English but Calice
of all that the English had got in two and forty years.

2. Man's (Cit. Cenomannorum by Antonius: by Ptol. Vidinum.)

Vendosme which gave Name to Antonio Father to Henry the Fourth.

3. Chartes, Carnutum, Ant. Ptol. Autricum, seated on the Loire: a fair and
pleasant City, Dignified with a University for the Study of the Civil Law.

4. Nevers, Noviodunum, Caesar. Nivernum al. Nivernium Ant. upon the Loire,
Dignified with an Ancient Dukedom.

5. Tours, Caesarodunum Ptol. Turonum Ant. where the Protestants are said first
to have begun in France, and were called Hugonots: Nigh to this place it was
that Charles Martel, Father of King Pepin, in Anno 732. discomfited an Army of
about 400000 Saracens, of which were slain near 370000.

Blois, pleasantly seated, and in a good Air: where the Duke of Guise the first
mover of the Civil Wars, and contriver of the Massacre at Paris, was slain by
the command of Henry the Third.

6. Angiers, by Ptolomy called Juliusmagus, Andeglaevum Ant. of a large
Circuit, well built, seated in a good Air, and made a University. Beaufort,
belonging to the Duke of Lancaster, nigh which Town was the Duke of Clarence,
Brother to Henry the Fifth, slain.

7. Poictiers, by Ptolomy, Augustoritum, Pictavium Ant. a University, Famous
for the Study of the Civil Law, and for greatness said to be next to Paris. In
the Vine-fields, two Leagues from the City, was fought that memorable Battle
between John of France, and Edward the Son of King Edward the III. Surnamed the
Black Prince, who with 8000 men overcame the French Army of 40000, whereof
10000 were slain, besides Nobles, Prisoners taken were King John and his Son
Philip, 70 Earls, 50 Barons, and about 12000 Gentlemen.

8. Rochel, seated on the Acquitane Ocean: a place of great Trade, and of
greater strength before it was dismantled 1627. witness its many Sieges Anno
1570. by Jarvil, Anno 1573. by Byron with an Army of 50000. men, and 60 Pieces
of Artillery. 1575. and 76. it was attempted by Land^riau in 1577. by Lansac.
In the troubles of 1585. and 88. it was the Retreat of the King of Navarre, and
Prince of Conde. Her Commodities Rochel-Wine, Salt and Brandy. Rupella Ant.
Mortus Santorum Ptol.

9. Angoulesme. Enculisma al. Cit. Etolinensium Ant.

10. Bourges, a Town of great strength by Nature, and well Fortified by Art:
Situate in a low Flat, amongst deep impassible Bogs and Marshes: It Is an
Archbishopric, and one of the best Universities in France, called Avaricum in
Caesar's time, of old Bituricum Ant. Varicum Ptol.

Sancerre a strong Town, memorable for a desperate and long Siege in the Reign
of Charles the Ninth.

In the Province of Bourgondy, once a Kingdom, is, first, Dijon, Divionum,
built by the Emperor Aurelian: proud in her Parliament, and for giving Birth to
St. Bernard, seated upon the Soasne. Next are Auxerre, Antissiodorum Ant.
Chalon, Cabullinum Strab. Caballinum Ptol. Cavillonium Caesar, Castrum
Gaballionense Ant. Mascon, Castrum Matisconense Ant. seated upon the Soasne,
the best Hold of King Charles the Seventh in his hard Wars against the English.

Alize, now a small Village, formerly Alexia, the chief Fortress of
Vercingeterix, who had 70000 Men in the Town, when Besieged by Caesar; and an
Army of 300000 Gauls at the back of Caesar, to relieve their fellows;
notwithstanding all which, the Town was yielded to Caesar, and Vercingeterix
sat at his feet, and became his Prisoner. Philip the third, Grandchild to
Philip the Hardy, united to this Duchy almost all the Belgic Provinces, but
Charles his Son in the War against Lewis the Eleventh, lost his Men, Money and
Life at the Battles of Granson, Morat and Nancy 1476. afterward this Duchy
was seized on by the French.

Adjacent to, and in the Government of Bourgondy, is Breast, the chief Town
thereof is Bourg, or Briss; a place well built, and so strongly Fortified, that
it is esteemed impregnable.

This Country was by the Duke of Savoy delivered to Henry the IV. of France, in
lieu of the Marquisate of Saluces, 1600.

In the Province of Guien, wherein are the Provinces of Gascoign, Guien, and
Bern, are many Cities, the chief whereof are, Bourdeaux, Burdegala Strab. and
Ptol. Cit. Burdegalensium Ant. seated upon the Banks of the River Geronne;
famous for being the Birthplace of King Richard the II. of England: At present
Honored with an University and Parliament, and is a place of good Trade. Near
to this City is the small Village called Greve, which yields those Excellent
Wines, called Graves Wine.

About the year 1259. Lewis of France gave unto Henry the Third of England, the
Duchy of Guien conditionally that he should renounce all Title to his other
Inheritances. It continued English till 1452.

In the particular Guien is the Province Saintonge, whose chief place is
Saints, Mediolanum of old Strab. Mediolanium Ptol. Cit. Santorum Ant. 2. The
Province of Perigort, whose chief place is Perigueux. Vessuna of Ptol. Cit.
Petrogoriorum Ant. Environed with Viney-Downs, divided into two Towns. 3. The
Province of Limosin, whose chief place is Limoges. Ratiastum Ptol. Lemovicum
al. Lemavicum Am the Prison of Beggars. 4. The Province of Querci, whose chief
place is Cahors, Dueona Ptol. Cit. Cadorcorum Ant. a Rich and Fair City. 5. The
Province of Rovergue, whose chief place is Rodez, Segodunun Ptol. Cit.
Rotenorum Ant.

In the Province of Gascoign are several Countries, whose chief Cities or Towns
are, Bazas, Cossium of Ptol. Cit. Vasatum Ant. Dax or D'Acqs, Aquae Augustae of
Ptol. Cit. Aque^sium Ant. Auch, Augusta of Ptol. Cit. Ausciorum Ant. an
Archbishops See. Again, Aginium Ptol. Agennensium Ant. Condom, Condomum, a
Bishopric. Bajonne, Baiona Merc. near Spain.

In the middle of the small River Vidosa between France and Spain, is the
Island Faisans (not mentioned by any Geographer I know of) where Cardinal
Mazarine and Don Lewis of Harro began the Pyrenean Treaty the 13 Aug. 1659. and
whence in the year 1660. happened the Interview between the two Kings, and the
Reception of the Iafanta; when the Island was divided in the middle, and a
House built so that at the Table where the two Kings sat to eat, the King of
France sat in France, and the King of Spain in Spain.

In the Government of Lionoise, are the several Provinces of Lionoise, Avergne,
Bourbon, and March.

In Lionoise, the chief City is Lions, by the Ancients, Lugdunum; seated upon
the conjunction of the Rosne with the Soane, esteemed the second City of
France; a Famous Mart-Town, Ancient, and the Sea of an Archbishop, who is
Primate of all France.

In Avergne is Cleremont, Claro Montium, upon its high Mountain.

In B^urbon, Moulins, the Center of France. Molinum, of old much resorted unto
from all parts of France for its Hot Medicinal Baths. Gergobia al. Gergobina
Caesar, test Parad. and Belfor.

In March, Gueret and Bellac, are the most considerable.

In the Government of Languedoc are, 1. Toulouse, Talosa Caes. Strab. Ptolomy,
Seated on the Garonne, the Seat of an Archbishop, and an University; near
whose large Fields, called by old Writers Campi Catalaunici, which I rather
think to be the Fields near Chalons, memorable for the overthrow of Attila King
of the Huns whose Army consisted of 500000, of which 180000 that day lost their
lives, by Aetius the Roman Lieutenant, who was rewarded (by Valentinian Emperor
of the West) with the loss of his Head. 2. Narbon, Narbo of Caes. Plin. and
Narbona Suet. A. Mar. in the Roman Infancy the most Populous and greatest Town
in France, and the first Roman Colony ( Carthage Excepted.) To which Archelaus
(Son to Herod King of the Jews) was banished by Augustus 3. Montpillier,
Montpessulanus, seated on a high Mountain twelve miles from the Sea; an
University for the Study of Physic, the Country about affording variety of
Medicinal Herbs; memorable for the Resistance it made against Lewis the XIII.
in the last Civil War about Religion. Nismes, Nemausus, Strab. Mel. Nemausium
Plin. and Ptol. and Nemausensium Ant. In the year 1270. Languedoc returned to
the Crown in the days of Philip the Third.

In the Government of Dolphin, (which is the Title of the first Son of France)
is Vienna, Situate on the Rosne; an A.B.'s See, and the chief of this Province;
2. Valence, a Bishops See, and University for the Civil Law; a Rich, Strong,
and well Traded Town; the Title of Caesar Borgia when he cast off his Cardinals
Hat. 3. Grenoble, Cit. Gratianopolita Ant. Accusionorum Col. Ptol.
Grationopolis Sido. and P. Diac. a Parliament-Seat; Briancon, Bigantio Ant.
Gap, Cit. Apencensium Ant. etc. Of the Seven Wonders of Dauphine, see Allard
Sylva in Latin Verse, which are, 1. The Burning Fountain: 2. The Tower Sane
Venin: 3. The inaccessible Mountain: 4. The Wine-Fats of Sassinage: 5. The
Vinous Fountain: 6. The Manna of Briancon: 7. And the Fountain of Barberon.

Provence took its name from the Romans, who being called in by the
Marsillians, possessed themselves of this Country until Stilico called in the
Burgundians, of which Kingdom it was a member, until the time of the Ostrogoths
Anno 504. In the year 1480. Rhene Grandchild to Lewis Duke of Anjou, Brother to
Charles the First, gave it to the Lewis the Eleventh King of France. Chief
Towns are, 1. Marseilles, Massillia, commodiously seated on the Mediterranean
Sea, enjoying an Excellent Haven and Road for Ships; a place of great Trade,
and well frequented with Merchants, and a Colony of the Phocians.

2. Aix, Aqua Sextiae, a Parliament Seat; near this Town the Cimbri consisting
of 300000 fighting men, as they passed by Marius, asked his Soldiers what
Service they would command them to Rome; but in their march through the Alps,
having divided themselves, Marius put them all to the Sword; who had slain Q.
Servilius Caepio and his whole Army after his surprisal and pillaging of the
Aurum Tolosanum. 3. Arles, Arelate Plin. and Arelatum Col. Ptol. 4. Toulon,
Tauroentium Ptol. Taurentium Strab. the best Seaport Town in all France. On
the North-West of Provence lies the Principality of Orange, whose chief place
is Orange, Arausia Plin. Arusio Strab. Col. Arausiorum Ptol. C. Arausinorum
Ant. Famous for many Rare and Wonderful Antiquities; belonging of Ancient Right
to his Illustrious Highness the Prince of Orange, but of late years seized upon
by the French King.

South of which lies the County of Venasin, so called from Avenio, now Avignon,
the chief City of it; Famous for being the Ancient Seat of the Popes, for about
70 years; said to have 7 Parish-Churches, 7 Monasteries, 7 Nunneries, 7
Palaces, 7 Inns, and 7 Gates to its Walls.

To these Governments might be added Lorrain, the French Comte, Alsace, most
part of the Spanish Provinces, the County of Rousillon on the Coast of Spain,
being now under the French King's Conquests; but for Method and Order-sake, I
shall refer them to their proper place.

The chief Islands of France, are, 1. Strong Bell-Isle, Venetica San. Calosus.
2. Salt Nermoustier. 3. Ree, the Out-work to Rochel, fatal to the English 1627.
4. Oleron, Vliaras, where Richard the III. gave those Laws as Lord of the Sea,
known to the World by the Title of The Laws of Oleron. 5. The Tower d'Cardovan
in the Mouth of the Garonne. 6. The Isle Ouessant, Vxantus, by the English,
over against the Lizard. In the Mediterranean lie the Isles de Eres the
Staechades of Ptol.

Of Spain.
map of Spain A New Map of HISPANIA and PORTUGALLIA By Robt. Morden


SPAIN by the Greeks first called Iberia, not from Iberus the most famous River
in that Kingdom; nor from Iberi a people of Asia; Quid igitur (inquit
Bochartus) Ehraeis (...) Eber, Chaldaeis (...) Ebra, vel ibra est transitus,
and quicquid est ulterius. Inde plurale ebrin vel ebrin, terminus and fines
significat; Merito igitur Iberi dicii, qui ex Phoenicium sententia terrarum
fines ultimos habitarunt. It was also called Hisperia either from Hesperus a
King thereof, or rather as being the furthest Country Westward. So also by the
Greeks and Romans it was called (...), from Pan, the companion of Bacchus. By
the Phoenicians Spania, or Sphania, a Country of Rabbets or Conics; lastly by
the Moors Mus-Arabia.

Conjointly with Portugal, it makes a great Peninsula, being encompassed with
the Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea; only toward the North-East, for 240
miles, it is firmly tacked to the Continent by the Pyrenean Hills.

It is situate in the most Western part of all Europe, in the most Southernly
part of the Northern Temperate Zone, and the longest Summers day is about 15
hours.

As for the Dimensions, it is said to be in length from Porto on the Mouth of
the River Duero, to Cape Creus in Catalonia, 600 Geometrical Miles. And from
Cape Gibralter to Cape Penas, in the Bay of Bisca, for the breadth is 480
miles. By Cluver 760 miles in length, and 600 in breadth.

Heylin, who follows Josephus, says this Kingdom was first Inhabited by the
Progeny of Tubal the Son of Japhet, being the Descendants of the Iberii, who
came in under Panus.

Cluver says, that the Celtae, a great and Potent Nation, descended from
Aschenaz, were the first that did people Spain, and caused the whole Country to
be called Celtiberia.

The next Foreigners that came into Spain, were the Phoenicians, Sailing from
Tyrus, as Diodorus and Strabo relate it. Then the Greeks or Rhodians;
afterward the Carthagenians did overrun a great part of it (under the conduct
of Amilcor, Asdrubal, and Annibal) even from the Western Ocean, to the Pyrenes;
destroyed Saguntum, now Morvedre, built new Carthage; and had not Annibals ill
Fate hurried him for Italy, the whole Country had been subdued to the State of
Carthage.

But the Carthagenians being overcome by the Romans, in the second Punick War,
it fell under the Dominions of the Romans, by whom it was divided into three
Provinces, Boetica, Lusitanica, and Terraconensis: Baetica was bounded on the
North and West by the River Ana, now Guadiana; on the South by the
Mediterranean Sea as far as Almeria: on the East it was separated from Terragon
by a straight line from Almeria to Cuidad Real, and contained the Kingdoms of
Granata, Andaluzia, part of New Castile, and Estremadura, and was inhabited by
the Turduli Eastward, and by the Celtici toward the West.

Lusitania was bounded on the North by the River Durius, now Duero; on the West
by the Ocean; on the South by the River Guadiana; on the East by a line drawn
from Cuidal Real to Samora, a Town seated on the River Duero, and contains
almost all Portugal, part of Old, and part of New Castile.

The rest of Spain went to the making up of the Province of Terragon.

The Romans also divided Spain into two parts; the one Citerior, the other
Vlterior; the first comprehended the Province of Terragon; the latter did
comprise Baetica and Lusitania, and so remained until the time of Honorius the
Emperor, when Gundericus King of the Vandals made an Eruption out of Germany,
and overran it about the year of our Lord 400. The Vandals were not well
settled in their New Conquest, when the Goths seized on this Country, forcing
the Vandals into Baetica, and after into Africa, and so made the Conquest
absolute. The Sarracens and Moors invaded it in the year 720, under the Conduct
of of Musa and Tariff, who were invited in by Julian, who was sent on an
Embassy to the Moors of Africa by Roderick the Gothish King, but in the mean
time deflowred his Daughter Cava, which the Father took in such indignation,
that he procured the Moors to come into Spain, who after a Battle that lasted
seven days, in which Roderick had 130000 Foot, and 35000 Horse; and Tariffe had
30000 Horse, and 180000 Foot, the Moors were Victorious; and having harassed
the whole Country, Founded several Kingdoms therein; but the Moors not long
enjoyed the sole Sovereignty therein, for the Goths having recovered
themselves, the Moors by little and little were brought under. Heylin tells us
that at last Spain fell into a 12-partite division, viz. Leon and Oviedo,
Navarre, Corduba, Gallicia, Bisca, Tolledo, Murcia, Castile, Portugal,
Valentia, Catelogue and Arragon. But I chose rather to follow Clever, Mercator,
Sanson, who all agree that at last Spain fell under the Command of several more
powerful Princes, and was parted into 15 grand Divisions, most of which carried
the Title of Kingdoms; five lie upon the Ocean, Biscaia, Astruria, Galicia,
Portugal and Andalusia; five upon the Mediterranean, Grenada, Murcia, Valentia,
Catalonia, and the Islands of Majorca, Minorca, and Yuica; and five Midland,
viz. Arragon, Navarr, the two Castiles, and Leon.

Afterward the whole Country was reduced under the Power of the Kings of
Castile, Arragon, and Portugal, and under these three Titles it is that the
King of Spain at present possesses his large Dominions which he Governs by
Eight Vice-Royes. But in the year 1640. the Duke of Braganza was proclaimed
King of Portugal, and ever since it continues Independent.

The People of Spain are of a swarthy Complexion, black Hair, and of good
Proportion, stately in all their Actions, of a Majestical Gate and Deportment,
grave and serious in their Carriages, in Offices of Piety very devout, not to
say superstitious; obedient and faithful to their King: patient in Adversities,
not prone to alter their resolutions, in War too deliberate, Arts they esteem
dishonorable, much addicted to Women, and naturally proud.

Their Women sober, discreet, indifferent handsome, clear complexioned, loving
to their Husbands and Friends, yet by them so narrowly watched and overlooked,
that it is hardly possible for them to have conference with any other man.

In matters of Religion they are Roman Catholic, and are most strict to the
Rites of the Roman Church, and of the Faith and Doctrine therein professed; the
Inquisition being introduced against all other beliefs; only there are some
Churches in Toledo where the Mus Arabic Office is used.

The Language is not the same in all places; in some parts it has a mixture of
the French: in Granado and part of Andaluzia it partakes much of the Moorish:
In other parts there is the Gothish Arabic, and old Spanish, but that which is
common to them all, is, the Vulgar Spanish, or Castilian, which has much
affinity with the Latin, and is said to be a brave lofty swelling Speech.

Their Civil and Imperial Laws generally used among them, are inter-mixed with
many Customs of the Goths; the Edicts and Constitutions of their several Kings,
those of the Goths first committed unto writing, and to order, by Euricus first
King of the Goths: those of Castile digested by Ferdinand the Fifth into seven
Books, called Partidas, which are read and disputed on in the public Schools,
as well as the Decretals, the Code, the Pandects, or any other part of Civil or
Common Law.

The Country is not very fertile in Corn or Cattle; but where it is productive
of the Fruits of Nature, it yields to no part of Europe for Delight and
Pleasure; but for the most part, it is either overgrown with Woods, or cumbred
with Rocky Mountains; the Soil of a hot and Sandy Nature, and deficient in
Water; their chief Food being Sallets and Fruits, which appear in greater
Ripeness and Perfection than in other places.

In Recompense of Corn and Flesh, they have several Rich Commodities, viz.
Wines, Oils, Sugar, several Metals, Rice, Silk, Licoras, Honey, Wax, Saffron,
Anniseed, Raisons, Almonds, Oranges, Limons, Cork, Soap, Anchovies, Soda
Barrellia, Samack, Wool, Lambskins, Tobacco, etc. besides the Gold and Silver
which they bring out of America, whereby they furnish themselves with those
other Conveniences which they want: In the year 1618, it was affirmed, that
since the first Discovery thereof by Columbus, the Spaniard had drawn out of it
above fifteen hundred and thirty six Millions of Gold, of which the European
Merchants share the greatest part: And their Necessity of Purchasing Foreign
Commodities, empties their Purses; and their getting of this Gold and Silver
depopulates and weakens the Country.

The Horses of this Country are in general Esteem, but those of Andaluzia more
than the rest; however, they Travel upon Mules and Asses, by reason of the
roughness of the Mountains.

Here lived in ancient times the Giants Geryon and Cacus, overcome by Hercules.
Seneca the Tragedian, and Seneca the Philosopher, Quintilian the Orator, Lucian
and Martial, Pomponius Mela the Geographer, Fulgentius and Isidore Bishops,
Arius Montanus, Osorius, Tostatus, Masius.

For Soldiers it had Theodosius the Great, Barnard del Carpio, Cid Rues Dias,
Sancho of Navarr, Ferdinand the Catholic, and Charles the Emperor.

The Mountains of Spain may be distinguished into six greater Ridges continued
and knit together, and whereof the rest are parts: The first are the Pyrenei
Montes Strab. Mons Pyrenaeus Plin. Pyrene Ptol. Los Montes Pyreneus Hisp. Les
Montes Pyrenees Gal. Monti Pyrenei Ital. extending from the Cantabrian Ocean to
the Mediterranean Sea, once the Bounds between France and Spain, which in
several places have diverse Names, which we shall not here mention.

The second are the Idubeda of Strab. Mela. Ptol. and aliis, the (...), Seld.
extending from the Pyrenes near the Springs of the River Ebro, Southwards,
toward the Levant Sea, having diverse Names in several places.

A third Row of Mountains are coasting all along the Shore of the Cantabrian
Ocean; the Juga Asturum Plin. a more eminent top hereof is the Mountain St.
Adrian, from whose top Vasaeus Brugensis says, he saw both the Cantabrian and
Mediterranean Seas, now Sierra d'las Asturias, and Monte d'Oca. Vill. Sierra
d'Oviedo, Coquo. Vindius Mons, Ptol.

A fourth Ridg or Branch of Mountains are the Orospeda of Strab. the Ortospeda
of Ptol. which at Alcaraz part into two Branches, the one tending toward
Murcia and the Levant Sea. The other passing through Granada, ends at the
Strait of Gibralter, the Extreme Point whereof was called Calpe.

One of the two Famous Pillars of Hercules opposite to which on the African
side of the Straits was the Mountain Abila, the other Pillar the narrow Sea
between was from hence called Fretum Herculeum, now the Straits of Gibralter.

Out of the Orospeda about the Town of Alcaraz brancheth the fifth Ridg of the
Mountain called Sierra Morena, running along the River Guadalquiver, until it
ends at the Atlantique Ocean. The Mons Marianus of Ptol. and the Saltus
Castulonensis of Caesar. The Scene of the Warlike Exploits of Don Quixot de la
Mancha.

The sixth Branch begins about the Springs of the Duero, and keeping the River
Taio upon the left-side, parts New Castile from the Old, and divides Portugal
into two parts, ending at the Town Sintra, some 30 miles from Lisbon. Some
Authors reckon this the Idubeda Branch. But we find not any known Name new or
ancient, only part hereof in Castile was by Pliny called Juga Carpetanta, and
part of it in Portugal, Lunoe Mons by Ptol. The chief of its New Names are
Sierra de Tornas Vaccas Montas d'Avela, and Sierra Molina.

The Principal Rivers of Spain, the Duero, Durius Plin. very full of Fish. The
Tagus Strab. now Taio, Renowned for its Golden Sand. The Guadiana, Anas Strab.
which, they say, runs under Ground. The Gualdalquiver, Baetis Strab. the
deepest of all. The Ebro, Iberus Strab. famous by its Name: They all of them
have their Sources in Castile, but are not so Navigable as those in France. The
Guadiana has given occasion to the Spaniards to say, that they have the Richest
Bridge in the World, upon which generally feed above 10000 Sheep, and over
which a good Army may March in Battel-array. The Ancients may have seemed to
have called this River very properly Anas, by reason it dives into the Earth,
and rises out again as a Duck does in the Water. Some of the Moderns say, that
they are certain Mountains that swallow up this River. Others affirm, that it
only falls into the Dikes and Graffs which the Country People make to Water the
Country, which is very Barren; however, this is certain, that this running
under Ground happens to be near the Springs of Guadiana, and not toward
Merida, as marked down in the Old Maps: To say truth, this is one of the three
Miracles of Spain; of which, the two others are, a City encompassed in fire;
that is, with Walls of Flint-stones, as Madrid; and a Bridge over which the
Water runs, as is the Aquaduct of Segovia.

The Cities of this Kingdom have their Names from their Excellency: Sevil the
Merchandising, Granada the Great, Valencia the Fair, Barcelona the Rich,
Saragossa the Contented, Valadolid the Gentile, Toledo the Ancient, Madrid the
Royal. It comprehends 8 Arch-Bishopricks, and 45 Bishoprics. The
Arch-Bishopricks are, Toledo, Burgos, Compostella, Sevil, Granada, Valencia,
Sarrogossa, and Tarragon. There are several very considerable Seaports,
Passagio, St. Andrews, Coruna, Cadiz, Cartagena, Alicant, etc.

Biscaie, formerly called Cantabria, is Mountainous and Woody, which furnish
them with Timber to build more Ships than all the Provinces of Spain besides:
It has also so great a Number of Mines and Iron Forges, that the Spaniards
call it the Defense of Castile, and the Armory of Spain. The Biscayners, who
were the Ancient Cantabrians, enjoy very great Privileges, and boast themselves
never to have been thoroughly Conquered either by the Romans, Carthaginians,
Goths or Moors, They use a different Language from that of the other
Inhabitants of the Country, and is said to be the ancient Language of Spain;
for as they remained in their Liberties not Mastered, so in their Language not
altered. They differ from the rest of Spain also in Customs, yielding their
Bodies, but not their Purses to the King; not suffering any Bishop to come
amongst them; and causing their Women to drink first, because Ogno a Countess
would have poisoned her Son Sancho. The Land, as well as in the Country of
Guipuscoa, is very well Tilled; for they pay neither Tax nor Tenth, nor Right
of Entry. Their chief Cities are Bilboa and St. Sebastian; places of great
Trade, especially in Wool, Iron, Chestnuts, and Bilboa Blades. Great Vessels
cannot come near Bilboa, being seated two miles from the Ocean, but upon a High
tide. It was built, or reedified out of the Ruins of the ancient Flaviobriga of
Ptol. by Diego de Harro 1300. The Port of St. Sebastian has a very fair
Entrance, being Defended by two Castles, the one toward the East, seated high;
the other to the West, upon a low Rock. St. Andero and Passagio are two
Excellent Ports, Fuentarabia the stronger place, and further Town in Spain, and
Guataria the Native place of Sebastian Cabot, who was the first that compassed
the World, in the Ship called the Victory; Magellanus, who went Chief in that
Expedition, perishing in the Action. Laredo Portus, Lauretanus, has a spacious
Bay. Placenza, upon the River Denia is inhabited by Blacksmiths. Tolosa upon
the Orio River. Asturia, called by some the Kingdom of Oviedo, is the Title of
the Eldest Sons of the Kings of Spain, being called Princes of Asturia. The
younger Children whereof are called Infants ever since the Reign of John the
First. Hence were the small but swift Horses which the Romans called
Asturcones, the English Hobbies. It was the Retreating place of the Kings of
the Goths, and several of the Bishops, during the Invasion of the Moors; for
which Reason, Oviedo, Lucum Asturum of Ptol. and Ovetum; the Capital City
thereof is called the City of Kings and Bishops; and indeed gave Title to the
first Christian Kings after the Moorish Conquest; for as the Lust of Roderick,
a Gothish King of Spain, first brought in the Moors, so the Lust of Magnutza a
Moorish Viceroy, proved the overthrow and loss of the Kingdom. Other Towns are
Aviles on the Seashore, near Cape de los Penas, of old Scythium Prom.

Galicia is not so fertile as well Peopled; its former Inhabitants were the
Gallaici, whence it had its Name. St. Jago Compostella, which Bishopric and
University is there Famous for the Pilgrimages which are thither made by those
that go to Visit the Relics of St. James, the Spaniards Patron. Coruna, by
the English the Groine, is often mentioned in our Spanish Wars in Queen
Elizabeth's days. The Flavium Brigantium of Ptol. Brigantium of Ant. Strong, and
the chief Bulwark of Galitia; is memorable for the goodness and largeness of
her Port: The Rich Silver Fleet, of above thirty Millions, put in there in the
year 1661, to avoid the English, who, to surprise it, had waylaid all the
Points of the Compass to Cadiz. Lugo is the Lucus Augusti of Ptol. and Ant. the
Lucus of Plin. now a Bishops See. Orense is the Aquae Calida of Ptol. the Aqua
Caleniae of Ant. a Bishops See. Tuy is the Tude of Ptol. Tide Plin. a Bishops
See. There are about forty other Ports in this Province, of which, Rivadeo,
Ponte Vedra and Bajona, are the most considerable.

Andaluzia, formerly Vandalitia from the Vandals. By Pliny Conventus
Cordubensis, is so fair a Country, and so plentiful in Corn, in Wine and
Olives, that it passes for the Granary and Magazine of the Kingdom. Sevil in
this Province, is the Magazine of the Wealth of the New World. The Hispalis of
Strab. Ptol. and Plin.

It is in compass six miles; compassed with stately Walls, and adorned with no
less Magnificent Buildings, insomuch that there is a Spanish Proverb, Chi non
ha Vista Sevilla, non ha Vista Meravilla.

He that at Sevil has not been,
Structure's Wonder has not seen.
The River Baetis, or Gaudelquiver, separates it into two parts, which are
joined together by a stately Bridge; from hence the Spaniards set forth their
West-India-Fleets, and hither they return to unload the Riches of the Western
World. It is Dignified with an University, wherein studied Avicen the Moor,
Pope Silvester the Second, here also were two Provincial Councils held Anno
584, and 636. and the Sea of an Archbishop, who is Metropolitant of Andaluzia
and the fortunate Islands. Here was Isodore Bishop. From hence comes our Sevil
Oranges, and here lies the Body of Christopher Columbus, Famous for his
Discovery of the New World.

Not far from hence are to be seen the Relics of the Italica, of Strab. Ptol.
and Ant. the Ilipa Italica Plin. the Country of the Emperors Trajan and Adrian,
now an obscure Village about a League East from Sevil. Cordova, that Honored
Antiquity with Lucan, and the two Seneca's; and was more considerable in the
time of the Moors than now. The Principal Church was formerly one of the
biggest Mosques among the Muhumetans, next to that of Mecca. Corduba of Strab.
Ptol. and Mela, a famous Colony of the Romans, and Head of a particular
Kingdom, so called; now a Bishops See, and Seat of the Inquisition for this
Province. Jaen is the Oningis, or Oringis of Livi, test Moral, taken by Scipio
Africanus from the Carthaginians. Ecya is the Astigi of Plin. Astygis of Ptol.
the Astrapa of Live. taken by Lucius Martius, or rather destroyed by the
Inhabitants, read Sir W. Rawleigh fol. 744. Iliturgis Ptol. and Ilurgis and
Illiturgis Plin. Iliturgi. Live. Lietor test Marian, Aldea el rio Car. Clusio,
Andujar, Floriano Andujur el viejo Amh. Moral. Castulo Ant. Castulon Ptol.
Plin. Castaon Strab. Caslono Car Clusio. Caslona la voja Florian. between
Alcazar and Baeza, seated on the Guadelquiver, not on the Ana, as Heylin says,
which being under the Romans, was surprised by the Gerasenis, but slain by
Sertorius entering after them at the same Gate; built 100 years before the War
of Troy, test Mariana. Here Hanibal is said to have took his Wife Himilce, and
was one of the last Towns that held out for the Carthaginians, the chief City
of the Oritani, seated upon an high Mountain, rather in New Castile than in
Andaluzia near Vbeda. St. Lucar, at the mouth of the Guadalquiver, is a Town of
great Trade; the West India Gold and Silver Plate has sometimes stopped at the
Tower of the Port, which is called the Golden Tower; but generally that Fleet
puts in at Cadiz, or Port St. Mary's, which is near to it. Xeres de la Fontera,
stands not far from that place where the Moors totally Defeated the Goths, in
the year 714; after which, they harassed all Spain, without control; and from
hence come our Sherry-Sacks. The Acta Regia of Strab. and Plin. the Asta of
Ptol. and Ant.

Medina Sidonia, the Asindum of Ptol. Asido Caesariana of Plin. whose Duke was
General of the Invincible Armado, 1588. Tariffa was so called from Tariff
General of the Moors in their first Spanish Invasion; which Lodovicus Nonius
thinks to have been the Famous Tartessus of H^rod. Strab. and other Authors,
rich in Gold and Silver, and visited by the continual Fleets of the Tyrian
Merchants, and by the Phocensis in the Reign of Arganthonius, a little before
their Expugnation by Cyrus, and by some thought to be the same with that
Tharsis from whence Solomon's Ships did fetch his Gold for the Temple at
Jerusalem. Some makes this the same with the Carteia of Mela, Ptol. and Plin.
Cartha of Ovid, Cartaea of Steph. as Curio, Mariana and Becan. but Moralus will
have Cartheja or Carteja, to be Algezira, whose position now is alike
uncertain, but both seems to me to be the Gibal Tariff of the Arab. or
Gibralter. Gibralter, which now gives a Name to the Famous Straight which joins
the Ocean and the Mediterranean, and parts Europe from Africa, called by the
Ancients Fretum Herculeum, Gaditanum, and Tartessiacum, now Estrecho de
Gibralter, Hispanis. This Straight is in length 36 miles from Cape Trafalger to
Gibralter, in breadth at the Entrance 18 miles, at the narrowest place about 7
English miles. Pales is the Port from whence Columbus first Embarked, upon his
Intentions of a New Discovery: And Cadiz, Cales Angl. and Batavis, Cadice Ital.
Gades Caes. Plin. and Mela, Gadira Ptol. Erythia, and Tartessos, Strab.
Continusa Dionys. Is the Harbor of the Rich Plate-Fleets, a Port so Important,
that Charles the Fifth Recommended the conservation thereof in a special manner
to his Son Philip the Second. Antiquity there shows us the Footsteps of a
Temple Dedicated to Hercules, with two Columns, either of Copper or Silver,
which the Natives aver to be the Pillars of that Hero, as well as the two
Mountains upon each side of the Streights of Gibralter: they Report, that in
this Temple it was that Julius Caesar wept when he called to mind the
Prodigious Conquests which Alexander the Great had gained at the Age of three
and thirty Years, the consideration whereof carried him to those High
Enterprises; as Scipio was incited by the Actions of Zenophon's Cyrus.

The Kingdom of Granada under the last Kings of the Moors (who lost it in the
Year 1491.) was far more Rich, and better Peopled than it is at this day: It
was also much more Fertile; for the Moors had a thousand Inventions to water
their Lands, by means of Cuts and Trenches, bringing the Water from great
Reservatories which they made in the Mountains, which are called Montes d'los
Alpayaras olim Alpuxarras.

The Situation of this Kingdom, and the Position of the Towns, agrees with the
Relation or Description which Julius Caesar has made. The City which bears its
Name, Granatum, al. Granado, is the biggest in all Spain; its Buildings are of
Freestone, Fenced about with a strong Wall, on which are 130 Turrets, and it
has 12 Gates. It is very pleasant Dwelling there, by reason of the pureness of
the Air, and plenty of Fountains; the Moors placing Paradise in that part of
Heaven which is the particular Zenith of this place. Malaga, Malaca Ptol.
Strab. Mel. Ant. a strong Town, and Bishops See. Velez Malaga is the Sex of
Ptol. Sexitanum Ant. Sexi Firmum, and Julium Plin. Is Famous for the Excellency
of its Wines and Raisins. Munda is Notable for Julius Caesar's Victory over
Pompey's Sons. For near unto this place in a Wood was fought that notable and
last Battle between Caesar and Pompey's Sons, the Honor of the day fell to
Caesar, though not without great loss. In other Battles he used to say he
fought for Honor, in this for his Life; which not long after he lost, being
murdered in the Senate House. Almeria is the Abdara Ptol. Abdera Mela, founded
by the Tyrians Strab. by the Carthaginians, Plin. Antiquera is the Singilia
Plin. Alhama the Artigis of Ptol. noted for its Medicinable Baths. Gaudix is a
Bishops See. Loxa enjoys a pleasant Situation. Muxacra is thought to be the
Murgis of Ptol. Plin. Huesca the Osca of Ptol. Vera the Vergao of Plin.

Murcia is said to be the Garden of Spain, by reason of the plenty of Excellent
Fruits in those parts, and so abounding in Silver Mines that the Romans kept
400 men at work. The City also that bears its name, the Menralia of Ptol.
drives a great Trade in Silk. Cartagena, built by Asdrubal of Carthage, Father
of the Great Hannibal, and taken in the second Punick War by Scipio Africanus,
twice sacked and razed by the Barbarous Goths and Vandals; re-edified and
fortified by Philip the Second King of Spain; Is a good Seaport, a safe and
large Harbor. Caravaca affords the wood for the Cross, to which the Spaniards
attribute a power to preserve men from Thunder.

Valencia is the most delightful Country of all Spain. The City (besides the
name of the Province) bears the name of Fair and Great Valencia. An
Archbishops See, the Valentia of Ptol. Plin. etc. seated not far from the
mouth of the River Durias by Mela, Turium Plin. Turia and Turias by others; now
Guadalaviar, Clusio. A University, where studied St. Dominick the Father of the
Dominicans. Here were born under contrary Stars Ludovicus Vives, and Pope
Alexander the VI.

Cullera a Sea-Town, at the mouth of the River Xucar, formerly Sacron after the
name of the River, and is famous in Plutarch for the Victory of Sertorius
against Pompey.

Denia, Dianicum of Ptol. Strab. Plin. and Solin. gives Title to the Marquess
of Denia, since Created Duke of Lerma.

Alicant is known by the good Wines, which are Transported from thence. Upon
the Seashore at a place called Morvedra, are to be seen the Ruins of the
Ancient Saguntum of Polyh. the destruction whereof by Hannibal occasioned the
second Punick War. A Town so faithful to the Romans, that the Inhabitants chose
rather to burn themselves than yield to Hannibal: Founded by the Zachynthians.
Here is also the Promontory Ferraria of Mela. Artemisum Strab. and Dianium Cic.
Plin. and Ptol. Puncia del Emperador, or Attemuz test Beuth. now Cabo Martin,
the refuge of Sertorius in his Wars against Metellus and Pompey.

Laurigi test J. Mariana, is the Lauro, or Lauron of Plutarch, the Laurona of
Floro, which Sertorius besieged and burnt when Pompey with his whole Army stood
nigh, and yet durst not succor it.

Xelua is by Florian. the Incibilis, or Indibilis of Livi, where Hanno was
overcome by Scipio; but Baud. says, Incibilis is now Trayguera, 20 Spanish
Leagues distant from Xelua, or Chelua.

Gandia gives title to the Dukes of the House of Borgia.

Segorbe or Segorve, is the Segobrega of Strab. and Plin. testae Vasae. Clus.
and Tarap. but the confusion of Authors makes me uncertain what it now is.

The Islands of Majorque and Menorque, are the ancient Baleares, the
Inhabitants whereof were exquisite Slingers, and great Pirates; they accustom
their Children to hit down their Breakfast with a Sling, or else to go without
it; and yet as nimble as they were they were constrained to beg aid of Augustus
against the Rabbets that destroyed their Lands. The Books of knowledge writ by
Raymund Lul^y are very much studi'd at Majorque. The Soil of Yvica has a
peculiar quality to destroy the Serpents that are bred in the Island Tormentera.

Arragon is overrun with the Branches of the Pyrenean and Idubeda Mountains,
and is in most parts dry and scanty of water, yet the River Iberus runs through
the middle of it. Its chief places are Saragoca, Caes. Augusta of Ptol. Strab.
Plin. Ant. etc. a Colony and Municipium of the Romans before called Salduba.
Under the Moors it was the Head of a particular Kingdom, recovered in the year
1118. by the Christians, and made the Residence of the Kings of Arragon, an
Archbishops See, and University and Seat of the Inquisition, and Viceroy for
the Province. Taracona, or Tarazona, the Turiaso Ptol. Turiasso Plin. is a
Bishops See. Calatajut upon the River Xalo, founded by Ajub a Sarazen Prince,
half a mile from which was the ancient Bilbis of Ptol. and Bilbilis of Strab.
the Country of the Poet Martial. Fraga upon the River Senga Gallica, Flava
Ptol. and Gallicum of Ant. Balbastro is the Burtina of Ptol. Bortina of Ant.
Huesca the Osca of Strab. Ptol. and Ant. was the place where Sertorius (in
Plutarch) kept the Children of the Spanish Nobility as Hostages for their
Fathers fidelity, but the Fathers revolting, the Children were cruelly
murdered. Jacca amongst the Mountains was the first Seat of the Kings of
Arragon. Ainsa and Benhuari, have been the Capitals of two little Kingdoms,
Sobrarbia and Ribagorca, or Riba Curtia. Monzon is a place where formerly the
States of Arragon were wont to Assemble.

Navarr was the second Kingdom for Antiquity in Spain, but surprised and taken
by Ferdinand the Catholic, Anno 1512. without one blow given. The King and
Queen of Navarr being at that time both French Subjects; the Country is plain,
yet on all sides environed with mighty Mountains, well watered with Rivers, and
fruitful: Chiefer Towns are Pampelona, Pompelon of Ptol. Strab. and Ant. first
founded by Pompey the Great after the Wars ended with Sertorius; a Bishops See,
and Seat of the Viceroys seated in a Plain upon the River Arga. At the Siege
of which Ignatius Loiola a Cantabrian, defending it against the French, was
almost killed by a wound of his Leg, which occasioned a New Order to the
Church, viz. the Society of the Jesuits, vide Monferrat in Catalonia.

2. Viana, the Title of the Navarren Prince. Nigh this place Caesar Borgia Son
to Pope Alexander the Sixth, was slain by an Ambush. Test Guicciardine.

3. Victoria (is the chief of the little Country called Olava, or Olaba,
between Navarr and Biscay) first built, or rather reedified out of the Ruins of
the ancient Villica of Ptol. Anno 1180. by Sanctius King of Navarr. This
Country is divided into six Merindida's or Governments, one of which lying on
the other side of the Pyreneans, is called Low Navarr, and is in the hands of
the French King.

The Kingdom of Castilia was at first named Bardulia, and was the most
prevailing Kingdom of all Spain, either by Conquest or Intermarriages, divided
into Castillia la Veia, or old Castille, and Castillia la Nueva, or New
Castile. Chiefer places in Old Castile are Burgos, Bravum and Masburgi Ptol.
test Tarapha, and Burgi, once the Royal Seats of the Kings of Castile, now an
Archbishop See.

Avila, the Abala of Ptol. of which Tostatus, Surnamed Abulensis, was Bishop,
who is said to have writ as many sheets as he lived days.

Soria is the place where the great Standard of the Kingdom is kept, not far
from which toward the Springs of the Douro stood sometimes that famous
Numantia, in which 4000 Soldiers withstood 40000 Romans for 14 years, and at
last gathering all their Money, Goods, Armor, etc. together, laid them on a
Pile, which being fired they all voluntarily buried themselves in the flame,
leaving Scipio nothing but the name of Numantia to adorn his Triumph.

Segovia is the Segubia of Ptol. Segobia Plin. and Ant. a Bishops See, near
which yet stands an ancient Aquaeduct of the Romans.

Calahora upon the Ebro was the Calagorina of Ptol. Calaguris of Str. and
Calagurris of Ant. a Town of the Vascones, and of the Orator Quintilian.

Logronnio upon the said River was the Juliobriga of Ptol. and Juliobrica of
Plin.

New Castile, is a Country for the most part Champian and plain, affording
sufficient plenty of Corn, Fruits, and other necessary provision: Chiefer Towns
are, 1. Madrid, the Mantua of Ptol. Madritum al. the Seat of the Kings of
Spain, and now one of the most fair and populous places of the Kingdom, well
built with good Brick-Houses, many having Glass-Windows, which is very rare in
all Spain, the most considerable Buildings are the Piazza, the Prison, the
Kings Chapel and Palace, the Palaces of the Duke of Alva, of Medina de los
Torres, etc. The English College of Theatines, Il Retiro, etc. Out of Town St.
Perdo, and the Escurial, or the Magnificent Monastry of St. Laurence, which is
about seven or eight Leagues from Madrid, amongst the Spaniards passes for the
Eighth Wonder of the World, and is said to have cost King Philip the Second
above twenty Millions of Gold, no great Sum for a Prince, who is said to have
expended 700 Millions of Gold during his Reign.

2. Toledo, the T^l^tum of Plin. and Ant. then the chief City of the Carpetani,
mounted upon a steep and uneven Rock upon the right shore of the River Taio,
with whose circling streams it is almost encompassed. By the Goths it was made
the Chamber and Royal Seat of their Kings. Under the Moors it became a petty
Kingdom, and their strongest hold in those parts; after five years Siege in the
year 1085. recovered by Alphonsus the Sixth, King of Castile and Leon. Now an
University and Archbishops See, the richest in Europe, whose Bishop is Primate
and Chancellor of Spain.

Alcala de Henares, is the Complutum of Ptol. and Ant. an University founded by
F. Ximenes Cardinal and Archbishop of Toledo.

Calatrava upon the River Gaudiana, abandoned by the Templers, and now gives
name to the Order of Knights so called, confirmed by Pope Alexander the Third
1164.

Alcaraz gives Name to the Mountainous Tracts of Sierra de Alcaraz.

Cuenca, a Bishops See, and Seat of the Inquisition, once an Invincible
Fortress of the Moors against the Christians, yet won from them Anno 1177, by
Sanctius the Second King of Castile.

Siguenca, or Siguenxa, is the Segontia Strab. Plin. the Secuntia of Live. and
Secontia Ant. Segontialacta of Ptol. a City of the Celtiberi, now a Bishops
See, having a fair Cathedral.

The Kingdom of Leon, was the first which the Christians established after the
Invasion of the Moors. The City which bears its name, has in it a Cathedral,
famous for its beauty. The Church of Toledo is magnified for its wealth; that
of Sevil for its bigness; that of Salamanca for its strength. The City of
Salamanca is honored with an University, which has the Privilege to teach the
Hebrew, Greek, Arabic and Chaldee Languages: They talk here of the Valley of
Vatuegas, lately discovered in the Mountains of this Kingdom, and which was
never known before from the time of the Moors Invasion; discovered by the
occasion of an Hawk of the Duke of Alva's, which was lost amongst those
Mountains: His Servants clambering from one Hill to another in search of it, at
last happened into a pleasant and large Valley, where they spied a Company of
naked Pataco's or Savage people, hemmed in amongst those many Rocks or
Mountains. And then told their Master, that instead of his Hawk they had found
a New World in the midst of Spain. Upon further discovery and inquiry they were
thought to be a remnant of the ancient Spaniards who had hid themselves amongst
these Mountains for fear of the Romans.

Of Catalonia, and the County of Roussillon.
CAtalannia, rather Catalonia, by the French Catalogne, is variously derived by
Authors; some from Gothalonia, of the Goths and Alani; some from the
Castellani, the old Inhabitants hereof: Others from the Cattalones, who also
had here their dwellings; others from the Catti of Germany, and the Alani of
Sarmatia, now Lithuania.

Paulus Hieronymus asserts it to be 170 Italian miles long, and 130 broad:
Boterus tells us there is numbered in this Province one Dukedom, viz. Cardona;
three Marquisates, 11 Earldoms, many Baronies and Lordships, 56 Cities, or
Walled Towns, and six hundred thousand Inhabitants, among which were 10000
French Shepherds and Husbandmen.

Some Authors tells us the Country is Hilly, and full of Woods, yielding but
small store of Corn, Wine and fruits; some say it abounds with Corn, Wine, and
Oil. Others tell us it is more enriched through its Maritine Situation, than by
homebred Commodities.

Chief places are Barcelona, Barcinon of Ptol. Barchino of Mela, and Barcino of
Plin. and Ant. a Roman Colony Surnamed Faventia by Plin. Seated upon the
Mediterranean Sea betwixt the Rivers Baetulus of Mela, now Besons and Rubricat
or Lobregat River, won from the Moors by Lewis the Godly, Son to the Emperor
Charles the Great. It Is now a rich and noted Port. A Bishops See and Academy,
said to be built by Hamilcar. Ant. Beath, says it was built by Hercules. It Is
the Seat of the Viceroy and Inquisition for the Province. It Is beautified with
stately Buildings, both private and public, with delightful Gardens: Its Port
has a Bridge or Mole of 750 Paces into the Sea, for the better securing of
Ships.

Terragona, Terracon Strab. and Ptol. Terraco Plin. Mela, and Solinus, is
pleasantly seated about a Mile from the Mediterranean Sea, upon the East of the
River Tulcis, now Francolino, test Coquo, founded by Cn. and Pub. Scipio
during the second Punick War; a Repository of ancient Monuments; Vid. Nomium c.
85. Afterward made a Roman Colony, and the chief Town, giving name to the
Province Terraconensis. It was An. 1572. an Archbishops See, and Academy
founded by Cardinal Gaspar Cervan.

Lerida, Llerda Ant. Strab. Ptol. Plin. Lucan. A Bishops See and University,
seated upon the Rivers Sicoris, now Segre, or Segor, and not on the River Linga
(as Heylin says) and the chief City of Arragon. Its adjacent Fields are well
stored with Vines, Corn, Fruits and Oil, oftentimes besieged by the French, and
as often relieved by the Spaniards. And is Famous for the Encounter which
happened nigh unto it, between Herculejus the Treasurer of Sertorius Army, and
Manillius Proconsul of Gallia, wherein Manillius was discomfited, and his Army
routed.

Cerdona is a Dukedom of the same Name, where are three things remarkable, a
Mountain whose Earth is like Meal, or Flower. A Fountain whose water is of the
color of Red Wine. A Salt of diverse Colors, but if pounded it appears only
white.

Tertosa, by the French Tortosa, a Bishops See, seated upon the River Ebro,
Dertosa Ptol. and Ant. Dertossa Strab. Dertusa Plin. a Roman Colony, Fortified
with two Castles. Vide Marin. Siculum.

Girona Gerunda Ptol. Ant. Plin. a Bishops See and Dukedom, gives Titile to the
Eldest Sons of the Kings of Arragon, built by Gerion 513 years after the Flood,
test Beuthero.

Vich, by J. Mariana, the Ausa of Ptol. Corbio of Live. Vicus. and Aquae
Voconiae, a Bishops See. 'Twas the Randezvous of Count Monteries Country
Militia, when he attempted the relief of Paysarda, but the passages were too
well secured by the French.

Not far from the right shore of the River Lobregat arises the pleasant
Mountain Edulius Mons Ptol. and Medulius by others, now Monserrato, a noted
place for Miracles. Here Ignatius Loyola laid the foundation of the Society of
Jesus, Anno 1522. This Mountain is said to be two Miles high, and four Miles in
Circumference, stuck full with Anchorets Cells; and honored with a much
frequented Chapel and Image of the Blessed Virgin; whose ravishing
description, read in Nonius Bibliothec. Hisp. and in Zeiler's Description of
the place in his Iteneries of Spain.

Rosas, or Roses, the Rhoda of Ptol. and Rhodope of Strab. founded by the
Emporites or Rhodians, under the Pyrenean Mountains, a strong place.

Puig de Cerda, or Puigcerda, by the French Puicerdan, is the chief Town of the
Carotani; Jugum Carratanorum near the Pyrenean Mountains, upon the River Segre
and Sicoris* one League distant from I l^via.

Llivia, Livia by Julian, Toletanus de expeditione Wambae Regis Jothorum, Julia
Libyca Ptol. and Plin. Linca or Linea Florian; by others Insa; in Sheldens
Manuscript, (...).

Campredon a walled Town, near the Springs of the River Ter of Old Sambraca,
the Sehendunum of Ptol. Jonquera by the French, Junquera by the Inhabitants,
Juncaria Ant. and Plin. (...) in Shel. Manuscript, it is in the little County of
Ampurdan, near the Passage of Le Col. de partus.

Cap de Cruex by Florian, is the Aphroditium of Ptol. Templum Veneris, and
Venus Pyrenaea of Strab. and Plin. Portus Veneris Mela; but Baud. tells us that
Port Veneris is now called Port Vendres, five Leagues distant from Aphrodisium
Prom.

Cadaques near Roses, is the Cap de Quires of the Gazete, 1683/4.

Balaguer, Ballegarium in Seriptis Hisp. by others Bergusia, seated upon the
River Segre, and is famous for the Siege of the French, 1645.

Of the County of Roussillion.
ROussillion by the French, is included betwixt two Branches of the Pyrenaean
Mountains, beginning at the Mountain Cano; The one extending to Colibre and C.
de Creux, a Promontory that is the furthest point Eastwarst of Catalonia; the
other Branch running out unto Salsas. This Country was pawned by John King of
Arragon, 1462. to Lewis the 11th of France, for 300000 Crowns; and restored to
Ferdinand the Catholic, by Charles the 8th, 1493. that he might not be hindered
in his Journey to Naples, test Botero.

Francis the first King of France, partly to requite the Emperor Charles the
5th, for the War he made in Provence, and to get into his Hands Perpignan, one
of the Doors of Spain, sent his Son Henry with an Army to force it, An. 1542.
but the Town was well fortified, so bravely manned, and so well stored, that
his Journey proved as dishonorable to the French, as the Invasion of Provence
and the Siege of Marselles had been to the Emperor.

Places of most Note, are Perpignan, Papirianum and Perpinianum, built out of
the Ruins of Ruscinum, An. 1068. by Guinard Earl of Rossillon, seated in a
pleasant Plain upon the River Thelis or Thetis, a rich and flourishing Empory,
and a strong-hold against the French, till the year 1642. Vide Nonium and
Marianum.

Colliure and Colibre, by the French Collioure, Elleberri Mela, Elliberis Plin.
Iliberis Livi, Illeris Ptol. Illyberis Strab.

Elna, by the French, Elne; Helena, of the Ancients, seated upon the River
Tech, once an Episcopal-See, but in An. 1604. it was translated by Clement the
8th to Perpignan.

Cerat, Ceretum, near the River Tech, was the meeting place of the French and
Spaniards Commissioners, for regulating the limits and bounds of their
Kingdoms, An. 1660.

Bellagardia is a strong place, often taken and retaken by the French and
Spaniards, seated near the entrance of Pertus into Catalonia.

Sal, Salsulae of Mela and Ant. taken by the French, 1640.

Between France and Spain, are the Pyrenaei Montes, which tieth Spain to the
Continent. The Cantabrian Ocean siercely beating on the West; and the
Mediterranean gently washing the East ends of them; the highest part whereof is
Mount Canus, upon which in a clear Day may be seen both the Seas: The French
side of these Hills, are said to be Naked and Barren; the Spanish very fertile,
and adorned with Trees: Here was Ronce Valles, so famous for the Battle betwixt
the French and the Moors, in which Rowland, Cousin to Charles the Great;
Oliver, and others of the Peers of France, were put to the Rout, and 20000 of
the French.

The other Dominions of the King of Spain, next to France, are the Spanish
Provinces, or Flanders, and the French County, Conquered in part by the King of
France. In Italy the Duchy of Milan. Final, Orbitello, the Protection of
Piombino and Porto Longone, the Kingdoms of Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia, etc.
In Africa, Oran, Marsal-quiver, Mellilla, Pennon de Velez, Ceuta, and the Isle
Pantalarea, all along the Coast of Barbary, upon the Mediterranean Sea. To
which we must add the Philipine Islands in Asia, and the greatest part of the
Islands and Continent in America.

Of Portugal.
map of Portugal A New Map of PORTVGAL by Rob. Morden


POrtgual is a Kingdom of above five hundred years Erection, in the Western
part of Spain, anciently called Lusitania, taking the present Name from Porto,
a Haven-Town at the Mouth of the Dueras, where the Gauls used to Land, and
therefore called Portus Gallorum, and since Portugal, or rather from Portus and
Cale, then a small Village not far from it; of old Portus Calensis, now
Portugal. The length of it from South to North is about six score Leagues. The
breadth thereof about 25 or 30 Leagues, and in some places fifty. It is scated
upon the Ocean.

The experience of the Inhabitants in Navigation, has caused their Kings to be
known in all the four Quarters of the World; where they have had many Kings
their Vassals: as also the convenience of bringing into Europe the most rare
and precious Merchandises of the East. Their Conquests have extended above five
thousand Leagues upon the Coast of Brazile, and in the East Indies, their
design being only Trade. It is true, that of late for several years, they have
not made any great Progress or farther Advantage, by reason of their War with
Spain, and the great Garrisons which they are forced to keep against the
Hollander, which has caused them to surrender some Places into the hands of the
English upon the Royal Match between Portugal and England, viz. Tangier and
Bombay.

The Provinces of Portugal have all their particular Commodities; they afford
among other things store of Citrons and excellent Oranges.

They have some Mines; for the Greeks and Romans sought in Portugal for that
Wealth, which the Portuguezes search for in the Indies. They are so well
Peopled, especially toward the Sea, that there are to be reckoned above six
hundred privileged Towns, and above four thousand Parishes. The Roman Catholic
Religion is only professed there; and those that are of the Race of the Jews,
are forced to baptize their Children.

There are three Arch-Bishopricks, Lisbon, Braga and Evora; and ten
Bishoprics; the Archbishops of Lisbon and Braga, have each of them 200000
Livres Rent. There are Inquisitions at Lisbon, at Coimbra, and at Evora; and
Parliaments at Lisbon and Porto, places of general Receipt of the King's
Revenue. Twenty seven Places have their Generalities, which are called
Comarques, or Almoxarifates. The Order of Christ that resides at Tomar, is the
most considerable which they have. The Kings are Grand Masters thereof; for
upon that Order depends all their Conquests from abroad. The Knights wear a red
Cross, and a white one in the middle, whereas the Knights of Avis wear a green
Cross, and those of St. James a red one, who have their Residence at Palmella
near to Setuval. It is said that the Revenue of the Kingdom, setting aside that
of the Indies, amounts to above ten Millions of Livres.

In the year 1640 this Kingdom revolted from the King of Spain, and at that
time it was an admirable thing to consider that a Secret of so great
importance, should be carried on with such an exact Secrecy, among above two
hundred Persons, and for the space of a whole year: The principal Motives to
this Revolt was, for that the King of Spain gave leave to others besides the
Portugals to Traffic into the East Indies, together with the Tribute of the
sixth part, which the King caused to be published in the year 1636, whereby he
exacted five per Cent. of all the Revenues and Merchandises of the Kingdom. It
consists of six Provinces, which are as many General Governments, Entre-Douro
and Minho, Tralos-M^ntes, Beyra, E^trema dura, Alen teio, and the Kingdom of
Algarve. Entre-Douro and Minho, is the most delicious part, and so well
Peopled, that for 18 Leagues in Length, and 12 in breadth, it contains above
130 Monasteries well endowed, 1460 Parishes, 5000 Fountains of Spring Water,
two hundred Stone-Bridges, and six Seaports; some call it the Delight and
Marrow of Spain. Porto by the Dutch, and by the English Port a Port, a City,
containing about 4000 Houses, is a place of great Trade, and Braga, Braecaria
Augusta of Ptol. Bracara of Ant. and Braecae of Plia. is renowned for the
several Councils that have been held there, and for the pretension of the
Archbishop who claims to be Archbishop of all. Trales-Montes is stored with
Mines, and adorned with the City of Braganca the Capital of a Dukedom of 40000
Ducats Revenue, wherein there are also fifty little Towns and other Lands,
which Entitle the Duke of Braganca to be three times a Marquis, seven times an
Earl, and many more times to be a Lord. The Princes of that Name, who are now
in Possession of the Crown, usually Resided at Villa Viciosa; and had a
Prerogative beyond the Grandees of Spain, to sit in public under the Royal
Canopy of the Kings of Spain. Beyra is fertile in Rye, Millet, Apples and
Chestnuts; Her City of Coimbra, formerly the Residence of Alphonsus the first
King of Portugal, who enjoyed a longer Sovereignty than any Prince, since the
beginning of the Roman Monarchy, attained to, faith Heylin; Sapores the Son of
Misdales King of Persia, whose Father dying, left his Mother with Child, and
the Persian Nobility set the Crown on his Mothers Belly before she was quick,
came short of him by two years; is famous for the University, and for the
Bishopric, which is reckoned to be worth above a hundred thousand Livres of
Annual Rent. Estremadura produces Wine, Oil, Salt and Honey, which the Bees
there make of Citron Flowers and Roses; her City of Lisbon, Oliosippon of Ptol.
Olisipon of Ant. Olysippo of Solynus, and Olysipo of Pliny, a Municipium of the
Romans, surnamed Faelicitas Julia, the Royal Seat of the Kings of Portugal, an
Archbishops Sea, the Residence of the Viceroys, a flourishing Empory;
situated upon five rising Hills upon the right Shore of the River Tagus, Tajo
incolis, about 5 Miles from the Ocean, having the advantage of the Ebbing and
Flowing of the Sea. It is said to contain 32 Parish-Churches, 350 Streets,
11000 dwelling Houses, 160000 Inhabitants, besides Churchmen, Strangers and
Courtiers; and with the Suburbs, about 7 Miles in compass; the Capital City of
all the Kingdom, one of the fairest, richest, the biggest and best peopled of
Europe. The little Town of Belem, which is near to it, is the Burying-place of
many of the Kings of Portugal. Santarim is so happy in the great number of
Olives that grow round about it, that the Natives boast that they could make a
River of their Oil as big as Tagus. It was the Scabaliscus of Ptol. the
Scabalis of Ant. and Pliny, surnamed Praesidium Julium, then a Roman Colony,
and a juridicial Resort, named from St. Irene, a Nun of Tomar, here martyred
and enshrined. Setubal, the Salatia of Ptol. is well situated and well built,
and is a Town of good Trade; it is the best Haven in all the Kingdom, 30 Miles
long, and 3 broad; her Salt Pits, and her Wines, by what the Portuguezes
relate, bring a greater Revenue to their King, than all Arragon to the King of
Spain. Alen teio passes for the Granary of Portugal, by reason of the Corn
which it produces. The City of Evora claims the next place in Dignity to
Lisbon. In the year 1663 the Portuguezes overthrew the Spaniards in a memorable
Battle, near to this City. Elvas is famous for its excellent Oils, and for the
Sieges that it has prosperously held out against the Spaniards. Ourique is the
place where was fought that famous Battle which occasioned the Proclaiming the
first King of Portugal; Portelegre is a Bishops See; Beja is supposed to be the
Pax Julia of Plin. and Ptol. Algarve, tho small in extent, it assumes the Title
of a Kingdom, and was reunited to the Crown by the Marriage of Alphonsus the
3d, with Beatrice of Castile: It produces Eggs, Olives, Almonds, and Wines
which are very much esteemed; and indeed the word Algerbia in the Language of
the Moors, signifies a fruitful Champaign.

Chief Towns are, Tavila, or Tavira, the Balsa of Ptol. and Plin. Faro is
seated near the Cuncum Promontorium, now Capo St. de Maria. Silves is the
ancient Ossonaba of Ptol. the Onoba of Mela, the Sonoba of Strabo, by the Moors
Excuba, by the Spaniards Estoy, by some Estomber. Lagus is seated near the
Promontorium Sacrum of Strab. and Ptol. now Cape St. Vincent from the Relics
of the Holy Martyr brought from Valentia by the persecuted Christians, flying
the Cruelty of Abderrahman, the first King of the Spanish Moors; removed
afterward to Lisbon by King Ferdinand.

Of Italy.
map of Italy ITALIA by Robert Morden at the Atlas in Cornhil London


ITaly Anglis, Italia Incolis and Hispanis, Italic Gallis, Welschlandt
Germanis, Wolska Zemia, Polonis, Vloska Sclavonice; called also by the
Ancients, Ausonia, Camesena, Oenotria, Hesperia, Janicula, Salevmbrona,
Saturnia, etc. once Empress of the then known World; still the fairest and most
delicious Country of Europe. After so long time, so many Ages elapsed, it is
not certainly decided who were her first Inhabitants; nor whether some one
Nation did plant here, after the Confusion of Babel; or that it was peopled by
little and little, as several Nations did arrive; it is equally dubious whether
it received its general Name at first, or whether particular Parts had first
their Appellations: It Is certain that several Nations, at sundry times, did
transport themselves thither from Greece, and Peopled all the Seacoast, said
to be Janus, An. Mun. 1925. after whom came Saturn out of Creet, Evander or
Oenotrus out of Arcadia, with their followers; after them arrived some Trojans,
under the conduct of Aeneas, whose kind entertainment by Latinus King of the
Latins, occasioned the Wars between him and Turnus King of the Rutuli; but
after the Romans grew Potent, all Italy fell under their Subjection until the
time of Honorius; after which several barbarous Nations, viz. Goths, Vandals,
Herules and the Huns, passing the Alps, overran all Italy, and divided it into
several Kingdoms. And when these were ejected, or at least subdued by the
Lieutenants of the Emperor Justinan, it was once more united to the Empire,
till the Empress Sophia envying Narsis Honor, recalled him from his
Government; whereupon he opened the Passage of the Country to Albonius King of
the Lombards, who possessed themselves of that Country, calling it by their own
Name Longobardia. These were at length subdued by Pepin King of France, who was
called into Italy by the Bishop of Rome. After that, the Seat of the Roman
Empire being fixed in Germany, Italy was reduced into several Parcels and
Factions, so that the Sovereign Princes thereof at this day, are 1. The Pope,
Pontifex Maximus, under whose Dominion are these Provinces or Estates, viz.
Campania, Romania, Sabina, Provincia Patrimonii St. Petri, Vmbria, Marchia
Anconitana, Ducatus Castrensis, Territoria Orivetanum, Perusium, and Civitatis
Castelli, Ducatus Vrbini, Romandiola, Bononiensis Ager and Ducatus Ferrariensis.

2. The King of Spain, Rex Hispania, to whom belongs. Regnum Neapolitanum,
Sicilia, Sardinia, Ducatus Mediolanensis, Marchionatus Finarii in Liguria, with
others upon the Coast of Tuscany, viz. Orbetellum, and tratus adjacens, called
by the Inhabitants, Stato delli presidii, Principatus Plumbini, and Ilua
insula, Isle de Elbe.

3. The Venetians, or Republica Veneta, under whose Dominion are Istria, Foro
Julium, Marchia Tarvisina, and Ducatus Venetus, Vulgo le Dogado, Territoria
Patavinum, Rhodighinum, Vicentinum, Veronense, Brixianum, Bergomense, and
Cremense.

4. Duke of Savoy, Ducatus Sabaudiae, to whom belongs Principatus Pedemontium,
and part of Ducatus Montis-Ferrati, and Comitatus Nicaea.

5. The great Duke of Tuscany, Magnus dux Heturiae, egente Medicea, under whom
is the greater part of Heturia, viz. Florentina, Pisana, and Senensis,
Petiliano, now Potegliano, and Apua, now Ponte Moli. As also the Islands
Gorgona, Igilium, now il Giglio, Gianutum, Mons Christi, etc. and Argous
Portus, now Porto Ferraio, or P. Ferraro, in Ilua Insula, now lle Elbe, in Mari
Tyrrheno.

6. The Genoans, or Res Publica Genuensis, upon the Coast of Mare Ligusticum,
to whom belongs also Corsica and Capraria Insula.

7. Dux Mantanus e gente Gonzaga, under whom is Ducatus Mantanus, and the
greater part of Ducatus Montis Ferrari.

8. Dux Mutinensis e gente Estensi, under whom is Ducatus, Mutinensis and
Rhegiensis, Principatus Carpensis and Corregiensis, and great part of
Carferonianae, or Carfagnana.

9. Dux Permensis e gente Farnesia, who enjoys Ducatus Permensis and
Placentinus, Ditio Bussetana, and great part of Principatus Vallis Tarri.

10. Lucca, or Res Publica Lucensis, in Heturia.

11. Dux Massae e gente Cibo, containing Ducatus Massae, and Principatus
Carrariae, in Heturia.

12. Dux Mirandulanus e gente Pica, containing Ducatus Mirandulae and Comitatus
Concordiae.

13. Dux Guastallae e gente Gonzaga.

14. Dux Sabulonetae, under the Dominion of Spain.

15. Princeps Castillonis e gente Gonzaga.

16. Princeps Sulphurini e gente Gonzaga.

17. Princeps Monoeci e gente Grimalda, under the Protection of France.

18. Princeps Masserina e gente Ferraria Flisca, and Marchionatus Crepacorii.

19. Princeps Plumbini e gente Ludovisia, containing Principatus Plumbini and
Ilua Insula, now Elbe Isle, under the Dominion of Spain.

20. Comes Novellariae e gente Gonzaga.

21. Res Publica S. Marini.

Marchio Fosdinovi e gente Malas pinae, in Valle Magrae.

The Emperor of Germany has Aquilea, and the Country of Goritz, as also
Tergeste, Pedana and Pisino in Istria. The King of France has Pignarol with
its Dependencies.

Episcopus Tridentinus, is under the Dominion of the Count of Tirol.

Lastly, The Swisses have four Italian Prefectures, viz. Lugan, Locarn,
Mendrisia and Madia, which before the year 1512. did belong to the Duchy of
Milan.

Luganum, upon the Lake Lucanus, Paulin. Lago de Lugano, Ital. Luwertzzee,
Helvet.

Chiavenna Ital. Clevenna Ant. Claven, 10 Italian Miles from the Lake Como. The
Larius Strab. and Plin. the Comacenus of Ant. and P. Diac. Lacus Insubriae,
aliis Lago di Como Italis, Cumersee Germa, Bormio Ital. Worms, Germ. and
Sondrio, are the chief Places in the Valtolina, valis Tatina and Volturena
Provincia.

The Lake of Geneva is crossed by the Rhosen, and yet they never mix their
Waters together. And there are Tempests upon it, even in fair Weather, because
it lies at the foot of the Hills. The Natives report, that Julius Caesar threw
his Treasure into this Lake, when he was pursued by the Switzers; but hitherto
they have sought for it in vain.

The Waters of all the Lakes and Rivers in this Country, are observed to be of
a greenish Color, as the Seawater, and yet are not Brackish or Salt.

Italy is situated in the middle Temperate Zone, in shape of a Leg, between the
Mediterranean Sea, and the Gulf of Venice. The Alps (which F. Livi calls the
Walls of Italy and Rome) guard it toward those parts where it borders upon
France, Savoy, Switzerland and Germany. The Apennine cuts through all the
length of it. Po, Adige, Tiber and Arno, are the biggest Rivers.

The Italians are Polite, Ingenious, Subtle, and very prudent in Conversation,
pleasant in Carriage, obliging, extreme in their Customs, temperate in their
Diet, faithful to their Friends; but these Dispositions are much sullied by
four Vices, Revenge, Lust, Jealousy and Swearing.

The Women for the most part are handsome, of good Wit, and modest Behavior,
Saints in the Church, Angels in the Streets, Magpies at the Door, Sirens in the
Windows, and Goats in the Gardens.

Their Cities are therefore the fairer and better Built, because the Nobility
and Gentry usually have their Habitations in them.

Their Language is Courtly and Eloquent, much of the Latin; but the. Tuscan
Dialect, as being more polished, is received at the Court of Rome, and among
Persons of Quality.

The Italians count not their Hours as we do, from 12 to 12. beginning at
Midday and Midnight; but begin their account from Sunsetting, reckoning from
1 to 24 Hours for a Day: And therefore necessitated to alter and new-set their
Clocks every Day, the setting of the Sun being a moveable Point or Term.

In Italy are a vast number of Religious Houses, where young Women of Quality,
who for want of sufficient Fortunes or Personal Endowments, cannot get Husbands
suitable to their Birth or Quality, their Parents for a small matter dispose
of, and settle them there for their lives.

There are also Hospitals for the Entertainment of poor Travelers, who have
their Diet and Lodging for three days (Gratis), besides a piece of Money when
they go away.

There are also Hospitals to take care of all exposed Children that are brought
and put in at a Grate on purpose; for at the ringing of a Bell an Officer comes
and receives the Child, and carries it to a Nurse, and there it is maintained
till it be grown up.

The Nobility and Gentry of Italy choose rather to spend their Revenues in
building fair Palaces, and adorning them with Pictures and Statues, in making
Orchards, Gardens, Walks, than in keeping Great Houses, and plentiful Tables.
And certainly it is better Charity to employ poor people, and give them Money
for work, than to give them Money freely, and suffer them to live in Idleness.

One Phoenomenon observed at Rome by Mr. Ray was, that in sharp Frosty weather
in the middle of Winter, the water in the Fountains was so hot that he thought
it had been heated over the fire.

Italy is divided into three great parts: 1. The Higher part, which is
Lombardy, Longobardia, containing the greatest part of Gallia Cisalpina, in
which lies the Duchy of Savoy, the Principality of Piedmont, the Duchy of
Montferrat, the Commonwealth of Genoua, Riviera di Genoua, the Duchy of Milan,
Stato di Milano, of Parma, Stato del Duca di Parma, of Modena, Ducatus
Mutinensis, Stato del Duca di Modena, of Mantoua, Stato del Duca di Mantoua,
the Territories of the Venetians, Stato di Venetia, and the Bishopric of Trent.

2. The middle part, wherein are the Dominions or Land of the Church, Stato
della Chiesa, or Ditio Ecclesiae. The Estates of the Great Duke of Tuscany, or
Ditio Magni Ducis Heturiae sou Tuscio. And the Commonwealth of Lucca, Dominium
Reipublicae Lucensis.

3ly, The Lower, in which is the Kingdom of Naples, Regno di Napoli.

4ly, To which we may add a fourth, viz. the adjacent Isles Sicilia, Sardinia,
Corsica, etc.

Of Savoy and Piedmont.
map of Savoy and Piedmont SAVOY and Piedmont by Rob. Morden


THE Ancient Inhabitants of this Mountainous Country, were generally called by
the Name of Allobroges; of whom the first mention we find in Story, is the
Atonement made by Hannibal, in his passage this way, between Bruneus and his
Brother, about the Succession of the Kingdom; afterward subdued by the Romans,
under the several Conducts of C. Domitius Aenobarbus, and Qu. Fabius Maxianus:
After which, Coctius, one of the Kings of these Allobroges, was in special
Favor with Augustus Caesar, whence it had the Name of Alps Coctiae, and by
that Name reduced into the form of a Province by Nero. In the declining of the
Roman Empire, it became a part of the Kingdom of Burgundy, and passed, with
other Rights, to the Empire of Germany.

Amadis the II. Earl of Maurienne, was, by the Emperor Henry the IV. Invested
with the Title of Savoy: And Amadis the VIII. Created the first Duke by
Sigismund, Anno 1397. But the main Power and Patrimony of this House, was by
the Valor of the two Earls, Thomas and Peter, in the years 1210, and 1256, who
got by Conquest a great part of Piedmont; to which the Marquisate of Saluces
was United by Marriage of the Daughter to Charles Duke of Savoy, whose
Successors kept Possession of it, till Francis the First, pretending some Title
to it, in Right of his Mother, a Daughter of the House of Savoy, annexed it to
the Crown of France; from which it was Recovered during the Civil Wars of
France, by the Savoyards, about 1588, by whom it is still possessed: By Reason
of the difficult and narrow Ways, and those full of Thieves, it was once called
Malvoy; but the Passages being opened by the Industry of the People, and purged
of Thieves by good Laws, it was called Savoy, or Salvoy, Sabaudia Lat. Savoia
Italis, La Savoye, Gallis.

It is full of those Mountains which we call by a general Name of Alps, though
several Branches have their peculiar Names: Mount Cenis, and little St. Bernard
open the two most considerable Passages into Italy. It Is a Country Healthy
enough, but not very Fruitful, except some Valleys, which are very fertile and
delighful.

The Common People are Naturally Dull and Simple, and unwarlike, but the Gentry
Civil and Ingenious. It passes for the most Noble and primier Dukedom of
Christendom; the Power and Presence of whose Dukes are the more considerable,
because Masters of the most part of the Passages out of France into Italy; and
by the Possession of Piedmont, the County of Nice, and other Signories.

Under the name of Savoy are comprehended these six parts, Sabaudia propria, La
Savoye. Genevensis Comitatus, Le Genevois. Mauriana, La Maurienne. Tarantaisia,
La Tarantaise. Fossiniacum, Le Fossigny, and Cabillicus Tractus, Le Chablais.

Chambery, Cambericum, Camberiacum, or Cameriacum, Civaro, Cic. test Caenali,
and Forum Vicontii, test Pineto, is the Capital City of the Dukedom, and the
Residence of a Parliament; Fortified with a strong Castle, and good Outworks.

Montmelian, Monmelianum, is the place of strength, with a Citadel that
defends the rest of the Mountains, almost inaccessible, where they say the Keys
of Savoy are Locked up.

Monstiers, Monasterium, is an Archbishops See, the Civitas Cantorum of Ant.
Annecy, Annecium, was the Residence of the Bishops of Geneve.

Ripaile was the Retiring place of Felix the IV. before and after his
Pontificate, that Prince living at peace in such a retirement from business,
that it became a Proverb, To live at Ripaile, of those that only took their
pleasure, and lived at ease.

Other Places are Cluse, Clusae. Fannum Sancti Johannis. St. Jean in Mauriena
Valle. Thonon, Thononium, or Thunonium. Le Bourg St. Morice. In the Mountains
bordering on this Country and France, are the Progeny of the Albigensis, which
about the year 1100. stood for the Liberty of the Church, and the Doctrine of
their Predecessors; and about the year 1250. they were almost utterly ruined by
the Popes and French Kings. The remainder preferring their Conscience before
their Country, retired up into the Mountains, and by their Industry and good
Husbandry, made the very Rocks to bring forth Herbage for their Cattle, and
here they worshipped God according to the Reformed Churches until the latter
end of Francis the First, when happend the Massacre of Merinianum, or Marignan
Gallis, and Chabrieres. And in the year 1662. and 1663. they were again
persecuted and Massacred by the Savoyards: Mr. Ray in his Travels of 1663. met
with some of the Protestants of Lucern and Angrona at Turin, who told him that
they were in number about 15000 Souls, and 2000 Fighting-men; that they dwell
in 14 Villages, that they are the only Protestants in Italy, and have
maintained their Religion 1200 years. But what has been done to them since
1684. History is silent.

Within the Limits of Savoy is the Signory of Geneva, about eight Leagues in
compass, seated on the Lake Lemanus, divided into two parts by the Rhosne, well
fortified, and a flourishing University, Governed by a Common Council,
consisting of 200, the four chief whereof are called Sindiques. The
Church Government consists of Laymen and Ministers, begun by Calvin, Anno
1541. Formerly it was the Sovereignty of the Duke of Savoy (and therefore
mentioned in this place) but since the resistance of the great Siege 1589. they
have stood on their own Liberty, and reckoned a Commonwealth.

Of Piedmont, Piemont Gallis, Principatus Pedemontana, Lat. Gallia Subalpina,
Plin. etc.
IT is now in the possession of the Duke of Savoy. The ancient Inhabitants
whereof, were the Salassi, Libyci, and Taurini, all vanquished by the Romans,
subdued afterward by the Lombards, of whose Kingdom it remained a part till
its subversion, and then became divided into several Estates, till conquered by
Thomas and Peter Earls of Savoy, in Anno 1481.

Possessed after by the French, upon pretense of a Title by the aforesaid
Marriage; after recovered by the Savoyard, Anno 1588. And in the year 1600
compounded with Henry the Fourth, the County of Breast being given in Exchange
for the Marquisate of Salusse, Marchesato di Saluzzo Italis, whose chief place
is Saluzzo Ital. Saluce Gal. Augusta Vagiennorum, and Salinae Ptol. of which
together with the rest of Piedmont, and some places of importance in
Montferrat, this Family of Savoy do now stand possessed of.

A Country very fertile in Corn, Cattle, Wine and Fruits, Hemp and Flax,
compared with Savoy and Switzerland, but inferior to the rest of Italy, to
which it did belong.

It contains 15 Marquisates, 52 Earldoms, 160 Castles or Walled places. Divided
into these parts, viz. Ducatus Augustanus, le Duche de Aouste. Marchionatus
Segusinus, le Marquisate de Suse. Marchionatus Eporediae, le Marquisat d' Juree
Marchionatus Salutiarum, le Marquisat de Salusse. Marchionatus Cevae, le
Marquisat de Ceva, Comitatus Astensis, le Comte d' Aste, Dominium Vercellense
la Seigneurie de Verceil. To which is added Canavensis Tractus, la Canavese.

The Principal Town whereof is Turin, Augusta Taurinorum Polib. Plin. Ptol.
Taurasia App. and Live. the Court and Palace of the Duke of Savoy, situate on
the River Po, a place very important for the Guard of Italy, and Fortified with
a strong Cittad^l; adjoym^^, to it is a Park of the Duke's, six miles in
Circuit, full of Wo^^^, La^es, and Pleasant Fountains, which makes it one of
the sweetest Situations in Europe: The Sea of an Archbishop, and an University
where Eresmus took his Degree.

Vercelli, Vercellae, Plin. and Ptol. Verceil Gallis, a strong Town, bordering
upon Milain; and by the Pyrenean Treaty restored to the Duke of Savoy.

Nice, or Nizze, Nicaea Strab. Live. Vrbs Vediantiorum, built out of the Ruins
of Cemeneleum, Ptol. Cemelion, Plin. Cemela. Not. Six miles Northwards. Seated
at the Influx of the River Varus, near the Sea; beautified with a Cathedral
Church, the Bishops Palace, a Monastery of Nuns, and an Impregnable Citadel,
famous for the resistance of a Navy of 200 Sail, under the Turkish Admiral
Barbarosa, Anno 1543. Given by Joanna Ludovico II. to the Duke of Savoy 1365.
The Country is called Nicaeensis Comitatus, la Contado di Nizza, Incolis. Ie
Comte de Nice, Gallis. And is famous for the Astronomer Hipparchus, and the
Poet Parthenius. Near which is the Harbor Villa Franca, where the Dukes Galleys
do ride. -- Jurea, or Hiurea is the Eporedia of Ptol. Eporredia Plin. Eporadia
Strab. Eporadir Ant. (...) Sheld, a Bishops Sea, and gives Title to the
Marquisate del Juree. Coni Cuneu^^, taken by the French 1641. now it belongs to
the Duke of Savoy, a strong Walled Town. Suse Segusium, Ptol. Segusio Plin. and
Ant. is the chief place of the Segusinus Marchionatus. Ceva the Ceba Caseum and
Cebanum Plin. and gives name to a Marquisate. Aouste, Aosta and Augst Germ.
Avost and Aoste Gallis, is the Augusta Praetoria Plin. and Ptol. and the chief
of Augusta Ducatus, anciently a Roman Colony, and now for greatness and beauty
of her Buildings may compare with the most stately Cities of Lombardy. Saluzzo
Italis, Salutiae, Salinae, and Augusta Vagiennorum of the Ancients, Saluce,
Gallis, is the chief place, Marchesato di Saluzzo. Carmaniola, now Carmagnola,
is seated two miles from the Po River, and nine from the Tenarus. Quieras is
the Cherasceo, or Cuirasco, Carrea Plin. Clarascum and Chierasco, is Famous for
the Peace made Anno 1631. The Principality of Masseran is under the Government
of its own Prince, (e gente Ferrera Flisca) who is a Dependant on the Pope.

Pignarol, Pinaroliam, Pinarolo Ital. Fortified with a Castle of great
Importance; Sold by Charles Emanuel, to Lewis the Thirteenth of France, Anno
1631. a Commodious Pass from France to Italy on all occasions.

Of Montferat, or Montis Ferrati Ducatus, Monferrato Italis, Monferrat Gallis.
THE Estate or Country of Montferat does in part belong to the Duke of Mantua,
and the rest to the Duke of Savoy, a Mountainous Country, but of a fertile Soil.
The River Tenarus parts the Possessions of Mantua from that of Savoy.

Chief places belonging to the Duke of Mantua, are the Impregnable Fortified
Casale, or Casal, upon the Po, Bodincomagum and Bodincomagus of Plin. and Ptol.
Anno 1640. the French beat the Spaniards off from the Siege of Casal, and in
their Camp took 60000 Ducats, and a Chariot that cost 8000 Ducats.

It is Fortified with a Castle and strong Citadel; the surest Key to the
Estate of the Duke of Mantua, and indeed to all Italy.

Alba, Alba Pompeia, where Pertinax the Roman Emperor was born, but Barbarously
murdered by the Pretorian Soldiers; now belongs to the Duke of Savoy, since
the Peace of Quieras, or Pace Clarasci.

Trin Gallis, Trino Italis, Tridinum and Tridinium Veteri, a Walled Town,
restored to the Duke of Mantua by the Peace aforesaid.

Acqui, Aquae Statellae Strab. Aquae Statyella Plin. belonging to the Duke of
Mantua.

Chief Rivers are the Great and Little Doire. The Stura, and the Denarus, and
the Bormio.

Of the State of Genoua, Res-publica Genuensis il Genovesato seu Riviera di
Genoua.
ONce very large, at present containing only the Ancient Liguria, in the
Continent, the Isle Corsica and Capraria.

The old Ligurians were a stout and warlike Nation, vanquished by the Romans,
and made one of the 11 Regions of Italy, in Augustus Caesar's Division; and one
of the 17 in the time of Constantine the Emperor. A Country very Mountainous in
the Land, and full of craggy Rocks to the Sea, but among those Hills are Rich
Valleys, abounding in Citrons, Limons, Oranges and Vines, which produces
excellent Wines.

It Is in length about 150 Miles, in breadth not one fourth part so much, tho
some pretenders to Geography tell us, it is 800 in length, and not so much in
breadth.

The chief City whereof is called Genoua, of old Genua; first built by Janus
the first King of Italy, but miserably destroyed by Mago the Brother of
Hannibal; built again by the Senate of Rome, but again ruined by the Lombards,
and re-edified by Charles the Great, situate on the Shore of the Ligurian Sea,
full of stately Palaces richly adorned within and without, to which are joined
pleasant and delightful Gardens. Its Strada Nuova or Newstreet, being a long
and spacious Street; on each side embellished with stately Palaces, for the
most part all supported with vast Pillars of Marble, not to be parrallel'd in
the World: Among which is the Jesuits College and magnificent Church, but
inferior to a new Church, over one of whose Altars (to omit other Ornaments of
an excessive Value) are placed four Pillars of wreathed Aggat of an incredible
Greatness. The Palace of the Doria with its famous Bird-Cage. To which we may
add its new Mould built even in the Sea, which make the Port (encompassed with
fair Buildings, in form of a Theater) twice as large, and much safer than
before; opposite to which, on a Pharos is a Lanthorn of great bigness, to give
light to Seamen in the Night. This City is in Circuit about 8 Miles, fortified
toward the Sea by Art, toward the Land by Art and Nature. Now Genoua, la
Superba. The Inhabitants are addicted to Trade and Usury. The Women are allowed
the Liberty of the Streets.

Other places of Note, are Sarzana or Serezana, a strong Fortress within the
Confines of Tuscany. Principatus Monoeci, Monaco Incolis, Mourgues Gallis,
Hercules Monoeci Portus of old, is a small, but a strong Town, seated upon a
Rock under its own Prince. Gente Grimaldi, An. 1641. It received the French
Protection. Finale is the Polliopice of Ant. test Siml.

Oneglia is a Principality under the Duke of Savoy, test Baud.

Savona, Savo Live. famous for the Interview of Ferdinand of Spain, and Lewis
the 12th of France, as also for yiedling three Popes to the Church of Rome.
Vintimiglia Abiniminium Ptol. Albintimilium Tac. Albintemelium Cic. Vintimilium
Var. and Albenga Albingaunum Plin. Albigaunum Ptol. both well fortified.

As for their Government, the principal of their Magistrates has the Name of
Duke, to whom there are assistant 8 Principal Officers, which with the Duke are
called the Signeury, which is also in matters of greatest concern subordinate
to the General Council, consisting of 400 Persons, all Gentlemen of the City,
who with the Signeury constitute the whole Body of the Commonwealth.

Their Forces have been 10000 ready to Arm at any time, and 25 Galleys always
ready in the public Arsenal, 4 Galleys at Sea to secure their Trade.

They are now under the Shelter and Protection of the Spaniards.

Of the Duchy of Milan. Ducatus Mediolanensis Stato de Milano.
WHose Ancient Inhabitants were the Insubres, but is now under the Obedience of
the King of Spain, seated in the best part of Lombardy, rich in Natures gifts,
and for its wonderful Fertility, esteemed the Flower in the Garden of Italy,
and the Noblest Duchy in Christendom; the ways are there very pleasant, set
out almost as strait as a Line, with channels of running Water, and rows of
Trees on both sides; the most desirable Place to live in that can be seen, if
the Government were not so excessive severe, that there is nothing but Poverty
over all this rich Country.

Its chief City is Milan, Mediolanum Strab. Plin. Milatio Ital. M^yland Germ.
which tho so often ruined, and its Foundations sown with Salt; having been
Besieged 40, and taken 22 times; yet it exalts it self as the fairest, and
greatest City of all Lombardy, seated in a wide Plain, environed with several
Rivers, strongly guarded with a spacious and almost impregnable Castle, besides
its other Fortifications, the Buildings fair and stately, three especially very
Magnificent, its Castle or Citadel, Hospital or Lazarette, its Cathedral or
Dome; here are 36 Monasteries of Nuns, 30 Convents of Friars, 96 Parochial, 11
Collegiat Churches, most of which are stately Structures, beautified with
curious Paintings, Images and Sepulchers. In the Cabinet of the Chanoine
Setalla, are ^are Curiosities, both of Art and Nature.

The whole City is about 10 Miles in compass, exceeding Populous, containing
300000 Inhabitants; very Rich, having many Families of Nobility and Gentry, of
great Commerce by reason of its Merchants, Shopkeepers and Artificers, and a
general Staple for all Merchandises from France, Spain, and other Parts of
Italy and Germany.

Other Places in Milan, are 1 Pavia, Papia seu Ticinum, made an University by
Charles the 4th, guarded with a Castle, and adorned with the richest Cathedral
in Europe, worth 300000 Crowns per Annum, famous for the Battle in which
Francis the first King of France was taken Prisoner by Charles the 5th. 2.
Alexandria, or Alessandria, now the strongest Work of the whole Duchy; well
fortified against the Assaults and Batteries of the French. 3. Cremena, seated
on the Banks of the Poe, a Place of good Trade, its Houses stately, its Streets
large, beautified with curious Gardens, famous for its high Tower and Cathedral
Church. Here Vitellius Soldiers were defeated by the Forces of Vespasian, and
the Town fired by them. Lodi is the Laus Pompeja of the Ancients, a Frontier
Town, but a miserable Garrison, 20 Miles from Milan, in the Venetian Territory.
Tortona is the Dertona Ptol. and Plin. Derton, Steph. Derthon or Darthon,
Strab. taken by the French, 1642. after delivered to the Spaniards. Novara,
Crema and Mortara, are also considerable. Her Lakes are Lago Magiore, Varbanus
Lacus of Strab. in length 300 Stadia, 56 Miles, and 6 broad, with her two
Borremean Islands, the loveliest Spots of Ground in the World. 2. Lago Del
Coma. 3. Lugani Lacus, or Lago di Lugano. Its Rivers are Ollius, now Oglio
River; Abdua, now Add River; Lambrus fl. hodie, Lambro River, Ticinus fl. now
Tesine River, which runs with such a force, that in 3 hours with one Rower, Dr.
Burnet was carried 30 Miles. Sencia fl. or Scesia River. 4. Coma, or Comum,
where the Plinies were born, on the South of the Lago de Coma, aforesaid, a
Lake 48 Miles in length. Laricus Lacus, Strab. and Plin.

Of Modena.
THE Dukedom of Modena, Ducatus Mutinensis, Stato del Duca di Modena, contains
the Cities of Modena and Reggio, with the Territories adjoining to them; Modena
the Capital City, anciently better known by the name of Mutina, famous for the
first Battle between Antony and Augustus Caesar. Now the Residence of their
Duke, whose Palace, tho not outwardly Great, yet is richly adorned within;
whose Cabinet or Museum, is well furnished with choice of natural Rarities,
Jewels, etc. Brissello, Brixellum Plin. and Ptol. famous for the Death of Otho
the Roman Emperor, who here Slew himself, because his Army was unfortunately
Vanquished by Vitellius. Reggio, Regium Lepedi, a Place that has occasioned
great Stirs between the Popes and the old Dukes of Ferrara. Here are many
Sculptors both for Ivory and Wood.

Of Parma.
THe Dukedom of Parma, Ducatus Parmensis, or il Ducato di Parma, is much of the
same Nature for Soil and Air, as Modena.

Its chief City Parma, is seated in a Fruitful Plain, 5 Miles distant from the
Appennine, about 4 Miles in compass, adorned with many rich and stately
Structures, very Populous, and well inhabited by Gentry, who are much addicted
to Learning, Arts, and Arms, the grounds about this City are of excellent
Pastorage, which feed abundance of Sheep. Here is made the curious Parmasan
Cheese so much esteemed throughout all Europe.

The Duke has here his Palace, a place of great Delight and State; its
Churches are beautiful and rarely Embellished with Pictures and Images.

2. Piacenza, or Placentia, famous for the Resistance which it made both to
Hannibal and Asdrubal; now renowned for its Fairs quarterly kept; which all
Italy, Germany, and other Countries do frequent, and here make their Exchanges.

The River Trebia was witness to the overthrow or the Romans by Hannibal.

Of the Duchy of Mantua.
THe Dukedom of Mantua, Ducatus Mantuanus, Ducato di Mantoua Italis, is a
Country plentiful in Corn, Pasture, Wines, and all sort of Fruit; Mantoua the
chief City is seated in a Lake, 20 Miles in compass, by Nature very strong and
well fortified; having no entrance but over Cawsies. The Dukes Palace is fair
and stately, and the best furnished in all Italy, except his Palace at
Mirmirolla, 5 Miles from the City, which for the Pleasures and Delights
thereof, and for its rich Furniture and beautiful Gardens, may acceptably
entertain the best Prince in Christendom. Mantoua is of great Antiquity,
Schottus says, it is 4 Miles in compass, has 8 Gates, and about 50000 Souls.
It was miserably attacked by the Germans, 1619. and by the Emperor Ferdinand
2d's Army in the year 1630. The Dukes yearly Revenue is said to be 400000
Crowns; yet the present Duke is very poor, being indebted to the Venetians, as
Leti says, four Millions of Crowns. There are besides four or five small
Princes, but Sovereign Lords, viz. Novellara, Guastella, Bozolo, Sabionetta,
whose male-line is failed; Castiglione and Solfare.

As also of the Estate of the Duchy of Montferrat, which does in part belong
to the Duke of Mantua, the other part to the Duke of Savoy, as aforesaid.

Of the States of Venice.
THE Demeasnes of the Venetians are very full of Rivers, Lakes, and Channels;
it is a Republique of above 1200 years standing, and the Bulwark of Christendom
against the Turks. The chief City is Venice, or Venetia, Seated at the bottom
of the Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of Venice, built on 72 Islands, distant from the
main Land about five miles, and defended from the fury of the Sea by a Bank of
(some say) 60, others 35 miles in length, open in seven places, which serve for
passages for Boats or Gondola's, of which there are 1300, but for Ships or
Vessels of great burden, the only passage is at Malamocco, and Castle Lido,
which are strongly fortified; it is about eight miles in compass, having about
4000 Bridges, of which that of the Rialto is the chief, built over the Grand
Canal. The Lagunes, or Shallows of Venice, sink of late so much, that the
preserving it still an Island is like to become as great a charge to the
Venetians as the keeping out of the Sea is to the Dutch.

Its Arsenal is the most beautiful, the biggest, and the best furnished, in all
Europe, being about two miles in Circuit, where they always keep 200 Galleys,
with all Materials for War.

Its Magazine of all sorts of Engines and Arms for Sea and Land, among which
are 1000 Coats of Plates garnished with Gold, and covered with Velvet.

But above all, its Church of St. Mark, Reported to be the fairest and richest
in all the World; a Church of Admirable Mosaic Work, with Pillars of Marble,
Porphyry, etc. and for the inside, the Riches of it are so great, the Images,
Tombs, etc. so glorious, the Altars so adorned with Gold, Silver, Pearls, and
Precious Stones, that all the Treasury of the State may seem to be amassed in
the Decking of it.

In this City are 200 particular Palaces, built of Marble, adorned with
Columns, Statues, Pictures, etc. of great Value, of such Grandeur, as that they
are fit to Lodge, and give Entertainment to any Prince; 17 Rich Hospitals, 56
Tribunals, or Courts of Justice, 67 Parish-Churches, 26 Monasteries of Nuns, 54
Convents of Friars, 18 Chapels, 6 Free Schools, and its Piazza's sumptuously
adorned with Statues, Paintings, etc.

As for the Religion of this State, though they Tolerate that of the Greek
Church, they profess that of the Church of Rome, but with Caution and Respect
to their own Authority.

Of their Forces some estimate may be made by the Arms they brought against
Lewis the XII. where they had 2000 Men of Arms, 3000 Light Horse, and 30000
Foot, most of their own Subjects, without any Detachments from their Forts or
Garrisons.

And a signal Evidence of their Power at Sea, was their great Fleet set out
against the Grand Signior for the War of Cyprus, Anno 1570. in which they
Manned out one great Gallion, 11 great Galleys, 25 tall Ships, and 150 Galleys
of lesser size. To sum up all, they once held a War for seven years together
against all the Princes of Europe, except England; in all which time, they
neither wanted Men nor Money.

We may conclude therefore, That as Europe is the Head of the World, and Italy
the Face of Europe; so Venice is the Eye of Italy, the fairest, strongest, and
most Active part in that Powerful Body.

The Annual Revenues of this Republic, according to Mr. Rays information, was
about five Millions, and 300 and 20000 Venetian Ducats yearly.

Other Cities with their Territories belonging to the State of Venice, are the
pleasant Vicenza, or Vicentia; the Healthy, Populous, and Fruitful Brescia,
Brixia. The strong Fortresses Crema, six miles of which is the famous Cave of
Custoza 4000 Foot long, and 3000 broad, and three miles in Circuit, with its
stately Temple Sancta Maria della Cruce, and Bergamo: The pleasant
Physick-University Padoua, Padua, the Patavium of the Ancients, built by
Antenor, and is famous for the Birth of Livy, Zabarel, and Maginus, noted for
the Civility of the Men, and Chastity of the Women, with its Garden of Simples.
Tarvisium, Trevigi, with its excellent Wheat. Verona, with its Hill Baldus,
Famous for Medicinal Herbs. The Territory of Friuli, where is the well
fortified Palma. Feltre and Belluno. The Territory of Istria, Istrie Gall.
Hystereich Germ. where is Triest, or Tergestum, Petana, now Pedena, belonging
to the Emperor. Citta Nova, or Aemonia, Parenzo, Parentum, and Pola. Rovigo
once belonging to the Dukedom of Ferrara, with Chioggia, the Bulwark of Venice.

Besides all these, the State of Venice commands a great part of Dalmatia, with
the Islands Corfu, Cephalonia, Ithaca, Zant, Cithera, and others. The Isle of
St. Maure, and the strong Prevesa, were in the year 1685. conquered from the
Turks.

The Bishopric of Trent, which belongs to its proper Bishop, is in the
Protection of the House of Austria: Its chief City of the same Name, is
Inhabited by Italians and Germans, and is Famous for the Council held there.
But of this we have Treated of more at large in the Description of Tirol in
Germany.

Of the Estates of the Church or Pope.
THE Second part of Italy, according to our Method, contains the Estates of the
Church, of Tuscany, and Lucca: The Territories of the Church are the more
considerable, because the Pope, to whom they belong, is a Spiritual as well as
a Temporal Prince, Chief and Sovereign Pontifex, as he styles himself, of all
Christendom: Patriarch of Rome, and of the West; Primate and Hexarch of Italy,
Metropolitan of the Suffragan-Bishops of Rome, and Bishop of St. John Lateran.

The chief City is Rome, formerly the Capital City of the most considerable
Empire in the World; Mistress of the fairest part of the Universe: Famous for
her great Men, that excelled in Valor, Justice, and Temperance: The Seat of
Kings, Consuls, and Emperors; said to have been 50 miles in compass, and her
Walls Fortified with 750 Towers. But now not having the Moiety of its former
pristine splendour and Magnitude, scarce containing 11 miles in circuit; yet few
Cities can compare with her, if we consider her Antiquity, her Churches, her
Palaces, and other Curiosities. Here was the Capitol saved from the Fury of the
Gauls by the Cackling of Geese. It was twice burnt, once in the Civil Wars of
Marius and Sylla, and in the Wars of Vespasian and Vitellius. Here was the
Temple of Janus open in the time of War, and shut in the time of Peace, which
happened but three times during all their Monarchy: 1. In the time of Numa: 2.
After the Punick War: And 3ly, in the Reign of Augustus, when our Savior was
born. Nor must I forget the Ponte Molle, a mile out of the City, anciently Pons
Milvius, where Constantine was showed the Cross, with these words, In Hoc Signo
Vinces. This City is seated on the Banks of the River Tyber (formerly upon ten
Hills, though now chiefly in the Campus Martius.) On the top of the Vatican
Hill is the proud Palace of the Popes, large enough to Entertain three
Sovereign Princes at once, and their Attendants; beautified and enriched with
excellent Paintings and Curiosities, with the Garden Beluedere, famous for its
rare Plants, delightful Walks, and curious Statues. On this Hill is the Church
of St. Peter, the most splendid and famous in all Rome; the most sumptuous,
stately, and magnificent Structure in the World, of that Majestic bulk and
greatness, that it exceeds in all dimensions the most famous Temples of the
Ancients; in length 520 Foot, and 385 in breadth; adorned with Paintings,
Tombs, and other choice Relics. My Bounds will not permit to speak of its
other Churches, Hospitals, Monasteries, Convents; of its Libraries, as the
Vatican, the Jesuits College, etc. The Palaces of the Cardinals are stately
Structures, and richly adorned; to which are joined pleasant Gardens. Here are
several Piazza's, abundance of Antiquities and Statues, which I shall not name;
but may not forget the Castle of St. Angelo, which, for its strength, is
esteemed impregnable, unless starved; and here the Pope lives in more State
than any Prince in Christendom. The chief of the other Cities and Territories
belonging to the Estates of the Church, are Bologna (alias) Bononia; famous for
its Study of the Civil Law, for the Pope's Palace, or retiring-place; Rich,
Populous, and well Inhabited by Nobility and Gentry, the chief University in
Italy. Ferrara, Ferrarea, with its Iron Mines, beautifully built, adorned with
many Suburb-Edifices; in the midst of it is a spacious Marketplace, into which
do open about twenty Streets, uniform and strait, and Comachio. The once fair
Haven Ravenna, in the Province of Romandiola, when Caesar Augustus kept his
Navy here; famous for the Seat of the Emperor Honorius, and Successors of the
Gothish Kings; of the Exarchs, and of its Patriarch: now the Haven is choked
up, and its Land covered with Water. Cervia, environed with Fens, and is famous
for its great quantity of Salt, as Fienza is for its Earthen Ware. Vrbin,
Vrbinum, seated at the bottom of the Apennine Hills, once famous for a
sumptuous Palace, and a most excellent Library; as also for Polydore Virgil,
the Author of the History of England. Rimini, Ariminum of old, the taking of
which so frighted Pompey, that he left Rome. Other places are Fano, the
Seaport Town to Vrbin. Senigaglia, the Seno-Gallia of old; and Pesaro, both
Maritine Towns. On the Banks of Metro, of old Metaurus, was fought the great
Battle betwixt Asdrubal the Brother of Hannibal, and the two Consuls, Livius
and Cl. Nero, where 56000 of the Carthaginians were slain, 5400 taken
Prisoners, as Livy writes.

Ancona, in Marchia Anconitana, or Strato Marcha del Ancona, the best Haven of
Italy, toward the Adriatic Sea: And here I must not forget Loretto, or St.
Maria Lauretane, famous for the Church of the Virgin Mary; a stately Structure,
richly adorned with Presents, Offerings, and Gifts of Princes, Nobles, etc.
whose Organs and other Music makes an Harmonious Sound to those that go on
Pilgrimage thither, either for Devotion, or Penance. Ascoli is the Asculum,
near which was fought the second Battle between the Romans and Pyrrhus; it was
also the Seat of the War called Bellum Sociale. Macerata the Seat of the
Governors of this Province; Firmo the Strong.

Perugia, or Perusia, is chief of the Province so called, seated on the Banks
of Tyher, in a rich and fruitful Soil: Here it was that Augustus Besieged L.
Antonius, and Fulvia, the Wife of M. Antony; and near to this City is the Lake
de Perugia, of old Thrasemene, of about 30 miles in compass; near whose Banks
Hannibal slew Flaminius, and 15000 of his Romans. Spoleto, in the Duchy of
Vmbria, of great Antiquity, where are yet remaining stately Aquaducts, the
Temple of Concord, and the Ruins of a spacious Theater. Here is also the high
Orvieto, in the Province of Orvietin, seated on a high Rock. In Terra Sabina
are Narni, Nequino, and Terni. In Campania Romana, the chief places besides
Rome are Ardea, now ruined, once the Seat of Turnus King of the Rutuli, the
Rival and Competitor to Aeneas; taken by Tarq. Superbus, the refuge of the
Romans, when the Gauls had taken Rome; as is also Alba Longa, once the Seat of
the Sylvian Kings after the Duel between the three Brethren of the Horatii and
Curatii, it was ruined by Tullus Hostilius. Iteranni of old. And the River
Allia where Brennus with his Gauls overcame the Roman Army of 40000, and
marched to Rome, and had agreed for 1000 pound weight of Gold to forsake the
City, but before the payment of the money they were vanquished by Camillus.
Alba, the Seat of the Sylvian Kings. Palestrina, Praeneste, of old the refuge
of Marius against Sylla, who killed 12000 of the Citizens when he took the
Town. Ostia built by Ancus Marcius, seated at the mouth of Tibur, but its Haven
stopped up; whose Bishop Consecrates the Pope. Lavinia, so named from Lavinia
Daughter to Latinus King of the Laurentini, married to Aeneas. Trivoli, Tibur
of the Ancients.

Chief places in the Patrimony of St. Peter, are Veii a City once of great
strength, wealth, and compass. In the assault of which 306 of the Fabii were
slain in one day, only one Child left at home, who restored the Family, and was
the Ancestor of Fabius Maximus, the Preserver of Italy against Hannibal. After
a Siege of ten years, this City was taken and destroyed by Furius Camillus.
Civita Vecchia, Maritine Town, abounding with Allom. Here are kept the Popes
two Galleys, maintained by 30000 Ducats, the yearly Tribute of 40000
Curtezans. Terracina is the ancient Anxur near the Promontorium Circeium, now
Monte Circello, famous for the dwelling of the Enchantress Circe. Monte
Fiascone, where is the so much celebrated Wine near the Lake Volsinii, now
Bolsena. Viterbo is a large and well-situate Town, where is the Monument of
Pope John 21, in the Domo. Here are Sulphure-Wells, and hot Springs.

Intermingled with the Estate of the Church, lies the Duchy of Castro, with
the Town of Ronciglione, the Country of Citta di Castello, Strato del Duca di
Parma, whose chief place is Castellana. The Sabatia, now il Ducato di
Bracciano, the Title of the Family of the Vrsines, near the Lake so called. And
lastly, the Republic of Marino, a little Town on the top of a high Hill or
Rock. The whole Territory is but one Mountain about three miles in length, and
about ten miles round, containing three Villages more, and eight Corn-Mills,
and two Powder-Mills, and about four or 5000 Inhabitants, of fighting-men about
1500. It has been a Free State or Commonwealth for about a 1000 years, as the
Inhabitants boast.

Of Tuscany, La Toscana.
TVSCANY comprehends the greater part of the Ancient Hetruria, or Etruria, and
is a Country full of spacious Fields, and fruitful Valleys, swelled here and
there with pleasant Mountains, abundantly stored with delicious Wines, and
other Blessings of Nature: Its Metropolis is Florence, Florentia, or Fiorinza
la Bella, a fair and flourishing City, about six miles in compass; seated in a
fruitful and pleasant Plain; the River Arno divides it into two parts, which
are joined together by four fair Stone-Bridges: Famous for the Stately and
Magnificent Palace of the Great Duke, richly adorned; and for the largeness of
the Building, the Architecture, and Ornaments of it, as also for the Gardens,
Fountains, Statues, Rarities, in the Gallery, in the Closets, Armory,
Argentoria and Theriotrophium, equalling, if not surpassing most Palaces in
Europe. The Cathedral, or Domo St. Maria Florida, is also one of the chief
Ornaments of it; as also the New Chapel of St. Lorenzo, said to be the most
rich and magnifick Structure in the World.

The second City is Pisa, once a rich, populous, and flourishing City when a
Free State, now poor, and much desolate; seated at the entrance of the River
Arno into the Sea, recovered to the Florentines by the Valor of Sir John
Hawkwood, an Englishman, now much eclipsed of its former Riches and Power:
Memorable for its fair Aquaduct, of about 500 Arches; its Cathedral with Brazen
folding Doors, curiously engraved; and its Steeple so built, that on all sides
it seems crooked at the top, ready to fall on the Head of the Spectator.

Siena, an Inland City, seated in a large, pleasant, and fertile Territory;
enriched with Mines of Silver, and store of Marble; adorned with beautiful
Buildings; as, the proud Palace, the lofty Tower of Mangio, its Domo built of
black and white Marble; part of it paved with inlaid Marble, containing part of
the History of the Bible.

Legorn, or Livorno, Portus Liburnus of old, a fair and beautiful City,
accounted the strongest, and one of the principal Towns of Trade, in the
Mediterranean Sea, and the Scale of the Florentine Dominions, by whom it was
purchased of the Genoyses for 120000 Ducats; now the Residence of many
Merchants and Strangers. The Haven within the Mole is but small, but there is
good riding for Ships without. Here the Wind is Easterly in the Forenoon, and
Westerly in the Afternoon, and after Sunset no Wind stirring. At Pistoya first
began the Quarrels of the Neri and Beanchi, and of the Guelfe and Ghibellini.

The Commonwealth of Lucca is about 80 miles in compass, very fertile, and so
well Inhabited, that in two or three hours time it can have ready 30000 men in
Arms. The chief City, Lucca, is a Free Town, rich, and splendid; well
Fortified, and Adorned with many fair Edifices, and stately Churches, of which,
that of St. Martin is the chief: It Is seated in a Plain about two miles in
Circuit. It bought its Liberty of the Emperor Rodolphus, and has been ever
since very zealous to preserve so fair a purchase. It was the Meeting Place of
Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus, where they joined into a Confederacy. And here the
Women walk the Streets more freely than in other Cities of Italy. The public
Revenue is thought to be 100000 Crowns per Annum. Their Olives the best in
Italy.

Adjoining to Lucca are the Principality of Malespine, and the Principality of
Massa, containing only Massa and Carrara; the last is often the Residence of
the Prince, the other is noted for its white Marble.

The Great Duke in all his Dominions is Supreme and absolute Lord, and imposes
what Taxes and Gabels he pleases; every House pays to him the Tenth of its
yearly Rent. No House or Land sold, but at least one Tenth part goes to him. No
Woman married but he has 8 per Cent. of her Portion. And every one that goes
to Law pays 2 per Cent. of what he sues for. Every Heifer pays a Crown. And not
a Basket of Eggs that comes to Market but pays some Toll. Besides the
Territories of Florence and Pisa, called the old State, of which he is absolute
Sovereign; and the Territory of Siena, called the New State, for which he is
Feudatory of the King of Spain: He is also possessed of a great part of the
Isle of Elba, which he holds of Spain; part of Graffignana, bought of the
Marquesses of Malespina. The Earldom of St. Fiora purchased of the Strozzi. The
Marquisate of Sarano. And the Earldom of Pitigliano and Sarano, and some other
small places for which he is Feudatory of the Emperor. Radicofani in Tuscany,
and Burgo San Sepulchro in Vmbria, for which he is Feudatory to the Pope.

His Cittadels and Fortresses are well Fortified, and provided with Ammunition
and Victuals, in which he keeps four or 5000 Soldiery in constant pay. He is
able to send into the Field 40000 Foot, 3000 Horse. He can put to Sea twelve
Galleys, two Galleasses, and twenty Ships of War.

Intermingled in the Territories of the Great Duke are the Principality of
Piombino, Noted for some Mines of Lead; Fortified with a strong Castle, in the
Hands of the Spaniards; as also some other Ports and Pieces on the Sea, viz.
Telamon, Remarkable for the great Battle fought near unto it by the Romans and
the Gauls, where Attilius was slain, but the Victory was got by Aemilius, with
the slaughter of 40000, and 10000 Prisoners of the Enemies.

Estat delli Presidi, Orbitello, Portus Hercole, and Monte Argentaro, are all
subject to the Spaniards, and strongly Garrisoned by them.

Of Naples, or Neapolitanum Regnum Latin. Regno di Napoli Incol.
THE Third part of Italy we have comprehended under the Kingdom of Naples, of
large extent, and very Fertile; abounding with Wines and Wheat, and famous for
its brave Horses: Here you may see large and beautiful Fields, over-shaded with
rich Vines, thick and delightful Woods, watered with sweet Fountains, wholesome
Springs, Medicinal Waters, Baths of diverse Virtues; enriched with Mines of
several Metals, and decked with sundry Physical Herbs: Replenished with sair
and beautiful Cities and Towns.

The chief City is Naples, one of the fairest in Europe; Seated on the
Mediterranean shore, amongst pleasant Hills, and fruitful Fields; Fortified
with four brave Castles, besides a strong Wall, Ditches, Towers, etc. Enriched
and Beautified with many superb Structures, and Magnificent Churches,
Monasteries, Colleges, Palaces of Princes and Nobles, with pleasant and
delightful Gardens, a commodious and safe Port and Haven, where are kept store
of Galleys. Here was the Rebellion under Massanello, and in this City the
Disease Morhus Gallicus was first known; and nigh unto it stands the Hill Monte
Grogo, formerly Vesuvius; no less famous now for its Grogo Wines, than of old
for its casting forth smoke and flames of fire. Upon the very top is a great
Pit or Hollow, in form of an Amphitheater of about a mile round. Near to which
is the Grotta di Cane, where the venomous vapor ascends not above a foot from
the Ground.

Other places of Note, are important Cajeta, on a Capacious Bay. Delicious
Capua, the Pleasures whereof enervated the Victorious Arms of Hannibal. Nola
was witness of Hannibal's overthrow by Marcellus. Near Cuma was the Lake
Avernus, with its unwholesome and Sulphurous stink, so infecting the Air, that
the Birds flying over, lose their Lives. At Puteoli, now Pozzuolo, was the
Bridge of Ships to Baiae three miles over, made by Caligula in a Bravado to awe
Neptune, and to exceed the like Acts of Xerxes and Darius. Misenum was one of
the Stations of Angustus's Armada, as Ravenna was the other that awed the whole
Roman Empire, and the Burial-place of Misenus the Companion of Aeneas, test
Virg.

Baiae famous for Antiquities, viz. the Sweating Vault, or Bagne de Tritoli,
and Monte de Cenere raised by an Earthquake.

And here was Aeneas's Descent into Hell, Fabled by the Poets; and the Cave, or
Grot of one of the Sybills. The Grot or Hole through Mount Pausilypus, about a
mile in length, and 12 Foot high, and broad enough for two Carts to pass one
another. Amalfi, where was invented the Mariners Compass, Anno 1300. by Flavio.
The Physic School Salerno, Nero's 100 Churches under Ground in the Rocks, and
his admirable Fish Pond within the Earth, within a mile of the Sea; in the
Cathedral is the Monument of Hildebrand, or Pope Gregory the 7th. and the
Seashore Polecastro, once Buxentum. The well-traded Mart; Lanciano, four miles
from the Adriatic. Theate, now Viti di Chieti, seven miles from the Sea.
Sulmo, Ovid's Birthplace. The Lakes Lesina and Varanus, memorable for Eels;
and for that draining cannot diminish them, nor floods increase them. Locris is
famous for the Lawmakers Zaleucus, and for the Victory of Cunomus an Excellent
Musician upon Aristonus of Rhegium of the same Profession. Gallipoli affording
abundance of Oil. Manfredonia, an Archbishops See, with its Capacious Harbor,
and Impregnable Castle. Populous St. Severine, the Rich Soiled Barri. The high,
steep, and full of cragged Rocks, Angelo, ol. Garganus Mons, a place Defensible
by Nature, and strong by Art. The Important Haven-Town, Berrulum, now Berletta.
The poor Village Cannae, near the Banks of Aufidus, now Lafanto, once memorable
for the great Defeat that Hannibal gave to the Romans, of whose Army he slew
42700 in one place.

Rich Lecca. The Choked Haven Brindisi. The Capacious Port Otronto, Hidruntum
of old, taken by Mahomet the Great, Anno 1481. The once well Fortified
Rossanum, now Rosano. Old Tarentum, where lived Archytas, so famous for his
Flying-Dove. The Ancient Cosentia, now Cozenza, on seven Hills; seated between
two Rivers, of which the one turns Hair red, and Silk white; the other Hair
and Silk black. St. Euphemie, where Roses grow thrice a Year. And Desolate
Rhegio.

To conclude, here are in this Kingdom Twenty Archbishops, One hundred twenty
seven Bishops, Thirteen Princes, Twenty seven Dukes, Twenty four Marquesses,
and Ninety Earls.

The Fourth General part of Italy, we said, might comprehend the Islands of
Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, etc.

Of Sicily.
map of Sicily SICILIA


OF all the Islands in the Mediterranean-Sea, Sicily is the most Eminent, both
for its Repute and Bigness: It was once, if we may credit the Ancients, joined
to the Continent, parted by an Inundation of the Sicilian Sea from Italy; now
divided by a small Channel a mile and half broad, between Messina and Regio,
called the Far, or Phare of Messina; once terrible from the frightful Names of
Scylla and Charybdis: the first a Rock, toward the North in Italy; the other a
Gulf, or Whirlepool, on Sicily-side, which gave the Occasions of the Proverb,
Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charybdim; now not so dangerous or
affrightful to the skilful Pilot.

It had its Name from the Siculii, a People of Italy; before that, it was
called Sicania, from King Sicanus, who came thither before the Trojan War, with
a great Number of Iberians. By the Greeks, called Trinacria; by the Latins,
Triquetra, from its three Promontories. It is placed under so favorable an
Aspect of the Heavens, and so rich a Soil, that the Mountains themselves, even
to the tops thereof, are found fruitful.

The People that now Inhabit it, are Ingenious, Eloquent, and full of Talk,
prone to Revenge, Subtle, Envious, and Flatterers, Valiant and greedy of
Honor, not much addicted to Traffic or Labor.

This Island was famous for Aeschylus, the first Tragedian of Fame; Diodorus
Siculus, the Historian; Empedocles, the first inventer of Rhetoric; Euclid,
the famous Geometrician; Archimedes, the Mathematician, who made a Sphere of
that Art and Bigness, that one standing within, might see the several Motions
of every Orb.

The chief Places are, 1. Messina, of great Strength, as well by Nature as Art;
strongly Walled, fortified with Bulwarks, a strong Citadel, and a commodious
Haven; beautified with fair and stately Buildings; the chiefest Place of
Traffic in the whole Island, well frequented with Gentry, Citizens and
Strangers, who live in great Delight and Pleasure. It lately, in a Rebellion,
was under the Command of the French; but they abandoning it, it is now returned
to the Spanish Government, who have four Castles, and the City as many in their
Command. The City Gates stand open all Night, for any to go in or out. The
Government is by six Jurats, four of the Gentry, and two of the Citizens.

Its other Places of Note, are Syracusa, once the Metropolis of the whole
Island; the greatest and goodliest City of the Greeks; of a strong Situation,
and excellent Prospect: The Ruins and Foundations of it do still demonstrate
its pristine Grandeur. Noto, a City which heretofore contended with Syracuse
for greatness situate on a very high Rock, unaccessable on all Sides but by one
narrow Passage.

The fair and capacious Harbor Passari, the never fortified Haven Augusta. The
Navel of the Island, Castro Giovanni, with its Mines of Salt. Leontini, with
its Lake, the Fishing whereof is yearly worth 18000, some say 500000 Crowns.
The Midland-town Enna, where Pluto is said to have Ravished Proserpine.
Paraymus now Palermo, Situate on the West Cape of the Island, beautified with
large Streets, delicate Buildings, strong Walls, and Magnificent Temples, with
its Artificial Haven, forced out by a mighty Pierre, a Work of vast Expense; an
Archbishops See, an University, and Competitor for Trade with Messina. The
Port Trapani, was the Drepanum of old, affords the best Seamen.

The Ruined Erex, near Mont St. Julian, the Seat of King Acestes, who so kindly
entertained Aeneas and his wandering Trojans. The Ancient Catania, the strong
Taormina, Tauromenium, near where the Cyclops dwelt; near Milazzo was Sextus
Pompeius Defeated by Augustus. Gerganti the Agrigentum and (...) of old, is
Famous for the Tyrant. Phalaris, and the brazen Bull of Perillus.

The chief Hills in this Isle, are Mont Hybla, Famous for its Bees and Honey;
and Mount Aetna, for its once continually sending forth Flames of Fire; the
Flames now commonly not being so great and visible as formerly; but the
extraordinary Eruptions and Conflagrations, when they happen, are still as
terrible and amazing, as Ruinous and Destructive to the Country.

The Ancient Aegathes, at the West end of Sicily, are famous for the Defeat of
Catullus by the Carthagenians in the first Punic War.

Sardinia, Sardegna Ital. Zerdegna Hisp. Strab. and Cic. Sardon Hesy.
Sandaliotis Plat. Ichnusa Plin. once a Carthagenian Colony; the next Island to
Sicily for greatness in the Mediterranean, where the Earth is more benign than
the Heavens; the length about 45 German Miles, the breadth about 26. Its chief
Places are, Calaris Plin. Carallis Ptol. now Cagliari, the Seat of the
Viceroy; a good Haven, and well frequented. Here is the Beast called Mufoli,
of whose Skin is made the right Cordovant Leather. Here is also the Herb, from
whence comes the Proverb, Risus Sardonicus.

Corsica was first called Therapne, afterward Cyrnus; in Length about 30
German Miles, the breadth about 20. It was first Inhabited by the Tusci,
afterward by the Carthagenians, then by the Romans, then by the Saracens, and
now by the Genoans. The most considerable Places now, are Adiazzer, Calui,
Bonifaci and Bastia: Of old, Aleria and Mariana were the most noted.

The chief of the Ligurian or Tuscan Islands, are Elba, Ilua Plin. Ptol. Mela.
Aethalia Strab. about 40 Miles Compass; famous for its two Ports, Porto
Longone, and Porto Ferraro; the first belongs to the Spaniard, the other to the
Duke of Florence; other Islands are, Gorgona, Capraia, Monte Christo, Giglio,
etc.

The Isles of Naples are 18 in Number, the chief of which, are the Impregnable
Ischia, AEnaria Plin. The Acylum of Ferdinand King of Naples, in the time of
Charles the 8th of France. 2. Prochita. 3. Capria, the Retirement of Augustus
and Tiberius.

Aeoliae or Vulcaniae and Lipararae Insulae, and Hephaestiades Graecis, now the
Isles of Lipari, are about 12 in Number; two of them, viz. Stromboli and
Vulcano, do still Burn and Flame, and are famous for the Fable of Aeolus, and
for the first Naval Victory of the Ancient Romans.

The Islands in the Adriatic-Sea, are Isola di Tremiti, formerly Diomedeae
Insulae, so called from Diomedes, King of Aetolia, who after the Trojan War
settled here.

Of Sclavonia; by the Germans or Dutch Writers, WINDISHLANDT.
map of Slavonia A New Map of SCLAVONIA CROATIA. DALMATIA. BOSNIA et REPUB.
RACUSA By Robt. Morden


SClavonia, L'Esclavonia Gallis, Schlavonia Italis: According to the Latin
Authors; It did contain Illiricum Hodiernum, viz. Dalmatia, Croatia, Bosnia,
and Sclavonia propria: But now, as it is properly taken lying between the
Dravus and Savus, it is part of the Kingdom of Hungary, and contains the
Countries of Sermien, Valcowar, Posega, Waradin and Zagrabia: A Country more
fit for grazing of Cattle, than for Tillage (for the Sheep bring forth twice a
Year, and are Shorn four times:) Its chief Commodities are Horses for Service,
Oxen, and other wild Beasts, which yields them abundance of Hides, Tallow,
Butter, Cheese and Wool; as also Wine and Oil, with some Veins of Gold and
Silver. Its chief Places, are Posega or Segovitza, a Place of great Strength,
and Gradiska, Gradischa, Graciana of old, under the Tyranny and Bondage of the
Turkish Garrisons. Zagrabria, Sisopa, Ptol. test Mol, and Agram. Waradin,
Variand aliis Varasdinum, test Lazio Varia-Castra in Libro Notitiae, belonging
to the House of Austria; and Copranitz or Caproncaea, a fair and strong Place,
under the Power of the Venetian. Sirmisch Germ. Sercim Hung. Sirmium of old,
Valcouvar, Valcum Ant. Veltz, Simlero. Virovitza, the Key and Entrance into
Sclavonia, An. 1684. Capitulated, and 600 Janissaries marched out, and left it
to the Imperialists, after 113 years Possession.

The Castle of Butschin and Walpo, surrendered to Count Dunewaldt in Sept. 1687.
Esseck was also deserted by the Turks, where were found 52 pieces of Canon, 4
Mortarpieces, and a vast quantity of Ammunition and Provision. Possega
situated about 4 Miles from the Save, was also at the same time abandoned, and
left by the Turks, and Garisoned by Count Dunewaldt.

Of Croatia, or Crabaten.
CRoatia. By this general Name were all the more Inland parts of Sclavonia,
called. The reason of the Name we find not; it was brought hither first by the
Sclaves. It is a Country, for the most part, Cold and Mountainous, yet
reasonably Fruitful, with all necessary Provisions for the Life of Man; were it
not for the Oppression and Neighborhood of the Turks, to whose Injury it is
continually exposed: Its chief Places are, 1. Sisseg, Famous for the notable
Resistance which the Turks there found, Anno 1598. 2. Wihitz, once the
Metropolis of the Country; strongly Fortified by Nature and Art, but taken by
the Turks, Anno 1592. But the chief Place in Croatia belonging to the Emperor,
is now Carelstat, the Residence of the Governor or Viceroy, Count
Herberstein, Anno 1685.

This Country contained anciently the more Inland part of Lyburnia.

Of Bosnia.
BOsnia Italis, Bosnia Gallis, Bossen Germ. was anciently accounted a part of
Croatia; by Ptol. part of Illyricum; by Cluver part of Panonia. To me it seems
to contain the more Inland part of the Dalmatia of Plin. and Ptol. and together
with it, it was united to Hungary, under the Homage whereof it was erected into
a Kingdom, but of a short continuance; for, in the year 1464. Mahomet the Great
surprised and took it, and converted it to a Province of the Turkish Empire.
The Places of most Importance therein, are Jaicza or Jazyge, for its Situation
on a Rocky Precipice, an unfordable River Plena, and an inaccessible Castle,
accounted Impregnable. 2. Bosna Serajum, Bosna Serai, the Metropolis and chief
of the Country. 3. Banialucum and Vammelucha, formerly Banjaluch, the Residence
of the Bosnian Kings. Named thus from the River Bosna, or from the River Bessi,
a People of the lower Maesia, expulsed thence by the Bulgarians, and fleeing
hither. It Is now a Turkish Province commanded by a Bassa, and contains the
Duchy of St. Sabba, now Hertzegovina, test Lucio.

Of Dalmatia, Illiricum Polyb. Illiris Ptol. Illiria Steph.
THis Province was by the Ancients divided into Liburnia on the West, and
Dalmatia on the East, now Vulgo Schiavonia, test Baud. It lies along on the
Seacoast of the Adriatic Sea, and is now possessed by the Venetians and the
Turks; the chief places possessed by the Venetians, are Spalato, Spalatum olim
Epetium, now Zarnoavia, or Zarnouniza, test Lucio, a Maritime Town, and the
Emporium of the Venetians; seated in a most pleasant Valley in a Peninsula,
joined to the firm Land of Dalmatia, by an Isthmus of about a Mile over, and is
guarded by a prodigious Precipice of Mountains to the firm Land, through which
it has only one Passage, which is defended by a Fort, built upon a Rock, just
in the Entrance, with an open Port, but unsecure Bay for great Ships.

Clissa, supposed to be the Andretium of Strabo, and Anderium of Ptol. is a
strong Fort more by Nature than Art, Situated upon a Rock, which stands just in
the middle of the Passage between the Mountains, which is so narrow, that not a
Man or Horse can pass by without the License of their Castle. It is now in the
Possession of the Venetians, taken from the Turks, 1647. under the Conduct of
the Signior Fescolo; it is about 8 Miles North of Spalato, and 4 from Salona.

In 1647. Obraozza, Carino, Ortissina, Velino, Nadino, Vrana, Tino and Salona,
were subdued to the Venetian Arms, by the prosperous Success of Foscolo. And
Sebenico Besieged by Mahomet Techli, who was forced to raise the S ege with the
loss and slaughter of many of his Soldiers.

Zegna, the Senia of the Ancients.

Zara, the Jadera of Ptolomy; strongly Fortified, and well Manned; of a
commodious Situation, almost encompassed with the Sea, only the East end joined
to the firm Land; new very strong, being secured by diverse Redoubts, and 4
Royal Bastions, and a new Line of Fortification, which makes it the most
considerable and strongest Place in all Dalmatia.

Sehenico is a strong Fortress, seated on a rising Hill, whose spacious Port is
secured by the Fort of St. Nicolas, and the Hills, by a Citadel, and the new
Works of St. John. Salona, a Roman Colony, and the ordinary Arsenal for their
Navies; well known in Ancient Stories, for the Retreat of Dioclesian, and the
Garden of his Retirement, after he had renounced the Empire.

Trau, Tragurium of Strabo and Plin. is situated between the firm Land, and a
little Island Bua joined to the Land by a Stonebridg, and to the Island by a
Wooden-bridg; it is about 18 or 20 Miles West from Spalato.

Lessina is the Isle which Ptol. calls Pharia, Strabo Pharos, very high, Rocky
and Mountainous, reckoned about 100 Miles in compass; at the South end is a
good Haven, where is the Town, having a Citadel on the top of a steep Rock.
The place is noted for the Fishing Trade of Sadelli, which are like Anchovies;
100 Miles from Zara, 30 Miles South from Spalato, and 30 Miles North from Lisse.

Almissa, the Peguntium of Ptolomy, or Pigantia; seated on a high Rock, and
Defended with a strong Castle, now belonging to the Turks, test Baud.

Castle Novo, a strong Fortress within the Gulf of Cataro, taken by the
Venetian, under the Conduct of General Conaro 1687. Cataro, Ascrivium Plin.
Ascrivion Ptol. a strong Hold also of the Venetians against the Turks. But Mr.
Wheeler says, it is the first Town belonging to the Turks.

Budua, the Butua of Ptol. is the last place of the Venetians on the Dalmatian
Shores. Places more belonging to the Turks, are Narenza, Dulcigno, or Vlcinium
of old, a City of indifferent good Trade, where the Franks have a Consul;
containing about 7 or 8000 Inhabitants. Scudari, the Scodra, of Old; strongly
Seated on a steep Rock, Memorable for the years stout Resistance which it made
against Mahomet the Second; but taken Anno 1578. by the Turks. And Al^sio, the
Lissus of Old; the farthest Town of all Dalmatia, where Scanderbeg was Buried.

Of the Commonwealth of Ragusa.
THIS is a small Commonwealth, whose Town and Territories are in Dalmatia, upon
the Gulf of Venice, and which pays Annually to the Turk 50000 Livres, as being
environed by the Territories under his Jurisdiction* and not able to subsist
without the Grand Signior's Leave. It makes some Acknowledgment also to the
Venetians, as Masters of the Gulf. It keeps good Correspondence also with the
Princes of Italy; and endeavors to preserve themselves under the Protection of
the King of Spain, to whom it pays Tribute, in the Person of the Viceroy of
Sicily. The Gentlemen must Marry Ladies, if they desire to be accounted Nobles
of Ragusa. Contrary to the Custom of other Nations, they count the Age of Men
from the Conception, and not from the day of their Birth. The Revenue of the
Republic is about 300000 Livres. The Inhabitants addict themselves altogethe^
to Trade. In the year 1667. a great misfortune befell the City, it being almost
all swallowed up by an Earthquake. Their Principal Port i^ that of the Holy
Cross, Santa Cruce, about nine miles from the City. The chief Governor is
called the Rector; but his Government lasts but one Month. The Citizens change
every day the Governor of their Castle: Neither do they let him enter into his
Command but in the Night, and then they blind his Eyes. The Turks have a
kindness for the Ragusians, because they pay their Tribute exactly, and because
they have, by their means, all the Commodities of Europe, which they stand in
need of. They give them those Privileges, which they grant to no other
Christian; for they permit them to buy Provisions in their Dominions: For the
Country about Ragusa is so Barren, full of Rocks and Stones, that if it brings
forth any thing, it is by means of the Earth which they fetch from other parts.
The Town is well Built, and Fortified with Walls, and a Castle; a Noted Empory,
and of a good Trade; the Epidaurus of Old.

1. Sabioneera is a Town Seated on a long slip of Land, (opposite to Curzola)
belonging to the Republic of Ragusa, where are many delightful and fruitful
Gardens.

2. Santa Croce, the Entrance good, the Port large, deep and secure, being
every way Land-locked by Mountains round it, covered with Vineyards, Gardens
and Houses of Pleasure of the Ragusians.

3. Budua, the Bulua of Ptol. is the last place of the Venetians on the
Dalmatian Shores.

4. The Gulf of Lodrin was anciently the Gulf of Apolonia, where Caesar
narrowly escaped with his Life and Fleet. It Is a dangerous passage, about 150
miles over.

Curzola by Strabo, Corcyra Nigro, once belonging to the Republique of Ragusa,
but taken from them by the Venetians by a cunning Exchange. The Town is of the
same Name, and seated upon a Peninsula, is a Bishops Seat and Walled, besides
which there is about five Villages.

Along the Coast of Dalmatia lies a great cluster of Islands, Debronicha
Turcis, Liburnides Insulae by Strab. the Names of the chief you will find in
the Maps, most of them belonging to the Venetians, which are said to contain
40000 Inhabitants.

Of SERVIA.
map of Serbia, Bulgaria, and Romania A New Map of SERVIA BULGARIA en ROMANIA
By Robt. Morden


SERVA, or Zervia, as some call it, contains part of Moesia Superior, and part
of Dalmatia of old, it had once Kings of its own, now extinct. It was once
under the Hungarian Kings; now wholly possessed by the Turks. It is now divided
into Maritine and Midland Servia, test Joan. Lucio, Servia Maritima olim
Chulmia, now Herzegovina, extends toward Dalmatia and Albania. Servia
Mediterranea is divided into two parts, viz. Rascia and Bosna. It is a Fruitful
and pleasant Country; consisting of Plains, Woods, and Hills, not without stout
Men, good Horses, Wines, and Convenient Rivers. Once well stored with Mines of
Gold and Silver, but those now decayed, or lost; and the People gross and Rude,
addicted to Wine, and false in their Promises.

Its chief places are, Belgrade, once the Bulwark of Christendom, bravely
resisting the Power of Amurath the Second, and Mahomet the Great; repulsed by
the Valor of Hunniades; at which time Mahomet himself was wounded in the
Breast, lost his Ordnance, and 200 of his Ships, destroyed by a Fleet which
came from Buda; but taken by Solomon 1520. Seated she is upon the confluence of
the Danube and the Savus, having the great Rivers Tibiscus, the Dravus, and
Morava running into the Danube not far from it; as brave a Situation for Trade,
as any Inland place in Europe. It is now adorned with two large Bezeste^ns, or
places where the Richest Commodities are Sold; with a Noble Caravansara and
Moschea, with a Metreseck, or College for Students.

Zenderin, Sing^dunum Ant. Semendera Lat. Simedro Graec. taken by Amurath the
Second, 1438.

Soph. Scupi Ptol. by the Turks called Vrchupia; a City of great Trade, Seated
in the Reinotest part of Servia, or Moesia Superior, or rather on the Confines
of Macedonia. It is a fair and large Town, having a great Number of Moscheas;
once a Bishop's, after an Archbishop's See; now noted for a great many
Tanners, that make Excellent Leather.

Great Actions have been hereabouts performed in the times of the Romans,
especially by Regillianus. Hereabouts also stood Paroecopolis, and Vlpianum of
old.

Jagodna is pleasantly seated in a fair Country, half way from Vienna to
Constantinople.

Halli Jahisar is a considerable place, where there is a Church with two fair
Towers.

Lescoa, or Lescovia, seated upon the remarkable River Lyperitza, the Maeaneder
of Moesia.

The Hills between Servia and Mercedonia are a part of Mount Haemus, of which
the M. Clissura one of the Spurs or Excursions, shines like Silver, consisting
of Muscovia Glass.

Urania is a strong Pass, which the Castle commands, and locks up the passage
into Maced^^ia.

The chief Rivers of Servia are, 1. Morava, Moschius of old, is divided into
two Streams, the one named Morava di Bulgaria, the other Morava di Ser^i, which
uniting run into the Danaube at. Zenderin; so that by this River the
Commodities of Servia and Bulgaria are carried into the Danube, and so
dispersed in Hungaria, Austria, etc. Not far from which was that great
Slaughter of the Turks by Hunniades, who with 10000 Horse set upon the Turkish
Camp by Moonlight, slew 30000, and took 4000 Prisoners; and Remarkable
Lyperitza, the Maeander of Maesia, which Dr. Brown says, that in less than
twelve hours they passed it 90 times.

Of Bulgaria.
BVLGARIA is a Country generally full of Woods and Deserts, the most
unpleasant, and unpeopled of all the Dacian Provinces; but the lower parts not
without some Plains and Valleys.

The Inhabitants of a Natural fierceness, yet patient of Toil and Labor.

Its chief places are, Sophia Procop. Sofia Italis, Sophie Gallis, the Tibisca
of Ptol. test Nig. and Mol. the Seat of a Beglerbeg, under whom are 21
Sangiats; Seated in a long and fruitful Valley three miles distant from a high
Mountain, covered with Snow all the year. It is Beautified with many fair Hanes
and Baths, a stately College, and fair Mosques.

Axiopolis, Galacz test Laz. Flotz. Merc. and Colanamik. Baud. on the Banks of
the Danaw, which from this Town begins to take the Name of Ister. Mesembria,
Situate on the Euxine. Mercianopolis, much mentioned in the Stories of the
Goths, for the Fights and Battles they had there with the Emperor Claudius.
Nicopolis, by the Turks Sciltaro test Leunc. and Nigeboli, memorable for the
Founder of it, the Emperor Trajan; more for the many great Battles fought near
unto it, whereof one was by Sigismund the Emperor, and King of Hungary, who
with an Army of 130000 Christians Besieged it, and Bajazet came to the Relief
of it, got the Victory, with the loss of above sixty thousand Turks, killed
20000 Christians, and most of the rest took Prisoners. The Second between
Michael, Vaivod of Valachia, and Mahomet the Third, over whom Michael got a
Remarkable Victory. Varna, the Dionysiopolis of the Ancients, on the Euxine
Sea; Remarkable for the first flight of Hunniades, and the Death of Vladislaus
King of Hungary, 1444. Silistria, the Ordinary Abode of a Turkish Bassa.
Ternova, the usual Residence of the Princes of Bulgaria. Budina, once of great
Importance, but burnt to the Ground by Hunniades, not far from the Old City
Oescus. Triballorum Acridus, the Birthplace of Justinian; by the Turks called
Giustandil. Tomi, or Tomos, to which Ovid was Banished; some say, it is at this
day called Tomiswar; others would have it to be Kiovia. Dinogetia Ptol.
Din^gutia and Diniguttia Ant. Denigu ex Tab. recens Drimago Nigro. Callatia,
Callacis Ant. Calatis Strab. and Plin. Kilia Laz. vulgo Bialogrod. Calliacra.
Laonico Pandalla Nig. Istropolis Plin. and Ptol. Istros Strab. Istria Arriano.
Stravico Castal. Grossea Nig. and Prostaviza Baud. much subject to the
irruptions of the Dobrusian Tartars.

Of Greece.
map of Greece GRECIA Novae Descriptio Per Robt. Morden London


GREECE, once the most Celebrated part of the World, in the present Latitude
and Extent thereof, has for its Eastern Bounds the Aegean Sea, the Hellespont,
Propontis, and the Thracian Bosphorus: For its Southern, the Cretian and the
Ionian Sea; on the West, the Adriatic Sea; and on the North, only United to
the rest of Europe by the Mountain Haemus.

Confined at first to Attica, and the parts adjoining, only then called Hellas,
from King Hellen, the Son of Ducalion; the Inhabitants Hellenes in Sacred Writ;
and Greece, from King Graecus, the Son of Cecrops, the first King of Athens,
communicated afterward to Thessaly, to Peloponnesus, then to Epirus, and
lastly to the Macedonian Empire.

The first Inhabitants of Greece did live each under their proper Magistrates
in several Cities, until Philip King of Macedonia, clearing his own Country of
the Iberians, Subdued Achaia, Thracia, and a great part of Peloponnesus. And
succeeded by Alexander his Son, who retained his Father's Conquests, and
Vanquishing Darius the great King of Persia, and other Kings of India, Founded
the Grecian Monarchy, but in the height of his Successes died, being Poisoned
at Babylon. Afterward the Romans became Masters of it; and after that the
Goths and Huns did rather Harrass than Inhabit. Lastly, the Saracens, now the
Turks and the Victorious Venetian share it under their Obedience.

Hence it is that Greece has lost its former Division of Countries, and their
Names, and received new; that which was particularly called Greece, is now
called Livadia; Peloponnesus, Morca, Thessaly, Janna; Epirus, Canina; Macedonia
is divided into four parts; that next Janna is called Camenolitari, that which
Borders upon Dalmatia is called Albania; that next to Thrace is named Jamboly,
and the midst of the Country retains its Old Name Macedonia. Lastly, Thracia is
now called Romania.

The Grecians, once a Nation in matters of Government Famous, in Arms Glorious,
in Arts Admirable; addicted to the love of Virtue, Civil of Behavior,
affectors of Liberty, and every way Noble; only in their Commonwealth
Principles, and Civil Dissentions unhappy. But now under the Turkish Yoke,
their Spirits are low, their Knowledge is Ignorance, their Liberty contented
Slavery; their Virtues Vices, their Industry Idleness: They are generally of
good Proportion, and of a swarthy Complexion: Their Women very well favored,
brown, and excessive Amorous: In Habit and Garb both Sexes generally follow
those under whom they live.

Their Primitive Language needs no Commendation, being well known for its lofty
sound, Elegancy, and significant Expressions, genuine Suavity, and happy
Composition of words; Excellent for Philosophy and the Liberal Arts, but more
Excellent for that so great a part of the Oracles of our Salvation is delivered
therein; but now not only the Natural Elegancy is lost, but the Language almost
devoured by the Lingua Franca, Turkish, and Sclavonian Tongues.

The Christian Religion was here first Planted by St. Paul, who went into
Macedonia, passing thence to Thessalonica, from thence to Athens, and thence to
Corinth, watering the greatest part of Greece with the Dew of Heaven: But now
considering the Tyranny of the Turks on the one side, and the Temptations of
Preferment on the other, it is almost a Wonder there should be any Christianity
left amongst them; yet the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against this afflicted
Church; for its members are endued with a Divine Humility, patience and
constancy; their Priests are reverenced, the Articles of Faith and Rules of a
Holy life preserved; their Fasts and Feasts observed; the power of the Keys
Exercised, and the Judicature of the Church preferred before that of the Divan.
As to the material Points of their Religion, I shall refer to the Description
of my Scripture Maps.

This Country has formerly been Famous for Miltiades, Aristides, and
Themistocles of Athens; Lysander and Agesilaus of Sparta; Pelopidas and
Epaminondas of Thebes; Aratas and Philoparmeus of Achaia; Pyrrhus of Epirus,
Philip of Macedon, Alexander the Great, brave Commanders. For Plato, Socrates,
Aristotle, Divine Philosophers: For Demosthenes, Isocrates, Aeschines, Eloquent
Orators. Hesiod, Homer, etc. Excellent Poets. Solon and Lycurgus, Eminent
Lawgivers. Xenophon, Thuciades, Plutarch, Herodotus, Famous Historiographers;
with several other Authors and Promoters of Arts and Sciences, too tedious to
relate. But to proceed to the Provinces.

The Inhabitants of Greece were of old divided into three sorts, viz. the
Jones, the more famous whereof were the Athenians. The Doors, the most renowned
of whom were the Lacedaemonians; and the Aeoles who sent Colonies into Asia,
near to Phocaea. By the ancient Writers called Achei, Achiai, Argivi, Danai,
Dolopes, Doors, Dryopes, Hellenes, Jones, Myrmidones, and Pelasgi.

The Province of Romania, or Romelia, is the Ancient Thrace, by Stephanus,
Aria; by some Scythia; by Josephus, Thyras, from Thyras the Son of Japhet; by
the Turks now called Romeli: A Country neither of a Rich Soil, nor pleasant
Air, yet well Inhabited. But the chief Glory of this Province, and of all the
Ottoman Empire, is the Renowned City Constantinople, formerly called Lygus,
Byzantium, and Nova Roma, now by the Greeks Istampoli, and by the Turks
Stambol; seated in the Latitude of 40 Degr. 56. In shape Triangular, commanding
the Propontis, Bosphorus, and Euxine Seas; Seated on a Haven so deep and
Capacious, that the Turks, for its Excellency, call it the Port of the World.
At this day the chief Buildings are the Turks Seraglio, and the Temple or
Mosque of St. Sophia, for Beauty and Workmanship exceeding Admirable to behold.

The Seraglio is a vast place, enclosed and divided from the rest of the City
with a wall three miles in Compass, wherein are stately Groves of Cypresses
intermixed with delightful Gardens, Artificial Fountains, and all varieties of
Pleasures which Luxury can effect, or Treasure procure. The principal Beauty of
the City is the situation of it on the Mountains; Crowned with Magnificent
Mosques with Gilded Spires, reflecting the Sunbeams with a mavelous splendour.

Other Cities of this Province are Andrianopolis, or Hadrianopolis Ptol.
formerly Oresta Lampridio. Vscudava, seu Vscadama Ammiano, Andernopolis, and
Turcis Endren, test Busb. a fair, large, and well composed City, with fair and
stately Mosques, especially one built by Sultan Soliman the Second, a very
Magnificent Structure.

Galipoli, formerly Callipolis, seated near the Hellespont within the Sea of
Marmora, the first City that ever the Turks possessed in Europe, surprised by
Soliman, Anno 1358.

Below Galipoli is the straitest passage of the Hellespont, formerly famous for
Xerxes's Bridge, but especially for the two Castles, Sestos and Abidos, noted
for the Story of Hero and Leander, now called the Dardanelles, or Old Castles,
the New Castles being at the mouth of the Hellespont, and are the Bulwark of
Constantinople, as the Castles on the Thracian Bosphorus are on the other side.
Galata or Pera, is opposite to Constantinople, where live all the Foreign
Ambassadors, Residents and Envoys. Belgrade is 12 or 15 miles Northwards, where
are the Summer-Houses of the Nobility, and the Costly Aquaducts that supply
Constantinople.

St. Stephanoes is Inhabited most by Christians. At Great Schecmashe are the
Seraglio's of the Nobility. Selimbria has Mosques, a Bazar and Greek Churches.
Heraclea Leunc. Heraclia Soph. Perinthus Plin. and Ptol. its Harbor makes it a
Peninsula of four miles in compass; now an Archbishops See, and its Church the
best in Turkey: Noted also of old for the Palaces of Vespatian, Domitian and
Antoninus, Emperors of Rome; as also for its Amphitheatre cut out of one entire
Marble.

Rodeste, Redaestum Plin. Bisanthe Ptol. Rodosto Sophi, 30 miles from Heraclia,
seated on the side of an Hill, at the bottom of a Bay, peopled with about 15000
Inhabitants, Christians, Turks and Jews, much frequented, but of little Trade.

Myriophyton by the Greeks, Murston by the Turks, it has about 200 Houses,
about five miles from Rodesto.

Abdera, now Asperosa, was the birthplace of Laughing Democritus.

Aenos, now Enio and Eno Grec. Ygnos Turcis, a Town of great strength and
safety, therefore an honorable Prison. Lisimachia, once of great Importance,
now Heximily, said to be built out of the Ruins of Phillipoli, from Philip the
Father of Alexander.

Cardia, Cardiapolis Ptol. was the Birthplace of Eumenes, a Curriers Son, but
a famous Warrier, Quae Steph. and Pa^s. ^adem Lysimachiae and Hexamilio.

The Province or Kingdom of Macedonia was so called from a King Macedo Son of
Osiris. Others say it had its name from a Son of Jupiter and Thyae; or as
Solinus says, from Maced^, a Son or Grandchild of Ducalion, called also
Aemathia Plin. and Peonia, Aemonia Livio. Formerly it contained several
Provinces, (the Names whereof are in my Sheet-Map of Greece) and it is said was
inhabited by 150 several Nations. By the Ancients it was divided into four
Principal parts, viz. Prima, Secunda, Tertia, Quarta. That toward the West, or
the Fourth part, is now called Albania. That part toward the N. E. first and
second part is called Jamboli. That in the middle retains the Name of Macedonia
Propria. That toward the South is called Comenolitari, containing part of
Macedonia Tertia, and some part of Thessalia.

The chief Towns of Albania, or Pars Occidentalis Macedoniae, are,

1. Dyrrachium Caes. Cic. Ptol. etc. and Epidamnus Thucyd. Plin. etc. Du^azzo
and Drazzi Turcis, once memorable for the Valor of Seaevo, who alone so long
resisted Pompey's Army, that he had 220 Darts sticking in his Shield, yet was
Caesar foiled. It was taken by Bajazet from the Venetians, Anno 1499.

2. Inaccessible and Impregnable Croia, thought by some to be the Epicaria of
Ptol. George Castriot, or Scanderbeg, took it by a wile; but Amurath the Fourth
lost his Life before it. The Antigonia of Ptol. test Soph. and Lazzio.

3. Aulon of Plin. and Ptol. now Valona, situate over against Otranto in Italy,
and about 60 miles distant, 30 miles from Valona, Landwards rises a Fountain
of Pitch mentioned by the Ancients, with which mixing Tar, they Careen Ships.

4. Apolonia Live. and Ptol. Pollina, Piergo, and Sossopoli, test Baud. Ceres
Nigro, a Town of great note in the times of the Romans, and the Key of Greece,
memorable for the Study of Augustus Caesar.

5. Ssestigrade, or Vestigrade, the Sphetia of Laonic. Turcis Sucrige test
Leund. Oxypyrgium Grecis, test Soph. one of the last Towns taken by
Scanderbeg, as Dibra was the first.

The Rock or Island Sassino six miles from Valona, boundeth the Gulf of
Lodrino; Drilo, Strab. Ptol. and Plin. Drinax Nigro, Drino aliis. Le Golphe die
Drin Gallis. Golfo Dello Drino Italis. Not far from this Island N.E. are the
Falls of Piscaria, the Fish they pickle, the Rows they salt and dry in the Sun,
and so make Botago.

Other places are Albanopoli, forty miles from Durazzo, and 35 from Alessio in
Dalmatia. Eladafagni the Daulia of Ptol. test Mol. and Locvida, Lychnidus Live.
Diod. and Ptol. Lychnidion Polyb. Lychnittus Herod. and Steph. A Lake and
Archbishopric of Macedonia, Justiniana Prima, then Achrydus, L'Ochrida,
Turcis Giustandil.

Chief Towns in Jamboli were, 1. Stagira Plin. Steph. Diod. Stantira Ptol. the
Country of Aristotle, test Laertio, now Liba Nova, test Soph. or Macra test
Nicaeta.

2. Pallene Plin. Phlegra Herod. Patalene Ptol. Patalents Mol. Canist^o Soph.
Tarcho, or Tarso Nardo. Sacred to the Muses.

3. Amphipolis Herod. Thucyd. etc. Neapolis Ant. Christopoli Soph. Emboli
Turcis.

4. Cavalla, Oesima Thucyd. and Ptol. the Cabyla Ptol. Cavyla Cedreno test
Leoncl. and Bucephala test Brietio.

5. Contessa, which gives its name to the Gulf Golfo di Contesa Castaldo.
Golfo di Monte Santo, Soph. the Strymonicus Sinus of Ptol.

6. Thessalonica, now Salonichi Soph. to whose Inhabitants St. Paul writ his
Epistles; very populous of Christians, Turks and Jews, and of great Commerce
seated at the bottom of the Gulf Salonichi. The Sinus Thermaeus, or rather
Thermaicus of Strab. and Ptol. distant from Constantinople about 320 miles, and
from Durazzo about 230 miles.

7. Siderocapsa the Chrysites of Live. test Bello, and Scydra Ptol. famous for
its Mines of Gold and Silver, so advantageous to the Turk as the report exceeds
belief.

8. Mount Athos of Live. and Strab. Acroathon, or Acrothon Plin. and Mela.
Acrothoon Herod. Athos, Aeron a Graecis (...), now Cima di Monte Sancto. Sanct
Laure, and Agios Laura. Monastir a Turcis and Seididag test Leunct. Inhabited
from the beginning of Christianity with Hermits, afterward with Monks
according to the Order of St. Basil. It stands in a Peninsula very fruitful,
being 160 miles about, where they have 20 Monasteries, and about 600 Kaloiis.
They pay 1000 Dollars a Month, and have safe protection. The Town Kareis is in
the middle of the Mount, where there is a Turkish Aga, and a Market. Their
Churches and Furniture are exceeding rich, and all are daily employed according
to their several degrees and qualifications.

Torone of Plin. and Mel. a Torone filia Neptuni test Steph. Longo Soph.
Castle Rampo Nardo and Pineto. Rainero vel Reinero Nigro. Agiomana, or Aiomana
Casteldo; from hence Toronaicus Sinus, now Golfo di Agiomana, or Aiomana Cast.
Golfo di Rampo vel Rampa Nardo.

Towns in Macedonia properly so called, and in Comenolitari are, 1. Pella of
Strab. Plin. Ptol. etc. Jeniza, or Janizza Soph. Zuchria Nigro, the Birthplace
of Alexander.

2. Piidna of Ptol. Steph. etc. Chitro Soph. taken by Cassander the Son of
Antipater, who Murdered Olympias the Mother, Roxane the Wife, and Hercules the
Heir apparent to Alexander the Great.

3. Berrhaea, or Berraea of Plin. Str^^. Ptol. etc. Veria Soph. Boor Turcis
test Leunct. where St. Paul and Silas Preached.

4. Adessa Ptol. Edessa Live. and Polyb. and Aegaea aliis. Vodena Mol. Soph. and
aliis.

5. Andaristus Ptol. Vostanza test Theveto aliis Erisso.

6. Tyrissa Ptol. Ceresei Mer. Dinorigriza and Xer^libado aliis.

7. Stobi of Plin. Live. and Ptol. in Pelagonia regione, Starachino Nardo.

8. Antigonia in Mygdonia reg. Coiogna Pineto, aliis Antigoca.

Of Thessalia.
THE Province of Thessaly was called Aemonia and Pyrrhaea; by Strabo.
Estiaeotis, by Plin. Dryopis, by Diod. Argos Pelasgicum by Homer. Comenolitari
Cast. Thumenestria Geufraeo Lamina Lazio. But the greatest part is now called
Ianna test Brietio. It is a Country no less Fruitful than Pleasant, famous for
the Hill Olympus, visible at a great distance, consisting not of one rising
Peak, but extending a great way in length from East to West, Remarkable for the
Exploits of Paulus Aemylius, of Appius, Claudius, and of the Consul Martius, of
which, see Sir Walter Rawleigh, Lib. 1. Cap. 7. For the Mountains of Pelion and
Ossa. For the Hill Othrys, the Hill Oeta, where Hercules is said to have Burned
himself with a poisoned Shirt. For the pleasant Valley of Tempe, called the
Garden of the Muses. For the Pharsalian Fields, where the Empire of the Roman
Universe was Disputed in two great Battles; the one between Caesar and Pompey,
the other between Brutus and Cassius on the one side, and Anthony and Augustus
on the other. Here lived the Mirmidons over whom Achilles was Captain at the
War of Troy. The chief places are, Larissa, Larizzo Soph. Yennee Sheir, Turcis,
an Archbishopric, Inhabited by Christians, Turks, and Jews; pleasantly seated
upon a rising ground, on the upper part whereof stands the Palace of the Grand
Signior, reputed also for the Town where Achilles was Born. 2. Ternovo, a large
and pleasant City, about ten miles Westwards of Larissa, where most of the
Inhabitants are Christians, there being 18 Churches, and but three Mosques. 3.
Dimitriada, Demetrias of old; by Plin. the same with Pegasa, of great strength
by Art and Nature. 4. Pegasa, now Volo, in which the Ship called Argo was said
to be Built. Armiro, Argos Pelasgicum al. Larissa, the Seat of a Turkish
Sangiac. Domochi the Lamia of Polyb. Cic. Ptol. etc. Homile Ptol. Homolium
Plin. Omole Strabo, Homolus Steph. Omolium Live. a City and M. in Thessaly vide
Virgil. L. 7. Aeneidos, now Lamina test Mol. Lastly, Janna, which gives Name
to the Country, an Archbishopric, that has under it four Bishoprics,
Argiro-Castro, Delvino, Butrinto, and Glykaeon. Doliche Ptol. is the Techala of
Merc. and Briet. Alchria, Villano. Trica, or Tricca, once the Bishopric of
Heliodorus the Author of the Ethiopick History.

Of EPIRVS.
THE Province of Epirus, now Canina, rather Chimera and L' Arta test Baud. is
Mountainous and barren, languishing under the Turkish Tyranny. Divided by some
into Chaonia, Thesportia, Acarnania and Aetolia. But by Brietius into Chaonia,
Thesportia, Cassiopaea, Acarnania, Amphilochia, Athamania, Delopia, and
Melossia, once a Country very populous, until Paulus Aemilius destroyed 70 of
their Cities in one day.

Places of most note were Dodona, memorable for the Temple and Oracle of
Jupiter, situate in a fair Grove of Vocal Oaks.

Ambracia Caes. Cic. and Strab. Ampracia Herod. now L' Arta, the Regal Seat of
King Pyrrhus, accounted by Hannibal, next to Alexander, the second great
Soldier of the World.

Actium near Cape Figula, nigh unto which Augustus and Antony fought for the
Empire of the World.

Nicopolis, now Prevesa, built by Augustus, yielded to the Venetians 1684.
where were 200 Turks, who were conducted near to Arta, 44 Pieces of Cannon, 18
of Brass, and 1200 Inhabitants which remained, whereby the Turks have lost
100000 Crowns yearly by the Fishery. And after the taking of Sancta Maura by
General Morosini, he caused his Troops to make a descent at Dagomestro, who
advanced 50 miles into the Country, and Ruined the whole Province of Acarnania,
and burnt two great Towns, called Vragosi, and Zapandi, and several Villages.

Cassiope, now Joanna, or Joannina, said to be the Metropolis of the Country,
which I suppose to be the same with Janna in Thessaly.

Hecatompelon, in the Wars of Cyprus called Supoto, now Chimera.

Torone, now Perga. Buthrotus, now Butrinto, belonging to the Venetians.
Anactoria, Plin. etc. now Vonizza test Soph. Vodizza Leunc.

In this Province is Mount Pindus, Sacred to Apollo, and the Acroceraunian
Mountains, the Rivers Acheron and Cocytus, said to be the Rivers of Hell; and
here was Olympias the Mother of Alexander born.

Of ACHAIA.
THE Province of Achaia, once called Hellas and Graecia test Plinio, Livalli
and Rumelia test Castaldo, of old divided into Boeotia, Attica, or Hellas,
Megaris, Phocis, Locris Ozolae, Doris, Aetolia, and Opunorum regio. Now by the
Turks called Livadia, a Country famous in the Authors of the ancient times, for
the Gallantry of its men, and for the Stateliness of its Structures.

Places of most note in Attica were, 1. Athenes, (...), or Athini, vulgarly
called Setines, in Lat. 38 degr. 5. min. A City heretofore adorned with all
those Excellencies of strength and beauty which Art or Cost could add unto it;
a large, rich and stately City, the Nursery of Learning, and the Source of all
Arts and Sciences, once called the famous Athens, the City of Theseus: Built by
Cecrops, and ruled by Kings 550 years, then by Archontes for 600 years; then by
the thirty Tyrants, till expelled by Thrasibulus, and by the help of
Epaminondas it obtained the Sovereignty of Greece, and many Isles of the Egaean
Sea for 70 years; till it submitted to Philip of Macedon, and Alexander the
Great. Afterward was much destroyed by Sylly, but restored by Adrian the
Emperor, and afterward received various Fates, till it was enslaved by Mahomet
the Second 1455. now taken from them by the brave Morosini 1687.

The Inhabitants are now, according to Esquire Wheeler's Description 1675. about
10000, three parts Christians, the rest Turks, who permit no Jews to live among
them. It Is an Archiepiscopal See, and has the Bishops of Salona, Libadia,
Granitza, and Thalanta under it. It affords a vast number of Antiquities, viz.
the Temple of Victory, by the Turks made a Magazine for Powder: The Arsenal of
Lycurgus: Minerva's, or Parthenions Temple, Demosthenes Lanthorn, the Octogon
Tower of the Winds, Theseus Temple, Adrians Pillar, the foundation of the
Areopagus, the Theater of Bacchus, the Temple of Jupiter Olympus. Lastly, the
Aeropolis or Castle on the South of the City, upon a hard Rock, and
inaccessible on all sides, save the West. S.W. from this Citadel is the Hill
Musaeum, and the Mount Anchesimus, now St. Georgio. And S. E. from Athens is
Mount Hymetus, now Televouni and Lambrarouni, where is plenty of Bees and
Honey. All Provisions of Flesh, Fish, Fowl, Corn, Wine and Oil are cheap here.
Their Merchandises are Oil, Turky-Leather, Raw Silks, Pernocochi, Cake, Soap,
Honey, Wax, etc.

The Town has eight Platoma's, or Parishes, and about 50 Parish-Churches, 150
Chapels, and several Convents.

Its two chief Ports are Portus Pyraeus, now called Porto Lione, by the Franks,
Turcis, Dracona; more South, Port Munichia, now Hagio, and Phalaras Portus, now
Port Nicolo.

Other places in Attica are, 1. Marathon, famous for the Marathonian Bull slain
by Theseus, and for the defeat of the Numerous Army of Darius by Miltiades, now
a ruined Village.

2. Eleusis, or Eleusin Cic. and Strab. now Lepsina, buried in its own Rubbish,
it lies at the Foot of the M. Kerata, or Gerata. Here was the Temple of Ceres,
her Sacrifices called Sacra Eleussinia, and her Mysteries unclean and
Devilish, and once the Fortification of the thirty Tyrants of Athens. A mile
off West, is the Spring (...), i.e. Floridas, where Ceres sat weary with the
search of Proserpina; and North is the Eleusinian Plain, and the Cytheron, now
Elitita Mountains.

3. Phyle, now Bigla Castro, or Casha, Wheeler, was the place where Thrasibulus
began his Exploit of Expelling the Thirty Tyrants, and delivering his Country.

4. Panormus, Strab. and Ptol. a Sea-Town, now Porto Raphai Soph. whence the
Athenians sailed to Delos to carry the Presents to Apollo sent from the
Hyperboreans.

5. Brauron, now Vrannia, where was the Temple of Diana.

6. Rhamnus, now Taura Castro, or Hebraeo Castro, famous for the curious Statue
of Nemesis.

7. Pallene, now Angelopico, where the Athenians have their Country-Houses.

8. Pentelicus Mons, now Pendeli, where is a Monastery of 100 Caloires on a
Mountain of curious Marble, in which are Grotta's incrusted with curious
Congelations.

9. Promontorium Sunium, now Cape Colonni, from the white Pillars of Minerva's
Temple yet standing; and the Town Sunium, one of the (...), or Burgess-Towns of
the Athenians.

Places in Boeotia are, 1. Thebes, Tiva Soph. Stives and Stibes Baud. rather
Thiva, Wheeler, in Lat. 38. degr. 22. min. Built by Cadmus test Isodore, and
fabled to be walled with Amphions Harp. Famous in old time for the Wars of
Eteocles and Policines, Sons of Oedipus. Here lived Pelopidas and Epamonidas,
who overthrew the Lacedaemonians at the Battle of Leuctra and Mantinea.
Northwards is the Thebean Lake, now Hylica Palus.

2. Aulis, now Aulide, is famous for the Grecians Shipping out for the Trojan
War.

3. Lebadea, not Lebadia test Baud. Badia, test Zardo, now Livadio, or
Libadia, Wheeler, and gives name to all Achaia.

The Christians have here four Churches, and the Turks five Moschs. Their Trade
is in Woollen Stuffs and Rice, and near it is the Trophonian Cave and Grove,
where was an Oracle given by Jupiter.

4. Ascraea, the Birthplace of Hesiod.

5. Chaerona, that of Plutarch.

6. Granitza, a Bishopric.

7. Coronaea, the same or near to Dymnia, i. e. two Months, because Corn is
sowed, ripe, and reaped in that time, test Wheeler. Here were the Coronaei
Agri, where the Games Pambriotia were Celebrated.

8. Alalcomene, probably now St. Georgio, where is a Convent, and two Churches.

9. Thespia, now Neocorio, hence Musae Thespiades.

10. Platea, now said to be called Cocla, in whose Plain was Mardonius slain,
and 160000 Persians, and of the Grecians but 699.

11. Leuctra betwixt Thespia and Platea, now Parapagia, in whose Plains the
Thebans overthrew the Spartans, some of whom had ravished Scedasus Daughters.

12. Thisbae, now Rimo Castri; it has now about 100 Cottages of Greeks and
Albaneses.

13. Tanagra of old, Graea and Paemandria, now Scamino, its Ruins are large; it
has about 200 Houses, and many Greek Churches; it is situate near Mount
Cerycius, on the River Asopus that divides Attica and Baeotia, over against
Oropus.

Its chief Lakes are, 1. The Lake of Livadia formerly called Copais and
Cephisis, about forty miles in compass. The Streams and Torrents that fall into
it would drown all Baeotia, but for the Subterraneous Channels, the Wonders of
Art and Nature, that suck in the water, and convey it into the Aegean Sea:
These Subterraneous Catabathra, are about fifty in all. 2. The Helica Palus,
now Lake Thives.

Its chief Rivers are Asopus, now Scamino, and Cephissus River.

Its chief Mountains were, 1. Helicon a Poetis decantatissimus, Musis Sacer, by
the Inhabitants called Eialia, now Zagara, Wheel. 2. Cithaeron Mons, Musis
Sacer, now Elatea Mons, test Wheel.

Chief Places in Aetolia are Lepanto, Naupactus Ptol. Neopactus Cic. Naupactum
Plin. Lepanti Gallis, Epactos Graecis, Einebachri Turcis, test Leonc. An
Archiepiscopal City, now built from the Seashore to the top of a high Conical
Mountain, having four Ranges of Walls before the Castle, which is seated on the
top of the Mountain. Its Harbor is narrow at its Entrance, and shallow; where
it is said, the famous Cosair Durack Bey, Basha of Candia resided. In the year
1408. it was subject to the Emperor of Constantinople, but the Emperor Emanuel
gave it to the Venetians, who so fortified it, that in the year 1475. it
destroyed 30000 Turks, and the Army forced to raise the Siege; but Bajazet the
Second with an Army of 150000, attacked it by Sea and Land, and brought it to a
most deplorable estate, and took it from them 1499. But in the year 1687. it
was retaken by Generalissimo Morosini. The Trade is Leather, Oil, Tobacco,
Rice, Barley, Wheat, Furs, etc. Near this Town was that famous Sea Fight betwixt
the Venetians and the Turks, where 29000 Turks were killed, 4000 taken
Prisoners, with 140 Galleys, and 1200 Christian Captives redeemed, 1571. At the
Entrance of this Gulf of Lepanto, by the Ancients Sinus Crisaeus, Sinus
Corinthiacus, and Mare Alcyonum, said to be 100 miles in length; are two
Castles called also the Dardanelles of Lepanto, not far from the Promontaries
Rhium and Antirrhium, Capo S. Andrea, Baud. rather C. Antirio.

Other places in Aetolia are Calydon with its Forest, where Meliagar slew the
wild Boar, now Aiton test Cyriaco, rather Gallata, Wheel. Here the River
Evenus, over which the Centaur Nessus carried Hercules Wife Dejaneira, to have
ravished her. Also the River Achelous, much Fabled by the Poets. The Aetolians
were a turbulent and unruly people.

Chief places in Locris are, Amphissa, Lambina test Nigro, Anfisa Baud.
Salona, Wheel. once the chief place of the Locrii Ozelorum, seated now on a
Rock under a Mountain, that joins Mount Corax and Parnassus, Musis Sacer apud
Poetas, Parnaso and Liacura test Soph. Licoura, Wheel. The Turks have here
seven Moschs, and the Greeks six Churches, whole Bishop is under the
Archbishop of Athens: They Trade with Tobacco and Cottons.

Turcochoreo, thought to be the ancient Lilaea, is seated near the River
Cephisus in the middle of a Plain between Mount Oeta and the Thermopylae,
famous for King Leonidas defense; said to be a Town of the Locii Epicnemides,
so called from the Mount and Town Cnemides.

Thalanda on the South Side of the River Platanius, a Bishopric and large Town
by the Ruins of Churches and Towers; a mile out of Town it seems to be the City
Opus, hence Locrii Opuntii, and Sinus Opuntius.

Drepanum and Molycrium Strab. and Ptol. Trapani Nigro, now Capo di Pratras.

Chief Places in Phocis are Delphos, or Delphi, Salona Nigro, Castri Soph. and
Wheel. once famous for the Oracle of Apollo, who delivered his sayings in
Amphiboli's and dark Sentences, whereby he deceived his Devotee's, as Crassus
and Pyrrhus; seated it was on the middle of the South Side of the Mount
Parnassus, where Ducalion and Pyrrha swed themselves.

2. Daulis, now Dalia, noted for King Tereus who ravished Philomela.

3. Cirrha Plin. and Live. Cyrrha Ptol. Aspropiti Zardo and Nardo, now Tramochi,
Wheeler.

4. Anticyrrha Ptol. Anticyra Paus. famous of old for its Helebore, now in
Ruins near to the Asprospiti Sinus.

5. Pythia, the Navil of the World, remarkable for the Assembly of the
Amphictymes that condemned the Phocians for Sacriledg.

Chief Places in Megaris are Megara, seated in a Valley toward the Gulf of
Engia, once comprehending two Rocks, now but one, having three or four Cottages
of Greeks, much infested with Pirates, famous once for the Secta Megarica of
Euelid, and for the Fable of King Nyssa's Purple Hair.

2. Toward the Harbor Minoa is the ruined Fortress Nicaea, and the Dodeca
Ecclesia; West are the Scironides Rupes, now Kakiscalia, or Bad Bay; and the
ancient Cromium, the Bounds between Attica and Peloponnesus.

Peloponnesus, now Mor^a, is the most Famous Peninsula in the World; Bounded
with the Sea only, where it joyneth to Greece by an Istmus of six miles in
breadth; very Momorable for the Fruitless Design of diverse Kings and Emperors
to cut it through, and to make a perfect Island of it; and for the Isthmian
Games instituted by Theseus; and for the Wall or Hexameli built by the Emperor
Emanuel 1413. demolished by Amurath the Second 1424; 1463. rebuilt by the
Venetians in 15 days, with 136 Towers.

A Country it was once abounding with all things, as well for the Delicacy and
Contentment, as Necessary for the Life of Man; and for the bigness of it, none
in the World has suffered in the Ruin of so many brave and stately Cities, yet
the best Inhabited of all Greece, being well Seated with Ports and Havens on
all sides of it.

This pleasant part of Greece has not always had the name of Morea, as it is now
called; Strabo says that it was once called Argo, or Argos, from a famous City
of that name within its Confines; and Aegialea from Aegialus a famous King of
the Syconians. Apollodorus and Pliny calls it Apia, from Apis the third King of
the Argives, Son of Aegialus, and also Pelasgia. Afterward it had the Name of
Peloponnesus from Pelops the Son of Tantalus King of Phrygia and Taygeta, now
Morea.

As to its Bigness, Authors disagree, Isodore allows it 363 miles in Circuit.
Bourdon 563. Porchacchi 573. Bleau, Sagredo, and Vianoli, makes it 600.
Baudrand 550. Strabo makes the length 1400 Stadia. Sagredo makes it 170 miles
from the Isthmus to Modon. Baudrand makes it 150 from Corinth to Tenarium Prom.
and from C. Schilli to C. Tornese 175.

It was by Ptolomy and others divided into eight parts, Achaia Propria,
Arcadia, Argia, Corinthia, Elis, Laconia, Messenia and Sicyonia. Pomponius Mela
divided it in but six of those parts; he left out Corinthia and Siconia.

Morri and Baudranel make four Divisions, viz. Ducatus Clarentiae, the Duchy
of Clarence, or Chiarenza, which comprehends Achaia Propria, Sicymia and
Corinthia. 2. Belvedera, which contains Elis and Messenia. 3. Sac^ania, or the
lesser Romania, containing the ancient Argia or Argos. 4. Traconia,
comprehending Laconia and Arcadia.

Places most Famous are, 1. Patras, an Archbishopric, known to the Romans by
the Name of Augusta, Aroe Patrensis, called also Neupatria; by the Turks, now
Badra and Balabutra, test Leunc. Memorable for the Death of St. Andrew the
Apostle, and now a Town of good Trade, in Raw Silks, Leather, Honey, Wax, Wool,
Cheese, and Currants. Situate near the Strait which opens into the Bay of
Corinth, now Lepanto, a Strait Fortified on both sides with two Castles by
Bajazet, to secure the Entrance of the Bay; taken by Andrew Doria 1571.
Recovered by Solomon the Magnificent. July 1687. abandoned by the Turks, and
possessed by the Venetians.

Chiarenza the Cyllene of Plin. Ptol. and Thucy. test Soph. Antravida Nig. But
Brietas will have Dyme. olim Stratos and Cauconia to be Clarenza, once the
Capital City of that Duchy, now some slight Traces of it are all that is
visible. Six miles from the Cape Tornese, Chelonates Prom. Strab. and is the
Castle or Fortress of Torneze, now by the Turks Clemouzzi, test Wheel.
Clemontii, Coronelli.

Pylas of Strab. Thucyd. etc. Abarinus Ptol. Nelea, Homero, test Paus. and
Coryphasium test Steph. Navarino Soph. Zonichia Leunct. now Zunchio, or
Navarin, 10 miles distant from Coron; is famous for its Port, where 2000
Vessels may ride at Anchor, about five miles long, and three broad, having an
Island lying before it, on the right hand it is guarded with a strong Castle
called New Naverin; on the other hand stands old Navarin, formerly called Pylus.

Modon, 10 miles from Coron, by the Turks Matum, by Plin. Methone; its
Situation by Nature and Art makes it strong, having a safe and commodious
Haven, taken first by the Venetians in the year 1124. In the year 1498. it was
taken by Bajazet with a great Slaughter. And in the year 1685. retaken by the
Venetians.

Coron, once Pedusus, Nisi, Laurenb, Epea, Paus. has a strong and advantageous
Situation on the right side of Cape Gallo, the Acritus Prom. of the Ancients,
taken by Bajazet 1498. Taken again by General Doria 1533. but soon again
returned to the Turkish yoke. But in the year 1685. after the defeat of the
Turkish Camp, and a vigorous resistance, it was taken by assault, with a
dreadful slaughter of all the Inhabitants, by the Venetians, who found 128
Pieces of Cannon, of which 66 were Brass.

Calamata the Abaea Ptol. Thuria and Aepea Strab. test Soph. (but Abaea is
Chioris, Mol. And the Thurium of Ptol. and Thyrea Plin. is now Cumestra, test
Mol.) The Thalame of Strab. and Paus. Theramne Plin. Therapnae Solino and Mela,
test Gemistro. But Niger will have Thalame to be Basilopotamo, or
Vasilipotamo; and Mol. will have it Borboliza. It is seated at the bottom of
the Bay of Coron, about a mile from the Sea, on the Bank of the River Pamisus
of Strabo, Stromio Niger, defended with a strong Castle, with Regular
Fortifications, taken by the Venetians 1685. Nigh to which is the Lake Lerna,
where Hercules slew the Monster Hydra; as also Mount Tenarus, where was the
Cave (called the descent of Hell) out of which he drew the Dog Cerberus; and
Naemea was the place where he slew the dreadful Lion. As was also Zarnata a
Fortress much favored by Nature, but much more by Art, which was delivered up
to General Morosini in sight of the Captain Bassa with a numerous and powerful
Army, who dared not to attempt its succor.

Chielefa, is a Fortress of great importance for its advantages of Nature and
Art, seated upon a steep Rock, a mile and half from the Sea; of a Quadrangular
Figure, Flanked with five great Towers, not far from the place where once
Vitulo stood. It surrendered to the Venetians 1686.

Passova is a Fortification seated in the Province of Maina, opposite to
Chielefa, and Port Vitulo, yielded to the Venetians 1685. without a stroke, and
demolished.

As also the Fortress of Maina built, where once stood the ancient Cersapolis,
by the Ottomans called Turcotogli Olimienas, by the Greeks Castro di Maina, by
the Turks Monige, demolished in the year 1570.

Mysitra, Seated in a large Plain, full of small Villages, Olive and
Mulberry-Trees, about 25 miles from the Sea, the Mountain Taygetus commands it
on the West; once Sparta, then Lacedaemon, once one of the most famous of the
Grecian Cities, now shrunk to a little Town, scarcely showing any Remains of
its former Glory. Historians do not agree who was its first Founder, some say
it was Spartus the Son of King Amiclas, others the Princess, King Lacedaemons
Wife, who was called Sparta; some affirm it was Cecrops, and others attribute
it to Spartus the Son of Phoroneus King of Argos, Contemporary with the
Patriarch Jacob, and make it older than Rome 983 years. The Castle is so
advantageously seated, that Histories assures us it was never taken. In the
year 1687. surrendered to the Venetians.

Malvasia the Epidaurus, Limera and Monembasia of the Ancients, has a very
advantageous Situation in a little Isle on a Rock, washed by the waves of the
Archipelagus, yet enjoying several Sources of sweet clear Springs, inaccessible
on all sides but one place, which is defended with a thick triple Wall, and
joined to the main Land by a Wooden Bridge, having a very spacious Port, and
well defended; yet though its Situation renders it almost invincible, yet by
its ill fortune it has undergone several Changes: Taken from the Greek
Emperors by the French and Venetians, Anno 1204. In the year 1537. it was taken
by Solomon, and during the Wars of Candia it was attacked by the Venetians and
taken, who demolished the Fort, and left it. There is another Epidauras in
Argia, called Esculapia Soph. famous for the Temple of Aesculapius. Pigiada
Nigro, Cherronisi Soph.

Napoli di Romania, amongst the Celebrated Cities, once the Glory of Argia;
this is now the chief, the Anaphia of Herod. Xenoph. and Strab. Nauplia Ptol.
Napli Soph. built by Nauplius King of Eubaea, the Son of Neptune and Amimone,
and Father to Palamedes. About two miles in Compass, almost surrounded by the
Sea, and defended by a Castle, as the Harbor is by a Fort, built upon a Rock
about 300 foot into the Sea, so that both Nature and Art have conspired to
render it strong; now an Archbishopric, and the Residence of the Governor of
the Province. Containing 6000 Greeks, besides a great number of other
Inhabitants; first taken 1205. by the Venetians, joined with the French; taken
soon after by King Giovanissa, who left terrible marks of his rage and fury by
putting the whole Garrison to the Sword, and sacking the Town. Assaulted it was
by Mahomet the Second with a powerful Army, but in vain; so Solomon also had no
more fortunate success, but by agreement obtained it from the Republic. These
two last places are all that the Turk now have in the Morea, so that the
Venetians are now Masters of all that Country.

Argos, of this Name are three Cities in Greece, viz. 1. Argos Amphilochium in
Epirus, now Anfilocha. 2. Argos Pelasgicum in Thessalia, now Armiro. 3. Argos
Peloponnesiacum, once Phoronia, Jassia, Hyppobole, Diposa, or Dipsion. Seated
on the River Inachus, now Planizza Soph. not far from the Ruins of the Ancient
Mycenia; Founded by Inachus in the year of the World 2197. and continued for
546 years under Kings, then a Commonwealth, now only retains the Name of its
passed Glory, though seated in a delightful Plain, about 24 miles from the Sea,
abounding with Wine and Oil, and all sorts of Grain, and defended with a Castle
seated on a Hill. Here King Pyrrhus was killed with a Tile from the hands of an
Old Woman.

Trapolizza, Megalopolis Polyb. Strab. and Christianopolis dicta test Baud.
Leondari, or Leontari Soph. by the Turks called Mora Orta, the Center of the
Morea, the chief place in the once famous Arcadia, the Birthplace of Polybius
the Historian.

Corinth, the Corinthus of Strab. and Polyb. Ephyro Lauremb. by the Inhabitants
Coranto, and by the Turks Gerame. In the Lat. of 38 degr. 14. had its
foundation from Aletes, who lived in the time of Cecrops 3066. So
advantageously seated in the midst of the Isthmus, that some have called it the
Eye of Greece, others the Bulwark of the Peloponnesus, and the splendour of
Greece. This City formerly so rich and Magnificent, is now nothing more than a
wretched Remnant of Wars and of Time, and has preserved nothing more of its
pristine Grandeur than its own Ruins.

The famous Fortress of the Acrocorinthus, the Guard of Corinth, must not be
passed by without a particular Remembrance. Built upon the point of a high
Rock, and strengthened with a stout Wall very strong both by Art and Nature;
yet after the taking of Lepanto, the Serasquier being terrified by the Venetian
Forces, had set fire to it, and left it; where the Venetians found 45 Brass,
and 4 Iron Guns 1687.

Thus have I as briefly as possible given an Account of the chief Cities now
extant in the Morea, the Stage and Theater of Action in the late Wars.

The chief Mountains in this Peninsula are the Foloe, or Phole Mountain, near
which was seated the City of Olympia, famed by the Poets for the Country of the
Centaurs slain by Hercules, after his being Victorious over the Nemaean Lion,
the Lernan Hydra, and the Erymanthan Boar.

Cyllene Mons, at the top whereof are yet to be seen the Remains of the Temple
of Mercury.

Lyceus Mons, memorable for the Sacrifice of the Tyrant Aristarchus, made to
the public Rage of the Lacedaemonians.

Menalus Mons, for its shady Groves, and refreshing Air, Dedicated to Pan.

Mons Sepia, for the Death of Epites stung by a Serpent.

Montes Poylizi, for Diana's Temple, called also Stymphalides.

Mons Mintia, or Mitena, which gives a Prospect to the Gulf of Coron, where
the proud Fanes of Pluto and Proserpina once stood. At the foot of Mount
Nonacres, at the foot whereof roll the fatal waves of Styx. Lastly, the
Taygeta, Sacred to Bacchus, Ceres, Apollo, and Diana.

Chief Rivers are, Alpheus Ptol. etc. Carbon, or Darbon, vulgo. Orfea Soph.
much famed by the Poets, who tell us also of its Subterraneous passage to its
beloved Fountain Arethusa in Sicily.

Eurotas, now Vassalipotamos, Iris Niger Hemerus Plut. it runs by Misutra, and
falls into the Gulf of Colchina; in Summer very dry and shallow, but in Winter
sometimes overflowing its bounds.

Inachus, now Plannizza, once Cramavor, then Haliacmon, called Inachus from the
Son of Oceanus and Thetis, whose story is well known.

I must not forget the River Pamysus, Strab. Plin. and Amathus, Panysus Ptol.
Stromio, Niger, Tifeo, Giovio, which falls into the Gulf of Coron.

All Europe affords not a place comparable to this pleasant Peninfula. Its
fruitful Plains flourish with plenty, adorned with the charms of variety. Its
high Hills, though thought unpleasant objects for their cragginess, yet endowed
with excellent Plants, and delicious Fruits; and its Climate is soft, serene
and temperate. Here we may have the Melancholy view of the Imperial Seats of
the Corinthians, Lacedaemonians, Syconians, Mycenians, Elians, Arcadians,
Pyleans, and Messenians, now lying buried in their own Ruins.

Of the Islands in the Aegean, Cretan, and Ionian Seas.
THE Islands that are adjacent to Greece, are, 1. Such as are in the
Archipelago, or the Aegean Sea, which are about 43, and of late years have had
1450000 Inhabitants that paid the Harach or Pollmoney to the Turks; few or no
Turks live in them, because of the Corsairs: Being Christians they are subject
to the Metropolitan of Scio, and are governed by their own Archontes, and
admire their own poor Freedom. 2. The Isles of the Cretan Sea, that are the Bar
of the Arches. 3. The Islands of the Ionian Sea, now are all under the Venetian.

Of the Aegean Isles.
THE chief of these Islands are, 1. Negropont, by the Greeks called Egripos,
but formerly Macris, Abantis and Eubaea, it lies East of Achaia, from which it
is said to be once separated by an Earthquake, which made the narrow Strait
called Euripus, whose ebbing and flowing is not only seven times a day, but
sometimes 11, 12, 13, 14 times in the space of 4 or 5 hours. This Island is
Queen of the Aegean Sea, as well for fertility as greatness; about 100 miles in
length, and 25 in breadth, and is plentiful in Sheep, Kids and Goats, Fish,
Wine and Fruits, and all other Provisions. The chief City is Negropont, or
Egripos, n a Peninsula near the place where Chalcis stood, a place formerly of
great wealth and power, and since so well fortified, that it cost the Turks
A.D. 1471. 40000 men in the taking of it from the Venetians; there S. Erizzo
was murdered, and his beautiful Daughter Signora Anna refusing the splendid
Courtship of Mahomet, was hewn in pieces by him. 2. Caristus, now Caristo,
hence Columnae Caristiae. 3. The Promontory Capherus, now Doro, where Nauplius
the Father Palemedes (having by his false fires in several parts of the Island,
ruined and destroyed 200 Grecian Ships, and many thousand men) drowned
himself, because Ulysses and Diomedes escaped. The whole Island is now under
the Turks.

2. Stalamine, once Lemnos, memorable for the fabulous fall of Vulcan, and for
the Entertainment of Jason and the Argonauts, by Hypsipyle, Daughter to King
Thoas, Son of Bacchus and Ariadne; now noted for a Sovereign Mineral Earth
against Infections, Poison, and cures Wounds, etc. it is gathered August 6th.
by the Greek Monks with much Ceremony, and many Religious Preparations, and
made into small Pellets, sealed with the Turks Seal, and called Terra
Sigillata, and so dispersed to the Merchants. 3. Sciros, the lurking place of
Achilles, as Ortelius conceives; others think it to be one of Cyclades, more
Southerly. 4. Thassus, now Tasso, it is 40 or 50 miles in compass, fruitful in
Wine, etc. and Woody. On the North it has a Town situate upon a good Harbor.
5. Samothrace, quasi Samos Thraciae, formerly Dardania and Leucosia, it has
plenty of Honey and wild Deer, and commodious Harbors, now much infested by
Pirates. 6. Imbrus, now Lembro, ten miles from Samothrace, and about 30 miles
in compass, it is Mountainous toward the East, and has a well watered Plain to
the West. 7. Alonesus, now Lanio. 8. Scopelius, now Scupelo. 9. Sciathus, now
Siatta, of which little memorable.

3. The Gulf of Saron, now Engia, has these Islands. 1. Egina, now Engia, the
Country of Aeacus, who was Fabled to be Judge of Hell, with Radamanthus and
Minos. It is 80 miles in compass, and has the Town Aegina, that consists of 800
Dwelling-houses, and from the Castle is a fair Prospect; here the Greeks and
Latins have each a Church. Here is plenty of Corn, Cotton, Honey, Wax, Almonds
and Carobs, and Red-legged Partriges. Betwixt the Islands Angestri, Metopi,
Douronisa, Moni, and it self, is a Harbor where Ships may ride. 2. Cophinidia
is S. W. And so is, 3. Calabrea, now Porus, 18 miles in compass, now inhabited
by Albaneses; here Demosthenes was banished, and poisoned himself to avoid the
Fury of Antipater. 4. Salamis, now Colouri, 50 miles in Compass; it has three
Towns, 1. Colouri, has now about 400 Persons. 2. Metropis, 30 Houses. 3.
Ambalachi, near this was the ancient City Salamis, near which was the Overthrow
of Xerxes his Navy, where 200 of his Ships were sunk, and most of the rest
taken by the Athenians, etc. Here also was the Birthplace of Solon, and the
Royal Seat of Telamon the Father of Ajax. 5. Lypsocalalia. 6. Megala Kira, and
Micra Kira, two Scoglio's, one formerly called Kaera, on which Xerxes sat in a
Silver Throne to behold the fight of the Navies. There are other small Islands
and Scoglio's which I omit for brevity's sake. The Inhabitants of these Islands
had a Veyvode and a Caddi, but now they are left to themselves, and pay the
Captain Basha 785 Dollars for all Duties.

4. The Cyclades, now the Islands of the Arches; the chief are, 1. Delos,
formerly Ortigia, now S. Deli, because it comprehends the Island Rhencia West.
It is now desolate, though formerly noted for the reception of Latona, where
she was delivered of Apollo and Diana. Apollo had here a Temple, and the
circumjacent Islands called Cyclades endowed it, and sent presents to it. 2.
Mycone, or (...), 4 miles distant East, and 30 miles in Circuit. The
Inhabitants are all Pirates, yet Christians, and have 30 Greek Churches, and a
Latin one. The Women are handsome, but not chaste. Here is plenty of Corn and
Wine, but little Wood and Water. They are Tributaries to the Turks. 3. Tenos,
now Tine, formerly Hydrusa, and Ophiusa, it lies high, being a large heap of
Marble Rocks, but in many places covered with a fertile Soil. Its chief Town
stands in the middle of the Island on a pointed Rock, on the highest part
whereof is the Castle, which affords a curious Prospect over most part of the
Archipelago. Here the Venetian General of the Archipelago resides. 4. Thermia,
Polyaegos of old, in most Maps Firminia; it is much frequented by Paralyticks,
Lame, etc. by reason of its many Baths and Hot Springs that are very
Diaphoretick. 5. Seriphes, by the Greeks Serfo, in most Maps Serphanto, it has
a Town and Harbor on the Southside, with a Convent of Greek Monks. 6. Paros,
or Pario, formerly Pactya and Minoa, famous for its good Air, and excellent
Marble; it was dedicated to Bacchus, because Wine is here no more than
Twelve-pence a Barrel; under the Marble Mountain is a Grotta with Figures of
all sorts of Woods, Groves, Trees, Pillars, and rare Poetical Fancies, framed
by the falling of Water congealed into Marble, which by Candlelight is a most
surprising Workmanship of Nature. 7. Siphanto, has ten Villages, famous for
excellent fruit, and beautiful Women. Here is a Monastery in which the Greek
Nuns are first initiated. 8. Argentera, from a Mine of Silver, by the Greeks
(...), by Ptolomy and Strabo (...), it has some inhabitants. 9. Milo, it is
said to have one of the best Ports of the World, now a refuge for Corsairs. 10.
Bella-Pola, or Isola Brugiala, because burnt and blown up not many years since
with Subterraneous fires. 11. Andros, once Cauros and Antandros. 12. Naxos, now
Necsia, or Nixia, of old Insula Veneris and Dyonisia, remarkable for the
goodness and plenty of its Wines, and for the excellent Marble Ophites. 13.
Chia, or Cheos, now Zea, with others of less note.

5. The Sporades, from (...), because scattered in the Sea; the principal are
12 in number, 1. Astrypalea, now Stampalia. 2. Anaphe, now Namfio. 3. Helena,
now Macronisa, where Paris enjoyed the fair Helena. 4. Sos, where Homer is said
to be buried. 5. Lagusa. 6. Phocusa. 7. Phaecasia. 8. Philocandros. 9.
Schinusa. 10. Strybia. 11. Thera, the Birthplace of the Poet Callimachus. 12.
Gierra, etc.

6. Cythera, now Cerigo. S. of Morea the Birthplace of Venus and Helena. Its
ill peopled, of a barren and Mountainous Soil; it has plenty of Sheep, Hares
and Fowls, especially Turtles, Venus's beloved Birds. On the South it has a
Town, and a good Harbor on the East-Point St. Nicolo. Here was the Temple of
Venus, out of which Helena was stolen. On the South are the Scoglio's Ovo and
Cerigotto. The rest of the Islands of the Aegean Sea we shall refer to the
description of Asia Minor.

The Cretan Islands: 1. Candia, formerly Hecatompolis, Macronnesus, Idaea,
Telchinia and Creta. It is seated in the mouth of the Aegean Sea, at the
Entrance of the Archipelago, in sight of Asia and Africa; so advantageously
situated, that Aristotle said it was the only proper Seat of an Universal
Empire. It is above 270 miles in length, and about 50 in breadth. It has been
famous for the Wars of the Titans against the Gods, for its excellent Ships and
Archers; for the Bull that ravished Europa; for the Amors of Pasiphae and
Ariadne; for the cruelty of the Minotaur; for the Government of Saturn; for the
habitation and Sepulcher of Jupiter; for the Laws of Minos and Rhadamanthus;
for the Labyrinth of Daedalus; and many other things the Inhabitants boast of;
but there is no belief of men that were always accounted Liars, as Tit. 1.12.
out of Epimenides. Anciently it had an 100 Cities, 40 remaining in the time of
Ptolomy. 1. Gnossus, now Cinosus. 2. Cydon, now Canea, Matter Orbium, hence Poma
Cydonia, now Adam's Apples. 3. Eleuthera, or Erythraea. 4. Miletum, named 2 Timothy 4.20. with Act. 27.7, 8, etc. and 21.17. 5. Gortyna, hence Spicula
Gortynia, their best Arrows. 6. Dictamnum. 7. Ampelus. 8. Minoa, now Allemara.
The chief Mountains are, 1. Ida, the highest in the Island, now called
Psiloriti, from the top whereof may be discerned both Seas. 2. Dicte, now
Sethia and Lasthi. 3. Leuci, a long Chain of Hills called of late, di Madara,
la Spachia, and la Sfacioles. The Rivers are none of them Navigable, but the
defect is supplied with good Harbors and Bays. The Mullet Scarus was a great
Roman delicacy. Its Commodities are Muscadel Wine, Sugar, Sugar Candy, Honey,
Wax, Gum, Olives, Dates, Raisins, but little Corn. This Island was first
Governed by Saturn, then by Jupiter, who was Interred at Gnossos; then
succeeded Minos his Son, begotten on Europa; after that the Island was Governed
by a Republic; and in the time of Pompey the Great it was subdued by the
Romans; then the Emperors of Constantinople were Masters of it; after it was
given to Boniface M. of Montferrat, who parted with it to the Venetians Anno
Dom. 1204. But the Turks in the year 1669. after a War of 24 years quite
expelled the Venetians, and so became Masters of it. This Island is now divided
into four Territories, which bear the Name of so many Principal Cities, viz.
Candia, Canea, Retimo, and Sittia. The Principal Fortresses are Grabates, Suda,
and Spinalonga, held by the Venetians. Candia, the Capital City, so strong by
Art and Nature, that it was the Bulwark of Christendom, and maintained it self
against many long and desperate Sieges of the Turks, before it surrendered to
them. Other Islands are, 2. Claude, Act. 27.16. now Gozo. 3. Dia, now Standia.
4. Letoa, now Christina. 5. Aegilia, now Cecerigo. Crete has one Archbishop,
and eight Bishops.

The Ionian Islands.
1. Zant, anciently Zacynthus in North Lat. 36 degr. 30. min. The Town is
stretched along the shore, and is very populous, according as the rest of the
Island, that has 50 Towns and Villages, some Springs, it is infested with
frequent Earthquakes. The Greek Church is here, and as in other places under
the Venetian, much Latinized in their Doctrine, though they hate the Church of
Rome. The Latins have here a Bishop, and diverse Churches and Convents. The
English, have a Factory, but no Priest, as in other places, and they seem to
the Natives to live without Religion, to die without hope, as they are buried
without decency, to the disgrace of our Reformed Church, and the great scandal
of them that are without. Here is plenty of Currants, Wine, Oil, Mellons, and
other good Fruits. 2. Straphades, 2 Isles, 50 miles South of Zant; here live
many Greek Monks well fortified. 3. Cephalonia, formerly Samos, Melaena, and
Teleboe; it is 120 miles in Circuit, the greatest Isle in Ulysses Kingdom.
Argostoli, a large Port every way Land-lockt, the Residence of the Venetian
Proveditor; the chief Town is Cefalona, it affords abundance of Currants,
Wine, Oil, etc. 4. Thiaki, four or five miles over against Port Pescarda, it
affords abundance of Currants. 5. Ithaca, formerly Dalichium, now Val de
Compare, the Birthplace of Ulysses, now without Inhabitants, yet it has good
Currants. 6. Echinades, five Scoglio's, now called Curzolari at the mouth of the
River Achelous; near these were fought the Battles of Actium and Lepanto. 7.
St. Mauro, by the Greeks Leucas, Leucada, and Nerilos; it is separated from
Acarnania by a Straight of five Paces over, and three or four foot deep in
water; the Castle is strong, called St. Mauro, Delivered up to General
Morosini, July 1684. The Port is good, and named Chimeno, and the Island
Leucas; it is inhabited with Turks and Greeks, most are Pirates; it is thirty or
forty miles in Compass, and fruitful in Corn, Pasture, Oranges, etc. 8. Corfu,
formerly Corcyra, an 180 miles in Compass, but for a Rock West, the Town would
be almost impregnable; in the Castle East resides the Venetian General by Sea
and Land, to whom the other Islands appeal. The Ruined Towns are Cassiopia, now
Cassopo. 2. Chersopolis, now Palaeopoli; here are also the Gardens of Alcinous,
etc. The Inhabitants are very revengeful; here is plenty of Wine, Oil, and
Fruits, but little Corn. The Greeks have here a Proto-pappa subject to the
Bishop of Cephalonia, but the Latins have a Bishop. Thus much for the Grecian
Islands in the Aegaean, Cretan, and Ionian Seas.

The present State of the Countries, Forts, and other Places, which belong to
the Europeans in the West and East Indies.
THERE were at first but two Nations in Europe that Successfully undertook long
Voyages by Sea, or who sent Colonies into Distant Climates: The Spaniards
toward the West, and the Portugals into the East. These also obtained from Pope
Alexander the Sixth, a Donation of all Lands undiscovered; but the other
Europeans were not satisfied at the Pope's Liberality; for the English, Dutch,
and French, would also have their share; since which time there have been
several Changes in those Countries; that Rigor which the Portugal and Spaniard
used to exclude all other Nations, serving only to destroy themselves.

The French have first in Canada, Montreal, the Three Rivers, Quebec, Tadousac,
and other Places upon the great River of St. Lawrence, and upon Sufferance or
Incroachment, they pretend to that which we call Nova Scotia, the Island of
Cape Bretan. In New Foundland, they have Bay Plaisance, and Bay Blanco.

2. Among the Islands called Antilles, part of St. Christophers, St.
Bartholomews, Santa Cruez, St. Martins, Guadaloupe, La Desiree, Maria Galante,
Les Saints, Martinique, St. Aloisia, Grenada, and the Grenadins, La Tortue,
and several Colonies in the Western part of the Spanish Island, otherwise
called Sancto Domingo. 3. Upon the Southern Continent of America upon the Coast
of Guyana, the Island of Cayene, where stands the Fort St. Michael de Ceperoux,
now called Fort St. Louis: The Islands of Corou, Coonama, Comoribo, etc. 4. The
Trade of the Coast of Africa, upon the Rivers of Senega: where they have a
Fort: Also upon the River of Gambia, at Rufisque near Cape Vert, at great
Sestre, at Ardra, and many other places in Guinie. 5. Fort Dauphin, and many
other Fortresses in the Island of Madagascar, called by them the Dauphin
Island. The Islands of St. Marie, Bourbon, and Diego Rois: The Bereaux, new
Suratt, and other Places in the Mogull's Country. In the Kingdom of Tunquin, at
Siam, in the Island of Java, and in other places.

The Spaniards possess the largest and best part of all America, where they
have a great number of Cities: 1. In Northern America, New Spain, where are the
Parliaments of Mexico, Guadalaira and Guatimala; the Islands of Cuba,
Hispaniola, Boriquen, etc. besides St. Austins, and St. Matthews in Florida,
and some part of New Mexico. In the Southern America, the Golden Castile,
otherwise called the Continent, where are the Parliaments of Panama, and of the
New Kingdom of Granada. Peru, where are the Parliaments of Quito, Lima and de
la Plata. Chili and Paraguay, which comprehends the Country of Tucuman and de
la Plata. The Islands also of Solomon in the South Sea. 3. All along the Coast
of Africa upon the Seashore, Larache, Mahamore, and the Canaries. 4. Toward
the East, most part of the Phillipine Islands, otherwise called the Manilles.
They had also some part of the Molucques, but these they have long since
quitted.

The Portugueses enjoy all the Coast of Brasil in Southern America, and all
along upon that Coast, the Captainships of Para, Maranhaon; Ciara, Rio, Grande,
Paraiba, Tamaraca, Pernambuco, Seregippe, Baia de Todos los Santos, Los Isleos,
Porto Seguro, Spirito Santo, Rio Janeiro, and San Vincente. Toward the mouths
of the Amazon River, Estero, Corduba and Cogemine. 2. In Africa, upon the Coast
of the Kingdom of Morocco, Mazagan. Some Forts upon the River St. Dominic; Upon
the Coasts of Guiny, Congo and Angola; and certain Habitations in the Island of
St. Thomas. The Acores, Madera, and Porto Santo. The Islands of Cape Verd, and
of the Prince, Fernando Poo, Annabon, etc. 3. Several places in the
East Indies, viz. Cafreria, upon the Coast of Monamotopa, the Castle of Sofala,
the Village of Sena, a Factory with a little Fort at Cape Corientes, with other
strong Houses upon the Entries of Guama, and the Rivers upon the Coast. In
Zanguebar, which is upon the Coast of Melinda. The City and Castle of
Mozambique, with the strong Fort of St. Mark; Factories, and some little Forts
at Angoxa and Quilimarre. The Castle of Quiloa, and a Factory in the Island
Monfia. The City and Castle of Mombaze, the Castle of Melinda, with the
Villages and Factories of Pale, and Ampaze. The Trade of the Coast of Africa,
from the Cape of Good Hope to the Red Sea. In the Island Zocotora, at Aden,
Fartach and Balsara. In Persia, Factories and half the Customs of the Island of
Baharem and Congue: the Traffic to Benderrich, to Cape Jasques and other
places. In India belonging to the Great Mogul, Damaon, with the Forts of St.
John, Kielme, Matri and Barampor. Becaim, the Fort Bandera, otherwise called
Manora, the Village of Tana fortified with three Bastions: the Rock of Asterim,
Ougueli upon the Ganges; the Trade of Agra, Amadabat. Cambaye, Surat, Baroche,
Bengala; and in Decan they have Chaul, with the Forts of Morro, Caranga, the
Village of Massagan. Goa with her Fortresses in the Country of Bardes, and the
Islands of Coran and Divar, and some other Lands about Goa. Upon the Coast of
China, Macao. In the Island Solor, the Village and Fort of Larentoque: the
Traffic of Persia, Golconda Aracan Pegu, Tanacerin, Ligor, Odia and other
Places of Siam, Camboya, and the Island of Timor.

The English have extraordinarily augmented their Territories in America. They
Trade to, and Possess all the Northwest part of America, New York, New Jersey,
Pensilvania, Maryland, Virginia, Carolina, New England, most part of the Isle
of New Foundland, all Bermudas, Long Island, Manhatten, now New York, etc. Of
the Lucaya Isles, as New-Providence, etc. Among the Southward Isles, Barbados,
Barbouda, Anguilla, part of St. Christophers, Montferrat, Meuvis, Antigo,
Dominico, and part of St. Vincent, St. Katherine's Isle, called the Island of
Providence, Jamaica, and Trinity Isle. The Holy Point. They had some Colonies
in Surinam, Maroni, Sinamari, etc. with some Forts upon the Coast of Guyana. In
Africa, Tangier, near the Streights. Fort St. Andrew upon the River of Gambia.
Fort St. Philip, toward the River St. Dominico. Tagrin, Madrebomba, Taxorari,
Cape Corso, Emacham, or Naschange, and other places in Guinia, and the Island
of St. Hellens. Madrespatan, and Fort St. George upon the Coast of Cormandel.
The Island of Bombay, Angediva. A Factory at Surratt and Bantam, with Houses
where the Presidents live. They have also Factories at Ispahan and Gombru,
where they have half the Customs: a Trade at Agra, Amadabat, Cambaya, Brodra,
Baroche, Dabul, Pettapoli, Maslipatan, at Balasor, Oguely, and at Daca in
Bengal, at Prianam and Jamby in Sumatra. In Siam, Camboya, Tunquin, and the
Island Formosa.

The Hollanders were expelled out of their New-Holland in America. However they
still possess the Islands of St. Eustace, Saba, Curacco, where they have the
Fort Amsterdam, and Tobago, or New Flushing, if not lately beaten out by the
French. The City of Coro upon the firm Land. The Colonies of Rio Poumaron,
where there is the New City of Middleburg, and the Fort Nova Hollandia, Rio
Esequebe, a wide and great River, at whose mouth lies three great Islands,
viz. Lugewaen, Magrieten, and Parrats Island. Higher up the River are seven
other Islands, and further up the River is the Fort Kiick-over-all. Rio
Demarary, and River Barbiezos. The Colony of Soronam, where is the Fort
Pamaribo. The River Caperwaca, or Aperruvaca, and the River Winypoco, or
Waiapoco, and other places upon the Coast of Guyana. In Africa, Arguin, and
Goree, toward Cape Verd, where they have a Fort and Factories at Rufisque, at
Porto d' Ale, and Joal. St. George of the Mine, the Fort of the Mine, the Fort
of Nassau, or Moure, Cormentin, Axime, and Botrou in Guiny upon the Gold Coast.
Many Forts in Congo, etc. at the Cape of Good Hope, and at Table Bay two Forts
more. In the Islands of Madagascar and St. Maurice. Upon the Coast of Malabar,
Onor, Barcelor, Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochin, Coulan. Upon the Coast of
Cormandel, Tuticorin, Negapatan, Karkalle, and Gueldres near Pallecate. In the
Indian Peninsula beyond Ganges, Malacca, with the Forts and Islands belonging
to it. In the Island of Ceylon, Negombo, Colombo, Galle, Baticalo,
Trinquilimaly, Jafnipatan, and a Fortress called Blakenburg in the Island of
Mamar. In the Island of Java, Jacatra, called Batavia, and its Dependencies.
The Isle Amsterdam, Leyden, Middleburgh, Delft, Encbysen and Horn. The Isle of
Bima, part of the Molucca Islands. In Ternate, the Forts Tacomma, Talucco,
Malaya, and Gammalamme. In Motir, the Fort of Nassau. In Machian, Taffaso,
Tabilolla, Naflaquia, otherwise Nahaca, and Maurice. In Bachian, Gammadore, and
Laboiia. In Gilolo, Sabou and Coma. In the Island of Amboyna, Coubella and
Lovio. In the Banda Islands, Nassaw, and Belgia in Nera, and Revenge in
Powleway. The Redoubt. Hittow in the Isle Hittow. In the Island of Solor, Fort
Henry, Fort Janpaudam, otherwise called Roterdam near the City of Macassar. The
Islands of Savo and Bocon near Macassar, with another Fort in Timor. Part of
the Southern Land, which is called New-Holland, where lies Carpentaria, the
Lands of Diemens, Witz, Endracht, Edels, Lewin, and Nuitz. Several Factories in
Persia, as at Gombru, Congo, and Ispahan. In the Territories of the Great Mogul
at Agra, Amadabat, Cambaya, Baroche, Surrat, Ogueli, Kasan-Basar, Daca, Patna,
and Bipilipatan. In Decan at Fingerla, in Coromandel at Tenega-patan at
Golconda, Maslipatan, Palicate, Datscheron, and Bincola-patan. In Pegu at Ava
and Siriam. In Siam at Odia. In the Island of Sumatra, at Titou, Priamam,
Indapout, Cillebar, Jambi, Palimbam, and other places. In the Island of Java at
Bantam and Japatra. In the Island of Celebes at Manada and Macassar. The Trade
of the Island of Zocotora. Upon the Coast of Arabia, at Mecca, Aden, and
Fartach. In the Islands of Larek, Resem and others near to Ormus. At Porca, and
most parts of Malabar. At Orixa in Bisnegar, in Aracan, in Pegu. At Tanazerim,
at Pera, at Ihor, Pahan, Patane, Singora, Bordelong, Ligor, on the Coast of
Mallaca. At Tunquin, Chincheo, and other places of China: And at Rima in the
Island of Borneo. At Naugeseque near Japan. And excluding all other Nations,
they pretend to the only Trade upon the Oriental Coast of Sumatra, Japan,
Amboyna, Balli, and other places.

The Danes have also Colonies in both the Indies. They have New Denmark in the
Northern part of America. The Fort of Frederick Burgh, with three Bastions that
Command Cape Corso in Guiny; and the Castle of Christiansburgh in the same
Country in the Kingdom of Accata. Krankebar, otherwise called Trango Bay, and
Dansburgh upon the Coast of Cormandel.

Of Money or Coin.
MOney commonly is the mean for all Commodities: it is the Sinews and Strength
of a State, the Life and Soul of Commerce. Geometricians say, That two Lines
equal to a third Line, are equal one to another; so is Money a third Line by
which all things are made equal in Value, not Materia prima, because it serves
Actually to no Use, but potentially to all.

Coin seems to come from the French Coin, a Corner; for the Ancientest sort
of Coin was cornered, not round.

The first Use of Money was to Supply every Man's particular wants by a Pledge
thereof.

The most Ancient Money was of the purest Gold, because it had greatness of
Weight, closeness of Parts, fixation, pliantness, or softness, immunity from
Rust, and Beauty or Color. And the Alchimists, who have most vexed that Body,
say, that it is harder to destroy Gold, than to make it. Silver is next to it,
and is more ductile than any other Metal, except Gold.

The pureness and fineness of Money, and the weight, is observable for the
intrinsic value thereof. The outward Form or Character of the Prince or State
for the extrinsick knowledge of Money.

The intrinsic value of Money or Coin is so much as there is pure Gold or
Silver in it, in fineness and weight. As for Gold, it is divided into 24 parts,
called Carrats; so that when it is said, Gold is 23 Carrats fine, there is a
24th part Allay mingled with it. Or if 22 Carrats fine, then there is a 12th
part of Allay, etc. The Ancient Standard of Sterling Gold was in Edward the
Third's time, 23 Carrats 3 grains and one half of fine, and half a grain of
Allay. Dr. Chamberlain in his Present State of England, says, it is now 22
Carrats of fine Gold, and 2 Carrats of Allay. The Silver is 11 Ounces and two
penny weight fine, and 18 penny weight of Allay, which also agrees with what
that Author says it is now.

It Is manifest that the most proper Measure in Nature for Gold and Silver, is
weight; and the Practice of Antiquity does confirm it; for the Shekel, Mina,
Talent, and Drachme, both of the Romans and Grecians, were the names of several
sorts of weight.

Of the Proportion between Gold and Silver.
This Proportion must needs differ in several times and places, according to
the scarcity or abundance of those Metals; and indeed I find much variety
amongst Authors, what it was amongst the Hebrews, both as to Times and
Interpretations. Bodine alleges the same places to prove, that the Proportions
were 25 for one, which other Authors do allege to prove it to be above 45 for
one; and others 10 for one. It Is the general consent, that in the times of the
Flourishing of the Grecian Commonwealths, the Proportion of Silver to Gold was
12 to one. And Livy tells us, that the Aetolians agreed with the Romans to pay
ten Talents of Silver, instead of every Talent of Gold.

In France in the Year 1614. the Proportion did arise to 13, wanting about a
seventh part, to one of Gold.

In Germany in the Year 1610. the Proportion held 13 for one, sometimes a
little more, sometimes a little less.

The Proportion in Spain has for a long time been as 12 to one.

In the United Provinces, by the Placcard 1622. it was about 12 and two thirds
fine Silver to one of Gold.

And in England in the 14th. Year of Q. Elizabeth, the ancient Sterling
Standard of Gold and Silver was altered, and a pound of fine Gold valued at 11
l. of fine Silver, and 7 s. 10 d. over. And in the Second Jacobi, the
Proportion was 12 for one, but after raised by Proclamation. The Proportion was
13 l. of fine Silver to 1 l. of fine Gold, at 24 Carrats to the Pound:
afterward I find it at 14 and one third.

The raising of the Price of Money both of Gold and Silver, as it has been
ancient, so it has been a great Confusion and uncertainty among Coins; for the
As, which was Originally coined of a pound weight by the Romans, was in the
first Punick War brought to two ounces, and the lesser parts of it were abated
proportionably. By Papirius it was reduced to half an Ounce. The Denarii of
Silver were at first current for 10 As, at length reduced to a Dram, which
is 8 in the Ounce, and the lesser parts were abated in proportion. Afterward
it was worth 16 As. And their Solidiaurei were coined of 48 pieces in the
pound; and in the time of Justinian they were 72 in the pound. And for some
hundreds of Years most Princes and States have vied one upon another who shall
raise their Money highest.

But as Money was first invented and chosen to be the Instrument of Exchange
and Measure of all things, to avoid the trouble and chargeable Carriage of
Commodities from one place to another: So was Exchange of Money also first
devised to avoid the danger and adventure thereof from place to place.

By the Exchanges, all Princes Coins are brought into one and the selfsame
quality and parity, for the real Exchange is grounded upon knowledge of the
Part or Value for Value of the Moneys of each several Country according to
their several Standards, abating or allowing according to the Value, Weight,
and Fineness of the same, and so rectifying both the one and the other in
equality and true Value.

But though the intrinsic value be the principal Rule by which Exchanges are
squared, yet there are many other Circumstances which do vary and alter the
Exchange: As the Plenty and Scarcity of money, the Occasions and Necessities of
Princes; the Trade and Commerce of Merchants, whose Estates being continually
traversed from one Country to another, and from one Coin to another, do give
and take as their occasions and the Rules of the Exchanges conduce to their
profit. Hence the Bankers in Italy, Spain, and France, being the great Takers
and Deliverers of moneys at their several places of meeting, do concur in
setting the Rates and Prices of Exchange for their own Commodity and Advantage,
which are seen so variously to alter, and daily to rise and fall by those that
use this Mystery, so that although I have given the common Estimate of Foreign
Coins to the Standard of London, as they are commonly valued, yet according to
the Rules of Exchange they will be very different.

Of the Roman Coin.
THE General Names for Money among the Romans are three, Moneta, Numus, Pecunia.

Moneta, (whence the French Monnoye) because it shows the Author, the Value,
and the Time.

Numus, or Nummus, says Vossius, a Numa, or rather of a Greek Original (...),
from the Law.

Pecunia, Either from the Images of Cattle stamped upon it, or from their skin
out of which money was Coined.

The Names of the Brass money among the Romans, were As, quasi Aes, the twelfth
part of a Roman penny, value of our money 3 farthings; Semis, half an As;
Triens, 1 third of an As; Quadrans, 1 fourth of an As; Sextans, 1 sixth of an
As of a farthing, etc.

Roman Silver Coins were the Denarius, the old in value at 8 d. three
farthings; Denarius the new, in value at 7 d. halfpenny. Sestertius being 2 and
a half assis, in value 1 d. 3 farthings and a half. Bigatus, Quadratus, having
the Image of a Chariot, the same with a Roman new Denarius. Victoriatus the
Image of Victory, called Quinarius, in value 3 d. 3 farthings. Libella, the
tenth part of the Roman penny, in value 3 farthings. Obolus the sixth part of
the Roman Denari 1 d..

Of the Roman Gold Coins, there was the Amient piece or Consul,. of a l. of
Gold in value 17 s. 1 d. 3 farthings. The Emperor's Coin or Piece 2/48 of a l.
of Gold, value 15 s. Half a Piece called Aureus Drachmalis weighing one
Drachme, value 7 s. 6 d. Tremissis Triens, or a third part of the Emperor's
Coin, value 5 s.

As to the Coins of Gold after the translating of the Seat of the Empire to
Byzantium, I find these, Constantine Pieces of Gold, value 8 s. 6 d. 3
farthings and 6/7 of (...) These were current until the days of Valentinian,
who, as also Valens, Arcadius, Honorius and others, made their Coin somewhat
heavier, but all differed little in the weight of their Coins; the Valentinian
Piece of Gold called Sextulus, was accounted in value 10 s.

The chief Roman Coins valued with our Money, were the Talentum, containing 24
Sestertia, 6000 Roman pence, value 187 l. 10 s. Then the Sestertium containing
1000 Sesterces, was valued at 7 l. 16 s. 3 d. Libra, vel pendo, a pound, 12
ounces, 96 darms; 1/24 part less than the Grecian pound was, in value 3 l.

According to this account I find Camillus his fine, 500000 Pieces of Brass,
was of our Money 1562 l. 10 s. vide Live. Lib. 6.

So Rossius the Stage Player, his 1000 Deneers or Roman pence, his daily reward
was 31 l. 5 s. vide Macrob. l. 3. c. 14.

Thais's demand of Demosthenes, 10000 Deneers, was 312 l. 10 s. 250000 Deneers
the price of Cicero's Head to Antonius, was 7812 l. 10 s.

At this Rate likewise was the Supper of Caligula, valued at 78125 l.

And Julius Caesar gave unto Sevilia the Mother of Brutus, a precious Stone,
which he bought 60 times, valued at 46875 l. The Heap of Brass-money gathered
by Curio the Son of Valerius, viz. Sexcenties Sestertiums, value 468750 l. Max.
l. 9. c. 1.

Aesop the Tragedian Stage Player left unto his Son Ducenties Sustertium, value
156250 l.

And the Remains of Crassus's Wealth after the 10th. to Hercules, and his
Public Treat of the People of Rome, and had given to all the Citizens 3 Months
Corn, were 7100 Talents, value 1331250 l.

The Roman Treasury taken from Captives and Enemies, began by Julius Caesar,
was Millies Sestertium, which is 1000 C, Thousand Sest. or 1 Million 100 M 000.
and in value of our Money was 781250 l.

Emilius Paulus brought into the Treasury from the Macedonian Captives, Bis
Millies Centies, that is two thousand hundred thousand H. S. or Sesters, valued
at 1640625 l.

The Money which at five Triumphs was brought unto Julius Caesar by the
Captives was Sexies, Millies Sest. viz. six Millions of Millions, value at
468250 l.

Lentulus the Soothsayer was worth before the Libertines impoverished him,
Quater Millies Sestertium, viz. 4000 hundred H. S. valued at 3125000 l.

Julius Caesar in the beginning of his Consulship, took out of the Capitol 3000
l. of Gold, and put in so much Brass-money, valued at 108000 l.

Antiochus to have peace with the Romans paid them 1000 Talents, value 2812500
l.

And the Tribute laid upon the Asians by Antonius was 20000 Talents, value
37500000 l.

Roman Liquid Measures I find were Cochlear sive Ligulus 46080 Cyathos 11520
Acetabulum 7680 Quartarios 3840 Heminas 1920 Sextarios 960 Congios 160 Modius
60 Vrna 40 Amphora 20 Cadus 13 Medimnus 10 Culeus 1

The Roman Measures of Length were, Digitus 80000 Pollex 60000 Palma the Less
20000 Palma the Greater 6666 Pes 5000 Cubitus 3333 Gressus 2000 Passus 1000
Stadium 8 Millare 1

Their Square Measures were, 1. Actus minimus, 4 foot broad and 120 long, viz.
480 Square feet. 2. Clima, about 60 feet Square. 3. Porca, A piece of Land 30
foot broad, and 120 foot long, containing 3600 Square feet. 4. Actus Quadratus,
half an Acre, or 4 Porca's. 5. Jugerum, an Acre of Ground in length 240 foot,
in breadth 120, which makes 28800 Square feet. 6. Centuria, 100 Acres, or
11520000 Square feet. 7. Saltus, a Forest or Land containing 4 Centuries, or
400 Acres.

A Table of the Roman Pound. Granum 6912 Siliqua 1728 Obolus 576 Scrupulum 288
Dram 96 Vncia 12 Libra 1

Or by another Author thus: Grains 5040 Oboles 504 Victoriatos 168 Denarios 84
Ounces 12 Libra 1

As, Libra, Pondo, Solidus; a Pound was 12 Ounces Troy weight: So I also find,
Grains 82 Oboles 6 6/7 Scruples 3 1/7 Drachms 1 1/7 Denarios 1


And the Roman Talent to be, Mina 75 the same with the Hebrew 125 l. Libra 125
the same with the Hebrew 125 l. Ounces 1500 the same with the Hebrew 125 l.
Peny-weights 10500 the same with the Hebrew 125 l. Drachms 12000 the same with
the Hebrew 125 l. Scruples 36000 the same with the Hebrew 125 l.


Of the Grecian Coin.
Darius Stater, having the Image of Sagittarius, containing 2 Drams, was worth
15 Shillings English Gold.

The Stater of Cizicus weighing 28 Drachms, was in value 1 pound, 1 shilling.

The Talent containing 60 Mina's, and every Mina a hundred Drams; viz. 6
thousand Drams to a Talent, was valued at 187 pound 10 shillings Sterling.

The greater Talent of 8 thousand Drams, was valued at 250 pound sterling, so
was the Talent of Egypt.

The Talent of Babylon at 7 thousand, was valued at 218 pound 15 shillings. The
Talent of Aegina at 312 pound 16 shillings; and that of Alexandria containing
12 thousand Drachms, at 375 pound sterling.

The Grecian Silver Coins.
The Stater of Macedon was in value 2 s. 9 d. farthing, and 2 thirds, sterling.

The Stater of Corinth, 1 s. 8 d. halfpenny, sterling.

The Didrachmum with the Image of an Ox, was in value 1 s. 3 d. English.

The Dram marked with Minerva's Candle, weighing with the Roman penny, value
sterling 7 d. halfpenny.

Of Grecian Distances.
The Dactylus or Digitus, a fingers breadth 96000 (...), the lesser Palm of
four fingers breadth 24000 Spithame the greater Palm 12 fingers breadth 8000
Pes, 4 Palms 16 fingers, less than the Roman foot by half 6000 an Inch, greater
than the Hebrew by one fourth 6000 The Cubits were of 3 sorts, viz. of 18, of
20, and of 24 fingers in breadth 4000 The Orgya, Passus, a pace; 6 foot 4
Cubits 1000 Stradium, Orgyas, furlong 100 paces, 400 cubits, 600 feet 8
Millare, 8 Stradia or furlongs, a Mile 1
There was also the Parasanga about twenty nine or thirty furlongs, and the
Schaenus which some make to be sixty furlongs, others but 32 furlongs.

The Grecian Liquid Measures were,
The Amphora of Attica, containing 12 Choos, 72 Zestes or Sextarios. Chus or
Congius, is six Sextarios: the Amphoreos half of a Metreta.

Then there is the Cotile half a Sextarius, the Quartarius a fourth of a
Sextarius, Oxibaphum an eighth, Chyathos the 1/22, Concha the 1/24 of a
Sextarius, Mystrum the 1/48, Chemes the 1/60, and Cochlear the 1/120 of a
Sextarius.

Of the Grecian Weights.
The lesser Talent of sixty pounds, the Pound of twelve ounces and a half, the
Ounce of eight Drachms, the Dram of three Scruples, the Scruple of two
Oboles, one Obole of one and a half Lupine; so that a hundred Drachms of Attica
are ninety six of the Roman; And the lesser pound of Attica is but seventy five
Drams, the greater hundred: one pound of the greater is 1 of the lesser, and
the greater Talent contained 80 l.

The Physic Weights mentioned by Dioscorides and Galen.
The Mina or Pound of sixteen Ounces, and the Libra or twelve Ounces, ninety
six Drachms, two hundred eighty eight Scruples, five hundred seventy six
Oboles, and six thousand nine hundred and twelve Grains.

The parts of a Pound were Sextans two Ounces, Quadrans three Ounces, Triens
four Ounces, Qui^unx five Ounces, Selibra half a Pound, Sextunx seven Ounces,
Bes eight Ounces, Dodrans nine Ounces, Dextans ten Ounces, Deunx eleven Ounces,
etc.

For the Hebrew Coins, etc. See Jerusalem.

Of the Coins, Weights and Measures of the Chief Cities in Europe.
Of Alicant.
ALicant, seated on the Mediterranean Shore, is a Commodious Road for Shipping;
It affords Wines, Raisins, Licoris, Anniseeds, Hard Soap, Soda Barrilla, and
Almonds.

The Coins, are Livers, Solds, and Deniers, 12 Deniers make a Sold, 20 Solds a
Livre, which is about 5 d. Sterling. here are also Rials which they call current
Money, a single Rial being reckoned above 6 d. Sterling: the Current Money is
of less worth than Plate from 7 to 16 per Cent. according to the Plenty or
Scarcity of Pieces of Eight in the Country.

The Weights are the Cargo, Quintal, and Rove of 24 l. being 18 Ounces; and the
Rove of 36 l. being 12 Ounces: all gross Commodities are weighed by 24 l. to
the Rove, and 4 Roves to the Quintal, and 2 Quintals and half to the Cargo, the
Quintal 96 l. because of 18 Ounces to the Pound, make 108 English.

Pepper, Cloves, all Spices, and other Commodities of Value, are sold by the
Rove of 36 l. being 12 Ounces to the Pound, whose Quintal is 120 l. which is
about 18 or 20 per Cent. less than the English 112 l. Here the Rove or Cantar
is a quarter less than at Cadiz or Mallaga.

The Measure is the Vare, which makes 35 Inches English and.

The dry Measure is the Hanague, whereof five make 8 Bushel English.

The Wine Measure is the Cantar, which is about two Gallons English.

Note that 12 Barrachilia's is a Chiaze, which is equal with 4 Hommocks of
Cadiz or Mallaga.

Salt at a Rial a Measure; you are according to Custom to have one Measure for
the Ships use without Money.

Of Amsterdam.
THIS City by reason of its vast Trade to Foreign Parts, affords plenty of all
known Commodities in the World; the several Commodities of Europe, the Drugs,
Spices and Silks of Asia, the Product of Africa, and the Riches of America.

Their Money or Coin is often inhansed or debased as they see occasion, but
commonly is found to be the same as in the account at Antwerp. Their Livre or
Pound which is 20 s. Flemish, and 120 Stivers, makes a Pound of Gross, and 20
Stivers or Solds Turnois makes a Gilder, which is commonly 2 s. Sterling; and 6
Stivers is a Flemish Shilling, and 5 Stivers is reckoned as much as 6 d.
Sterling. Besides these, all Coins of Europe do here pass current, and are paid
and received in Merchandise according to their Value. The Duccatoons are equal
to 10 Dutch Shillings, or 60 Stivers; Patatoons are equal to 48 Stivers, or 8
Dutch Shillings.

Their Weight is the Pound of 16 Ounces, 100 whereof makes their Quintal, which
makes at London 108 or 109 l. neat.

Their Measure is the Ell, which is of a Yard English; so that 100 Else makes
at London 74 Yards, or 60 Else and a half, some say 59 Else.

Of Antwerp or Anvers.
THE Former and Ancient Trade of this City was as great and eminent as now
Amsterdam is.

Commodities here found, are Tapestries, Pictures, several Manufacturies, and
other the Commodities of Flanders.

Their Accounts are here kept by Livres, Solds and Deniers; which they term,
Pound, Shillings and Pence of Grosses; 12 Grosses making a Sold, and 20 Sold a
Livre or Pound Flemish.

The Current Money here, as generally through all the Spanish Provinces, are
(besides the Spanish and Imperial) Doits; of which 8 makes a Stiver, and 6
Stivers a Shilling Flemish; and 20 Stivers makes a Gilder, 6 Gilders a Pound
Flemish; which is reckoned for 12 s. Sterling, and 20 s. Sterling for 33 s. 4
d. Flemish; but in Exchange it is sometimes more than 36 s. Flemish for a Pound
Sterling.

Their Weight is the Quintal of 100 l. of 16 Ounces per l. which makes at
London 104 l.

Their Measure is the Ell Flemish, which is one fourth of a Yard English, so
that 100 Else Flemish makes 60 Else, or 75 Yards English.

Corn is sold by a Measure called the Vertule, whereof 37 and a half makes a
Last at Amsterdam, which is 10 Quarters English.

Wine is Sold by the Stoop, the Ame, and the Butt; 50 Stoops is one Ame, and
152 Stoops is a Butt: the Stoop makes at London 7 Pints, and the Ame 42 Gallons
Wine-measure.

Of Bilboa.
BIlboa is a Town of great Trade, and much frequented by Merchants; Seated two
miles from the Ocean: Its Commodities are Iron, Chestnuts and Wool.

The Coins are the same as used throughout Spain. Vide Madrid and Sevil.

As to their Weights, they make use of two Kintals, the one being 100 l.
Subtle, which produces at London 111 or 112 l. the other is only Proper for
Iron, which makes at London 128 l.

Their Measure is the Vare, of which 109 makes 100 Yards English.

Corn is sold by the Hanega, 5 whereof makes a Quarter English.

Of Cadiz.
HEre their Weight of Gold is more than in Italy, the Pistol being two Grains
heavier. To a Dobleon you must add 4 Grains; to a double Dobleon you must add 6
Grains.

Of Copenhagen.
COpenhagen, the Seat of the Danish Kings in Winter; Commodities are Hides,
Tallow, Stock Fish, Armor, Cordage, Masts, Pitch, Tarr, Deals, Wainscot,
Buck-skins and Salt-fish.

Coins here current are the Dollars and Shillings; 66 Shillings makes a
Rix-Dollar, which is 5 Shillings Sterling.

They keep their Accounts by marks of 16 s. Danish: and their Exchanges are
made by Rix-Dollars, which is the current Coin of the Kingdom.

Their Weights are the great and small Hundred, viz. one of 120 l. the other of
112 l. which are divided into 12 parts, or stones, at 10 l. per Stone.

They have also a Skip-pound, which makes 32 stone at 10 l. per Stone, which is
320 l. or 20 Lis-pounds of 16 pound mark, is a Skip-pound. And the 100 l.
English is found to be 92 at Copenhagen.

Their Measures I find no where certain; the best that I can fix upon is that
100 Yards English makes about 163 Else there.

Of Constantinople.
COnstantinople is the Seat and Residence of the Great Turk, enjoying the
Advantages of the Euxine and Mediterranean Seas; of which it is Observed, That
the first Emperor that Commanded, it was a Baldwin, and a Baldwin that lost it.
That a Constantine Built it, a Gregory being Patriarch, and a Constantine lost
it, a Gregory being Patriarch: And it was gained by Mahomet, and a Mahomet
(according to the Turks Prophecy) shall lose it.

The Commodities are Grograins, Camlets, Mohair, Carpets, Anniseeds, Cottons,
Galls, etc.

The Coins current are Aspers, 80 whereof is accounted a Dollar, and 120 Aspers
to the Sultanies of Gold: a Rial of 8 and a half is a Sultanie of Gold. The
Lion Dollar at 75 Aspers. The German Sestine at 70 Aspers. The Rial of 8 for 80
Aspers. Sometimes the Sultanie, Hungar, or Chequin, is worth 10, 12, or 15
Aspers more than 80. And in Merchandise it does pass for 90, 100, or 110 Aspers.

Thevenot tells us that the Aspers are little pieces of Silver stamped with the
Grand Signiors Name, and are worth about 8 Deniers, or 3 farthings a piece. The
Isolette is worth 55 Aspers. The Aslanies, or German Rix-Dollar, is worth 80
Aspers. The Piastre or Picade of 58 Sols, is commonly worth 90 Aspers,
sometimes but 80. And then the Aslanie is worth but 75 Aspers. The Turkish
Chequin is worth 2 Piasters. The Venetian is worth 10 Aspers more. And that a
Purse contains 500 Piasters, or 45000 Aspers.

The Cantar which is 150 Rottes, the Rotte is 12 Ounces, the Ounce 12 Drams,
the Dram is 16 Quirats, the Quirat is 4 Grains. The Oque contains 400 Drams,
176 Drachms is a Lodero, and 100 Lodero's is accounted to be 42 Oques, and
called a Quintar, or Cantar, which is 120 l. English.

Silk is sold by the Baleman, which is six Oaks, or 16 l. and one third
English; but weighed by the Lodero, 13 Loderoes, and 112 Drams makes a Baleman.

The Mitigal, or Midical, is 1 Dram and a half, which is 24 Killats, 20
Mitigals of Gold is 3 Ounces English. The Chequin, Sultanie, or Hungar, is 18
Killats.

The Measure is the Picos, one of Cloth, 4 of which makes three Yards English,
and is about 26 Inches and a half.

The Second is the Grogram or Chamlet Pico, containing 24 Inches, 24 whereof
makes 16 Yards English.

Corn is sold by the Killow, and weighs about 20 Oaks; and eight Killows and
two thirds is a London Quarter.

Wine and Oil is sold by the Meter, which makes 8 Oaks, and is about two thirds
of a Gallon English.

Of Cracovia.
CRacovia, tho the Metropolitan City of Poland, yet of small Account in Trade.

Its Coins are the Gold Ducate, of the same value of the Hungarian Ducate.
Groszes, Or^s, and Rix-dollars. 18 Grosz make an Ort, 30 Groze make a Gilder or
Florin, 6 Gilders make a Ducate, 5 Orts of 18 Grosz makes a Rix-dollar, and 4
Orts of 22 and a half Grosz makes a Rix-dollar, which in Specie is worth 40
Polish Grosz, but in Buying and Selling it is accounted 36 Grosz. They make
Contracts by Silver Gilders or Florins, but no such real Coin.

The common weight is the pound, 136 whereof is accounted a Quintar, which
makes in London 114 pound circa; and the 100 pound of London has yielded here
about 120 pound.

The Measure of Length is the Ell, which is half of the English Ell, but their
Linnens are sold by the Shock, which contains 57 Else and a half English.

Of Dantzick.
DAntzick, Seated about an English Mile from the Baltic Shore, on the River
Vistula; the fairest City, and greatest Trade of any in Prussia. Her
Commodities are Wheat, Ric, Oats, Potashes, Clap-boards, Oats, Flax, Hemp, and
Canvas.

Their Coins are Dollars, Gilders, Grosz, and Pence. The Rix-dollar is worth 90
Grosz, which is commonly valued at 4 s. 6 d. Sterling. A Gilder is worth 30
Grosz, and 18 of their Pence makes a Grosz. So that a Gilder is about 1 s. 6 d.
Sterling.

They keep their Accounts by Gilders, Grosz, and Pence. And they reckon one
great Mark is 2 Polish Gilders, and one Polish Gilder is worth two lesser
Marks, one lesser Mark is worth 15 Grosz, and the Grosz is 18 Pence. And a
Grosz is worth 2 2/^ of a Farthing Sterling.

Their Weight is the Pound, whereof 116 l. at London makes 100 l. There is also
the Skip-pound, and the Lis-pound, 16 or 14 Mark-pound is one Lis-pound, and 20
Lis-pound makes one Skip-pound by the small Stone of 24 l. But there is a great
Stone to weigh gross Wares of 34 l. whereof 10 l. to the Skip-pound of 340 l.

Their Measure for Length is the Ell, 100 Else whereof makes in London about 49
Else.

The Measure of Beer is the Fat, which contains 180 Stoops.

The Measure of Corn is the Last, which contains 60 Sheffels, 56 whereof makes
a Last in Amsterdam, or 10 Quarters and a half English. And 4 Sheffels make one
Mud, which is the Ship-pound of 34 l.

Of Florence.
FLorence is Seated on a Fruitful and Pleasant Plain, near the Confluence of
the River Arno and Chiani, first Built by Sylla, made a Colony by the
Triumviri; razed by the Lombards, Rebuilt by Charles the Great, bought its
Liberty of Rodolphus; and lastly, Subject to the Medices, now Dukes of Florence.

The Commodities that this City produces are the product of the Dukedom, viz.
Wines, Oils, Silks both raw and wrought into several Fabrics, as Taffaties,
Sattins, Velvets, Plushes, and Grograms.

The Coins here current are Ducats of 7 Livers per Ducat, which is reckoned for
5 s. 3 d. Sterling. The Liver is 20 Solds, which is valued 9 d. Sterling. The
Liver is also divided into 12 Craches, whereof 8 is a Julio, which is 6 d.
Sterling; 5 Quatrins is a Crach, and 60 Craches makes a Liver.

They keep their Accounts generally in Livers, Solds, and Deniers, 12 Deniers
to a Sold, and 20 Solds to a Liver.

The Weight is the Quintal or 100 l. of 12 Ounces to the Pound, which 100 l.
makes at London 78 l.

The Measure is the Brace, and 4 Braces is a Cane, and 100 Braces are found to
make 48 Else and a half, or 60 Yards and a half.

Wine is Sold by the Cogno, which is 10 Barrels, each Barrel 40 Metadels, or 20
Bottles, and the Barrel is to weigh 120 l.

Oil is Sold by the Orcio, or Barrel, and contains 32 Metadels, which should
weigh 85 l.

Wrought Silks are here Sold by the Pound for Livers, and not by Measure.

Of Frankford.
FRancford is a Free City, Famous for the Election of the Emperors, as also for
two Fairs or Marts for Books, Annually kept, the one in Lent, the other in
September.

The Weight is the Pound of 16 Ounces, of which there is three Quintals, the
one of 100 l. for fine Goods, the other of 120 for Gross Goods, and the third
of 132 l. for Food; the 100 l. makes at London 108 l.

The Measures of Length are two, one for Linen, the other for Woollen, both
Else differing about two per Cent. 100 Else whereof make at London about 48
Else.

Of Genoa.
THIS City is Inhabited by the greatest Money-Mongers in Europe. Their Coins
here current are Deniers, whereof 12 make a Sold, 4 Solds a Chavalet, 5
Chavalets or 20 Solds, a Liver, which is 1 s. 4 d. Sterling. 90 Solds makes a
Crown of Gold, a Ducat in Silver is 4 Livers.

They keep their Accounts by Livers, Solds, and Deniers. 20 Deniers is a Liver,
and 5 Livers a piece of Eight. Here note, that a piece of 8/8 current Money is
worth but 96 Solds. But St. Georges weighed 104 Solds.

Their Weight is the Pound of 12 Ounces, and 25 Pound is a Roue, 6 Roues is a
Kintal; and 100 l. Genoua is 70 l. English; and 1 Pound English is 17 Ounces
Genoua; and 112 l. English is 58 l. Genoua. And the Quintal is 100 Rotelles,
which makes 150 smaller Pounds, and is 106 l. English. The gross Quintal of 150
l. is of 18 Ounces to the Pound.

The Measure is the Cane, which is of two sorts, one for Silk, which is of 9
Palms, whereof 100 makes 26 Yards English; the other for Linen and Woollen is
of 10 Palms, and makes 2 Yards English.

Wine is sold there by the Miserold, whereof 5 makes a Botta dimina, and two
Barrels makes a Miserold, which is 100 Pints.

Oil is sold by the Barrel, 14 whereof makes a Tun of 236 Gallons to the Tun.

Of Hamburgh.
HAmburgh is a Free City of the Empire, enjoying the Privilege of a Hanse-Town;
the Haven is guarded with an Iron Chain, the City adorned with nine Churches, a
Senate House, and Exchange.

The Merchants Exchange here for London by the Pound Sterling, for other places
upon the Rix-dollar, at 54 Stivers.

A Dollar is here said to be worth 3 Whit-pence, one Whit-penny is worth 18
Shillings, one Shilling to be 12 pence, and one penny two Hellers. A Mark is 16
Stivers, and 7 Marks and a half is 20 s. Flemish.

Their Weight is the Pound, 120 whereof is their Quintal, and makes at London
107 or 109 l.

The Measure is the Ell, 100 whereof makes at London 48 Else and a half, and
100 Yards at London makes about 162 and a half, or 163 Else.

Corn is Measured by Schepel, 90 making a Last, and 83 Schepels is 10 Quarters
English.

Of Lego^n, or Livorn.
COmmodities are Oils, Wines, Silks raw and wrought, Anchoves, Anniseeds, Rice,
Argal, with other Italian Commodities.

Coins are Quatr^ens, 5 whereof make one Scratch or Craca, 12 Scratches or
Craca's is one Livre, which is 9 d. English, 8 Craca's is one Julio, which is 6
d. English, 6 Livres or 9 Julio's is one Dollar, which varieth according to the
Exchange; 7 Livres is a Ducat which is 5 s. 9 d. English. And 7 Livres is a
Scudoe or Crown D'oro which is 5 s. 7 d. Sterling.

The Accounts are kept in Dollars, Solds and Deniers, 12 Deniers to a Sold, and
20 Solds to a Dollar, Charges of Goods are kept in Livres, Solds, and Deniers,
and brought into pieces of 115 Solds per piece, which is called short money, of
which 5 Livres and 3 quarters is a Dollar, and 6 Livres or 120 Solds makes a
Dollar, which is called Long-Money. Exchanges are with London for 56 s. d. per
piece. Marseilles for 60 Surneise per piece. Naples Ducats 92 for -- Pieces 100
Venice Ducats Debank 103 for Pieces 100. with Solds, 113 for a Dollar.

Commodities sold by the Pound 12 Ounces. All sorts of Silks in Julios, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Indigo, Cochineal, Storax, Benjamin Manna, and all other Drugs in
Livres. Russia Hides, in Solds.

Commodities sold by the Kintal; Pepper, Cinnamon, Cassia, Lignum, Nutmegs, Wax,
Tinn, in Ducats. Cotten-wool, Cotten-yarn, Ginger. In Ducats; Gawles in Livres.
Commodities sold by the 1000 l.

Lead, Campeach, Faxumbuck in Ducats; Potashes in Dollars. Sugars of all sorts
by the Kintal of 151 Pound in Scudoes or Crowns. Newfound-Land-Fish by the
Kintal of 160 l. in Julio's, Herrings by the Barrel, and Pilchards by the
Hogshead in Dollars.

Their Weight is the Pound of 12 Ounces, of which 15 and a half makes the Pound
English, so that their Quintal of 100 l. is 77 l. three Ounces English, or 145
l. there; is 112 l. English. By a late Account I find that their Kintal of 100
l. makes 76 l. English, and 148 l. there is about 112 English; and that their
Kintal of Sugar is 151 l. a Kintal of Fish 160 of their Pound.

The Measures of Legorn, 4 Braces makes a Lane, which is 2 Else English; 8
Braces is 5 yards English.

The Quintal of Allom is 130 l. which makes 100 l. 6 Ounces 5/^ English.

The Quintal of Wool is 160 l. and makes 123 l. English.

Corn Measure is a Stax, 3 Staxes is a Sack, 8 Sacks, or 24 Stars, is Moggio. A
Stax, if the Corn be good, will weigh 50 l. English, 3 Sacks and three quarters
makes the English Quarter. 63 Mina's at Genoua makes 100 Sacks at Legorn, and
12 Mina's makes a Tun of 40 Bushels Winchester Measure.

Wine is sold by the Coyno, which is 10 Barrels, one Barrel is 20 Flask, and 2
Mettidals is a Flask.

Oil is sold by the Oxcio or Barrel, and should weigh 85 l. and hold 32
Mittidals.

Coxal and Colchester Bays are sold by the Cayne in Livres, Serges and
Perpetuanoes, Says, etc. are sold by the piece for Dollars.

Of Lions.
LIons is Seated upon the Conflux of the Rosne and Soane, is Famous for its
Trade of Silks, and for Exchanges. Their Coins current, and Accounts keeping,
are the same with Paris.

For Weights, I find three sorts, viz. The Kings weight, the Towns weight, and
the Silk weight.

The Town-weight is 100 l. of 16 Ounces, which makes at London 96 l.

The Measure is the Alne, 7 whereof makes in London 9 Yards, so that it is about
a Yard and quarter at London.

Of Lisbon.
COmmodities are, Honey, Wine, Oil, Fruits, Fish, Salt, white Marble, Allom;
and besides Drugs, Spices, Cottons, Callicoes, Precious Stones, Silks, and
other East India, Persia, Arabia, and China Commodities.

Coins are a Vintin, which is 20 Res, or 3 d. Sterling. A Rial, which is 40 Res,
or two Vintins, 6 d. Sterling. A Teston is 100 Res. 400 Res is an Old Crusadoe or
Crown. 500 Res is a New Crusadoe or Crown. 600 Res is a Piece of Eight. 1000
Res is a Mil Rea.

Weights are 16 Ounces to a Pound. 32 Pound is a Roue. 4 Roues is a Kintal. 54
Roues is a Tun. This weight is 2, or 3 per Cent. greater than the English. The
Quintal, which is of two sorts, the Greater Quintal, whereby they weigh Sugars
and all Spices, except Pepper and Cinnamon, is divided into four Roues, each
Roue being 32 l. which is 128 l. at 16 Ounces to the Pound, and is bigger than
the English hundred by 16 l.

Pepper is sold by the Quintal of 121 l. which is just our Hundred, and
Cinnamon by the Quintal of 128 l. English.

Measures are of two sorts, the one is the Vare for Linen, Silk, or Stuffs;
and in measuring, to every Vare is given an Inch, so that the Vare is 42 Inches
and three quarters, which is almost an Ell English.

The other, called the Coveda, makes three quarters of a Yard English, and to
this there is no Advantage given.

Measure for Corn is the Alquier, three of which makes a Bushel of Winchester
Measure, and 5 of the Alquiers makes the Hanaque, 15 Alquiers makes a Tun of
Bristol Water-measure, 60 Alquiers makes a Moy of Salt. 100 Moys of Salt is 33
Weys English, 3 Alquiers makes a Bushel, 13 Chants makes an Allmuden, and 52
Allmudens is a Tun of Wine.

Of London.
WHEN Julius Caesar first entered this Island, certain Iron Rings were current
instead of Money; afterward the Romans brought in the Use of Gold, Silver, and
Brass Coins.

In the time of Richard the First, pure Money was Coined in the East of
Germany, whereof some of those Easterlings were sent over for, and employed in
his Mint; from thence our Money was called Easterling, or Sterling Money, as
some think; but others say, of the Saxon word Ster weighty.

The Coins here, and throughout all England, as well Gold as Silver, are
several, and of a different value, but all reduced to Pounds, Shillings, and
Pence; all Coined of Gold and Silver; only in relation to the Necessity of the
Poor, and Exchange of great Money, a small piece of Brass, called a Farthing,
or fourth part of a Penny, has been permitted to be Coined, but no Man enforced
to receive it in pay for Rent or Debt, which cannot be said of any other State
or Nation in the World besides. Four Farthings makes a Penny, 12 Pence a
Shilling, and 20 Shillings a Pound Sterling.

No Moneys in any Mint are made of pure Gold and Silver, because they are too
flexible, and therefore Allayed with Copper. The Standard of Crown Gold is 22
Carrats of fine Gold, and two Carrats of Allay in the Pound-weight Troy, which
is divided into 44 parts and a half, each part is to pass for 20 s. and the
half part for 10, which is 44 l. 10 s. the Pound Troy. The Allay of some Gold
Coins is all Silver, as the Guinea Gold, which renders the Gold Coins some more
white, some more yellow. The Standard of Sterling Silver is 11 Ounces, and 2
peny-weight of fine Silver, and 18 peny-weight of Allay of Copper out of the
fire; so that 12 Ounces of pure Silver without any Allay is worth 3 l. 4 s. 6
d. and an Ounce is worth 5 s. 4 d. halfpenny, but with Allay it is worth but 3
l. and the Ounce 5 s.

Of Weights there are two sorts used throughout all England, viz. Troy Weight,
and Avoirdupoise Weight.

The Monyers Divide the Pound Troy into 12 Ounces. The Ounce into 20 Penny
weight. Penny weight into 24 Grains. Grain into 20 Mites. Mite into 24 Droites.
Droite into 20 Perits. Perit into 24 Blanks.


It Is also divided into 24 parts, which are called Carrats, so that each Carrat
is 10 penny weight Troy, or half an Ounce. And this Carrat is divided into four
parts, which are called Carrat-grains; so that the Carrat-grain is two penny
weight and a half, or 60 Ordinary Grains; so there are 480 Grains in the Ounce,
and 5760 Grains in the Pound.

By this weight are weighed Pearls, Precious Stones, Gold, Silver, Bread, and
all manner of Corn and Grain, and this weight the Apothecaries do or ought to
use, though by other Denominations their least weight is a Graln, 20 Grains
makes a Scruple, 3 Scruples makes a Dram, 8 Drams makes an Ounce, 12 Ounces
makes a Pound, L


Avoirdupoise Weight is reduced into several Denominations, viz. Tuns,
Hundreds, Quarters, Pounds, and Ounces; so that 16 Ounces makes a Pound. 28
Pound makes a Quarter. 4 Quarters makes a Hundred, or 112 l. 20 Hundred makes a
Tun.


By this weight are weighed all Grocers Ware, Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Iron,
Hemp, Flax, Lead, Steel; also all things whereof comes waste.

All Measures in England are either Applicative, or Receptive.

The smallest Applicative Measure is a Barley-Corn, whereof, 3 In Length makes
an Inch. 12 Inches makes a Foot. 3 Foot makes a Yard. 1 Yard and a quarter
makes an Ell. 1 Foot and half makes a Cubit. 2 Cubits makes a Yard. 5 Foot
makes a Geometrical Pace. 6 Foot makes a Fathom. 16 Foot and a half makes a
Perch, Pole, or Rod. 14 Perch makes a Furlong. 8 Furl. or 320 Perches makes a
Mile English.


So that a Mile, according to the Statute of Henry the Seventh, ought to be
63360 Inches, 1760 Yards, 1056 Paces, 320 Pole, or 5280 Foot, that is 280 Foot
more than the Italian Mile; 60 Miles more exactly, 69 and a half, makes a
Degree, and 360 Degrees, or 25020 Miles compass the whole Globe of the Earth.

Receptive Measures are twofold: First, of Liquid or moist things: Secondly,
of dry things, whereof about a Pound Avoirdupoise makes a Pint, 2 Pints makes a
Quart. 2 Quarts makes a Pottle. 2 Pottles makes a Gallon. 8 Gallons makes a
Firkin of Ale. 2 Firkins makes a Kilderkin. 2 Kilderkins, or 32 Gallons makes a
Barrel of Ale. 9 Gallons makes a Firkin of Beer. 2 Such Firkins, or 18 Gallons
makes a Kilderkin. 2 Such Kilderkins, or 36 Gallons makes a Barrel of Beer. 1
Barrel and half, or 54 Gallons makes a Hogshead. 2 Hogshead makes a Butt or a
Pipe. 2 Butts, or 2 Pipes makes a Tun.
Consisting of 1728 Pints or Pounds; and a Barrel of Butter or Soap is the same
with a Barrel of Ale. The English Wine-measures are smaller than those of Beer
or Ale, and hold proportion as four to five; so that four Gallons of
Beer-measure are five Gallons of Wine-measure, and each Gallon of Wine is eight
Pound Troy weight; so that a Roundlet of Wine holds eighteen Gallons, half a
Hogshead thirty one Gallons and a half, a Teirce of Wine holds forty two
Gallons, a Hogshead sixty three Gallons, a Punchion eighty four Gallons, a Pipe
or Butt a hundred twenty six, and a Tun two hundred fifty two Gallons, or two
thousand and sixteen Pints.

Dry Measures are those in which any kind of dry Goods are measured, as Corn,
Coal, Salt, etc. of which there is the Pint, two Pints make a Quart, two Quarts
a Pottle, two Pottles a Gallon, two Gallons a Peck, four Pecks a Bushel, four
Bushels a Comb or Curnock, two Combs a Quarter, four Quarters a Chaldron, five
Quarters a Weigh, ten Quarters a Last or Weigh, which contains 5120 Pints;
where note, that the Corn Gallon is bigger than the Wine Gallon, and less than
the Ale or Beer Gallon, and is in proportion to them as 33 to 28 and 35, and is
counted 8 pounds Troy weight.

Of Lubeck.
ITS Coins current are the Rix-Dollars, worth 48 Stivers; the Merchants Dollar
at 33 Stivers, the Slecht- Dollar at 32 Stivers, the Mark at 16 Stivers, the
Guld is one Mark and 8 Stivers; the Real is 2 Marks and 14 Stivers, and 5 of
their Stivers is 6 d. Sterling, and one Stiver is 12 Fenning.

Their Weight is the Pound, of which is made a Centner and a Schip-pound, one
Schip-pound is 20 Lis-pound, or 280 l. 1 Centner is 8 Lis-pound. A Tun of Salt
is 20 pound. A Stone of Flax is 20 l. A Stone of Wool is 10 l. one Pound is 16
Ounces, or 32 Lodt.

Their Measure is the Ell, 8 whereof make in London 5 Yards.

Of Madrid.
MAdrid, the Court of Spain, and greatest Village in the World: The Coins here,
are the general Coins of Spain, viz. the Ducat which is 375 Mervedes in
Exchange, and is called by some the Doblon of Castile. The Castiliano which is
worth 265 Mervedes.

The Florin of Castile worth 265 Mervedes.

The Spanish Ducat has eleven Rials of Plate, and a Rial is 34 Mervedes, a
Ducat is generally valued about 5 s. 6 d. English, and the Rial at 6 pence.

Of Malaga.
MAlaga, Seated on the Mediterranean, abounds in Raisins and Wine. Their Moneys
are general with all Spain.

They generally keep their Accounts in Beillon or Brass-money, by Rials,
Ducats and Mervedes. 34 Mervedes make a Rial of Beillon, which according to
the Law of the Kingdom should be worth 50 in the Hundred less than a Rial of
Plate or Silver, upon the account 100000 Maravedis are worth about 61 l.
English. But because the Silver Coin in Spain is now Cent. per Cent. better
than the Money of Beillon, which is most part of Copper, 100000 Maravedis is
worth but half of that money: So that Beillon is not intrinsecally worth so
much as the Prince puts upon it.

Their Weight is the Quintal or C. which they divide into four Roves or Parts
of 25 l. at sixteen Ounces per l. each Ounce contains sixteen Drams, each Dram
28 Grains; and this Quintal or C. makes in London 106 Averdupois.

Their Measure is the Vare, of 32 or 38 Inches English.

Wine-measure is a Rove, which is divided into eight small Measures called
Sombres, and is in England four Gallons, and 25 of these fill a Pipe, which is
a hundred Gallons English.

Oil-measure is the Rove of 25 l.

Dry measure is the Hanoque, which is divided into two Almodes, making one
Bushel and a half in weight by heap, 144 l. by strike, 99 l. English.

Messena Weights and Measures.
TWelve Ounces is a Pound by which Silk is Sold. 2 Pound makes a Rottella 100
pound, there is between 70 and 71 l. English, and 100 Rottella's makes a common
Cantar, which is 176 l. English.

Of its Measure: 8 Palms makes a Cane, which is reckoned 2 yards English, but
found above 84 Inches.

Coins are, 20 Grains, or 2 Carleens is a Tarry, which is 5 d. Sterling. 30
Tarries makes an Ounce, which is 12 s. 6 d. Sterling. 12 Tarries is a Crown, or
Scudo, which is 5 s. Sterling. 11 Tarries is commonly reckoned a Dollar as
Exchange.

Accounts are kept in Ounces, Tarries and Grains, 20 Grains to a Tarry, and 30
Tarries to an Ounce. Perpetuanoes are Sold by the piece for Crowns. Cloth,
Bays, etc. by the Cane for Tarries. Pepper, Indigo, by the Cantar, for Ounces.
Lead and Iron by the Cantar for Crowns. And Silk of all sorts by the Pound, for
Tarries.

Of Millain.
THeir Current Money are the Imperial Coins; other Coins, as Spanish, French
and Italian pass here in Merchandise. The Crown of the Gold of the Sun is worth
96 or 98 Sol; the Ducat of Gold is in Circa a hundred Sol; the Ducat Imperial
is valued at four Livers; a Crown of Gold Italian is five Livers and six Sol
Imperial; and the Crown passes in Commerce for a hundred and ten Sols, and the
Ducat for as much.

Weight is the Quintal of a hundred pound, which makes at London seventy pound.

Measure is the Brace, a hundred whereof makes at London forty three Else.

Of Marseilles.
AT Marseilles the 100 pound is in English 88 l., and 8 Palms makes a Cane,
which is 2 Yards English. The Muld of Corn is 60 Bushels, or 7 Quarters English.

Of Moscow.
THeir Coins are the Cuppeck, ten whereof make a Greven, and ten Grevens is a
Ruble, which is about 8 s. Sterling, by some 10 s. Sterling. There is also the
Altine, by which name all Receipts and Payments are made, 33 whereof, and one
Crapeck, makes a Rubble, which is an Imaginary Coin and not Real, 3 Cuppecks
make an Altine.

Weight is the Zelotneck, of which ninety six make a pound, forty pound a Pood,
and ten Pood a Bercovet, so their Pood is thirty five pound English.

Measure is called an Archine, which is about 27 Inches in Circa, so that a
hundred Archines are found to make about seventy five Yards English.

Of Naples.
THeir Commodities are Wines, Oils, Silks raw and wrought, Saffron, Almonds,
Argal, Brimstone and Anniseeds.

Their Coins are, Six Cavals, or Cavallas, makes a Turnese, two Turnesses a
Grain, ten Grains a Carline, two Carlines a Tarry, and 5 Tarries a Ducat;
which is 5 s. Sterling.

Their Weight is a pound of twelve Ounces, which makes eleven Ounces English,
or 1/23, so that a hundred pound there produces 71 pound English. A Dollar is
valued at 96 Grains according to Exchange. 6 Ducats make an Ounce, by which the
Customs are rated. All Goods paying 91 Grains per Ounce, according to the
value. Accounts are kept in Ducats, Tarries and Grains, 20 Grains to a Tarry,
and five Tarries to a Ducat.

The Rottello is thirty three Ounces and a half, a hundred Rottelloes is the
Cantar of 277 l. which produces 196 l. at sixteen Ounces per l. in London.

Oil is sold by the Salmo, five and a half is reckoned for a Tun, which is 236
Gallons English.

Of Nuremberg.
THeir Weight is the Pound of sixteen Ounces, of which are two several
Quintals, the one of a hundred pound, the other of a hundred and twenty pound;
and the hundred makes at London a hundred and eleven pound.

Their Measure is the Ell, a hundred whereof make at London about sixty three
Else.

Of Paris.
PAris is one of the three Cities in France where Exchanges are made, and gives
the Rule in matter of Coin to the other Cities.

The Coins here, as generally through France, are Deniers; twelve whereof makes
a Soul, and twenty Souls a Liver; and by these they keep their Accounts.

But the common Coins are the Gold and Silver Lewis's, the Gold Lewis weighing
eleven Deniers, and twelve Grains, the same weight with the Spanish Pistol, and
the same Standard; once it was ten Livers, now it passes for eleven Livers;
the French Liver is commonly reckoned to be one Shilling six pence Sterling,
and the Golden Lewis 16 s. 6 d. English.

The Silver Lewis weighs twenty one Deniers, and twelve Grains, little more
than a Spanish piece of Eight, and about the same Standard, and now goes for
three Livers, or sixty Souls, and is accounted for 4 s. 6 d. English; but the
Par in Exchange is sometimes less than 56, sometimes more than 72 d. Sterling,
for a Crown French.

Their Weight is the Quintal of a hundred pound, at sixteen Ounces to the
pound, which makes at London a hundred and ten pound Subtle.

Their Measure is the Alne, which makes about forty five Inches English.

Of Riga.
RIGA, an Archbishops See, and of great Commerce. Commodities here found, are
Hemp both Rine and Pass, Flax, Osens and Stringflax, Clap-boards, Wainscots,
Oars, Potashes, etc.

Coins are Rix-dollars, Guilders, and Grosz; thirty Grosz is a Guilder, three
Guilders a Dollar; and a Guilder is one Shilling and six pence Sterling, as
Vulgarly reckoned.

Weight is the pound, whereof twenty make a Lispound; and twenty Lispound a
Ship-pound, which is three hundred and a quarter English.

Measure is the Ell, whereof a hundred sixty six and a half make a hundred
Yards English.

Of Roan.
THE Kintal at Roan in Normandy is 104 l. English 119 l. The Aulne is 46 Inches
English; but for Linen, is allowed 24 Aulnes, for 20.

Two Deniers make a Dooble, 12 Deniers make a Sous, 20 Sous make a Liver, which
is 1 s. 6 d. English, and is called a Frank; 60 Sols, or 3 Livers, is a French
Crown, or Lewis, which weighs 21 Deniers, 12 Grains, and is 4 s. 6 d. English.

Of Rome.
THeir Coins are Ducats or Crowns of Gold, which is worth eleven Julios or
Paulos; the Crown of Silver is worth ten Julios, the Julio is worth ten
Bajoches, or forty Quatrins, the Bajoche is worth one Sold four Deniers small
money of Rome.

Their Weight is the Quintal of a hundred pound, which makes in London eighty
pound.

Their Measures are two, the one for Woollen, the other for Linen; the one is
the Cane, and eight Palms make a Cane, and thirty Canes is fifty five Else and
a half English.

The other is the Brace, which is three Palms and a half of the said Cane.

Of Sivil and Cadiz.
SIvil is the Fairest City of all Spain, and of the greatest Trade.

Its Commodities are Wool, Silk and Oranges, Gold, Silver, Tobacco, Ginger,
Cottons, Sugar, etc. being the product of the Western Indies.

The Merchants keep their Accounts as in other places of Spain, in Mervedes and
Rials; and the Exchanges are made upon the Imaginary Ducat of 375 Mervedes,
which is something above 5 s. 6 d. Sterling. But the Rial in Sivil is worth but
34 Mervides, and so some keep their Accounts in Rials of 34 Mervides to the
Rial, which is about 6. pence English, and so it is generally esteemed
throughout all Spain.

The Doblon of Castile is worth 375 Mervides, but the Doblon current of Carline
money is 81/87 Mervides.

34 Mervides is a Rial. 8 Rials is a piece of Eight, and 32 Rials is a Single
Pistol. 64 Rials is a Double Pistol.

Note, that there is an Advance of 6 per Cent. on Pieces of 8/8 above 8 Rials.
And 2 Rials Beilloon is one Rial of Plate.

Their Weight is the Kintal of 100 l. Subtle, at 4 Roves to the Kintal, each
Rove being 25 l. which Kintal is said to make about 108 l. in English.

The Common Measure is the Vare, a hundred whereof makes in London 74 Else.

Liquid Measure is the Rove, which is about 4 Gallons English. Four Quarteels
is a Somar. 8 Somars is a Rove for Oil and Wine. A Hanaga of Corn is a Bushel
and half English.

Of Stockholm.
STockholm is Seated in watery Marshes, upon the Lake Mellar, Secured by the two
Forts Waxholm and Digne, besides Fortified with a strong Castle, wherein are
said to be 400 Brass Guns.

Her Commodities are Iron, Steel, Copper and Lead, and other Minerals; also
Honey, Wax, Tallow, Hides from Moscow.

Coins are the same generally current in all Sweden, viz. Dollars, which are
divided into Marks, 8 whereof makes a Dollar, by which they Exchange with other
Countries.

Their Weight and Measure is the same, as far as I can find, with Riga.

Of Vienna.
THeir Weight is the pound, which in some Commodities is divided into 32
Cootes, and in some into 28 Pints; the 100 l. does make at London 123 l. in
Circa.

Their Measures are two, the one for Linen, the other for Woollen; the hundred
Yards at London makes here a hundred and three Else in Linen, and a hundred
and thirteen Else in Woollen.

Their Exchange is by Rix-dollars of eight Shillings Flemish, and by Ducats of
Gold at twelve Shillings Flemish.

Of Venice.
THeir Commodities are Wines, Oil, Rice, Paper, Quicksilver, Looking-glass,
Anniseeds, Venice-Treacle, Aloes, Silk; the Commodities of Turkia, and the
product of India, Persia, Arabia and Egypt.

Accounts are kept here by some in Livers, Solz and Grosses, reckoning 12
Deniers Gross to the Solz, and 20 Solz to the Liver, 5 Solz and 2 Deniers is a
Grosz, and 24 Grosz makes a current Ducat, which is 6 Livers 4 Solz.

By others in Ducats and Grosses, at 6 Livers and 4 Solz per Ducat, reckoning
24 Gross to a Ducat.

Others by Livers, Solds and Deniers of Piccoli, which is the current Coin of
the City.

The Ducat of Gold is worth 24 Deniers; the Liver of Grosses are of two sorts,
one de Banco, usually valued at 4 s. 4 d. Sterling, the other at 3 s. 4 d.
which varieth according to the Rise and fall of Money in Exchange.

By the Monthly Account of 1687, it is said that the Ducats which were worth 7
Livers, will go hence forward for no more than 6. The Pistols which were valued
at 11, are set at 9 Livers 12 Solz, and the rest proportionable.

Their Weights are of 4 sorts, the 100 l. Gross is 158 l. Subtle, and 106
English.

The 100 l. Subtle for fine Goods, is 83 l. and a half Gross, and makes at
London 64 l. some say 66. And 100 English is 151 Venice Subtle.

The 100 l. of Silver or Gold thread is 116 l. 8 Ounces Subtle.

The other is for Silver, Gold and Gemms.

Their Measures are two, called the Braces, the one for Silks, Damask, etc. of
which 5 Braces makes 3 Yards English, or one Brace is 22 Inches 47/49 English.

The other for Stuffs, Linen, etc. whereof 5 makes 2 Else and a half English,
or the Brace is 25 English Inches.

Wine is sold by a Measure called the Amphora, which is 4 Bigorzas; the Bigorza
is 4 Quarts, the Quart 4 Sachies, the Sachie 4 Liras.

Oil is sold as well by weight as measure, the measure is called the Miro,
which makes by measure 25 l. and by weight 30 l. 3 Ounces.

Of the Coins, Weights and Measures of the Chief Cities in Asia.
Of Arabia.
THE Money of Arabia is called Larins, and are in Value as one of the French
Crowns, only they want in weight 8 Sous of the French Crown, or Rial of Spain,
which is about 14 per Cent. loss. These Larins are the Ancient Coins of Asia,
but only current in Arabia, and at Balsera, and along the Persian Gulf, where
they take 80 Larins for one Toman, which is 50 Abassis. Another Author I find
that says, that all the Coins throughout all Arabia, especially Arabia Faelix,
are the same, or at least do correspond with those under the Grand Signior's
Dominions. In other places: viz. the Asper, 60 whereof (or rather 80) makes a
Rial of 8 Spanish, or a Dollar; also 100 Aspers are reckoned for a Sultanie,
Chequin, Zechin, or Sheriff, which are the common Gold Coins, and held to be
about 8 s. Sterling.

That their Weights are also much the same with those of Turkey, viz. the Dram,
of which 10 makes an Ounce, and 14 Ounces a Rotello, 24 Rotello's is a
Fracello, which is 25 l. 12 Ounces English, 15 Fracello's is a Cantar, or, as
it is called at Aden, a Bahar, making about 386 pound English.

Their Measure is also Turkish, viz. the Pico, Esteemed to be 26 Inches and a
half English.

Of the Chief Cities in Turkey, etc.
Of Aleppo.
ALeppo is the most Famous City of all the Grand Signior's Dominions, and is
Seated about 100 English miles from Alexandretta or Scandaroone, which is the
Seaport and Road for all Ships to Lade or unlade their Goods, which are
Transported by Camels to Aleppo.

Commodities are Silks, Chamlets, Galnuts, Valaneed, which is a sort of
Acorn-shell (which the Curriers use to dress their Leather) Cotton, Yarn,
Mohairs, Soap, Drugs of all forts, Galls, etc.

Coins of the Country are Shehees, of which 16 make a Piece of Eight, and 14 of
them a Lion Dollar. The Sultanie, which is two Dollars or Pieces of Eight,
which is 80 Aspers, the Lion Dollar is seventy Aspers.

Thevenot says that at Aleppo the Piaster of Rials is worth 80 Aspers. The
Boguelle 70. The Schaiad 5 Aspers, and 16 Schaieds for a Piaster, and 14 for a
Boguelle.

The Weights are the Dram, and the Rotello, which differs in Drams according to
the Commodities.

The Rottulo is 4 l. 13 Ounces, that is 720 Drams.

The Rottulo for the Persian or Ledg-Silk is 680 Drams, 72 Ounces.

The Balladine Rottulo is 720 Drams, 74 Ounces. The Aleppo Rottle. Thev.

The Tripoli Silk Rottulo is the same.

The Castravan Silk Rottul is 600 Drams, 4 l. Engl. and 5 l. Marseilles.

The Aleppo Wells, is 120 Drams, 13 Ounces Engl.

The Cyprus Cotton Kintal of 100 Rottulo's is 506 l. Engl.

The Kintal of 100 Rottulo's is 625 l. Levorne.

The Oque contains 400 Drams.

Others tell us a Kintal of 100 Rottulo's is 430 l. Engl. called a Cantar.

A Wesno of Silver is 100 Drams, and there is a Wesno of 3600 Drams, 60 Drams
to one Ounce, and 12 Ounces to the Rotello, which is about 4 l. 14 Ounces
Avoirdupoise; so that 112 l. Avoirdupoise is 22 Rotello's 8 Ounces; and 100
Rotello's is a Cantar, which is 481 l. Avoirdupoise.

Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, etc. are sold by the Mittigal, which is one
Dram and a half: a Dram is sixty Carrat^, and a Carrat is four Grains.

The Measure is the Pico, which is 27 Inches, or three quarters of a Yard
English.

The Measured Pike is of a Yard English.

Of Alexandria.
A Kintal is 103 l. English. A 100 Rottulo's is 101 per Marseilles. 330
Rottulo's is a Sciba. which is 120 l. Livorne.

Of Bagdat.
THevenot tells us that the Patman makes three Rottles of Aleppo, or 6 Oques
and 3 Ounces. That the Abassi is worth there two Chais and. The Piastre Rial is
worth 8 Chais, and each Chais 5 Paras, and the Para is 4 Aspers. The Boquelle
is worth 7 Chais. The Turkish Chequin is worth 18. the Venetian 19 Chais.

Of Smyrna.
SMyrna Weight: 180 Drams is a Rottello. 100 Rottelo's is a Kintal of 45 Oaks,
and is 119 l. English. 44 Oaks is a Kintal. 2400 Drams, or 6 Oaks is a Battman.
400 Drams is an Oak, which is 2 l. 11 Ounces, Avoir. English. 800 Drams is a
Chigue. 250 Drams is an Oak Opium. 120 Drams is an Oak of Saffron. 146 Drams is
a Pound English.


To reduce Rottelo's into Oaks multiplied by 9, and take the half thereof,
cutting off the last figure, and multiply that by 20. To bring Oaks into
Rottello's per Cont. that is multiply by 20, and divide by 9.

To bring Rottello's into Battmans, multiply by 3, cut off the last figure, and
divide by 4, adding the remainder to the figure cut off, which mult. by 60.

To bring Battmans into Rot. mult. by 40, and divide by 3.

To reduce Battmans into Kintals mult. by 2, and divide by 15. To bring Kintals
into Battmans multiply by 15, then take the half; for 7 Battmans is a Kintal.

By the Kintal of 45 Oaks are Sold Cotten-yarn in sorts, Gawles, Allom, Lead,
Brazeel-wood, Beeswax, Valonea, Logwood, Steel, Sugar, Gums, Almonds. By the
Kintal of 44 Oaks is sold Cotton-wool, and Sheeps-wool in sorts, Tin, Anniseeds
and Boxwood.

By the Battman is sold several sorts of Silks. By the Oak is sold Pepper,
Cloves, Mace, Benjamin, Galbanum, Seahorse Teeth, Gum Arabeck, Indigo,
Wormseeds, Cassia of Cairo, Senna, Rhubarb, Scamony, Aggarick, Cochincal, white
Cordivants; and by the Cheque is sold Goats-hair, beaten or unbeaten.

Commodities are Raw Silk, which the Armenians bring out of Persia,
Chamlet-yarn, and Chamlet or Goats-hair, which come from Angouri, Cotton
twisted, Skins and Cordovants of several Colors, Calicuts White and Blew, Wool
for Matrisses, Tapestries, Quilted Coverlets, Soap, Rhubarb, Galls, Valleneed,
Scammony, and Opium.

The Custom paid by the English is 3 per Cent. as generally throughout all
Turkey.

The Coins current of Smyrna are the same with Constantinople, and they keep
their Accounts in the same Nature, and therefore I shall refer you thither.

The Weights of Smyrna and Scio are the same, viz. the Dram, of which 180 makes
a Rotello, 100 Rotello's makes a Quintal, which is 45 Oaks, and is 119 l.
English; 400 Drams also make an Oak, which is 2 l. 11 Ounces and a half
Avoirdupoise English.

Their Measure is the Pico, which is about of a Yard English.

Of Jerusalem, or of the Hebrew Coins, etc.
ALthough in all the Land of Judaea, Palestine, or the Holy Land, there is not
now any City of Trade or Commerce, yet I cannot omit what was once Remarkable,
and may be of use to many to know the Coins, Weights and Measures of the Jews
in the Flourishing days of their State and Grandeur.

G ld. A Darkon, or Drakmon, of which we read, Ezra 8.27. and Ezra 2.69. in
Greek (...), which the English render a Dram, the value was about 15 s.
English; the Dram of Silver 1 s. 3 d.

Silver. A Gorah, rendered Gerah and Megna by the Chaldee Paraphrase, by the
Greeks, Obolos; by the English, a Piece of Silver, 1 Samuel 2.36. Exodus 30.13.
accounted to be about 1 d.

Silver. Argenteus, Heb. Ceseph, or Keseph, a Piece of Silver; when it stands
for a Shekel of the Sanctuary, it is in value 2 s. 6 d. when it stands for a
common Shekel, it is 1 s. 3 d.

Argenteus Graecus the Attick Dram, Act. 19.19. valued at seven pence halfpenny.

Brass. Assarius or Assarium, by the Rabbis Isor, by the Greeks Astarion; a
Roman Coin weighing four Grains, the 96 part of the Pigah, or Shekel, Mat.
10.29. is in value one farthing and.

Silver. Denarius the Roman penny, Mat. 18.28. with the Image of Caesar, Mat.
22.21. It was a fourth of the Silgah of the Caldeans, or Shekel of the Hebrews,
in value seven pence halfpenny English; and this was the common Penny.

Silver. Dram, one fourth of the Shekel equal to the Roman Denarius or penny,
Luke 15.8, 9.

Silver. Didrachmum half a Shekel, the penny of the Sanctuary, Exodus 30.13. was
1 s. 3 d.

Gerah, in the Chaldee Paraphrase Megna, the Megah of the Arabians; one fifth
of a Dram 1/20 part of a Shekel of the Sanctuary, three half pence English.

Keseph, Genesis 20.16. and 23.16. and 43.21. and 2 Samuel 18.11. the same with
Ceseph, and Argenteus Hebraeus, the Chaldean Silgah or Jewish Shekel, 2 s. 6 d.

Keshitah Heb. a Lamb, Genesis 33.19. Josh. 24.24. Job 42.11. the same with Obolus
and Gerah.

A Maneh of Silver contains 60 Hebrew Shekels, Ezekiel. 45.12. is in English 7 l.
10.

A Maneh of Gold it weighed 100 Hebrew Drams, 200 Grecian Drams, or 100
Shekels, 1 King. 10.17. 2 Chronicles. 9.16. of our Money it made 75 pound.

The Shekel from Shakal, Ponderare and Librare, was twofold, the Shekel of the
Sanctuary, and the common Shekel, which was but half the other. The Shekel by
some was reckoned as was said before for 2 s. 6 d. English; by Sir Walter
Rawleigh at 2 s. 4 d. by Mr. Greaves, and the Primate of Ireland at 2 s. 5 d.
according to which one Maneh of Silver will be 7 l. 5 d. of our money.

One Talent will make 362 l. 10 s. Gold is generally accounted to be 12 times
as much in value as the like quantity of Silver. The proportion in England
being one to 14 and one third, that is one Ounce of Gold is worth of Silver 3
l. 14 s. 2 d. and the Ounce of pure Silver is worth 5 s. 4 d. halfpenny; so
that a Dram of Gold at 17 s. 5 d. ob q, the Shekel is 2 l. 9 s. The Talent will
be 4350 l. According to which Computation King David and his Princes gave
toward the building of the Temple 838 Millions 477 Thousand 362 pounds 13 s. 6
d.

Of the Hebrew Weights.
The Common Weights were 8 Drams 4 Shekels 2 Staters 1 Ounce
or Weights of the Sanctuary. 16 Drams 8 Shekels 4 Staters 1 Ounce.


A Shekel is about the weight of an English half Crown, or half an Ounce.

Mr. Greaves and Rivet says that the distinction of a double Shekel, the one
Sacred equal to the Tetra-Drachme, the other Profane weighing the Didrachme,
is without any solid Foundation in Writ, and without any probability of Reason
in a Wise State.

The Hebrew Cubit contained of our measure according to Guildhall Standard, 17
Inches 40/100 or of an Inch, exactly answering to the Roman foot and a half. It
was a measure from the Elbow to the fingers end, vulgo a foot and a half, Deuteronomy.
3.11. The Holy Cubit contained two common Cubits, 1 King. 7.15. 1 Chronicles. 3.15.
The Kings Cubit was three fingers longer than the common Cubit.

The Geometrical Cubit contained 6 common Cubits according to which was Noah's
Ark built.

The Barah translated often Millarium, signifies so much ground as may be
Traveled in half a day between Meal and Meal.

Kaneh, Arundo, the Reed six Cubits and a hands breadth, Ezekiel. 40.5. the use of
it was to measure Building, Rev. 21.15.

Stadium, a Furlong, containing 125 paces.

Zaghad, Zemed, and Beroth, Genesis 35.16. a little way or piece of ground
containing 1000 Cubits, an Hebrew mile, about 500 English yards.

Zereth, Spithama, and Dodrans, a Span; Exodus 38.16. Isa. 40.12.

Dry Measure.
I find the Ephah is stated at 52 l. which reduced into English Measure makes
six Gallons one Pottle and half a Pint, and 10 Ephahs made one Homer; the Omer
was 1 Pottle 1 Pint 3 Ounces, and 10 Omers made 1 Ephah.

Liquid Measures.
Their Liquid Measures were the Log, Hin, and Bath: The Bath is ordinarily
reckoned of like Quantity with the Ephah, more exactly it is 52 Pints and a
half, or by others 6 Gallons one Pottle and a half.

The Hin is one Gallon and three Quarters of a Pint, which is the 6th. part of
a Bath.

The Log is the one 1/12 of the Hin, that is ^/3 of a Pint, and of an Ounce,
that is 3 Quarters of a Pint, wanting but the part of an Ounce; so that the
part of a Hin is almost one quarter of a pint.

Of the Coins, etc. of Persia.
THE Commodities of Persia are Gold, Silver, Raw Silk in great abundance, some
Drugs and Spices, Wine-Fruits, several Manufactories, viz. Carpets, Arras-work,
Hangings, Cloth of Gold and Silve^ and fine Cotton-Cloths.

The Coins in Persia are Real and Nominal; Real Coins are Bisti's, Sha^^^^,
Mamo^^^^ and Abassis; a Bisti is a tenth of an Abassi, a Shaxet is a ^^urth of
^^^bassi, and the Abassi is valued at 16 d. Sterling, or 18 So^^ 6 Deniers. The
Nominal Coins are Larins, Ors and Tomond: A Larin is 2 Shaxes, and 80 Larins to
a Tomond in Commerce at Gamron, but in no other place; an Or is accounted for
five Abassis, 6 s. 11 d. English, and a Tomond for ten Ors or fifty Abassi's,
which is in value 3 l. 9 s. English. Rix Dollars and Pieces of Eight pass for
14 Shaxets, or 3 Abassi's per Piece.

Thevenot tells us, That the Piasters are commonly worth 13 Schais if full
weight; 13 a Bisti. The Bisti consists of 4 Casbeghis, of which 10 makes a
Schais. The most current Money are the Abassi's, Mamoudis, Schais and
Casbeghis; the Abassi is of the value of 4 Schais, which is about 18 Solz
French. The Mamoudi contains two Schais, which is about 9 Solz. the Schai about
4 Solz 1/^, and the Casbeghi 5 Deniers. The Tomond is worth 15 Piasters, or 50
Abassi's; the Bovello is worth 3 Abassi's or 12 Schais.

In Geometry Thevenot tells us the Persians make use of a certain Measure
called a Farsange, which is 3 Miles. The Miles contains 4000 Cubits, the Cubit
24 fingers (which by an Experiment he made, he finds to be 18 Inches, or a
common Foot and half, which is exactly the Cubit. The finger is 6 B^rly-corns
laid side-ways so that the Mile will be 6000 common Feet. And a degree to
contain 22 Farsanges, or Parasanges, and 1/7 which is much about a French
League.

Their Weights are various, viz. the Maundshaw, which is about thirteen pound
Avoirdupois for Silk.

The Maund Surrat contains two and a half of the other, and is used for gross
Goods, especially at Gombrou.

The Load or Cargo which contains thirty six Maundshaws, makes about 486 l.
Avoirdupois.

The Mittigal for Gold, etc. whereof six and a half makes an Ounce Venice.

The Rattee for Diamonds, Pearls, etc. wherein are twenty Vals, ard twenty
three Vals makes an English Carack.

Their Measures are two, called Cavedoes, the greatest is an Inch longer than
the English Yard, and the lesser is three Quarters of the other, agreeable to
the Pico of Turkey.

Taffiner says, their Wine as all other things are sold by weight, and not by
measure; and that in the year 1666, the whole account of Wines made at Sciras
amounted to 200025 Men's, the only weight for Wines, containing nine pound
French at sixteen Ounces to the pound, or 4125 Tuns at 300 Pints to the Tun.

Of the Coins, etc. under the Dominion of the Great Mogul.
THE Commodities in Surrat, Cambaia, Amadabat, and generally throughout the
Mogul's Country, are Precious Stones, Agats, Jasper, several Drugs, Civet,
Sugar Candy, Indigo, Lacque, Saltpetre, Musk, Borax, Ogium, Myraboles, Ginger,
Sal-armoniac, Amber, and Rice; all sorts of Cottons, Callicoes of all sorts,
Carpets and Coverlets of Leather, artificially wrought with Silks of all
Colors, Sattins, Taffities, Velvets, several Manufactories of Wood Carved and
Imbellished, as Desks, Chests, Boxes, Standishes, etc.

Coins. The Roupy of Gold weighs two Drams and a half, and eleven Grains, and
is valued in the Country at fourteen Roupies of Silver, and the Roupy of Silver
is reckoned at thirty Sous, so that a Roupy of Gold comes to twenty one Livers
of France, the half Roupy comes to ten Livers ten Sous, and the quarter Roupy
to five Livers five Sous.

As for their Copper money, the biggest sort is generally worth two Sous, the
next one Sous, the next to that 6 Deniers, or a Pecha. In Surrat, Cambaja,
Baroch, Boudra and Amadabat, five Mamoudies goes for a Crown or Real; and for
small Money they use Almonds, whereof forty, sometimes forty four, goes for a
Pecha, which is six Deniers in value; there is also little pieces of Copper,
which are called Pecha's, whereof twenty they give for a Mamoudy; there is also
in some parts shell-money, fifty or sixty of which makes a Pecha; as for the
Mamoudy, it is always valued at forty Pecha.

Their Weights are various. As for Gold, Silver, Civet, Muks, Bezarstones, etc.
they have the Weight called the Toll, which is 12 Masses, and is seven penny
sixteen grains Troy weight English; nine Deniers eight grains French.

Thevenot tells us, That at Surrat, there are diverse Heads of Weights and
Measures; but the most common Weight used in Trade, is the Man, which contains
forty Serres or pounds, and the pound of Surrat contains fourteen Ounces, or
thirty five Toles. That all Gold and Silver is weighed by the Tole, which
contains forty Mangelis, which makes fifty six of our Caracts, or thirty two
Vales. A Vale is 3 Gongys. That two Tolets 11/32 makes one Ounce of Paris
weight.

The Man makes 40 pound weight all the Indies over, but the pounds or Serres
vary. The pounds of Surrat are greater than those of Galconda; and the pound at
Agra is double to that at Surrat, viz. 28 Ounces or Serres.

The Silver Roupie is as big as an Abassi of Persia, it weighs a Tole, and
commonly passes for thirty French Solz, but is not worth above 29 or 31 Pechas,
sometimes 32. The Pecha is worth something more than 10 French Deniers. And 68
Badan or bitter Almonds for a Pecha.

For Silk there is the Pice, which is five Mittigals and a half, or two Tolls.

The common Weight for other Commodities is the Sear, which is various in
several parts; the Sear at Agra is twofold, the one is twenty six Pices, which
is 26 Ounces, the other is thirty Pices, which is 22 Ounces Avoirdupoise.

The Sear of Surrat is eighteen Pices, which is 13 Ounces Avoirdupoise:
Taffener says it is of a pound, and the pound is sixteen Ounces.

There is also the hundred Weights called Maunds; forty Sears make a Maund of
thirty three pound English, and forty Sear makes a small Maund of fifty four
pound 2/4 of English. Taffener says, the Men is 69 Pound at 16 Ounces to the
Pound; but the Men which they weigh their Indico withal, is but 53 Pound.

Their Measures are called the Covado or Cobit, the shorter is used for Silk
and Linen, and is 27 Inches English; the other Covado is different in several
places, viz. at Surrat, Cambaja, etc. it is thirty five Inches, but in Agra,
Delli, etc. it is thirty two Inches.

All Grains and Liquid Commodities are sold by weight, there being no Concave
Measure in any of the Moguls Territories.

Of Pegu and Arackan.
THE King of Pegu's Silver Coin weighs two Drams and a half, and twelve Grains,
and makes about twenty Sous six Deniers. And his Fano's or little pieces of
Gold weighs seven Grains; fifteen of which passes in value for a Real or French
Crown.

The King of Arackan's Money weighs two Drams and a half, and fifteen Grains,
and makes twenty one Sous: He Coins no Gold, but Trafficks in Gold uncoined;
the Metal is not worth above fourteen Carats, one Carat being the third part of
an Ounce.

Of the Money which the English Coin in the Indies.
THE Money which the English Coin at the Fort of St. George upon the Coast of
Cormandel, they call Pagods (as those of the Kings and Raja's of the Country
are called) are of the same weight for goodness, and passes at the same value,
which is about the weight of the French half Pistol; but the Gold is of baser
Metal, so that an Ounce is not worth above forty two or forty three Livers, and
not going for more than 4 Roupies. And at the famous Port of Bombay, the
English have built a strong Fort, and Coin both Silver, Copper and Tin, but
that Money only passes among the English, and the Villages along the Coast for
two or three Leagues about, as it is reported.

Of the Money which the Dutch Coin in the Indies.
AT Palicate the Dutch Coin Pagods of Gold, and Roupies of Silver, being of the
same Weight of those of the great Mogul or the King of Golconda and Visapor;
they have also small Copper Money. Four Roupies to a Pagod, which is about six
French Livers. There is also Fanons half Gold and half Silver, six and a half
with half a quarter-piece make a Roupie, and 26 a Pagod. Gazers are small
Copper-pieces, 40 of which go to a Fanon.

Of the Money in Sumatra.
THE Money of Gold Coined by the King of Achen, is better than the French Louis
in goodness; an Ounce being well worth 50 Franks; it weighs ten Grains, and
is worth 16 Sous, and 8 Deniers of French Money: Another Author says, that the
Coins here are the Cattee, which is 8 Tail, or 6 pound 8 shillings Sterling. A
Tail is 16 Masses, or 16 shillings Sterling; and a Mass is 4 Cupany, which is
twelve pence Sterling.

Their Weight is the Bahar, which is 200 Cattees, a Cattee is 29 Ounces
Avoirdupoise English.

Of Goa.
THE Commodities natural of Goa are inconsiderable, but in Trade there is the
Commodities of the Indies, of Persia, Arabia, China, etc. viz. Precious Stones,
Gold, Silver, Pearls, Silk, Cotton, Spices, Drugs, Fruits, Corn, Iron, Steel,
etc.

The Coins there, are the Pardaus Sheraphin, worth 300 Rees of Portugal, or 4
shillings 6 pence English.

The Pagod of Gold is worth 10 Tangas, and 4 Tangas in good Money is one
Pardau, and one Tangas is worth 4 good Ventins, a Ventin is worth 15 Basaracos,
and the Basaracos is about 2 Rees of Portugal Money.

The St. Thomas of Gold is worth 8 Tangas, and the Pardaus de Reales, is about
440 Rees of Portugal.

Their Weight for Spices is the Bahar, which is three Quintals and a half of
Portugal Weight, and another for Sugar, Honey, etc. which is called the Maund,
which is 12 pound of the aforesaid Weight.

Their Measures for Length are the same with those of Lisbon.

Their Measures for Grains, Rice, etc. is the Medida, 24 whereof is a Maund,
and twenty Maunds is a Candel, which is about fourteen Bushels English.

Of the Coast of Cormandel.
THeir Commodities are Sugars, Pintadoes, Grains, Fruits, Drugs, Precious
Stones, Crystal, etc.

Their Coins are the Pagode of Gold, which is 36 Fanans; a Fanan is about 3 d.
value, and so the Pagode is 9 s. but the true value is 8 s. 6 d. or thereabouts.

Their Weight is the Candet, which is 20 Maunds, a Maund 40 Sears or 22 Masses,
which is 26 Pound 14 Ounces English.

Of Bantam.
THE Commodities are Pepper, Sugar, Preserved Ginger, Rice, Honey, etc. as also
the product of other places.

The Money Coined here are only pieces of Copper Minted, in the midst whereof
is a hole to hang them on a string which they call Petties, 1000 whereof are in
value about 5 shillings Sterling. But the Merchants keep their Accounts by
Spanish Reals of 8, which are Current for all sorts of Commodities.

Their Weights are the Bahar, which is 3 Picals, or 369 pound English, the
Pical is 100 Cattees, or 132 pound English; and a Cattee is 20 Ounces English.

Their Measure of length is the Covet, that is one fifth of an English Yard.

Their Dry Measure is a Gantang which is 21 pound English.

Of Siam.
THE Commodities of Siam are Cotton, Linen, Wine of Coca^, or Indian Nuts,
Benjamin, Lac, Calamba, Camphora, Bezar, and Gold.

The Coins there are a piece of Gold Coin, which weighs 18 Grains more than the
French half Pistol, and is worth 10 s. 7 d. Sterling.

The Silver Coin is about the bigness of a large Hazel-Nut, weighs 3 Drams and
a half, and 25 Grains, and is worth about 2 Shillings 5 pence Sterling.

Their Weights are the Bahar, which is of two sorts, the great Bahar is 200
Cattees, a Cattee is 26 Tail, a Tail is one Ounce and a half of Lisbon.

The small Bahar is also 200 Cattees, a Cattee is 22 Tails, a Tail is an Ounce
of Lisbon Weight.

Of China.
THE Commodities are Rice, Wheat, Wool, Cottons, Flax, Silk raw and wrought
into several Sorts of Stuffs, Fruits, Honey, Wax, Rhubarb, China-Roots, Wines,
Sugar, Camphire, Musk, Civet, Salt, Gold, Iron, Tin, Steel, Quicksilver,
Saltpetre, Porcelaine Dishes, Precious Stones, Rubies, Saphires, Agats, Pearls,
etc.

They pay their Money by weight, which is denominated by Talents and Measures.

In all the Kingdom of China there is no Money Coined either Gold or Silver;
that which they make use of in payments is only in Lumps, or pieces of Gold or
Silver of diverse forms and weights.

The pieces of Gold by the Hollanders called Goltfchut is worth 1200 Gilders of
Holland, or 101 l. 5 s. Sterling; the other piece which weighs but half as
much, is in value according to its proportion; an Ounce of this Gold is worth 3
l. 3 s. English.

In Trade every man carries about him a pair of Sheers to cut and divide their
Money; as also Scales and Weights to weigh it, and to proportion his Money
according to the value of the Commodity he buyeth.

Their Weights are the Bahar, which is said to differ in several places; but
the common Bahar of China is 300 Cattees, a Cattee is 16 Tails, which is about
20 Ounces and 3 Quarters Avoirdupois; so that the Bahar is about 190 l. English.

There is also the Bahar for small weight of 200 Cattees, 22 Tail to a Cattee,
and a Tail is one Ounce and a half Avoirdupois; so that the Bahar is 412 l.
English.

Of Japan.
THE Commodities of Japan are Wheat, Millet, Rice, and excellent Barley, diverse
Metals, as Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron; their Pearls are great, but
Red.

The Gold of Japan is in value worth 3 l. 15 s. the Ounce, there is one Coin or
Piece of Gold which weighs one Ounce six Drams, which comes to about 6 Pound 11
Shillings 3 Pence; there is also another that weighs the third part of the
great one, viz. half an Ounce 48 Grains, and comes to 2 l. 3 s. 9 d. Sterling.

There are also several Pieces of Silver called Ingots, some weighing 7 Ounces,
at five Shillings the Ounce, comes to thirty five Shillings; others of two
Ounces 3 Drams and a half, which comes to 12 Shillings 10 Pence Sterling, and
so proportionable in value according to their weight, are the rest.

There is also Copper Money, which they thread to the Number of 600, which is
the value of a Tell or Tail in Silver, which the Dutch reckon to be worth 3
Gelders and a half, which is 6 Shillings 4 pence Sterling.

Their Weights are the Fiakin, which is 125 Dutch Pounds, one Fiakin makes 100
Cattees, one Cattee 16 Tail, one Tail 10 Maes, and a Cattee is by some
accounted 21 Ounces Avoirdupois.

Their Measure for Length is the Tattany or Ichin, which is about 2 Yards
English, or 6 Rhynland feet; 60 Ickiens or Ichins is 30 Rhynland Rods, and 180
Rods is a Japan Mile.

Their Dry Measures are the Gant, which is 3 Cocas, which is three Pints
English.

Persian Money. French English l. s. d. q. A Bassi, or 2 Mamoudi's 18 6 Deniers
0 1 4 2 1 Mamoudi's, or 2 Chayets 0 0 8 0 1 Cheyets 5 Double Casbekes 0 0 4 0 1
Bisti 2 Double Casbekes 0 0 6 1 74/100 A Casbeke simple 5 Deniers half penny 0 0
7 2 41/100 A double Casbeke 11 Deniers 0 0 3 0 82/100 One Or 5 Abassi's 0 6 11
1 One Toman 46 Livers 1 Denier Piaster- 3 9 0 0 9/25

Indian Money. French English A Larin of Arabia, etc. 1 Ecu, or French Crown 3
10 3 A Mamoudi's 0 1 2 A Roupy of Gold 21 Livers 1 11 6 A Roupy of Silver 30
Sous 0 2 3 A Pecha 6 Deniers 0 0 0 1 Arakan-Money 21 Sous 0 1 6 3 A half Roupy
16 Sous 0 1 2 1 Tipoura Silver 22 Sous 0 1 7 3 Pagods A Pistol: A Pistol in
Gold is 11 Livers 0 8 3 Fano's 1 Ecu 0 4 6 0 Achen Gold 16 Sous 8 Deniers 0 1 3
Macassar Gold 23 Sous 8 Deniers 0 1 9 1 Camboya Silver 4 Sous 0 0 3 2 Siam Gold
7 Livers 1 Sous 0 10 6 3 Siam Silver 32 Sous 4 Deniers 0 2 5 0 Asem Fanos 1 Ecu
0 4 6 Asem Silver 23 Sous 0 1 8 2 China Goltscut 1350 Livers 101 5 0 China
Silver Pieces 59 Sous 8 Deniers 0 4 5 2 Pegu Gold Fanos 1 Real 0 4 4 0 Pegu
Silver 20 Sous 6 Deniers 0 1 6 1 Japan Gold 87 Livers 10 Sous 6 11 3 Japan
Silver Pieces 30 Sous 0 2 3

These Computations are made, supposing a French Crown to be in Value 54 d. or
4 s. 6 d. Sterling, the reputed Par, so that a Sous is in Value 9 d. and 10
Deniers 3.

A Table containing the Proportion that the English Foot bears to the
Measures of other Places, divided into 12 Inches and Tenths. And the Proportion
of a Pound-weight Avoirdupois divided into 100 parts, bears to the Foreign
Pounds carefully collected from the Tables of Snellius, Dogen, Greaves,
Ricciolus, etc.
Amsterdam Foot 0 11 3 93 Ell 2 3 2 Antwerp Foot 0 11 3 98 Ell 2 3 3 Bologne or
Ell 2 0 8 89 Bononia Foot 1 2 4 1 27 Bremen Foot 0 11 6 94 Cairo Cubit 1 9 9 1
61 China Cubit 1 0 2 Cologn Foot 0 11 4 97 Copenhagen Foot 11 6 94 Dantzig Foot
11 3 1 19 Ell 1 10 8 Dort Foot 1 2 2 Florence Brace or Ell 1 11 0 1 23
Francfort on the Main 0 11 4 93 Ell 1 9 9 Genoua Palm 0 9 6 1 42 Greek Foot
Foot 1 0 1 Hamborough Ell 1 10 8 95 Leipsig Ell 2 3 1 1 17 Lisbon Vare 2 9 0 1
6 Lovaine Foot 11 4 98 Lubeck Ell 1 9 8 Lions Ell 3 11 7 1 9 Mantua Foot 1 6 8
1 43 Middleburg Foot 0 11 9 98 Millain Calamus 6 6 5 1 40 English Feet Inches
Tenths Pounds Parts of a l. Naples Palm 0 9 6 1 43 Brace 2 1 2 Cauna 6 10 5
Norimberg Foot 1 0 1 94 Parma Cubit 1 10 4 1 43 Paris Royal Foot 1 0 8 93
Persian Arach. 3 2 3 Prague 1 0 3 1 6 Riga Foot 1 9 9 Roman Foot on the Monum.
of Cossutius 0 11 6 1 23 Of Statilius 0 11 7 Roman Palm 0 8 8 Span. Palm, or
Palm of Castile 0 9 9 Span. Vare, or Rod qt. 4. Pal. 3 0 0 Toledo Foot 0 10 7 1
00 Vare 2 8 2 Turin Foot 1 0 7 Turkish Pike at Constantinople 2 2 4 86 Venice
Foot 1 1 9 1 53 Vienna 1 0 6 83 Universal Foot, or a Pendulum, that will
vibrate 132 times in a Minute. 0 8 1 Foot Inches Tenths Pounds Parts of a Pound

ASIA.
map of Asia ASIA a New Description by Robt Morden


ASIA is one of the Tripartite Divisions of our Continent; if we consider the
Advantages, which the Author of Nature has given it; Or the memorable Actions
which have passed in it: That the first Monarchies and Religions have here had
their rise: That the chief Mysteries both of the Old and New Law, were here
laid open: That from hence all Nations of the World, and all Arts and Sciences,
had their first beginning: We may justly prefer it before the other parts of
the World.

It is seated in the Oriental part of our Continent, and most part in the
temperate Zone; what it has under the Torrid, being either Peninsula or Isles,
which the Waters and Sea do much refresh.

It extends from Smirna in the West to the farthest part of Tartaria near Jesso
in the East, four thousand and eight hundred Miles; and from the lowermost
point of Malacca in the South to the Straights of Weigats in the North, it
makes four thousand and two hundred Miles of sixty to a degree. In this length
and breadth we do not comprehend the Islands which belong to Asia; which are as
great, as rich, and possibly as numerous, as in other parts of the Universe.

Whether it took its Name from Asia the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, wife of
Japetus, and Mother to Prometheus, or from Asius the Son of Atis, a King of
Lydia, or from Asius the Philosopher, who gave the Palladium to the Trojans, or
from the Phoenician word Asia signifiing Medium: These Originations to me are
uncertain; most certain it is, that this Name was first known to the Greeks on
that coast opposite to them, after it was given to that part of the Country
extending to the Euphrates called Asia Minor, and at last was communicated to
all that Oriental Continent.

Many are the Religions there followed; but the Jews, Mahumetans, and Idolaters
far exceed the Christians in number. Idolatry began in the time of the
Assyrians; Judaism among the Hebrews; Christianism in the Holy Land, but first
so called at Antioch; and Mahumetanism in Arabia.

Mahumetanism is received by the four principal Nations of Asia; the Turks,
Arabians, Persians and Tartars. The Turks give the most liberty, the Arabs are
most superstitious, the Persians are most rational, and the Tartars are most
simple. Some have made seventy and two Sects among them, which may be reduced
to two: That which the Turks follow according to the Doctrine of Omar, and that
which the Persians follow according to Haly's Instructions: These have their
Patriarch at Ispahan, the Turks theirs at Bagdat. The Greeks have also their
Patriarchs here, known under the Titles of Antioch and Jerusalem. There are
also other Christians, as Jacobites, who have their Patriarch at Caramit,
otherwise called Amida; the Nestorians, the Cophites, the Georgians, the
Armenians, and the Maronites. The two later have two Patriarchs, the one at the
Monastery of the Three Churches near Erivan in Armenia, the other at Canobin in
Mount Libanus.

Asia toward the West is separated from Africa by the Red Sea, and by the
Isthmus of Sues. It is divided from Europe by several Seas and Streights
already mentioned in the Description of Europe. Toward the other Regions of the
World, Asia is environed by the Tartarian, Chinean, Indian, Persian and Arabian
Seas.

The principal Seas within the Country are the Caspian, the Euxine, and the
Persian Sea. The Dead Sea is very small in respect of the rest, yet is it
famous for being in the Holy Land.

The principal Rivers of Asia, are Euphrates, Tigris, Indus, Ganges, Croceus,
Kiang and Obi.

Caucasus and Taurus, so celebrated by the Ancients, are the highest Mountains;
but several Countries give them several other Names.

We find that the Air of Asia is almost every where Temperate. And if we
consider her Gold, her Silver, her Precious Stones, her Drugs, her Spices, her
Silks, we may aver it to be the richest as well as the most noble part of the
World. Among other of her products, we most esteem the Diamonds of Narsingue,
the Pepper and Ginger of Malabar, the Silks of Bengale, the Rubies and Lake of
Pegu, the Porcelane of China, the Cinnamon of Ceylan, the Gold of Surat, the
Canfir of Borneo, the Cloves of the Molocca's, the Nutmegs of Banda, and the
Sandal of Timor.

Of the Seven Wonders of the World, there were four in Asia. The Temple of
Ephesus, the Mausoleum in Halicarnassus, the Walls of Babylon, and the Rhodian
Colossus. The Statue of Olympian Jupiter in Europe. The Egyptian Labyrinth, and
the Pyramids in Africa.

The Asiaticks have been always a Soft and Effeminate people, except the
Mountaineers and the Tartars, who by their Incursions perpetually vexed their
Neighbors. Their Coats of Arms are nothing like those which the Families of
Europe bear; being composed only of the Letters of their Names, to which they
add sometimes the Names of their Predecessors. Their Embassies, considering the
Presents they make one to another, are but a kind of Trade and Exchange of
Merchants, wherein every one looks after the true value, and so to make his
advantage.

Asia is in subjection to four Potent Monarchs, who are able to bring mighty
Armies into the Field: The Grand Signior, who resides in Europe, the Sultan of
Persia, the Came of Tartary, at this day King of China, and the Great Mogul.
Besides these, there are several great Princes in Georgia, in Arabia, in
Tartary, in India, and in most pa t of the Isles. Several Nations also maintain
their Liberty by living among the Mountains.

As to the Division of this part of the World, some Authors divide it into
Interior and Exterior, in reference to Mount Taurus: By means of which Mountain
the Greeks made two Grand parts, the first to the North, the later to the
South. I shall first divide it into Terra Firma and Islands. The Countries of
the Terra Firma toward the West, are Asiatick Turkey, Georgia and Arabia. Toward
the middle, Persia; toward the North, Tartary; to the East, China; and to the
South, India, divided likewise into Terra Firma, which is the Empire of the
Great Mogul; and into two Peninsula's, one on this side, the other beyond
Ganges. The Islands in the Eastern, or Indian Seas, (which are the biggest, the
richest, and more in Number than in any other part of the World,) are the
Maldives, Ceylon, the Islands of Sonde, viz. Sumatra, Borneo, Java, etc. of
Japon, the Philippines, and the Molucca's. There are some Isles appertaining to
Asia in the Mediterranean, as Cyprus and Rhodes; and others in the Archipelago,
as Metellino, Scio, Samos, etc.

So that Asia now stands divided in these Monarchies or Principal parts, Viz.

Whose chief Cities are Turkey in Asia Georgia Arabia Persia Tartaria China The
Empire of the Mogul India within Ganges India without Ganges Aleppo, Cairo,
Smirna. Tefflis, Akazlike and Cori. Mecca, Medina, Mocha. Hispahan, Tauris,
Sciras. Surmarchand, Balch, Camul. Pequin, Canton, Hanchew. Agra, Lahor,
Surrat. Goa, Calicut, Golconda. Pegue, Siam, Mallaca.

Islands in the Oriental Ocean, Japan, Sumatra, Borneo. Mediterranean Sea,
Cyprus, Rhodes. Archipelago, Metellino, Scio, Samos, etc.


Of Turkey in Asia.
map of Turkish Empire The Turkish Empire in ASIA. By Rob: Morden


ASiatique Turkey comprehends more than the Roman Empire, in this part of the
World: Those Dominions did not often extend beyond the River Euphrates: This
beyond the River Tygris.

Once the Temperature of the Air exceeding sound and healthful, now every five
or six years the Pestilence destroys Millions.

The Soil formerly exceeding plentiful of all Fruits, both for use and
pleasure, now generally waste and barren.

Once very populous and full of Stately Cities, now lamenting the Ruin and
Destruction of them.

The Mohammedan Religion is chiefly professed in most places thereof, only there
are some Jews, and Greek Christians mixed among them. As to their manners, a
Cadi or Turkish Judge judiciously observed, that the Turks were to be blamed
for their Lechery, the Jews for their Superstition, and the Christians for
their Litigiousness.

Most excellently Seated is this part of the World, for it lies in the midst of
our Continent, in the temperate Zone, being watered by the whole Course of
Euphrates and Tigris, with the Convenience of Four Seas, the Mediterranean, the
Euxine, the Caspian, and Persian Seas, by which it Commerces with the principal
Regions of the World, and chiefly with that of the East Indies.

Four great Provinces are in this Asiatick Turkey. Anatolia, Turcomania,
Diarbeek and Syria. Anatolia or Asia Minor is almost a Peninsula lying between
the Black Sea, the Archipelago, the Mediterranean, and the River Euphrates. The
ancient Greeks were wont to store it with Colonies, and the Grand Cyrus did not
think his Empire considerable without it. For the same Reason have so many
Battles been fought either to preserve or conquer it. The Ancients divided this
Anatolia or Asia Minor into several lesser Parts or Regions, viz. Pontus and
Bithynia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Armenia Minor, Cilicia, Isauria, Pamphylia,
Lycia, Caria, Jonia, Aeolis, Lydia, or Maeonia, Pisidia, Lycaonia, Galatia,
Phrygia Major and Minor, Misia and Troas. Here I had intended to have given a
larger Description of all the ancient Names of places, etc. contained in this
Asiatique Turkey, viz. in Asia Minor, Mesopotamia, Armenia, Assyria, Caldea, or
Babylonia, Arabia, Terra Sancta, Syria, etc. But having lately purchased six
Plates, vulgarly called Scriptural Maps, viz.

First, Of all the Earth, and how after the Flood it was divided among the Sons
of Noah.

Second, Of Paradise, or the Garden of Eden, with the Countries circumjacent
inhabited by the Patriarchs.

Third, The 40 years Travel of the Children of Israel through the Wilderness.

Fourth, Canaan, or the Holy Land, as it was divided among the 12 Tribes of
Israel, and traveled through by our Savior.

Fifth, The Travels of St. Paul, and other of the Apostles, in the propagating
of the Gospel.

Sixth, Jerusalem, as it flourished in our Savior's time.

I shall therefore here only give you the present State and View of those
Countries, and refer you to my Description of those Map^, which will be a most
complete Epitome of the whole History of those Eastern Countries. It now
contains four Beglegbegs, or principal Governments, that of Natolia, at Cutaye
or Cute, Turcis, test Leuncl. Cutaige or Chiutaie test Band. Kietahi. P.
Rycant. of Caramania at Cogni, or Gogni the Iconium of Cic. Zenop. Plin. of
Amasia at Tocat or Siwas, or Suvas the Sebastiopolis of Plin. and Ptol. of
Aladuli at Marazh, or Marasch, by the Turks Zulkadie. The City of Bursa, the
Prusa of Strab. Plin. and Ptol. Prusias Solino, Bursa, Belon, Buruss Turcis,
test Leuncl. built by King Prusias who betrayed Hannibal An. Mundi 3297. taken
by the Turks A. D. 1300. It was the Residence of the Kings of Bithynia, and of
some of the Greek Emperors, and lastly of some of the Turkish Emperors, till
they won Constantinople. The first of the Ottoman Race were buried there,
except Solomon the first, who would be buried at the Mouth of the Dardanels
near Gallipoli: It yields to none unless Constantinople, either for wealth or
number of Inhabitants. Nicomedia, Comedia, Nicor, Isnigimid and Ismir Turcis,
test Leuncl. it is now a place of great Traffic for Silks, Cottons, Wool,
Linen, Fruits, Pots, Glasses, and other Commodities. Nice or Isnich, Nicaea of
Strab. Plin. and Ptol. prius Antigonia Strab. Olbia Plin. Ancore Steph. Isnich
and Nichor, Leuncl. Nichaea Soph. is famous for the first General Council of
318 Bishops Ann. 325. and for the Residence of the Grecian Emperors after the
Franks had taken Constantinople, Anno 1201. Angouri and Angara Leuncl. Enguni
Turcis, Ancyra Strab. and Plin. Angyra ex Codice Graeco, famous for Tamerlan's
Victory over Bajazet Emperor of the Turks, and before that for Pompey's Victory
over Mithridates, and now for good Chamlets. Troy, Pergamus, and Sardis, have
been Royal Cities. Troy renowned for the Ten years Siege of the Greeks, whose
Ruins also are mixed with the Remains of so^^ modern Structures. Pergamus, by
the Turks Bergama, is about 60 or 64 miles N. N. W. from Smirna, watered by the
River Cacus, is famous for the wealth of King Attalus, who overcame the Galatae
or Gallo-Grecians in a bloody Battle, was confederate with the Romans against
King Philip, for the ^^vention of Parchment, for the Birthplace of Galen, for
its Tapestry, and for its being one of the Seven Churches. That of Sardis by
H^^^ Meone, for the Residence of Croesus, and other the Kings of Lydia Sinope
upon the Black Sea, for its Copper Mines, and for the Residence of Mithridates,
the most formidable Enemy of the Romans. Scutari, formerly Chalcedon, where the
4th General Council was held, it is now a miserable Village with heaps of
ancient Ruins and Monuments of destruction. Abydos, now one of the D^^danels,
was famous for the Loves of Hero and Leander, and for the passage of Xerxes
prodigious Army over a Bridge of 674 Galleys Foglia Vecchia, formerly Phocaea,
the Mother of Marse^^es; the first City which was taken by a formal Siege, by
Harpagus Lieutenant to Grand Cyrus. Smirna, Ismir Turcis, for Trade by Sea and
Land, is the most celebrated City in the Levant; hither the Western Fleets are
bound, and from hence the fairest Caravans set out, feated at the bottom of a
Gulf, which is seven Leagues in length, defended with a Castle or Fort in such
a part of the Gulf, that no Ships can escape its Command.

One of the Seven Churches of Asia, at this day a great City, but not so great
and beautiful as formerly; here are the Ruins of the Amphitheater, where it is
said St. Polycarp was exposed to fight with Lions.

This City is very populous, wherein is reckoned no less than Sixty thousand
Turks, Fifteen thousand Greeks, Eight thousand Armen^^ns, Six or seven thousand
Jews, besides European Christians.

Smirna is a place of great plenty, the Soil abounding with Oil and Wine. The
Sea affords good store of Fish, and Fowl is very cheap. But the Heats are very
excessive in Summer, and would be insupportable, were it not for the Breezes
that come off the Sea about 10 in the Morning, and continues till the Evening,
but the Plague and malignant Fevers that succeed it are more destructive. Over
the gate of the upper Castle the Roman Eagles continue still Engraved, and a
great Head of Stone, by the Turks called Coidafa, which some think it to be the
great Amazon Smirna, which gave Name to this City.

Ephesus, Efeso Soph. Figena or Fiena cast. Ayasaluck Turcis, Rycant. During
the Trojan War Pliny tells us it was called Alopes, then Ortygia, by Lysimachus
Arsinoa, then Morgas, then Ephesus 45 Miles from Smirna, and about 5 Miles from
the Sea upon the River Cayster, another of the 7 Churches of Asia. Once famous
for the Temple of Diana, said to be Four hundred twenty five Feet in length,
Two hundred and twenty in breadth, supported with One hundred and twenty seven
Marble Pillars Seventy Feet high, Two hundred and twenty years a building,
seven times fired, the last time was in the Night that Alexander was born.

Laodicea, more anciently Diospolis, one of the Seven Churches, now forgotten
in its Name, and overwhelmed in its Ruins, which are by the Turks called
Eskihisar, not far from a place called Dingizlee, inhabited by Greeks, seated
upon the River Lycus.

Philadelphia, another of the Seven Churches, by the Turks Alashaher, or the
fair City, is yet adorned with Twelve Churches which profess the Christian
Faith. It Is seated on the Rising of the Mountain Tmolus, and watered with the
River Pactolus. And is a place of Trade, being in the Road of the Persian
Caravans.

Thyatyra, Akisar by the Turks, the last of the Seven Asian Churches, is a City
well inhabited, and of a very considerable Trade of Cotton-wooll, which they
send to Smirna.

Hierapolis, Seideschecher Turcis, test Crussio and Leuncl. Pambuck-kalaf
Smith, Aphiom-Carassar Tavenn. is seated over against Laodicea, where are now
to be seen the Ruins of vast Fabrics, and the Grotta of Platonium of Strab.
famous for those pestilential Vapors which it perspires.

Melaxo Mol. Melesso aliis, formerly Miletus, sent several Colonies abroad, and
a long time withstood the Kings of Lydia. Halicarnassus, famous for the
Mausoleum built by Queen Artemisia, in memory of Mausolus her Husband. Xanthus,
famous for the stout Resistance of its ancient Citizens against Harpagus,
Alexander and Brutus, in all which Sieges they suffered all Extremities
imaginable. Sattalia, otherwise Antali, lends its Name to a Gulf hard by.
Tarsus, Tarsos Plin. Tarso Europis, Terassa incolis, Tersis Turcis Leuncl. once
a famous Academy, and Archbishopric, and Metropolitan of Cilicia, built by
Sardanapalus, Anno Mundi 3440. post Romam 60 Isodoro. It has also been called
Antoniana, Severiana and Hadriana, the place of St. Paul's Education. Cogni the
Iconium of old, advantageously situated in the Mountains. Tiagna, where the
learned Apollonius was born. Amasia, Amasea, Strab. and Ptol. Amnasan Turcis,
is famous for the Birth of Mithridates and Strabo, for the Martyrdom of
Theodorus, and for the Residence of the eldest Son of the Grand Signior, built
in the hollow of a Mountain. Zela not far off, built by Zeila Son of Nicomedes,
famous for the Victory of Pharnaces over Strabo. Trebizond, Trapesus Strab. and
Plin. Mel. etc. Trabisonda and Trebisonda Europaeis. Tarabasar Turcis test
Leunc. the Seat of an Empire of short continuance, viz. 200 years from the year
1261, to the 1460. now the Residence of a Turkish Basha. Tocat, the new
Caesaria of old, is a fair City, and one of the most remarkable Thorough-fares
in the East, where are lodged the Caravans from Persia, Diabequer, Bagdat,
Constantinople, Smirna, and other places. The Christians have there Twelve
Churches, and there resides an Archbishop, that has under him Seven
Suffragans. The on^ place in all Asia, where Saffron grows; in the middle of
the Town is a great Rock, upon the Top whereof is an high Castle with a Garrison
to command the Neighboring Parts, it is governed by an Aga and Cadi; for the
Bashaw lives at Siwas, which is the ancient Sebastia, a large City, three days
Journey from Tocat. Laiazzo, the famous Issus near to Pylae Ciliciae, where
several Battles have been fought. In modern Story, That of a Sultan of Egypt
against Bajazet the second, Emperor of the Turks, wherein he was defeated. In
the same place Alexander the Great defeated Darius in person. There Ventidius
Bassus vanquished the Parthians. And Severus the Emperor overcame Pescenninus
Niger his Rival in the Empire. Not far off stood the ancient Anchiale, built in
the same day and year in which Tarsus was by Sardanapalus. Satalia, Attalia
Ptol. Antali Turcis, test Leunc. is famous for its rich Tapestries, and for
giving Name to the Neighboring Gulf, founded by Ptolomy Philadelphus King of
Egypt. Among the Rivers of Asia the Less, there is first Thermodon, upon whose
Banks the Amazons inhabited, now called Parmon. Hali, Halys. Strab. Ptol. and
Pli. Laly Nig. C^silirma P. Gyl. Otmagiuchi and Aytotu Turcis, test Leuncl.
was the Bounds of the Kingdom of Cyrus and Croesus. Granicus toward the
Hellespont, Granica Saus. Lazzara, test Nig. was the Witness of the first
Victory of Alexander the Great over the Persians. Pactolus, Strab. Plin. and
Chrysorhoas Sol. now Sarabat. near to Sardis and Thyatira, was famous for its
golden Oar; Meander, Strab. Plin. and Zenoph. Maeandros Ptol. now Madre, ex
Aulocrene font oriens, for his Swans and his Windings. Cydnus near Tarsus, now
Carasu Leuncl. whose Waters were so cold, that they killed the Emperor
Frederick Barbarossa, who bathed himself therein. And Alexander, who did the
same, was forsaken and given over by all his Physicians.

The most renowned Mountains of the Lesser Asia are Taurus, which divides all
Asia into two Parts, as we have said already. It is the most famous Mountain in
the World, for its Height, its Length, and for its Members Caucasus and Imaus.
Ida, near to Troy, is famous for the judgment of Paris between the three
Goddesses. On Mount Tmolus Midas preferred Pan's Pipe before Apollo's Harp. On
Cragus was the Monster Chimaera made tractable by Bellerophon. On Latmus passed
the Loves of the Moon and Endymion. Mount Stella for the fatal Overthrow of
Mithridates by Pompey, and Bajazet's by Tamerlain.

Of SYRIA.
SYria, Soria, Italis; La Sourie, Gallis; Suristan, Turcis; Souristan, Incolis.
By the Ancients it was divided into three principal parts, viz. Syria Propria,
Phaenicia and Palestina, or the Holy Land. At present the Turks divide it into
three Beglerbegs, viz. of Halep or Aleppo, Tripoli or Tarabolos, and Scham or
Damascus, which contains 16 or 20 Sangiacks, whose Names and Situations being,
for the most part, to us unknown, I shall follow the Ancient Geography, and
first speak of

Syria Propria.
In the Division or Parts of this, I find much Contrariety among all
Geographers, and in all Maps. Baudrand tells us, it is divided into Comagena,
Phoenicia, Coelosyria, Palmyrena, and Seleucia. In another place he says, its
parts are Syria Propria, Coelosyria, Comagene and Palmyrene.

Cluverius says, it is divided into Antiochene, Comagene, Coelo-Syria, and
Palmyrene.

Golnitz divides it into Comagena, Seleucia, Coelo-Syria, and Idumaea.

Heylin into Phoenicia, Coelo-Syria, and Syrophoenicia; Bleau into Comagena,
Coelo-Syria, Phoenicia, Damascena, and Palmyrena.

I come therefore to speak of the chief places in Syria Propria, which are,

1. Antioch, or Antiochia magna, Theopolis a Justiniano Imperatore, Rebbata a
S. Trinitate, by the Turks Antachia Leuncl. once the Metropolis of Syria,
situate on the River Orontes, now Assi or Hasei, 12 Miles from the
Mediterranean Shore. Once adorned with stately Palaces, Temples, etc. The Seat
of some of the Roman Emperors.

The Suburbs, called Daphne, from Apollo's Mistress so called, turned into a
Laurel, now 5 Miles from Antioch, was accounted one of the most delicious
places in the World, famous for the Oracle and Temple of Apollo, who was here
worshipped in a Grove 10 Miles in Compass, planted with Cypresses, and other
Trees, so full and close together, that the Beams of the Sun could not dart
through, watered with pleasant Streams, beautified with Fountains, and enriched
with Variety of Fruits.

2. Aleppo, Chalybon Rawolfio and Postello. Beroea, Berou, or Beroe. Zonara,
Cedreno and P. Gyll. Hierapolis test Bellonio. Sansone and Brietio. At present
Aleppo or Halep is the greatest and principal City of all Syria, and one of the
most famous of the East, and the 3d in the Ottoman Empire, if we consider it as
the Rendezvous of the Caravans, and of the Turkish Armies; as the Magazine of
Jewels, of Spices, of Silks, and other costly Commodities which are brought
thither by Sea and Land, and from thence sent into other Parts of the World by
the Port of Alexandretta or Scandaroon.

3. Hamah Leuncl. Hamous Bellon. Aman aliis and Damant in mappa Bleau. is the
Apamea or Apamia of the Ancients built by Seleucus, and so called from the Name
of his Wife, seated in the midst of a great Plain, encompassed with pleasant
Hills abounding in Corn and Wine. Its Orchards stored with Variety of Fruits
and Palm Trees. Its Gardens watered with many Channels drawn from the Orontes.

4. Hams, Hemz. Turcis, Haman Bell. Chemps Postel. and I. Kydo. Camalu Nigro,
is the Emisa Eusebius. Emissa Ptol. Hemesa Plin. for pleasant Situation much as
the same with Hamah.

5. Seleucia, built near the Mouth of Orontes by Seleucus, esteemed the
greatest City-Builder in the World, viz. 9 of his own Name, 16 in memory of his
Father Antiochus, 6 bearing the Name of his Mother Laodicea, and 3 in
remembrance of his Wife Apamoea, besides several others either built, repaired,
or beautified by him. It had the Surname of Pieria, called also Soldin Nig. and
Seleuche-Jolber. Leone Sidonienfi.

6. Zeugma, seated on the Banks of the River Euphrates, where Alexander the
Great passed over on a Bridge of Boats.

7. Samosatha, Seempsat L. Sidoniensi near the Banks of the Euphrates, over
which there was a Bridge for a passage into Mesopotamia, here was born Lucian,
and Paulus Samosatenus, Patriarch of Antioch, who was condemned for Heresy.

8. Palmira, Amagara Ortel. Fayd. Sans. seated near the Desert of Arabia,
famous for Zenobia, who stood in opposition with Gallienus for the Empire of
the East, but was taken Prisoner, and led in Triumph through Rome by Aurelian.

9. Adada is memorable for the Victory that Aretus King of Arabia obtained
against Alexander King of Jewry.

10. Damascus. Damasco Europaeis, Sciam Minad, Scham incolis Leuncl. Damas
Gallis, once the chief City of Syria, and one of the most ancient in all Asia,
seated near the River Chrysorrhoas, Pharphar Hebraeis, Adegele Bell. Farfar and
Fern Gist. in a Soil so fertile in Gardens, Orchards, and Vineyards, a place
so pleasant with Rivers and Fountains so surfeiting of Delights, so ravishing
with Pleasures, that some have called it, The Paradise of the World, famous for
the Temple of Zacharias, garnished with 40 stately Porches, and adorned with
about 9000 Lanthorns of Gold and Silver. Ruined and destroyed by the Persians,
Macedonians, Romans, Parthians, Saracens, Tartars, by the Soldans of Egypt, and
by the Turks. After the Battle of Issus, Alexander the Great found in Damas
200600 Talents of coined Money, and 500 Talents uncoined.

Laudicha, Laodicea Cic. Strab. Plin. Laodice Polyb. so called from Laodice the
Wife of Antiochus, and Mother of Seleucus, surnamed Cabiosa, called Lizza and
Lyche Minad. and Olivario, 100 Miles from Damascus.

There was also another Laodicea, Ptol. upon the Seacoast, 30 Miles from
Antioch West. Rhamata Hebraeis, Lyche incolis test Mol.

Beritus, now Barutti or Berite, once much frequented by Merchants, and others,
near which is that noted Valley where (as it is said) St. George, by killing
the Dragon, redeemed the King's Daughter.

Biblus, now Gibbeleth, was the Habitation of Cinivas the Father of Myrrha,
Mother to the fair Adonis, from whom the Neighboring River took its Name; once
a Bishops See now desolate.

I had almost forgot Alexandretta or Scanderone, the Seaport of Aleppo, a
confused heap of paltry Houses inhabited by the Greeks, who keep Fudling
Schools for the Mariners, and other meaner sort of the People, only the
dwellings of the Vice-Consuls are very convenient: But Tavernier says, They
must be Men who love Money that accept of those Employments, for the Air, like
that at Ormus, is so bad in Summer especially, that if it does not kill, yet
they cannot avoid very dangerous Distempers; And after some stay there to
remove to a better Air, is to endanger their Lives: But Auri sacra fames.

Of MESOPOTAMIA.
THE Padan Aram of the Scripture, Yrakin by the Persians, Jazeirey by the
Arabians, Meredin by the Arminians, by the Turks Diarbeck, is a Peninsula
between the Euphrates and Tygris on the West, South, and East; and on the
North, the Mountains separate it from Turcomania; the South part desert and
barren, the Northern part abounding with Corn and Wine.

A Country memorable for the Birth of Abraham and Rebecca; the long Abode of
Jacob, and the Birth of his Children, the Original of the Hebrew Nation.

Successively subjected to the Babylonians. Assyrians, Medes and Persians; from
them Conquered by the Romans, Recovered again by the Persians, then sell into
the power of the Sarazens, and now enslaved under the Turks.

Orpha or Ourfa, is the ancient Edesa, Edessa, Ptol. and Plin. Edesa Strab.

Erech by the Hebrews and Rages, as Villanovanus tells us, Orpha by Paulus
Jovius. Rotas by Haithonus, Rhoas and Rhoa Niger. Orfa by P. Gyllius, Rohai al.
Orrhoai Arab. The Capital City of Mesopotamia, where they dress the Yellow
Cordovant Skins, the Blue at Tocat, the Red at Diabeker.

Carrha, known to the Romans for the death of wealthy Crassus, Orfa Baud.
Heren. Nig. and Sans. Dr. Leonard Ronwolf, who in Anno 1575. was at Haran,
tells us it was then called Ophra, 11 days Journey, or 232 Miles, from Mosul or
Ninive; That it was a fair City, well inhabited, and richly furnished with
Merchandise, but especially with fair Coverlets of diverse Colors.

Tavernier and Thuenot tell us, That Ourfa is built where stood the ancient
Edessa, memorable in the Church History for the Story of Abagarus; and in Roman
History for the death of the Emperor Caracalla; and, by the Report of the
Inhabitants, the place where Abraham lived: So that Havan, Edessa, Carrha and
Orfa, seem to me to be all the same City. The Walls of the City are of Free
Stone, with Battlements and Towers, but Ruinous within; upon the South Side
there is a Castle upon a Hill, with some old pitiful Guns. The City is governed
by a Bashaw.

Diarbeker, or Diarbequir, is also the Caramit or Caremu and Carahemit Turcis,
test Leuncl. the Amida of Procop. Ammaea Ptol. Hemit incolis olim Constantia
dicta test Baud. Zoriga Molet. seated near the Tygris, a Frontier Town of
great Strength, the Seat of a Turkish Basha, containing two or three fair
Piazza's, and a magnificent Mosque, formerly a Christian Church. It Is well
peopled, containing, by Report, 2000 Christians, Armenians, the rest
Nestoreans, and some few Jacobites. Famous for its Red Marroquins, surpassing,
in Color, all others in the last, as also for excellent Wine and good Bread.

Bir, or Birigeon, is seated on the Euphrates, upon the Brow of a Hill, Plenty
of Bread, Wine and Fish.

Sharmely Tav. Tcharmelick Thev. is a very good Town, with a fair Inn, and very
good Baths round about it, near which is a Mountain, on the top whereof is a
Fortress, with a Garrison, which the Grand Vizier in the Year 1631. after his
loss at Bagdat, intended to have made his Refuge, but was strangled before he
could accomplish his design.

Dadacardia Tav. The Ruins whereof denote it to have been a large Town, but
now the Inhabitants have no other Habitation, but the Hollows of Rocks.

Cousasar Tav. Kodgiasar Thev. is a Village where you pay the Customs of
Diarbequir Tav, rather of Merdin test Thev.

Merdin, Marde Herod. Ptol. Merdino Onuph. Mirdin. Barb. Mirdanum Procopio, two
Leagues from Kodgiasar, is a little City seated on a Mountain with good Walls,
and a Castle, where is resident a Basha, who has under him 200 Spahi's, and
400 Janissaries.

Karasara Tav. Caradene Thev. shows the Ruins of seven or eight Churches, and
was once a great Town, one days Journey from Nesbin.

Nesbin is but the shadow of the ancient Nisibis of Strab. Ptol. Plut. Plin.
and formerly a great Town, now hardly an ordinary Village.

Mosul, upon the West side of the River Tygris, is encompassed with Walls of
rough Stone, plaistered over with little pointed Battlements on the Top. It
has a Castle built of Free Stone, and the Walls are about three Fathom high;
on the Land side separated from the Town by a Ditch five or six Fathoms broad,
and very deep. In the Castle there are six large Guns, whereof one is broken,
and one is mounted; several Fieldpieces, whereof two mounted.

The Tygris here in Summer is not broader than the River Sein in France, but
deep and rapid, and in Winter it is as broad again.

And here I cannot omit what Thevenot affirms of Sanson's Map of this Country,
viz. That besides the mistakes of Rivers, he has made so many Faults in the
position of Places in their Distances, as also in their Names, that nothing of
the Country is true in the Map.

Diarbeck, taken in general, comprehends Arzerum, the Assyria of old, and Yerac
the ancient Chaldea, or Babylonia, the chief Cities whereof are Babylon and
Nineveh, which were heretofore very famous, now altogether ruined: Nineveh just
over against Mosul, was the Residence of the King of Assyria, 24 Leagues in
Circuit. The voluntary death of Sardanapalus, and the Repentance of the
Inhabitants have renowned it in Story. Toward the Frontiers of Assyria
inhabited a Warlike People, called, The Curds, where many great Battles have
been fought, viz. That at Arbela and Gaugamela, Plin. or Gangamela Strab. now
near to, if not the same with, Schiahrazur, the Seat of a Turkish Beglerbeg,
Renowned for the Victory of Alexander the Great against Darius, killing above
400000 Persians, with the loss of 300 Macedonians. There the Califfs wan the
Battle of Maraga, which made them Masters of all Persia. And near to Chuy,
Selim defeated Ishmael Sephi, who had always been a Victor before. Babylon lay
a small days Journey from Bagdat, which stands upon the Tygris, and is only a
heap of Ruins in a place called Felougia, near to which they show the place
where stood the Tower of Babel, famous for the Confusion of Languages.

This Babylon was built by Nimrod, whom some affirm to be Belus. Semiramis and
Nebuchadnezzar much augmented it: The first of the two having encompassed it
with such Walls as were accounted one of the Seven Wonders of the World; and
the high and fair Gardens upon the Terras were no less admired. It was taken by
Cyrus, by Darius, by Alexander the Great, who died there, and by Seleucus. The
power and wealth of Babylon was so great, that it contributed more to the Grand
Cyrus, than the third part of all his Dominions. Next to Babylon, Seleucia,
called Coche and Alexandria, then Seleucia, from Antiochus the Son of
Seleucius, test Martiano, now Bagdad, or Bagadat, test Sansone; was the most
considerable City in all Asia, and then Ctesiphon: Baghdat, or Bagadad,
generally called Babylon, is not only the Rendezvous of several Merchants, but
also of the Mahumetans of all parts of Asia, who go to visit the Sepulchers of
Omar and Haly, and other Mohammedan Saints. It was a long time the Residence of
the Caliphs. Ulit, who was one of them, was Master of one of the greatest
Monarchies in the World; for it extended from the most Western parts of
Barbary, to the East Indies. Another Caliph of this City, at his death left
Eight Sons, Eight Daughters, Eight Millions of Gold, Eight thousand Slaves, and
the addition of Eight Kingdoms to his Dominion. In the Year 1638. when Amurath
the Fourth re-took it from the Persians, he caused three Men out of every Tent
through his Army to be cast into the Moat, and over them a vast number of
Bavins and Wooll-Sacks, that he might the more easily assault the Town. Kufa,
or Mecha Ali, is a City for which the Mahometans have a particular Veneration,
as being the Burying place of Haly. Bassora, or Balsora, is the Teredon of
Strab. Plin. Ptol. a Town near the mouth of Tygris, which they of the Country
call Shat. It is large and pleasant, by reason of its Palm Trees. The
convenience of its Port furnishes India and Persia with Dates, which are Bread
and Wine to those that know how to order them. Some few Years since, Balsora
fell under the Jurisdiction of Ali-Bassa, who styled himself King thereof, who
left it to his Successors, who enjoy it from Father to Son, paying a small
Tribute to the Grand Signior, who is afraid to oppress him lest he should
revolt, but these two last Places properly belong to Arabia.

Of CANAAN.
map of Canaan CANAAN by Rob. Morden


THis Country was first Inhabited by Canaan the Son of Cham, and called by his
Name. He dying left it to his 11 Sons, that bore the Name of the Children of
Canaan, at what time it contained 52 Kingdoms, and 5 Satrapes: Divided
afterward into 12 Tribes, that bore the Names of the Sons of Jacob and Israel,
being conquered by Joshua, and possessed by the Israelites; who for 386 years
were governed by Captains and Judges; after that, for 418 years, by Kings. From
Rehoboam 10 Tribes revolted, who chose the fugitive Jeroboam for their King:
His Successors were styled Kings of Israel, so that it then contained 2
Kingdoms, viz. 1st, of Judah, whose regal Seat was Jerusalem; 2d, of Israel,
whose Seat was at Samaria. After 259 Years, the Israelites were led into
Captivity by the King of Assyria, some say beyond the Caspian Mountains, from
whence they never returned. And the Assyrians possessed their Land, and were
called Samaritans. The People of Judah were also afterward carried Captive
into Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar, after set at liberty by Cyrus, and returned
back under the Conduct of Zerubbabel. After this, they were called Jews and the
Country Jewry; and for about 364 years they were governed by Aristocracy, until
the Maccabees, who, after many Conflicts with their powerful Neighbors, uphold
the Government 131 years; during which interval, the Romans under Pompey
conquered Judea, and after the Death of Antigonus, the last of the Race of the
Maccabees, Herod is made King by Augustus and Anthony, a man of admirable
Virtues and execrable Vices, fortunate abroad, unfortunate in his Family; his
Life Tragical, his Death desperate. After whose Death, the Kingdom was divided
into 2 parts, half of it had the title of Ethnarch, the other half divided into
2 Tetarchies. Archelaus banished and dying in Exile, his Ethnarchy was reduced
into a Roman Province, and the Government committed unto Pontius Pilate, by
Tiberius Caesar, under whom our Savior the Holy Jesus did suffer Death, when
the Jews cried out, his Blood be upon Us and Ours. A wish not long after
effected with all fullness of Terror, for the Calamities of the War inflicted by
Gallus, Vespasian, and Titus, exceed both Example and Description, and
destroyed about 110000 Thousand People. The Land destroyed and on every Head an
Annual Tribute imposed: The Jews were quiet until the Reign of Adrian, when
again they raised new Commotions, being headed by Berochab their counterfeit
Messiah; but Julius Severus Lieutenant to Adrian razed 50 of their strong
holds, and 985 Towns, and slew five hundred and fourscore Thousand; so that the
Countries lay waste, and the ruined Cities became an habitation for wild
Beasts, and the Captives were transported into Spain, and from thence again
exiled in the year 1500.

In which Interval of time, the Country inhabited by other People, about the
time of Constantine, embraced the Christian Religion: But in the Reign of
Phocas, the Persians overran the whole Country of Palestine, inflicting unheard
of Tortures on the patient Christians. No sooner freed from that Yoke, but they
suffered under a greater by the execrable Saracens, under the Conduct of Omar,
who were long after expulsed by the Turks, then newly planted in Persia by
Tangrolipix. When the Christians of the West, for the recovery of the Land, set
forth an Army of 300000, Godfry of Bologne the General, who made thereof an
absolute Conquest, and was elected King of Jerusalem, in the 89th year of that
Kingdom, and during the Reign of Guy, the Christians were utterly driven out
and destroyed by Saladine, the Egyptian Sultan, who held it until Selymus the
first, Emperor of the Turks, in the year 1517 added the Holy Land, together
with Egypt unto the Ottoman Empire, under whose power it now is governed by two
Sanziacks, under the Bassa of Damascus, one residing at Jerusalem, the other at
Naplous. It is now for the most part inhabited by Moors and Arabians, those
possessing the Valleys, these the Mountains; some few Turks, many Greeks, with
other Christians of all Sects and Nations; some Jews, who inherit no part of
the Land but live as Aliens in their own Country.

The Chorographical Division of Canaan.

This Land of Canaan, within Jordan, was divided into 5 principal Parts or
Provinces, vix. 1st, Jewry in the South, where King David's Throne was set and
the Holy City built, comprehending the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin. 2d,
Samaria in the midst, the chief Seat of the 10 Tribes of Israel, containing the
Tribe of Ephraim, and the half Tribe of Manasses. 3d, Galile in the North East,
where Christ Jesus was very conversant, and was divided into the higher and the
lower, containing part of Asher, all Napthali, and part of Zebulun. 4th,
Phaenicia on the North-West part of Canaan, containing the Seacoast of Asher
and Zebulun. 5th, The Land of the Philistines upon the West of Canaan, whose
Country was allotted to Judah, Dan and Simeon, these were always great Enemies
to the Israelites; and from them was the whole Land called Palestine.

The Land of Canaan without Jordan, possessed by the Amorites who had diven out
the Moabites and Ammonites, contained 3 principal parts; 1st, part of the
Kingdom of Sihon King of the Amorites, in Heshbon, taken from the Moabites,
which was given to the Reubenites. 2d, The Land of Gilead, which contained part
of the Kingdom of Sihon, taken from the Ammonites; and part of the Kingdom of
Og King of Bashan, which was given to the Gadites. 3d. The rest of the Kingdom
of Og, with half Gilead, and the Region of Argob, was given to the half Tribe
of Manasses: All which are delineated in the Map, as also the Names of the
Chief Cities and Towns in each Tribe.

Once a Country so fertile, that it was called, A Land flowing with Milk and
Honey; adorned with pleasant Mountains, and luxurious Valleys; neither scorched
with Heat, nor pinched with Cold. The Wealth and Power of it so Great, the
People, Cities and Towns so Numerous, that there was no Country in the World
that could compare with it. But now remains a fearful Monument of Divine
Vengeance, a sad and dismal Mirror for all other like sinful Countries to view
their Destiny by. Jerusalem, though fallen from her ancient Luster, deserves
still our Remembrance. Once her Kings, her Princes, her Temple, her Palaces
were the Greatest, the Richest, the Fairest, and most Magnificent in the World.
Once a City Sacred and Glorious, the Seat of Infinite Majesty, the Theater of
Mysteries and Miracles, the Diadem in the Circle of Crowns, and the Glory of
the Universe, but now Icabod: It was ruined by Nebuchadnezzar; Vespasian and
Titus utterly razed it, and destroyed above Eleven hundred thousand People.

To describe this Country in all its Circumstances, to speak of its Laws,
Religions, its Divisions, Wars, and Alterations; to write of all the various
Transactions that have happened in it, would require a Volume of itself. I shall
therefore leave it to my aforesaid Description of this Part of the World, where
I shall give a more particular Geographical and Historical Relation of its
Cities, Towns, and other memorable Transactions, which will be a very useful
and necessary Introduction into the Principia' of ancient Geography and History.

Of ARMENIA MAJOR, GEORGIA, etc.
map of Armenia ARMENIA and GEORGIA COMANIA and By Robt: Morden


ARmenia is divided by the River Euphrates into two parts, Major and Minor. The
greater Armenia is by the Turks called Turcomania, by the Persians Thoura,
Emnoe, or Aremnoe, by the Nestorians Zelbecdibes, by Sanson Curdistan, by
Cluver Papul and Curdi.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Mardi, and Gordiaei; now the Turcomans and
Curdes. The first are said to be descended from Turquestan in Tartary, from
whence came the Turks. The later are descended from the ancient People of
Assyria.

Ptolomy divided Armenia into four principal parts, which contained 20
Provinces, and 87 Cities.

Pliny accounted 120 Strategies, Governments, or particular Jurisdictions of
every Province.

A Country much better known, and more famous in ancient Time than now. The
Advantage of its Bounds, the Nature of its Situation, the Magnificence of some
of its Kings, among which, Tygranes, Son-in-law to Mithridates King of Pontus,
has been the most Famous, its Greatness, Government and Riches, much
contributed to its Renown.

In this Country are the Heads of four Rivers, Euphrates, Tygris, Phasis and
Araxes.

Euphrates, Perath Moses, Frat Nicolaio, Morot sou Turcis, from one side of the
Mountain Mingol falls this River, which divides Armenia and Mesopotamia from
Asia Minor, Syria and Arabia, descends into Chaldea, where it waters the
ancient Babylon, and joins with Tygris somewhat below Bagdat.

Tygris, Hidekel Ebraeis, Tegil Castal. and Pinero, Diglath Josepho, descends
from the Georgian Mountains, falls into diverse Lakes, loses itself diverse times
in the Earth, cuts through the Mountains, separates Mesopotamia from Assyria,
washes the Ruins of Niniveh, receives the Branches of the Euphrates, and
diseharges itself into the Persian Gulf.

Phasis or Fassa, has its Head in the same Mountain with the Euphrates, and
runs its Course toward the North; and after it has passed 100 Bridges falls
into the Euxian Sea.

Araxes, Arass, Achlar Leunc. Cajacz. Thev. runs Eastward, and joins itself
with Kur or Cyrus, whose Rise or Spring is from the other side of the Mountain
Mingol, and then falls into the Caspian Sea. Since these Rivers have here their
Springs, Sanson tells us, That if there yet remains any marks by which we may
discover the place where the Terrestrial Paradise was placed, it was rather in
this Country, than in any other. But Sir John Chardin makes the River Phasis to
arise from the Caucasus Mons, about 350 Miles distant, and to run South into
the Pontus Euxinus.

The Armenians are generally of a healthy, strong, and robustious Bodies, their
Countenance commonly grave, their Features well proportioned, and of comely
Personage, but of a Melancholy and Saturnine Air. In their Humors, Covetous and
Sordid, Heady and Obstinate; of a dull and stupid Apprehension, unless in
Merchandise and Trade: Yet, it is observed, That those that are brought up in
other Countries, are of a more acute Understanding, pleasing and merry in
Behavior; but the Women are commonly ill shaped, long nosed, and not so much
as tolerably handsome. Ric.

Armenia was conquered in the Year 1515. by Selimus the First, and annexed to
the Ottoman Dominions; yet the Armenians pretend, they cannot be made Slaves,
by reason of certain Privileges which their Predecessors obtained from
Mahomet, when they assisted him to settle his Empire, upon which consideration
most of the Merchants of Turkey go by the name of Armenians.

The Armenian Church is Ruled by four Patriarchs, the chief of which resides at
Etchmeasen Ric. Ecs-miazin Chard. Changlee Chilse by the Turks, or Ouch Chilse
from the Three Churches, which are there built in a Triangle, about two or
three Leagues from Rivan or Erivan.

The chief Places now are Erzirum, Theodosiopolis, P. Gillio, Sinera Minadaio,
Aziris aliis, a Frontier Town, and Great Thorough Fare, the Residence of a
Basha. The Houses are ill built of Wood, without any Order or Proportion, where
are some Remains of Churches. Tavineer tells us, That though it be very cold,
yet Barley grows there in 40 days, and Wheat in 60.

Erez, after Garisoned by Mustapha, was taken by Storm, and was Witness of
Emirhamz first Contest with the Turks.

Cars, Carse, or Charsa Leunc. a large City, but thin peopled, seated in a good
Soil, the Rendezvous of the Grand Signior's Army. A days Journey from Kars, are
to be seen the Ruins of a great City called Anikagee, strongly situated in a
Mersh, Tav.

Rivan, or Erivan, is seated in a plentiful Country now belonging to the Sultan
of Persia, being taken by Sha Sefi, who put all the Garrison to the Sword. It Is
famous for its Trade of Silks, and plenty of Wine; not far from this City are
to be seen the Ruins of the ancient Artaxata, the Seat of the ancient Kings of
Armenia, test Tavernier: So that Teflis in Georgia cannot be the Artaxata of
the Ancients, as in our Geographical Dictionaries.

Nassivan, or Nachavan, the Nexuana of Ptol. according to the opinion of the
Armenians, is the most ancient City of the World, three Leagues from Mount
Ararat, the place where Noah lived after he came out of the Ark. There is seen
the Ruins of a great Mosque, which, they say, was one of the most stately
Buildings in the World, erected in memory of Noah's burying place.

In the Canderan Plains, not far from Nassivan, was fought a memorable Battle
betwixt the Turks and Persians, where both the Emperors Selym and Ismael were
present.

Van, the Artemita Plin. Artemitta Strab. Artemidita Ptol. is a great City upon
the side of the wide Lake Arcissa, or Arsanias, now Lake de Vastan, seated on
the Top of a high Mountain, and is the Seat of a Turkish Beglerbeg.

Betlis, by some said to be the Tigranocerta of Plin. and Tac. belongs to a
Bey, or Prince of the Country, who neither acknowledges the Grand Segnior, nor
the Persian Sultan. It is situate between two high Mountains, guarded with a
Castle and Drawbridge. The Bey, besides the strength of his Passes, is able to
bring above 25000 Horse, besides Foot, into the Field. Near this place the
Persians obtained a great Victory over the Turks, in which were slain five
Sanziacks, 800 Janissaries, 20000 Soldiers, 40 pieces of Cannon taken, and
Solyman's Seraglio, in which were Beauties he not a little doted on, when
Ebrahim Bassa was strangled by a Mute.

Old Julpha or Zulfa was the ancient Habitation of the Armenians, which Sha
Abbas carried into Persia, and is thought to be the Ariammene of the Ancients.

Astabat, a League from the Aras, the only Country that produces the Ronas
Root, whose use is to dye Red, and for which there is a vast Sale all over
Persia and India.

Marante is famous for the burying place of Noah's Wife.

Sophiana is more like a Forest than a City.

The Convent of St. Stephens near Naksivan, was the retiring place of St.
Matthew, and St. Bartholomew, in the time of their Persecution, a noted place
for Devotion.

Of GEORGIA.
Between the Black Sea and the Caspian lies Georgia; so called by the Grecians
from the word Georgoi, which signifies Husbandmen: Some will have this Name
derive itself from that of St. George, the Patron Saint of all the Christians
of the Greek Church. Under the general Name whereof, we comprehend Mingrelia,
Gurgistan, Zuiria, and Comania: Provinces which the ancient Romans could not
subdue, by reason of the ruggedness of the Mountains, which were known to the
Ancients by the Name of Caucasus, made famous by the Fable of Prometheus.
Mingrelia with Avogasia, are the same with Colchis, or little more: Famous for
the Amors of Jason and Medea, and for the Conquest of the Golden Fleece by the
Argonauts.

Gurgistan is the ancient Iberia; Zuiria answers to the ancient Albania; and
Comania or Carcassia composeth some part of the Asiatic Sarmatia on the South
of Don.

The ancient Kingdom of Colchis was not so small as now it is reckoned, when it
extended from the Palus Maeotis, as far as Iberia, whose Capital City was also
so called, where our modern Geographers place Fasso. The Corax and Phasis,
famous Rivers in ancient History, now called Codours and Rione, serve for its
Bounds, in Length 110 Miles, in Breadth about 60. It is now divided into three
parts, viz. Mingrelia, Guriel, and Imiretta.

Mingrelia, Odische Incolis, is a Country full of Hills and Mountains, Valleys
and Plains, almost covered with Woods. The Air is temperate, but very moist and
unwholsom, in regard of the extreme wet Weather; so that in Summer the moisture
of the Earth, being heated by the Sun, causes frequent Pestilences, and other
Diseases, very dangerous to Strangers. It abounds with many Rivers, which fall
from the Mountain Caucasus, and discharge into the Black Sea, viz. Codours, the
Corax of the Ancients. The Tacheur, which Arrian calls Sigamus. The Socum,
supposed to be the Terscen of Arrian, and the Thasseris of Ptol. The Langur,
the Astolphus of old. The Kelmhel, or Cobi of Arrian. The Cianiscari, Cianeus
of the Ancients. The Scheniscari, or River Horse, by the Greeks Hippus. The
Abascia, or Glaucus of Strabo, the Caries of Arrian, and the Caritus of Ptol.
These two Rivers intermix with the famous Phasis, about 20 Miles from the Sea.

The Phasis, by the Turks Fachs, by the Inhabitants Rione, at the Mouth is
about a Mile and half over. There are several small Islands in the Mouth of it,
upon the biggest of which Sultan Morat built a Fortress in the Year 1578. when
he attempted the Conquest of that Country, the Ruins of which are now to be
seen, but no Remainders of the Temple of Rhea to be seen, which was Consecrated
to the Worship of Christ in the Reign of the Emperor Zeno, nor any Ruins of
the ancient Sebasta, or the famous Colchis now to be seen. And the City Fasc,
placed where Cholcis stood by our late Geographers, is also a great mistake,
test Sir John Chardin, who was upon the place.

The Country produces little Corn or Pulse, the Fruits are most wild and
unwholsom; that which thrives best is the Grape, of which there is great
Plenty, and the Wine most excellent, strong, and a good Body, pleasing to the
Taste, and comfortable to the Stomach; so that if the People knew how to make
it rightly, there would be no better in Asia.

Their usual Grain is Gom, which is as small as Coriander Seed, and very much
resembles Millet, which is sowed in Springtime after the same manner as Rice,
by making a hole in the ground with their Finger, then put in the Grain, and
cover it, which produces a Stalk like to the Sugar-Cane, at the end of which
there is an Ear that contains above 300 Grains. This boiled into a Paste is the
only Bread of all the Inhabitants of the Black Sea, from Palus Maeotis round
to Trebizond.

Besides this Gom, they have Millet, Rice, Wheat and Barley, which two last
they sow upon the Ground without plowing, for the Ground is so soft, that it
takes root a Foot deep in the Mold, and comes up without any trouble.

The ordinary Food of the Country is Beef and Pork very plenty, and so good,
that the World affords no better. Their Wild-Fowl is good, but scarce. Their
Venison is the Wild Boar, the Heart, the Stag, the Fallow Deer and Hare, which
are most excellent. There are Partridges, Pheasants, Quails, and Wild Pigeons
in abundance.

In the Mountains of Caucasus are bred great numbers of Eagles and Pelicans,
Hawks, Hobbies, and other Birds of Prey, and other strange Fowl, unknown in our
Parts. And the Forests produce a number of Wild Beasts, as Tigers, Lions,
Leopards, Wolves and Chacals.

At Pigivitas is a Church with three Bodies, where they say St. Andrew preached
in that place, and the Catholicos once in his Life goes thither to make the
Holy Oil.

In Mingrelia are neither Cities nor Towns, only 2 Villages by the Seaside.
Isgaour is the chief Port and grand Market of Mingrelia. Anarghia is the most
considerable Village built, where stood the ancient Heraclea. But all the
Houses are scattered up and down in the Country, that you cannot travel a Mile,
but you shall meet with three or four together.

There are about nine or ten Castles, at the chiefest whereof, called Ruos, the
Prince keeps his Court. It Is surrounded with a slight stone Wall, and guarded
with a few Cannon, but the rest of the Castles have none. Sapias is the name of
two Churches, one of which belongs to the Theatines.

The Mingrelian Men are endued with all mischievous qualities, there is no
wickedness to which they are not inclined. All addicted to Thievery, which they
make their Study, Employment, Pastime and Glory. Assassination, Murder, Lying,
are esteemed noble and brave Actions. Drunkenness, Fornication, Adultery,
Bigamy, Incest, are Virtues in Mingrelia. Other wise good Soldiers, well
shaped, Ride a Horse well, and handle their Lance with an extraordinary
dexterity.

The Women of Quality are very handsome and well shaped, having Features and
Glances very charming and obliging, naturally subtle and quick of Apprehension,
extremely Civil and Complemental, otherwise the most wicked in the World.
Haughty, perfidious, deceitful, cruel and impudent to procure their Lovers, or
to destroy them.

The Education of Children in Mingrelia, is the most Lewd and Vicious in the
World; their Fathers bring them up to Thievery, and their Mothers to Obscenity.

The Inhabitants of Caucasus that border upon Colchis, are the Alanes, whose
Country was formerly the Northern Frontier of Armenia; The Suane's, the
Gigue's, the Caracioles, by the Turks called Cara-Cherks, that is the Black
Circassians, by reason of the Fogs and Clouds that darken their Sky, though
else they are the fairest People in the World. Formerly they were Christians,
and yet retain some Relics and Customs of it, but now profess no Religion, but
live by Robbery and Rapine, ignorant of all Arts and Sciences, more tall and
portly than other People, furious in their Looks, and their Dispositions, and
Courage no less savage; the most daring Robbers, and most resolute Assassins in
the World.

The Nagayan-Tartars for the most part inhabit the Champaigne Land about
Astracan, living in Tents fenced with Stakes and Palisadoes, to secure
themselves from the Assaults and Insolences of Night Robbers, and the Kalmuc
Tartars, who oftentimes surprise them unawares, and carry away both Men and
Cattle.

The Country of Guriel is very small, separated from Mingrelia by the River
Phasis: And in every thing, as to its Nature and the Manners of its
Inhabitants, it resembles Mingrelia, for they have the same Religion, Customs
and the same Inclinations to Lying, Robbery and Murder.

Gonie is a large Castle, four Square built, of hard and rough Stones, of a
great Bulk, seated upon the Seaside; it has four Walls and two Gates, but no
Trenches nor Fortifications belonging to the Prince of Guriel distant from
Phasis about four Miles.

Akalzike is a Fortress, built upon the Descent of Mount Caucasus, seated in a
hollow place among Hillocks, fortified with double Walls, and flanked with
Towers, both built with Battlements after the Ancient manner, defended with a
few Guns, and is the resi^^dence of a Turkish Bassa. Adjoining to this Fortress
is a large Town, consisting of about 400 Houses, all new, and of a late
Erection, inhabited by Turks, Armenians, Georgians, Greeks, Jews and Christians.

Imiretta is called by the Turks Pachatchcouk, or Pachakoutchouk, the Little
Prince; is a Country full of Woods and Mountains, but the Valleys are lovely,
and the Plains most pleasant: Here Money is Coined, and here are several Towns,
but as for the Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants they are the same as in
Mingrelia. The King has Four good Castles, viz. Scander seated upon the side
of a Valley, Regia and Scorgia, both almost inaccessible in the Mountains, and
naturally fortified; 4 Cotatis bearing the Name of the Town and Country round
it; perhaps the Catatene of Ptol. 90 miles from the mouth of the River Phasis,
built at the foot of a Hill, consisting of about 200 Houses, it has a Fortress
built with several Towers and a double Wall.

These Three Kingdoms are tributary to the Turks. The Tribute of the King of
Imiretta is 80 Boys and Girls, from Ten to Twenty years of Age. The Prince of
Guriel pays 46 Children of both Sexes. And the Prince of Mingrelia 60000 Else
of Linen Cloth made in that Country.

The Princes of Mingrelia give themselves the Title of Dadian, that is, the
head of Justice.

Of GURGISTAN.
Georgia by our modern Geographers and the Persians, is called Gurgistan, by
the Georgians Carthuel. By some Authors it is divided into four particular
Provinces, viz. Imirette and Guriel, of which we have spoken of before; 3,
Caket, 4, Carthuel. These two last are under the Persian Dominion; and this is
that which the Persians call Gurgistan, and the Georgians Carthueli.

It is a Country full of Wood, and very Mountainous, yet encloses a great
number of pleasant Plains; and the River Kur, the Cyrus of the Ancients, runs
through the midst of it.

The Temper of the Air is very kindly; their Fair weather begins about May, and
lasts till the end of November. The Soil, if well watered, produces all sort of
Grain, Herbs and Fruit in abundance; therefore as fertile a Country as can be
imagined, where a Man may live both deliciously and cheap. Their Bread as good
as any in the World, and their Fruit of all sorts is very delicious. Nor is
there any part of Europe that produces fairer Pears and Apples, or better
tasted; nor any part of Asia that brings forth more delicious Pomegranates.
Their Cattle very good and plentiful; their Fowl of all sorts is incomparable.
There is no better Meat in the world than their young Porkers, of which there
are abundance. The Caspian Sea and Kur River furnish it with all sorts of Salt
and Fresh Fish; and there is also no Country where they drink more or better
Wine: No Men are more addicted to their sensual Pleasures, and beastial
Voluptuousness, that is, to Drunkenness and Luxury; neither are the Women less
vicious and wicked, having an extraordinary Inclination to the male Sex, and
contribute more to that torrent of Uncleanness, which overflows all the Country.

Nature, says Sr. John Chardin, has bestowed upon the Women of that Country
Graces and Features which are not other where to be seen; so that it is
impossible to behold them without loving of their more charming Countenances;
nor more lovely Statures and Proportions can be pencilled forth by all the Art
of man: They are Tall, clear Limbed, Plump and Full, but not over-Fat, and
extremely slender in the Waste; but that which spoils all is their Nasty
Shifts, and Painted Faces.

The Men are naturally witty, nor would there be more Learned men or more
Ingenious masters in the world, were they but improved by the knowledge of Arts
and Sciences; but their Education is so mean and brutish, having nothing but
bad Examples, that those Parts are altogether drowned in Vice and Ignorance, so
that they are generally Cheats and Knaves, Perfidious, Treacherous, Ungrateful
and Proud.

There are several Bishops in Georgia, an Archbishop and a Patriarch, whom
they call Catholicos: There are also many Churches, but nothing remains of
Christianity, unless the name of their Fasts, for they neither know or practice
the least precept of the Law of Jesus Christ.

The Churchmen also will be as drunk, and keep Female Slaves for their
Concubines, as well as others.

The Nobility exercise a more Tyrannical power over their Subjects than in
Mingrelia, challenging a right over their Estates, Liberty and Lives, if they
seize upon them, whether Wife or Children, they sell them or dispose of them as
they please.

The Province of Carthuel contains no more than four Cities, Gori, Suram, Aly,
and Teflis; Gori or Kori, Armatica or Harmastis, of old, test Sans. is a small
City seated in a Plain, between two Mountains, upon the bank of the River Chur,
at the foot of a small Hill, upon which there is a Fortress built, which is
garisoned by Native Persians.

Suram is a small Town, but the Fortress is large and well built, having 100
Men in garrison.

Teflis, Artaxata Plin. Artaxia Tac. Artaxiasata Strab. by the Georgians Cala,
by some Tebele-cala; is called also Darel Melec; by P. Jovius Choim, the
fairest City in Georgia, seated at the bottom of a Mountain, at the foot of
which runs the River Cur. The City is encompassed with strong Walls, defended
with a large Fortress on the South Side; it contains about 14 Churches, six
belonging to the Georgians, and the rest to the Armenians. The Cathedral, which
is called Sion, is seated upon the bank of the River, built of all fair hewn
Stone. There is not a Mosque in Teflis, though the City belongs to a Mohammedan
Emperor, and governed by a Mohammedan Prince. The Bazars or Marketplaces are
very fair and large, built of Stone. The Inns or Caravansera's are no less
beautiful. The Princes Palace is one of the most beautiful Ornaments in Teflis,
it has been twice under the power of the Turks, once in the Reign of Ishmael
the second, King of Persia, and in the Reign of his Successor. Solomon took it
almost at the same time as he did Tauris.

The Kingdom of Caket is at present in subjection to the King of Persia,
governed by his Viceroy. The Cities are all Ruins, unless that which is called
Caket or Kaket.

In the Northern part of that Kingdom, the Amazons are supposed to have
inhabited. Ptol. fixes their Country in the Asiatick Sarmatia to the West of
Wolga. Quintius Curtius says also that the Kingdom of Thalestris was near to
the River Phasis; and Strabo, speaking of the Expeditions of Pompey and
Canidius, is of the same opinion.

Quiria borders upon the Caspian Sea; its chief Places are Derbent, Caucasiae
Portae, Plin. or Pylae Iberiae Ortel. Demir and Temir-Capi Turcis, Alexandria,
Portae Ferreae, and Caspiae Portae, of old, now belonging to the Persians; it
is a great Market for Slaves, and is a strong walled Town, said to be built by
Alexander the Great. And Tarky, at this day under the Duke of Moscovy. Some
Authors tell us of Stranu or Zambanach, which answers to ancient Albana, of
Zitach or Gorgora, thought to be the ancient Getara, or Gagara of Ptolomy, and
Chipeche to be the ancient Chabala.

It contains the Circassian and Dagestan Tartars: The Circassian Country is
very fertile, producing good store of Fruit and Grain, and also good pasture
Ground. The Men are very Corpulent and Robust, have broad Faces, but not
square, like the Crims and Calmucks; of a swarthy yellow Complexion, shaving
their Heads and Beards after a strange manner; a surly ill-natured People, good
Horse men: Their Arms are a kind of long Bow, which they handle with great
dexterity. Their Women are very fair and lovely, with Black Eyes, well
proportioned in their Bodies, of a middle Stature.

The Dagestan or Daghestan Tartars inhabit the Hilly Country, which lies
toward the Sea; the Men are in Shape and Habit much like the Circas-Tartars;
their Arms are Bow, Arrows and a Scimitar: When they ride out they have Spears
and Lances, a Helmet and Target; great Men-stealers, which they sell to the
Turks and Persians. The Dagestan Tartars are subject to several Princes and
Lords, who are independently sovereign.

About Derbent appear the Ruins of a Wall, which is said to reach as far as the
Euxin Sea; and in many places of the Country appear the Ruins of many Castles.

Schamachy, Sammachi and Summachi, the Cyropolis of Ptol. Circambate, Persis;
Cyseleth, Arabibus, was once a strong place, but in the wars of the Turks and
Persians, it was dismantled, and made an open Village. The Streets are narrow,
the Buildings low; it has a spacious Marketplace or Bogan, having several
Shops and Galleries, rich in Merchandises and Manufactories, but much subject
to Earthquakes.

Of the ISLANDS about ASIA MINOR.
map of Islands about Asia Minor CYPRI INSULA


SOme of these Islands have been very remarkable to Antiquity, others to us at
present. The most remarkable are:

1. Tenedos, Calydna and Leucophryn. Eust. Phenice and Lyrnessus Plin. Tenedo
Soph. which produce most excellent Muscadine Wines and cheap, situate near the
Mouth of the Hellespont opposite to Troy, famous for the concealing of the
Grecian Navy.

2. Metelino, Lesbos seu Mytlena, of old Antissa, Pelasgia, Macarea, Hemerte,
Lasia, Aegyra and Aethiope, Plin. and aliis. Its chief City is Meteline, which
for its greatness, and excellency of its Wine, gives Name to the Island. Here
was Sappho born, the Inventress of the Sapphick Verse: Pittacus, one of the
Sages of Greece; and Arion the Dolphin Harper.

3. Chios, of old Aetalia, Aethale, Macris and Pityusa, now Chio or Scio, by
the Turks Sacher, by the Persians Seghex, distant from the Ionian Shores about
four Leagues, in compass about 124 Miles. It affords excellent Fruits in
great plenty, but is most remarkable for its Music, for its Honey, for the
Church of its Convent of Niomene, once one of the fairest in the World, and for
the Sepulcher of Homer. It was given to the Gennues by the Emperor Andronicus
Palaeologus, and by them possessed Ann. 1565. It was by Selimus Secundus
fraudulently surprised and taken, and now subject to the Turks.

4. To the West of this Island lies Psyra, a small Island now called Psara,
witness of the unhappy Fate of a great part of the Venetian Fleet 1647. and the
loss of G. Grimani then drowned.

5. Icaria, now Nicaria, of old Doliche, Macris and Ichthiesa. It abounds in
Corn and Pasturage, in compass about 80 Miles, and is remarkable for the
Shipwreck of Icarus. The poorest, and yet the happiest, Isle of the whole
Aegean Sea; the Soil barren, but the Air healthful; their Wealth but small, but
their Liberty and Security great.

6. Samos is one of the greatest and most remarkable Islands of the
Archipelago, the Country of Pythagoras, and once a Kingdom, and governed by its
own Kings. It is now about 26 French Leagues in compass, and counts 18 Towns
and Villages.

The Ruins of the old City of Samos are six Miles in compass, over against the
old City, about a Mile distant, stands the new, now called Megale Chora, where
is the Residence of the Archbishop, lately in London, the Cadee Aga, etc. Mons
Cercetius, or the Mountain Kerkis is the highest of the whole Island, and is
covered with Snow almost all the Year, and has a Lake on the top well stored
with Eels.

The little Samos abounds with a Flower which has a fragrancy like Musk, and
has also this quality, that Time does not decay, but augment, the fragrancy of
its smell. This Flower is transplanted into the choicest Gardens of
Constantinople, and the Grand Signior wears it ordinarily in his Turbant.

Carlovasy is the second Town in the Island, having 500 Houses, and five
Churches, a place of great Trade to Sea, and yet their Port is so unsafe, that
they are forced to load their Vessels ashore, and so launch them off. Nor must
I forget the Samian Vessels, sovereign for diverse uses in Physic and
Surgery.

Between Nicaria and Samos, lie the noted Rocks once called Melanthii, now
Fornoli.

7. Pathmos, Palmosa, Soph. and Bell. now Patino, by Georgirenes, 36 Miles in
compass.

Once famous for the Residence of that great Apostle St. John, and for those
wonderful Revelations which that Evangelist had there, during his Banishment in
the time of the Persecution under Domitian, which to him indeed was Apocalypse,
but to all others Apocrypha.

The Port called Scala on the West side toward Naxos, is the best of all in
the Archipelago, near which is a Rock of a great height, called Cynops, from
the Magician in St. John's days. The Island is well stored with Vines,
Fig Trees, Lemon and Orange Trees, and Corn, but all subject to the Robbery of
Pirates, as well Christians as Mahometans; so that Poverty is their best
protection against Rapine, and Patience the only Remedy against their
Tyrannical Oppression.

8. Heron, now Lero, about 18 Miles in compass, noted for Aloes.

9. Claros, now Calamo, 40 Miles in compass, very mountainous, once sacred to
Apollo, abounding also with plenty of Aloes.

10. Cous, Cos, or Coa, formerly Meropes, Caria and Nymphaea, now Lango. Nig.
Stancora Turcis. It is in compass 70 Miles, furnished with sweet and pleasant
streams; and is famous for being the Birthplace of Hippocrates, the Reviver of
Physic, and Apelles the famous Painter.

11. Carpathos, now Scarpante, in compass 60 Miles, stored with the best Coral.

12. Rhodus, Ophivsa and Telchinis, Strab. Asteria, Aethraea, Trinacria,
Corymbia, Poessa, Atabyria, Macaria and Colossa, according to the Ancients, in
compass is 135 Miles. Its Soil fertile, its Air temperate; plentiful in all
things as well for Delight as Profit; full of excellent Pastures, adorned with
pleasant green Trees. The Sun is here so constant, that it was dedicated to the
Sun, and held sacred to Phoebus, to whom they erected that vast Colossus of
Brass, accounted one of the Seven Wonders of the World, said to be 50 Cubits in
height, every Finger as great as an ordinary Statue, and the Thumb too great to
be fathomed, made by Charetes of Lindus. It was 12 years a making, and 66 years
afterward thrown down by an Earthquake. 900 Camels were laden with the Brass
which was used about it to fasten and hold fast the Stones.

The Town or City is well fortified with a treble Wall, and five strong
Fortresses, embracing a most safe and admirable Haven, given to the Knights of
St. John de Acre, or Jerusalem, by Emanuel the Greek Emperor in the year 1308.
but in the year 1522. after it had been defended against the Infidels 214
years, it was taken by Solomon the Great, and after six Months Siege it was
surrendered, Villerius being the great Master, to the general dishonor of the
Christian Princes in their tardy Succors.

13. Cyprus, of old Crypta, or Crypton. Ptol. It was also called Cerastis,
Cethin and Cethina, then Amathusia, Paphia, Salaminia, Macaria, Citherea,
Achamantis, Asperia, Collinia and Erosa. It is in circuit, according to Strab.
427 Miles. To Plin. 375. From the rocky shore of Cilicia 60 Miles, and from the
Coast of Syria 100. During the Empire of the Persians and Macedonians, it
contained nine Kingdoms; but by Ptol. divided into four parts, Salamina,
Amathusia, Lapatha, and Paphia, so named of their principal Cities.

1. Salamis Ptol. Salamine Plin. was built by Teucer, when banished by his
Father Telamon.

Afterward called Constantia Steph. but destroyed by the Jews in the days of
the Emperor Trajan.

And lastly, by the Saracens in the Reign of Heraclitus, from the Ruins
whereof the Hamacostas, Fama Augusta, now Famagosta was erected by King Costa,
the Father of King Katharin, famous in Story for the unfortunate Valor of the
Venetians under the Command of Signior Bragadine, against the furious Assaults
of the Army of Selymus II. conducted by Mustapha, who caused them all to be
murdered but the Governor, whom he flead alive, after the Surrender of the
Place upon honorable Conditions.

In Lapathia, where once stood Tremithus, Trimethus Ptol. Tremisausa, or
Tremituge Soph. now stands the Regal City of Nicosia. Leucasia and Leucotheon
Graec. Ledrinsis and Leutheon Soph. of a circular Form, and five Miles in
circumference, taken by the aforesaid Mustapha Ann. 1570. with an uncredible
Slaughter.

North of this, and upon the Sea, stood Ceraunia or Ceronia, Cirynia, Plin.
Carynia and Cerinium Ortel. now Cerines, erected by Cyrus, a strong place, yet
yielded to the Turks before it was besieged.

Amathus, now Limiso, Sacred unto Venus, and wherein the Rites and Sacrifices
of her Adonis were annually celebrated, said to be built by Amasis, who was the
first that conquered Cyprus. Our late Navigations tell us, that Larricho is the
City from whence our Merchandise comes that is laden at Port Salines, or
Larneca, so called, of the abundance of Salt that is there made, and here the
Turk first landed his Army, the chief Port in Cyprus.

Further Westward is a Promontory, in form of a Peninsula, now called, Capo
delle Gatte, formerly Curias, from a City not far distant of the same Name, now
called Episcopia. On this Promontory is the Ruins of a Monastery of Greek
Coloieros, who breed up Cats to destroy Serpents, and to return home upon the
Sound of a Bell, and therefore by some called the Cape of Cats.

Phrurium Promont. now Bianco, is the place from whence they were thrown that
but presumed to touch Apollo's Altar in the adjoining Grove.

Paphos Nova, Ptol. Nea Paphos, Plin. Palaepaphos, Strab. and Mela Paphium
Polyb. now Buffo, or Bapho, built by Agapenor, five Miles from the old Paphos,
said, by Ovid, to be built by the Son of Pigmalion, by his Ivory Statue; such,
said to be, in regard of her Beauty. Others say it was built by Cyneras, Father
and Grandfather to Adonis, who having sworn to assist Menelaus with 50 Ships,
sent him only one, with the Models of the other in Clay, to color his Perjury.
Both places famous for the Worship of Venus, and the Sacrifices which her
Votaries of both Sexes did perform in their natural Nakedness: But her Temples
were razed to the Ground by the procurement of St. Barnaby, not only here, but
throughout the Island.

Eastwards of Capo St. Pifano, formerly Pro. Acamas, was the City Arsinoe, now
Lescare, Lusig. or Crisoca and Alessendretta, renowned for the Groves of
Jupiter.

This Island boasts of the Births of Asclapiades, Solon, Zeno the Stoic,
Apollonius and Zenophon. A Country abounding with all things necessary for
Life, and therefore called Macaria; and afforded matter to build a Ship from
the bottom of the Keel, to the top of her Top-gallant, and to furnish her with
Tackle and Munition. In Summer exceeding hot and unhealthy, annoyed with
Serpents. The Brooks, for Rivers it has none, are often exhausted by the Sun,
and for 36 years, in the time of Constantine, it never rained. It was first
possessed by the Sons of Japhet, paid Tribute to the Egyptian Amasis, conquered
by Belus, and governed by the Posterity of Teucer, until Cyrus expulsed the
nine Kings that there ruled. After the Grecians repossest the Sovereignty, and
kept it until the death of Nicocles; then it fell under the Government of the
Ptolomi's; then the wealth of it allured the Romans to make a Conquest of it;
restored to Cleopatra, and her Sister Arsinoe, by Antonius; but he overthrown,
it was made a Roman Province, and with the Transmigration of the Empire,
submitted to the Bizantine Emperors, governed by a Succession of Dukes for 800
years, when conquered by our Richard I. and given in Exchange, for the Titular
Kingdom of Jerusalem, unto G^y of Lusignan, in whose Family it continued until
Ann. 1473. It was then by Catharina Cornelia, a Venetian Lady, the Widow to
King James the Bastard, who had taken it by Force from his Sister Carl^tte,
resigned to the Venetians; who, 97 years after, lost it to the Turks, under
whose Yoke it now groaneth. It Is for the most part inhabited by Greeks, whose
Ecclesiastical Estate is governed by the Archbishop of Nicosia, and the 3
Bishops of Famagosta, Paphus and Amathus.

Its chief Mountain is Olympus, containing 50 Miles in its Basis, now called
the Mountain of the Holy Cross, clothed with Trees, and stored with Fountains
and Monasteries, possessed by the Greek Coloicres of the Order of St. Basil.

Its Commodities are Oil, and Grains of several sorts. Wine, that lasts for
eight years. Raisins of the Sun, Citrons, Oranges, Pomgranates, Almonds, Figs,
Saffron, Coriander, Sugar, Turpentine, Rhubarb, C^lloquintida, Scammony, etc.
Cotton, Woolls, Chamolets, Salt, Soap, Ashes.

There are Mines of Brass, some Gold and Silver, Green Soder, Vitriol, Alom,
Orpiment, White and Red Lead, and Iron, diverse kinds of precious Stones, viz.
the Emerald and Turkey.

Thus having described the chief places of the Ottoman Empire, I shall also
give a short account of their Government, Policy, Religion, etc.

In order whereunto, we need not so much regard their first coming out of
Scythia, Anno 577. nor when they seized on Armenia Major, giving it the Name of
Turcomania, Anno 844. nor when T^ingr^li^ix overthrew the Persian Sultan, 1030
nor yet when Cutlu Moses revolted from him, and made a distinct Kingdom in
Arabia: But when Ottoman, by strange Fortunes, and from small Beginnings,
swallowed up the other Families into the Ogusian Tribe, and united them into
one Head, Anno 1300. from thence must we deduce the first Foundation of the
Ottoman Empire: They had then no Government but what was Martial and Arbitrary
in the highest degree; wherefore it is not strange, if their Laws are Severe,
their Justice Rigor, their Government Tyranny: That their Emperor should be
absolute, uncontrollable; whose Speeches may be irrational, and yet Laws; whose
Actions irregular, and yet examples; whose Sentences and Judgments though
corrupt and inconsiderate, yet are irresistible Decrees.

So that when one reflects on the small reward for Virtue, and no punishment
for thriving Vice; how Men are raised by Flattery, Chance, and the sole Favor
of the Prince, to the weightiest and and most honorable Charges of the Empire,
without any previous deserts or experience of Parts or Abilities: When one
considers, that one Frown of their Prince cuts them off, that their Treasure is
their snare, and their Riches will inevitably effect their Ruin, though they
have all the Arguments of Faithfulness and Honesty; one might admire the long
contiuuauce of this vast Empire, and wonder at the increase of its Dominions.

But that which cements all Breaches, and cures the greatest Disorders, is the
quickness and severity of their Justice, which makes every Crime, relating to
Government equal, and punishes it with the last and extremest punishment,
Death. And to die by the Hand, or Command of the Grand Signior, with an entire
Resignation, is accounted the highest point of Matyrdom, the greatest reward of
Faithfulness, and the consummation of all honor. Otherwise this great Body
would burst with the Poison of its own ill Humors, and spread into ruinous
Divisions.

The Youths, that are designed for the great Offices of the Empire, are called
by the Turks Ichoglans, which are of Christian Parents, taken in the War, or
presented from remote Parts, so that they have no other Relations nor
Dependences; no other interest to serve, besides that of their Great Master, to
whom they are taught by Education, and compelled by necessity, to be faithful:
And indeed they are the best adopted Instruments for such a Tyrannick Prince,
whom he can raise without envy, and destroy without danger.

Their chiefest studies and learning is in Reading and Writing, being
instructed in the Arabian Tongue, wherein the secrets and treasure of their
Religon and Laws are contained, especially the Alcoran. The more Polite and
Ingenious learn the Persian Tongue, which fits them with Eloquence, corrects
the grossness, and inriches the barrenness of the Turkish Language.

They have some Books of Poetry, written both in Persian and Arabic; but as
for Logic, Physic, Metaphysick, and Mathematics, they are wholly ignorant of
them: Some certain Rules of Astrology they have, with which they busy
themselves in Prophesies of future Contingences in the Affairs of the Empire:
As for Geography, the wisest or greatest amongst them have not the least
inspection into it, nor durst their Seamen heretofore venture beyond sight of
Land, having little knowledge of the Art of Navigation until some improvement,
which of late they have made therein: As for History or Chronology, they
understand so little, that the most Learned affirm Job to be a Judge in
Solomon's Court, and that Alexander the Great was General of his Armies.

The Vizier Azem, or Prime Vizier, whose great Office of Charge and Trust, as
it is the highest, so it is the nearest to Jove's Thunderbolt, and most exposed
to Envy and Destruction. It being the Policy of the great Princes of the East
to constitute one on whom all the blame of miscarriages in Government might be
thrown, whilst they with the more freedom enjoy their Softness and Luxury. This
great Minister, as he is the Representative of the Grand Signior, because to
him all the power of the Sultan is immediately devolved; so he is the Head or
Mouth of the Law, and to him are all Appeals made, and his State and Greatness
lives in the Honor of him whom he represents, and his power, in respect of his
Inferiors, is as ample as his Masters, who gives it him. Next to this Vizier
Azem are the several Beglerbegs, which are so many general Governments, upon
which depend several Sangiacks or Provinces; there being in Turkey about 30
Beglerbegs, whereof 22 are Has, that is, such as have their Revenue allotted
them in the places that they govern, collected by their own Officers according
to Commission: Of which the first is Kiotahi or Choutaja of Anatolia, the
yearly Revenue of which is a Million of Aspers, and has under its Jurisdiction
14 Sangiacks, and the Command of 22 Castles. The 2d is at Cogni, or Iconium in
Caramania, whose Revenue is 660074 Aspers, and contains 7 Sangiacks, and 20
Castles. The 3d Diarbeker, or Sangiar, whose Revenue is a Million 200660
Aspers, and has 19 Sangiacks, of which 11 are properly belonging to the
Ottoman Royalties, and are Curdian Countries, called Hukenmet or Saline, which
have no Lords or Timariots to command them, but are absolute Masters of their
own Estates. The 4th is Scham or Damas, whose Revenue is a Million of Aspers,
and has 7 Sangiacks, and 5 Sangiacks Saline. The 5th is Siwas in Armenia,
which has 900000 Aspers Revenue, and 6 Sangiacks, and 19 Castles. The 6th is
that of Erzerum, on the Confines of Georgia, which has a Revenue of a Million
200660 Aspers, and contains 11 Sangiacks, and 13 Castles. The 7th is the
Government of Wan or Van in Media, of a Million 132209 Aspers, and has 14
Sangiacks. The 8th is Tehilder, on the Confines of Georgia, with a Revenue of
925000 Aspers, and 9 Sangiacks. The 9th is the Government of Scheherezul in
Assyria, which has a Million of Aspers, and 20 Sangiacks. The 10th is Halep,
or Aleppo, which has 877772 Aspers, and commands 7 Sangiacks, and 2 in which
are no Timariots. The 11th is Marasch, near the River Euphrates, being a
Revenue of 628450 Aspers, and commands 4 Sangiacks. The 12th is the Government
of Cyprus, or Kibros, allowed a Revenue of 500650 Aspers, and commands 7
Sangiacks, 4 with Has, and 3 with Saline, and 14 Castles. The 13th is Tripoly
of Syria, or Tarabolas Scham, has a Revenue of 800000 Aspers, and 4 Sangiacks.
The 14th is Trabizond, formerly the Imperial Seat of the Comneni, seated on the
Euxine Sea: This has no Sangiacks, but the Revenue is 734850 Aspers, with 14
Castles. The 15th is that of Kars, has a Revenue of 820650 Aspers, and
commands 6 Sangiacks. The 16th is that of Mosul, or Nineveh, in Assyria, a
Revenue of 681056 Aspers, and commands 5 Sangiacks. The 17th is of Rika, has a
Revenue of 680000 Aspers, and 7 Sangiacks: These are the Beglerbegs in Asia. Of
those in Europe, the 18th, viz. that of Rumuli is the most honorable, the Seat
of the Pasca or Basha is at Sophia, it has a Million and 100000 Aspers yearly
Revenue, commands 24 Sangiacks, whereof Morea was one though now made part of
the Revenue of the Queen Mother. The 19th is the charge of the Kupudan, or
General of the White Seas, whose Revenue is 885000 Aspers; he is Admiral of the
Turkish Fleet, and commands 13 Sangiacks, whose Residence is at Galipoli. The
20th is that of Buda in Hungary, it commands 21 Sangiacks. The 21st is that of
Temeswaer, and has 7 Sangiacks. The 22d is that of Bosna, now called
Sclavonia, which commands 8 Sangiacks. Those that are with Salary, or paid out
of the Grand Signior's Treasury, are first that of Grand Cairo or Misir, who
has a Revenue of 600000 Scheriffs or Zechins a year, and commands 6 Sangiacks,
besides as much is the Tribute paid the Grand Signior, and another Sum of
600000 Zechins yearly goes for the payment of the Turks. The 2d is the
Government of Bagdet or Babylon, which has a Revenue of a Million and 700000
Aspers, and commands 22 Sangiacks. The 3d is that of Yemen in Arabia Felix,
whose place of Residence is Aden, upon the Red Sea, which is now under the
power of the Arabians. As is also the Government of Habelch, upon the Confines
of the Abissines, now wholly lost to the Turk. And the Government of Bosra, or
Balsera, a Maritime City in the Sinus Persicus, where were reckoned 26
Sangiacks, but now the Turks have no power there. Lastly, the Government of
Labse, on the Confines of Ormus, where are 6 Sangiacks, but poor and
inconsiderable.

To these, we should add the Governments of Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoly in
Barbary, but these are now much fallen off from the Turk's obedience, and
almost independent, and subsisting of themselves.

Besides the Dominions of the Grand Signior already mentioned, he possesses
Suaquem upon the Red Sea; Dolfar and Elcalif, Asaph or Azac, at the Mouth of
Don; Temrock, near the Palus Meotis; Caffa, and other places in Lesser Tartary;
Bessarabia, Ocziacow, and Dussan, toward the Mouth of the Nieper, and the
Kingdoms of Zibit and Ziden, in Arabia the Happy. All which may be seen in the
following Map.

map of Turkish Empire A New Map of the TURKISH EMPIRE By Robt. Morden


So that in less than 300 Years, the Turks have made Conquests in Europe, Asia,
and Africa, as considerable as those of the Romans, who spent 850 ere they
accomplished theirs.

The delightful Fields of Asia, the pleasant Plains of Greece, the Plenty of
Egypt, the Fruitfulness of the Nile, the Luxury of Corinth, the Substance of
Peloponnesus, Lemnos, Scio, with other Isles of the Egean Sea, the Spices of
Arabia, the Riches of great part of Persia and Georgia, all Armenia and
Assyria, the Provinces of Asia Minor, the Countries of Syria, Palestine and
Phoenicia, the Principalities of Moldavia, Valachia, Romania, Bulgaria, Servia,
and the best part of Hungaria, concur altogether to satisfy the appetite of
this Turkish Sultan; all the Extent of this vast Territory, the Lands and
Houses, as well as the Castles and Arms being all his, and at his sole Disposal
and Gift; only to Lands dedicated to Religious Uses he disclaims all Right, and
will not (to the shame of our Sectaries) violate the Penetralia of the
Sanctuary.

The absolute and unlimited Power of this Prince is evident by his Titles, as,
God on Earth, The Shadow of God, Brother to the Sun and Moon, The Giver of all
Earthly Crowns, etc. And it is an ordinary saying, That the Grand Signior is
above the Law, that the written Law is controulable, that his Mouth is the Law
itself, and the power of an infallible Interpretation is in him.

It is vulgarly known to all, that their Law was compiled by Mahomet, with the
help of Sergius the Monk, whose infamous Life is particularly recorded by many
Authors, and too tedious to be repeated here: I shall therefore only say, that
though there is a great diversity amongst Doctors, as touching the Explanation
of their Law; yet there are five Articles or Fundamentals thereof, to which
every Turk is obliged. 1. Cleanness in the outward parts of the Body and
Garments. 2. To make Prayers five times a day. 3. To observe their Ramazan, or
monthly Fast. 4. To perform faithfully the Zekat, or giving of Alms. 5. To make
their Pilgrimage to M^cha, if they have means and possibility to perform it.
The sole Article of Faith required to be believed, is, That there is but one
God, and Mahomet his Prophet.

When Mahumetanism was first weak, and therefore put on a modest Countenance
and plausible Aspect to deceive Mankind, then it courted and favored the
Christian Religion, drawing its Tenants and Doctrines in some Conformity to
that Rule, confessing Christ to be a Prophet and greater than Moses, that he
was born of a Virgin, etc. But as soon as its Government increased, and that by
Arms and bad Arts the Grand Signior had secured his Kingdom; his promises of
Toleration and Indulgence were changed into a harsher Note, and his Edicts were
then for Blood and Ruin; what knots of Argument he could not untie, he cut,
and made his Spiritual Power as large as his Temporal. Yet toward his
Followers, he rendered his Precepts easy and pleasant, acceptable to the Fancy
and Appetite, as well as to the Capacity, of the Vulgar: Representing Heaven to
them not in a spiritual manner, or Delights unexpressible, and Ravishments
known only in part to illuminated Souls; but with gross Conception of the
Beauty of Women, of the Duration of one Act of Carnal Copulation, of the
beastly Satisfaction of a gluttonous Palate: And that Persuasion and Principle
in their Catechism, That the Souls of those who die in the Wars against
Christians are therefore immediately transported to Paradise, must necessarily
whet the Swords, and raise the Spirits of the Soldiers, and is the Reason they
run so eagerly to their own Slaughter, esteeming their Lives and Bodies at no
greater price than the value of Stones and Rubbish to fill Rivers and Ditches.

The Mufti is the principal Head of the Mohammedan Religion, or Oracle of all
doubtful Questions in their Law, and is of great esteem amongst the Turks. When
he passes determination in any Case, it is brought to the Cadie or Judge, and
the Grand Signior himself will in no wife contradict or oppose it; so that
Lawsuits of the greatest moment are concluded in an hour without Arrest of
Judgment, Appeals, or other dilatory Arts of Law.

The State of Marriage is accounted both Honorable and Holy amongst the Turks,
yet the Priest or Churchman has the least hand in the Solemnity, but it is
performed by the Cadie or Judge. Polygamie is freely indulged to them by their
Religion, as far as the number of four Wives. And lest this Confinement should
seem a restriction of their Liberty, and free use of Women, every one may
besides enjoy his Women Slaves, which is not much envied by the Wives, so long
as they enjoy their due Maintenance, and a reasonable share in their Husbands
Bed: For if neglected above a Week, she has Remedy by Law; and if she be so
modest not to sue for the Default, she is often so ingenious to contrive a
supply of her Wants, being accounted the most lascivious of Women, and excel in
the most refined and ingenious Subtilties to steal their Pleasure, which, if
discovered, the Blood of her Family is reckoned tainted and disgraced; but the
Husband, getting a Divorce, quits himself of his Wife and Dishonor together.

Amongst all the Privileges that the Sultan enjoys above his Subjects, this
one he has less than they, that he cannot marry, yet has as many Women as
serves his use, though never so libidinous, which are kept in the Seraglio,
like Horses in Stables.

Circumcision is not reckoned one of the five Points which constitute a true
Mohammedan Believer, but is only proposed as a trial and proof of Man's
obedience to the more necessary parts of the Law.

They never Circumcise their Children until the Age of 7 years, and upwards;
and then they do it by a Barber or Chyrurgion.

The Forces of the Turks are very numerous, their Armies well disciplined, and
the Belief of Predestination, besides the use of Opium, makes them bold to
undertake any Enterprise. Their Militia is of two sorts, one receives
maintenance from certain Lands bestowed on them by the Grand Signior: And these
again are either Zaims or Timariots, which together may amount to about 100000
Men, and come under the general denomination of Spahi's, and compose the
Turkish Horse.

The other sort, which receive their constant Pay in ready Money out of the
Grand Signior's Treasury, are the Janissaries, who are now increased to the
Number of an 100000, and the next main Sinew of the Ottoman Power; being
considered in the Wars, they are the best disciplined Soldiery of the Turkish
Camp.

Besides these in Egypt, there are 20000 Horse paid at the Charge of the
Country, and 80000 Timariots. The Crim Tartars are also to furnish him with an
100000 Men, and the Prince in person to lead them, if the Grand Signior come
into the Field, otherwise but half the number. And the Princes of Valachia,
Moldavia, and Transylvania, are never excused from personal attendance in the
Camp with 6 or 7000 Men apiece.

But the Ottoman Armies are not now so renowned for their Chivalry and
Discipline, as in former times; that ancient Sublimity and Majesty of the
Sultan is much abated, their Forces by Land decayed, their Maritime power
weakened, nothing remains of their ancient Government and Valor; nor does the
Ottoman Court remunerate the Services, exalt the Interest of the Cavalry, or
maintain the Reputation of the Janissaries; but grown rich and luxurious with
Peace and Plenty, they are much declined from their Greatness and Power; for in
this vast and large Empire Countries are depopulated, Villages abandoned, whole
Provinces, as pleasant and fruitful as Tempe or Thessaly, uncultivated and
turned into a Desert or Wilderness.

Of ARABIA.
map of Arabia A New Map of ARABIA By Robt. Morden


THE Arabians were first called Ishmaelites, from Ishmael: Then Sa^^^^s, from
Sarah the Wife of Abraham: Though others derive the Name from Saara, which
signifies a Desert: Others from Sarake, which signifies Robbery. They that
deduce the Etymology from Sarah, affirm, That the Sarazens, being at first
called Agarens, chose rather to bear the Mistresses than the Servants Name, and
so changed their Appellation.

The Arabians, that live in Cities, go by the Names of Moors. They that live in
the Deserts are divided into Tribes, and every Tribe into Families, which have
every one a particular Cheik, who acknowledges the supreme Cheik. These
vagabond Arabians boast themselves to be the most noble People in the World;
for which Reason, they never ally themselves with any other Nation but their
own. They could never be subdued either by the Egyptians, Persians, Greeks,
Romans, or Turks: But, on the contrary, they have settled themselves in several
parts of Africa, where they have a large Dominion. They wander up and down in
that fashion, the better to find out Pasturage for their Cattle, and to free
themselves from the oppression of the Turks. The Basha's of the Grand Signior,
who are their Neighbors, and the Caravans, are forced to give money to the
Cheiks, to preserve themselves from being molested or despoiled by them in
their Journies. Under Ulit, one of the Caliphs, or Arabian Princes, their
Empire extended from Messa, upon the Atlantic Sea, to the River Indus; so that
in length it exceeded the Roman Empire.

The Arabic Language is so enchanting, that it is a common Hyperbole, That the
Saints in Heaven, and those in Paradise, speak it: And as in it the Holy
Decalogue was given, so, as an Allay, therein was hatched the Delusive Alcoran,
and therefore is generally received in Asia.

These Arabians, because of their continual lying in the open Fields, were once
accounted the best Astrologers and Physicians in the World, as Rhasis and
Mesue, Avicen and Averroes Philosophers; Algazal^^; Hali, Albumazar
Astrologers, great Geographers Leo and Abulf^da.

The Beduins and Bengebres, who are the most known People, are so inclined to
Robbery, that their principal Maintenance consists in plundering of Passengers,
claiming a Privilege to demand Ishmael's Right from the Sons of Isaac. They
are very dextrous on Horseback in managing their Bows and Half-Pikes, so that
Thirty Turkish Musketeers will hardly attack Ten of these Arabians armed after
their manner.

Their Wealth consists in Herds of Cattle and Horses, which will travel great
Journies; of which they make so great reckoning, that they keep a Register of
their Breed, which is approved by certain Judges.

They sit at Meals upon their Heels; and the oldest among them wears the
richest Habit, and the most gay Colors. Their Predecessors forbad Building,
and Tilling their Lands; alleging, that were but to invite Enemies to invade,
and make them a Prey to enjoy it.

The Succession of the Kingdom belongs to that Noble Person who was first born
after the King was proclaimed. And, indeed, to compare the Manners and Maxims
of the Asiaticks and Europeans together, we may say, That the Arabians are like
the Italians, the Persians like the French, and the Turks like the Spaniards.

Arabia, in general, was first called Ethiopia, is subject to such excessive
Heats, that People are constrained generally to Travel by Night. There are
abundance of Mountains, but few Rivers. It is divided into three parts. The
Stony, the Desert, the Happy. The two first belong almost, to the Turk; the
Happy Arabia acknowledges several petty Princes.

The Stony Arabia Barraab, Nabathaea Ptol. Barrha Castald. Bengaucal Zeigler.
Rathal-Albagh incolis, was anciently possessed by the Midianites, Moabites,
Amalekites, and the Idumeans, or Edomites. The Lands of the Ammonites or
Amorites, and of Og King of Basan, were parts of Arabia Petraea; though it be
also true, that some part of Arabia Deserta belonged to the Ishmaelites and
Amalekites, the Inhabitants thereof at this time pay a Tribute to the Basha of
Cairo. Petra gave it its Name, which signifies a Rock, whereon it was built,
was a place of great strength, and much noted as well in Holy Writ, as in
profane History. Besieged in vain by Severus, and before him by Trajan, who
was compelled to throw away his Imperial Habit, and fly for his Life.

Yet Amaziah, King of Judah, after he had slaughtered 10000 of the Edomites,
took it by War, and called it Joktheel, 2 Kings 14.7.

The Soldans of Egypt, for the exceeding strength thereof, kept therein all
their Treasures. Of this place, see more in the Description of Canaan, and the
bordering Countries.

Bostra, now Bussereth, is a place of good Esteem, I suppose the same with
Petra.

Tor, or El Tor, upon the Red Sea, is a pitiful Haven, defended by a
Apiece Castle; near to it are found Champignons, petrified white Coral,
Seal-skins, Small Oysters, and sometimes Sea Monsters like Men. They report that
this was the Haven Ezion Geber, from which Solomon sent his Ships for Ophir.
Mount Horeb and Sinai are famous in Scripture.

Arabia the Desert, or Beriara, is a place almost quite destitute of Water; or
if there be any Wells, the Water is for little service Ana upon the Euphrates
(the place where the Grand Signior's Tribute is paid, as the Lord of the
Country) is the best place in it. There is one King in Arabia that has a moving
and portative City, that is to say, it consists in Tents, which he can command
them to carry where he pleases. Sumiscasac is thought to be the ancient Saba,
whence the Magi set forth to adore Christ, and the Queen to visit Solomon.

But Sir Thomas Herbert tells us, That after the Flood Nimrod Sovereignizing at
Babylon, his Brother Havilah seated his Colony in Susiana, Seba, Raamah, and
Sabbata, in Arabia. Seba or Sheba fixed on the Western Coast adjacent to the
Red Sea, where he built a City after his own Name, from whence the Queen came
that visited Solomon, as he supposes.

That Sabata planted the South-part of Arabia; and Raamah, or Rhegma, on the
North-East part toward Balsera, where they built Cities after their Names,
mentioned Ezekiel. 27.

In these parts was the Wilderness where the Children of Israel wandered 40
years. Here Moses established Ecclesiastical and Political Laws. Here was the
burning Bush, the Water-bearing Rock, the Mountains of Sinai and Horeb, and
Mount Hor where Aaron died.

The Happy Arabia, Hyaman or Aiman. Gemen or Giamen Turcis, Marmotta,
Sarracenis; Sabaea, Plin. carries that Name, as being a more fruitful Soil than
either of the two. It breeds excellent Horses, Manna, Cinnamon, Myrrh, Balsam,
Benjamin, Incense, and other Perfumes; so that if Aromatic Gums, Succulent
Fruits, Fragrant Flowers, and such sort of Delicacies please thy Sense, say,
Arabia is the Phoenix of the East, and with Danaeus, The Epitome of Delight,
and with St. Austin, Paradise. The Air is temperate and healthful. The Country
enriched with pleasant Streams and Fountains, whose Waters are Medicinal.

Aden is a Town of great Trade, standing in a little Peninsula, at the foot of
a Mountain guarded with two Castles toward the North, and a small Fortress at
the Entry into the Haven. The Portugueses, when they first settled themselves in
the Indies, had a design to make themselves Masters of this City, as also of
Ormus and Malaca. But the Turk prevented them from taking Aden, the King
whereof they hung at the Yards-Arm of the Admiral's Gally. Since which, some
other Revolutions have happened, so that the Natives of the Country have again
dispossessed the Turks. Mecca and Me^ina are famous for the Pilgrimages of the
Mahometans: For which they that make them, are in high esteem among the rest.
They go particularly to Mecca, to pay their Devotions to a Apiece House,
which they call The House of God, and pretend the same to have been built by
Abraham. This City, containing about 6000 Houses, stands about a days Journey
from the Red Sea, being the place where Mahomet was born, whose Body was
afterward translated to Medina, upon the discovery of Albuquerque the
Portuguese's design to have surprised the Port of Ziden, otherwise Gidde, with
an intention to have carried away that Mohammedan Relic. The Country about
Mecca produces abundance of that sort of Berry of which Coffee is made.

Kufa, or Kalufa the Holy City, called Rastack, when walled by Omir, the Burial
place of Mortis-Ali, Saint, King and Prophet of the Persians.

Medina is three days Journey from the Red Sea, the burying place of Mahomet, as
the Turks pretend. The Sepulcher or Tomb wherein Mahomet lies, is enclosed
within an Iron Grate, and covered with Green Velvet, which is every Year made
new, and sent by the Grand Signior, the old one being by the Priests cut in
little pieces, and sold at great Rates, as Relics, to the Pilgrims. In the
Temple where this Tomb is placed, there are said to be 3000 Lamps of Gold and
Silver, wherein is Balsam, and other rich Odors, Ointments and Oils continually
kept burning. They would impose it for a Miracle, that his Tomb should hang in
the Air by means of the Loadstone: But besides that there is no such thing,
were it true, there were no wonder in it: For Democrates the Athenian, by the
Order of Ptolomy King of Egypt, undertook to make the Statue of Arsinoe all of
Iron, and to hang it up in the same manner. And in the Temple of Serapis in
Alexandria, there was an Iron Sun that hung in the Air by the force of a
Loadstone, being a rare piece of Workmanship.

The Prince of Mecca, called Sultan Sheriff, is one of the most potent Princes
in all Arabia: His Residence is usually at Almacharana, seated on the top of an
high Mountain of difficult access.

Sanaa is one of the greatest, fairest, and strongest Towns of Arabia, adorned
with Vineyards, Meadows and Gardens.

Dafar is one of the chief Ports upon the Red Sea, next to Zibit near the mouth
of the Red Sea, which is Fair, Rich, and of great Trade for Drugs, Spices,
Perfumes, etc. Once the Residence of a Turkish Beglerbeg, before that the Seat
of a King, beheaded by the Turks, at the same time when the King of Aden was
hanged at the Yards-Arm of the Admiral's Ship. The Ports of Dolfar and Pescher
are most renowned on the South-Coast for Frankincense. The Grand Signior, the
Persian Sophi, and other Mohammedan Monarchs, oft-times send him Presents, and
the first allows him also some part of the Revenue of Egypt, because he is of
the Race of Mahomet, and to oblige him to be kind to the Pilgrim Turks.

Fartach, a Kingdom and City near the Sea, Caxem, Gubelhaman, Alibinali,
Amanziridin, Masfate, Mascalat and Jemen are so many Sultanies or petty
Kingdoms in the Happy Arabia: Mascate, or Mascatsaif, not far from Rozelgate,
Corodanum Ptol. Macin Amian. thought to be Rhaguma, Rhegma of Ptol. the Raamah
of Ezekiel. 27.22. formerly belonging to the Portuguese, had, for a long time, all
the Trade of the Indies to Mecca, through the convenience of the Cities
Elcatif, or the ancient Gerra, which communicates its Name to the Persian
Gulf, and Labsa, or Lazarch. Sohar in the Eastern part had also formerly the
Trade, but since the same has been translated to Ormus and Gombron. Mocha upon
the Red Sea is an open City, indifferently well built, and fortified with a
small Castle. In it there live Jews, Persians, Armenians, Indians, and Banians:
So that it is a Town of great Commerce; and there it is, that all the Pilgrims
land that come from the Indies to Mecca. It has also much increased in Riches
and Repute, in regard that the Vessels that come from Sues to Aden, rather
choose to unlade there, to avoid the dangerous passages of Babel-Mandel, Diodori
Insula. Arrian. test Rhamusio.

OF PERSIA.
map of Persia A New Map of PERSIA by Robt. Morden


THE Kingdom or Empire of Persia, is at present, one of the greatest and most
famous of all Asia; yet is but a part of the ancient Empire of the Persians;
for the Assyrian Monarchy contained all that which both Turk and Persian at
this day possess in that part of the World: And beginning under Ninus, lasted
13 or 1400 years, ending in that Notorious and Effeminate Epicure, Sardanapalus.

After which it was divided into that of the Medes and Babylonians, who
continued it less than 300 Years. Then the Persians made themselves Masters of
it during 200 and odd Years, under Cyrus Son of Cambyses, Son of Cyrus, Son of
Darius, Son of Achamenes, Son of Perses, who says Isidore gave Persia its
Name. In Nimrod's days, called Chusa, or Cuth; in Chedorlaomers, and to
Daniel's time Elam; afterward Persia, from Persius, Son of Perseus, a Grecian
Hero, Son to Jupiter, by Danae the Daughter of Acrisius. Afterward called
Arsaca, from Arsaces the Heroic Parthian. After by the Inhabitants, Artea. By
the Tartars, Corsaca. By the Arabians, Saracdnea. By the Turks, Azamia and
Axmia. Farsi and Farsistan Incolis.

The Macedonians and Greeks succeeded; for having ruined the Empire of the
Persians, they gave a beginning to that of the Macedonians: But Alexander the
Great held this Empire but few Years, and dying, it was Cantonized out among
his Captains, who, taking the Title of Kings, waged War against each other,
till the Romans seized the Western, and the Parthians the Oriental part of that
Monarchy.

These Parthians freed themselves from the Rule of the Macedonians 250 Years
before the Birth of Christ, and Reigned near 500 Years.

Artaxerxes restored the Persian Government 228 Years after Christ's Nativity.
About the Year 605, the Caliph of Bagdat, Omar or Hoshmar the Third after
Mahomet, became Master of it. So that Persia, after a long uninterrupted
Succession of 28 Kings from Artaxerxes, sets in an eclipsed Cloud, and becomes
fettered under the Iron Yoke of a Saracenick Bondage, once garnished with 22
Kingdoms, formidable to the Roman Emperors, and Mistress of the greatest part
of Asia.

In the Year 1257 or 8, the Tartars exterminated the whole Race of the Caliph
of Bagdat. And in the Year 1472. the Turcomans of Armenia got the Kingdom. But
about the Year 1505, Ishmael Sophi once more re-established the Persians in the
possession of the Oriental part of that ancient Empire, which now extends from
the Tygris and Euphrates on the West, almost to the River Indus on the East;
And from the Persian Gulf, and the River Oxus on the North, to the Persian and
Indian Seas on the South.

But that you may the better understand the full Extent of the Dominions of
this large Kingdom, I shall give you the true Number of the Provinces of the
whole Continent of Persia, according to the old and new Descriptions of several
Geographers.

And first the old Names by Cluver. were Gedrosia, Carmania, Drangana,
Aracosia, Paropamisis, Bactriana, Margiana, Hyrcania, Aria, Parthia, Persis,
Susiana, Assyria, Media.

The new Names Sarc. Cusistan, Elaran, Farsi, Arac, Elsabar, Diargument,
Corason, Sablestan, Candahor, Sigestan, Chesimur, Kirman, Goadel.

2. By Baudran, old Names, Media, Hyrcania, Margiana, Assyriae pars, Susiana,
Parthia, Aria, Paropanisus, Chaldea, Persia, Caramania, Drangiana, Arachosia,
and Gedrosia.

The new Names are Servan. Gilan. Dilemon. Ayrack Agemi. Taberestan, Gorgian,
Rhoemus, Churdistan, Corasan, Yerack, Cusistran, Farsi, Kherman, Sisistan,
Macheran, Candahor, and Sablestan.

1. Therefore this Monarch possesses a great part of the great Armenia, which
we call Turcomania, especially that part which is seated between the two Rivers
Kur and Aras, the Cyrus and Araxes of old: This Country is one of the most
beautiful and richest pieces of Land in all Persia, by the Natives called Iran
or Karahag.

2. Shirvan or Schirwan all along the Caspian Sea, part of Media Atropatia.

3. The Province Edzerbaijan or Azerbeyan; And these two Provinces make up the
ancient Media, Sarch Clu.

4 Is Kylan or Guilan, Persis, which is the old Hircania, Strava M. Angiol.
Diargument Merc. Hyrach. Eryth, and comprehends several other Provinces, as
Mesandran, Lahetzan, Rescht and Kesker.

5. Is Estarabad, Tabristan, or Tocharistan, formerly Margiana, Jeselbash Cast.
Tremigan Pineto, which extends to the River Oxus.

6. Zagathay or Sacathay Nig. is the Province of the Ousbec Tartars or
Mauranahar, comprehending all the ancient Sogdiana, and part of Bractiana, etc.

7. Corassan, Sernere Merc. is some part of Bactriana, now Batter Ramus.
Charossan. Castald. which also comprehends the Province of Heri, or Eri,
remarkable for the greatest Trade of any in Persia. The Aria of old.

8. Sablestan, formerly Paropamifus. Calchistan Cast. Navagrat M. P. Ven.

9. The Territories and Cities of Candahor and Cabul, comprehend the ancient
Aracosia, now belonging to the Mogul.

10. Is Sigistan Marc. formerly Drangiana; aliis Ilment.

11. Is Kirman, or Chermain, and comprehends all the Territories of the ancient
Carmania bordering upon the Indian Sea, containing the Province of

12. Makeran, wherein is Circan, Patan, and the Desert of Dulcinda.

13. Chusestan Mind. Chus Merc. which was heretofore called Susiana.

14. Is Hierack, or Erack Agemi, the ancient Parthia, Nig. Charessen, and lies
in the midst of all Persia, Arach Merc. and Minad. Tex. Alph. Hadr.

15. Is Fars, (which Laet calls Farc,) Farsistan Merc. and is the ancient
Persia, whereof Persepolis was the chief City.

16. Is Diarbeck, Merc. Azamia Bell. formerly Mesopotamia, between Euphrates and
Tygris.

17. Is Curdistan, or Arzerum, formerly Assyria, extending all along the
East Side of the River Tygris, from the Lake Van, to the Frontiers of Bagdat.

18. Is Yerack, or Hierack-Arabi, otherwise the Country of Babylon, or Chaldea.
These three last Countries being most now under the Turkish power, we have
already discoursed thereof.

The Government of Persia is Despotick, or absolutely Arbitrary, the King
having the sole power of Life and Death over all his Subjects, without any
Trials, or Law-proceedings. Nor is there any Sovereign in the World more
Absolute than He; yet, in the exercise thereof, it is said to be gentle and
easy, supportable both to Persians and Strangers. And for the Laws of
Hospitality, they are so strictly observed, that the King will have all
Strangers to be his Guests. The general Title given to the Kings of Persia is
that of Sha, though the Vulgar call him by the Name of the Sophi, which is a
proper Name. The Persians had ever a very great Veneration for their Sovereign.
And, at this day, they believe it to be a greater Asseveration to swear by the
Name of their King, than by the Name of their God, perhaps out of the same
Belief with those of Achem in Sumatra, who say, that God is far off, but the
King is near at hand. The Wealth of this King is very vast, as appeared by the
Treasure which Alexander found in the Coffers of Darius. And to descend toward
our Times, Sha Sephi, one of their last Kings, had no less than 7400 Marhes of
gold-Plate for the ordinary Service of his Court.

The King deceasing, the Eldest Son ascends the Throne, whilst his Brothers are
kept in the Haram, and their Eyes put out; and oftentimes the Children of the
King's Brothers and Sisters also, to avoid Competition for the Sovereignty, and
Rebellion.

The State of Persia is distinguished, like most of the European States, into
three Bodies.

The first of the Sword, which answers to the Nobility.

The second is that of the Gown, which answers to the Law and Religion.

The third is composed of Merchants, Handicraftsmen, and Laborers.

The Athemat Doulet is the Prime Minister in Temporals, the Sedre in
Spirituals, whose Offices are much the same with the Grand Visier's and the
Mufty in Turkey.

The greatest part of the Lands in Persia belong to the King, and are farmed by
private persons, the rest are measured, and pay so much a measure. The King
has also a vast Income by Merchandises that pay Custom and Toll.

The Commerce of this mighty Empire consists in the Trade of the Country, and
Foreign Traffic. The Country Trade is in the hands of Persians and Jews. The
Foreign Trade in the hands of the Armenians, who are Factors for the King and
Noblemen.

Their Commodities are curious Silks, exquisite Carpets and Tissues, with other
Manufactures of Gold, Silk and Silver, great quantities of Linen Cloth of all
sorts of Colors. Their Seal-skins and Goat Skins are transported by the
Hollanders into India and Japan, as also into Moscovy and Poland. The famous
Ronas Root is transported over all India, great store of dried Fruits, of
candid Quinces, and Boxes of Marmalet made at Balsera: Fruits pickled in
Vinegar, sweet Water, Almonds, Raisins, and purgative Prunes; They vend
abundance of their Camels into Turkey, great store of Horses and Mules into
India, and a prodigious number of Sheep and Lambs into Natolia and Romania.

The natural Complexion of the Persians is Tawney, as may be seen by the
Gaures, the original Inhabitants of the Country; but the present Persians, by
reason of their frequent Marriages with fair Georgian Women, have contracted a
better degree of Comeliness and Beauty.

The Justice among them is very exact and speedy, Suits being determined upon
the place. Murder severely punished, and extraordinary Care taken for the
security of the Highways, for Thieves find no mercy; and if a Merchant be
robbed, the Governor of the Province makes good the Loss.

The Air of Persia varies according to the diversity of its situation; the
Country of Edzerbeitzan is very sharp and cold, but healthy; the Air of Kilan
is very unwholsom, but the Province of Mazandran, from September to March,
seems a kind of Terrestrial Paradise. At Ispahan in the middle of Persia, there
are six months of hot, and six months of cold weather. In the Southern
Provinces the Heats are very excessive: In some parts the Snow falls three or
four times in a Season, and sometimes very thick, but Rain there is very little.
As for Woods, there are none in all the Country; and Springs are very scarce to
Travelers. It Is a Country generally mountainous, out of some of which they dig
Salt, as Stones out of a Quarry; and there are some Plains there, where the
Sand is nothing but Salt. Of late several Copper Mines have been found out, of
which the Natives make all sort of Kitchen Household Stuff; their Lead comes
from Kerman, their Iron and Steel from Corazan and Kasbin; some Mines of Gold
and Silver there were, but the Expense is more than the Profit. The Provinces
of Guilan and Mazandran furnished all Persia with Oil. Armenia, Mengrelia,
Georgia and Media abound in Vineyards, but their Vines they bury all Winter,
and take them up in the Spring. The Flowers of Persia are not comparable to
those of Europe for Variety or Beauty, nor are their Apples, Pears, Oranges,
Granates, Prunes, Cherries, Quinces, Chestnuts, Medlers, and other sorts of
Fruits so well tasted as ours; yet their Apricots, the better sort are better
than ours, which when you open, the Stone cleaves in two, and the Kernel, which
is only a small Skin as white as Snow, is most pleasant to the Taste; so
likewise their Melons are most excellent, very plentiful, and more wholesome than
ours.

Their Fowl are much the same as we have in Europe, and their Poultry are very
plentiful, only there are no Turkies. All sorts of Waterfowl are common in
some parts of the Country, and as for Birds of Prey it wants none.

The Native Inhabitants are generally very inquisitive after future Events,
consulting their Astrologers like Oracles; much addicted to ill Language, but
never blaspheme God, nor subject to swear; naturally great Dissemblers and
Flatterers, excessive in their Luxury and Expenses, much accustomed to Tobacco
and Coffee, and to make mutual Visits; generally addicted to Play and Pastimes,
yet Men never dance, nor do they use walking to and again as we do.

The two great Sects amongst the Followers of Mahomet (which are most violent
against each other,) are the Turks and Persians. The first hold Mahomet to be
the chief and ultimate Prophet; the later prefer Haly before him, and esteem
his Inspirations greater, and his Interpretations of the Law more perfect and
divine; and their grand Festival is the Feast of Hocen and Husscin. The King
permits the Carmelites, Capuchins, Austin-Fryers, and other Orders, to have
their Houses and Churches in his Royal City of Ispahan, where their Superiors
live in nature of Ambassadors for the Christian Princes: They are as
superstitious as the Turks, and believe material enjoyments in Paradise, though
others, more refined, affirm, That Beatitude consists in the perfect knowledge
of the Sciences; and for the Senses, they shall have their satisfaction
according to their quality.

Their Women are esteemed the handsomest in all Asia; their Horse the nimblest,
their Camels the strongest: And in the Country they commend the Bread of
Yezdecas, the Wine of Schiras, and the Women of Yez'd.

The Persian Language is so sweet, that it is only in use among the Women and
Poets, the King and the Nobility generally speaking the Turkish Tongue.

The greatest Trade is at Bagdat for Turkey, and at Gombron for the Indies. The
Kings of Persia permit Strangers to trade upon their Coasts, but not to build
Forts: And the Mogul and Emperor of China observe the same Policy in their
Dominions. They lie between two potent Neighbors, the Turk and the Great Mogul.
The strength of their Kingdom consists chiefly in its Situation, being
surrounded by high Mountains, and vast Deserts. Ishmael Sophi brought into the
Field an Army of 300000 Men against Selim Emperor of the Turks. And other
Persian Kings have had Armies of 7 or 800000 Men: But generally their Armies
now adays consist not of above 50 or 60000 Horse, besides 30000 which are
always kept upon the Frontiers.

The Militia is divided into three sorts, which are the Corschis, generally
called Kesel-Bashi, or Red-heads, in Number about 22000, all good Soldiers and
Horsemen.

The second sort, the Goulams or Slaves, Renegado Georgians, who are about
18000, being also Horsemen.

The third sort are the Tafenkgis, who are composed of Men taken from the
Plough, as most fit for Labor; they are Footmen armed with a Scimiter and a
Musket.

The Persians, especially the Rich, are much less subject to Sickness than the
Europeans; nor are they much troubled with the Pox, for the dry Air of the
Country is an Enemy to it; besides, they go often to the Bath, to sweat out the
Venom of that Distemper; for as for any method of Physic they have none, Diet
is the chief Remedy which the Physicians prescribe in all Diseases, and account
most sovereign.

They divide the Natural Day into four parts, from Sunrising to Noon, from
Noon to Sunset, from Sunset to Midnight, and from Midnight till Sunrise; and
in the Vulgar Computation of Time, make use of Lunar Months, which they always
begin from the first Appearance of the New Moon: But in their Astronomical
Accounts, they make use of Solar Months. The first Month begins upon the 11th
of our March, the day of the Vernal Equinox being the first day of their year,
upon which day if a Persian has not money to buy him a new Habit, he will
mortgage his own Body to have one.

The Persians betroth their Children very young, at nine or ten years; and
among the Armenians some are married and lie together at five or six; their Law
allows them but four Wives, but they may have as many hired Women as they
please, and may also enjoy their Slaves whom they purchase; the Children both
of the one and of the other are accounted Lawful, and inherit all alike. The
Nobility of the Persians is founded upon their being descended from Mahomet,
and these have the Title of Mir or Prince; and the Daughters that of Mirza or
Princess.

The Persians wear Red Turbants, the Tartars of Giagatay Green ones: The
Turkish Turbants are White, and the Greeks Blue. And as they are thus
distinguished in the Colors of their Turbants, so if we regard the natural
Enmities of Nations, we shall find as great an Antipathy between the Turks and
Persians, as there is between the Chinese and Japanners, the Armenians and
Nestorians, the Arabians and Abassines, the French and Spaniards, the Italians
and Greeks, the Germans and Polanders, the Danes and Suedes, or the Moscovites
and Tartars.

The Capital City of all Persia is Ispahan, built by Arsaces, who enlarged the
Parthian Dominions, and called Dara, afterward Aspadara, also Nymzamena by
Ben. Jonas, Hagistan, Clu. Asbahawn by the Arabian Geographer Saphaon Mandevel.
Spahawn Herb. Spahan, Aspachan, Izpaan and Hispahan, in some Maps and Authors.
537 Miles from the Persian Sea, 360 from the Caspian, 450 from Babylon, and 870
from Candahor: By which last distance, agreeing very near with what Tavenier
makes it, viz. 390 Agats, (every Agat being a Province League,) I find Persia
is at least 3 or 400 Miles too much in length in most Maps, and in some much
more: As it is the Residence of the Persian King, and in the Center of his
Empire, Noble; as seated on a vast Plain, which extends three ways 15 or 20
Leagues, Fair and pleasant; for Air, healthy; considering her Palaces, Stately:
her Gardens, Delicious and Fragrant; her Piazza's, and the Wealth of her Bazars
or public Market places, Rich and populous; only the Streets are narrow and
dark, annoyed with Loads of Ordure and Filth; in the Summer dusty, and in the
Winter miry.

Zulpha, or Jelphey Herb. is a little City, separated from Ispahan by the River
Sonderou, and is a Colony of Armenians, who enjoy Lands and great Privileges.
They have 15 or 16 Churches and Chapels, and no Mahometans may live amongst
them.

Schiras, Sherazz a Persis, Schirasium Baud. Sheraz Herb. Syaphas Ben Jonas,
Xirias Don Garcias, Zyras P. Venet. Cirecatha Steph. Cyropolis
Muslaedini-Saddi: A City no less ancient than great, according to that Proverb,
Quando Schiras erat Schiras tunc Cairus erat ejus pagus, and is now the second
City for Magnificence in the Persian Monarchy, pleasantly seated at the end of
a spacious Plain circumvolved with lofty Hills, enriched by Trade, made lovely
by Art. The Palaces rise so amiably, the Mosques and Hummums with their
caerulean Tiles, and gilded Vanes amongst the Cypresses so glitter by
reflecting the Sunbeams in a curious splendour. The Vineyards, Gardens,
Cypresses, Sudatories and Temples, ravishing the Eye and Smell; so that in
every part she appears fair and delightful.

Here Cyrus, the most excellent of Heathen Princes, was born, and here his Body
(all but his Head, which was sent to Pisagard,) lies entombed.

Here the great Macedonian glutted his Avarice and Bacchism.

Here the first Sybil sung our Savior's Incarnation; And here a Series of 200
Kings have swayed their Scepters.

The Government of Schiras is one of the highest Commands for a Subject, and is
particularly famous for the most excellent Wines in all Persia.

Tavernier tells us, That now it looks rather like a Town half ruined, than a
City; And that there is a wonderful Well, which is 15 years rising to the Top,
and 15 years falling or sinking to the Bottom.

Persepolis, by the Greek and Latin Authors, Elamis by the Persians and
Oriental Nations, when in its Perfection, was the Metropolis of the World, and
Totius Orbis Splendour, when in its flourishing condition, says D. Siculus, and
Q. Curtius, the Richest, the Noblest, and the Loveliest City under the Sun; so
beautiful and so stately in its Structure, being most of Cedar and Cypress
Wood; the Order of Building so curious and regular, as it was in that Age
justly styled, The Glory of the World.

The Success Antiochus Epiphanes had at Jerusalem, when he sacrilegiously
ravished ten Tuns of Gold, made him march to Persepolis with an Army, in hopes
of getting the greatest Exchequer in the World; for though Babylon and Shushan
were very Rich, the one furnishing the Macedonian Victor with 50000 Talents,
the other with 9 Millions of Gold, and 50000 Talents in Bullion, yet in
Persepolis there was found 120000 Talents, or, according to Strabo, 32
Millions, 750000 Pounds.

Time would fail me to mention the lofty Palace of the Persian Emperors, which
for Situation, Prospect, Richness in Materials, and Curiosity of Art, rendered
it incomparable, of that Majesty and Splendour as put the World's Conqueror into
amazement at his entrance thereinto. But alas! this rich and famous City, yea,
the Palace also, was at a drunken Feast, in a debauched Humor, by the
Instigation of Thais, and at the Command of Alexander set all on Fire, an Act
which the great Prince would have quenched with his Tears, but preceding
Mischiefs are not amended by succeeding Lamentations: But of the Mausolea, the
Temple dedicated to Anaia, or Diana, and of the Ruins of it at this day,
called Chilmanor, or Chehelminor, Vide Herbert's Travels.

Comeshaw, where Sir R. Shirley was once Commander, thought to be the Caunaxa,
where the memorable Battle betwixt Artaxerxes and Cyrus his Brother was fought.
Others think it the same which Pliny called Paradona, or Orebatys of Ptol.

Near Gheez is a narrow Strait, the Mountains on either side are very
precipitous and vastly high, not more than 40 Yards broad, and 8 Miles long,
and is one of the three noted Passages through the Mountain Taurus, which leads
to Hircania; through this Strait the fair Amazonian came to Alexander.

Periscow Herb. Firuseuch Val. is noted for the abundance of Pheasants, and
other Game for Hawking.

Asharaff Herb. Escref de Val. is about two Miles from the Caspian Sea, in
Latitude 38 degrees, 17 minutes, due North from Ispahan. Here Sha Abbas gave
Audience to Sir Dodmore Cotton the English Ambassador, and is but 5 Miles from
Ferrabaut the Hircanian Metropolis.

Ferrabaut, or Estrabut upon the Caspian Sea, some take this for the Remains of
the old Amarusa, some for the Socanda Ptol. others suppose it to be the Phraata
which Marcus Antonius besieged when he invaded Media, to be revenged for the
death of Crassus the Rich, who, with 30000 of his Men, were slain by Phraartes
the Pa^^hian.

Omoul, by some Zarama, by others Zadracarta, where Alexander refreshed his
Army in the persuit of Bessus the infamous Bactrian; others think it to be the
Remains of Nabarca, where the Oracle of Dreams was famoused. The Inhabitants
observe six or seven several Sabbaths.

At Damaon the Jews inhabit in great Numbers having, as they report, been
seated, ever since the Transplantation from Canaan, by Salmanasser (...) 2
Kings 17.6. And also say, that upon the Damoan Mountain Noah's Ark rested.

Tyroan seems to be the Rhazunda of Strab. a City of about 3000 Houses. The
Women are lovely and curious in Novelties, but the Jealousy of the Men
confines them, yet vetitis rebus gliscit voluntas.

Susa, or Shushan, everywhere famoused, was one of the three Royal Palaces ^he
Median Monarchs so much gloried and delighted in was the place where Ahashu^rus
kept his Court, and some other Kings: Alexander there espoused Statyra the
Persian Princess, and Daughter of Darius, and Ephestion her Sister. Here he
made a Feast for 9000 Guests, to each of which he gave a Cup of Gold. Here he
got 50000 Talents in Silver, and 9000000 Millions of coined Gold, now Valdac or
Baldach, P. Venet. Sustra Cast. Souster Sans. seated upon the River Choaspis, a
River of such account with the Persian Emperors, that no Water but of Choaspis,
no Bread but from Assos in Phrygia, no Wine but the Chalyb^nian in Syria, no
Salt but from Memphis in Egypt could please their Palates. It was called Ulai
in David, Eulaeus Plin. Tiritiri Sans. Here Cyrus the Great entertained his
most beautiful Parthea. Here Alexander gave 10000 Talents to pay the Debts of
those that had a mind to return into Greece, and received a Recruit of 30000
young Soldiers. Here it was also, that Esther obtained so much favor for the
Jews, and where Haman was hanged in the place of M^rdecoi. It is related that
the Palace of Susa, built by Darius, was enriched by Memnon, with the Spoil of
the great Thebes in Egypt, and that the Stones were fastened with Gold. Next to
Persepolis, it was reckoned one of the most sumptuous Fabrics of the Kings of
Persia, but this City is now waste and desolate.

Congo, or Bander Corgo, is a City upon the Gulf of Balsara, not much unlike
Toulon in Provence: It rose from the Ruins of Ormus, as well as Gombron; and
there is a Custom-house, of which the Persians and Portugueses divide the
Profit.

Laar, Corrha, Ptol. Laodicea Pynetus; Seleucia Elymiadis, Appian. Lara Baud.
Laar P. Venet. (gives its Name to a certain piece of silver Money coined there,
and) contains above 4000 Houses, and a little Citadel. Some believe it to be
the ancient Pasagardes, where the Grand Cyrus vanquished Astyages, and
translated the Empire of the Medes into that of Persia. Calanus, an Indian
Philosopher, suffered a voluntary Death there, in sight of the whole Macedonian
Army. It has been much dispeopled by Earthquakes, which often happen in those
Parts.

Larr is the Capital City of the Province, which formerly bore the Title of a
Kingdom; it is enclosed on both sides with high Mountains, being built round
about a Rock, upon which there stands a Castle, where the King keeps a Garrison;
the most part of its Inhabitants are Jews; there is no water but Rainwater,
which does not happen sometimes for three years together, which water standing
in the Cisterns so long breeds Worms, and whether you strain or boil it, there
will remain a Foulness and Corruption in it, which breeds Worms in the Legs and
Feet of Men; and J. B. Tavernier says, That at his Return to Paris the fifth
time of his Traveling, he had one came out of his Left Foot an Ell and half
long, and another from the Ankle of his Right Foot an Ell long.

At Jaarown, or Gaarom, about 20 Farsangs, or 60 English Miles from Larr, the
Inhabitants are most Jews, who tell us, they are of the Issue of Reuben, Gad,
and the half Tribe of Manasses, who by Tiglath Pilasser were carried Captive to
this place, 2 Kings 17.6 And that the Offsprings of Dan, Zebulon, Asher and
Naphtali were planted at Damoan.

Near this place is a precious Liquor or Mummy growing, carefully preserved for
the King's sole use. It distills only in June from the top of those Mountains a
most redolent Gum sovereign against Poison, a Catholicon for all sorts of
Wounds.

Tauris, (the Ecbatana of the Ancients, the Metropolis of the Empire of the
Medes,) by the Turks Taberyz, by Ezra Achmetha, is a great City, and well
peopled, the general mart for Turkey, Moscovy, the Indies, and Persia; for all
sorts of Merchandise, especially Silks.

Anno 1514, the Grand Signior Selym sent a Basha with an Army, and ransacked
it: 1530, Solomon invaded it with so much Fury, that it flamed many days;
Reviving again, it was made prostrate to Ebrahim Basha's Luxury 1534. But 1585,
it groaned under the greatest Suffering, when Osman Basha, Slave to Amurat,
perpetrated all manner of Cruelty.

In the Year 1638, it was almost ruined by Sultan Amurath, but now Re-edified,
the Buildings of Brick being baked in the Sun. At this City are seen the Ruins
of stately Structures, or great Mosques or Temples of a prodigious Height and
Magnitude. In one dedicated to Diana, the great Artaxerxes sequestered the fair
Aspasia, whose Beauty made him and his Son Competitors Here are dressed the
greatest part of the Shagreen Skins that are vended all over Persia.

Casbin. Cazbyn Herb. Kazvin by the Persians. The Arsatia of the Ancients, or
Arsisaca of Strabo. Here Parmenio was killed, and Ephestion, Alexander's
Favorite, dyed, and a Monument erected, upon which was spent 12000 Talents, or
7 Millions of Crowns. Then did the Altar smoke with Incense, and the Doctor was
offered up in Sacrifice, and the dead Corpse worshipped as a Deity. It is a
great City without Walls, thought to be the Rages in Tobit, the best half of it
is in Gardens, seated in a large and fair Plain, 30 Miles in compass. Here dyed
Sir Robert Shirley, and Sir Dodmore Cotton the Ambassador who went for Persia,
Anno 1626. having no gilded Trophies to adorn their Sepulchers, only their
Virtues, which will out-last those bubbles of Vanity. Here also dyed Abbas the
Persian Monarch in the Year 1628.

Sauvay Herb. Saba de Val. a City pleasantly seated upon a rising Hill, in a
fruitful Country, much delightful for aerial Music, especially the
Nightingale, A Thousand warbling Notes their Throats displays,
Which their sweet Music chants as many ways.


About 11 Leagues from Tauris, is a Lake about 15 Leagues compass, in the
middle of which is a little Hill that rises insensibly, out of which there
bubble out many little Springs; and the Earth, which they water, is of two
strange distinct qualities; for one sort serves to make Lime, the next to that
is a hollow spungy Stone, and under that is a white transparent Stone, which is
only a Congelation of the Waters of these Streams, for sometimes you shall meet
with creeping Animals congealed therein; for one piece sent to Sha Abbas,
Tavernier offered 15000 Crowns, in which was a Lizard about a Foot long.

Ardevil is not only famous for the Royal Sepulchers of Sha Sefi, and other
Persian Kings, and for the Pilgrimages that are made to it; but also for
numerous Caravans of Silk, which render it one of the most considerable Cities
in Persia: It is of a moderate bigness, seated in a lovely opening of the
Mountains, the Avenues of it are very pleasant, being Alleys of great Trees,
and is watered with a River that runs through the middle of the City.

Sultany, Tigranocerta, Tigranopolis, and Tigranopetra, test Appiano.
Sultania, Jovio. Saua, Bonacciolo. Bitlis Baud. is a very large City; and if
you will believe the Armenians, they will tell you, that there were once near
800 Churches in it.

Kom, Coom Herb. Gauna, Arbacta, or Coama of old, by some Hecatompolis, is one
of the great Cities of Persia, in a fat Country, abounding with Rice and
excellent Granates; that which is most remarkable is a large Mosque, where are
the Sepulchers of Sha Sefi and Sha Abbas the Second, the Tomb of Sedi Fatima,
the Granddaughter of Hali, and the Tomb of Fatima Zubra the Daughter of
Mahomet.

Caschan is also a large City, and well peopled, stored with Silkweavers, which
make the best purfled Satins mixed with Gold and Silver. The Houses are fairly
built. The Mosques and Baths are in their Cupoloes curiously caerulcated with a
feigned Torquoise. The Buzzar is spacious and uniform. The Caravansera is the
most stately Fabric of that kind in Persia.

Bakuy gives its Name to the Caspian Sea; and near to it there is a Spring of
Oil, which serves all over Persia to burn in Lamps.

Kirman toward the Ocean affords very fine Steel, of which they make Weapons
very highly prized: For a Scymiter of that Steel will cut through an Helmet
with an easy Blow.

Ormus formerly bore the Title of a Kingdom. As to the Name, it was called
Organo and Gera by Verrerius, Necrokin by B. Jonas, Zamrhi by the Tartars,
Vorocta by Niger, Ormusia by Josephus, Omiza Pliny. Amozon Ptol. Ogyris
Theuetus, Curtius and Rufus, Ternia Strabo, where Prince Erythaeus was buried,
from whom Mare Rubrum had its denomination. The Island is about 15 Miles in
compass, subject to such excessive heats, that it produces nothing considerable
but Salt, and is two good Leagues from the firm Land. There is not a drop of
fresh Water in it but what is carried thither.

In the Year 1507. it was reduced under the Crown of Portugal by Alphonso
d'Albuquerque. The fair and delicate situation of Ormus, for Trade and
Commerce, as it was the Staple and Glory of the Eastern World, has occasioned
some to say, That if the World were a Ring, Ormus was to be the Jewel.

In the Year 1622. Sha Abbas took it by the assistance of the English,
commanded by Capt. Weddal; and then translated the Trade to Gombron, which he
called by his own Name Bender Abassi. The Portugals lost about 6 or 7 Millions
at the taking of the Town.

Gombrou, or Gomrou, Hacand Os^r. since the Fall of Ormus, is become a City of
great Commerce, guarded with two Castles, in which are planted 80 pieces of
brass Ordnance. The Air is so hot and unwholsom, that no Strangers can live
there above 3 or 4 Months in the Year, but for 6 or 7 Months are forced to
retire up in the Mountains 2 or 3 days Journey off. About 3 Miles from Gombrou,
is the famous Bannyan Tree, of as great Repute, as the Idol Oak to our Druidae
of old: Now all Nations that traffic upon the Indian Seas, and Land Caravans,
carry Commodities thither, and bring from thence Velvets, Taffaties, Raw Silk,
and other Persian Commodities: So that now Ormus is ruined, and may well be
called Ormah, or destruction.

Baharem, upon the Coast of Arabia, is the ancient Tylos yet belonging to
Persia, it is an Island famous for its Springs of fresh Water at the bottom of
the Sea: For its Pearl Fishery, where are found the clearest, biggest, and
roundest in all the Levant. The Air is so unwholsom and so hot, that no
Strangers can live there, unless it be in December, January, and March; for the
Wind is so sultry and stifling, that it suffocates and kills them presently;
and sometimes it is so hot, that it burns like Lightning.

But at Bander Congo the Air is good, and the Soil and the Water excellent,
only the Passage for Ships is dangerous, and therefore not so much traded to as
the other.

The City Candahur, is the chief of one of the conquered Provinces of Persia,
Sha Abbas left the possession of it to Sha Sefi, in whose time Alimerdenkan
delivered it up to the Great Mogul: But Sha Abbas the Second, took it in the
Year 1650, under whose power it still remains.

At Caramon-Shashoon, of old Counstia, was decided that Famous Contest for the
Persian Crown 'twixt Artaxerxes and Cyrus.

Of Asiatick Tartaria.
map of Tartary A New Description of TARTARIE by Robt. Morden


THis is the Vastest Region of our Continent, in Bigness it equals all Europe,
and contains all those great and spacious Provinces, which the Ancients called
Seres, Scythia extra Imaum, Scythia intra Imaum, Sucae, Sogdiana and the
greatest part of Sarmatia Asiatica, extending itself the whole length of Asia.

If we look back to their Original, we shall find that they were of all other,
the most Ancient people, patient in Labors, fierce in War, and strong of Body;
their Flocks and Herds their greatest wealth; Silver and Gold they contemned as
much as others coveted it; Meum and Tuum those common Barretors and Authors of
Debate were not known among them: And the ignorance of Vice did as much
contribute to their welfare, as the knowledge of Virtue does to others.

The first grand attempt of these People, of which we find any mention, was
when the Chazari or Chozars, in the time of the Emper Iustine, overspread all
that vast continent between China and Boristhenes, conquered part of India, all
Bactria, Sogdiana, and made the Persians Tributaries, and possessed also
Taurica Chersonesus, called by them Cassaria or Cazaria: The residence of their
Prince was about the mouth of the Wolga, which the Tartars called Athel, a
large City of great trade by Nassir Eddin, called Belanjar; and by him and
Abulfeda placed in 46 Degrees. 30 Min. N. Latitude, which is within a few minutes
where Olearius makes Astracan, and doubtless may be that which he calls old
Astracan.

These Chazari did continue till about Anno Chr. 900. at which time they gave
place to the Comanians or Cumanians, a Turkish Nation, who inhabited all that
Tract of Land from the Neiper unto Turquestan; these were almost totally
destroyed by the Tartars, soon after the death of Ingiz Chan, or Cingis Chawn,
under the conduct of Batu or Bathy, Nephew to Hocata the Tartarian Emperor,
only the King Kuthen escaped with 40000 men into Hungary, where they had a
Country allotted them called to this day Campus Cumanus.

Bathy having destroyed the Comanians, established his own Dominions, and fixed
his abode on the East of the River Volga, and built a place and called it
Serai, which was a great and populous City, the Ruins whereof are now called
Czarofsgorod.

But when Tamerlan, who was Vice Roy or General of those Countries comprehended
between the Oxus and Iuxartes, had extended his conquests toward Balch and
Chorasan, (the Aria of the Ancients:) Thuotamisch then Emperor of Serai, filled
with jealousies of his growing greatness, gathered a great Army to invade him,
whom Tamerlan met on the borders of his own Country, and after a most bloody
sight gained the Victory; after which Success Tamerlan having subdued great
part of India, Persia, Media, Armenia, Mesopotamia, Babylonia and Syria,
resolved to requite the Invasion of Thuctamish, whereupon with an Army of
500000 Men, he marched through Media, passed the Portae Caucasae (now Derbent,)
and over Volga, and at last encountered with Thuctamish. The Battle was long
and doubtful, three days without intermission, at last Thuctamish was defeated
and fled, leaving his Country exposed to the fury of his Enemies, who
demolished Seraie with other Cities on the north and west of the Caspian Sea,
and leaving the Country a desert, they returned into Persia. After this
devastation, these Tartars, by discords, fell into several divisions, and
Tamerlan dying, his great Empire was also divided amongst his Children; so that
Tartarie is now divided into several Hords or Tribes; but the knowledge we have
of them is so little, the Ataxie or disagreement and confusion of Authors that
write of them, so great, that I am not a little doubtful what to write of them,
that may be of any certainty for the Readers satisfaction; however in this
obscurity we shall follow the light of the best reputed Geographers, and say,
that the Asiatick Tartarie is divided into five great parts. The Desert
Tartarie, Zagathy, Tarquestan, Northern Tartarie and Kin Tartarie.

The Desert Tartarie is so called, because most part of the Lands lie untilled;
for the Tartars are a people that hate Agriculture, and laugh at Christians for
feeding on the Tops of Reeds, for so they call our Corn: The Inhabitants are
divided into several Tribes or Hordes, of which the more considerable are, 1.
the Nogajan Tartars or great Nagoy, whose Country is all plain and desert 400
or 500 miles in length, between Astracan and Samara, and 200 miles in breadth
from Astracan to Yeike or Iaick River; it has no fenced Towns or Habitations,
though formerly there were diverse, especially that of Czarofsgorod, said to
have been 20 miles in Circuit, seated between the Rivers Volga and Actabon, in
a fertile and healthful Country; and Astracan placed on a rising ground not far
from the mouth of the Volga, about 50 miles distant from the Caspian-Sea,
guarded with a strong Castle and encompassed with Water.

These Tartars are said to be more Tall and Proper than the rest, but ill
favored, broad Faces, flat little Noses, small hollow Eyes, and of Blackish or
rather Tawny Complexion: The heat of the Sun for some months of the year is
most excessive, and the Cold in the Winter no less extreme.

Polygamy is much in fashion amongst them, having many Wives according to their
ability; if one Brother die, the other takes all his Wives; and if all the
brothers chance to die, then the Wives are devolved like other Goods and
Chattels unto the Eldest Brothers Son; not suffering a Married woman in any
wise to go out of the Kindred.

When they remove their Habitation, which is usually against the Summer and
Winter, they carry their Houses in Wagons with four Wheels drawn by Camels.

2. On the North of great Nagoy dwell the Kalmuke Tartars, in a Country
abounding with all things necessary for a comfortable subsistence: Their chief
Commodities are Sables, Martens, Black Foxes, Squirrils-Skins, and other Furs,
which they exchange with the Russes, for Aquavitae, Mead and Tobacco: Their
Chief places are Siberia the head of a Province, as also is Tumen; Casan and
Bulgar are the chief Towns of the Zavolhenses, and toward the North lie the
Samoides, all subject to the Russes; the Kalmakes are accounted good Soldiers,
and their Women are little inferior in Skill and Valor. They own no religious
worship, except some adoration to the Sun and Moon; and for their Diet,
Horseflesh is a great dainty, and any Carrion is good fare.

3. Next to the great Nagoy toward the East is Cassachy Horda, or Wild
Tartars, who march up and down the Country (which is very desert,) much after
the manner of the Nagoise.

4. Eastward from the Kalmukes toward the South live the Yurgeacheans, being a
numerous and warlike People, governed by a Chan or King.

5. The Caragans lie all along the Caspian-Sea, between the River Yaike unto
the River Iaxartes, a desert and barren Country, the People miserable poor,
very Tawny and ill Favored, having no Town except Presslannes on the south
side of Iaxartes.

Most part of Desert Tartarie is under the jurisdiction of the Duke of
Moscovie, and yield him great store of rich Furs.

Zagathy, Sacathy, Usbeck or Ouzbeg, contains the ancient Mergiana, Bactria and
Sogdiana; Mergiana by Pinetus is called Tremighen, by Gastald Jeselbash: A
Country so fruitful in Corn and Wine, that Strabo reports, how one bunch of
Grapes, presented to Alexander, filled a Baket, two Cubits about, which
encouraged him to found that City Alexandria, afterward Antiochia and Selucia,
since Indion. In this Country some think Noah planted, soon after he left the
Ark; and that he, or some to his Memory, built the City Nissa, though others
pretend Bacchus to be the Founder of it; and that from hence, Nimrod and his
Followers departed into the Vale Shyna^, which lies between the Rivers of
Iaxartes, now Chesel and Oxus, a Country of different soil, and indifferent
fertile, but much augmented by the Industry of the Inhabitants, who are the
most ingenious of the Western Tartars, lovers of Art, and well skilled in
Manufactures and Trade. The City of Sarmarchand, the Marcanda of Ptol.
Paracanda, Strab. was both the Cradle and Grave to Tamerlan the Great, who
adorned it with an Academy, as is also Bochar, Bactria, of old Bactra; before
that, Zoroastes and Zoroaspa, probably from Zoroaster, their first King slain
by Ninus. A Town of great Trade, where lived Avicen, one of the most famous
Philosophers and Physicians of the East; there are also Balch and Badaschian on
the Frontiers of Chorozan. Sogdiana was a province subject to the Persians:
Here Cyrus built the old Cyroscata or Cyropolis, which held out a long time,
and was almost fatal to the great Macedonian Conqueror, but by him destroyed,
in revenge of so great a danger. Not far from which that Infamous Regicide
Bessus, after his perfidious dealing with his Prince, was apprehended and
brought bound to Alexander, who abhorring his sight, ordered he should be
delivered to Oxates the brother of Darius, to be disposed of as he should think
fit. Here also was Alexandria, Oxiana and Alexandria Ultima.

Tarquestan lies east from Usbeck, and is subdivided into several Kingdoms; of
which the best known are Cascar or Hiachan, Chialis or Turphan, Chiartiam,
Cotam. Thebet or Tenduc and Camul: That of Cascar is the richest and is well
stored with Rhubarbe. That of Ciarthtam is the least and sandy, but has many
Jaspers and other Stones.

Those of Cotam and Chialis have Corn, Wine, Flax and Hemp. Thebet or Tanguth
is stored with Musk and Cinnamon; whose Kings were formerly called Un-Chan or
Prester John, a Title now erroneously conferred on the Abassine or Ethiopian
Emperor in Africa; for Presbyter John was chief of the Kingdom of Tanchut or
Tanguth, which the Tartars call Barantola, the Sarazins Boratai, and the
Natives Lassa, which is by the consent of all knowing persons seated in Asia,
next to the confines of the great Mogul, amongst the Mountains of Caucasus and
Imaus. It was in the year 1248, when King Lewis was in the Island of Cyprus at
Nicosia, that Ambassadors from one of the Tartarian Princes, whose Name was
Ercalthay, informed the King, that the Great Cham of Tartary had about three
years before been baptized, having been converted by the Empress his Mother,
and Daughter of a King of the Indians; She having always been a Christan; and
that their Master Prince Ercalthay, who had also for a long time been a
Christian, was sent by the Great Cham with a potent Army against the Calife of
Baldac, an Enemy of the Christians.

The Name of Presbyter John denotes some Christian Prince, whose Dominions are
placed by the consent of most knowing Persons, not among the Ethiopians, nor in
any part of Africa, as most suppose, but in the Continent of Asia; but in what
part, formerly 'twas, is not exactly known. Some Authors say they were Kings of
Cathay, which is doubtful, because it is now discovered by modern Relations and
Travels into those parts, that all Cathy is but the Northern part of China.

But it is more than probable, that besides that portion of Land, there is
another large part of the World conterminate on the north and west, unto the
Empire of China, which in former Ages had the Name of Cathay, and is the same
with that of Thebet, by some called Begargar, etc. as aforesaid; which clearly
appears by a Voyage of two Fathers from China to the Mogor, who tell us that
at We^ala a Castle at the end of Barentola, the Great Lama or Priest did then
reside and gave an account of their Christian Religion: And to me it seems
further confirmed, by a Journey made into the Western Tartary, Anno 1683. By the
Emperor of China, we have this account of those People In all the Western
Tartary there is nothing to be found but Mountains, Rocks and Valleys; there
are neither Cities, Towns or Villages, nor Houses. The Inhabitants lodge under
Tents in the open Fields, which they remove from one Valley to another
according as they find pasture. They pass their Life either in Hunting or doing
nothing. As they neither Plow nor Sow, so they make no Harvest. They live upon
Milk, Cheese and Flesh, and have a sort of Wine not much unlike our Aqua-Vitae,
with which they are often drunk. In short, they care for nothing from morning
to night, but to drink and eat like the Beasts and D^oves, which they feed.
They are not without their Priests, which they call Lamas, for whom they have a
singular veneration; in which they differ from the Oriental Tartars, the most
part of whom have no Religion, nor do they believe any God. This part of
Tartary lies without the prodigious Wall of China, for more than 300 Miles of
which Wall, says our Author, I can say without Hyperbolizing, that the Seven
Wonders of the World, put together, are not comparable to this Work. And all
that Fame has spread concerning it among the Europeans, is far short of what I
myself have (...). He also tells us, that diverse of the Petty Kings, of the
Western Tartary, came from all sides for 300 Miles, and some for 500 Miles,
together with their Wives and Children, to salute the Emperor. That this
Country is divided into 48 Provinces, and now tributary to the Emperor of China

(...), (which all Authors con^ound with a nonsuch Cathay,) (...) divided into
several parts, of which I am able to say nothing, in the way of Chorography,
nor much in History, only I find that the King of Niulhan or Niuche, called
Xunchi, conquered China at twelve years of Age, with the Faithful assistance of
his two Uncles; a young Conqueror, not only famous for his Success, but also
for the Moderation which he used to his newly subdued People. And it is certain
that these Tartars know of no Cities or Towns beyond the wall of China,
therefore Cathay can be no other than the Northern part of China, and Cambalu
is Pekin, and Quinzey answers to Hancheu.

The Northen Tartarie, which is called the true ancient Tartarie, is the
coldest, most untilled, most barbarous, (and most unknown of all;) Some amongst
them have their Kings, others live by Hords or Commonalities: As for their
Names it is easy to give what names Men please in parts wholly unknown.

But in the year 1682 the Emperor of China made a Voyage into the Eastern
Tartary: In this Journey (says the Father Verbiest, who was the publisher of
it,) we always went toward the North East, from Pekin, in all 1100 miles to
the Province of Leao-tum; the way being about 300 miles, the Capital City
whereof is Xin-Yam in the Latitude of 41 Degrees 56 Minutes; a City very fair,
and pretty entire, and has in it the remains of an ancient Palace, where was no
declination of the Magnetic Needle.

This Province is about 400 miles from the Frontier to the City, Vla; but all
the Cities and Towns are entirely ruined, only some few Houses built of Earth,
or the rubbish of old Buildings, and covered with Thatch or Straw.

That all the Country beyond the Province of Leao-tum is exceeding desert,
where nothing is to be seen on all sides but Mountains and Valleys, Dens of
Bears, Tigers and other devouring Beasts: Here and there a poor Reed-hut upon
the side of some Brooks.

The City Vla, on the River Songoro Tart. Sumhoa Chin. lies in 44 Degrees 20
Minutes. The Needle there declines from the South to the West 1 Degree 20
Minutes, and is the fairest in all this Country, and sometimes also the Seat of
the Empire of the Tartars.

But Kirin is about 30 miles from Vla, upon the River Songoro, (which takes it
Course from the Moun. Champe,) Famous for having been the ancient Seat of our
Tartars. That the Moscovites come oftentimes to the River Songoro to fish for
Pearls. That the Distance of Kirin from Xin-Yam was 1028 Chinese Stadia,
containing 369 miles; the Chinese Stadium being 360 Geometrical paces.

I shall only add, that by this relation it does appear to me, that Niulhan or
Niuche must be the same Country which is here called Lea^-tu^, for the Emperors
design was to visit the Sepulchers of his Ancestors.

Of INDIA.
THE Name of India is now given to the Empire of the Mogul, and to the two
Peninsulas, one on this side, the other beyond Ganges, and the Islands
scattered in the Indian Sea, which are all comprehended under the general name
of the East Indies; under which Appellation some Authors do also take in all
the Oriental part of Asia. The old Inhabitants hereof were by Megasthenes said
to be 122 several Nations; Originally descended from the Sons of Noah before
their journey to the Valley of Shinaar; and Heylin says, that the Plantation of
India did precede the attempt of Babel. Its first invasion was by Semiramis
with an Army of above four Millions, (if Ctesias and Diodorus Siculus say
true,) who was met with by Staurobates an Indian King, with as great an Army,
by whom she was overcome and slain. The next Invasion on this Country was by
Bacchus the Son of Jupiter, companied with Hercules, who by force or by Arts
overcame them, and taught them the use of Wine, Oil, and the Art of
Architecture. After this Alexander invaded India, beginning first with Clophae
Queen of Magaza. After with Porus, whom he vanquished and took, but giving them
their Liberty and Kingdoms again, he returned into his own Country; after this
they lived in peace under their several Kings until the year 1587, when
discovered by the Portugals, after by the English, Dutch, etc.

OF THE Empire of the Mogul.
map of Mughal Empire EMPIRE de MOGOL by Robt. Morden


THis vast Empire comprehends the greatest part of the Continent of India: The
present Mogul, who is the Sovereign, derives his Original from Great Temarleng,
or Tamerlan, and is the Eleventh in a direct Line descendent from him; there
are several Indian Kingdoms tributary to him, and he is esteemed the richest
Prince in the world, and the most potent Monarch of Asia.

The Territories of his Country being his own Hereditary Revenues, the great
Lords are but his Receivers, who give an account to the Governors of the
Provinces, and they to the chief Treasurers and Comptrollers of the Exchequer.
He is also the general Heir to all those to whom he gives Pensions, and his
Will is a Law in the decision of his Subjects Affairs, and therefore they carry
the Names of their Employments, and not of the Lands which they enjoy.

Sha Jehan, who Reigned Forty years, left behind him about 5 Millions, and the
Throne that he made cost an 160 Millions, and 500000 Livres; besides six other
Thrones set all over with Diamonds, Rubies, Emralds, and Pearls: Test Tav.

The Money of this Kingdom is of a good Alloy: The Mogul is able to bring 100000
Horse into the Field, but his Infantry is very inconsiderable, either for
Number or Experience. He has a good number of Elephants, which do him great
service; for they are sure of foot, and lie down and rise up very readily. The
King is a Turkish Mahumetan, nevertheless the most part of his Vassals are
Pagans: But as there are several sorts of People, so likewise there are diverse
sorts of Religions amongst them, which I shall briefly mention at the end of
the Description of the East Indies.

The Mogul's Country is very fertile and well peopled near the great Rivers.
They make excellent Bread, having Corn and Rice in abundance: Victuals, in
general, are very cheap, however the Inhabitants are very temperate and sober.
The neighboring Country to Tartary is full of Mountains and Forests, where the
Mogul ofttimes takes his pleasure in Hunting, there being great abundance and
variety of wild Beasts: And there it was that Alexander cut down the Wood for
the Ships which he sent down the Indus into the Ocean. As for Remains of
Antiquity there are few or none, the Moguls having ruined all the ancient
Cities, which (according to the Ancients) were 30 large Cities, 3000 walled
Towns and Castles, for natural Defense reckoned impregnable, which may not be
improbable, if it were, as some affirm, the first Seminary or Station of Noah
after his descent from Ararat, not far hence distant; and afterward the delight
of Bacchus, which some think was the same with Noah; and from the wonderful
increase of People, which appears by that huge Army Staurobates drew out in his
defense against Semiramis the Assyrian Empress, both Armies containing 3
Millions.

And so well builded and planted was this part of India, that when Alexander,
by the overthrow of Porus near the River Hydaspis, entered India, Herodotus and
Curtius report that Alexander should say, He found greater Cities and more
sumptuous Buildings in King Porus 's Dominions, than he had observed in all the
World besides.

Indus is Navigable from Lahor to Send, the Natives called it Pang-ab, by
reason of the five Rivers that fall into it toward the upper part of its
Course, which are now called Rauee, Behat, Obchan, Wihy and Sindar by Ptol.
Acesines, Cophys, Hydaspis, Zaradras and Hispalis.

Ganges was formerly famous for its Gold, now for its Water, which is very
pure. The Natives hold, that it sanctifies them, whether they drink, or whether
they bathe in it.

There are in the whole Empire about 37 Kingdoms, the Names whereof are almost
the same with those of the Capital Cities, viz. Agra, Attock, Bakar, Bakisch,
Bando, Bengala, Berar, Buchar, Cabul, Kakares, Candahar, Candis, Canduana,
Cassimere, Chitor, Delli, Gor, Guzarate, Haiacan, Jamba, Jenupar, Jesselmere,
Jesual, Maluay, Mevat, Multan, Narva, Naugracut, Patna, Pengab, Pitan, Sambal,
Siba, Soret, Tatta, Udessa. Test Thev.

There are also some petty Territories, as the Raja's, which are of very
ancient Extraction, and maintain themselves in Mountains and Fortresses that
are inaccessible. Some of their Cities, that terminate in Pore, seem to retain
the memory of Porus; as others by Scander, the Name of Alexander. The Dominions
of the great Mogul are larger than the Persians, and equal to those of the
great Turk. His strength lies in the Number of his Subjects, the Vastness of
his Wealth, and the Extent of his Empire, his Revenue exceeding the Persian and
the Turks both put together; but the Sophi surpasses him in Horse, in Arms, and
warlike People: And with the Turk he keeps a good Correspondence, as being both
of the same Religion. Guzerat yields him yearly above 18 Millions of Gold, and
the Merchants of that Country are accounted the best in all India. It contains
3 fair Cities, Amadabat, Cambaya, and Surat, with about 30 others very
considerable.

Amadabat, Amacastis Ptol. test Herb. Amadavastis in Arrian. one of the
greatest Cities in India, and of a vast Trade. The Buzzar is Rich and Uniform;
The Castle Strong, large Moated; The Maus^leum Stately, compassed at a little
distance, with the Dormitories of many Cambayan Potentates; and two Miles off,
are the curious Gardens and Palace of Chawn-channa a Persian.

Cambaya, Camane Nigro. Barigaza, test Baud. Syrastene, test Stuchio, was
called the Indian Caire, as well for its Greatness, as also for its Traffic,
and the Fertility of the Soil. Here they shape the fair Agats that come from
the Indies into several sorts of Workmanship, and in the Suburbs they make
Indico. The Tides are so swift to the North of the Gulf, that a Horse at full
Speed cannot keep pace with the first Wave. The Streets were formerly locked up
every Night, but the Sea and its Trade is fallen away from it.

Sura^, the Muzi^is of Prol. Herb. Si^astia, Sans. about 40 days Journey from
Agra, drives as great a Trade as any of the Cities of Asia, though the Access
to it be very dangerous; and the River Tappy or Tindy, which rising out of the
Decan Mountains, glides through Brampore, and in Meanders runs by the Walls of
Surat, and after 14 or 15 Miles circumgyring to and fro, discharges itself into
the Ocean, so shallow at the Mouth, that it will hardly bear a Bark of 70 or 80
Tuns, so that the Ships are forced to unlade at Soali or Swali, remarkable for
the mischance of Capt. Woodcock, who, at the taking of Ormus, had lighted upon
a ^rigat laden with about a Million of Ryals, which he seized, and coming into
this Swali Road, the Whale sunk. Alas! the uncertainty of fading Pelf. The
English and Dutch have there their Presidents and Factories, making it the
greatest Mart in the East Indies.

Baroche is of a great Trade for Cottons, the English have a very fair House
there, not far from which place Tavernier tells us, That of a dry Stick, a
Mountebank in less than half an hour made a Tree four or five Foot high, that
did bear Leaves and Flowers.

Broudra is a great City, in a fertile Soil, and of a great Trade for Calicuts.

At Navapour near Surat, grows the best Rice in the World.

The famous Port of Bombay, the Milizigeris of Ptol. belongs to the King of
England, where is built a strong Fort, and Money is coined there.

The Portugals have had frequent Quarrels with the Mogul about their Fortress
of Diu, the Patola of Ptol. test Nig. and Pinet. Patalena and Hid spa Plin.
and Strab. Petacal. Castaldo, Barace of Ptol. Adriano. Here, after Alexander
had sailed down the Indus, and arrived at this place, he invaded the Country of
the Oxydracans, and stormed the principal place of the Mallyans, where
temerariously mounting the Parapet, and violently leaping into the Town,
followed but by 2 Officers, he had perished by the Darts and Weapons of his
Enemies, had not the Army, as Men desperate, in his Rescue enforced their
speedy Entrance.

This Island is about a League long, and four Musket Shot broad, the Haven is
barred with an Iron Chain, being under the command of the Cannon of the Castle.
It was Nobly defended in the years 1539, and 1546, against prodigious Armies;
so that the Mogul was forced to let them settle there to his extreme
dissatisfaction: But the last Relations from those Parts brings News, that the
Portugals have been at length constrained to abandon it.

Agra was of old (as some tell us,) called Nagara, before that Dionysiopolis
founded by Bacchus. Nissa Justino, vide Hacluyt fol. 489. It contains the
Capital City of the Empire, able to raise 200000 fighting Men upon occasion.
The Prince receives a great Revenue for about 200 Stows that are therein. It is
twice as big as Ispahan, but ill built, and without Walls; and has been
enlarged since 1566, when Eckbar resided there, and having built a stately
Castle or Palace, gave it the Name of Eker-Ahad. Deli, or Dehly, was the
Residence of the Mogul before Agra, and so continues, since Sha Jehan had built
the new City, and called it by his Name Jehan Abad, or Gehanabat, where the
Mogul has a stately Palace half a League in Circuit. Gouleor is a Castle where
the Mogul imprisons the Princes of the Blood which he suspects.

Lahor is the Metropolis of that Kingdom, built upon one of the five Rivers
that descend from the Mountains to swell the River Indus: It is the Rendezvous
of the Caravans, and was the ancient Bucephalus, and has been, by Report, 24
Leagues in Compass. Naugracut shows an Idol, to which many come in Pilgrimage.

Fettipore, if the Water had been good, by this time had triumphed over all the
Cities in India.

Bannaras, on the Banks of Ganges, is full of misshapen Pagods.

Cabul, the Chabura of Ptol. by some thought to be the Alexandria Arachosia,
which the Macedonian built near the Mount Caucasus, whose City bears the same
Name, is large and well fortified; of great Trade for Horses, Sheep, and other
Cattle, and is in the great Road from Labor to Samarcand.

Mando is one of the fairest Towns of the Province of Malva, fortified with
Walls and a Castle on the top of a Hill.

Siranaker is the chief City of Cassimere.

Multan is of a rich Soil, and great Trade for Callicoes, but decayed.

Attok, or Atek Tau, is one of the best and strongest Ga^isons the great Mogul
has, and no Stranger is permitted to enter without the King's Passport.

Buckar stands where the Rivers Rawey and Chaul fall into the Indus.
Lourebander and Diul are the Ports to Tatta. Janagar is the chief City of
Soret, Beisher of Bankish, Dankalus of Kakares, Hardware of Siba. Jambu gives
Name to its Province, as also does Sambal.

Bikanar is chief of Bakar, and Narual that of Meuat, Pitan and Patna give Name
to their respective Provinces; between the Kingdoms of Cambaya and Bengala are
the Provinces of Candis, Chitor, Malucy, Berar, and Ranas, whose chief places
are Brampore, Chitor, Rantipore, Shapor, the Sora of Ptel. by Baud. and
Gurchitto. Jesselmere is the City where Ekbar was born. Asmere is famous for
the Sepulcher of Hogi. Hendown, Bando and Janupar are three Provinces near Agra
and Delli. Rotas is one of the strongest places in Asia.

Brampore, Baramatis Ptol. is a great City, but much ruined, with a Castle in
the midst of it, of a great Trade for Calicuts, some painted with Flowers of
diverse Colors, others white and clear, and some striped with Gold and Silver.

Chytor is a City upon a high Rock, claiming Precedence for Antiquity amongst
all the Cities of India, of old Taxilla, supposed to be the Metropolis, whence
King Porus issued against great Alexander. After which Battle, Alexander
celebrated the Bacchanalia at the Mount Maeres, and for 15 days glutted his
Army with those mystic Fopperies, and constituted his Argy^aspides. And at
Nyssa built by Bacchus upon the Bank of the Hydaspis, a Branch of the River
Indus; Alexander reposed, famous in those days for the Sacred Mount, and
incomparable Vines there abounding, which some think to be the first Plantation
of the Patriarch No^h.

Scronge and Chitpour are of great Trade for painted Calicuts called Chites;
those of Seronge are the most lively Colors, and lasting.

Hallabas, or Elabasse, the Chrysoborca in Plin. by some Nisua test Herb. is a
great City upon the Confluence of Jeminy and Ganges, which River there is no
broader than the Seine before the Loure; and at some times in the year so
little water, that it will not bear a small Boat; much resorted to by the
Bannyans, for the Relics of diverse deformed Pagothia's. These Bannyans swarm
in multitudes all over the Indies, sucking in the sweetness of Gain by an
immeasurable thirst and industry: But the Moors and Gentiles often ravish it
from them, for the Bannyan is no Hestor nor Fighter, but morally honest,
courteous in Behavior, temperate in Passion, decent in Apparel, abstemious in
their Diet, industrious in their Callings, charitable to the Needy, humble to
all, and so innocent, as not to take away the life of the smallest Vermin,
believing the Transanimation of Souls into Beasts, a Persuasion though strange
to us, was not to our Countrymen the Druidae of old.

Elora, not much above three hours from Doltabad, is famous for the many Pagods
of Gigantick Figures of Men and Women cut in the Rock, so that if one considers
the number of spacious Temples full of Pillars and Plasters, and the many
Thousands of Figures, all cut out of a Natural Rock, it may be truly said, That
they are Works surpassing Human Force.

The River Ganges, having received an infinite number of Brooks and Rivers from
the North-East and West, discharges itself by several Mouths into the Gulf of
Bengala, making several pleasant Islands, containing many Towns covered with
lovely Indian Trees.

Patna is one of the greatest Cities of India upon the Banks of Ganges about
two Leagues long, where the Hollanders have an House, because of their Trade in
Saltpeter.

Daca is a great Town, about two Leagues long by the side of Ganges, where the
English and Hollanders have very fair Houses for their Goods and Trade,
reckoned the Capital City of Bengala.

At Ouguely is the general Factory of the Dutch, and at K^ssen Baser is the
House of the Director of all the Holland Factories in B^ngala. Kachemire,
Cachmir and Kichmir, Thev. is esteemed the little Paradise of India, by reason
of its Beauty. At Banareus upon the Banks of Ganges, and Jaganate, upon the
mouth of it, are the ch of Pagods, than which nothing can be more magnificent,
by reason of the quantity of Gold and Jewels wherewith they are adorned, and
millions of People repair thither to celebrate their Festivals.

Bengala, famous for its temperate Air, for the Fertility of the Soil, for the
great store of Rice, for its Cane or Bamboo's, and its Calamba wood, which
yields the most pleasant scent in the world. It gives its Name to one of the
most famous Gulphs of Asia, called Golfo de Bengala, the Sinus Gangeticus of
Ptol. Its yearly Revenue paid to the Mogul, comes to a Million and 500000
Roupies clear; the chief City thereof is Bengala, by some Satigan. Gange Ptol.
Ganges Strabo. Thevenot calls this Province Oulesser; the Idolaters, Jaganat.

Besides these Countries, I find mention made by Mr. Tavernier,

1. Of the Kingdom of Bouton, of a large Extent, famous for Musk, Rhubarb,
Wormseed, and Furrs, and the Caravan is three months traveling from Patna to
Boutan, the way being generally through Forests, and over Mountains, which
after you have passed, the Country is good, abounding in Rice, Corn, Pulse and
Wine. They have had for a long time the use of Muskets and Cannon, and their
Gunpowder is long, but of great Force: The Natives are strong and well
proportioned, but their Noses and Faces are somewhat flat; and there is no King
in the world, more feared and more respected than the King of Boutan.

2. Of the Kingdom of Tipra adjoining to Pegu, of whose extent there is no
certain Conjecture to be made; there is a Mine of Gold but course, as also a
sort of course Silk, which is the greatest Revenue the King has.

3. Of the Kingdom of Asem, which is one of the best Countries in all Asia,
producing all things necessary for human sustenance, yet Dogs flesh is the
greatest delicacy; there are Mines of Gold, Silver, Lead, Iron, and store of
Silk and Gumlake. Kenerof is the Name of the City where the King keeps his
Court, and at Azo are the Tombs of the Kings of Asem; and it is thought that
these are the first Inventers of Guns and Powder, which from thence spread into
China. They have Vines, but make no Wine, but dry their Grapes to make
Aquavitae; and of the Leaves of Adam's Fig Tree they make Salt. The Men and
Women are generally well-complexioned, but swarthy, subject to Wens in their
Throats, as well as those of Bouton and Tipra. They go Naked, only covering
their Privy Parts; and a Blue Bonnet or Cap upon their Heads, with Bracelets
upon their Ears, Arms and Legs.

The PENINSULA On this side GANGES.
map of Peninsula on this side Ganges INDIA on this side GANGES by R. Morden.
Cancer.


THis Peninsula is comprehended between the Mouths of Indus and Ganges, and
advances Northwards from the Estate of the Mogul to Cape Cormorin in the South,
and on the East and West it is washed by the Ocean or Indian Sea. It is divided
into two parts by the Mountains of Gata, which stretch themselves from the
North to the South with several fair Plains on the top, and occasion several
Seasons at the same time; for many times it is Winter on the one side, and
Summer on the other. It belongs to above fifty Kings, the potentest of which by
degrees subdueth the rest. The Portugals, English and Hollanders, have several
places near the Sea, with Fortresses for the security of their Trade, which is
generally in Spices, Jewels, Pearls and Cotten-Linen. The other places upon the
Land are inhabited by the Natives, whose Petty Sovereigns, not being able to
hinder the Settlement of the Europeans, are glad to entertain Commerce with
them, and to crave their Assistance in their Wars one with another. This
Peninsula may be divided into four principal parts; Decan, Golconda, Narsingua,
and Malabar.

Decan acknowledges Visapour, Musopatta, Baud. Viziapour, Thev. for her Capital
City, which is large but scambling; the Kings Palace is vastly big, but ill
built, the Seat of Idalcan, or Dialcan, a Mohammedan King, once very powerful;
He took Dabul from the Portugals, besieged Cha^l and Goa, leading in his Army
near two hundred thousand men, well provided with Ammunition, his Artillery
great, having, as it is said, one particular Cannon that will carry a Bullet of
near eight hundred pound weight, once tributary to the Mogul, but now absolute,
Tav. who has won from him Dultabat of a great Trade, and one of the best
Fortresses in the Moguls Empire, Bider, Paranda and other places, and built the
great and new City of Aureng-abad, encompassed with a Lake, and adorned with a
fair Mosque and stately Monument.

Goa, the Barigaza of old, is the residence of the Portugal Viceroy, and the
King of Portugal's Magazine for the East Indies, and Harbor for their Indian
Fleet: It Is reported, that the Hospital of Goa is more Beautiful, Richer and
better accommodated than the Hospital of the Holy Ghost in Rome, or the
Infirmery of Maltha: The City is very large, and though without Gates and
Walls, yet with its Castles and Forts it is of great strength and force: Their
Houses fair, their Palaces and public Buildings very Magnificent, their
Churches stately and richly adorned. Her Strength and Beauty took rise from the
Decan Kings, from whom Anno 1509 Albuquerque the Victorious Portugal conquered
it, and after that defended it against 70000 Foot and 3500 Horse, which Idulcan
brought to reduce it with. It Is the bravest and best defended City in the
Orient, seated in an Isle called Tilsoar, 30 miles in Circuit, surrounded by a
fresh River, streaming from the mighty Mountain Bellaguate: The whole Isle so
abounding in several little Towns, Fields, Groves and Gardens, replenished with
Grass, Corn, Cattle, Fruit, Flowers and such self-ravishing Objects, that here
the Portugals live in all manner of delight and pleasure, exceeding Proud and
Stately, but Civil and Courteous; both Sexes given to Venery, and the Women
excessively amorous of White Men, but much confined. The King of Visapour has
four good Ports in this Decan Territory, Rejapour, Dabul, Dunga of old, first
yielded to the Mercy of Andragius Governor of Chaul, but soon taken by the
Decanees, but recovered from them by F. Almeyda; and after great Slaughter of
the Inhabitants and Rich Spoil burnt the City, repaired afterward by the Vice
Roy of Goa: About the year 1620 taken by an English Captain, (Hall) who made
the Daring Portugal know, that their Bravadoes to the English were not terrible.

Choul the Comane of Ptol. test Cast. ravished from the Diadem of Decan by
Almeyda in the year 1507. And in the year 1573 it was besieged by Misamoluc,
the Decan Prince, with an numerous Army of Horse, Foot and Elephants, but he
was forced to raise his Siege with Loss and Shame.

Crapatan and Mengrelia, which last is one of the best Roads in all India, and
is famous for Cardamum, the best of Spices, and the Dutch have a Factory there.

The HISTORY of Sevagy Tav. Sivagi Thev.
THe Plundering of Surrat by Sivagy, and the desperate Attacks made upon some
of our East India Ships, especially that of the President Captain Jonathan Hide
Commander, in the year 1683, by 1500 of his men, in three Ships and four Grabs,
who were bravely repulsed with a great Slaughter, though those brave Men had
not the happiness long to enjoy the Honor of that noble Action, the Ship being
unfortunately cast away coming into the Chanel, and all the Men but two lost.
These and many other of his Actions, have given many occasion to inquire what
he is, and what Country he possesses.

This Raja Sivagi born at Bashaim, the Son of a Captain of the King of
Visiapour's, being of a restless and turbulent Spirit, rebelled in his Fathers
lifetime, and putting himself at the head of several Banditi and other
debauched young men, he retired unto the Mountains of Visiapour, and made his
part good against all those that came to attack him.

The King of Visiapour thinking that his Father kept Intelligence with him
caused him to be arrested, and he died in prison. Sivigy conceived so great a
hatred against the King that he used all endeavors to be revenged of him. And
in a very short time he plundered Visiapour, and with the Booty he took, made
himself so strong in Men, Arms and Horses, that he became able enough to seize
some Towns, viz. Rasapour, Rasigar, Crapaten, Daboul, and to form a little
State thereabout. The King dying about that time, and the Queens endeavors to
reduce him being unsuccessful, she accepted the Peace he proposed to her, that
he should enjoy the Territories which he had subdued, that he should be
tributary to the Young King and pay him half his Revenue.

However he could not rest but plundered some places belonging to the Great
Mogul, who therefore sent Forces against him under the Conduct of the Governor
of Aurenge-Abat. But Sivigi having his retreat always in the Mountains, and
being extremely cunning, the Mogul could not reduce him. In the mean time to be
revenged on the Mogul, he resolved to plunder Surrat, which he did for 40 days;
so that none but the English and Dutch saved themselves, by the viperous
Defense they made, by reason of their Cannon which Si^^^ would not venture
upon, nor durst he adventure to attack the Ca^^le but marched off with the
Wealth he got, which was reported to be worth in Jewels, Gold and Silver, to
the value of Thirty French Millions, which was in the year 1664 when he was 35
years o^ Age. And the Mogul s Affairs not suffering him to pursue his Revenge
upon Sivigy, he still continues his Robberies and Pyracies upon all
opportunities and occasions.

Mal^bar or Malavar is a low Country, with a delightful Coast, and well
inhabited by people that practice Pyracy. There is a certain wind, which
blowing there in winter, so disturbs the neighboring Sea, that it rouls the
Sand to the mouths of the adjoining Ports; so that at that time there is not
water for little Barks to enter; but in the Summer time another contrary wind
is there so violent, that it drives back the same Sand, and renders the Ports
again navigable: The great number of Rivers in this Country renders Horses
useless, especially for War. A Country most part of the year verdant, and
abounding with Cattle, Corn, Cotton, Pepper, Ginger, C^ssia, Cardamum, Rice,
Myrobalans, Ananas-pappas, Melons, Dates, Coco's and other Fruits.

Calecut or Calicut, thought to be the Town which Ptol. calls Canthapis, an
Error of Niger and Bertius. Calicaris Herb. is a Town of Trade, where the
Portugals first settled themselves, though not with that success as at Cochin,
where they obtained leave to raise a Citadel, which was the first Fort they
had in the East Indies; but that Fortress was taken from them by the Hollanders
in the year 1662. The Prince of Calicut calls himself Zamorin, a Prince of
great power and awe; and not more black of color, than treacherous in
disposition. Many deformed Pagotha's are here worshipped, but with this
ordinary Evasion, That they adore not Idols, but the Deumo's they represent.
And the Dutch General, who was Cook of a Ship, Crowned the King with those
hands which had oftener handled a Ladle, than a Sword: And exacts a Tribute from
all the Kings of Malabar, but most of them are dispensed withal from paying
it. Besides this Prince, there are in this Country the Kings of Cananor, Tanor,
Cranganor, Cochin, Coulan, and Travancor, and 10 or 12 other considerable ones.

Cochin, Colchin of Ptol. Herb. not much inferior to Goa, pays Tribute to the
Hollanders who keep the Castle. The Harbor is pestered with Rocks and Shelves.

Coulan has been much richer, and better peopled than it is; for it had
formerly above 100000 Inhabitants, Sopatpa in Arrian, and Co^^y in Ptol.
Zamoryn valued it for its Situation, for its Port, and its Fidelity. Since
that, the Sands having stopped up the Port, Goa and Calecut have got all the
Trade from it.

Cananor, Calligeris Ptol. test Castal. holds also some Islands among the
Maldives, viz. the Isle Malicut, and the five Isles of Diavandorow.

Onor, the Hippocura of Ptol. test Baud. produces a weighty sort of Pepper,
and Black Rice, accounted better than the White.

Baticale and Gersopa, further in the Land, are the Capital Cities of their
Kingdoms, included under the general Name of Canara.

To Malabar joins the fishing Coast, called the Coast of Manar, where they fish
for Pearls in April for three weeks together. The Country, which contains about
30 little Cities, is dry and Sunburnt, having no other advantages but by the
Fishery, for which they keep a Fair at Tuticorin; The most part of it is under
the N^ic of Madure, the Hollanders possessing only the Island of Kings, where
they have built a Fort, and to which there is no coming but by a Chanel, for
the defense whereof they have raised several Works, for conservation thereof,
being of so great importance to them, by reason that thereby they are Masters
of the Banks of Manar. There is also found some Amber-greice; and heretofore
near to Cape Com^rin, a Cape well known of old by Ptol. called Cory and
Calligicum by Strab. Conomencina by Plin. Calusca and Colaicum. Comar by Arrian
in his Periplus. Comara extrema, or Cape Comryn, there was a Pearl found that
weighed above 30 Quintals.

Coromandel, or Corobander, Cartagar damna Ptol. so called, from the abundance
of Rice which it produces, is famous for the best Ports of India. The City of
Meliapore, Malipur incolis, St. Thomaso Lusitanis M^lange Ptol. or the
Calurmina of Sophron. and St. Thomas's, Anglis, where that Apostle wrought many
Miracles, and where (as their Traditions) he foretold the coming of White
People into that Country. It is observed that the Offspring of those that
Martyred St. Thomas, have one Leg bigger than the other.

^^liour is seated upon a small River, having five Foot of Water at the Mouth
of it, which is about Cannon-shot from the City; but small Ships had rather
harbor themselves at Pelicate, and the great ones at N^ga^^t^n, which with
Meliapor belongs to the Portugal^.

P^licate, besides the Town, there is a Fort called Geldria, that belongs to
the Du^^h where they have their chief Factory, and where lives the chief
Intendent over all the rest that are in the Territories of the King of G^l^^da.
In the Fort are generally 200 Soldiers, besides Merchants. The Bastions are
well stored with good Guns, and the Sea comes up to the very Wall of it.
Tavernier tells us, That when the Inhabitants fetch their Water to drink, they
stay till the Sea is q^^te gone out, then digging holes in the Sand as near the
Sea as they can, they meet with fresh Water.

About 7 or 8 Leagues off, is Fort St. George, which belongs to the English,
whose Port or Harbor is called Madraspatan.

The Kingdom of Golconda is a Country abounding in Corn, Rice, Cattle, and
other Necessaries for Human Life; and Bagnagar is the Name of the Metropolis
commonly called Golconda, which is the Name of a Fortress about two Leagues
from it. The City is said to be little less than Orleance, seated upon a River,
which near to M^slipatan falls into the Gulf of Bengala, over which River
there is a stately and fair Bridge into the City, which is adorned with the
King's Palace, and the Houses of the great Lords, and other Persons of Quality,
the Merchants and Tradesmen living in the Suburbs, which are a League in
length. In this City is to be seen the Foundation of a magnificent Pagod,
which, had it been finished, had been the fairest in India; there is one Stone,
which is an entire Rock, of such a prodigious Bulk, that 5 or 600 Men were five
years before they could hew it out of its place, and they say that 1400 Oxen
were employed to draw it away.

The Men and Women of Golconda are well proportioned and of comely statures,
only the Country people swarthy; there are said to be 20000 Licensed common
Women about the City and Suburbs.

The present King, descended from an ancient Family of the Turcomans, is a
Mahumetan, and of the Sect of Hali, and pays the Mogul an annual Tribute of
200000 Pagods.

Maslipatan is a great City, and the most famous Road for Ships in the Gulf of
Bengal, the Argaric Gulf of old, from whence they set Sail for Pegu, Siam,
Aracan, etc. where, Bloom says, the English have settled a Factory.

Concerning the Kingdoms of Narsinga and Bisnagar, which some Authors make two
distinct Countries, though some others confound them together, I shall give you
this account, That formerly the Territories of the Raja of Narsinga extended
from Cape Cormorin all along the Coast of Cormandel as far as the River Guenga
that falls into the Bengalan Gulf, near the mouth of the Ganges, the other
Raja's being his Subjects; that the last Raja, who was at War with Ackbar the
Mogul, brought into the Field four Armies, the first lay in that Province which
is now called Golconda, the second was quartered in the Province of Visapour,
the third in Brampore, the fourth in Doltabat. This Raja dying without
Children, the four Generals divided amongst them the Country; but the Successor
of the Mogul conquered again that of Brampore, of Doltabat, and part of
Visapour; but the King of Golconda became Tributary to him, as was said before,
so that it is very probable there are no such Cities as Narsingue or Bisnagar.
Tavernier in his Travels makes no mention of them.

The last Relations tell us, that Gandicot, Tav. Guendicot, Thev. is one of the
strongest Cities in the Kingdom of Carnatica, about 85 Leagues from Meliapour,
and 1200 from Goloonda: And that the greatest Raja on that side Ganges is of
Velour, whose Territories extend to Cape Cormorin, and who succeeded to some
part of the Estate of the Raja of Narsingue; but in regard there is no Trade in
his Country, he is but little known to Strangers.

Thevenot tells us, That the Usurpers were but three, viz. of Viziapor, of
Bisnagar, or Carnates, formerly called Narsinga; and Golconda. Thus these Kings
clashing together, the Kings of Viziapor and Golconda warred upon the King of
Bisuagar, and seized upon several of his Towns, so that he was constrained to
fly into the Mountains, and that his chief Town was Velour.

The Winter begins at Golconda in June with Rain and Thunder; the Air was
little cold at Night and in the Morning; and in February the great Heats begin;
Vines are plentiful there, and the Grapes are ripe in January. They have two
Crops a Year of Rice, and many other Grains.

Some Relations make mention of the Naiques of Madure, the Helura Ptol.
Mundiris Arriano. Modusa Plin. Tanaior and Gingi, the Orthura Ptol. test Baud.
Orissa Castal. of the Kingdom of Messur, next to that of Madure, but give us
little of Remarque with Certainty.

Of the Peninsula Beyond GANGES.
map of Peninsula beyond Ganges A New Map of INDIA Beyond GANGES By R: Morden


THis Country in the elder Times was so Renowned for Wealth, that one Tract of
it had the Name of the Silver Region, the other of the Golden Chersenese; yet,
in truth, the Country itself was but little known in the Times of the Ancients,
or the Interior part of it to us in these days. Our latest Discoveries tell us,
it is dismembered and subdivided into almost as many Kingdoms and Estates as
Cities and Towns, and into as many distinct Governments as there are Tribes and
Nations amongst them; the chief Cities of which are Pegu, Triglipton, or
Trigliphon of Ptol. by Castal. which was very considerable, when it
comprehended two Empires, and 26 Kingdoms; and then it was that Gold, Silver,
Pearls, and precious Stones were as common in the Court of Pegu, as if the
whole Orient had brought all its Riches thither: But what its Revenues, what
its Government, what its Forces and Riches now are, I do not certainly find.

On the North of Pegu near Bengala, is the City and Kingdom of Arachan, now
said to be subject to the Great Mogul. Siriangh, or Sirejang, is a strong Fort
on the mouth of the River, given to the Portugals by the King of Arachan, who,
at last, were forced to yield it to the King of Ana, by whom the Governor was
cruelly Tortured on a Spit,

Sandiva is an Island about 30 Leagues in compass, very fruitful, once subdued
by the Portugals, but taken from them by the King of Arachan, Anno 1608.

2. Siam, of which our last Relation tells us, That it is a Country plentiful in
Rice and Fruits: The Forests of large Bamboo's, are full of Rhinocero's,
Elephants, Tigers, Hearts, Apes, and Serpents with two Heads, but one has no
motion.

The Rivers are very large, and overflow the Banks when the Sun is in the
Southern Tropic. The Capital City is Siam, the Sobanus or Cortacha of Ptol.
about 3. Leagues in Circuit, and walled, the River running quite round it; and
in the Year 1665. fortified with very good Bulwarks by a Neapolitan Jesuit,
whose Port Town is Bancock, six Leagues from the Sea.

The Natives are all Slaves either to the King or the great Lords; they have a
great many Priests called Bonzes, very ignorant, yet greatly reverenced; they
hold the Transmigration of Souls into several Bodies, and say, That the God of
the Christians and theirs were Brothers.

They have 33 Letters in their Alphabet, and write from the Left to the Right,
contrary to the Custom of other Indians.

Their King is one of the richest Monarchs of the East, and styles himself King
of Heaven and Earth, though Tributary to the Tartars, as Conquerors of China.
He never shows himself in Public above twice a Year, but then in an
extraordinary Magnificence. He has a great kindness for Elephants, counts them
his Favorites, and the Ornaments of his Kingdom, and styles himself King of
the White Elephant, for which there has been great Wars between him and the
Peguan King.

Martaban, said to be the Triglipton of Ptol. on the Gulf of Bengala, once
subject to Pegu, now to Siam; once a Kingdom, now of a great Trade, especially
for Martabanes, which are Vessels of Earth, of a kind of Porcelain varnished
with black, and much esteemed in all the East.

3. Malacca, the Aurea Chersonesus of old, in the Peninsula whereof are diverse
Kingdoms, all which, except Malacca, are Tributary to that of Siam; Tenasseri,
Juncalaon, Quedda, Pera, and Malacca, are on the Western part; Ihor, Puhang,
Patane, Burdelong, and Ligor, are on the Eastern Coast.

Malacca, the Tacola of Ptol. test Alph. Adriano. (aliis Tacolais Juncalaon,)
is the most famous, being great, rich, and powerful; An. 1511. the Portugals
took it, and kept it till 1641. when the Hollanders took it from them. Among
the Rarities of the Malacca, or rather of the World, is the Arbor Tristis,
which bears Flowers only after Sunset, and sheds them so soon as the Sun
rises, and this every Night in the year.

4. Camboja, Forte Pytindra or Pityndra of Ptol. on the River Mecon, 60 Leagues
up the River, once one of the three prime Cities in this part of India: The
King thereof is, or lately was, Tributary to Siam, whose Manners and Customs
the People much resemble. In the year 1644. four Holland Ships made into this
River, and got out, notwithstanding all the opposition of the King of Camboja.

5. Chiampa, which communicates its Name to the Country, said to be a distinct
Kingdom. It is seated near the Seaside, and of good Trade for the Wood called
Lignum Aloes; by some the Town is called Pulo Caceim.

Cochin China is said to be one of the best Kingdoms in all India; it borders
upon China, of which it was once part; and whose Manners, Customs, Government,
Religion, and other Ceremonies they yet retain, but their Language is that of
Tonquin. Among the Rarities of this Country, is,

First, The Inundation which in Autumn covers with its Waters almost all the
Country, making the Earth so fruitful, that it brings forth its Increase twice
or thrice a year.

Secondly, Their Saroy Boura, or matter wherewith the Swallows make their
Nests, which being steeped and moistened in Water, serves for Sauce to all
Meats, communicating a variety of Taste, as if composed of several Spices.

Thirdly, Their Trees called Thins, the Wood whereof remains uncorruptible,
whether in Water or Earth.

Sansoo is one of the greatest Cities of Chochin China, and greatest Trade, but
now the Port, failing, it decays.

Haifo, or Faifo, is remarkable for its Forest of Orange and Pomgranate Trees.

Dinfoan is a good Port, but of a difficult entrance.

Tachan is an Isle where the Fowls retire during the Heats.

Boutan is a good Haven.

Checo, Kekio, or Kecchio, is the chief City of the Kingdom of Tunquin, and the
ordinary Residence of the King, said to contain a Million of Inhabitants.

The Tunquineses, as well Men as Women, are for the most part well
proportioned, of an Olive Complexion.

Their Habit grave and modest, being a long Robe that reaches down to their
Heels, bound about at the Waste with a Girdle of Silk. Only the Soldier's upper
Garment reaches no farther than his Knees, and Breeches down to the mid-leg.

They are naturally mild and peaceable, submitting to Reason, and condemning
the Transports of Choler.

The Air is so mild and temperate, that all the year long seems to be but one
continued Spring; Frost and Snow are there never known.

There are but two Winds which divide the whole Year, the one North, the other
South, both continuing for six Months.

The Country produces neither Corn nor Wine, but store of Rice, Aqua-vitae,
and excellent Fruit.

Bodego is the place whence they embark the King's Body.

Cuadag is the Port where all the great Ships lie.

Cuaci is the Bounds between Tunquin and Cochin China.

Chancon is the place where St. Xavier died 1552.

The Country is adorned with many beautiful and fertile Plains, and watered
with many great Rivers.

Two Ships, or at least one, goes yearly from Nangesaque to Tonquin, where is
much Silk and Musk, and Lignum Aloes, which they truck for Scarlets, Linen, and
Amber; the Alabaster the Dutch load for Balast

The King's Palace, before which the Dutch Ships ride at Anchor, is very
costly, and their Bridges are all of Alabaster.

Modern Relations also mention the great Kingdom of Lao, which extends from
Fourteen Degrees to Two and twenty and an half of Northern Latitude, and Fifty
miles in breadth all along on the River Mecon, whose Capital is Lanjang in
Eighteen Degrees of Latitude. As also the Kings of Ava, the Palibothra of Ptol.
by Market. Palimbothaea Arriano. Bao, Brema, Ciocangue, and Tangu, which are
said to be Tributaries to the King hereof.

About Twenty Leagues from the Coast Cambodia, lies the Bank Pracellis, being
about an Hundred Leagues long, and Forty broad. The Indians relate, that it was
a Kingdom in former Ages, but sunk by Earthquakes; and here it was in Anno
1660. the rich laden Ship Tergoes was shipwrack'd.

Of CHINA.
map of China CHINA a New Description by Robert Morden


CHina has been called by as many Names as there have been Royal Families in
it, but always accounted one of the most considerable Countries in the World,
by reason of its Largeness, the Beauty of its Cities, their Number, and the
politeness of the Inhabitants. It is also reputed that Printing the Silk
Manufactures, Artillery, Powder, are more in use there than in Europe. Besides
all things necessary for human subsistence and delight, it produces the most
precious Merchandises of the East; and Nature seems to have bestowed upon every
one of its Provinces something of particular esteem; and some that have lived
there affirm, that whatever is found dispersed in the rest of the World, is
there to be met with in one heap together; and some things that no part of the
rest of the World affords.

China lies in a kind of a Square, and is so populous, that there have been
reckoned 60 Millions of People fit to be taxed. The Rivers are so full of
Boats, that it is thought they have more than all the Rivers of the World
beside. The Revenue of the King is said to be an 150 Millions of Gold; or, as
others affirm, 400 Millions of Ducats.

The Chinese laugh at our Maps, that place their Kingdom in one of the
extremities of the World, averring, that they lie in the middle, as the Jews
pretended for Jerusalem, the Greeks for Delphos, and the Moors for Granada. The
Chinese also say, that they have two Eyes, the Europeans one, and that all
other Nations have none at all. They have been always so jealous to conceal the
Maxims of their Policies, that willingly they will not give Strangers
admittance into their Country. The great Wall, or Entrenchment rather, 400
Leagues in length, was a work of more labor than use; for the Tartars have
several times overrun China, notwithstanding that Obstacle. If you will
believe their Histories, they will tell, you that the Tartars have troubled
China for above these 4000 years. In these last years there have been strange
Revolutions in this Empire; for after the Rebels had acted there as Sovereigns,
the Tartars, under Xunchi their King, conquered their Country in less than
seven years, beginning since 1643. Their Military Force was but small, the Men
of Learning overpow'ring the Men of the Sword; so that the strength of their
Kingdom was only their Number and their Policy. Their principal Nobility and
Rulers were called Mandarins, and now the Tartar keeps his Tartar and Chinese
Officers under the Title of Viceroys; the one for War, the other for Learning;
there is only this difference, that now the Sword ore-tops the Gown, and the
Mandarins are clipped of their Power, which they exercise with no small Pride
over the People.

Paganism is generally received, yet Virtue is in high esteem. The public is
far richer in proportion than private Men. They continue their Writing from the
top to the bottom in length. They have above 60000 Letters, but not above 300
Words, which are, for the most part, all Monasillables. So that whereas the
Europeans have few Letters, but many Words, the Chinese have many Letters, but
few Words, which they pronounce with a various Tone, denoting the various
signification of the Word, so that they may be said to sing, rather than speak.
The Chinese are so in love with their hair, that they will rather suffer Death
than be shaved.

All China is divided into 15 Provinces, which are bigger than large Kingdoms.
There are 10 toward the South, that is to say, Junnan, Queicheu, Quangsi,
Quantung, Fokien, Chekiang, Kiangsi, Kiangnang, or Nanking, Suchuen, and
Huquang, which Provinces united some call by the name of Cathay or Katay, as
they call the Southern, Mangin. The five to the North are Xensi, Xansi,
Pecheli, or Peking, Xantung, Honan, to which they also reckon the Territory
called Leaotung, and the Peninsula Corea.

The Isles of China are Ainan toward the South, near to the Coast of Fokien lie
Quemoy and Eymuy; further off at Sea appears Fermosa and to the East of
Cheklang are the Isles Chanque and Chexan.

The Province of Peking or Pecheli is the first in Dignity, and is divided into
eight lesser Counties, containing 131 Cities.

The Metropolis is Peking, by the Tartars Xuntien, by Marcus Paulus Cambalu in
39 degr. 50. North Latitude, adorned with many stately Palaces or Courts:
According to the Dutch Narration, the Emperor's Court was exactly square,
containing 3 quarters of an hours walk, with 4 Gates opposite to the 4 Angles
of the World; at the end of this Court stands a Bridge, on each side whereof
stand three Elephants richly caparisoned and generally loaded with gilded
Towers, through this you enter into another Quadrangle of 400 paces, at the end
of which stand three stately Houses. Beyond this a third, and farther a fourth
Court all paved with Freestone, and being 400 spaces square. In this stands
the Emperor's Throne, and four stately Edifices curiously built and covered
with costly Roofs, adorned with gilded Galleries. Beyond this Court are several
Orchards and Gardens planted with all sorts of Trees, and adorned with curious
Buildings: And thus flourished the Palace of Pekin, rebuilt by the Tartars in
Anno 1645.

In or near the Place of Paoting the Emperor Hoangti anciently planted the Seat
of his Kingdom; and on the East Side of the City Hokien stands a great Temple,
in the middle of which is a stately and great Image. Chinting is great and
populous. Jenkin and Junyping are strong places for the defense of the Empire.
The Garizon Tiencin lies on the Bay Xang, it is a Port or Haven Town to Peking
and of a great Trade; and on the North-side lies the great Garrison Xanghaie on
the Island Cue.

Westward beyond the Province of Pecking lies Xansi, on the North whereof lies
the great Wall, and behind that the Tartar Kingdom of Tangu and the Desert
Xamo. This Province is divided into five Counties, having eighty six Cities,
and though not very big, yet is pleasant. The City Taiyven is the Metropolis,
which for its Antiquity of Building, stately and brave Edifices, is accounted
amongst the best Cities of China: At the City Pingiany the Emperor Jau kept his
Court within the Walls; and without the Gates of Fuencheu stands two stately,
ancient and magnificent Buildings.

The Province of Xensi extends to the Kingdoms of Prester John, Cascar and
Thebet, which the Chinese in a general name call Sifan, it is a large
Province, and is divided into eight Counties, having one hundred and eighty
Cities: Sigan is the Metropolis of the whole, seated on the River Guei, in a
most pleasant and delightful place, of a noble Prospect and good Trade.

In the year 1625 a stone was found, in digging a Foundation for a house,
inscribed with the Old Chinese and Syriack Characters, which contained the
Christian Religion. Cungchand, Fungciang, Hanchung, Kingyang and Linyao, are
the chief Cities of the Countries of the same names. Socheu is a strong hold
and well fortified, and Xancheu or Cancheu is very strong, and the residence of
a Vice Roy.

Xantung may justly be esteemed an Island, being washed by the Sea on one side,
and separated by several Rivers on the other, and is divided into six Countries.

Chinan, the Metropolis of the whole Province, is very large and full of
stately Houses, having two Lakes within its walls, out of which flow several
little streams through the whole City; it is also adorned with several stately
Temples. Among the great Cities of this Province, Lincing exceeds in
Inhabitants, Buildings and Trade, but above all for its Porcelane Tower ninety
cubits high, curiously adorned with Imagery and painting without, and within
laid with Marble of diverse colors smoothly polished; on the Top stands an
Image cast of Copper and gilt thirty foot high.

The Province of Honan, by the Chinese thought to lie in the middle of the
World, because it lies in the midst of China; it is divided into nine
Territories or Countries, having one hundred and eight Cities. The chief City
Caifung lies about two Leagues from the Yellow River, whose Water is said to be
higher than the City: The other chief Cities are Qunte, Changte, Honan,
Nunyang, and Juning.

Suchuen is a great Province and separated by the River Kiang, and is divided
into eight Countries, containing one hundred and fifty Cities, besides
Garrisons. Cingtu is the Metropolis, and lies in an Island, yet includes
several Moats, over which are many Bridges, Paining, Xunking, Sincheu,
Chungking, Quicheu, Luggan, are the chief Cities of the other parts of this
Province.

The Province Huq^^ng is divided also in the middle by the River Kiang. The
Chinese call it the land of Fish and Rice, and the Storehouse of China, and
have a Proverb, that the rest of the Provinces affords them but one Meal, but
that of Huquang feeds them all the year long; it is divided into fifteen
Countries, containing one hundred Cities great and small, and eleven Garrisons.

The Metropolis whereof is Vuchang, on the south shore of the River Kiang,
Hanyang, Siangyang, Tegan, H^angcheu, Kingcheu, Jocheu, Changxa, Paoking,
Hancheu, Chante, Xincheu, Iungcheu, Chingyang and Chingtien, are the other
chief Cities, and Chingcheu is the chief City of a little Territory of the same
Name.

Kiangsi is divided into thirteen Countries, contaning 67 Cities; the chief
whereof is Nanchang, once the Metropolis of the Empire: Iaocheu, Qua^sin,
Kicukiang, Kienchang, Linkiang, Kiegan, Kancheu are other chief Cities. In this
Province near Iaocheu, and no where else, is that Water to be found which
brings Porcelane to perfection, especially when they intend it an Azure,
Vermillion or yellow Tincture. The last Travelers into China tell us, that
Porcelane is made of a particular Sand or Earth, which is fetched out of the
County of the City Hoiecheu, in the Province of Nanking; nor is it necessary
that the Earth should be buried a whole Age together, as others idly affirm;
for the Chines^s only knead this Sand or Earth together, and make Vessels of
it, which they bake in Furnaces for fifteen days; but the coloring of it is
one of the chief Arts or Secrets which they conceal from Strangers.

The Province of F^kien is divided into eight Counties, and contains sixty
Cities and Towns: Focheu or Hocksieu, is the Metropolis and chief of the
Country; it is seated about fifteen Leagues westward from the Sea, on the
Southern shore of the River Min, which with a wide mouth falls into the Sea,
and brings both small and great Vessels up to the City walls; it is populous
and of great Trade, where the Dutch also had sometime a Factory in the year 1662.

The City Chiencheu lies near the Sea, in a delightful Plain, with a large Bay,
that the greatest Ships ride close under the walls. Chaucheu of great Trade for
all rich and foreign commodities. Kienning upon the River Min, is a place or
great Trade, for all commodities pass through it. Hinhoa is neatly built,
adorned with many triumphant Arches and Colleges, for the encouragement of
Learning.

Xaouw and Tincheu are also considerable. Foning is also fair and large, lying
near the Sea. The Castle Ganhui near Changeheu has a convenient Haven for
Ships: And Tinyan is a Fort for the defense of the Seacoast.

The Province of Chekiang exceeds all the rest in fertility of Soil,
delightfulness in Prospects, and in plenty of Silk; it is divided into eleven
great Countries, having eighty three Cities or Towns, besides unwalled places,
Castles and populous Villages. Hanchew is the chiefest City, thought to be the
ancient Quinzay. Kiahing is moted about with Rivulets of Water, full of stately
and well built Structures; all the Streets are arched, under which they walk,
as in a Piazzo, free from wind and weather: Niencheu, Kincheu, Chucheu, Kinhoa,
Vencheu, Ningpo and Xoahing, all chief Cities and bravely adorned; not far from
Ningpo lies Liampo, once much frequented by the Portugals. The whole Province
of Chekiang is every where cut through with Rivers, Rivulets and murmuring
streams, some natural, others artificial. The chief River Che, which gives name
to the Country, of which they tell us, that annually upon the eighteenth day of
the eighth Moon, (which is our October,) a prodigious Springtide happens,
roaring extremely in its ascent, beyond the loud murmur of Cataracts or
Water-breaks, and comes with a head high and strangely mounted above the Waters.

The Province of Nanking, by the Tartars called Kiangnan, is the second in
honor, in magnitude and fertility in all China: It is divided into fourteen
great Territories, having Cities and Towns an hundred and ten; Nanking or
Kiangning being the Metropolis, a City, that if she did not exceed most Cities
on the Earth in bigness and beauty, yet she was inferior to few, for her
Pagodes, her Temples, her Porcelane Towers, her Palaces and Triumphal Arches.
Fungiang, Sucheu, Sunkiang, Leucheu, Hoaigan, Ganking, Ningue, Hoeicheu, are
also eminent Places, and of great Note and Trade.

The Province of Quantung lies along upon the Seashore, having many convenient
Havens and Harbors: It contains ten Counties and eighty great and small Cities.
Quancheu, or Canton by the Portugals, is the Metropolis and chief of the
Province; exceedingly beautified with Pagodes, Palaces, stately Structures and
Triumphal Arches; fortified with strong Walls, Towers, Bulwarks and Redoubts,
defended by five Castles. Of the greatest Trade, and the richest in the whole
Kingdom. The other great Cities are Xaocheu, Hoeicheu, Chaocheu, Chacking,
Liencheu and Luicheu. The Island of Ainan or Hainan, is reckoned for the tenth
County, it lies in the Bay of Tunking, separated from China by a Chanel of
about five leagues broad, where they fish for Pearls; it chief City is Kiuncheu
or Ingly, fortified with strong Walls, handsome Buildings, and well seated for
Trade, and the whole Island produces all Necessaries for human sustenance.

Southwards of Canton lie many small Islands in the Sea, on one of which, or
rather a little Rock, joined to a great Island, lies the City Macao, once
possessed by the Portuguese, so naturally fortified that it is almost
invincible, being defended with two strong Castles against the attempts of an
Enemy.

The Province of Quansi in Bigness, plenty of Merchandise and pleasant Fields
may compare with the rest. It is divided into eleven great Countries, which
contain ninety eight Cities great and small, the chief whereof is Quilia full
of stately Structures; other chief Cities are Gucheu, Kingyang, Cincheu,
Nunning, Taping, Chingan and others.

The Province of Quicheu is divided into eight Counties, having great and small
Cities, to the number of eighty one, of which Quiyang is the chief, Chinyveng,
Tunying, Liping, are the next considerable.

The Province of Junnan, though the last in place, is not the least in extent
and goodness, viz. in the abundance of rich commodities. It Is divided into
twelve Provinces, contaning eighty seven Cities great and small, besides
thirteen Garrisons. The Metropolis Junnan boasts to be one of the best and
greatest Cities in all China, flourishing in Trade and Riches, adorned with
fair Structures and Temples. Jungning, Likiang, Yaogan, Tali, Manhoa, Kinghung
and Lancand, are other chief places.

In short, they reckon in these Counties twelve hundred ninety nine Towns, two
hundred forty seven great Cities, called Cheu, and eleven hundred fifty two
little Towns, called Hien, yet as big an ordinary City in Europe. Martinius
sets down thirteen hundred forty eight Towns, whereof one hundred fifty nine
are great, called Cheu, and the other Hien. There are also great Garrisons or
Military Countries, every one with lesser Garrisons under their commands, thirty
seven in number; also several Forts and Castles to the number of one hundred
seventy six. Besides these Towns and Fortresses, China is very full of
innumerable Villages and Hamlets, so that it appears to be as one entire City.

Corea is divided into eight Territories; On the North it joins to Nieuche in
Tartary; the South respects the Island Fungma or Quelpaerts, on which in the
year 1653 the Ship Sperwer of Batavia was Shipwracked, and of sixty four men
thirty six got to shore, who suffered many extreamities, and there found one of
their Dutch Country men that had been prisoner twenty seven years. The whole
Country is exceeding populous, full of Towns, built after the Chinese manner,
whose Fashions, Language, Letters, Religion and Government, the Coreans follow.
Its chief City is Pinjang, but by the aforesaid Dutch men's Relations, Sioor was
the Royal City, from whence in the year 1666, in a Fishermans bark, in ten
days, eight of them got to Gotto Island, and from thence to Nengesaque on the
Island Dysma.

The Isle Formosa, once Paccand, now under the Tartars, abounds with Deer,
wild-Goats, Hares, Coneys, Swine and Tigers, the Woods with Pheasants and
Pigeons, and the Ground produces Rice, Wheat, Sugar, Ginger, Cinnamon,
Coco-Nuts and several other necessaries for human Sustenance.

Their chief practice or special Virtues are Theft, Murder and Adultery; but if
any of the Women prove with Child before they are thirty seven years of Age,
when they are ready to be delivered the Midwife kneads it to death in the womb.
They Write, Read and have Registers.

In Anno 1654 happened a mighty Earthquake, which continued seven weeks with
little intermissions: In December and January is generally the fairest Weather:
Their greatest Rains are in July and August: The Mousons or stormy Seasons
begin in October, and continue till March, which is called the Northern; the
other, or Southern, begins in May and holds till September.

Against the North-East part of Formosa lies a rich golden Mine, surrounded by
many Rocks, from whence in August, the Rains wash down great store of gold Oar,
not far from the Fort Kelang, which the Dutch had in possession.

Taywan or Tayovan, upon the Isle Formosa, the utmost Northpoint, being distant
almost a league, but the Southermost point within a Bow-shot of the Land, it is
about two leagues and an half in Length, and a quarter in Breadth; on the
North-side upon a Sand-Hill stands the Fort Zelandia, built by the Dutch, 1632;
under the Castle Westward lies another Fort, guarded by two points of the Sea:
A Bow-shot distant lies a strong Outwork, being the Key to the Castle, called
Utrecht, Eastward from which stands the Town built by the Dutch: On the other
side, on the main of Formosa, stands the Fort and Village Sakkam, well planted
with Cannon; but in the year 1661 Coxinga and his Associates, being a crew of
Rebels Chinese, took both the Island of Formosa and Tayoven from the Dutch,
after a siege of ten Months, where Coxinga found ten Tun of Gold, forty pieces
of Ordnance, and other things to a great value.

Of JAPAN.
map of Japan JAPONAE ac TERRAE IESSONIS Novissima Descriptio Robt. Morden


THE Island of Japan, if it be an Isle, is not only one but many. for the
Coast, discontinued with many Inlets, stands like a broken Wall, and the
several falls of Fresh-water-Brooks and Rivulets, descending from the upper
Grounds, with their mixed interweavings, both from Sea and Land, make a numerous
crowd of petty Isles, the most spacious and wealthy whereof is Japan, by the
Natives Nippon, formerly said to comprehend fifty three Kingdoms; but our later
Relations tell us, that they are now fallen into the lap of one sole Monarch,
who keeps his magnificent Court at Jedo. This Island extends in length seven
hundred and twenty Miles, the breadth generally about one hundred and eighty,
but various. The East looks toward Californea in America, though four thousand
and two hundred Miles distant. I am not ignorant, that some Geographers have
made them to meet, others bring them very near together: I have two Lunar
observations and the co-herence of the Sea-chart with them to strengthen my
assertion. The Air of these Islands is temperate, but for the most part snowy
and cold; they abound in Rice, Pearl and Mines of Silver, very much esteemed,
the Pearls are very large, but somewhat inclining to Red.

The Country appears more hilly than plain, amongst which are two wonderful
Mountains, one vomiting continually flames, the other of a Prodigious height.

The Palm Tree that grows there is of a strange quality, (if true,) for it
endures no manner of moisture at the Roots, which is as destructive to them as
Poison. To make it to grow, it must be set in a hole full of filings of Iron
and dry Sand; and if any Boughs or Branches are broke or torn off by Winds or
any accident, if but nailed to the body, it will grow as well as if grafted.

The Japanners are generally tall of Stature, and well-set, and of a strong
Constitution, being exercised in all manner of suffering, and separated from
their Mothers and female Relations, believing that nothing makes them more
tender and effeminate than to be near Women: They much delight in War and are
good Soldiers, they exercise their Arms at twelve years of Age, and their
Swords or Scimiters are of an excellent temper.

They have the most happy Memories in the World, a nimble Fancy, and solid
Judgment: They are of a courteous Behavior and civil Deportment, covetous of
Honor and Reputation, impatient in Affronts and Disparagements. But unhappy it
is, that these excellent Qualifications should stand taxed with as many
notorious vices. Their Language is very curious, wherein they have several
words to express one thing, some in derision, others in honor, some for the
Prince, others for the People. Their Customs and Fashions are quite contrary to
ours. They drink warm or rather hot Water; alleging that Cold causes Coughs
and diseases in the Stomach, but that hot Water preserves the natural heat,
opens the Passages and quenches the Drought sooner. To their Sick they
minister very sweet and fragrant Potions. They never let blood, which they
husband as the chariot of Life. They esteem black Teeth, and mount the right
side of a Horse. And it is scarce to be believed with what a studied opposition
they differ from us; but though they differ in common Customs and Opinions, yet
in the solid work of Government and Authority, they act by the same Rule and
Policy, rising by degrees as we do, and ending in a sole Monarch, the Emperor,
who rules not by the Power of his Riches, but by the number of Men, and is
honorably attended in times of Peace at his Royal Palace: And in time of War is
guarded with a strong and numerous Army.

The Jesuits, Franciscans, Jacobins and Austin Friars, had made a great
Progress in the conversion of the Natives, in the year fifteen hundred ninety
six; for they were reckoned to be above 600000 Christians. But since the year
sixteen hundred and fourteen, they have been all driven out of the Island, and
no person dares profess Christianity but in private. Spaniards, Portugals and
Priests are all expelled; only the Dutch are permitted, in regard they strictly
forbid their People to speak of Religion, and by Relation as little to profess
it. There are several Tones or Princes among them, whose Power for the most
part is confined to a single City. And it is observed, that when one of these
Tones or Governors lose their Principalities, their Subjects lose their Goods.
The Dayro had once the chief Command of the Japan Empire; but since the year
1550, the Dayro has only the chief command in Ecclesiastical affairs, and is
esteemed above the Emperor, who keeps all the power in his own hand. In the
center of the Imperial city Meaco, stands the glorious Palace of the Dayro,
which out-shines the Emperors Court, the Temple of Bonzi, or the stately house
of the chief Bonfiosen: There is also the Imperial Garden so curiously planted,
that the Eye seems never satisfied with so pleasant an object. This City is
said to contain 90000 houses. At Dubo, not far off, is the stately Temple of
the Idol Zacca, said to contain ninety thousand houses.

Jedo the second City in Japan, is very large and exceeding populous, the
Streets are 60 Ikins long, which is 150 paces; at the end is a gate that is
locked and guarded every night; it is famous for the great houses of the
Nobility, the Emperors Banqueting House, his Magazine, his Seraglio or
Chandran, the Imperial Garden. The Empresses magnificent Palace, and the Temple
of the Golden Amida; but in the year 1657, in two days time, this City lay all
in Ashes, above a hundred thousand houses burnt, and as many Inhabitants
destroyed, a great number of Palaces and Temples, and Forty eight Millions of
Gold.

Saccai is one of the stateliest Cities in all Japan, fortified with an
invincible Castle; and there is scarce any place in Japan, that for
pleasantness surpasses Jonda. Mewarry is a handsome City crowned with many
Spices: Akay is well fortified with a Castle and surrounded with a Wall: Osacca
is a Stately and Imperial city, in the midst of which stands the much
celebrated Temple of the Idol Canon or their Neptune. And before the Earthquake
fifteen hundred eighty five, there was the fairest and largest Palace that ever
Sun shined upon: And a large Castle built by Taicosama.

Tempe and Campania may not be compared to the pleasantness of Sajoja, so
exceeding delightful, as the Dutch Ambassador tells us, that the whole Earth
cannot show a finer spot of Ground.

Onwari is situate on the hanging of a pleasant Hill, near which is a steep
Rock, on which stands an invincible Castle, which is seen at a great distance.

Quano is the most artificial built City in all Japan; Piongo was ruined in the
War of Kobanunga and the Emperor Cassas. Mia is curiously built and adorned
with many Temples.

The stately City Occasacci is fortified with a strong Castle; Josinda is of a
delightful Situation. Sarunga is a great but ruinous City. Facione is the place
where is kept a strong Guard, formerly a famous City, but swallowed up, and
shuffled into Ruins and Rubbish by an Earthquake, which are very frequent in
Japan. Oudarro is a stately City, adorned with a sumptuous Palace and lofty
Spires.

The other chief Islands about Japan are Bungo, Cikoko, Saykok, or Ximo, all
one Island, but thus called by several Authors. 2. Tonsa or Xicoco, or Tokoese
and Chiccock. 3. Firando and Gotto with innumerable others.

Congoxuma is the first City where the Portugueses landed and got footing in
Japan and was their Staple: Nangesaque is the chief Staple and Residence of the
Dutch in Japan, first built by the Portugues. This Lodge or Fortress lies on
the small Island Disma, and is the Magazine for all Indian Commodities, and the
best harbor for the reception of Merchant Vessels of any Port in Japan.

At this day the Hollanders pretend all Trade at Japan.

The extent of Jesso being Mountainous and abounding with costly Furs, is yet
unknown, only that it is a vast, and wild Country full of Savage People,
clothed with Skins of wild Beasts, who can give no account further than they
dwell.

Of the ISLES in the Indian Sea.
SUch is the Infinity of these Isles, that it is impossible to give a just
account of them, I shall therefore only mention the most considerable: And
first of the Maldives.

map of Maldive and Ceylon Islands The Maldives and Ceylon Islands by Robt.
Morden.


Of the Islands of the MALDIVES.
THE Maldives Islands, situate under the Equinoctial Line, derive their Name
from the principal City called Male, and Dive which signifies an Island. They
are reckoned to be about 12000, but that is supposed to be only by taking a
certain Number for an uncertain: They are dispersed from the North-West to the
South-East, into 13 Provinces, which the Inhabitants call Attollons, every one
of which is fenced with a Bank of Sand; but some of them are only Sand-hills or
Rocks, being all of them very little, for Male, the chief, is but a League
about.

They are divided by Arms of the Sea, and environed with Rocks, which renders
the Access to them very difficult: There are some Ports or Openings, one
opposite to another, so placed, that they give an Entrance into the four
Attollons, for the benefit of Trade, otherwise the Currents would carry the
Vessels above 7 or 800 Leagues beyond. The Currents run six Months to the East,
and six to the West, sometimes more, sometimes less: But the Sea being shallow,
the Winds outrageous, and few Commodities to be had, these Islands are not
frequented by the Europeans. The King of Maldives is called Rascan; his Kingdom
never is governed by the Female Sex, and for his Revenue it consists in the
misfortunes of others, that is to say, Wrecks at Sea. So that there is no
trusting to the Maldives Pilots, who will cast away a Ship on purpose, that
their King may have the Spoil. On the other side, the King himself uses to
caress the Masters of Ships, and to invite them to his Island, to the end, that
dying of the Distemper of the Island, which carries off Strangers in a short
time, he may be Heir to their Goods.

The Natives are little, Olive, colored, and Mahumetans: They are subject to
violent Fevers and Sickness, by reason of the excessive heat. They shave with
cold Water, catch Fish swimming, and will dive to the bottom of the Sea to find
a convenient place where to cast their Anchors. They will fetch up out of the
Sea, with an incredible easiness, an 100000 weight, by the help of a Cable, and
some pieces of their Candon Wood. Their Coco's are very profitable to them, for
of those they make Wine, Honey, Sugar, Milk and Butter. They eat Almonds
instead of Bread, with all sorts of Food. They put every Trade into a
particular Island; and to preserve their Wares from Vermin, they build their
Storehouses upon Piles in the Sea, about an 100 paces from their Isles.

A Description of ZEILON, alias CEYLON, the Nangieris of Ptol.
map of Ceylon A New Map of CEYLON by Rob Morden


THE Hollander is now Master of all the Seacoast; the Inland Country is under
the King of Candy, and is divided into several Parts or Provinces, which lie
upon Hills fruitful and well-watered, and are called in general Conde Uda.

This Inland Country of Conde Uda is strongly fortified by Nature, the
Entrances being up vast and high Mountains, and the Ways so very narrow, that
but one Man can go abreast; and these Paths also are barricado'd up with Gates
of Thorns, and two or three Men to watch and examine all that come or go.

Candy, or Conde by the Europeans, Hingodagul-neure by the Inhabitants, is the
Chief or Metropolis of the whole Island, bravely situated in the midst of it
for all Conveniences, but of late much decayed.

South of Candy, 12 Miles distant, lies Nellemby-neur, where the King kept his
Court when he left Candy.

Alent-neur is the place where the King was born, and his Magazin for Corn and
Salt. Badoula was burnt down in the time of War by the Portugals.

Digligy-neur is the place where the King now keeps his Court since the
Rebellion Ann. 1664. its Situation is very Rocky and Mountainous, being a place
for Safety and Security.

Anurodgbarro is one of the ruinous Cities where they say 90 Kings have
reigned, distant from Candy 90 Miles Northwards.

Leawava affords Salt in abundance, the Easterly Winds beating in the Sea, and
in the Westerly Wind (which makes fair Weather,) it becomes Salt.

Rece is the chiefest Flower of their Corn, which is of several sorts; some
will be ripe in seven Months, others in six, five, four, and three, but all
requires water to grow in. Their Seed-time is about July and August, their
Harvest about February.

Of Fruits there are great plenty and variety, viz. the Betel Nut, whose Leaves
are 5 or 6 Foot long, and have other lesser Leaves growing out of the sides of
them; some of these Nuts will make People drunk, and giddy-headed, and purge,
if eaten green.

There are also Jacks, which are as big as a Peck-Loaf, the outside prickly
like a Hedgehog, and of a greenish color; the Seeds or Kernels do much
resemble Chestnuts in color and taste.

The Jombo is like an Apple full of Juice, and pleasant to the Palate; it is
white, and delicately colored with red, as if painted.

There are also Murro's, like Cherries, sweet to the taste; Dongs, like Black
Cherries; Ambeloes, like to Barbaries; Carolla Cabella, Cabela Paradigye, like
our Pears.

Here are also Coker-Nuts, Plantines, and Banara's of diverse sorts, sweet and
sour Oranges, Limes, Partaurings, in taste like our Lemmons, but much bigger;
Mangoes of several sorts, Pine-Apples, Sugarcanes, Water-Melons, Pomgranats,
Grapes black and white; Mirablins, Codiews, and several other.

There is also the Tallipot-Tree, which bears no kind of Fruit until the last
year of its life, and then it comes out full of yellow Blossoms which smell
very strong, which come to a Fruit round and hard, as big as our Cherries, but
not good to eat; but the Leaf of this Tree is so broad and large, that it will
cover 15 or 20 Men, and keep them dry when it rains; and the Pitch within the
Tree is good to eat, and tastes much like to white Bread.

There is also the Kettale-Tree, which yields a delicious Juice, rarely sweet
and pleasant to the Palate, which they take from the Tree two or three times a
day, which Liquor they boil, and make a kind of Sugar.

The Cinnamon-Tree grows wild in the Woods as other Trees, and by them no more
esteemed, being as plenty as Hazel in England. The Cinnamon is the Bark or
Rind, which when on the Tree looks whitish, when they pull it off they scrape
it, and dry it in the Sun. The Wood has no smell, it is of a white color, and
soft like Fir. The Leaf much resembles Laurel both in color and thickness. The
young Leaves look red like Scarlet; if bruised, they will smell more like
Cloves than Cinnamon. It bears a Fruit which is ripe in September, much like an
Acorn, but smaller; it neither tastes nor smells like as the Bark, but being
boiled in Water, it will yield an Oil, which when cold, is hard as Tallow, and
white, and of an excellent smell; and it is used for Ointment for Aches and
Pains, and to burn in Lamps.

There is also the Ovula, the Fruit whereof they make use of for Physic in
Purges; and being beat in pieces in a Mortar, and soaked in Water, it will Dye
a very good Black; and rusty Iron lying one Night in the Water will become
bright, and the Water black like Ink.

The Betel-Tree, whose Leaf is so much loved and eaten, grows like Ivy, twining
about Trees or Poles, which they stick into the ground for it to run up by; and
as the Betel grows, the Poles grow also.

Of Roots, they have Aloes, or Inyames of diverse sorts; some they plant, and
others grow wild in the Woods. These serve for Food, and for Sause, or a Relish
to their Rice; some of them in a year or two will grow as big as a Man's Waste,
others as big as a Man's Arm.

They have Herbs of several sorts, some in six months growing to maturity, the
Stalk as high as a Man can reach; and being boiled, almost as good as
Asparagus. They have Coleworts, Carrots, Radishes, Fennel, Balsam, Spearmint,
Mustard. There is also Fern, Indian Corn, several sorts of Beans, Cucumbers,
Calabassa's and Pumkins. And the Dutch have Lettice, Rosemary, Sage, and other
European Herbs and Plants which grow well there.

The Woods are their Apothecaries Shops, where with Herbs, Leaves, and the
Rinds of Trees, they make all their Physic and Plasters, with which they will
make notable Cures.

Of Flowers they have great variety, growing wild, as Roses red and white, and
several other sorts of sweet smelling Flowers; one called the Sendric-mal, of a
murry color, and white, which opens at 4 of the Clock in the Evening, and
shuts at 4 in the Morning, which serves them sometimes instead of a Clock.

The Pichamauls are a white Flower like our Jasmine, well scented, the King
has a parcel of them every Morning brought to him wrapped in a white Cloth; but
the Hon-mauls are the chief Flowers the young People use, and are of greatest
value among them.

They have Cows, Buffaloes, Hogs, Goats, Deer in great abundance, Hares, Dogs,
Jacols, Apes, Tigers, Bears, Elephants.

There are Ants of diverse sorts, some worthy our Remark, viz. the Coura-atch,
which is a great and black Ant, living in the ground, making great hollow Holes
in the earth, and have no sting.

The Vaco's are the most numerous, whose hinder part is white, and the head
red. They eat and devour all they come at, except Iron and Stone. They creep up
the Walls of Houses, and build an Arch of Dirt over themselves all the way as
they climb, be it never so high; and in places where there are no Houses, they
will raise great Hills, or Humbosses, some 5 or 6 Foot high, so hard and
strong, as not easily dug down with Pickaxes, within full of hollow Vaults
and Arches, where they dwell. Their Nests are much like Honey-Combs, full of
Eggs, and young Ones: As they increase in multitude, so they also dye in
multitude; for when they come to maturity they have Wings, and in the Evening,
after Sunset, they issue forth in vast Numbers, that they almost darken the
Sky, flying to such a height, as they go out of sight, and so keep flying, till
they fall down dead upon the Earth.

Of the ISLES of SONDE.
map of Sonda The Isles of SONDA By Robt: Morden


The ISLES of SONDE.

THE Straight of Sonde gives its Name to the Isles of Sumatra, Java and Borneo,
that lie not far from it. It is the ordinary passage for Vessels that are bound
for China, and the more Eastern Seas; the Air of these three Islands is very
unwholsom, nor do they afford those Provisions which the Continent does. The
Inhabitants of the Uplands are Pagans, of the Seacoasts Mahumetans. They have
several Kings potent as well by Sea as by Land. They afford rich Commodities,
especially Spices, which the Portugals, the Hollanders, and the most part of
the other Nations of the World fetch from thence.

Sumatra is the most famous Island in all the East, for Largeness and Riches:
For it is 300 French Leagues long, and 70 broad, having several Mines of Gold.
It lies 10 Leagues from the Continent, and the Ancients believed it to be a
Peninsula, by reason of the several little Islands that seem to join it to the
Land. Six Kings command it; the King of Achem, best known to us; of Camper,
Iambi, Menancabo, and Palimban. They have so well defended their Island, that
the Europeans could never get footing on it. There is a Mountain that casts
forth Flames like Mount Gibel. The Pepper of this Island is better than that of
Malabar, because the Land is more moist. They find G^ld in grains, and in
little pieces, after the great Floods of water. The Inland part is inhabited by
Barbarians, that will eat the Raw Flesh of their Enemies with Pepper and Salt.
The City of Achem is the best in the Island, it has been better than it is, it
lies half a League from the Sea upon a Plain, by the side of a River, as large
as the Seine in France, but very shallow. There is also a Fortress upon the
Bank of the River.

Java, governed by several petty Kings, every City having one: Among the rest,
the Kings of Japara, Tuban, Jottan, Panarvan, Panarucan, and Palambuam. Many
are Pagans, some are Mahumetans, and the most part acknowledge the great
Materan, or the Emperor of Materan, who formerly claimed the Sovereignty over
the whole Island. Upon the Coast grow Oysters that weigh 300 pound. The Isle
produces such large Canes, that one alone suffices to make a Boat. It affords
excellent Lignum Aloes, Salt from Jottan, and Gold and Pepper in abundance. The
Southern Coast is last known. It is one of the largest Islands in Asia, and,
for its Plenty, may be called, The Epitom of the World. The City of Bantam lies
at the Foot of a Hill, environed by 2 Rivulets, and divided by another. The
Port is large, and the most frequented of all the Islands of Sonde, for it
affords all kind of Spices, Stones, and other Commodities of the East Indies.
The Spaniards call Bantam the Geneva of the East. Jacatra, or Batavia, is the
Residence of the Consul for the Holland Company, ever since the year 1619. It
is defended by a good Citadel, with four regulated Bastions; it lies in a Bay,
which being secured toward the Sea by some Islands, makes the best Road in all
the Indies. Jortam, next to that, is one of the best Ports, and most frequented.

Borneo, the very biggest Island of all Asia, abounds in Mirobalans, and
Camphire: It has several good Ports, but few good Cities. Some say, that this
was the Java of Mark Poll of Venice, and that the Lesser Java was that already
mentioned. The City is built upon Piles in the Sea, at the Mouth of a fair
River, having a large and commodious Harbor. The Natives have a peculiar King
of their own, as likewise has Bender-Massin. Sambos is the Capital City of the
Kingdom, affording Diamonds.

Of the PHILIPPINE Islands.
map of Philippines The PHILIPINE ISLES By Robt. Morden


The PHILIPPINE Islands.

PHilip the Second gave his own Name to these Islands, which are about Forty or
fifty great ones; for should we reckon up little ones, they would make, by
Relation, some Thousands, the most part of them very fertile, and the
Inhabitants pay their Tribute in Soldiers. The Council of Spain oftentimes
proposed the quitting of those Islands, because of the Expenses of the
Garrisons: But because they lie convenient for the Trade between China and the
Molucca Islands, the King was resolved to keep them. The Islanders are valiant,
and preserve their Liberty in several places.

Luc'on, otherwise New-Castile, is the biggest of all the Philippine Islands.
The City Manilla, which lends its Name to the whole Body of these Islands, is
the Seat of the Viceroy, and an Archbishop. It is but small, but neat and well
fortified, and safe from Mining, two thirds of the Town lying upon a River
Navigable for Barks, and the third part lying upon the Sea. Besides Spaniards
and Indians, there are several Chinese that resort thither, as to the Magazine
of the richest Commodities in the world. Cavite, two Leagues from the City, is
the principal Haven, secured from the Winds, and fortified with two wooden
Forts. The Bay is 40 Leagues in compass, where there is a convenience to build
great Gallions, however the North Winds blow hard upon it; the Bottom is bad,
and Entrance difficult.

New Segovia, or Cagajon, is in the most Northern part of the Isle Luc'on.

Tandaya, or Philippina, is South-East from the Southermost point of Lucon, and
the Straight between them is called the Straight of Manilla, esteemed the best
and most pleasant of all the Islands, whose chief place is Achan.

The Island Mindanao has not been in the Spaniards hands, but a little while.

St. Juan or John lies North-East of Mindanao. That of Paragoya, or Calamianes
of Boterus, the Puloam of Maginus, who discovered these Islands in 1520, and
some others, obey their own Kings. Cebu and Matan are known the first by the
discovery of Magellan, the other by the death of Magellan.

The Spaniards that are bound to the Philippines never sail through our
Hemisphere; and therefore they would have these Islands, as well as the
Molucca's, to be the Bounds of the West Indies, which they, for that Reason,
would have to reach as far as the Molucca's. Other Islands are Mindora, which
gives Name to a Straight so called, Masbat, Negoas, Panay, Kapul or Bohol.
Abuya, or Rebujan.

From the Philippine Islands Eastward, there lie several other Isles, called in
Spanish by the general Name, Islas de las Velas, by the Dutch Isles de
Lad^^nes, or Larrons, of which I find nothing memorable except their Names in
some Maps; And that the Inhabitants are poor, naked, and great Thieves.

Of the MOLVCCA Islands.
map of Maluku Islands The MOLUCCA ISLANDS etc. By R. Morden


The MOLVCCA Islands.

THere are five of these Islands that carry the particular Name of Molucca's:
These five Islands are very small, seated much about the Equinoctial Line, in
an unwholsom Air for Strangers. They are under several Kings: The Hollanders
have also some Fortresses there. They afford Nutmegs, Ginger, and Cloves;
Ternate, the biggest of the five little ones, is eight Leagues about, with a
Mountain that casts out Fire. It has besides several Villages uninhabited in
times of War, three Cities, or rather Forts, viz. Gammalamme, Mayloye, now
called Orange, Tacony by the Dutch William Stad: The rest are Tidor very
considerable, Motir, Machoan, Bachian.

The Molucco's are good Soldiers, and for the most part Mahumetans. Besides the
Kings of Ternate, Tidor and Bachian, there are several others in the Celebes
Islands, and Gilolo. The King of Macassar in the Celebes, particularly has a
while since extraordinarily fortified his own City. He has always given
Strangers free entrance into his Ports. In 1667, he treated with the
Hollanders, and quitted the Portugals. But in 1668, the Hollanders obliged him
to trade with no other Nations but them: And there was a Report, that the Dutch
have since seized upon, and taken Macassar.

The Air of this Country is good, but the Heats are insupportable in the
Daytime. Formerly the Natives of Macassar ate Human Flesh, for which Reason
the Neighboring Princes sent them all their Criminals.

Celebes is fertile in Rice, and the Land of Papous yields Gold, Ambergreece,
and Birds of Paradise.

Banda is an Island toward the South of the Molucco's, with five or six other
Islands about it, to which it gives its Name. It is the only Island in the
World that produces Nutmegs and Mace: There is in it a burning Mountain, and in
the year 1615, all the great Guns in the Island were spoiled.

About four Years before the barbarous proceedings of the Dutch at Amboyna,
they shot Captain Courtupt in his Boat, going from his House and Factory in
Polleroon, to one of the adjacent Clove Islands, called Lantore, on which
Island, not long after, some English suffered such unparalled and barbarous
Cruelty by the Dutch, as a created Nature was capable of enduring.

In the Year 1617, the Inhabitants of Banda Island besought Capt. Bal, then
President at Bantam, to receive their Island into his Jurisdiction, to defend
them from the Tyrannies of the Dutch, who murdered them at their pleasures, and
abused their Wives, whilst themselves were enforced to look on; protesting
also, that they never gave the least consent to them to possess their Island,
which was accepted of by the English; but in the Year 1622, they were forced by
the Dutch to abandon the Banda Islands, and it is credibly reported, that after
the English had left those Islands, the numerous shoals of Mackerel, which was
the chiefest Support to the Inhabitants, and which came constantly in their
Season, forsaked those Islands also.

Amboyna, toward the South of the Molucca's, gives its Name to some other
Isles. It is an Island abounding in Cloves; for the buying and gathering
whereof, the English had five Factories, the chiefest whereof was at Amboyna,
the other at Hitto, at Larica, at Cambillo, and Lobo, who begun to be rich,
when on the 11th of February 1622, began the barbarous proceedings of the Dutch
against the English, where the two Elements of Fire and Water, although
merciless of themselves, by making their Fury more deliberate, were here
instructed to be more unmerciful, whilst accurate Cruelty did torment even
Invention itself to torment the Innocent. The Dutch have now several Forts
there. It Is their best Colony, next to that of Batavia, and they have forced
the Inhabitants of the Island to trade with no other.

And here let me Remark, how strange and admirable indeed it is, That a small
Number of Merchants, assembled at first upon the single score of Trade, should,
in a few Years, presume to make War in Countries so far distant, and to assail
so many potent Kings and Princes; To plant so many Colonies, besiege so many
Cities and Forts, expelling the Portugals in many places, surprising the
English, encroaching upon all. And lastly, setting forth so many Navies at such
prodigious Charges and Expenses, of about 12 Millions a year, that the most
potent Sovereigns of the Universe cannot equalize.

The End of ASIA.
Of AFRICA.
map of Africa AFRICA by R. Morden


AFRICA, by the Ancients, was called Olympia, Hesperia, Oceania, Coryphe,
Ammonis, Ortygia, and Aethiopia. By the Greeks and Romans, Lybia and Africa. By
the Aethiopians and Moors, Alkebu-lan. By the Arabians Ifrichea or Ifriquia, by
the Indians Bezecath, by the Turks Magribon; but the most noted Appellation is
Africa, either from Apher an Hebrew word signifying dust; or from Epher or
Aphar, one of the Nephews of Abraham; by the Greek Fablers, from Afer, a
Companion of Hercules; by the Arabians from Faruch to divide or separate, or
from the ancient name of Carthage, called Africa: By Bochartus from Feruc, a
Corn Country.

Situate it is, for the most part, under the Torrid Zone, the Equator
crossing it in the very middle, and therefore by the Ancients supposed
unhabitable, and parched with the Suns excessive heat: But what they knew not,
and thought almost impossible to be known, is now common; for the secrets of
her deep and remotest Shores are now beaten up and tracted with continual
Voyages, first by the Portugals, and after by the English and Dutch. So that
now four famous Seas are known to be the bounds of Africa, on the North the
Mediterranean, on the East the Red Sea or Arabian Gulf, on the South the
Ethiopian, and on the West the Atlantic Ocean; so that it is divided from all
the World by Sea, except Asia, whereunto it is joined by a narrow Isthmus. The
whole being formed like a huge Pyramid or Triangle, whose largest extent from
North to South, and from East to West is differently set down by most
Geographers, though contrary to others. I shall state it thus, the length from
Cape Verde to Cape Guardafuy is 72 degrees of Longitude, which is 5256 miles;
Sanson makes it 80 degree, which is 5840 miles, 584 miles too much: And its
breadth, from Cape Bon to the Cape of Good Hope, is 72 degrees Latitude, which
makes 5110 miles, at 73 to a degree.

Africa in General stands divided into these Regions or Parts.

Barbary. Fez. Morocco. Tremisen. Algier. Tunis. Tripoli. Barca.
Egypt. Upper. Middle. Lower.
Billedulgerid. Tesset. Dara. Segelomesse. Tegorarin. Zeb. Billedulgerid. The
Desert of Barca.
Desert of Sarra. Zanhaga. Zuenziga. Targa or Hair. Lempta. Berdoa. Gaoga.
Borno.
Negroland. Guinea. Benin. Tombotu. Biafara. 19 Kingdoms in all.
Aethiopia Superior. Aethiopia, or Abyssine. Nubia. Coast of Adel. Zanguebar.
Coast of Ainan.
Aethiopia. Inferior. Congo. Monomotapa. Caffres.
The Islands. The Canaries. Cape Verde. Madagascar. Malthar, with many other
smaller Islands.

The greatest Rivers in Africa are Nilus, and Niger. The River Nilus is famous
for its Greatness and Foecundity; it has anciently had several Names; the
Hebrews called it Nahar Nachal, the Inhabitants Nuchal; by the Jews it was
called Shichor or Sihor; by the Greeks, Melas, Homer, Diodorus, Xenophon, etc.
gave it the common Appellation of the Country, viz. Egyptus: Plutarch calls it
Osyris and Syris; Apollonius Triton, Pliny Astraton, Diodorus Aquila, Cedrenus
Chrysorrhoe; Dyonisius Syene: The Abyssines style it Abanha; the Negroes or
Moors Takkui; the Inhabitants of Goyame, by Report of Sanatius, call it Gihon;
and the Lybians and Africans, Nilus. It runs many Leagues, passes through
several Lakes, diverse Islands, and waters the most lovely Valleys in the World.
The heads thereof, now well known, are in Aethiopia.

Kircher, from a Manuscript of one Peter Pais, (who in company of the Abyssine
Emperor, in the year 1618, March 21, most accurately searched for it,) tells
us, that it rises in the Country of Sahala, being part of the Province of
Agaos, bordering on Goyam, whose Source or Springhead first appears in two
Founts, seeming perfectly round: The Diameter of each about 18 Inches, but in
depth unfathomable. On the top of a Morass or Boggy plain, (which shaking
Plain, says Kircher, was once a large open Pool,) which, by length of time,
contracted a Filme or Crust of Earth, made more substantial and firm by the
growing and spreading of Grass and other Dust and Slime. Concerning this, see
more in the Description of Aethiopia. The Cataracts or Falls, upon the confines
of Aethiopia and Egypt. And the Mouths that often throw themselves into the Sea
below Egypt; where the Ancients have made seven, some nine, and the Moderns
four. But now there are but two, when there is no inundation, Damiata and
Rosetta.

Whatsoever was, or is the Number of the Ostiaries of Nile, ancient and modern
Authors, as well as Maps, differ among themselves, for Pomponius, Strabo,
Diodorus and Herodotus make seven, others, with Ptolomy, nine, viz. the
Heraclean called also the Canopean and Naueratian; the Bolbitian; Sebennitian;
Pathmetian, by Strabo; Fatnian, by Herodotus in his Euterpe Bucolian; the
Mendesian; the Tanitian and the Pelusian. The other two were the Dialcos and
the Pinaptimi, to which some add two more. William of Tire, who had exactly
searched the Number of them upon the place, assures us, there were no more but
four. To reconcile these Differences, give me leave to note, that when this
River overflows the Country, it then discharges itself into other Channels,
which remain dry all the rest of the year, and then it is restrained to those
four which were then the natural branches, now said to be but two when there is
no Inundation, viz. Damiata and Rosetta, by which its Waters flow regularly
into the Sea. The Water has a foecundating Virtue, and peculiar quality to
fatten the Land, so that by its yearly inundation, which begins about the
middle of June, and ends the beginning of September, Egypt is made exceeding
fruitful; for it not only produces a Harvest plentiful, even to Admiration,
but causes an infinite increase in all sorts of Cattle that water there, and
breeds a prolifick faculty in Men and Women, even to Admiration, as makes
Wonder stand amazed to see Nature turn prodigal. This made the Gymnosophists of
Egypt to make it one of their chief Numens, which they worshipped under the
name of the Goddess Isis. This also was the cause of those noble Epithets
bestowed on it, viz. the Gift of Jupiter, the Tears of the Gods, the Veins of
Paradise, the Seed of the Gods, etc. The Moors and Negroes often call it The
Fountain of Heavenly Water, and the Arabian Poets style it The Life of the
Earth. Mr. Sands tells us, that in the year 1610, at Cairo, it usually did rise
23 Cubits, it rises generally sixteen Cubits. It is perceived by the retiring
of the Cattle; by the marks which are in their wells; and by the weight of the
slime of the River, which the people lay out at their windows to receive the
Dew which falls, and Prognosticates the increase. The cause of this overflowing
of Nile is variously conjectured, some say, that the Tempests of the Sea swell
the River; others affirm, that the Sand which gathers at the month stops the
Stream, and that the Northe^^ Wind drive it back again. Many Moderns believe,
that it is swelled and increased by the melting of the Snow, and the Rains that
fall in great abundance, and at certain seasons in Aethiopia; and in regard
that in Egypt it is Winter, when Summer in Aethiopia, they say, that the Nile
increases when other Rivers decrease. Of late it has been asserted, that the
Nitre, which abounds in this River is the true natural reason of all these
mavelous effects; which, being melted by the heat of the Sun, mixes with the
Water, troubles it, ferments it, and swells it, and makes it exceed its bounds,
so that the Mud, which the Nile carries along with it, neither comes very far,
nor raises the banks any higher. The Niger retains the Name, which it received
from those people whose Country it runs through, sometimes it runs under ground,
and, before it falls into the Atlantic Ocean, divides itself into three
principal Members, Senega, Gambia, and Rio Grande. Enfertiles all the Countries
through which it passes; and in the Sand are found good store of Grains of
Gold. The Water, having the same virtue as Nile, has made some believe, that
these two Waters somwhere meet together. The Zaire is considerable for its
Sweetness, and for its plenty of Water. The Zambera divides itself into three
Currents, Cuama, Spirito Sancto, and Rio De los Infantes. The Ghir loses itself
often in the Sand, and as many times retreives itself again.

The greatest Lakes are Zair, Zambere, and Zaflan, all three in Aethiopia. The
Mountains of most Remark are the Great and Lesser Atlas, the Crystal
Mountains, Mountains of the Sun, Saltpetre Hill, Sierra Liona, Amara, Mount
Table, and Isle Picos Fragosos, Montes Lunae, etc.

The Great Atlas (by the Natives Aydvacal, test Marmot; by Aug. Curio,
Anchisai; by Olearius Majuste;) runs through Africa, as Taurus through Asia,
beginning in Marmarica, about 20 miles from Alexandria, extending Westward
(with many Gaps and Breaks,) to the Atlantic Ocean, dividing Barbary from
Belidulgerid. No Mountains in Africa are more celebrated for its wondrous
height, that seems to reach to the Sky. The Poets feigned, that Atlas
sustained Heaven upon his Shoulders, by reason of its excessive height: Or
else, because that Atlas, King of Mauritania, was the first that studied the
motion of the Heavens.

The Lesser Atlas Coasts with the Midland Sea, extending from Gibralter to
Bona, by the Spaniards Montes Claros.

The Crystal Mountains are in Congo, near which is that of the Sun; Eastward
appears Saltpe^re Hill. On the borders of Guinea appears Sierra Leona: Amara is
the most noted of Aethiopia. Table Mount appears near the Cape of Good Hope,
not far off are those called Ospicos Fragosos. And those of the Moon lie
between the two Aethiopia's, and are the highest in Africa, and called by the
Inhabitants Betsh. The Ancients took these Mountains to be the limits of the
World.

The Isthmus of Sues, which keeps Africa from being a perfect Island, is about
nine Leagues in breadth between the Red Sea, and the Chanel of Nile; for from
one Sea to the other is above thirty five Leagues. Stories relate, that one of
the Ptolomies, Queen Cleopatra, some of the Soldans, and others that have been
masters of Egypt, have assayed in vain to dig through that Isthmus, and that
they gave over the enterprise, as well by reason of the prodigiousness of the
Toil, as for fear of being greatly endamaged by the Red Sea, which was found
to be higher than the Mediterranean Sea, and which with its bitterness would
have tainted the River Nile, the only drink of the Egyptians: And indeed all
Authors agree, that the Waters of the Nile are sweet, healthful and nourishing.
Ptolomy's design was to perform a work of Fame, by making Africa an Island.
Cleopatra's intention was to carry her Ships into the Red Sea without any
danger of falling into Augustus's hands. The contrivance of the Soldans was to
carry the Trade of the Europeans into the East Indies, through their
Territories, in hopes of some great Tribute. But none of them were able to
attain their Ends.

Africa is the barrennest and worst peopled part of our Continent. Her great
Rivers are full of Crocodiles. Her Mountains and Deserts filled with Lions and
other wild and cruel Beasts; the scarcity of Water producing many Monsters,
while Creatures of several species couple and engender at the watring-places,
where they often meet. There is no Creature in the World that grows so big,
from so small a beginning, as the Crocodile, for it is hatched in an Egg, and
grows every day as long as it lives, which is said to be an hundred years. The
Elephants are very serviceable to the Africans; as also are their Camels and
great Baboons. Dromedaries are a sort of Camels, less and swifter than the
others. They have also wild Asses, Unicorns, Barbary Horses, Cameleons, little
Monkeys and Parrots. Their Ostriches afford them fine Feathers, and their Civet
Cats are esteemed for the excellency of their Scents.

Amongst a great number of different Tongues that are in Africa, the most
general are the Beribere or African, which comes from the Ancient Punick and
the Arabic; these two extend through all Barbary, Billedulgerid, Aegygt and
Sarra, the Aethi pian in the greatest part of Aethiopia. The Language of the
Negro's, which is different and has diverse Idioms.

Their Religions in Africa are for the most part Idolatrous, as Paganism, and
Mahometanism, though there are also mixed amongst them vast numbers of Jews,
and Christians of several sorts.

At this day Africa is possessed by five sorts of Religions, viz. Christians,
Jews, Caffers, Idolaters, and Mahumetans. The Christians are partly Strangers
and partly Natives, whereof some are Slaves to the Turks and Barbarians, others
are free people. Of the Jews some are Natives, others are Strangers; divided
they are into several Tribes, Wealthy and Numerous, but despised and abominated
by the Turks and Moors.

The Caffers, or Libertines, hold many Athiestical Tenants, live together
without Ceremonies, like our Familists or Adamites, inhabiting from Mosambique,
all along the Coast, beyond the Cape of Good Hope.

The Idolaters are numerous, in Negroland, in both the Aethiopia's, and toward
the Great Ocean.

The Mahumetans possess the greatest part of Africa.

Egypt and most of the Coast, or the Red Sea and almost all Barbary belongs to
the Turk, excepting the Kingdoms of Morocco and Fez, (which are governed by
Kings of their own,) the Cities of the Pirates, and some others upon the Coasts
that belong to the Christians. Aethiopia, Nubia, Congo and Monomotopa have
their particular Kings. There are also Arabian Cheiques in Belledulgerid and
Sarra. The Country of the Blacks is under several Petty Sovereigns, whose
Jurisdiction is bounded sometimes within the limits of a Town. The Kings of
England, and Portugal, and the Hollanders have several Ports upon the
Seacoast, for the better accommodation of their Trade into the Inland Country.
The French also possess some places of Trade in Barbary, Guiney, and in the
Island of Madagascar, which they call the Dolphins Island. The grand Master of
the Order of St. John of Jerusalem is Lord of the Island of Maltha.

Of BARBARY.
map of West Barbary West BARBARJE by Robt Mordon


map of East Barbary East BARBARJE by Robt. Morden


BY the Name of Barbary was that part of Africa known to the Ancients which we
call Zanguebar, whereas the modern Barbary lies all along upon the
Mediterranean Sea, being the best, and best peopled, Country of all Africa, by
reason of the convenience of Trade. The Romans, the Sarazens, the Vandals, the
Arabians, the Moors, the Turks, have been successively Lords thereof, and have
called the Cities by different Names; But, at this day, a great part of it is
under the Turk. The Emperor of Fez and Morocco Rules the North-west part. The
Spaniards, Portugals, English and Dutch, possess several places upon the Coast.
Susaon, Constantine, Couco, Labes, are little Kingdoms that lie in the
Mountains. Saly, Tituan, Algier, Tunis and Tripoly, belong to the Pirates; the
three last, under the Protection of the Grand Signior, who sends a Basha to
each, though they have but very little Authority. The French hold the place
called the Bastion of France, and the Genoeses the Island Tabarque.

Barbary is inhabited by the Africans or Bereberes, oftener called Moors: There
are also some Arabians who settled themselves there in the Year 999. They live
in the open Field in Adouares, or Commonalties composed of several Families,
which they call Baraques, where they have an 100 or 200 Tents set up in a Round.

The Inhabitants are generally of a duskish, or rather blackish Complexion,
naturally Ingenious, and given to Arts and Literature, studious in their Law;
very distrustful, inconstant, crafty, malicious, when angered; very active, good
Horsemen, of a stately gate, costly in their Apparel, and jealous of their
Wives, who are of a comely Body, well featured, of delicate soft Skins, and in
their Dress exceeding sumptuous.

The Language spoken, at present, in most of the Maritime Towns is the Arabic,
but in Fesse, and Morocco, the Punick, or old African, the ancient Language of
the Country.

It Is situate between 30 and 35 degrees of Northern Latitude, the longest
Summers day about 13 hours one quarter, increased to 14 and one quarter in the
most Northern parts; it is extended, in length, from the Atlantic Ocean to
Egypt; in breadth, from the Mediterranean Sea to the Atlas Mountains.

Barbary comprehends several Kingdoms that contain Cities of the same Name,
Morocco, Fez, Telensen, or Tremisen, Algier, Tunis, Tripoly and Barca.

Of the Kingdom of Fez.
map of Kingdom of Fez and Morocco A New Map of the Kingdoms of FEZ and MAROCCO
by R. Morden


THis Country lies between the Mediterranean Sea and Morocco, on the North and
South, and between the Ocean Atlantic, and the Argierine. Territories on the
West and East, and contains the ancient Mauritania Tingitania. It Is now divided
into seven Parts or Provinces, viz. Temesne, Fez, Azgar, Habat, Errife, Garret,
and Chaus.

The chief places of the Province of Temesne are, 1. Rabat, Opinum olim
Episcopalis Tingitanae, built, after the Model of Morocco, with its Aqueduct 12
Miles long, by King Mansor.

Anfa and Anafe on the Coast, seated in a delightful Plain, was once one of the
most famous Cities of Africa for its Trade with the English and Portugals, and
for its Riches, but being addicted to Piracy, was the cause of its Ruin, and
of that of Almansor.

Muchatia on the Guer is now famous only for the Tomb of one of their Morabuts
or Saints.

Adendum is noted for its many Iron Mines about it.

Tegaget for its store of Grains.

The Province of Fez lies between the Rivers of Suba, Sabur, test Marm. and
Cast. and Baragrag, the Salu of Plin. Ptol. etc. the Ornament of this Province,
nay, of all Barbary is Fez, which the Mahometans call, The Court of the West,
about a degree from the Ocean, and as much from the Mediterranean Sea,
Volubilis Tingitanae, Ptol. Volubile, Plin. test Marmol. (...), Seldeni, the
fairest and best City of all Barbary; but the Romantic Description by Heylin,
Blome, etc. is very different from our later Relations, so that I can write
nothing of it with certainty.

The City of Mahmora fell into the hands of the Portugals in 1515, but retaken
by the King of Fez, who there defeated 10000 Christians, and got 60 pieces of
Artillery, taken again by the Spaniards, 1614. and fortified, having a good
Port.

Sally, or Sale, is the Salu Plin. Ptol. and Sol. Sella, Jo. Leoni; Cela, Marm.
is composed of two Cities, the Old and New; its Fortress is on a rising Ground,
with an high Tower; in its Castle is the magnificent Tomb of King Manson and
others; it has a Trade with the English, French, Dutch, and Genouese, but it is
most enriched by its Piracies.

Michness, between Sally and Fez, is encompassed with Gardens of excellent
Fruits, as Pomegranates, Citrons, Oranges, Lemmons, Figs, Olives, Grapes, etc.

Asgar, or Azgar, toward the Sea, affords Fens and Marshes, where they catch
store of Eels: And store of Forests, whence they have Charcoal and Wood, whose
chief places were Elgiumha, or Elgiuhma, now only a Granary, where the Arabs
store up their Corn.

Casar-Elcaber, or Alcazar, is a place of pleasure, built by King Mansor,
famous for the Battle which Don Sebastian, King of Portugal lost in 1578.
fought near this place; in which all three of the Competitors lost their Lives;
Don Sebastian was slain in the Field, Muly Mahomet of Fez was drowned, and
Abdelmelech of Morocco the Conqueror, died either with the labor and pains, or
with the sickness with which he was seized before the Battle, and, amongst
several others of eminent Quality, was that famous infamous English Rebel
Stuckley slain.

Lharais, or Larrach, the Lixos of Plin. Lixa, Ptol. Lix, Sol. test Marm.
Arais, Africanis, once greater than the great Carthage, the Royal Residence of
Antaeus, whom Hercules defeated, and from whence he brought the Golden Apples
gathered in the Hesperides Gardens, is now one of the principal Fortresses of
the Kingdom, delivered to the Spaniards by Muly Xecque 1610. for which he lost
his Life by his own People.

Habat is one of the most considerable Provinces in Fez, its chief Cities are
Arzilla, Zilia, Ptol. Zelis, Strab. test Marmol. took by the Portugals 1471,
but in the Year 1508, besieged by Muley Mahomet, and Oataz, who took the City
and Castle, the Portugals securing themselves in the Tower, were relieved, and
retook the City and Castle; retaken since by the Xerifs, who, at present, keep
it. It was oftentimes the retreat or shelter of Gayland in his Wars against Ben
Boucan, and Taffilette.

Tangier, Tingi, Strab. and Plin. Tingis, Ptol. Tingios Steph. Tangeri Marmol.
some Writers tell us, it was first built by Phut. others say it was founded by
Syphax Son to Antaeus, slain by the Lybian Hercules, and called after his
Mothers name Tagena, but depopulated and ruined by the Civil Wars amongst the
Natives. After which, the Romans, making themselves Masters of the Country,
re-edified or founded this City, which gave name to the whole Country of Fez
and Morocco, called, Tingitana Mauritana, under whom it continued, until the
Goths overran the whole Country. These were dispossessed by the Africans and
Arabians, first attempted, in vain, in the Year 1483, by the King of Portugal;
but in the Year 1508, it was seized by the Governor of Arzilla for the King of
Portugal, who strongly fortified it. In the Year 1661, it was delivered into
the hands of the King of Great Britain, Charles II. as part of the Dowry of His
Royal Consort Queen Katherine.

Tettuan, or Tetteguin, is a well built Town, and keeps many Christian Slaves,

Ceuta remains in the hands of the Spaniards.

The Mountains or Cavila's of this Province are very considerable, viz. Angera
for Flax and Timber.

Gazar Ezzaghir once belonging to the Portugals. Chebib much enlarged.

The Province of Errif is very mountainous and woody, abundant in Barley,
Vines, Figs, Olives and Almonds.

Gomer is seated on a River of the same Name.

Terga drives a Trade in Salt Fish.

Bedis, or Belis, with its Castle and Palace, maintain some Galleys, but much
molested by the Fort Pinnon de Velez, held by the Spaniards in an Island hard
by it.

Mizemma, or Bezuma, formerly great and well peopled, where the French intended
to settle a Factory or Trade.

Of the Mountains or Cavila's, that of Beniguazeval, or Benzarael, can arm
25000 Men, and has a Vulcano which continually casts out Fire. It found a
months work for Taffilett's Army, after he had taken Fez by Stratagem.

Susaon is one of the most fruitful and most pleasant places of Africa, its
People, under their Xeque, keeping themselves in Liberty.

Gebha, or Gebba, is the Sestiaria of Ptol. test Castal. but according to Mol.
Cabo de tres Forces, is the Sastiaria of old; And Cabo de tres Forcas is
Metagonium, Strab. Metagonitas, Ptol. Castal. and Cabo de Casasa Mol.

The Province of Garret lies upon the Coast of the Mediterranean Sea, extending
to the River Mulvia, which separates it from Teleusin; its chief place is
Melilla, Ryssadirum Ptol. Rusader, Ant. Rusardir, Plin. test Marmolio, now in
the hands of the Spaniards, taken Anno 1^97. by John Gusman Duke of Medina
Sidonia. Chusasa was taken before by Ferdinand King of Castile, etc.

The Province of Chaus is very large, among its Cities Tezza is the chief,
esteemed the third of the Kingdom, adorned with three Colleges, 23 Banians,
many Hospitals, and 100 Mosques or Temples, and a magnificent Castle.

2. Turret, seated on a Hill in the midst of a Plain, very advantageously
enclosed with strong Walls.

3. Dubdu, on the side of an high Mountain, from which many Fountains descend.

Among the Inhabitants of the Mountains some are rich, and others poor; some
are fruitful in Vineyards, some in Fruits, and some in Pastures. In this
Province is the noted Basket-bridge over the River Sebu, the Subur of Plin. and
Ptol. test Marmol. and Cast. between two high Rocks, 150 yards from the Water.

Gherseluin is beyond the Atlas Mountains.

Garsis is the Galapha of Ptol. test Marm.

The Kingdom of Morocco, with that of Fez, contains the ancient Mauritania
Tingitania.

It Is divided into seven Provinces, viz. Sus, Hea, Guzula, Morocco, Teldes,
Hascora, and Ducala, and contains the ancient Mauritania Sitifensis.

C. Ca^tin is the Usadium Ptol. test Baud. Marmol. makes Usadium to be C. de
Alguer. Market. makes Herculis Promontorium, to be Cabo Cantin.

Sus Province lies about the River Sus, and extends as far as Cape Non, whose
chief City is Taradunt, where the English and French Merchants have a Staple
for their Sugars, the only Mart-Town of all the Country.

Tifelfeldt is the Tamusida, or Thamuside of Ant. test Marmol.

Messa, seated at the Flux of the River Sus, is composed of three little Cities.

Tedsa, accounted larger, but not so rich as Taradant.

Teient on the Sus is composed of three Towns, each distant a Mile from the
other, having their Temple in the midst.

The Fortress and City of Guarguessen belongs to the Portugals.

Aguar is a Promontory of great Importance, near which is Sancta Crux built by
the Portugals.

Masagan, or Mazzagran, Cartennae, Cast. Mostagan Marm. Circelli Etrobio.

The Province of Guzula is not far from the Seat of the ancient Getuly; it has
many Boroughs and Towns, but no walled Cities or Fortresses, said, by Sansar,
to be rich in Mines of Gold, Brass, Iron, etc.

The Province of Morocco, the chief City bears the same Name, the Bocanum
Hemerum of Ptol. Hisp. Marueccos Gal. Maroc. test Nig. and Curione, and was
the chief of the whole Kingdom, and once the Metropolis of all Barbary, at
which time it had 24 Gates, in Circuit contained 12 Miles, and about 10000
Families, strongly girt about with Walls, and adorned with many public and
private Buildings, especially one Mosque, accounted the greatest in the World,
seated in the midst of the City, beautified with a stately high Steeple. A
Castle as big as a Town, in the middle whereof is a Temple, on the top of whose
Tower are three Balls of Gold esteemed worth 200000 Ducats, so fixed by Magic,
as that they cannot be taken away. However now much of its Splendour is lost,
and a great part of the City is deserted, and its Trade decayed.

Agmet, once so adorned with pleasant Gardens, fruitful Vineyards, and fertile
Fields, that it was called the Little Morocco.

Elghiumha is but a small place.

Imegiagen is seated on an high Mountain, as is also Temella; Tenozze is a Town
of some Note.

The Province of Hea is mountainous and woody, inhabited by an idle and
barbarous People; its chief Cities are Tednest on the River Sauens, the
Inhabitants most Jews.

Hadequis, Teguleth, Tejeut, are places of Trade.

Tesegfeldt, the Tamasida or Thamusida of Ant. test Marmol. and Xleusugagen,
are the most considerable of those in the Mountains.

The Isle Mogador near the Cape of Ocem, is distant from the Coast about two
Leagues, where is built a Fort to guard the Mines of Gold and Silver which are
in the neighboring Mountains.

Gozoporto is the Suriga of Ptol. test Curione.

Ducala Province is the most Northern part of the Kingdom of Morocco, whose
chief Cities are Azamer, taken by the Portugals 1613, since retaken by the
Moors, who have a strong Garrison there, the Thymaterium Hanno, Thymiateria
Steph. test J. Marian. and Ramusio.

Magazan is so strongly fortified by the Portugals, that 200000 have in vain
besieged it. Tite was by them dismantled. Asafi or Saffa has a French Consul.

The Province of Hascora has Elmadine for its chief City, once accounted the
Capital of the Country, whose Inhabitants addict themselves to Arts, Traffic,
and Manufactures. Tegodaft has fair Women. Elgiumuha is governed by Artizans,
as Tegodaft admits of none but Nobles. Bzo is a place of some Trade.

The Province of Teldes has the rich City of Tefza, built by the old African
Moors, beautified with many Mohammedan Mosques, and its Walls a kind of Marble.

In these two Provinces are great quantities of Goats, of whose Skins are made
the Cordovants; and of their Hair, plain and watered Camolets. Their Grapes are
said to be as big as Pullets Eggs.

The chief Rivers of Morocco are the Sus, the Una of Ptol. test Marmol. that
waters the Southern part; the Tensift, that divides it in the middle, the Asama
of the Ancients; the Ommiraby which separates it from Fez, the Rusibis Ptol.
Rusubi Vic. Uticensi. Rutubis Plin. Umarabea, test Marmol.

The Asifnual, that makes an Abyss or Gulf, like to that of Sivoli in Italy.
The Agmet loses itself underground.

The Commodities of this Country bearing the Name of Mercantil, are Flax, Hemp,
Honey, Wax, Sugar, Hydes, Marokins or Cordavants, Course Twine, Dates, Almonds,
Camolets, and other Manufactures, as Mats of a curious Straw, Mantles,
Alheicks, and in some places store of Saltpetre. As for the fabulous abundance
of Gold, there is no Truth in it.

The Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco ought to be considered in three sorts of
Lands, Mountains, Campaigns, and Coasts. The Mountains and Valleys are almost
all in the hands of the Alarbes and Barabars, who live partly Free, and partly
Tributary to the Zeriffs. The Coasts, in part, belong to the Moors, and part to
the Spaniards and Portugals; these holding those on the Atlantic, the other on
the Mediterranean Sea.

The Alarbes are, by the Europeans, called Mountaineers, living in Haimas or
Tents, more rudely and rovingly, shifting from Mountain to Mountain, according
to their Exigences, or Fickle Humors, carrying with them their Itinerary
Habitations, Robbery being their best Livelihood.

The other sort of Moors are called Barabars, or Brebers; these have fixed
Dwellings, and live in Neighborhood, and gather into Aldea's, Cavila's, or
Villages: Over these Barabars are subordinate Governors, or Almocadens, to whom
they pay a dutiful Observance, their Vocation is Tillage and Grazing.

The Moors are of a large Stature, strong Constitution, stately Carriage,
differing in Complexion, according to their conversing with the Sun and Air;
jealous and revengeful; implacable in their hatred, and impatient till they
have avenged an Injury.

The Female Moors, if preserved from the Injuries of the Sun and Weather, are
generally well complexioned, full bodied, and of good Symmetry; those that live
in Towns are inclined to Paleness, seldom stirring abroad, unless to visit the
Sepulchers of their deceased Friends, in Devotion to pray for their Felicity,
and in the Nightime to the Baths for Health and Cleanliness; but always
closely veiled, that no part is visible but an Eye. In the state of Matrimony
their principal study is to please their Husbands, and to render themselves
delightful to their Conversation.

Those Husbands that are able, allow their Wives Negro's or Black Women, to do
all the servile Offices in the Family, yet there is no Quality that sit idle,
for the chief of the Morisco Dames employ their time in some thrifty
Housewifery. In their Visits one to another, no Man, though never so near a
Relation, can be admitted into their Society; to prevent which, she that makes
the Visit, first sends to know whether the Husband be at home, if not, then she
goes to her Gossips Apartment, where she is entertained with a Liberality that
never injures her Husband: And if the Husband chances to return home in the
interim of the Visit, he is careful to give no Interruption, but, upon Notice,
quickly departs the House, which intimated to the Visitant, she also shortens
the Visit. This prevents the custom of expensive Gossippings, with which in
some Nations so many Wives are debauched, and Husbands beggared. The Women are,
indeed, kept in great subjection and retirement, which makes Adultery a
Stranger to their Bed: Nor can it reasonably be otherwise, seeing that the Wife
is fully assured, that the very Attempt to pilfer a Pleasure, if discovered,
will cost her her Life.

There is a great appearance of Piety, in the customary Expressions and
Salutations of the Moors in the beginning of any Labor or Journey, with Zeal
and Humility they will look up to Heaven, and with a low Voice say, Bismillah;
that is, In the Name of God: Intimating, That nothing ought to be enterprized,
but in the power and hope of the Divine Favor and Help. And when the Work or
Journey is finished, they say, Ham der Illah, Thanks be unto God, denying all
Ascriptions of Success to themselves. When they meet upon the Road, their
Greeting is, El ham dillah al salam tipsi, i. e. God be praised that I see thee
well. In passing by one another, Salem alleque, Peace be with thee. At the
hearing of one another sneeze, they say -- God be your Keeper. The like Air and
Genius of Devotion and Piety is observable in their Letters.

This Country abounds with Giamma's, Moschs or Churches, to which the Moors
perform a great Reverence and Liberality, never suffering them to be profaned,
nor to want a competent Stock to keep them in Repair; their Situation is East
and West.

In greater Towns there are many Giamma's; in Tituan 15, in Alcazar more; in
Arzilla 5, and in Fez 700.

The Moors have at this day no Schools of Science, like the European
Universities and Colleges. As for the College called Amarodock in Fez, whose
Structure cost King Aba Henan 480000 Crowns, and which has been so often
celebrated for its delightful Situation, Mosaic Arches, and Brazen Gates, it
is now wholly destitute of Students. There are only petty Schools to write and
read; and when the Pupil can read the Alcoran with perspicuity, and understand
the principal Points it contains, and bears good a affection to the Priesthood,
and is informed of the Rites of the Giamma, which are few and easy, and is
deemed competent for Age and Learning, then two or three Alfaqui's or Priests
examine the Candidate, and being found deserving, they grant him Testimonials
of his willingness and abilities to be an Alfaqui, and this is all the
Education and Orders bestowed upon their Priests.

The Moors season of Prayers is five times in 24 hours: The first is about
Noon; the second about Three of the Clock in the Afternoon; the third at the
going down of the Sun; the fourth a little within Night; the fifth a little
before day in the Winter. In their Addresses to these Holy Celebrations, the
Moors use great tokens of Reverence, being very careful by washing, etc. in
sitting themselves for the Giamma.

And here give me leave to hint, what some of these Men (which we count
Barbarians,) have animadverted, That the irreverent Carriage in Holy Places,
and saucy Behavior at our Sacred Solemnities by some of us Christians, are
great Reproaches to our Religion, and often by them resented with Anger and
Indignation.

Prayer, they style, The Key of Paradise, and, The Pillar of Religion; and
generally maintain so careful a performance of this public Duty, that no
secular Business can detain them from, nor any thing divert them, at their
Devotion.

As every Cavila have an Alcalib, or High Priest, chosen by the Alfaquis or
Priest, who is possessed of the Giamma Gheber, or Great Church, wherein every
Friday, which is their Sabbath, he expounds some Text of the Alcoran; so also
every Cavila and Town have a particular Alcaddee, from whom they cannot appeal
to any other but Alcaddee Gheber, or the chief of these Justi^ers, who is
appointed to receive such Appeals, and is in constant attendance upon the King
or chief Governor. The Alcaddees sit in the Gates of the Cavila, or some
public place, to hear and determine all Cases. And the Alcoran being the
immutable Rule both of Civil Justice and Religion, therefore, according to the
Letter and Interpretation thereof, the Alcaddee frames all his Definitions and
Judgments: Here Is no intreaguing the Plea, with Resolutions, Cases, Presidents,
Reports, Old Statutes, but according to the fresh circumstances of the Fact,
and the proof of what is alleged.

Adultery is a Capital Crime in the Moresco Catalogue, and the person Convicted
thereof, without any regard of his Eminence or Quality, is certainly stoned to
Death.

For the first Theft, the Convict is publicly whipped in the Market. For the
second, he loses his Hand. For the third, he dies exquisitely tormented, and
then exposed to the Birds of Prey. All Homicide, or killing of a Man by a Man,
is Capital.

Usury is totally forbidden by their Law, for Mahomet has made it an
irremissible Sin; but he that borrows Money of another wherewith to traffic and
gain, gives the Lender an equal share of the Profits; and it is usual for the
Lender to forbear the Borrower, till he perceive him fr^udulent, careless, or
unfortunate.

Marriage is in so peculiar an Estimation, that Mahomed made it the second of
his eight Precepts; and the Moors are so generally observant of this
Commandment, that few among them are found to live out of the state of Wedlock,
if they are able to purchase a Wife.

Polygamy, Concubinage, and Divorce, are used by them; for Mahomed, that he
might the better complease the loose Humors of his first Sectaries, made his
Religion to contain many carnal Indulgences, denying nothing to Musselmen, that
had any sensible compliance with their brutal Affections.

Of ALGIER.
map of Algeria A New Map of the Kingdom of ALGIER by Rob. Morden.


THE Kingdom of Algier is Famous as well for its Riches and Forces, as for its
Piracies of Christians, and its Barbarousness to its Captives. It was known to
the Ancients by the Name of Mauritania Caesariensis.

Geographers divide it into five Parts or Kingdoms, Telensin, Tenes, Algier,
Bugia, and Constantina: Grammajus tells us, That the Turks have established
therein twenty Governments, whereof ten are upon the Coast, and ten within
Land: To these he also adds ten Divisions more, but so intermixed and
uncertain, that I shall not mention them.

But I shall proceed to a Description of the five principal Parts aforesaid;
and first of the Province of Telensin, by the Inhabitants called Tremecen, from
its chief City, which is the Timici of Plin. and Ptol. Marmol. distant about
seven or eight Leagues from the Sea. In the decay of the Saracenical Empire, it
usurped the Majesty of a Kingly Title, which, though much disgraced by being made
subject to Abulthasen, King of Fez, after a Siege of thirty Months, yet at last
it assumed its Liberty under diverse Kings of its own; one of which, viz.
Abdalla, shaking off the Spanish Allegiance, submitted himself and Kingdom to
Solomon the Magnificent. It was once a City one of the greatest and fairest of
Barbary, and very strong; for it sustained a Seige of seven years against
Joseph the puissant King of Fez, and at last forced him to raise it.

Humain al. One is the Ancient Artifiga, Sans. Cisira and Siga of Ptol.
Castaldo. in 1535. ruined by the Castilians. The Country about it abounds with
Figs, Oranges, Pomgranats, and Cotton, of which the Inhabitants make diverse
Manufactures

Haresgol or Aresgol is the Siga of Strab. Plin. and Mela. test Marmol by some
Zerfen or Zersen: A Roman Colony and Residence of Syph^x, before he seized the
Estate of M^ssi^issa. Its situation is on a Rock, surrounded with the Sea,
except on the South side; once much greater than it is, but the ill treatment
it has received from the Kings of Fez, from the Califfs, from the Moors, from
the Castilians, and from the Arabs, has reduced it to that small Estate that
it is now at, under the Government of Algier

Oran, which the Africans call Tuharan (rather Guharan) the Nubian Geog.
Vaharan, is the Cuisa of the Ancient Sans. The Quiza and Zenitana of Plin. the
Buiza of Ptol. taken by Cardinal Ximines, in the year 1509. at which time the
Spaniards lost but fifty Men, killed four thousand Moors, redelivered twenty
thousand Christian Captives.

Marsa el Quibir Sans. Marzachibar Merc. M^rza Quivir Baud. Portus Magnus of
Plin, and Mela; taken by the Marquess of Comares, an^ 1505. for the Spaniards:
It is one of the fairest, greatest; and securest Ports in all Africa.

Tefezara or Tefesre was the Astalicis or Astacilitis of Ptol. test Marmol.

Hubbede or Hubet, is the Mniara of Ptol. the Mina of Ant. Marmol.

Guagida the Lanigara of Ptol. Marmol. is the capital City of the Province of
Hanghad or Anghad, possessed by the Arabs, and noted for its Ostriches.

Beniarax, or Beniarasid, the Bunobora of Ptol. Sans. is the Capital Town of
the Province so called; it contains twenty five thousand Inhabitants, and pays
twenty five thousand Ducates of Tribute.

Calat-Haoara, or the Vrbara of old, is strong.

Moascar, the Victoria of Ptol. is the Residence of the Governor of the
Algerins.

Batha is the Vaga of old, much ruined; but Villanov. and Mol. tells us, That
Vaga is now Tegmedel.

Tenes is a Country both plain and mountanous, yielding Fruits, Wax, Honey and
Cattle: Its chief City bears the same Name, and by Sanson is the Jol and
Julia Caesaria of Plin. Strab. etc. seated near to the Sea, having a Castle and
Palace, formerly the abode of its Kings, now of its Governors: other places
are Brisch alias Brexcar, the Icosium of Plin. and Mela. Sans. But Castal and
Molet tell us, Icosium is Acor.

Meliana is on the Mountains, so is Beni Abucaed and Guanser the Zabacus of
Ptol. which can raise two or three thousand Horse, and fifteen or sixteen
thousand Foot.

Mostagan is the Cartenna of Mela. Ant. and Ptol. Marm. Mazzagran Cast.
Circilli Etrobio.

The Government of Algier comprehends likewise that of Couco in the Mountains,
Built on the top of a Rock, whose Governors have often disputed their Liberty
with the Deys of Algier. These Mountains are two or three days Journey long,
and their Approaches difficult. They yield Olives, Grapes, and especially Figs,
which is the Kings principal Revenue: As also, Iron and Saltpeter; the Plains
afford Corn and Cattle. The Inhabitants are Bereberes and Azuages, well armed
and courageous.

The Metropolis of this Province is Algier or Argier, Incolis Gezier, the
Ancient Jol built by King Juba, afterward the Julia Caesaria, Plin. test
Marmol. But Sanson will have Algier to be the Ruscurian of Plin. the
Rusaccurran of Ant. the Rhusuccorae Ptol. But Marmol. will have Ruscarar to be
Garbele. Castaldus will have Algier to be Sald^e of Plin. Ant. and Ptol. It Is
one of the richest and best inhabited Cities of all Africa, by reason of the
Pyracies of the Inhabitants upon the Ocean and Mediterranean. It is said to
contain fifteen thousand Houses, and near as many Gardens round about it,
abounding with store of pleasant Fruits, with their Fountains, and other places
of delight.

The Air about Algier is pleasant and temperate; the Land has excellent
Fruits, as Almonds, Dates, Olives, Raisins, Figs, some Drugs, etc. The Plain of
Mottia, fifteen or sixteen Leagues long, and eight or ten broad, is so fertile,
that sometimes it yields an hundred for one, and bears twice a year. But most
of the Inhabitants live by their Pyracy, which does so much enrich the place,
that Cardinal Ximenes was wont to say, That they that could take Argier, would
find Money enough in that Town to Conquer all Africa. Among the Tombs without
the City is remarkable, that of the fairest Cava, Daughter of Count Julian of
Bettica, who having been ravished by Rodoric King of the Goths, was the cause
of the Moors descent into Spain. The Emperor Charles the Fifth lost before
Argier the fairest Navy he ever had in his life.

The City of Temendfust, or Mansora, is about six Leagues from Algier, the
Iomnium Municipium of Ptol. the Lamnium, Ant. test Sans. or Caffen test Mol.

Teddeles, or Taddeles, twenty Leagues from Algier, is the Rusipisis test
Sans. Saldae. Merc.

Cercelle or Sarcelle, near Albatel or Sargel, is the Rusicibar Ptol. the
Rusubiticari Ant. test Baud.

Couco is a separate Kingdom in the Mountains, of so difficult access, and so
strong, that it maintains its Liberty, said to be the Tubusuptus Ptol. test
Baud.

The Province of Bugia lies between the Rivers Major and Sufgemar, or
Suffegmar, the Ampsaga of Mela, and Ptol. test Marmol. And has for its chief
City Bugia, a large City, adorned with many sumptuous Mosques, s me Monasteries
and Colleges for Students in the Mohammedan Law, and Hospitals for the Relief of
the Poor, guarded with a very strong Castle. The Igi^gili, Castal. Taba^ra or
Tabraca, Fazell^, Baldae M l. Marmol. and aliis.

Lub^z makes a separate Estate above Bugia, and consists only in Mountains of
so difficult access, that they are scarce forced to pay Tribute.

Calaa is the Chief Fortress and Residence of their Z^que or King.

T^zli, and Caco de Tele^ta, are at the foot of the Mountains.

Necaus is the most pleasant place of all Barbary, every House has its Garden,
and every Garden is so embellished with Flowers, Vines, Fruits and Fountains,
that it seems a Terrestrial Paradise. The Baga, and Bagaia, Divo Augustino,
Lib. Conc. Vaga Ptol. and Sil. Vaganse Op. Plin. test Marmol. and Vagal Ant.

The Province of Constantina has sometime had its Kings. This Province is
divided into three Parts or Quarters, viz. that of Constantina, Bona and
Tebessa.

Constantina, which the Moors or Arabians call Cosantina, the Ancients Cirtha
or Cirta Julia, which in Roman History was the Residence of many Kings of
Numidia, as Massinissa and Syphax. This Cirta was besieged and taken by
Massinissa, where Sophonisba, the Daughter of Asdrubal, Syphax's Queen was; who
had so many Attractions and Charms, that in the same day she was Captive and
Wife to Massinissa, who, that she might not be led in Triumph through Rome,
poisoned her self. Its situation on a Mountain, which has but two Avenues, the
rest being Precipices, makes it strong.

Bona is the Ancient Hippo regius, the Bishop's See of St. Augustine; ab
Africanis Bened and Vgneb, test Marmol. Vaga, Silio. Aliis Biserta Vecchia,
and Razamilara, test Baud.

Tebessa the Ancient Thereste, is said to excel all other Cities in Barbary in
three things, in the force of its Walls, beauty of its Fountains, and great
number of its Walnut-trees.

Collo is the Collops Magnus of Ptol. Mabra is the Aphrodium Colonia, test
Mol. Castal. Stora is the Rusicada of Plin. Ptol. and Mela, test Mol. and
Marm. The Genovese have a Fortress in the Isle Tabarca: And the French a
Bastion between the Isle Tabarca and Magazin, called Bastion de France, for the
security of their Fishing and Commerce.

These two Provinces of Bugia and Constantina contain the Numidia propria of
the Ancients, Guzuntina incolis, test Marmol. A Country which has suffered
great Changes under the Romans, Vandals, Moors, and afterward by Barbarossa.

Of TVNIS.
THE Kingdom of Tunis was the Native Country of Amilcar, Hannibal, Asdrubal,
Mago, and Massinissa; And Christianism also is beholden to it for the birth of
St. Augustine, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, Lactantius, Fulgentius. The Kingdom of
Tunis is divided into four Maritim Governments, and three or four Inland ones.
The Maritim are Biserta, Goletta, Sousa and Africa. The Inland ones are Beija,
Vrbs, Cayroan, to which some add a part of Billedulgerid: and contains the
Africa propria of Old: In qua Punica Regna vides, Tyrios, and Agenoris urbem.
Virg. Lib. 1. Aeneidos. The Libyphaenices Live. Libophaenices Plin.
Libophaenicia apud Salustium. This City grew from the Ruins of Carthage, once
formerly Romes great Rivaless: and the Capital City of a large Territory first
built by Dido, Anno Mundi 3070, about an hundred forty and three years before
Rome, and two hundred and ninety years from the destruction of Troy. Tunis is
now one of the fairest Cities in Barbary, a place of great Traffic, and much
frequented, affording several good Commodities, viz. Saffron, Wax, Oil, raw and
salted Hides, hard Soap: Variety of Fruits, Wool, Spunges, Ostrich-Feathers,
and chiefly Christian Slaves: The Tarsis of the Ancients test Sanut. memorable
also, in the holy Wars, for the Sieges and Successes of two of our English
Princes, Edward the First, and Henry the Fourth, when but Earl of Darby. As to
the old Carthage, let me only say, that it was once one of the fairest Cities
of the World; when in its Splendour it was three hundred and sixty stadia in
circuit, like to that of Babylon. Its Inhabitants so rich and powerful, that
they disputed with the Romans, as was said, for the Empire of the World, but
now lies buried in its Ruins. Biserta is the ancient Vrica, of Caesar. Cic.
Plin. Ityca Polyb. and Ptol. Porto Farina, and Incolis Garal-mesha, Marmol. and
Faz. Mazachares, N^g, Bensert, Arab. Biserta, Ital. test Baud. Here is a fair
Burse or Exchange for Merchants; two great Prisons for their Slaves, and some
Bastions to defend the Port, which is good and large. Memorable for the death
of Cato, consisting of a high and low Town, the one on a Rock, the other on the
Sea. That of Sousa (the Ruspina of Ptol. test Sans. but Mahadia is the Ruspina
test Mol.) is a higher and lower City, the first on a Rock, and of difficult
access; the later on the Sea with a good Port. In the year 1619, the Duke of
Savoy made an unsuccessful Enterprise upon them: Within this Government is the
City Hammametha Arab. the Adrumetum. Plin. Hadrumitum Melae, Adrumittes Ptol.
which by Adianus is now called Toulba, by Merc. Mahometta, which communicates
its Name to the neighboring Gulf in the bottom, whereon it is seated, having
strong Walls, and a safe Harbor.

In the Government of Africa, Merc. Mahadia Incolis, test Faz. El-madia. Sans.
the Aphrodisium Ptol. is a City of the same Name, twenty Leagues from
Mahometta. Its Situation is in a Peninsula, guarded with a double Wall, and
good Ditches: Its Port capable to lodge fifty Galleys, but its entrance so
narrow, that a Gally cannot pass without lifting up its Oars. Sanson makes
El-madia to be the ancient Thapsus, where Caesar defeated Scipio, and Juba,
after which defeat Cato slew himself at Vtica, by Sans. now Benserta: And
Scipio being met by Caesar's Fleet, passing his Sword through his Body, flung
himself into the Sea: Juba retired to Zama, where he had left his Children and
Treasures, but being refused entrance, he and P^trejas retired into a House in
the Field, where they killed themselves.

Zamara is the Zama of Polyb. Strab. and Plin. test Marmol. Zamamizon Plin.
where Hannibal was overcome by Scipio, one hundred Miles from Mahametta, and
one hundred and twenty from Tunis.

Goletta is a Fortress between Tunis and the Sea; under this Fort General ^lake
with the English Fleet fired the Pyrate Ships of Tunis in 1654. Cayroan was the
Residence of a Caliph, or one of Mahomets high Priests. It is the ancient
Thesdrus, where Massinissa beat Asdrubal, while Scipio looked on. Beg, Beja
lies in a Soil so fertile in Corn, that the Natives say, That if there were but
two Beja's, there would be more Grains than Atoms of Sand upon the Seashore.
The River Gu^dibalbar Mol. makes so many windings and turnings, that you cross
it twenty five times in the Road from Bona to Tunis. Rubricatus Mela. and Ptol.
Armua Plin. Ardalio Oros. Ladog. Cast. Jad^g. I. Leon. But Bagradas Ptol.
Strab. and Live. Magrida Leon. M^grada Mar. Magiordeck P. Jovi^, Macra Polyb.
Bagrada Caes. is made to be the River Guadibalbar in the Maps of Ortelius and
Sans. Between the Kingdom of Tunis, and the Island of Malta lie some little
Islands, as Pantalarea belonging to the King of Spain, wherein is a Gulf, from
whence the Vapors that thicken upon the Rock above, destill as much Water as
serves for the use of the Inhabitants: the Cossyra Ptol. Cosura M^la. and Flac.
Cosyra Plin. Cosura Strab. distant from C. Bona, olim Herm^ae vel Mercurii
promontorium forty five Miles, and from Maltha olim Melita, ninety. Lampadosa
and Limosa belong to the Knights of Maltha. In Lampadosa stands a Chapel,
famous for the Offerings of both Turks and Christians. And it has been
observed, that never any Sacrilegious Person went unpunished, that robbed it.
The first Lopadusa of Strab. and Ptol. The other Aethusa and Aegusa, test Ort.
Checara I. Italis, Circare Gallis, Querquene Merc. Charchana Faz. is the
Circina and Circinna of old.

The Kingdom of Tripoli is a barren Country, considerable only for the Trade of
Tripoli in Barbary, so called to distinguish it from Tripoli in Syria and
Natolia.

Capes and Caps Nig. Castal. etc. is the Tacape of Plin. Cape Ptol. Capa
Procop. Thacapae or Tacapae Ant. Upon the Coast of this Kingdom lie the two
Syrtes, the little one is called, The Gulf of Capes, by Ortel. Golfo di Caps,
by Faz. Golfo di Beito. In circuit, 190 Miles; the great one, The Gulf of
Sydra, Golfo di Solocho, and Golfo di Palo, in the Charts, Gallis, Les Seiches
de Barbary. Baxos de Barbaria Hisp. Golfo de Sidra, Italis. In circuit about
four hundred Miles, test Baud. 625. Plin. infamous for the shipwreck of
Vessels, inhospita Syrtis Virg. 4. Aeneidos. The Island of Gerbas, where the
Spaniards were defeated in the year 1560. by the Infidels. And here it was also
that Dragut the Pyrate escaped the famous Doria, it was the Lotophagites of
Strab. and Ptol. Meninx Plin. Mirmex Polyb. Girba Ant. Gerbi, Faz.

Old Tripoli, formerly Sabrata, Sans. is now decayed: The Sabathra Ptol.
Sabatra Plin. Raksanabes Villan. Saxambis Mol. But New Tripoli, of Old Ocea, is
much enriched by Pyracy. Along this Coast are some Isles, where grows the fruit
Lotes very sweet and pleasant, and on the South of Tripoli is the fairest and
best Saffron.

Lepeda and Lebeda, Baud. the Leptis of the Ancients well known to the Romans,
and to the Arab. of Nubia, Zoara of old, Pisida noted for its scarcity of Water.

Of the Kingdom of Barca.

Cyreniaca, Lybia, Marmarica are now comprehended under the name of Barca,
which begins on the part where formerly stood the Altars of the Phylenians,
which were also the bounds between the Territories of Carthage and Cyrene; and
after that to the Empires of East and West. It is a Country for the most part
dry and barren, covered over in most places with a thick light Sand,
continually moved about with the winds, turning Hills into Valleys, and Valleys
into Hills. As infamous for the birth of Arius, who denied the Divinity of
Christ, so, as famous for one of the Sybils, hence named Lybica. These Sybils
were in number ten, viz. Persica, Lybica, Delphica, Cumaea, Samia,
Hellespontica, Tiburtina, Albunea, Scythoea and Cumana, which last is said to
have written the nine Books of Sybils presented to Tarquinius uperbus, which
contained Prophesies, of the Name, Birth, and Death of Christ.

The chief places of most esteem in former times were, 1. Barca, of old called
Ptolomais, of such account, that it gave name to the whole Country.

2. Cyrene, once of such Power, that it contended with Carthage about their
Territories: The Birthplace of Eratosthenes, Callimachus, and Simon of Cyreen,
who carried our Saviors Cross: Now called Carvanna, Corene, Villano and
Cairoan. Baud.

3. Berenice on the great Syrtes, now Bernicho.

4. Herculis Turris erected in honor of Hercules for killing the Dragon, and
robbing the Orchards of the Hesperides of their golden Apples, this Orchard
being placed here by Ptolomy, by Pomponius in the Atlantic Islands, by Virgil
and Pliny in Mauritania.

5. Alberton, of old Paraetonium, the Seaport to the Temple of Jupiter Hammon,
seated in the midst of a vast sandy Desert, as they tell us, encircled with a
delightful and pleasant Grove, watered with wholesome Springs, refreshed with a
temperate Air, shaded with Fruit-bearing Trees, whose Leaves were always green.

This Country is now the thirteenth Calsiliff or Government under the Turkish
Bashaw in Egypt, called Bonhera or Barca the Southern part whereof is called
the Desert of Barca, famous for the Temple beforementioned, for its Oracle, for
the Fountain of the Sun, for the destruction of Cambyses Army; and for the
visit of Alexander.

Rivers I find few, but one of same enough for all the rest, by Ptolomy called
Lathon, by Pliny Lethon, by the Poets Lethe, and feigned to come from Hell, and
to cause forgetfulness in those that drink it: Now Milel. test Marmol.

Of EGYPT.
map of Egypt EGYPT by R. Morden.


EGypt is bounded on the North with the Mediterranean Sea, on the East with the
Red Sea, and the Isthmus between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean; on the
South with Ethiopia and Nubia; on the West with the Lybian Mountains, or
Deserts of Barca.

This flourishing Kingdom possessed by Mizraim, changed her ancient Name, and
became Egypt, at such time as Aegyptus (or Ramasis) the son of Belus, having
expelled his Brother Dan^us or Armeus into that part of Greece, now called
Morea, by whom the Argives were made Danai, which happened 877. years after the
Flood, in the time of Joshua, as St. Augustine conjectureth out of Eusebius.

This Country by the Jews was called, Misraim; the Caldeans, Misrai; the
Assyrians, Misri; the Arabians, Mesra; the Moors, Missir; and Babara, by the
Ancient Inhabitants Chemia and Hamia; by the Romans, Augustanica; by Berosus,
Oceania; by Xenophon, Ogygia; by Herodotus, Potamia; by Lucian, Melambolos,
alias Milampodus; by Homer, Hefestia; by others, Nilea, Aeria, an Osiria; by
the Modern Turks, El-kebit. It is the only Region of Africa that borders upon
Asia; and though the Air be bad, it is the best peopled in the World. Nor was
it less peopled formerly, if it be true, that in the Reign of Amasis, one of
their Kings, it contained above twenty thousand Cities. The extraordinary
quantities of Corn which it yielded, caused the Ancients to call it the public
Granary of the World. And the plenty or scarcity of the whole Roman Empire was
still according to the Harvest of Egypt. Nile by the Inundation of his Stream,
which is full of Nitre, gives the Ground this fertility. The Plants grow in
such abundance, that they would choke one another, did they not strew the
Fields with Sand. The Western part of Nile is more fruitful than the Eastern.
Besides Corn, this Country affords Rice, Sugar, Dates, Senna, Cassia, Balsom,
Hides, Flax, and Linen. They know little, who say that it rains not there. For
the ordinary time of Rains and Winds begins in the Month of December or
Kijahak, and continues till January and February, at the Eve of Pentecost, in
the year 1672. there was Rain at Ros tte, and on the 24 of November, the Rains
fell at Cairo, test F. Vansleb. So that it is a great Error to say, it never
Rains in Egypt; besides, there are often wet Mists, and in all seasons of the
year, when the Nights are serene, there is much Dew that falls, but when the
Nights are cloudy, there is no Dew.

To this day also Egypt shows us Pyramids, Obelisques, Labyrinths, and other
Works of the Ancient Kings raised at an incredible expense, to testify their
Puissance, and to employ their people. The Statue of Memnon was there formerly
most remarkable, as also the Pharos near Alexandria: In the Lake Meris is said
to be seen the place where the Labyrinth stood, wherein they say, There were
above thirty three hundred Rooms. Mommies which are frequent in this Country,
are nothing but the Bodies of dead Men embalmed and buried in Vaults, carefully
provided for that purpose, where they keep entire two or three thousand years.

About five Miles from Cairo, as one Stephen Dublies reports, (being an eye
witness) there is a place in which on every Good Friday there appears a great
many Heads and Legs of Men, rising out of Ground: By late Relations, it is said
to be only a Trick of the Watermen to get Money.

The Palm Trees may be reckoned among the Rarities of Egypt, they grow in
couples, Male and Female, and do not fructify but by coiture; the Fruit it
bears is known by the name of Dates, in taste much like Figs, and all its parts
are of several uses, as the Pith for a Sallet, the Husk of the Cod for Cordage,
the Leaves for Fans, Feathers, etc.

Egypt at the beginning had Native Kings, who governed their Subjects with a
free and unlimited Authority, and till the Government of Psammenitus, Son of
Amasis, who ruled in the year of the World 3454, were all called by one general
Surname, or Title of Pharaoh, being a Name of Dignity, as with us the Name of
Emperor or King. But though Egypt has been always of old governed by Kings, yet
the Royal Seats have been changed. The first Royal Seat we read of was Tanis,
where was Pharaoh's Court, and where God performed great Wonders; Thebes also
was the Royal Seat. Then Memphis, which was the Seat of the Kings, of the Race
of Coptus, till Nebuchadonozer sacked it. Alexandria, where the Greek Kings
resided for nine hundred years, till the Arabians took Egypt, and made Fostat
near old Cairo the Metropolis. After Giauher had built Cairo, about the year of
the Hegira 362, he made that the Royal Seat, which continues to this time.

The Egyptians were anciently Heathens, almost every City had a God to adore:
Abusir, or the old Busiris worshipped a Calf; Alexandria, the ancient Racotis,
adored a Serapis of Stone; Achmin, the old Panos, acknowledged Apollo; Bana
worshipped a Dog; Bassa, or the old Bubastis had for a God a Lion of Stone;
Eida adored a Serapis; Ischemunein, or the ancient Hermepolis, worshipped a Man
of Stone, Isvan, called by the Copties S^van, reverenced the Tree Lebaca; Cous
worshipped the Moon and Stars; Mindadi the Fig tree of Pharaoh; Memphis a Calf;
Atrib, or the old Atribis, adored a Calf of Stone; Semenant, which is the
ancient Sebennis, worshipped a Calf of Br^ss; Sa a Hog of Stone; Tuba had
respect for the Water, according to an old Manuscript in Arabic.

Cambyses, the Son of Darius, in the year of the World 3454, was the first that
made them stoop to a foreign yoke, he with a strong Army invaded and conquered
Egypt, took Psammenitus Captive, putting to death, banishing and destroying all
before him, reducing the Country to a Province, in which subjection to the
Persians it remained above one hundred and fifty years, till the Reign of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, in whose time the Egyptians set up one Inarus, Son of
Psammitichus, before King of Libia, who governed happily, till Artaxerxes, with
a great Fleet and Army, came upon them out of Phoenicia unawares, and soon
reduced them again to his obedience, from which time it was subject to the
Persian Kings, until the Reign of Darius Nothus, when they were expelled by
Amirteus, born in the City Sais, or Pelusium, now Calixene.

Six years reigned Amirteus, succeeded for about ninety one years by four
Mendesian Princes, after that by three Sebenites, until Neciabanes the Second,
in whose time Artaxerxes Ochus bereaved him of his Kingdom, and so Egypt fell
again into the hands of the Persians, to whom it continued subject till the
destruction of Darius Codomanus, by Alexander the Great, who brought it to the
Grecian or Macedonia^ Kings, that reigned five years over it; after Alexanders
death it fell to Ptolomeus, Surnamed Lagus, whence all the Kings, his
Successors in that Kingdom, were called Ptolomies, subjoyning thereunto some
other name.

The Ptolomies in Egypt which bore the Title of Kings, were ten in Number.

And their Race ended with Cleopatra, the Daughter of Ptolomy Auletes, courted
at first by Julius Caesar, then by Mark Antony, through whose favors she kept
her Sovereignty, but Augustus, at the Battle of Actium, ruining Antony's
fortunes with the death of Cleopatra, who poisoned her self, made it a Roman
Province, and it continued under that Empire, till the Reign of Heraclius, who
held his Royal Court at Constantinople. After the dividing of the Roman Empire
into Eastern and Western, Egypt fell to the Greek or Western share, till the
Egyptians submitted to the Arabian Califs, about the year 704, to whom they
stood faithful, till conquered by the Mahumetans. In the year 1155 Syracon or
Xarracon, by others Aserddin, Schirachoch, an Armenian General, or first Vizier
of the King of Damas, by his Victorious Arms took Captive the Calif of Egypt,
and made himself Master there, with the Title of Sultan, or Souldan; so that it
continued in that Name and Race, till the year 1242, when the Marmaluks, the
offspring of a people, on the Banks of the Euxine Sea, Mercenary Soldiers kept
in pay of the Souldan, by the Murder of their Lord made themselves Lords of the
Country, under the Tyranny of whose Race and Possession it groaned from 1255,
until the year 1517.

The last Souldan of Egypt, being called Tomumbey, the second of that Name,
which by the Warlike Marmaluks was elected Sultan, who having Wars with the
Turkish Emperor Selim, and by him defeated, fled to Cairo, where taken Captive
and delivered up by a Moorish Prince, he was miserably in the said year 1517
Murdered, and his Body tied to the Tail of a Camel, and dragged through Cairo.
Which Victory so ruined the Power of the Marmaluks, that Egypt, by their
Courage and Conduct kept in subjection above three hundred years, has ever
since truckled under the Command of the Turkish Empire, where the Grand
Signiors manage the Government by a Bashaw, or Pacha, and chief of the
Sangiacks, in the same manner as other Countries, subject to the Turks: Whose
yearly Revenue is about 150000 pounds, which is divided into three equal parts,
of which one is allotted for the discharge of the Annual Pilgrimage to Mecha,
the second for the payment of the Soldiers, with other necessary charges of the
Kingdom, and the third goes into the Turkish Chequer.

Egypt is inhabited at present by Copties, Moors, Arabians, Turks, Jews, Greeks
and Franks. The Turks govern the Country, and act in all Offices of State. The
invention of Astrology, Arithmetic and Physic, is attributed to them, for
which reason Egypt is called the Mistress of Arts. Ptolomeus Philadelphus, is
said to be the Person who ordered the Bible to be translated by the Seventy
Interpreters: as usally called, though indeed they were seventy two; and bought
above two hundred thousand Volumns of Manuscripts. There were also a prodigious
number of Books in the Library at Alexandria, which were unfortunately lost,
when Julius Caesar made War there. The Natives of the Country, have a
particular Art to hatch Chicken by the heat of their Ovens, wherein sometimes
they will put three or four thousand Eggs together; and when they are hatched,
they sell them by the Peck. The Copties are Natives of Egypt, the natural
Inhabitants of the Country, and use a Language altogether particular to
themselves, and a certain sort of Writing little different from that of the
ancient Greeks. There is now scarce ten or fifteen thousand of them left,
according to the relation of their Patriarch; Millions of them having been put
to the Sword, partly by the Pagan Emperors, for their adhearing to the
Christian Faith, and partly by the Christian Emperors, for their obstinacy in
maintaining the Error of Dioscorus, one of their Patriarchs concerning one
Nature, one Will, and one Person in Jesus Christ. Histories tells us, That the
Governor, under Dioclesian the Emperor, Massacred in one Night, at Christmas
80000, who were buried at Mount Achmin in the upper Egypt; and at another time
near Isna, the same Governor, or another, put to death so many as were not to
be numbered. And Macriz, in his History of the Patriarchs tells us, That
Justinian the Emperor caused 200000 Copties to be killed at Alexandria.

The Egyptians, in old time, were eminent in Arts and Learning, from them
Pythagoras and Democritus learnt their Philosophy, Licurgus, Solon and Plato
their Forms of Government. Here flourished the learned Grammarian, Aristarchus;
Herodian and Dydimus so well skilled in Sciences; Appianus the Historian; C.
Ptolemeus the Geographer; Trismegistus the Philosopher; Pantenus a Reader of
Divinity; Origin, and Clemens Alexandrinus, notable in all Learning; Dionysius,
Athanasius and Cyril, Bishops, and the glories of their times.

The Copties divide the Seasons of the year thus; Autumn from the fifteenth day
of September, to the fifteenth of December; Winter from thence to the fifteenth
of March; Spring from thence to the fifteenth of June; and Summer from thence
to the fifteenth of September.

They begin the year on the eighth of September, according to the Gregorian
Style, or on the Twenty eighth of August, according to the Greeks Calendar.

They begin their Computation or Era from the Dioclesian Massacre, and reckon
this present year 1687 to be the year 1413.

To every Month they allot thirty days which makes up three hundred and sixty,
and to complete the year, they add the five at the end of all.

The present Egyptians are generally of an Olive Color, and the further they
are from Cairo toward the South, the more tawny, and toward Nubia black, as
the Nubians. Their ordinary Vices are Idleness and Cowardice: Their ordinary
Employment is to take Tobacco, and drink Coffee: To sleep and lie in an idle
place, or sit talking together: Generally ignorant in all manner of Sciences.

In the present State of Egypt, the Author F. Vanslebius tells us concerning
the Crocodile, which is the most remarkable, and most curious Animal belonging
to Nilus: That (though Pliny affirms it to be commonly above eighteen Cubits in
length) many Hunters of Crocodiles have assured him, that it never grows above
a Cubit in length in a year, and when it comes to twelve years old, it grows no
more: That its Eggs are as big as the Eggs of Ostriches, and are sometimes
thirty, never a hundred; and as soon as out of its Body, it carries them to
some Island of Nilus, and puts them in a Hole, and covers them with Sand, and
so leaves them, till by natural Instinct it knows that the Young are formed: It
goes then and opens the Hole, and breaks the Shell for the Young to creep out:
Of all the Creatures that live upon the Earth, this alone is without a Tongue,
and this alone moves the upper Jaw in eating.

Concerning the Ichneumon, called by the Arabians, Nims; by the Italians, Sorca
di faraone; by the French, Rat d' Aegypte; it is very true, that it creeps into
the Mouth of the Crocodile, enters into its Belly, which it gnaws to the very
Entrails; the like happens to the Camels and wild Beeves, and other Animals,
when they sleep in the Fields.

That which Pliny speaks concerning the Dolphins, is not likely, for there are
none in the River: But it may be the Tirse, which is the only Fish that
assaults the Crocodile.

That which Pliny says of the Trochilos, requires a farther inquiry; for one
may ask an hundred years in Egypt what this Bird is, and yet get no acount of
it. Beitar says, there is a certain Bird, as little as a Teitavy, enters
between his Jaws, and eats up Slime and Worms, if any; and when the Crocodile
feels that all is clean, he shuts his Mouth to eat the Bird also; but nature
has provided an expedient to secure it; for it has two sharp pricks on the
top of the Birds head, which when the Crocodile feels, he opens his Jaws again
for the Bird to escape out.

But the Moors in Egypt knew not any Bird that had any prick, on the head; they
told the Author, That there is in Egypt the Saksak, a Bird that always kept the
Crocodile company, and which lives upon the Filth and Meat that sticks about
the Crocodiles Teeth: So that whether the Saksak of the Moors, or the Bird
mentioned by Beitar be the Trochilos of Pliny, I leave it to the Reader to
judge.

That the Crocodile will live a long time without Meat, as Pliny affirms, is a
truth, for the Author had two which lived a Month without eating: And the Moors
say, they will live forty days without nourishment: They have in all seventy
two great Teeth, very sharp, thirty six in the upper, and as many in the lower,
Jaw.

Its four Paws are furnished with great sharp Claws, the two forefeet have five
distinct, separated the one from the other; the two hinder feet have but four,
which are all joined together by a thin Skin, as are the Feet of Sea-fowl, as
Geese or Ducks.

The Arabian Authors say, That it casts out its Excrements by its Throat,
because it has no hole under its Tail, and that its Stones have the smell of
Musk; but of this, the Author had no experience of; when the Male covers the
Female, she lies upon her back, and because she cannot well turn her self
again, the Male turns her when he has performed.

Amongst the rare Trees of Egypt, he names the Doum, or the Gum-Tree, in which
are two things remarkable. 1. That its Leaves burst forth only at the ends of
its Branches, and in the thick bunches. 2. That they are so equal and even at
the end of the Branches, that one would think they were cut with Cissars.
Amongst the Plants he mentions one called Gesalaht, that grows as big as a Tree.

As to the rare Birds he has seen heads of Ostriches in the Deserts, that lead
to the Monastery of St. Anthony, what he relates of their hatching their Eggs
with their Eyes is very strange, and that the Sciamta is so strong, that it can
carry a Man up into the Air.

That there is such a prodigious number of Pigeons, that they are sold at the
rate of about two hundred and forty couple for four shillings and six pence.

Concerning the Pyramids he tells us, That he guesses by the place, that there
have been formerly an hundred Pyramids great and small; that they are all built
on a Rock, for the greatest is nothing but a Rock cut as a Pyramid, and covered
over with a Wall of Stone; so that it is probable that the Stones have been
taken from the place, and not brought from far as some imagine: That the
greatest has but two hundred and six steps; and that on the top of it was
anciently a Statue or Colossus: And on the top of the Sphinx stands the head of
a Woman, of an extraordinary bigness and height.

That the Caves of Egypt are strange Curiosities dug in the main Rocks, the
Walls of many of them are full of Hieroglyphical Figures carved in the Rock;
the Colors of them being extreme fresh and beautiful, after so many Ages
since. It Is said that the Kings of Egypt employed the Israelites in digging of
them.

At Sacara, a Village four hours traveling from the Pyramids are pits where
Mummies are buried.

That at the Church of Gemaine, on a certain day, they yearly observe the
Apparitions of some Saints, which F. Vanslebius tells us, are only from the
Reflections of Objects, that pass by the Church at some convenient distance.

That the Lodgings of the Seventy Interpreters are yet standing, with the
Closets, where they performed the Work in Alexandria.

The Salt Pits and Cisterns near Alexandria are remarkable, for that the Water
of Nilus, the sweetest and freshest in the World, makes a Salt not only whiter
than ordinary, but very excellent, having the taste of Violets: This quality
proceeds from the Nitrous Earth, for if a piece of it be laid in the Sun, it
will become white as Snow on that side that is toward the Sun. These Lakes of
Saltpeter or Niter yield every year three thousand and six hundred Quintals,
so that every Quintal sold for twenty five Meidins, this Revenue comes to
thirty six Purses, or eighteen thousand French Crowns yearly.

The Grand Signior has yearly carried out of Egypt to Constantinople, in
Spanish Coin and Zequins of Venice, one thousand two hundred Purses, each Purse
containing five hundred Crown, which makes one hundred and fifty thousand pound.

The Talismantick Science is much used in Egypt. And our Author tells us, He
has procured all the rare Manuscripts of the antientest and best Arabian
Authors concerning it, and that he hopes one day to discover the admirable
Secrets of this Science, and to unfold the Aenigmas under which it lies hid.

Egypt is generally divided into four parts, Thebais now Sahid, or upper Egypt;
Bechria or Demesor, otherwise middle Egypt; Errif, or the lower Egppt, and the
Coast of the Red Sea. Some make only two Divisions, the Upper and the Lower,
following the course of Nile: But at present Egypt is also divided into Twelve
Caciefs, Sangiacutes, or Governments.

Jaques Albert reckons thirteen Kossuffs or Provincial Jurisdictions, viz.
Girgio or Sahid, Manselout, Benesuef, Fiam Gize Bouhera, or Baera Garbia,
Menousia, Mansoura, Kallioubich, Minio, Cherkeffi, and Kattia: But the Divan,
or Council of Gran Cairo will not allow Kattia to be numbered with the rest. F.
Vansleb. tells us, There are thirty six Caciefs or petty Governors.

Strabo of old divided it into thirty seven Parts, by the Greeks called Monoi:
Ptolomy enlarged it to forty; and Herodotus reduced it to twenty eight: But
thirty seven seems most agreeing to the mysterious Temple or Labyrinth, (on the
South side of the City of Alexandria, near the Lake Mereotis, and adjoining to
the Sepurchers of King Meris and his Wife) in the midst whereof were thirty
seven Palaces belonging to the thirty seven Jurisdictions of Egypt, whereof ten
in Thebaes, ten in Delta, and seventeen in the middle Region; unto which
resorted the several Presidents, who had there their particular Temples to
celebrate the Festivals of their Gods. There were also fifteen Chapels,
containing each a Nemesis to advise of Matters of Importance concerning the
General Welfare.

Among the Cities, Caire is called the Great, in respect of the advantages,
which it has above all the Cities of Africa. It is three Leagues Lower, and
upon the opposite side to that place, where stood the ancient Memphis. The
Castle, which is built upon the rising ground, has the noblest prospect, and
enjoys the best Air in the World. It is one of the largest, and most
Magnificent, and counted the strongest that ever was contrived: But the last
relation of 1627, says, it has lost much of its ancient Splendour, and it is
not now of any strength: It is not of Marble as some relate, but beautified
with several pieces of Mosaic work. In the Castle, Gunpowder is made in two
Rooms, in each of which are twelve Pewter Morters, with Iron Pestles to pound
the Ingredients, which receive their motion from a long Pole, that answers to a
B^am that stands in the middle of a Chamber, which a Horse turns round. The
Water of Nile is conveyed thither by an Aqueduct of a hundred and fifty Arches.
The Inhabitants of Caire must needs be very numerous; it being averred, that in
the year 1618, there die d above six hundred thousand People of the Pestilence,
and yet there was no miss of the Inhabitants. And our Author tells us, That the
Archbishop of Mount Sinai told him, That the Plague of 1671, or 1672, had swept
away 680000 poor Persons, but of the richer sort scarce four hundred were dead.
In short, they say, it contains two hundred thousand Houses, eighteen thousand
considerable Streets, and is in Compass about twenty five or thirty Leagues.
But then you must take in the Old as well the New Caire, Festat, Babylon,
Charaffat, and the Boulac, that joins to it: For the New Caire it self is not
so big as Paris. The People ride in the Streets upon Asses, as we make use of
Sedans; not but there are Horses in Egypt, but the Turks have introduced this
Custom to preserve the Horses for themselves. The Inhabitants of Caire make
those fair Carpets which we call Turkey Carpets. Five Miles South East of the
Pyramids, and two from the Nilus West stood the Regal City of Memphis, the
Strength and Glory of old Egypt, where was the Temple of Apis, and the
sumptuous Temple of Vulcan. Here stood the Fane of Venus, and that of Serapis.
A City once adorned with a World of Antiquities, but now the Ruins are almost
ruinated.

Besides the Pyramids and the Mummies, which are about six Leagues from Caire,
all Travelers are curious to see Joseph's Well and his Granaries. About two
Leagues also from Caire is to be seen the Matarea, Ma-Tarca, or retiring place
of the Virgin, with a Fountain, which, together with that at Caire, is the only
Spring Water of Egypt. But the Plant, or Balm trees, which bears the true
Balsom, and which was brought from the Holy Land, by the care of Cleopatra, and
the permission of Antony, is quite lost. As also the Sycamore Tree which split
in two to hide our Lord Jesus Christ, and his most Holy Mother, when the
Soldiers of Herod persued them.

Sahid formerly Thebes, Diospolis and Heliopolis D. Siculo, Solis Oppidum Plin.
which had a hundred Gates, was the Residence of the Egyptian Kings, who
afterward removed to Alexandria, thence to Memphis, and lastly to Caire. The
Modern Relations call this City Gergio, and make it the Residence of a Basha,
affirming that only the Province bears the Name of Sahid; called Hecatompylos,
and in the Copt^es Dictionaries, Antinoe and Thebes, now Insine, test Vansleb.
Its Mountains and Islands are as great Curiosities as any in Egypt. As also the
Pillar of Marcus, Aurelius, and the Arch of Triumph, and the Hieroglyphick Cave
where the Colors of the Figures are very beautiful and lively, during so many
Ages passed: Now Minio, test Sanson.

Alexandria, Scanderic, Turcis and Arahibus. Hebraeis, No, built by Alexander
the Great, was formerly one of the best Cities in all Africa next to Carthage,
where the Ptolomies and Cleopatra kept their Courts. It was adorned with many
stately Edifices, the most famous whereof were the Serapian, which for the
curious Workmanship, and stateliness of Building was not inferior to the Roman
Capitol. The Library of Ptolomy Philadelphus, founded the year after the
Creation of the World 3704, or by others 3^80, is said to contain 400000, or,
as others write, 700000 Volumes. The Obelisks full of Egyptian Hieroglyphics
of a vast bigness, and of an entire Stone. When this City was subject to the
Romans, it contributed to them more in one Month, than Jerusalem in a whole
year. Formerly the Tower of Pharos stood not far from it, one of the seven
Wonders of the World. The Pillar of Pompey leans on one side, occasioned by the
Arabians digging, and under-mining of it, in searching for a great Treasury hid
under it, as they believe. The City enjoys a small Trade to this day, by reason
of its two Ports, or Havens; and is the Seat of a Patriarch. St. Mark and St.
Catherine have rendered it famous in Ecclesiastical History, and in the Deserts
of St. Macarius, where were reckoned to be above three hundred Monasteries
which lie to the West of it. But now of all those Monasteries there are but two
remarkable, that of the Syrians, and Amba Biscio^.

Damietta, by the Arabians Damiat, Tamiatis, or Tamiathis, test Guilandino,
about eight Miles from the mouth of Nilus: Next to Cairo it is the greatest,
most beautiful, the richest, the most populous, and fullest of Merchants of all
Egypt. It is built upon the River Nilus in form of an half Moon: But it has no
Walls, nor Fortifications, only a round high Tower, where there is neither
Watch, nor Ward, nor Guns, yet memorable for the often Sieges laid unto it, by
the Christian Armies, and the taking of it, Anno 12 8, and ^^ 9. The Trade of
this City is in Linen and Stuffs of all kinds and Colors, Coffee and Rice, of
which last there is every year above five hundred Ships great and small loaded
out for Turkey. The pickled Mullets here are highly esteemed all over the
Levant. The Town is governed by an Aga, sent thither by the Pacha of Cairo.

Mansoura is situate upon the East side of the Nilus. Here St. Lewis the French
King was taken Prisoner by Sultan Saleh, in the History of the Holy War,
translated out of the French, it is called Kase^. Its ancient Name I find not by
its situation it should be near unto the Tanis of Strabo and Ptol. the Taphnis,
Ezekieli.

Pelusium, called Belbais, by W. of Tire, now Calixene, test Bonacciola, was
the Birthplace of Ptolomy the Geographer, and the Episcopal Seat of Isidore.

Rosetta Italis, Raschit Turcis, the Metelis of Ptol. and Mela, test Ben.
Tudelensi, Bolbitina, test Villano, and Mol. aliis, Canopus: But by Ziegler,
Bocher, or Bichieri, vulgo C. d. Be ur, is the Canopus from Canobus. Menelaus,
Pilot here buried, and where stood the Temple of Serapis.

According to F. Vanslebius, Fuva, or Fuoa seated upon the East side of Nilus,
seven hours from Rosetta, was by the Greeks called Metelis, and in the Copties
Dictionary, Messil, which he says is very ancient, a great and considerable
Town, in a delightful Territory of pleasant Fields and Gardens, and that
Geziret, or the Island of Gold, is over against this City.

At Rosetta the Nilus has two Branches or Mouths which run into the Sea, which
are guarded with two Castles, that which is about a Mile and a half from
Rosetta, is a square encompassed with strong Walls, built according to the old
way, having four Towers furnished with seventy four Pieces of Cannon, whereof
seven are of an extraordinary bigness. The other Castle is but a Mosque, before
it stand seven Pieces of Artilery on the Ground.

The Waters of Maadie is a Gulf or Pool, whose Waters are very salt, and comes
not from Nilus.

Benesuaif is the Hermopolis of Strab. and Plin. test J. Leone, the Hermetis,
and Hermopolis Ptol. Here Pan and Hircus were worshipped, test Zozomeno, in
Historia Eccclesiastica: It Is now called Ischemunein, test Vansleb.

Seminaut, the ancient Sebennis, or Sebenit, test Vansleb. Sturione Negro, is
a great Town seated on the West side of Nilus, where the Barks that sail for
Cairo pay Custom. The Custom-house is built upon a Ship in the River.

Mitgamr is a very beautiful and large Town, in the middle way between Damiata
and Cairo, on the East side of Nilus: and over against it is Sitfe a fair and
large Town.

Chana is the Ombri or Ombros, Invenal. test Ortel. rather Coptes, test
Ramusio, forty four Miles from Thebae, and three hundred from Alexandria.

Alguechet is the Oasis Magna of Herod. Ptol. etc. Anasis, Strab. Avasis aliis,
now Gudemez Zieglero.

El-Eocath, or Eleochet is the Oasis parva. Azagar Barria.

Abutich or Albutig is the ancient Abydus, test. Cast. and Mol.

Sues, or Suez, the Residium of Strabo, the Arsinoe and Cleopatris Ptol. test
Zieglero, which contains not above two hundred Houses, with a bad Port, is
nevertheless the Turks Arsenal upon the Red Sea. The Haven is small and
shallow, for neither Galleys nor Ships can enter into it till they are half
unladen; which is the reason that most of the Vessels lie in the Rode, where
they are more secure than in the Port. The Governor keeps two small Galleys,
and some other Vessel, to maintain his Authority in the Red Sea. The
Commodities of the East Indies were heretofore brought thither, and then
conveyed into Europe, but now the Turks enjoy no more that Commerce, by reason
of the settlement of the Christians in the Indies. The Ships set out from Sues
in the Spring and Summer, when the North Wind blows; the South Winds being most
constant in Winter and Autumn. Cossir formerly Berenice, was the Port whither
the Romans ordered all goods to be brought that came from the East Indies;
which from thence were carried the nearest way by the Nile to the City of
Coptos, now called Cana. Buga in the most Southern part of Egypt is a Kingdom,
according to the Relations of 657, tributary to the Abyssins.

The ancient Town of Arsinoe situated near Fium is totally ruined, nothing now
remaining but a great many Mountains made of the Ruins and Rubbish of the Town,
once one of the most great and glorious Cities of Egypt.

The Monastery of St. Anthony has no Gate, but Men and Beasts are all drawn up
over the Wall by a Pulley, it has about two thousand four hundred Acres within
the Wall.

Siut, called in Greek Lycopolis, test Vanst but Baud. tells us, Licopolis is
now Munia, test Mol. is one of the most famous Towns of the Upper Egypt,
seated at the foot of a barren Mountain, that stands on the West side about
half a League from Nilus: The Town is great and populous, full of Christian
Copties, where is a Cave cut in the Rock, large enough to draw up in Battalia
one thousand Horse.

Tahta is seated near the Ruins of the ancient Town, Abutig called by the
Copties (...), upon the Banks of Nilus about two days journey from Siut toward
the South.

The Monastery of St. Sennodius the Archimandrite, surnamed the White, is built
near the Ruins of the Ancient Town Adribe, where are the Remains of one of the
most Magnificent Structures that has been in Egypt

Minie is an ancient, great and fair. Town on the West side of Nilus, where are
made the Bardaques, or Water-pots, which are so highly esteemed at Ca^ro.

Isne, Vansl. Asna, J. Leont the Syene Plin. Ptol. and Diod. four hundred and
fifty Miles from Alexandria: Isvan, Asnan, or Asuam, is the Metacompsa of Ptol.
Tacompson Plin. Tachemimpto Mela, test Zieglero. Tuot is Eleven Leagues North
of Isna, on the East of Nilus, where is a Temple of the ancient Egyptians.

Arment is twelve Leagues from Tuot, now ruined and forsaken, where the
Egygtians believe, Moses was born.

At Luxor two Leagues from Tuot, are to be seen the Remains of an ancient and
beautiful Temple, in which are seventy eight Pillars of a prodigious bigness,
and at the old Luxor is an ancient Palace, whose Ruins show, that it has been
very glorious.

Bethsames, was one of the chief Cities of Ramasis, or Goshen.

Abydus, now Abutich, once the Royal Seat of Memnon, renowned for the Temple of
Osiris, and the Statue of Memnon.

The chief Lakes in Egypt were Mareotis, now Lago de Antacon. Sebaka Vansleb.
the other Meeris, now called Buchiarea, or Kern, Vansleb.

BILEDVLGERID, ZAARA, etc.
map of Biledulgerid and Sahara Biledulgerid Sarra Terra Nigritarum Guine Nova
Descriptio Robt. Morden


BIledulgerid improperly is the Numidia of the Ancients, where inhabited the
Getuli, it signifies a Country plentiful in Dates. Which is a Fruit which much
enriches the Inhabitants. This part of Africa extends from East to West, almost
as far as Barbary. Its principal Parts are Sus or Tesset, Darha, Segelomessa,
Tegorarin, Zeb and Mezzab, Techort and Guergula, Biledulgerid, and the Desert
of Barca.

Sus by Sanutus is called Tesset, to distinguish it from that in the Kingdom of
Morocco: It is said to have many Towns, Castles and Villages. Its Inhabitants
are Beriberes, Africa^^ or Arabs.

Tesset is a Town of about four hundred ^^^ses.

Darba, its chief Town (...) same name, seated upon a River, a so so called.

Segelomessa^^, one of the greatest and best Provinces of Biledulgerid, whose
chief City bears the same name, containing several small Estates.

Tegor^rin has more than fifty walled Towns, and one hundred and fifty
Villages.

Zeb and Mezab are much troubled with Scorpions, whose bitings is mortal.

The Estates of Techort and Guergula have each their Prince; yet pay Tribute to
Algier.

Biledulgerid, or Beled-Elgered contains the Estates of Gademes, Fezzen and
Teorregu, the chief City is Caphsa, the Capha said to be built by the Lybian
Hercules.

There are in Biledulgerid some few Mohammedan Kings, whose power is very
inconsiderable. The Arabians under their Cheicks or Cheifs, are very strong in
Horse, and would be able to attempt great things, were they not so much at War
among themselves. Sometimes they assist the Turks, sometimes the King of
Morocco and Fez. The change of Governments, and diversity of Languages has made
a great alteration in the Names of the Cities. The Arabians are great Hunters
of Ostridges, as getting great profit by it. For they sell the Feathers, eat
the Flesh, make Bags of their Skins to put their baggage in; they divine by the
Heart, they make their Medicaments of the Fat, and Pendants for their Ears of
the Claws and Beaks.

Mount Alas extends some of its Limbs into Biledulgerid. And the Cape of Non
was for a good while the furthest shore of the Portugal Navigation.

Zahara or Zaara signifies a Desert: And is part of that which the Ancients
called Lybia interior, where lived the Ancient Getuli and Garamantes.

The Getuli were a people of the Interior Lybia, Vagrants having no certain
fixed Habitation, test Silio and Melas: By Pliny they are placed in Mauritania
Caesariensis, next to the Massaesylis. By Ptolomy in Lybia interior near to
Dara: By Honorius between Carthage and Numi^ia.

There is nothing to be seen but Sand, Mountains, and Scorpions; for which
reason the Inhabitants wear Boots to preserve themselves from being bitten by
those Animals. Nevertheless, the Air is wholesome, and the Sick are brought
thither out of other Countries to recover their Health. The Arabians make three
Divisions of it; Cebel, where the Sand is small without any greenness. Zaara,
where it is all Gravel, and somewhat green. And Asgar full of Lakes, Grass and
Shrubs. Travelers must provide themselves of all necessaries. For the Houses
and Wells are so far distant one from another, that a Man may Travel a hundred
Leagues together, and not meet either with Lodging or Water. In one of these
Deserts, a Merchant suffered so severe a Drowth, that he gave ten thousand
Ducats for a glass of Water; and yet he died as well as the Carrier that had
received the Money. Men are forced sometimes to bury themselves in the Sands,
to avoid the Lions, and other Wild Beasts, that make a most dreadful roaring in
the Night. The Natives are for the most part Shepherds, and the best Huntsmen
in the World, but very miserable. Some of them are Mahumetans, but the most
part Libertines. Several petty Lords receive the Tribute of the Caravans that
pass through the Country. Their other Revenue consists in Cattle; and when they
value the Wealth of a Man, they ask how many Camels he has.

There are reckoned to be five principal Deserts, Zanhaga, Zuenz^ga, wherein
there are Salt Pits, Targa, Lempta and Berdoa, to which some add Borno and
Gaoga. The Ghir, which is their biggest River, makes some very considerable
Lakes, and is lost in the Sands, in several places as it runs; the Rio Ouro,
was so called by the Portugals, by reason of Gold which they found in it, at
their first coming. This River runs under the Tropic through Desert Countries,
with ten or twelve Arms toward the end of its course. The Coast to Cape Bejador
is nothing but white and gray Sand-h^lls, overgrown with wild Bulrushes.

Nigritia, or the Land of the Blacks seems to be so called from the Ancient
Nigrites, so termed also from the blackness of their Complexion: Or else from
the Color of the Earth, which in some parts is all scorched, and burnt up by
the excessive heat. The Niger somewhat qualifies the heat of the Country; but
the Rains occasion several Diseases. Cape Blanco, or Caput Album, is a long
extent of Sand, as hard as a Rock, about ten or twelve Cubits high, with a
spacious Port, where Ships ride safe, what ever Wind, for the most part, blows.
Arguin, a Castle in a small Island, belongs to the Hollanders. Barks may go up
the River of Saint John, and there Trade with the Negros for Ostridge Feathers,
Gums, Amber, and some small parcels of Gold. Senega, one of the principal Arms
of Niger, is not above a League over at the Mouth. The Coast to the North of
Senega is very low, not to be seen hardly twelve Leagues off the Road of Cape
Verd. the Asinerium promontorium, test Barrio, Mancandan and Besenege, Thev.
Ryssadium prom^nt. test Nigro, is about twelve Fathom deep, with a gray Sand
at the bottom. The Flemish Island, or Goree, is fortified with a Platform flank
d with four Baslious, with a strong brick Tower. The entry into it is upon the
West part of the Island, where a Ship of fifteen hundred Tun may Ride. The Road
is good, but there is little fresh Water. Rafrisque is a very convenient
retiring place. Gambia is about five Leagues over at the Mouth; but is not
Navigable for Barks above sixty Leagues, by reason of the Sands and Rocks in
it. Some say, that the Portugals go up the Niger, as far as the Kingdom of
Benin, which is above eight hundred Leagues: That the Danes possess Cantozi,
toward that part where Niger divides it self: That Niger makes several Lakes,
upon which are built many fine Cities, from whence there go Caravans as far as
Tripoli in Barbary. The Negros are very simple, Idolaters toward the Sea, and
Mahumetans in the Inland Country. They have some very considerable Kingdoms,
but the greatest part of their Cities are not so good as our Villages; the
Houses being built of Wood, Chalk and Straw; and many times one of these Cities
make a Kingdom. The last Kings of Tombote were reported to have great store of
Gold in Bars and Ingots. The Kingdom of Gu^l^ta affords Millet. Geneh^a is rich
in Cotton: In that of Agades stands a City indifferently well built. Borno,
formerly the Country o^ the Garaman^es, is inhabited by a People that have all
things in common, every particular person acknowledging them, for his Children,
which are most like 'em; the most flat nosed being acconuted the most beautiful
They of Senega trade in Slaves, Gold-dust, Hides, Gums and Civets. The Negro's
there are very strong, and therefore bear a better price; those of Guiny are
good, but not so strong, for which, reason they are usua ly put to work within
doors. It Is the Proverb, That he that would have good service from a Negro,
must give him little Meat, keep him to hard Labor, and beat him often. To the
South of Niger lie several little Kingdoms, that of Melli, with a City
containing six thousand Houses. Gago, abounding in Gold. Z^^r^g, considerable
for its ^rade. Z^nfara, fertile in Corn. To reckon any more of their Towns,
would be as tedious as unnecessary, as being neither well peopled, nor of any
Trade And indeed all these Kingdoms and People are so little known, that it is
not worth the time and pains to speak more of them.

I shall only say, That the Arabian Geographer tells Wonders of Ghana or Cano,
of its Greatness, Riches and Trade, of its King, Government, Palace, etc. But
how far to be credited must be left to those who have been in those parts, the
Portugals and Hollanders, having been the chief Traders on these Coasts.

Of GVINY.
Giny is a long Coast of Land, contained between the Cape of Sir Leone, on
the West, and the River Camerones on the East, containing about seven or eight
hundred Leagues in length, and not above one hundred, or one hundred and fifty,
in breadth: It is divided into three principal Parts, called Maleguete, Guiny
and Benin. Under the Name of Malaguete, is contained all that Land between the
Capes of Sir Leona, and Palm^s, and is so called from the abundance of
M^leguete, a sort of Spice like Pepper, but much stronger than that of India;
and of their Palm Trees they make Wine as strong as the best of ours.

Guiny extends from Cape Palmas, to the River Voltas, it is the largest and
best known of all the three Parts; its Coast from Cape Palmas to Cape three
Punctas, is called the Ivory Coast, that which is beyond it is called the Cold
Coast, where are the Kingdoms of Sabou, Foetu, Accara, and others. The Kingdom
of Benin, which is the third Part, has more than two hundred and fifty Leagues
in length. Cape Formosa, dividing it into two parts, its principal City so
called is esteemed the greatest and best built of any in Guiny, the King
thereof is said to keep five or six hundred Wives.

The whole Coast of Guiny is subject to such excessive heats, that were it not
for the Rains and the coolness of the Nights, it would be altogether
unhabitable. It furnishes other Countries with Parrats, Apes. White Salt,
Elephants Teeth, Hides, Cotton, Wax, Ambergreefe, Gold and Slaves. The Natives
are reputed to be presumptuous, Thieves, Idolaters, and ver superstitious
keeping their Festisoes day or Sabbath on the Thursday; there is Saint George
of the Mine, built by the Portugals, but now in the possession of the
Hollander, as also the Ports Nassau, Cormentin, and Axima. To the English,
among others belongs Cape Corse, and to the Danes, Frederic's burgh. The best
City that belongs to the Negro's is Ardra, toward the Coast in Benin, (...)
Governed by a King, who sent an Ambassador to Paris toward the end of the year
1670 for the settlement of a Trade. The Baboons in Guiny do the Natives very
great pieces of service. For they fetch Water, turn the Spit, and wait at
Table, etc.

Nubia is three hundred Leagues in length, and two hundred in breadth. It
preserves some remains of Christianism, in the old Churches, and in their
Ceremonies of Baptism. The Nubians are under a King, who always keeps a Body of
Horse upon the Frontiers of his Kingdom, as having potent Enemies to his
Neighbors, the Ab^ssius and Turkish Historians credibly relates, that an Army
of one hundred thousand Horse was raised, and lead against one of the Governors
of Egypt, by a King of Nubia. Out of this Country the Merchants export Gold,
Civet, Sandal-wood, Ivory, Arms and Cloth. The Nubians trade chiefly with the
Egyptians of Caire, and other Cities of that Country. They have a subtle and
penetrating Poison, an ounce whereof is valued at a hundred Ducats. Insomuch
that one of the principal Revenues of the King is in the Duties, which he
receives for the Exportation of this Poison. They sell it to strangers, upon
condition they shall not make use of it, within the Kingdom. There grow
Sugarcanes in the Country, but the Natives know not what to do with them.
There are among them a sort of Bereberes, of the Musselman Religion, who travel
in Troops to Cairo, where they put themselves into service, and return again,
as soon as they have got ten or twelve Piasters together. The Capital Cities
are Nubia, and Dancala, near to Nile. The rest so little known, that it
suffices to see their names in the Maps. A Relation made in the year 16 7, tell
us, That the King of Dancala pays a Tribute in Linen Cloth, to the King of the
Abyssius. Geography is in some measure beholding to this Country, as being the
place that gave birth to that famous Nubian Geographer.

Of ETHIOPIA, Or HABESSINIA.
map of Ethiopia HABESSINIA Seu ABASSIA at ETHIOPIA By R. Morden


So little of Truth has been communicated to this part of the World concerning
Ethiopia, that having met with the Ethiopick History of Job. Ludolfus, which is
the most exact Account extant: I have been the larger in taking an Abstract of
it.

It Is seated, as this Author tells us, in Africa above Egypt beyond Nubia,
between the eighth and sixteenth Degree of North Latitude, contrary to all our
Maps extant, which extends it self to the fourteenth or fifteenth Degree South
Latitude: So that the length of it from North to South, is not more than four
hundred and eighty Miles, of sixty to a Degree; but according to the old Maps
it was more than one thousand eight hundred of the same Miles; and the length
of it is about six hundred Miles from the Red Sea, at the Port of Bailleur, to
the River Nilus, at the farthest limits of Dembea.

Toward the North, it joins to the Kingdom of Fund or Sennar by the Portugals,
Fungi; a part of the ancient Nubia, toward the Fast it was formerly bounded by
the Red Sea: But now the Turks are Masters of Arkiko, the Island Matzua, and
all that Coast, only the Prince of Dancale, who commands the Port of Baylur, is
a Friend to the Abessines: But the King of Adel, a Mahumetan, upon the straits
of Bab-elman dab (the Dreadful Mouth) is a professed Enemy to them.

Toward the South, the barbarous Nation of the Gallans have either wasted or
possessed the Kingdoms of Dawaro, Bali, Fatagar, Wed, Bizama, Cambata, Alaba,
Zendero, by the Portugals, Gingiro, and Enarea the Southern Bounds: Lastly, the
River Maleg and Nilus rolling through several vast Deserts close up the Western
Limits.

The Inhabitants are now called Habessines, Abessines, or Abassenes, a Name
given them by the Arabians, in whose Language Habesh signifies Confusion or
mixture of People: The Germans sound it Shab^sh, or Hbab^sh; the Italians,
Habascia; the French, Habech; the Portugals, Abex: But they generally call
their Kingdom Itjopia (Ethiopia) and themselves Itjopiawjan, Ethiopians, and
also Geez, and the Country of Ag^azi, or the Land of Ag^azjan, that is,
Freemen: These Ab^ssenes formerly inhabited Arabia, and were reckoned into the
number of the Sabeans or Homerites: So Stephanus relates out of the Arabicks of
Vranius, that they bordered upon the Sabeans. The Grecian Writers called them
Axumites; and many of the Ancients called them Indians, others the Empire of
the Negus, and some the Kingdom of Prester John.

The Kingdoms of Ethiopia are variously named by most Authors. Pauius Jovius
distinguishes the Empire into more than forty Kingdoms; Matthew the Amenian,
first Ambassador from the Abassenes to Portugal will needs have sixty, Tessa
Sionus affirms sixty two, P. Nicolaus Godignus, from John Sabriel, a Gortuguese
Colonel, that had been many years there, asserts twenty six Kingdoms, and
fourteen Provinces: But Job. Ludolphus, in his History reckons these, 1. Amhara
the most Noble, where are those inaccessiable and fortified Rocks, Gelhen, and
Amhacel, where formerly the Kings Sons were secured; 2. Angot; 3. Bagemder, in
the old Maps Bagamidri, a large and fertile Kingdom, watered with many Rivers:
4. Balli, the first subdued by the Gallans: 5. Bizamo: 6. Bugna: 7. Gambata,
the Inhabitants whereof are called Hadea: 8. Cont, by the Portugals called
Couch: 9. Damot: 10. Dawaro: 11. Dembeja, or Dembea, now famous for the Royal
Camp continually pitched there: 12. Enarea, by the Portugals, Narea; and by
Gordinus, Nerea: 13. Tatagar: 14. Gafat. 15. Gajghe: 16. Began: 17. Ganz: 18.
Ghedm: 19. Gojam, Goyame in the Maps, famous for the Fountains of Nile therein
now discovered: 20. Gombo: 21. Gonga. 22. Guraghe: 23. Ifat: 24. Samen, by
Tellezius Cemen: 25. Set. 26. Sewa, or Shewa, by the Portugals Xoa, or Xaoa, a
very large and opulent Kingdom: 27. Shat, by the Portugals Xat: 28. Tigre, or
Tegra, one of the principal and most fertile Kingdoms, where the former Kings
kept their Courts at Axuma: 29. Is Walaka, by the Portugals Oleca, or Holeca:
The 30. Wed, by the Portugals, Ogge; of all these the King of the Abessines
enjoys at present Amhara, Bagemder, Cambata, Damot, Dembea Enarea, Gojam,
Samen, and Sawa, with the Provinces of Emfras, Mazaga, Tzagade, Wagara, and
Walkayt, to which we may add the Coast of Abax, ou de Abexim, whose chief
places are Suaquem, Ptolemais Ferarum of old. Ercoco, or Arguico, the Aduliton
Plin. Adalis Steph. Adule Ptol. and Zeita, or Auce Gurele, the Avalites of the
Ancients: The two first places belong to the Turk, the last to the King of Adel.

The Air is various, in low and open places the heat of the Sun is intolerable,
as the Coast of the Red Sea, and the Islands, especially at Suaquen, it
excoriates the Skin, melts hard Indian wax in a Cabinet, and sears your Shoes
like a red hot Iron: But the higher you ascend the Mountains from the Coast of
the Red Sea, the more temperate you shall feel the Air, which is generally
healthy.

Their Thunders are dreadful, rattling continually, with Lightning incessantly
flashing: Their Rains are violent, pouring from the Clouds, not by Drops, but
by Streams; and the Earth also opens her Mouths and vomits up Water, which
renders their Winters for three Months very unpleasant, tedious and
troublesome. They have a Whirlwind, which they call Senda, which signifies a
Snake, so furious, that it throws down all before it, Houses, Oaks, etc.

There are properly but three Seasons among the Abyssines, viz. the Spring, or
season of Flowers, which begins upon the 25th of September, called M^^zau: Then
the Summer which may be divided into two parts, the season of Harvest or
Autumn, which begins upon the 25th of December, called Tz^dai: The Summer
Season called Aagai, which, my Author says, begins upon the 25th of June, but
I suppose rather the 25th of March for it must follow their Harvest and Autumn.
And then their (...) or Winter begins on the 25th of June: So that our Summer
is their Winter. But upon the Coast of the Red Sea, there their Winter is in
November, December and January, as in Europe, which sufficiently convinces
what some Geographers affirms, that the P^^i^^^i, or those that dwell under the
same Meridian, have the same Winter and Summer.

Abassia abounds in Gold, which is found in the shallows of Rivers in Damota,
and Enarca, upon the superficies of the Earth, and is the chiefest Tribute
which they pay.

In the confines of Tigra and Angora are natural Mountains of Salt; in the
Mountains it is soft, but in the Air it hardens, from whence it is conveyed in
Caravans or Cafilas, and vended through all the neighboring Countries, and
serves them instead of Money, to buy all things not much desired: G^ms and
Jewels are in Ethiopia, but black Lead they more esteem of, to black their
Eyebrows: And for Iron they find it in great plenty upon the superficies of
the Earth.

All Ethiopia is very Mountainous, between which are immense Gulphs, and
dreadful profundities among the Mountains: Lamalm^na lifts up her head more
loftily than the rest, and is most dangerous: But the most famous are Amba
G^sh^n, and Ambacel in the Kingdom of Ambara, where the Ethiopia Princes used
to be caged up. And in our old Maps and Globes, called Amara, and placed under
the Equinoctial. In these Mountains the Inhabitants breath a serene Air, and
they are as so many Castles, not only for Habitation, affording pleasant
Springs; but for defense against their Enemies the (...) and Gallans, for some
of these Mountains are so craggy and precipitous, that there is no way to get
up without Ladders, and Cattle are drawn up with Cords Tell^zi^s writes, that
the Alps and ^^en^^ns compared with the Ab^ssin Mountains are but low Hills:
And the Portugal Mounts are but trifles to them. The tops of some of them are
very spacious, with Fields, Woods, Fish Ponds and running Streams, as Am^^,
Dorb^, etc. The temperature of the Air makes the Country healthful, and
maintains a vivacity in the Inhabitants, sometimes to an hundred years: Only in
Tygra about the beginning of the Ethiopick Spring, which is in the Month of
September and October, Fevers are rife.

He rationally conceives, that the Rivers flowing from the Mountains in this
Country, take their rise from the Rainwater, insinuating it self into the
Pores of the Earth, and Clefts of Rocks, and so passing into subterraneous
Vaults; observing that in those Countries, where there is little or no Rain,
there are few or no Fountains; and that where there is much, they abound.

He tells, us that Nilus, which for the length of its Course, the abundance of
its Waters, its sweetness, wholsomness and fertility, exceeds all the Rivers of
the World, owes its rise to the Kingdom of Gojam in Hab^ssinia, found out by
the Travels of the Portugals, and by the sedulity of the Fathers, which was so
long and unsuccessfully sought for by the Ancients, and Kircher has described
them from the relation of P ter Pays, who saw them himself, which differs not
much from what Gregory an Ethiopian has written of it, viz. That it has five
Heads, that it encircles Gojam, and passing by several Kingdoms of Habassia,
reviews the Kingdom of Senna, and travels to the Country of Dengala: Thence it
turns to the right hand, and comes to a Country, called Abaim, before it arives
in Nubia, where by reason of Clifts and Rocks, its Stream is divided into two
Branches, one running South to drench the thirsty Fields of Egypt, the other
West to quench the drowth of those Sands in the Country of the Negrites. It is
called in the Scripture Shibber from its darkness, because it carries Waters
troubled with Mud from the Fields of Ethiopia; and by the Greeks, for the same
reason (...), by the Habessines, Abawi, in their vulgar Language; but in the
Ethiopick Gejon, or Gewon, from a mistake of the Greek G^on, and Hebrew Gebon.
He says, the ancient Geographers t^ought it to take its rise beyond the
Equinoctial, in I know not what Mountains of the Moon; thinking it might
receive its increase by the Winter Rains of those Regions: For they could not
persuade themselves, that the Sun being in the Northern Signs, there could be
Winter and Rain enough so near, to raise so great a River from them. After it
has past about forty Leagues from its source, which is in an elevated, but
trembling and moorish Ground, it enters a vast Lake in Dembe^, and passes it
without mixing its Waters, as the Rh^^e does the Lake Lemanus, and the Rhine,
Aeronius. The cause of the Inundation of Nile is from the great Rains falling
in many Regions of the Torrid-Zone, upon the Suns retiring back into the Winter
Signs. It has been the opinion of some, that it has been formerly in the power
of the King of the Habessines to divert Nilus from its course into Egypt, and
to drive it into the Red Sea; there being at a certain place an absolute fall
of Land to convey it thither, only one Mountain being cut through; though now
that place where it could be diverted, is possessed by others.

He mentions another River in Ethiopia, called Hawas, which passing a great way
from its Source, sinks at length into the Sands, never going to the Sea, as
other Rivers do: Also, that the Rivers Melegi and Tacazae abounding with
Crocodiles, fall into the Nilus: That the River Mareb rising in Tygr^,
encompassing great part of the Kingdom, hides its self under ground, and then
rises, and, after a continued course, it disperses and leaves its divided
Waters in the Sands of Dequin.

The Soil is so fertile, that in some places they sow, and have Crops twice,
and in others thrice, a Summer. They make Bread of a sort of Corn called T^f,
thought to be the same with our Rye, though they have Wheat, Barley, etc. They
make no Winter Provisions for Cattle, the Soil yielding always Herbage enough,
nor lay up any stores for other years for themselves, confiding in the
fertility of their Soil, for their Fields are always pleasant, and always
smiling with a Flowery Grace.

He says, they have an Herb, called Assazoe, which by its touch, or even
shadow, so stupifies all Serpents and venomous Creatures, that you may handle
them without offense; and that he who has eaten the Root of it, is secured from
them for many years. And he is of opinion, that the Psylli of Africa had the
Virtue of curing the bitings of Serpents by the touch, through the use of this
Herb. The Amadmagda that cures broken and disjoynted Bones; as the Ossifraga of
Norway sn^ps the Bones of Cattle that tread upon it.

They have a Tree called ^u^ets, resembling the Indian Fig tree, which is four
yards thick, if shrouded, it sprouts forth with a world of young Shoots, which
are all good Food; so that this Tree need not bear any Fruit, being indeed all
Fruit, if sliced and boiled it assuages thirst.

He tells us, that by reason of the plenty of Herbage, and the heat of the
Climate, Quadrupedes and (...) are much bigger in Ethiopia and India than with
us. They have strong and excellent Horses, but never shoe them nor use them,
but in War, employing Mules in all their drudg^ry.

They have the known sort of Sheep with great Tails, of which some weigh above
forty pounds.

They have multitudes of Elephants, but never use them. To say they have Lions,
Tigers, Panthers. Wolves, Hyaena's, Camel, Panthers, higher than Elephants,
etc. it is no more than other Countries yield: But he says, they have a Beast
called Zecora or Zembra, exceeding in beauty all Quadrupeds; it is about the
bigness of a Mule, and naturally gentle; his Body is all encompast with
interchangeable Circles of Black, and of a lively Ash color; and this with
such an Elegancy and Order, that they surpass the Art of the best Painter to
imitate them: His Ears only are a little disproportionate, being too long: One
of them was sold by the Basha of B^^quena for two thousand Venetian pieces, for
a present to the Great Mogul. They have thousands of Apes, feeding chiefly on
Worms, which they find under Stones. Hence in the Mountains where they use, you
will scarce find a Stone unturned, be it never so great; for if two or three
cannot move it, they call more ai^. They eat also Ants, and sometimes devour
whole Fields of Fruit. They have also an innocent and very pleasant Animal,
being a sort of little Monkey, of which there is an elegant Ethiopick Rhyme; in
Latin thus: Hominem non laedo, frumentum non edo, oderunt me frustra. It is of
a various color, full of greyish specks: They are extreme tender, so that
unless they are clothed and kept warm they cannot be brought to us. He tells
us also of some that have seen the famed Unicorn there, an Animal of the form
and size of a midling Horse, of a bright Bay Color, with a black Mane and
Tail, and with a fair Horn in his Forehead, five Palms in length, being
somewhat whitish.

For Water and Amphibious Animals, he says, they have the Hippopotamus, thought
to be the Behemoth in Job, and the Seahorse of the Greeks, the Crocodile, the
Water-Lizard, and amongst others the Torpedo, with which they cure Tertian and
Quarian Agues: The way is thus; They bind the Patient fast on a Table, and then
apply the Torpedo to his Joints, which causes a very cruel torture in all his
Limbs; but the fit of the Ague returns not after. The Author conceives it may
also do good in the Gout; and the Ethiopians firmly believe it will drive the
Devil himself from a Man.

For Birds, they have Ostrich, or Struthiocamel, and Cassowars, swifter than
Horses: The flesh of this either fresh or dried, is accounted a Medicine
against the Poison of Serpents, this Bird devour them without prejudice to
himself. The Bird Pipe that discovers prey to the Hunters of Wild Beasts,
conducting them where they be hid.

He tells us of Dragons, that will swallow whole Children, little Pigs, Lambs
and Kids; and that they are scaly, and look like the Bark of an old Tree, but
not Venomous. That there are Water-Snakes and Adders, which upon drying of the
Moorish grounds in Summer, are very hurtful, being enraged with the drought and
heat, and that they kill by their Breath, unless a quick remedy be used, none
being better than to drink human Excrements in Water, which Remedy the Panther
uses.

That the Habessines are sometimes strangely infested with Locusts, devouring
their Fruits and Herbs; they appear in prodigious Multitudes, like a thick
Cloud, that obscures the Sun, nor ^lants, nor Shrubs, nor Trees remain
untouched: And wheresoever they feed, their leavings seem, as it were, parched
with the Fire, and a general Mortality ensues: And that those People sometimes
feed on the Locusts, being a pleasant and wholesome meat, and thereby satisfy
their hunger and revenge. That there are great store of Bees, amongst others a
very small black Be without a Sting, making their Combs under ground, which
yield an extreme white Wax, and most delicious Honey, which they use in their
Medicines.

He says, the Habessines are generally of a good Disposition, Strong, vivacious
and Long-Livers, Ingenious, and very desirous of Learning, easily remit
Injuries, and commonly determine their Quarrels and Differences at Cuffs, or by
an Arbitrator or two. From this their towardly disposition, he thinks their
King has been called Prester Jan, by some, the words Prester Chan in the
Persian Language, signifying a Prince of excellent Servants; and the Servants
of this Nation are more prized, and sell for more than others. In the shape of
their Body, and comeliness of their Countenance, they far excel other
Ethi^pians, having no swollen Lips, nor broad bottle Noses. Their Color for the
most part is Black or Brown, though they are not born black, but very Red, soon
after turning Black. The Women are Strong, Fruitful, and easily bring forth
Children, as generally all Women in the hotter Countries. They have no
Midwives, but fall on their Knees at the time of Childbirth, and disburden
themselves. Several other Nations inhabit this Kingdom, viz. the Jews who
formerly dwelt in Denbea, Wegara and Samen, till driven thence by S^sneus, and
now dispersed into several parts. Mahumetans are also intermingled up and down
the Country, and drive the greatest Trade with the Turks and Arabians. There
are also Wild Men living in the Deserts, without God, King or Law: The most
sordid and v^^est of Human Creatures.

The Noblest and Antientest Tongue of the Habessines is that Ethiopi^^, whereof
our Author set forth a Lexicon and Grammar in Lond^^ Anno 1^61. This was
formerly the Tongue generally spoken by the T^^renses, when the King of
Habessinia lived in Tigra, but now (...) is only used in Writing, and has its
Dignity continued in the public Sacred Worship, and in the Kings Charters etc.
It is very much (...) to the Arabic, and serves often to illustrate the
Oriental Tongues, especially the Hebrew: For instance, he says the Latins have
called that most elegant and delightful Work of God, which comprehends all
things in it self, Mundus, in imitation of the Greeks, who called it (...), the
Appellation not being invented by themselves, but by the Phoenicians, with whom
the World, and especially the Earth, was called (...) Adamah, Formosa: He says,
he knows it is commonly derived from Redness, because the Hebrew Root (...)
Adam signifies to be Red; whereas it is certain, that our First Father took his
name Adam, not from the redness of the Earth, but from his perfect and absolute
Beauty, as being the most consummate Work of the Creator. And that
signification which has been unknown to other Oriental Lexicon-writers, is
plain to the Ethiopians, with whom Adama signifies Delightful, Elegant and
Lovely; nor do the Ethiopians take Adams name otherwise than from Formosus. The
present King of Habessinia (the Seat of Government being removed to the midst
of the Empire) uses the Amarick Dialect, which all the Nobility and Learned
speak, being as general in Habessinia, as the Latin in Europe. They say, that
on the Coast of Africa, every fifteen or twenty German Miles produce a
diversity of Language.

He says, that though the Kings of Habessinia cannot well make out their
Descent from the times of Solomon, (as some think they may) but begin it only
from the two Brothers Atzbeha, and Abreha, under whom the Christian Religion
began amongst the Axumites, being about three hundred after Christ; from whose
time the History of the Habessines is more clear, and their Kings Names more
certain: They may nevertheless contend with the most famous Kings of the World
for Antiquity of Progeny.

Their King Lalibala sent for Workmen from Egypt, and set them on a strange and
unheard of Enterprise, viz. to work Temples out of Solid Rocks, by hewing them
in a regular form; leaving, where need required, Pillars, Arches and Walls. Fr.
Alvarez affirms upon Oath to have seen ten Temples built there after this
wonderful manner, and brought Draughts of them with him.

No private Ethiopian, he says, only a very few of the Nobles excepted, has any
thing of his own: All Lands and Possessions are the Kings, and are enjoyed
precariously by the Subjects; so that all take it patiently, if the King gives
or takes away all, whenever or wheresoever, to and from whom, he pleases.

The Kings Revenues are not in ready Money, but consist of the natural Products
of Countries, by an even way of Tribute: Some pay Gold, others Horses, Cows,
Oxen, Sheep, Bread-corn, Ox-hides, Garments, etc.

Enarea pays fifteen hundred ounces of Gold, formerly much more; to Susneus it
paid one thousand, and sometimes but five hundred, when they are at Wars with
the Gallans. Gojam pays yearly eleven hundred Ounces, and some Garments to the
value of three thousand German Dollars, together with two hundred Fustian
Tapestries.

Out of Tygra twenty five thousand Patacks; out of Dembea five thousand, and as
much out of other Kingdoms. Gojam and Bagendra find him Corn and Flesh. But his
chief Tribute is from the Grasiers, who are bound to pay him every three years
the tenth Ox or Cow. Besides every Christian Weaver pays him a Fustian Garment:
Every Mahumetan a Drim or Patach, which amounts to one thousand Imperials
yearly. The Toll of Lamalmona Mountain, over which all the Merchandise must
pass from the Red Sea into Ethiopia, the King reserves for himself.

The King and chief Nobility think it an office beneath them to lift their
Hands to their Mouths to feed themselves; and keep Boys to cut their Meat, and
put it into their Mouths; which they do in great gobbets, as those that cram
Poultry.

Axuma or Ascum, erroneously Chaxumo, was formerly the Metropolis of
Habessinia, from whence they were called Axumites: And then adorned with
beautiful Structures, a fair Palace and a Cathedral proudly vaunting her
Obelisks, Sculptures, and sumptuous Edifices, but now demolished by the Wars,
or defaced with Age, and the City now totally ruined, seated it was in the 14d
30m North Latitude; and distant from the North Sea forty five Portugal Leagues,
or six or seven tiresome days Journeys, by reason of the Mountains.

Besides Axuma, there are no Cities in Habessinia, and but few Towns; Dobarowa
in Tygra is the Seat of the Viceroys. Fremona was the first Residence of the
Fathers, enlarged by the Portugals. Gubay a Town in Dembea, where the Queen
resides. Nanina in Gojam was long inhabited by the Portugals. The Celebrated
Mountains of Amhara are their only Citidels, where the Kings Children were
formerly committed to custody.

The Kings, he says, always live in Tents, and seldom long in a place. In the
year 607, the Camp pitched in Coga. In 1612, it was at Duncaza, and after at
Guendra, which Bernier called the Metropolis of Ethiopia. Their Tent is of a
white color, and very large, standing in the midst of the Camp, a large space
being left round it for the convenience of Persons to approach it. Next this,
two Temples are placed, and Tents for the Queen and her Attendents: Next these,
the Nobles, the Kings Friends, Servants, and other Courtiers pitch their Tents;
then all the common Soldiery, with the necessary Attendents of the Camp, and
those that come to Negotiate. When they remove, as they often do, and come to
set down anew, in a few hours space all things are seen placed in the same
order they were before; for every man knows his place, and the measure of his
ground, the order of the Camp being always the same. But Peter Pays built the
King a Palace after the European manner in Gorgora, by the Tzaneo Lake, not
much inferior to the Country Palaces of our European Princes.

Murderers are given to the nearest Relations of the Person murdered; it
being in their power to pardon them, or take a sum of Money, or to sell them as
Slaves, or put them to what death they please. If the Murderer be not found,
the Inhabitants of the Place, and all the Neighborhood are fined.

In the third Book, which treats of the Ecclesiastical Affairs of the
Habessines, our Author tells us, That some hold, they have had the knowledge of
God ever since the time of Solomon.

That they use Circumcision, though not on any Religious Account, in Obedience
to the Law of Moses, but only as a Custom of their Country, (being done by a
Woman privately) the Jews slit the Skin with their Nails, till the Preputium
falls down and leaves the Nut bare. The Habessines only round the Skin with a
Knife.

That they do not Circumcise Women, (as some idly affirm) though it is a Custom
not only with the Habessines, but likewise with other People of Africa, as the
Egyptians and Arabians, to cut off from Girls something which they think to be
an undecency and superfluity of Nature.

That they abstain from Swines Flesh, Blood and suffocated things, not as
commanded by Moses, but by Apostolic Constitution, this having been always
observed in the Oriental Church, and in the Western Church for many Ages; and
having been ratified by some Councils: And they condemn us for leaving the
practice. Nor do they allow the Jews Sabbath, out of respect to Judaism, but
because it was the ancient Custom of the Primitive Church, for which they have
some written Ancient Constitutions: Yet they prefer the Lords Day before the
Jewish Sabbath; for upon that Day (say they) our Lord Jesus Christ rose: And
upon that Day the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles in the Oratory of
Sion: And upon that Day Christ shall come again to reward the Just and punish
the Evil.

He says, If an Habessine marries his Brothers Wife, or commits Polygamy, the
Civil Magistrate takes no notice of it: For they are of opinion, that
whatsoever does not offend the Commonwealth, nor the security of Private
Persons, ought not to be chastised with Secular Punishments: Nevertheless the
Church is severe in the case, and will not permit Persons so married to receive
the Sacrament. He also tells us, That Habessinia is full of Monks, that their
Institutions and Habits are different from the Greek and Latin. He speaks of
the portentous Miracles of their Saints, their Austerities and Spontaneous
Torments.

It Is a common fame in Europe, that the Conversion of the Habessines to the
Christian Faith was effected by the Eunuch of Queen Candaces: But our Author
says this is certain, that in the time of St. Athanasius Patriarch of
Alexandria, in the Reign of Constantine the Great, about the year of Christ
330, or not long after it, the Conversion of Ethiopia happened after this manner:
Meropius a Tyrian Merchant going into India, came to the Coast of Ethiopia in
the Red Sea; dying there, he left two Sons, Frumentius and Aedesius, who being
taken and carried to the King, were kindly received by him; and he finding them
ingenious, employed them in keeping his Books of Account. During the time of
their Employ, they did all good Offices to Christian Merchants that came to
those Parts, and showed so fair a specimen of their Virtue and Integrity, that
they wrought in the Habessines a great esteem for the Christian Religion. Which
ground being laid, Frumentius went to St. Athanasius, who considering the
excellency of his parts, and the constancy of his Faith, created him the first
Bishop of Ethiopia; and returning thither, he baptized the Inhabitants, created
Deacons, built Churches, and so first planted the Christian Religion.

The Hab^ssines received the Scripture with Christian Religion, and it is
translated into the Ethiopick Language from the version of the Septuagint; and
that according to a Copy used in the Church of Alexandria: They have the New
Testament translated from the authentic Greek Text. They enjoy the holy
Scriptures entire, and reckon as many Pooks as we do, though they divide them
after another manner. They acknowledge the holy Scripture to be the sole and
only Rule of what they are to believe and do. They use the Nicene Creed; they
admit of the ancient Greek Councils; they acknowledge the Trinity, and the
sufficient Merits of Christ; one Person in Christ, his Divinity and Humanity;
they use Baptism, and the holy Communion; they Administer it to the Laiety and
Clergy, as it is the Custom of all the Eastern Churches, and acknowledge the
Real Presence but not Transubstantiation, pray for the Dead, deny a Purgatory.

He gives an Account of their Errors, as, that they hold the holy Ghost to
proceed from the Father only, and not from the Son. That they hold the Soul of
Man not to be created, because, they say, God perfected all his Work on the
Sixth Day: They think it therefore drawn from the Matter, but Immortal. They
hold likewise some other Errors.

On their Eleventh of January, which to us is the Sixth of the same Month, and
the Feast of the Epiphany, the Habessines, in memory of the Baptism of our
Savior, (which they hold, with many of the Ancients, to have been for certain
on that day) keep a joyful Festival; all of them just at break of day, before
the rising of the Sun, going into Ponds and Rivers, and there dipping and
sporting themselves: This Custom having given occasion to some to affirm, That
they were baptized anew every year.

They begin the Year on the Calends of September, with the Grecians, Armenians,
Russians, and other Oriental Christians; for they believe, as many of the
Ancients have asserted, that the World was made in the Autumnal Equinox.

If any discord arise betwixt Man and Wife, so that they cannot be reconciled,
the Kings Judges dissolve the Marriage, and they are free to marry again.

As we have mentioned before the King of Habessinia's unparalleled
absoluteness in Temporals, so our Author says, That the chief Ecclesiastical
Power is in him; so that all things of Jurisdiction, only some small Causes
excepted, are Determined by the Kings Judges. Nor do the Clergy enjoy any
Ecclesiastical Immunity or Privilege in Courts of Judicature, but undergo
correction from Secular Judges as mere Layicks. Our Author tells us, That the
Habessines have few Books but those of Sacred Things. That they have no written
Laws, but judge all Right and Wrong, according to the Custom and Manner of
their Ancestors.

Physic, he says, is wholly neglected by them: They cure Men by Burning and
Cutting, as they do Horses. They cure the Jaundice by burning a Semicircle
about the joint of the Arm with a crooked Iron, putting on the place a little
Cotton, and so letting the vicious Humor distill from it till the Distemper be
gone. They cure Wounds with Myrrh, which is there mighty common.

They look upon it as an egregious Fable, for any Man to assert, that the Earth
is a round Globe, suspended of it self in the midst of the Air.

He tells us, they eat raw Flesh, or such as is but half-boil'd, and use Gall
as a sauce. That they take Herbs half digested out of the Bellies of Cows and
Oxen killed, and seasoning them with Salt and Pepper, they make a sort of
Mustard, which much gratifies their Palate.

map of Congo CONGO by Robt. Morden at ye Atlas in Cornhil LONDON.


COngo is very temperate, for the Rains and the Winds assuage the heat, which
is insupportable in the neighboring Countries. Nor has Africa any Province
more interlaid with Rivers: The Zair, which is the chief of them, is very
considerable for the Rapidity and depth of its Stream. The Inhabitants of Congo
have Mines of Gold, but they only make use of Shells for Money. They for the
most part owned themselves Christians or Catholics, by the Example of their
Kings: In or about the year 1640, at what time the Capuchins had made a great
progress there in Preaching, which, nevertheless, did not succeed according to
expectation; for being never well grounded in any solid Principles, they soon
abandoned the name and Profession. The Portugals bring from thence Ivory and
Slaves. For which reason they have settled themselves in the Royal City, which
is called St. Salvador, and in that of St. Paul in the small Island of Loanda,
this was since seized upon by the Dutch, which is very level, seven Leagues
long, and one and a half broad, where they get fresh Water by digging holes in
the Sand. The Portugals keep Garrisons in the Forts of Massagan and Cambambe in
the Kingdom of Angola, for the preservation of their Silver Mines: And here it
is, that they rendevouz their Slaves appointed for Brasile. The Males only have
the right of Succession in this Kingdom; and all the Land belongs to the King,
whom they call Mani. Learning is so little esteemed among the Congolans, that
when Emanuel, King of Portugal, sent to their King all the fairest Books of the
Law he could meet with, and several Doctors to expound them, he sent the
Doctors back, and ordered the Books to be burnt, saying, That they would only
confound and disorder his Subjects Brains; who had no need but only of Reason
and Common Sense; however, that he would continue no less the King of Portugals
Friend.

Under the name of Congo are also comprehended the Kingdoms of Angola, Cacongo
and Malemba; the Ansicains, who rememble our Biscainers, and the Brama's or
Loanghi. But neither these Kingdoms nor People acknowledge the King of Congo,
as formerly they did. The King of Angola styles himself grand Soba; his chief
City is Cambazza, Enguze, or Donge. His Subjects are so in love with Dogs
Flesh, that they breed up whole Flocks together; and one well-fed Dog is
sometimes sold among them for two hundred Crowns. They are excellent in nothing
but in shooting in a Bow. For they will discharge twelve Arrows before the
first shall be fallen to the Ground. They believe, The Sun to be a Man, and the
Moon a Woman, and the Stars to be the Children of that Man and that Woman.

map of Mutapa Empire The Empire of MONOMOTAPA and ye Coast of Cafres


THE Country which bears the name of Cafreria is the most Southern part of all
Africa, and indeed of all our Continent along the Ethiopick Sea, part in the
Torrid, part in the temperate Zone, extending about twelve hundred Leagues upon
the Coast. It is full of Mountains, subject to great colds, and under several
petty Kings, the most part of which pay Tribute to the Emperor of Monomotopa.
The King of Sofala, which was part of the Aegisymba of old, pays also to the
King of Portugal, who keeps a Garrison in the Castle of Sofala, and by that
means gets good store of Gold from the Mines which are up in the Country. And
that Gold is esteemed the best in the World: From whence Vertomannus,
Volaterranus, and from them Ortelius labor to persuade the World how that this
was Ophir. And David Kemchi, a learned Rabbi, places Ophir in South Africa; yet
Josephus, St. Hierome, and many more are of opinion that Ophir was part of the
East Indies; whose distance and great plenty of Gold best agrees with a three
years Voyage. They take it up sometimes out of the Rivers in little Nets, after
it has rained. The Coast of Cafreria lies low, and full of Woods; but the Soil
produces Flowers of a most pleasing scent; and the Trees afford a lovely
prospect. Three great Rivers fall into the Indian Sea out of Cafreria: Every
one of which is known at the head by the name of Zambera. The most Northerly is
called Cuama, the middlemost Spirito Sancto, and the Southermost Los Infantes.

The Cafres live under no Law nor Religion, as their name imports: Herbert
tells us, That during the time he staid amongst them, he saw no signs of any
knowledge of God; no spark of Devotion; no symptom of Heaven or Hell; no place
set apart for Worship; no Sabbath for Rest. Many of them will steal with their
Feet, while they stare ye in the Face. They sell their Cattle to the Seamen
that come into those parts: But they are forced to tie the Oxen to Trees, and
to put the Sheep in Pens, before they pay them, for else upon a peculiar
whistle, the Cattle will run after them, and leave the Purchaser in the lurch.
In Complexion they are like our Chimney Sweepers. Besides they have great
Heads, flat Noses, whither it be that they are pressed in their Infancy, or
because that their Mothers carry them at their backs, against which they may be
subject to knock them. Their Hair is frizl'd, their Lips extraordinary big,
their Back Bone very sharp, their Hips large; so that there can be nothing seen
more ugly. The Cape of good Hope, which lies in the most Southern part of this
Country, is the most famous, the longest and the most dangerous Cape in the
World. It was so call d, because that being once past that, the Seamen had some
hopes to arrive quickly at the East Indies. Formerly it was called the Cape of
Whirle-winds or Tempests, which much annoyed those Seas. Some call it the Lion
of the Sea; others the Head of Africa. There are certain signs to know when you
are near it. For within fifty or sixty Leagues, the Sea is full of the bodies
of thick Reeds that float upon the Water: and the white Birds with black Spots
make their appearance. The Mouth of the Bay to the East of the Cape is five
Leagues broad, encompassed with sharp Rocks. The Air is temperate, and the
neighboring Valleys are full of Herbs and Flowers. Their Rivers abound in
Fish, their Woods in Venison and Bees: The Natives that cloth themselves with
the Skins of these Beasts, are very swift, but brutes in their eating; and when
they speak, they gobble like Turkey Cocks.

The Hollanders have built a Fort there, a League from which they have a fair
and handsome Town, all sorts of Grain there out of Asia or Europe, thrive
better than in other parts.

The Cafres are black, because they rub themselves with a Grease or Ointment,
composed of several sorts of Drugs, to preserve themselves from being
Hydropical; they have great knowledge of Simples, and have cured several of the
Dutch of Ulcers and old Wounds, which were past the skill of their own
Chyrurgeons.

Monomotopa is almost environed by Cafreria. It bears the name of the King. It
is very fertile, abounding in Ivory, and so rich in Gold, that the King is
called the Golden Emperor. The Inhabitants who are very superstitious, have no
other Arms, than Pikes, Bows, and Arrows: But they are so swift, that they will
run as fast as a Horse. The common People wear nothing above their Wastes; and
for the Maids they go stark naked, so that a Man may choose his Wife according
to the Custom of the Vtopian Commonwealth. A Relation made in the year 1651,
Reports, that the King of Monomotopa was baptized with all his Court, by the
Jesuits. The King himself is generally tricked with Bracelets and Precious
Stones like a Bridegroom, nor will he ever wear any Foreign Stuffs, for fear
they should be poisoned: Unless it be the T'wist, the Collar, and his Buskins,
of which he has liberty to change the Fashion, he is obliged in other things to
follow the Fashion of his Predecessors, by the Laws of his Kingdom. It Is
reported, that for his usual Guard, he has a Regiment of Women, and another of
Dogs, and that those Women in War do as much service as Men. He gratifies the
Princes, which are his Tributaries with a present of Fire every year, as a mark
of his acknowledgment. Mono Emugi is a potent Kingdom to the North of
Monomotopa. The Giaques, otherwise called Galls, and Chava's are neighbors to
one another, and are famous for their Valor, and for the Victories they have
got over the Abassins, in the Upper Ethiopia.

map of Zanzibar The COAST OF Zanguebar and Aien by Robt. Morden


ZANGVEBAR, called by the Ancients Barbary, is a large Coast in the Eastern
part of Africa, which extends it self all along the Indian Sea, on this side,
and beyond, the Equator. The Natives are Idolaters, under diverse Sovereigns.
They give their minds to Trade as well as the Arabians and Mahumetans that are
among them. The Southern part, chiefly bears the name of Zanguebar, which
contains the small Kingdoms of Mozambique, Quil^a, Mombaza, and Melinda. The
Northern part is called Again, and sometimes New Arabia. It comprehends the
Dominions of Brava, Magadoxo, Adea and Adel. In Mozambique lies the best place
that the Portugals have in all those quarters. For they possess a very strong
Castle in the Island of that Name, about half a League long, where their Ships
stay for seasonable weather to carry them to the East Indies. The Port is upon
the Northside of the City and you must leave two Islands upon the left hand as
you enter into it. It would be better inhabited, but the Air is very
unwholesome. Quiloa lies in the same Peninsula. The King thereof, was the first
in Zanguebar that became Tributary to the Portugals. In Quiloa are a most
excellent sort of Hens, though their Flesh, their Feathers, and their very
Bones be black: Mombaze lies in an Island, and upon a Rock under 3d 50m. South,
was subdued to the Crown of Portugal by Almeyda, in the year 1505. Sometimes
the Portugals Winter there, for Provisions are very plentiful and cheap. The
entrance into the Port is so narrow and so rocky, that in some places there is
not room for above one Ship to enter. The Estates of Lamon and Pate are under
the Government of Melinda. The Coast of Ajan contains the Republic of Brava,
is a small Commonwealth, with a City built, according to the Fashion of the
Moors. It has usually paid a small Tribute to the Portugals. Magadoxo is under
a King of their own, and the Natives are Mahumetans. To Adea belongs a very
good Port, called Barraboa. Adel, whose chief City is Arat, obeys a King, who
is an enemy to the Abissines. Barbora and Zeila are places of great Trade, by
reason of the convenience of their Ports, toward the entry into the Red Sea.
Zeila was the Aralites of Plin. Ptol. and Steph. the Emporium of the
Trogloditicae test Mol.

Zocotora Isle, well known to former Ages, to some by the name of Dioscorida,
thought to be the Topazo of Pliny; by the Turks, Catuchomer; by the Persians,
Cabar; by the Spaniards, Acebar: Ramusio, Curia Muria, aliis Alba Curia,
incolis Abbadal Curia, is situated at the Mouth of the Red Sea, sixty Miles
long, and twenty four broad, which though defective in most necessaries for
life, yet it has plenty of Physical Drugs, especially of Aloes, called in
Spain, Semper vivum and Sanguis Draconum.

Here John the Castro for many days found it high Water at the Moons Rising,
and low Water when the Moon was Highest.

Of the AFRICAN Islands.
IN the Occidental or Atlantic Ocean, and not far from Africa, we find three
different Bodies of Islands, and each very considerable, viz. the Azores, the
Canaries, and Cape Verde Islands.

The Isles of AZORES.
map of Azores Islands The Isles of AZORES by Robt Morden


Of the AZORES.

THE Azores are situate betwixt the thirty seventh, and forty sixth Degree of
Northern Latitude, and are nine in number, Saint Michael, Saint Mary's, which
lies next to Spain, Tercera on the North-West, then Saint Graciosa, Saint
Georges, Faial, and Pico, in the middle; C^ruo, and Flores, nearest to America;
Saint Michael, directly North of Saint Mary's, is the largest, and of most note
among Modern Geographers for the place of the first Meridian, about which you
may see more in my use of the Globes. Tercera is the chief of the rest, in
regard of its strength; of its commodious Haven, and well fortified Town Angra,
the Residence of the Governor and Archbishops Sea, it is esteemed the
Principal of these Islands, and communicates its Name unto them, the Air of
these Islands is generally good. They are well stored with Flesh, Fish, and
Fruits, but the Wines not very good nor durable. The chief Commodities they
transport unto other Countries are singing Birds, Oad for Dyers, which yearly
they gather in two places, called Los Folhadores, and los Altares, and a sort
of Wood red within and waved admirable beautiful, I suppose the same, Workmen
call Princes Wood.

The Isle Tercera is as well fenced by Nature, and strengthened by Art, as most
Islands in the World, being every where hard of access; having no good Harbor
wherein to shelter a Navy, and upon every Cove, or Watering Place, a Fort
erected to forbid the approach of an Enemy, yet the Marquess of Sancta Cruz,
after he had showed himself (in the Road of Angra) to Emanuel de Sylva and
Mons. de Chattes, who kept it for the use of Don Antonio, with five or six
thousand Men, set Sail suddenly, and arrived at Port des Moles, and there wan a
Fort, and landed before Mons. Chattes could come to hinder him.

The difficult landing of our English at Fayal, in the year 1597, under the
Conduct of Sir W. Rawleigh, was as valorously performed, as honorably and
bravely enterprised, but was more of Reputation than Safety.

These Islands were first discovered by the Flemings, but subdued by the
Portugals, under the conduct of Prince Henry, in the year 1414.

map of Canary Islands The CANARIE or FORTVNATE Islands by Rt. Morden


THE Canary Islands are now in number seven; by the Ancients called Insulae
fortunatae, and by Pliny, Ombrio, Iunonia Major, Iunonia Minor or Theode,
Canaria, Nivaria, Capraria, Plavialea.

By Ptolomy they were styled, Aprosita, Herae Insulae, Canaria, Pinturia, or
Conturia, Casperia, Pluitania or Pluitalia: first discovered 1346.

But now better known by the names of Lancerota, Forteuentura, Canaria,
Teneriffe, Palma, Ferro, and Gomera. Lancerota, or the inaccessible and
enchanted Island, because of the difficulty sometimes to make it more than at
other times. It was the first of these Islands that was made subject to the
Crown of Castile, discovered 1393. In Forteuentura, are said to be the Tarhais
trees which bear a Gum, of which there is made pure white Salt; the Palm tree
which bears Dates, Olive Trees, Mastick-trees, and a Fig Tree, from which they
have a Balm as white as Milk, and of great Virtue in Physic.

Canary Island is exceeding fruitful, and the Soil so fertile, that they have
two Harvests in one Year, its Commodities are Honey, Wax, Sugar, Oad, Wine and
Plantons which bear an Apple, like a Cucumber, which, when ripe, eats more
deliciously than any Comfit.

Teneriffe, is famous for its high Pike, said to be the highest Mountain in the
World; for its Laurel-trees, where the Canary Birds warble their pleasant
Notes; and for its Dragon-trees, out of which they draw a red Liquor, well
known to Apothecaries, by the name of Dragons blood, and for its yearly export
of twenty thousand Tuns of the most excellent Wine which the World produces.

Palma abounds in Corn, Wines and Sugars, and all sorts of Fruits, well stored
with Cattle, therefore the Victualling place of the Spanish Fleet that passes
to Peru and Brasil.

Fero Isle is famous for a Tree whose Leaves distill Water which serves the
Island, it would be too tedious for me here to relate the different Relations
of Writers about this Island, I shall therefore only mention some few; One
Nichols, who had been seven years Factor there, says there is no Fresh Water
in the Island, only in the middle of the Isle there grows a Tree, which being
always covered with Clouds, drops from its Leaves into a Cistern, very good
Water, and in great abundance. One Jackson, an English man, affirms, that the
Tree has neither Flowers nor Fruit, that it dries up in the Day, that at Night
a Cloud hangs over the Tree, and distills its Water drop by drop, and fills a
Reserver of twenty thousand Tuns.

Jans in his Hydography says, it very rarely rains in the Island. Linschot
says, there is no fresh Water, except about the Sea Coast, but this defect is
supplied by the Tree.

In the History of the Conquest of these Islands, it is said that this Island
has great plenty of water, and Rain often; and in the higher Countries are
Trees which drop Water pure and clear which falls into a Ditch, the best in the
World to drink.

Ferdinand Suarez says, That this Tree bears a Fruit like an Acorn, of a
pleasant and aromatic taste, and that the Pond, or Cistern contains not twenty
Tuns.

Sanutus says, the Cloud begins to rise about Noon, and in the Evening quite
covers the Tree. Others say, that this Water falls from Noon all Night.
Others will have the Cloud always about the Tree, and that its distillation is
continually; now how to reconcile all these different Relaters in a Verdict of
Truth I must leave to the Readers Experience, or the more certain informations
of time.

These Canaries are often times the Rendevouz of the Spanish West- India Fleet,
where they receive Orders to what part of Spain they shall make, in order to
the unlading of their Wealth.

Madera, or Isle of Wood, sixty Leagues in compass, in the Atlantic Sea, and
to the North of the Canaries, belongs to the Crown of Portugal. The Air is very
wholesome, many Fountains and Rivers refresh the Country, so that it is not
subject to excessive heats; it is called the Queen of the Islands, because of
its Beauty, and the Fertility of the Soil, which produces excellent Wine,
strong and racy, and in great abundance; for the Vines bear more Clusters than
Leaves. It bears delicate Fruits, excellent Wheat, and delicious Sugar, the
best in the World, it affords great store of Quinces, and other Sweetmeats.
Dragons blood, Cordevanis, Cedar Wood, and a plant called Mader. It contains
three Cities, the chief of which is Fouchial, or Funghal, the Residence of a
Governor and a Bishop. The City is long and narrow at the foot of a Mountain,
which is about three quarters of a League high, with three Fortresses and a
Port like a Crescent, where Ships may ride within Pistol shot of the Town. The
Island contains thirty six Parishes, five or six Religious Convents, four
Hospitals, six or seven thousand Houses, twenty five thousand Inhabitants, and
so many Gardens, that the whole seems a Garden of pleasure.

The Island Porto Sancto has much what the same Commodities with Madera, but
is not above eight or ten Leagues in circuit, thought to be the Cerne of
Ptolomy, and reckoned for the most remote Colony, which the Carthaginians had
in the Western Ocean: Between the Canaries and the Madera's, I find two small
Islands called Salvages in some Maps, but in the Sea-charts I find only a heap
of Sands, and no description of them in any Geography.

map of Cape Verde Islands CAPE VERDE Islands by Rt. Morden


THE Islands which are in the parallel of Cape Verd, are to the number of ten,
and bear the name of the Cape, which lies in the most Western part of all
Africa. The Ancients called them Hesperides and Gorgades, and the Fables placed
there the Orchards with Golden Apples which were kept by a Dragon. Christopher
Columbus said, they were falsely named, for in his third Voyage he found them to
be dry and barren. They are, for the most part, possessed and inhabited by the
Portugals, who transport thence Salt and Goats-skins, of which they make
excellent Cordevants. There is in one of these Islands, called Mayo, so great
quantity of Salt, that it is said it could load above two thousand Sail of
Ships, so that the Flemings call them all the Islands of Salt. The Principal
Island is that of Saint Jago or James's, with a City of the same Name, which is
none of the best inhabited, through the unwholesomeness of the Air. The Nine
other Islands are Saint Anthony's, Saint Vincent, Saint Luce, Saint Nicholas,
the Isle of Salt, Bona Vista, Mayo, I. de Fuogo, and Brava. There are some,
wherein there are no Inhabitants but only Goats. The neighboring Ocean bears
the Name of Green, by reason that it is covered with a kind of Green, and
Yellow weed, so that it looks like a Meadow.

There are four things which to me strongly prove, that the Islands of Cape
Verd do rather answer to the fortunate Islands of Ptolomy, then the Canaries;
1. Their difference of Latitude, for Ptolomy places his fortunate Islands
between the tenth and sixteenth Degree of Latitude, the Canaries are about
twenty eight Degrees of Latitude.

2. Their distance in regard of the Coast of Africa, which Ptolomy makes the
nearest distance to be eight Degrees, when as the furthest of the Canaries is
not so much.

3. The disposition of their Situation from East to West, for Ptolomy confines
his Fortunate Isles almost under one Meridian, the Canaries contain five or six
Degrees in Longitude.

4. In respect of their Situation from North to South; for Ptolomy extends
those four or six Degrees of Latitude, whereas the Canaries lie all in the same
Degree of Latitude, however I shall submit to better judgments therein.

The Isle of Saint Thomas, under the Equator, affords a great quantity of
Sugar, but the Air is bad for strangers that come to live there; for they never
grow bigger than they were at their first arrival. The Portugals were the first
that subdued it. The best Town in it is Pavoasan containing about seven hundred
Houses, with a Fortress in the Eastern part of the Island. It has several Trees
like those in the Island of Fer, which distill Water continually for the use of
the Inhabitants. Hogs Flesh is more wholesome and nourishing than Fowl, by
reason they feed their Hogs with Sugar Canes.

The Island of the Prince (so called because the Revenue of that Island is
appointed for the Maintenance of the Prince of Portugal) yields some Fruit,
Sugar and Ginger.

Annobon is so called, because it was first discovered upon the first day of
the year. The Portugals live toward the North part thereof; it yields Sugars,
Cottons, Cattle, and excellent Fruits, and Oranges, that in the year 1623
weighed twelve ounces.

Saint Hellens, sixteen Leagues in compass in the Ethiopick Sea, high and
mountainous. There is no Island in the World so far distant from the Terra
Firma, it is called the Sea-Inn, because they that return from the East Indies
stop and refresh there, and in the Valleys it is very Fertile, the Air so
healthful, that Sick Persons are in a short time restored to their Health, well
furnished with good Water, which alone is a great refreshment to the Ships, and
of so great importance, that the English keep and possess it in despite of
Portugals, Spaniards or Dutch, or any other that dispute with them the Dominion
of the Sea.

The Islands of Fernando, Saint Matthews and Ascension are not inhabited, and
of no great account, only they afford Fowls, Wild Beasts, and Fish.

Zocotora, and Behel-Mendel, lies toward the Red Sea, where the passage is most
convenient from the Coast of Africa, Zocotora, near Cape Guadarfu, is under the
Jurisdiction of an Arabian King. It is a good Road, and has very convenient
Bays, where Ships may ride secure among the very Rocks. It affords excellent
Fishing, Cattle in great abundance, and is famous for the goodness, and
quantity of its Aloes.

map of Madagascar MADAGASCAR or St. LAURANCE by Rob. Morden


MAdagascar, Madecase by the Natives; Sazandib by the Arabs, Manuthyas Ptol.
Magaster, by M. P. Venet. Albagra, Thev. D^ Cerne Merc. Dauphin Island by the
French; St. Laurence by Trisian; d' Acunna the Portugal, who discovered it, An.
Dom. 1508, tho great is the difference in Spanish Writers about the first that
landed here, lies in the Eastern, which we call the Indian Sea; it is the
biggest of all the Islands that belong to Africa; from whence it does not lie
above a hundred or ninety Leagues distant. Nor is there any Island in the World
of so vast an extent: For it is in length above three hundred and forty of our
Leagues, and about one hundred broad. Its chief Ports are the Bay of Antongil,
or St. Anthony, the best in all the Island: Further toward the North,
Boamarage; toward the South, Angoada, Cacumbout, Manialoufe, Manajara, or the
Port of Prunes, Matatane, Manapate, or the Port of Gallions, Manatenga,
Anamboul. Fort des Francois, Sancta Clara, Bay St. Lucia, Fort Dauphin; Cape
Romain; Cape St. Mario; Port St. Augustine; Port Santiago, or St. James; Port
St. Vincent, Terra del Gada, Terra de St. Andra, Vingagora, etc. According to
our Relations, the Air is temperate enough, the Soil produces several sorts of
Grains and Trees; the Waters are excellent, and the Fruits delicious. The
Mountains are full of Wood, Pasturage and Plants of diverse sorts, and the
Champain Country is watered with Rivers and Lakes full of Fish. Pity it is,
that so noble an Island, and so populous, should continue so long uncivilized,
and corrupted with Mahumetism and Heathenism, and estranged from God and
Virtue, and seated so advantageously for Traffic with all the World. They
transport from thence Rice, Hides, Wax, Gums, Crystal, Steel, Copper, Ebony
and Woods of several sorts. Among the Natives there are both Blacks and Whites,
generally Strong, Active and Courageous, delighted with Sports and Novelties,
Hunting, Hawking, Fishing and Dancing are their Recreations: Nature, abhorring
cruelty, instructs them to punish^ ^^ther with Death; Adultery with public
Shame; These with Banishment: Ignorant they are in Agriculture and Learning,
for to them Nil scire, nihil Jucundius.

There are in Madagascar a great number of particular Lords, who bear the Title
of Rohandrians, who are continually at War among themselves for their Cattle.
The English, Portugals and Hollanders have sometimes set footing there. The
English in the Bay of St. Augustine, and at Port del Gada. The Portugals in the
Bay of Gallions. The Hollanders in the Bay of Antongil: But since the erecting
Fort Dauphine, the French have assumed to themselves all the Eastern and
Southern part of the Isle.

Madagascar sits as Empress amongst many smaller Islands, which do, as it were,
inviron and defend her: The Chief whereof are the Isle Burbon, otherwise called
Mascarenhas, twenty five Leagues long, and fourteen broad, it belongs at this
day wholly to the French. In this Island there is a Mountain that vomits Fire,
but the rest of the Land is the best and most pleasant in the World, for the
Waters are very wholesome, and there are most of the Commodities which are in
the Island of Madagascar. This is also called by our Seamen Englands Forest.
The other Islands are Mauritius, or Cerne, where the Variation was twenty four
Degrees and nineteen Minutes, test Herbert. An Island abounding with, and
capable of, all things requisite for the necessary use of Man, in circuit about
one hundred English Miles: The Air good, the Soil luxuriant in Grass, Herbs and
Flowers, replenished with Trees of several sorts, especially with Ebony, Cocos
and the Palm Tree: Saint Apolonia, and others, the Names and Situations whereof
you may see in the Map.

Nine Leagues from Madagascar lie the Sholes or Baixos d' India, memorably
dangerous for Shipwracks, as are also John de Nova, and Primero, or St.
Christopher upon the Baixos d' Pracel.

The Isles of Chumro are four, viz. Chumro, Motilla, where the Variation was
sixteen Degrees and twenty Minutes, Joanna and Mayotta.

map of Malta MALTHA by Rob. Morden.


MAltha, seated almost in the middle of the Mediterranean, was formerly called
Melita from its plenty of Honey. It is said to belong to Africa, as being nearer
to that Coast than the Coast of Europe; and for that the Maltesi partake more
of the Customs and Manners of the Africans than of the Europeans.

The Island had formerly the same Lords as Sicily. Now it is the Residence of
the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, under one Prince whom they call the Grand
Master, the Patron of the Order. The Emperor Charles the Fifth gave it to the
Knights, who had no certain Residence after the loss of Rhodes, having formerly
resided at Jerusalem, Margat, Acra, and Limisso in the Island of Cyprus. The
Order is composed of eight Languagues, Provinc, Auvergne, France, Italy,
Aragon, England, Germany, and Castile. The three Languages of France, have
three hundred Commanderies; but the rest of the five altogether have no more.
The name of Knights was not in use at the beginning of the Institution; being
then called the Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem.

The Soil of the Island, which is not above two Foot deep, produces Cuminseed,
Anniseseed and Cotton Wool; here is but little Corn and Wine, so that Sicily
supplies that defect. The Island is not above twenty three Miles in length, and
twelve broad. It is the best fortified place in the World, as being the Bulwark
of Christendom, there being above three hundred Canons mounted upon all her
Fortresses.

The Roses of Maltha contend for sweetness with those of Paestam; and the Honey
with that of Hybla or Hymettus. The Air is clear and healthful, and the
Inhabitants live long. The New City Valetta is fortified with impregnable Walls
and Bulworks. There are also three other considerable Towns, viz. the Isola, or
the Town Senglea, with the Fort of St. Michael, which, for its stout resistance
it made in 1565 against the Turks, obtained the Name of Citta Invitta. The
other, the Borgo del Castello a Mare, guarded with the Castle St. Angelo, for
its Valor and Fidelity against the Ottoman Army 1569, was honored with the
Title of Citta Vittoriosa. Lastly, the Old City, called Milita, now Citta
Notabile, about the middle of the Island: To which we may add about thirty or
forty great Casales or Villages, and twenty six Parish Churches; the number of
Inhabitants according to a Survey taken 1632 were 50112, of which about may be
now accounted fighting Men. The number of Knights are said to be between two or
three thousand: And the number of Slaves about two thousand belonging to the
Order, besides three hundred to private Persons, besides those in the Galleys.
The Great Master of the Order is now Prince and Chief Governor of the whole
Island; and the Island now is in a very flourishing condition, so that few
Subjects live more happily.

Gozo, of old Gaulos, a little Island near to Maltha affords Wheat and other
Grain; and the Grand Master is called Prince thereof. It maintains about three
thousand Persons, and about five hundred Houses, in the year 1565 the Turkish
Armata most inhumanly wasted it, and carried away six thousand Prisoners.

Between Maltha and Gozo lies a little Island, called Comino, H^phaestia of
old, guarded with a Fort opposite to that in Gozo. And to the young Knights,
whose valor deserves reward he gives the Title of Prince of Forfolo, which is a
Rock not far from the Coast.

AMERICA.
map of Americas AMERICA By R. Morden


THIS fourth and last part of the World, is called the New World, new for its
last discovery, World for its greatness; it is likewise commonly, but
improperly, termed America, and often the West Indies; what kind of Country it
is, and what it produces we now do know in part, but shall know better in
future Ages.

This great part of the Earth was unknown to the Europeans until the year 1492,
when it pleased Divine Providence (God having promised, that his Gospel should
be preached to all Nations) to stir up one Christopher Colon, alias Columbus, a
Genoese, who (whether by considering the motion of the Sun, he did persuade
himself that there was another World, to which that glorious Planet did
Communicate both its Light and Heat, when it went from us; or, whether he was
informed of it from Alonso Zanches, we know not, certain it is, this World he
purposed to seek after, and opening his design to the State of Genoa, in the
year 1486, was by them rejected, who therefore sent his Brother to King Henry
the Seventh of England, which Messenger, whether being taken Prisoner by
Pirates, and detained along while, or deferred at Court after his Address, we
find not certainly related; but true it is, that in the mean time Christopher
Columbus conceiving the offer of his service neglected, applied himself to the
Court of Spain, where after six years attendance, he was at last furnished with
three Ships, only for discovery, with which he sailed upon the Ocean more than
sixty days, and could see no Land, so that the Spaniards began to mutiny; and
Columbus was forced to promise to return again, if they could not see Land in
three days time, when toward the end of the third day, one of (...) pany
descried Fire. The place discovered was an Island on the Coast of Florida, by
the Natives called Gunahani, now Salvador, where landing his Men, he took
possession of this New World for Ferdinando King of Arragon, and Isabella his
Wife, Queen of Castile, October 11 1402. After whom John Cab^^, a Venetian, in
behalf of King Henry the Seventh of England, in the year 1497, discovered all
the North East Coast thereof, from Cape Florida to the South beyond
Newfoundland in the North, causing the Royalers to turn Homagers to that King,
and to the Crown of England. Next after him, succeeded Americus Vespusius, a
Flor^ntine, employed by Emanuel the King of Portugal, Anno 1501. upon a design
of finding out a nearer way to the Moluccos than by the Cape of good Hope, who
though he passed no further than the Cape of Augustine on the Coast of Brasil,
yet from him this Country is called America. As for this vast Tract of Ground
in general, it has the advantage of being temperate and fruitful, by reason of
its great and fair Rivers, and the fresh Breezes that blow in the Torrid Z^^e,
whereby we find that the cause of violent or remiss heats does not always
proceed from the nearness or distance of the Sun; but many times from the
Situation of the place, the disposal of the Mountains or Lakes, the Quality of
the Soil, and the Nature of the Winds that blow.

The wealth of America is so vast, that Spain has drawn, and still draws from
thence, prodigious quantities of Gold and Silver, and the Mines of Potasi have
furnished him with many Millions. There are no Treasures comparable to those
related to be found in possession of Attabalippa, and Guimacapa, Kings of Peru,
and to the precious Household Stuff of the City of Cusco. It was no
extraordinary thing in the Reigns o^ those Kings to behold Temples all plated
with Silver, and to see Houses covered with slates of Gold. The Spaniards
affirm, that their Kings Revenue amounts to above twelve Millions yearly by
means of the Impositions which he lays upon goods transported thence, as Gold,
Silver, Pearls, Emraulds, Skins, Sugar, Tobacco, Cochenille, Sarsa-parilla,
Ginger, and other things. The first expense upon the discovery of America, came
but to fifteen thousand Ducats, which were advanced to Columbus by the Spanish
Secretary of State, and not taken out of the Treasuries of the King. As for the
Original of this People, it is most probable, that they did descend from the
Tartars, if so be that the West side of America be continent with Asia, or
disjoined but by a very small strait, as it is described in some Maps.

But from whatsoever Root they did first come, certain it is, that they had
settled here many Ages since, and overspread all the parts and quarters of this
large Continent.

But their numbers are much wasted since the Spaniards discovery; for some
Authors affirm, that they put to death above fifteen Millions of Natives in
less than fifty years, and that the blood of those that perished in the Mines,
where they were forced to labor, weighed more than all the Gold and Silver
drawn from thence.

At the first Arrival of the Spaniards, they found the People naked, reasonably
fair, and clear, little inclining unto that blackness which is natural to most
of the Africans, and to some of the Asiaticks that inhabit under the same Clime.

Ignorant they were of all things they had not seen, wondering exceedingly at
the Spaniards Ships and Horses, and strangely admired to see them know the
Health and Affairs of one another by reading a Letter; yet it is reported, the
Mexicans had some knowledge of the Deluge; that they believed the Soul could
not die, and the Body should revive; that those that lived honestly and justly,
or offered up their Lives for defense of their Country, should find a place of
everlasting peace and happiness: So natural is the knowledge of the Souls
Immortality, and of some Vbi for the future reception of it.

They have as many Languages as Towns, which may be the reason we have so
little knowledge of their Original: They are naturally active, swift Runners,
and good Swimmers.

The Mexicans and Pernans, were the only Americans that lived in Cities, which
Cities, though founded by People which we call Savages, were no way inferior to
ours in Europe, either for bigness or Magnificence.

The Spaniards possess the largest, the richest, and the most fertile
Provinces; among the rest Mexico and Peru, formerly two famous Kingdoms, the
first Elective, the other Hereditary, and claim it all as their right, by
virtue of the donation of Pope Alexander the Sixth, in the year 1493. But the
other Nations would not give their consent. The Portugueses have the Coast of
Brasil. The French have their Colonies in Canada, in several Islands, and upon
the firm Land. The English are fairly seated all along the Coast of North
America, and in the Islands. And of late the Dutch have gotten many places on
the Continent and on the Islands: For so rich a Prize could not be kept by the
Spaniards, who hoped indeed to have had a Monopoly of so wealthy a Country, and
to have enjoyed without a Rival the possession of so fair a Mistress.

The Seas that compass this Continent are, on the East, that commonly called
the North Sea, or Mar del Nort; on the West, the South Sea, or Mar del Zur, and
on that part which hides its self under the Pole of the Erymanthean Bear, to
the South of the Straits of Magellan, the North and South Seas meet and embrace
together, dividing, it as is supposed, from either Pole.

Divided it is into two great parts or Peninsula's, by the Isthmus of Panama,
viz. Mexicana on the North, and Peruana on the South.

Of Peruviana or South- America.
THIS Part of the two great Peninsula's, into which the vast Continent of the
New World does now stand divided, extends it self from about the twelfth Degree
of the Equator North, unto the four and fiftieth Southerly, and is now by
Geograghers divided into these Kingdoms or Parts, viz. Castella del Or, by some
called Terra Firma, Guiana, The Amazons, Peru, Chili, Brasil, Peraguay, or La
Plata, and Terra Magellanica.

Its form approaches near a Triangle, whose sides are almost equal.

Its situation is for the most part under the Torrid Zone, the rest under the
Antartick temperate Zone.

The Coasts of this part of the World are in part known to us, but the Inlands
very little.

And here I must beg pardon for my digression, from the usual Order and Method
of Geographers, for being necessarily obliged to wait upon some of our North
American Proprietors, for a more exact Description than what is generally
extant: And the haste of the Press pressing me for more Work, I was forced to
take this Course to begin at the most Southern part of America, and to proceed
to the more Northerly, and so finish this Circle of Geography. Come we
therefore to.

map of Magellanica TERRA. MAGELLANICA By Rob: Morden


MAgellanica lies upon the South of America, near the Straight of Magellan,
whose name it still retains, though sometimes called the Country of the
Patag^ns. It is a very poor Country, and subject to cold, by reason of the high
Mountains, where the Snow lies almost all the year. As for the Natives, they
live in Caves, and adore the Devil, that he may do them no harm. The Spaniards,
English and Dutch have given various Names to the Places where they have been.
In the first part of the Reign of King Philip the Second, the Spaniards built
C^^d^d de^ Rey Philippe, and several other Forts upon the Eastern Entrance in
the Straits of Magellan, to hinder their Enemies from passing that way; but all
signified little or nothing, because of the wideness of the Straight, and the
whole Colony perished for want of Provisions. For which reason that City was
afterward called the Port of Hunger. Port Saint Julian, where Magellan
wintered, and punished his Mutineers. Port Desire upon the Eastern Coast: This
Port, otherwise called Bay de los Trabayos, has an entrance about half a League
broad, with two little Islands, and two Rocks, which are not to be seen at high
Water. The Soil is a white Sand without Trees. However there is fresh Water, of
which the Ships provide themselves that are bound toward the Straight.
Magellan, Drake, Cavendish, Oliver of the North, Maire, Schouten, and others
have all passed the same Straight.

The relations of the Spaniards affirm, that there are Men there ten foot high.
Those relations add, Demi-Giants, that will carry each of them a Tun of Wine,
etc. They call them Patagons. The English who lately passed the Magellan
Straight report things quite contrary, and say, that the Natives of that
Country are no bigger than our Europeans.

In the year 1669, his Majesty of Great Britan, his Royal Highness the Duke of
York, and several others of the Nobility, designed a better discovery of the
Southern part of Chili: In order whereunto were two Ships sent out, the one
called the Sweepstakes, under the conduct of the adventurous and worthy
Commander, Sir John Narborough, and the other the Bachelor, who proceeding on
their Voyage, near the Streights of Magellan, about Rio S. Julian, losing one
the other, the Bachelor returned home with an apprehension, that his Consort
was lost: But contrarily, the Sweepstakes very honorably proceeded on her
Voyage; passed through the Streights into Mar-del Zur, and failed all along the
Coast of Chili unto Baldivia, which is under the Command of the Spaniards, who
by a pretended friendship betrayed and detained four of the English, all
endeavors of Sir John for their relief being ineffectual, he was forced to
leave them behind, and so he returned back through the Streights, and in June
1671 came to London, giving great hopes and expectation of a very advantageous
Trade in those Parts, by reason of the abundance of Gold and Silver in that
Country. Out of whose Journals I have taken these following Memorials, That the
difference of Longitude from St. Jago to Penguin Island was 46d 38m, and
Meridian distant was 2321 Miles 7/10. Soals Bay in Latitude ^8d 15m at the
North end of this Bay was a Rocky Island full of Seals, therefore called Seals
Bay.

In Spiring Bay lie three Rocky Islands.

On the North side of Spiring Bay, Penguin Island about a Mile and a half from
the Main, so full of Penguins, that they knocked them down with sticks, and are
about the bigness of a Goose, they cannot fly, nor go very fast, having no
Wings but small Stumps that they swim with, that they get their Food out of the
Sea.

Port Desire lies in the Latitude 47d 30m, and from St. Jago. 46d 38m
Longitude, where is six Fathom Water, at low Water Northward: Off Port Desire
there lies a League of Rocks, and are about a League from the Shore: And on the
South side is Penguin Island, and just at the entrance of it, on the South
side, is a spired Rock, much like a Steeple or Watch Tower, which is a good
Mark, and stands about a Mile from the Sea side, and the River runs up about
thirty Miles: A barren Land, little Wood, or fresh Water, and no People were
seen by the English: There were great store of Weyetnacks or Spanish Sheep;
plenty of Hares and Estriches; abundance of Ducks, Mallards, also Ducks,
Curlews, Black-shanks, White-breasts, and great blew Ducks as big as Geese, and
store of Seals; upon an Island, up the River, the English found a piece of Lead
nailed to a Post, and a Tin-Box with a Paper left by Captain Jagus Lamir, dated
December 8. 1615. It is high Water at twelve of the Clock, upon the Full Moon
or Change; and at Spring Tides it Ebbs and Flows about three Fathoms right up
and down; the Harbors mouth is but narrow, being about a Musket shot from side
to side.

Port Julian lies in the Latitude of 49d 00m: A Mile within the Narrow, there
is nine Fathom Water at high Water, and but four Fathom at low Water; the
Chanel going in lies S. W. and N. E. and when in the Harbor it lies S. S. W.
and N. N. E. It Is high Water at half an hour past eleven at full Moon, or at
Change, the Water rises and falls about four Fathom and a half. In the Harbor
there are several Islands, and also two Ponds within a Bow-shot of the Water
side, the one is Salt Water, the other Fresh. The Harbor affords great store of
Wild Fowl, as at Port Desire: And the Land, Weyetnacks, Estriches, Hares, etc.
Here were seen five or six Indians, and about nine Miles W. from the Harbors
Mouth was found a great large Salt Pond full of good Salt about three Miles
long, and one Mile in breadth.

Beach Head in Latitude 50l 00m, from which about ten Miles lies the Hill of
St. Ives.

Cape Virgin in Latitude 52d 15m South Latitude from the pitch of this Cape S.
W. there lies a Beachy Point, about a League into the Sea, that has little
Bushes growing upon the top thereof.

The first Narrow of the Magellan Streights, which is about three Leagues in
length, and in the narrowest part about one League over: The Water deep, no
ground with forty fathom of Line: At the Mouth of the entrance, it was high
Water at eight of Clock on the Full Moon, and on the Change. The distance
between the first and second Narrow is about ten Leagues, and in breadth about
six Leagues.

The second Narrow is about three Leagues in length, and four or five Miles
broad, in which were Queen Elizabeth's Island, upon which were seen thirty
Indians, St. Georges Island, St. Bartholomews Island, etc.

About Port Famine the Hills are very high, and covered with Snow; but the Land
toward the Water side was lower, and full of good Timber Trees.

In Fortiscus Bay, or Port Gallant, Water flows ten Foot, and it is high Water
about ten of the Clock on the Full Moon.

About Cape Monday was observed sixteen or seventeen Degrees Variation, and is
about thirteen Leagues from Cape Desire.

The English went up Segars River by Boat about nine Miles, and two by Land,
but could see no Inhabitants.

From Cape Blanko to the Lizard, the difference of Longitude was found to be
60d 45m 5/10, and Meridian distance eight hundred and forty Leagues.

The West Entrance of the Streights of Magellan is 5^d of South Lat. and the
East Entrance lies in 52d 20m: The length is an hundred and ten Leagues. The
breadth in some places two Leagues, in others not two Miles over, and is famous
for the passage of Magellan, Drake, Cavendish, Oliver. Van North, Scouton, etc.

There is another passage between the South Sea, and the Atlantic Ocean,
called Fretum le Maire, found out in the year 16^5, much more convenient than
the former, being about ten or twelve Leagues of length and breadth, and then a
large Sea formerly supposed to be Terra Australis or Terra Incognita.

That of Brewers discovered in the year 1643, has the same advantages as that
of La Maire.

map of Chile and Paraguay CHILI and PARAGAY by Robt. Morden


CHili bears the name of one of her Valleys, though, some say, it is so called
by reason of the cold weather in the Mountains, which inviron it toward the
North and East. The difficulty of passing through these Mountains obliges the
Spaniards to go by Sea, when they have business at Chili. They have possessed
it ever since the year 1554, at which time they conquered it under one of the
Almagres. In some parts of this Country the Soil is so fertile and pleasant,
that no part of all America more resembles Europe. It yields Ostriches, Copper,
the finest Gold in the World; and there are so many Mines, that Chili is
reckoned but one plate of Gold, which makes the King of Spain take more than
ordinary care for its preservation. So that it costs him more to defend that
place, than all the rest of America. The cold is however so excessive, that
Almagre lost more Men and Horses by the Cold, than by the Sword; at the end of
four Months after he invaded it, the Inhabitants found some of his Horsemen
that were dead, and sat in a living posture, as fresh as if they had but newly
taken Horse: Their Rivers run only in the day, being frozen all the night long,
notwithstanding there are several Mountains that cast forth Fire. The Spaniards
have a Governor there, who is under the Viceroy of Peru. The Savages being
governed by their Captains. The Arauques above all the rest made such a
resistance, that the Spaniards were forced to make a Peace with them in the
year 1641. In all America there are no people more Valiant or more Warlike than
those Arauques: They know how to make Swords, Muskets, and Cuirasses; as also,
how to range themselves in Battle, to fight retreating, to encamp to advantage,
to fortify and to use Stratagems; all which they learn by having seen but
once. They have often surpised and ruined Cities, massacred Garrisons, and
demolished the Fortresses Araucho, Puren, and Tu-Capel. In short, an Arauque
will not be afraid at any time to encounter a Spaniard.

St. Jago, La Conceptio, and Imperiale are the principal Cities of Chili. La
Conceptio is the Residence of the Governor, by reason of the neighborhood of
the Arauques. Valparaiso is an excellent Port for the City of Saint Jago.
Mocha, five Leagues from the Continent, is a little Island upon the Coast,
where the Ships oft-times take in fresh Water, and whither many of the
Inhabitants retired from the cruelty of the Spaniards.

La Sarena, taken and fired by the Buccaniers. It had seven Churches, and one
Chapel, the Houses neatly furnished. In the Gardens were Strawberries as big
as Walnuts.

At Isle de Juan Fernandez, in Latitude 3^d 40m neither Fowl nor Fish.

At El Guasco the Bu^caniers got store of Sheep and Goats, Lat. 28d 40m.

Near Point St. Helena is a Rock which runs into the Water for half a Mile,
distant about eight Leagues, called Chanday, where many Ships are lost.

Of Paraguay Rio de la Plata.
THE Name of P^ata is common to the Country, and to a great River that waters
it, 'twas given there unto in consideration of the Mines, and the Silver which
they first got from thence. The Country is very pleasant and delightful, for it
abounds in Corn, Vineyards, Fruit Trees and Cattle in abundance. Assumption is
the chief Place in the Country, where the Spaniard keeps a Garrison, near to
which is a great Lake, in the midst whereof is a great Rock, said to be two
Fathom above the Water. The true Paraguay lies toward the head of the River,
that bears the same name, which in our Language signifies the River of
Feathers. Parana lies along by the River side, wherein there are Cataracts or
falls of Water above a hundred Cubits high. Buenos Aires is one of the best
Colonies, by reason of its Commerce with Brasil, from whence it receives the
Merchandises of Europe. Which is the reason, that invites the Spaniards thither
from Potosi to exchange their Ingots for such necessaries as they want;
notwithstanding the rigorous Prohibitions of their King, whose duties are lost
by that means. Chaco is a fruitful Country interlaced with many Rivers. The
Tobares were about fifty thousand, and a valiant People. The Chiraguanes will
not suffer the Spaniards to live amongst them. In this Country grow great Trees
of which the Natives make Boats all of a piece. They mark out their Highways by
the sellings of their Trees; and in regard these Trees are some black, some
green, some red, some yellow, the Forests afford a pleasant prospect.

The Orochons are remarkable for the bigness of their Ears. According to the
relations of the year 1627. there are in Plata, a more civilized People, and
more capable to learn our Arts, and our Religion, than in all the other parts
of America: For they say, that, according to a Tradition delivered to their
Fathers by Saint Thomas, whom they call St. Sum, certain Priests shall come
into their Country and instruct them in the way of their Salvation.

Tu^uman is a very ten perate Country, interdivided with several Rivers, which,
having watered the Plains, fall into the great River of Plata. The Inhabitants
are docible, lovers of peace rather than War: So that the Spanish Captain, that
subdued them, had no great need of any considerable force for that purpose.
They have many Cities, where they live under the Jurisdiction of the Caciques,
and their Wealth consists rather in Cattle than Mines. The Spaniards have a
Governor there, and the principal City is St. Jago de Estero, in the midway
between Buenos Airs and Potosi. Then St. Miguel de Tucumen. N. S. de Talevera
on the River Salado. Corduba on the Road from Bueyos Airs and Potosi, and from
Sancta Fee to St Jago in Chili. The Quirandies to the Meridional part partake
apparently of the Scithian humor: For they live in Huts, that move upon Wheels,
and have always made great resistance against the Spaniards. The Trapalandes,
the Juries, and Diaquites are the most famous.

map of Brazil BRAZILE A New Decription by Robt. Morden


BRasile was called the Country of the Holy Cross, when it was first
discovered, which was in the year 1501, in the name of the King of Portugal, it
extends it self all along upon the North Sea, toward the North and East, with
great Rocks near the Shore under Water; the distances between which make
several good Ports: The bounds thereof toward the West are not known: The
Southern bounds are variously placed, according to the wills of Portugals and
the Spaniards; for both the one and the other interpret, according to their own
sense, the Regulation that was made in the year 1493, and both claim the
possession of the River of Plata, and the Molucca Islands, making to that
effect Geographical Maps to their own advantage. By this Regulation Alexander
the Sixth (whom Sixtus the Fifth extols for one of the three greatest Popes of
the Church) invested Ferdinand King of Arragon, and Isabel Queen of Castile his
Wife, in all the Lands to the West of an Imaginary Line, drawn from one Pole to
the other, one hundred Leagues beyond the Isles of Azores. That was discovered
to the East of this Line, was to belong to the King of Portugal; the difficulty
was to put it in execution; for on the one side, the Castillians began to count
these hundred Leagues from the most Occidental part of the Azores; and the
Portugueses reckoned from the most Oriental, with a design to exchange the
Deserts of America, for the Possession of the wealthy Molucca's, which were
afterward engaged to their King by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, for three
hundred and fifty thousand Duckers. At length, because these two Nations could
no more agree in this particular, than in many others, the Portugals accounted
Brasile all that which extends from the River Maranhaon, to the River of Plata
Southward; and the Spaniards placed the Southern bounds thereof at Cape St.
Vincents.

Though Brasile lie under the Torrid Zone, nevertheless the Air is temperate,
and the Water the best in the World; so that the People live often to the Age
of an hundred and fifty years. Besides Brasile, the Country produces Amber,
Balsom, Tobacco, Train-Oil, Cattle, Sweetmeats, above all things Sugar in
abundance. The neighborhood of Plata gives the Portugueses great opportunities
of sucking the Spaniards Silver from Peru. There are in Brasile living
Creatures, Trees, Fruits, and Roots not to be found any where else. The
Serpents, Adders and Toads have Poison in them, and therefore the Natives feed
upon them. The Plains are destined for Sugar, the Hills for Wood, the Valleys
for Tobacco, for Fruits and Mandroche, which is a certain Root, of which they
make Bread. The most part of the Villages do not contain above an hundred or
sixscore Houses. The Coast of Brasil is divided into several Capitanies, which
belong at this day all to the Portugals. The French had formerly something to
do there; but the Hollanders lost all their footing, in the year 1654, their
Wars with England not permitting them to send any relief; and the Portugals
being far more numerous than they. Nevertheless in the year 16 2, the Portuga s
treated with them to allow them some damages, to preserve their friendship,
when they were to defend themselves against the Spaniards. Among all the
Capitanies Tamaraca is the most ancient, though the smallest. Fernanbuco is
esteemed the Terrestrial Par^^^se by reason of the beauty of its Soil. Bahia de
Todos los Santos contains the City of San Salvador, the Residence of the
Governor, which was taken in 1624, by the Hollanders, who got so much Plunder
there, that every Common Soldier had for his share above fifteen thousand
Crowns: But this good Fortune was the cause of their retreat, and their retreat
gave the Portugals opportunity to retake it. The Capitanie of Rio Janeiro,
which the Savages call Ganabara, is a great Rendevouz for Ships by means of a
navigable River, or rather an Arm of the Sea, that runs up ten or twelve
Leagues into the Land, some seven or eight Leagues broad. In the year 16^8 a
Silver Mine was found in that Capitanie. That of San Vincent contains Mines of
Gold and Silver. The City of Santos is able to harbor Vessels of four hundred
Tuns in its Port, in the year 1591, it was assaulted by Sir Thomas Cavendish.

The People of Brasil go naked for the most part, and will cross great Rivers
by the help of a Pannier and a Cord. The Chief are the Toupinambous, Les
Margajas, Tapuyes, and others who differ in Manners and Languages, and are
generally distinguished by the wearing of their hair. They were more numerous
before the coming of the Portugals, but several Toupinambous, to preserve their
liberty, crossed the great Deserts, and went to live near the River Maranabon.
The Tapuyes are more difficult to be civilized than the Brasilians, which
inhabit the Aldees. The Aldees are certain Villages, which contain not above
six or seven Houses, but very large, and able to contain five or six hundred
Persons. The most part of the Inhabitants of Brasil have so well defended
themselves, that, notwithstanding the Wars they have had among themselves, they
have however hindered the Europeans from making any progress in the Conquest of
their Lands. And have also several times ruined the Plantations and Engines
belonging the Sugar-works that are upon the Coast.

map of Peru CASTILLA del Or GVIANA PERV The Country of ye Amasones by Robt.
Morden


THE River Amazone is the greatest and swiftest River in America: It begins at
the foot of the Cordellier Mountains eight or ten Leagues from Quito^: From its
Springs, to its approaches to the Sea, is according to its course eleven or
twelve hundred Leagues, at its mouth it is fifty or sixty Leagues wide: It is
inhabited by abundance of People, and receives an innumerable company of
Rivers. The Voyages of Texeira tells us, that the Counties about the Amazone
enjoy a temperate Air. That the Annual Inundations, like to those of Nile, the
great quantity of Trees and Forests, that the pleasantness of their Fruits, the
Verdure of their Herbs, and the beauty of their Flowers, give refreshment and
delights to the Inhabitants all the year long.

That it is a Country fertile in Grains, rich in Pastures, full with Rivers and
Lakes, stored with delicate Fish and Tortoise, that their Honey is Medicinal,
their Balm excellent for Wounds; that they have inexhaustible quantities of
Ebony and Brazil, store of Cacoa and Tobacco, plenty of Sugar Canes, and Rocon
for the dying of Scarlet, besides Gold, Silver, and other Metals, which are
found there.

That they observed an hundred and fifty different Nations upon and about the
Banks of the Amazone, of which the Homagues are excellent for their
Manufactures of Cotton Cloth. The Corosipares for their Earthen Vessels. The
Sarines for their Joynery Work. The Topinamubes for their power.

As for the Amazonian Women, from whence it is pretended this River took its
name, many and strange Relations have been writ of them. All I can find of it
is, that when the Inhabitants were in Arms, at the arrival of the Spaniards,
there were some Women so courageous as to be amongst them, but never any
Country of such, and therefore as fabulous, as those of whom the Greeks have
formerly writ such wonders.

Of PERV.
PERV is a name so remarkable, that, under the same, many times all the other
parts of Southern America are comprehended: It lies almost all under the Torrid
Zone; and yet it has not the qualities of the Countries in our Hemisphere, that
lie under the same Zone. There are in it three sorts of Countries, very
different the one from the other, the Plain, the Hill, and the Andes. The Plain
lies near the Sea, nothing delightful, being sandy, and subject to Earthquakes.
The hilly Country consists of Valleys, Hills and Mountains, where it is very
cool. The Andes, where it almost continually rains, are very high Mountains,
yet fertile and well peopled. The Plain is not above twelve Leagues broad, the
Hilly Country twenty; and the Andes as broad as that. So that under the name of
Peru are comprehended more Lands than are subdued by the Spaniards.

The Spaniards have a Viceroy in that Country, where they have particularly
fortified Arica; being the place where the Merchandises of Lima, and the Wealth
of Potosi are brought. They invaded this Kingdom under Pizarro, in the year
1525. But the Civil Wars that ensued, hindered for some time the absolute
Conquest of the Country. The Indians that cannot defend themselves pay Tribute.
The King of Spain receives vast Treasures out of the Mines of Peru. For the
principal Cities are full of it, and the very Earth is oftentimes nothing but
Gold and Silver: So that Peru is certainly the richest Country in the World.
And it reported, that the Spaniards made above twenty Millions of Ducates of
their first Voyage thither.

The Ways are so secure from Robbery, that four Musketeers serve for a Convoy
for three or four thousand Ducates.

The Inca's were Hereditary Kings of Peru, for above three hundred years before
the Invasion of the Spaniards. They had made there two Highways; the one along
the Plain, where it required an extraordinary Expense to settle the Sand, the
other over the Mountain; where it was as necessary to fill up the Valleys.
These Highways were every one of them five hundred Leagues in length; and upon
the Road stood Houses, whither Travelers were carried and entertained by the
Natives upon freecost. The same Inca's had also reared Temples to the Sun, to
the Moon, and to the Stars, which they call Ladies attending the Moon; to
Lightning, Thunder, and Thunderbolts; and to the Rainbow, which they said
executed the Sun's justice. It is reported, that their Polities were not unlike
those of the Greeks and Romans; that their Government was mild, free and
liberal: And that they divided the Earth into three parts, the first high, the
second low, and the third under ground, signifying Earth, Heaven and Hell.
Atabalippa, who was one of those Kings, said, That the Pope was not a Wise Man,
to give away that which was none of his own, and that for his part he had more
reason to prefer the Divinity of the Sun, than of a Man that was crucified. He
also threw away a Breviary, which they presented, because it spoke never a word
of Christ, of whom they told him it related great things. This unfortunate
Prince being defeated and taken by the Spaniards at Caxamalca, offered for his
liberty as much Gold as could be heaped up half way in a Hall seven and twenty
foot long, sixteen foot wide, and proportionably high; nevertheless they put
him to death, as a Traitor and a Tyrant. It is not to be wondered, that the
Inca's had such vast store of Gold and Silver, for they had framed in Gold all
the Creatures and Plants imaginable in their Temples; also they put great
numbers of Statues of all pure Gold, and adorned with precious Stones. The
Edifices were demolished by the Spaniards, who expected to find Gold in the
Materials, and in the cement of the Stones, though they got a prodigious Sum
besides.

The Provinces of Peru are Quito, Los Reyes, Los Charcas, and La Sierra: Quito,
which produces much Gold, Cotton, and Physical Drugs, has a City of the same
Name, the ancient Residence of Inca Guaynacapa. The Province de los Reyes,
contains the best Cities in the Country, Lima and Cusco: Lima is new, and one
of the best in all America, though it contain not above six thousand
Inhabitants. There are also about four thousand Negroes, but they keep them
disarmed for fear of revolting. The great Trade of the Town, the Residence of
the Viceroy, and the Archbishop make it the Capital City of Peru. Cal^ao a
City and a Port two Leagues from Lima, is able to receive and secure several
Vessels. Cusco built four hundred years before the Spaniards took it, very well
peopled, because the King usually kept his Court, and obliged the Lords of the
Country to build them Houses, and dwell in the City with their Children. The
Province de los Charcas contains the Cities of La Plata and Potosi, which is
the best inhabited place in all the West Indies, for it is stored with all
conveniences and delights of this Life; for which reason several People go to
live there. The Silver Mines in her Mountains are certainly the richest in the
World, and no way subject to the Water, as the other Mines are. The King of
Spain had from thence a Million of Ducates formerly for his fifth; but for some
time since the Rent has fallen.

At the Island Perico was the Fight between the Buccaniers and Spaniards, where
the Buccaniers took five Ships; the Buccaniers were but sixty eight Men, the
Spaniards two hundred and twenty eight.

At Gorgona Island the Buccaniers carreen'd.

At the Isle of Plate, Sir F. Drake made the Dividend of that vast quantity of
Plate, which he took from the S. Armada, which, the Spaniards say, was twelve
score Tuns of Plate, and sixteen Bowls of Coined Money, so that they were
forced to heave some over board.

Tumbes was the first Place the Spaniards settled in these parts after Panama.

Of GVYANA.
THis Country has by sundry Europeans been called the Savage Coast, the Country
of the Amazons, El Dorado, and Guyana. But this last name, which is Indian, has
put down all the rest. Afterward the continued resolutions of the French to
settle themselves there, together with the situation of the Country, has
occasioned it to be called by them Equinoctial France. Orenoque bounds it to
the West; Amazonia to the Fast, the North Sea to the North, and the high
Mountains to the South. All which limits give it a Figure, that is somewhat
oval.

Orenoque, or Raliana, from Sir Walter Raleigh, who in 1595 discovered it,
constrains the neighboring Inhabitants, by reason of its overflowing, to lodge
in the Trees: The other Rivers of Guyana are Ess^qu^be, Brebice, Coret ne,
Boron, Maruvine, Surinam, the entrance whereof is as large as the Sein at
Horfleur: Mawari, Sinamari, Caurora, near to which great plenty of Tortoises
breed. Cayenna, that makes an Island of the same Name; Cauwo, at the Mouth
whereof lie great Mountains, where, they say, there is a Mine of a Lapis
Lazuli. Aperwaque, which is thought runs to the Lake Parime, but it has so
many falls, that its course is hardly known, Via-poco, Poumaron, etc.

At the lower part of these Rivers, and all along the Coast, which is generally
low, and extends above two hundred and fifty Leagues in length, several
English, French and Dutch Colonies have settled themselves. Who having made the
Indians sensible, that they are not able to master their Lands alone, dispute
among themselves the possession of other Nations Rights. The Country between
Viapoco, and the North Cape, is not much coveted by the Europeans, because it
is very boggy.

The Country about the Lake Parima, in the middle of Guyana, acknowledge, by
report, a Successor of Guainacapa of the House of Inca's of Peru, and compose
the true Kingdom of the Golden King. The remaining part toward the North is
possessed by diverse People, which cannot of themselves make a Body of two
hundred and fifty Men. They are all Idolaters, and obey the ancient Chiefs of
their Families. Some Relations affirm, that there are Amazons in those parts,
or rather largesided Women, that wage War with much Skill and Valor, insomuch
that the Natives of the Isle of Arowen, at the Mouth of Amazona, have acquired
that Name, by reason of their long Hair: The same Relations aver, that there
are some Nations, where the Men exchange their Wives, and where the Men always
choose the most elderly, as being more industrious, and better experienced in
Huswifry, than the young ones.

The People of Guyana live long, by reason of the good Air, which they breath.
Their Country lies in the middle of the Torrid Zone, but the Eastern Winds are
very constant. The Days and Nights are equal, the later being very cool, the
dews falling in great abundance. The Mountains are high, and the Forests very
thick, so that it is never excessive hot, nor excessive cold. The Soil is very
proper for the Tillage of Manioc; others for the planting of Cotton; others for
Sugar and Tobacco; others that yield Gums, Wood, Stones of diverse sorts,
Parrots and Monkeys. Besides that Hunting and Fishing are equally profitable
and delightful.

Manoa, near the Lake Parima, the principal City of Guyana is called El Dorado,
by reason of the quantity of Gold, which, they say, is there so great, that the
Inhabitants make their Weapons thereof, and cloth their Bodies with it, after
they have rubbed themselves with Oil or Balsom. So that this City may be
accounted the richest in the World, if there be such a one.

The Island of Cayenne, the principal Colony of the French in those quarters,
is about sixteen or seventeen Leagues in compass, five whereof shoot into the
Sea, the rest lie between the Arms of a River of the same name. It encloses
several high Hills, which are manurable to the very tops; and some Meadows for
the fatting of Cattle. St. Thomas is remarkable, for the unhappy enterprise of
that worthy Englishman, Sir Walter Raleigh, by whom Cumana was fired in his
first return from Guyana.

And at St. Joseph's, a small City in the Isle Trinidado, Sir W. Raleigh took
the Spanish Governor Antonio Berio, from whom he got the best account of those
Parts and its Trade.

Of Castella Del Oro.
GOlden Castile, so called from the plenty of Gold the Castillians found there,
called also Terra Firma, because one of the first parts of firm Land, which the
Spaniards touched at; divided likewise into several Parts or Governments, viz
Panama, Carthagena, Sancta Martha, Rio dela Hacha, Venezucla, Paria or New
Andalousia, Popajan, and Granada.

The Government of Panama, which particularly takes the name of Terra Firma, is
between the North and South Seas, placed in the Isthmus, which joins the two
parts of America together. The Country is either low or miry, or mountainous or
barren, its Air is very unhealthful, subject to great Heats and Fogs: Its chief
Places are, Panama seated on the Southern Seashore, the Residence of the
Governor, a Bishops See, and a Town through which the riches of Spain and Peru
pass every year. In December 1670, it was taken by the English, and kept twenty
eight days.

Panama is the Place whither they bring the Gold and Silver of Peru, which they
afterward carry to Porto Belo, a place of great strength, fortified with two
Castles, which lies about sixteen or eighteen Leagues off upon the North Sea,
and raised upon the Ruins of Nombre de Dios, which was forsaken for the badness
of the Air, and lying too open to the Invasions of the English: This carriage
is performed by great Rams, called Vieuves, which are the only Mules of the
Country. At Porto Belo they lade this Gold and Silver in the Ships, that carry
it to Spain.

In the way from Panama to Porto Belo, you may, if you please, take the
convenience of the River Chagra, which comes within five Leagues of Panama, and
then you may go all the way by Water.

In the year 1668, the English plundered Porto Belo, and got considerable sums
of the Spaniards, before they would surrender it again.

Cartagena affords sovereign Balsom, little inferior to that of Egypt, Rosin,
and several sorts of Gums, long Pepper, Dragons-blood, Emeraulds, etc. Formerly
the Inhabitants had particular places, whither they carried their Dead with
their Gold, their Chains and their costly Ornaments. But the Spaniards to get
this Wealth into their hands, made those Relics see the Sun again. The City
standing in a Peninsula, had its name from the resemblance of its Port, with
that of Cartagena in Europe. It is one of the best Cities in America, for it
contains above four thousand Spaniards, about four thousand Negro's, and is the
usual Randevouz of the Fleets, that are bound from Cadiz to the Firm Land.

Saint Martha produces almost all sorts of Fruit that grow in Spain, Gold,
Saphires, Emeraulds, Jasper, Cassidoins: And there begin those high Mountains,
which under the names of Andes run a long as far as the South. The City is
honored with an Episcopal See, but still laments the Ruins suffered by the
English in Anno 1595 and 1596.

Rio de la Hacha has lost the Fishery of Pearls not far from it, but its Soil
is very fertile.

Venezuela had its name from a Village hard by, which was built upon Piles in
the midst of the Water: When this Country was first discovered, the Germans,
to whom Charles the Fifth had engaged it, had a design to have built a City at
the Mouth of the Lake Macataybo, according the Model of Venice, but afterward
they changed their resolution, and chose rather to return into their own
Country: The Water of the aforesaid Lake is salt, but it becomes sweet, through
the abundance of Water that falls into it out of several Rivers. Venezuela
produces all things necessary for human sustenance, so that it is, as it were,
the Granary of the adjacent Provinces.

New Andalusia is otherwise called Paria, from its great River; and the Seacost
bears like that of Venezuela, the name of the Coast of Pearls, by reason of the
Fishery there, since it failed about the Islands of Margareta and ^ubagua Some
of the Indians still hold out against the Spaniards, and the most part of the
Sea Towns have been often plundered by the English. The Country near Comana is
full of Saltpits. The Country and City of Popayen have preserved the name of
their last King. The Paezes, the Pixo's, the Manipo's, and other neighboring
Natives could never be subdued.

The New Kingdom of Granada, which was discovered by one Xemenes a Granadin,
affords Silver, Copper, Iron, and Emeraulds. Heretofore there was One brought
to Philip the Second, King of Spain, of so high a Price, that the Goldsmiths
knew not how to value it: And therefore as a rarity it was laid up in the
Treasure of the Escurial.

map of Western Islands A Map of The WESTERN ISLANDS By R. Morden


BEtween the two America's, North and South, and before the Gulf of Mexico are
many Islands, generally distinguished into the Antilles, Caribbes, and Lucajos.

Of the ANTILLES.
THE Islands of the Antilles are Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica and Peru Rico alias
Boriquen. Hispaniola is affirmed to be in length an hundred and sixty Leagues;
the breadth in some places sixty, in some but thirty, thence growing less and
less till it comes to the Angles; situate between the eighteenth and twentieth
degrees. of the Northern Latitude. An Island for the most part beautiful and
flourishing, the Trees always in their Summer Livery, the Meadows green, as if
they did enjoy a perpetual Spring; of such excellent Herbage, that the Cattle
brought thither out of Spain have increased beyond measure grown wild for want
of proper Owners, and are hunted unto death, like the Stags of the Forest, only
to rob them of their Skins. In a word, rich Mines of Gold without mixture of
Dross, or other Metals; the great increase of Sugar Canes, one Cane filling
twenty, sometimes thirty Measures, the exceeding increase of Corn, producing in
some places an hundredfold; Herbs and Fruits, that in eighteen days will come
to their perfections, and ripen, etc. are evident Arguments of the richness and
fertility of the Soil, only the Air is much infested with Morning Heats, but
cooler in the Afternoon.

It was discovered by Columbus, in his first Voyage made 1492. The Spaniards
have since settled many potent Colonies there, who, having rooted out the
Natives by their infinite cruelties, and exhausted the riches of the Country
with as infinite covetousness, dispersed themselves into the Continent.

Its chief Places are St. Domingo, first built by Bartholomeus Columbus, Anno
1494, now situate in a pleasant Country, with a safe and capacious Haven, for
Ships to ride in. An Archbishopric, and a place of great Trade, till the
taking of Mexico, and the discovery of Peru, since which time it has much
decayed, nor has it yet recovered it self of the great loss and damage it
sustained by Sir Francis Drake, in Anno 1586.

Porto de la Plata, the second place of Trade and Wealth, seated on a
commodious Bay on the Northern Shore.

At present among their Insects and Vermin, the Nigua is the most dangerous,
it leaps like a Flea, and piercing it self, till it lodges between the Skin and
the Flesh is very troublesome to get out.

The Cucugo, a kind of Snail, that has its Eyes and Flanks when it opens its
Wings, so Bright, that it serves to Read or Write by in the darkest Night.

Among their Fish the Manati is the most remarkable, which is a kind of a
Sea-Calf, about twenty Foot long, and their young not above a hand long.

The Commodities now are Cattle, Hides, Cassia, Sugar, Ginger, Cocheneil,
Guaiacum, and other Herbs, as well for Physic as Dying.

The French now possess the Western part of this Island, as also the Island
Tortugas not far from it.

Of CVBA.
CVBA, by Christopher Columbus called Ferdinanda, is in length from East to
West about two hundred Spanish Leagues; in breadth not about twenty five or
thirty, in content equal with Hispaniola, for fertility of the Soil, and
temperature of the Air, beyond it.

Liberally stored with Ginger, Mastich, Cassia, Aloes, Cinnamon and Sugar,
besides great plenty of Flesh, Fish and Fowl, the Gold more drossie in the
Mines than those of Hispaniola, but the Brass more perfect; the Mountains
filled with diverse Trees, of which some drop that purest Rosin; and the Hills
send to the Valleys many Rivers streaming down with Gold.

Among the Rarities of this Island, there is a Fountain, out of which flows a
pitchy substance or Bitumen, excellent for the chalking of Ships, and serves
the Indians for diverse Medicines.

As also a Valley covered with an innumerable number of Flint-stones of diverse
Magnitudes, which Nature has made so round, that they may serve for Bullets
for all sorts of Cannons.

Its chief Places are St. Jago, built in 1514, by Don Diego de Valasques,
seated in the bottom of a capacious Bay, in the South part of the Island, the
seat of a Bishop, much decayed, and now of little Trade. 2. Havana, one of the
most famous Ports in the West Indies, for strength, largeness and richness, so
strongly situated and fortified, both by Nature and Art, that it seems
impregnable; the entrances defended with two Castles, and a greater opposite to
the Mouth of the Haven; it is the general Randevouz of the Spanish Fleets, (and
is capable to receive a thousand Vessels) when they return for Spain, honored
therefore with the Seat of the Governor, and the greatest Trade of all these
Seas. Twenty five Leagues from the Havana toward the East is the Port of
Mataacas, memorable for that Peter Heyn General for the Dutch West India
Company, there surprised in the year 1629, the Spanish Fleet, and carried it
into Holland: A Prize esteemed worth more than seven Millions of Crowns, yet
very ill recompensed for his service and pains.

Nor can I forget the memorable Story of one of the Caciques of the Island, who
addressing himself unto Columbus, advised him to use his fortune with
moderation, and to remember, that the Souls of Men had two journies, when they
leave this World: The one soul and dark, for the injurious and cruel; the other
delightful and pleasant, for the peaceable and just.

map of Jamaica INSULA IAMAICAE By Robt. Morden


IT is situated South of Cuba, and West of Hispaniola, in the Torrid Zone, in
eighteen Degrees of Northern Latitude; yet the heat is so qualified with the
fresh Easterly breezes, that constantly blow all day, refreshed with frequent
Showers, and such Dews which fall in the Night, that it may be truly called
temperate; its Air healthful; its Soil rich and fertile, plentiful of all
things necessary. The Land well stocked with Cattle, the Woods well stored with
Fowl, and its Rivers with Fish.

From East to West along the midst of the Island runs a continual ridge of
lofty Mountains, which are full of fresh Springs, whence flow the many Rivers,
that so plentifully water the Island.

There is scarce any sensible increase or decrease of the Days or Nights
throughout the year, and the Winter Months are only known by a little more Rain
and Thunder.

This Island produces many excellent Commodities, viz. Sugars so good, that
they out-sells those of Barbados; Indice, Cotton which is excellent fine,
Tobacco, Hides, Copper, Tortoises in great abundance, whose Meat is excellent
to eat, and their Shells much esteemed for several curious Works.

Several sorts of Woods for Dyers, as Fustick, Redwood, a kind of Logwood, also
Cedar, Molthogency, Brassiletto, Lignum Vitae, Ebony, Granadilla, with many
other sweet smelling and curious Woods.

There is also Ginger, Salt in great abundance, Saltpeter, Jamaica Pepper very
Aromatical, and of so curious a Gust, that it has the mixed taste of diverse
Spices. Drugs in great abundance, Guiacum, China Roots, Sasaparilla, Vinills,
Cassia-Fistula, Tamarindes, Achiots or Anetto, with many other Drugs, Balsoms
and Gums, as also Co^haneil, especially Cocao, of which Chocalate is made.

In this Island is great abundance of Cattle, viz. Cows, Sheep, Goats and Hogs;
it having good Pastures, and Grass always green and springing, the Trees and
Plants never dis-robed of their Summer Liveries.

In their Rivers are very excellent Fish, viz. Tortoise, Snappers, Crabs,
Lobsters, Tarbums, Macquerels, Mullets; Cavallo's, Parrat Fish, Cony Fish,
Green Turtles.

Excellent Fruits all the year long, Oranges, Pomegranates, Citrons, Lemmons,
Cocar Nuts, Limes, Guauars, Mammes, Alumee-Supotas, Cashues, prickle-Apples,
prickle-Pears, Grapes, Sower-Sops, Custard-Apples, Dildows, Plantines, Pines,
Macows, Indian-Figs, Bonames, M^lons, etc.

There is great plenty of Hens, Turkies, Ducks, Teal, Wigeon, Geese, Pigeons,
Turtle Doves, Guiny Hens, Plovers, Flemmings, Snipes, Parrats, with great
variety of small Birds.

There likewise grow very well all manner of Summer Garden Herbs and Roots
common to us in England, viz. Letuce, Parsley, Rosemary, Lavender, Marjoram,
Savory, Time, Sage, Purslane, etc. For Roots; Pease, Beans, Cabbages, Colly
Flowers, Turnips, Potatoes, Onions, and Radishes.

Upon the Island are few hurtful Beasts or Insects; only the Muskettoes and
Merrywings, a sort of stinging Flies, which are troublesome in some part of the
Isle. And the Aligator, which is a very vexatious Creature, but its fat is a
Sovereign Ointment for any internal Ach or Pain in the Joints or Bones

Its Diseases are Dropsies, occasioned often by ill Diet, Drunkenness and
Sloth; Calentures, too frequently the product of Surfeits, Fevers and Agues,
but with good Diet, and moderate Exercise, without excess of drinking, the
English enjoy a competent measure of health.

The Island abounds in good Bays, Ports and Harbors, viz. 1. Port Royal,
formerly called Cagway, situate on the extreme end of that long point of Land,
which makes the Harbor exceeding commodious for Shipping, and is secured by a
strong Castle; the Harbor is two or three Leagues cross in most places, and
has every where good Anchorage, and is so deep, that a Ship of a thousand Tun
may lay her sides to the Shore to unload, and is the only place of Trade in the
Isle, being populous and much frequented.

2. Port Morant seated on the Eastern Point, a very capacious and secure
Harbor, where Ships do conveniently hold Water, and ride safe from the Winds,
where is also a potent Colony settled.

3. Point Negrel in the West, very good and secure to windward.

4. Port Antonio in the North, a very safe and Land-locked Harbor, being wholly
taken up by the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Carslile, once Governor of the
Island; and now called Port St. George.

About twelve Miles from Port Royal, within the Land, in a Plain by a River is
seated St. Jago, once a place of great account, when the Spaniards were Masters
of the Isle, now the Residence of the Governor, and the chief Courts of
Judicature are held there, and therefore likely to arrive to a greater spendor
than before: Its Inhabitants live in great pleasure, where they have their
Havana, in which the richer sort recreate themselves every Evening in their
Coaches or on Horseback, as the Gentry do here in Hide-Park.

About the middle way between St. Jago and Port Royal, and on the Mouth of the
River is seated Passage, a small Town, built for the convenience of passage to
Port Royal from St. Jago, where is also a Fort raised to secure the same.

In a word, the great encouragement of gaining riches with a pleasant life does
invite every year abundance of people to inhabit there, so that in a short time
it is likely to become the most potent, and richest Colony in the West Indies.

Besides the number of Inhabitants, which are reckoned to be about forty or
fifty thousand, there belong to the Island about three thousand lusty stout
fighting Men, called Privatiers or Bucca^iers, whose Courage has been
sufficiently evidenced in their late exploit, and attempt against the Spaniards
at Panama.

As concerning the Laws, by which they are governed, they are assimilated as
near as can be to those of England, having their several Courts, Magistrates
and Officers for the executing of Justice on criminal Offenders, and the
hearing and determining of Causes betwixt Party and Party; and for the better
assistance of the Governor he has his Council to consult with.

Borequen is little less either in Circuit or Fruitfulness than Jamaica. Its
chief Place is St. Jaan del Puerto Rico, which communicates its name to the
whole Island; the Residence of a Bishop and Governor. The Island is traversed
by a Chain of Mountains, which cuts it from West to East. Here is found a white
Scum, which they use instead of Pitch to chalk their Ships, and instead of
Tallow to make Candles, and for want of other Medicaments for Wounds and Sores.
These four Islands are the greatest and chiefest of the Antilles.

Of the CARIBBE Islands.
THE Caribbe or Canabal Islands lie East off Boriquen or Portorico, advancing
in a Demi-Circle toward America Meridionalis. The Chief whereof are,

map of Barbados The Island of BARBADOS. By Robert Morden.


BArbado's is the most considerable Island, that passes under the name of the
Caribbe Isles. It is seated in thirteen Degrees and thirty Minutes of North
Latitude; being not above eight Leagues in length, and five in breadth, of an
Oval form. It is a potent Colony, and able to arm ten thousand fighting Men,
which, with the strength that Nature has bestowed upon it, is able to bid
defiance to the stoutest Foe.

This Isle is very hot, especially for eight Months, yet not so but labor or
travel is sufferable, by reason of the cold breezes of Wind, which rise with
the Sun, and blow fresher as the Sun mounteth up. The Air, tho hot, is moist,
which causes all Iron Tools to rust, but this great heat and moisture makes
the Soil exceedingly fertile, bearing Crops all the year long, and its Trees
and Plants are always green, and the Fields and Weeds always in their verdent
livery.

Its Commodities are Sugars, Indico, Cotton, Wool, Ginger, Logwood, Fustick,
Lignum Vitae, etc. Of the four first there is such great abundance, that above
two hundred Sail of Ships have yearly their loading there.

As for its Trees, Fruits, Herbs, Roots, Foul, Beasts, Insects, and Fish, they
are much the same as found in Jamaica, to which I refer you.

The Island is divided into eleven Precincts or Parishes, in which are fourteen
Churches and Chapels. The Names whereof, and how situated, you may plainly see
in the Map. Its chief places are,

St. Michael, formerly the Bridge-Town, situate at the Bottom of Carlisl^-^ay
in the Lee ward or Southern part of the Island, having a capacious, deep and
secure Harbor for Ships, large enough to entertain five hundred Sail at once.

The Town is graced with abundance of well built Houses, being the Residence of
the Governor, the place of Judicature, and the Scale of Trade, where most of
the Merchants and Factors have their Storehouses or Shops: It has two strong
Forts opposite one to another, with a Platform in the midst, which commands
the Road for the defense and security of the Ships.

Next is little Bristol, formerly Sprights Bay, seated about four Leagues ^ee
ward from St. Michaels, has a commodious Road for Ships, well traded, and
strongly defended by two Forts.

3. Saint James, formerly the Hole, has good Road for Ships, and is of a
considerable Trade, where is kept the Monthly Courts.

4. Charles Town, on Oyster Bay, secured by two strong Forts with a ^lat form
in the midst.

The Inhabitants of this Isle are of three sorts Masters, Christian Servants
and Negroes. And according to the Calculation not long since made, the two
first did amount to fifty thousand, and the Negroes to double the number.

The Masters for the most part live at the height of pleasure, and the
Servants, at the expiration of five years, become Freemen of the Island, and
employ their times according to their abilities and capacities, and the Negro
Slaves are never out of their Bondage and the Children they get are likewise
perpetual Slaves.

The Isle is governed by Laws assimilated to those of England, by a Governor as
Supreme, his ten Council as so many Peers, and an hundred Burgesses chosen by
the Commonalty out of each Parish.

SAint Christophers, so called from Christopher Columbus the first Discoverer
thereof, situate in the Latitude of seventeen Degrees and twenty five Minutes;
in Circuit about seventy five Miles, the Soil light and Sandy, produces Sugar,
Cotton, Tobacco and Ginger: The whole Isle is divided in four quarters, two of
which are possessed by the English, the other two by the French; the English
have two fortified places; one commanding the great Haven, the other distant
not far from the Point De Sable. By the Treaty of Breda, the French were to
return us St Christophers, which after four years delay was delivered to Sir
Charles Wheeler, but my Information tells me, the Plantations were destroyed,
and Country laid waste, and left in a much worse condition, than if it had
never been planted. However the French have now four strong Forts, that of most
note is called Basse Terre: There are five Churches belonging to the English,
at Sandy Point, at Palm Tree, one near the great Road, and two at the inlet of
Cayoun: And the French have a Town of good bigness, whose Houses are well built
of Freestone, well inhabited and Traded unto, with a fair and large Church and
Castle, being the Residence of the Governor, pleasantly seated at the foot of a
high Mountain, not far from the Sea, having spacious Courts, delightful Walks
and Gardens, with a curious prospect.

Neivis or Mevis, a small Isle, not above eighteen Miles in circuit, near St.
Christophers, inhabited by about three or four thousand English, who live well,
and drive a Trade of Sugar, Cotton, Ginger and Tobacco, a well-governed Colony,
it has three Churches for Divine Worship, a Storehouse for the accommodation
of its Inhabitants; a strong Fort for the security of Ships, in the Road called
Bath Bay, from its Baths which are much frequented for the curing of several
Distempers.

Antego, seated in the Latitude of sixteen Degrees, eleven Minutes, of a
difficult access, and very dangerous for Shipping, it has some few Springs of
Fresh Water, plenty of most sort of Wild Fowl, for Fish great abundance.

Dominica, seated in the Latitude of fifteen and a half, of about twelve
Leagues in length, and eight in breadth, is very Mountainous, yet not without
many fertile Valleys, and might be of some account to the English, would they
subdue the Natives, who do much annoy them.

Monsferrat in the Latitude of seventeen Degrees, of small extent, is much
inclined to Mountains, filled with Cedar Trees, and the Valleys and Plains are
fertile, most inhabited by the Irish, who have there a Church for Divine
Worship.

Anguilla in Latitude of eighteen Degrees, twenty one Minutes, an Island but
slenderly inhabited, and esteemed not worth the keeping.

Barbada in the Latitude of seventeen and a half, not of any considerable
account to the English.

Sancta Crux, inhabited by the French, Woody and Mountainous.

Guadaloupe, about three Leagues in length, possessed by the French, of some
note for its Fresh Water.

Grenada, about six Miles in length, in form of a Crescent, possessed by the
French.

Saint Vincent, about six Leagues in circuit, of a fertile Soil, yiedling
abundance of Sugar Canes, well watered with Rivers, having safe and convenient
Bays for Shipping, possessed principally by the Dutch. For the English have
here some settlement, but not considerable.

Curacao, Tabago, Saba, and Eustache are also in possession of the Dutch,
February 26. 1677. was the account of the taking Tabago by Count d' Estree: The
ninth or tenth of December landed fifteen hundred, and attacked the Fort,
opened the Trenches, and raised a Battery, on which were three Mortar Pieces;
the third Bomb that was shot into the Fort, set fire to their Magazine of
Powder, by which the Vice Admiral Binches, fifteen Officers, and about three
hundred Soldiers were killed, and the rest surrendered, the Fort was destroyed,
two hundred Pieces of Cannon taken, and four Dutchmen of War in the Port.

Martin possessed by the French and Dutch.

St. Martinique, Desseada, Marigatanta, St. Lucia possessed by the French.

map of Bermuda AESTIVARUM INSULAE at BARMUDAS Lat. 32D 25m 3300 miles from
London 500 from Roaneak in Virginia by R Morden


THE Bermuda's are a certain number of small Islands first discovered by one
John Bermudas, since called the Summer Islands, from the Shipwreck which Sir
George Summers, and Sir Thomas Gates, suffered, Anno 1609. Of these Islands,
the greatest, to which the Name of Bermudas is more generally given, is about 5
Leagues long, and 2 Miles broad, all the rest being very small: The whole
cluster together do form a Body much like a Crescent, and enclose several good
Ports; the chief whereof are the Great Sound, Harrington's Sound, Southampton
Harbor, guarded with several Forts, taking their Names from the several
Noblemen that were concerned as Undertakers, which are set down in the Map; as
also the Names of some of the biggest Islands.

Since the English first settled in these Islands, they have now established a
powerful Colony, consisting of above 4 or 5000 Inhabitants, who have strongly
fortified the Approaches by the aforesaid Forts, which, with the Rocks in the
Seas, render them secure and impregnable; so that without knowledge of the
Passages, a Boat of 10 Tuns cannot be brought into the Haven; yet, by the
assistance of a skilful Pilot, there is entrance for Ships of the greatest
Burden.

The Earth, in these Isles, is exceeding fertile, yielding two Crops every
year, which they gather in about July and December.

They have no fresh Water, but that in Wells and Pits, which ebbs and flows
with the Sea, there being neither Fountain nor Stream in these Islands, nor
venomous Beasts, neither will they live if brought thither; nor are their
Spiders poisonous, but of sundry and various Colors, and in hot weather make
their Webs so strong, that the small Birds are sometimes entangled and caught
therein.

The Sky is generally serene and clear, and the Air so temperate and healthy,
that it is rarely any one dies of any distemper than that of old Age: So that
the Inhabitants enjoy a long and healthy Life.

When the Sky is at any time darkened with Clouds, it thunders and lightens,
and is very stormy and tempestuous: The North and Northwest Winds cause Winter
in December, January, and February, which yet is so very moderate, that young
Birds and Fruits, and other Concomitants of the Spring, are seen there in those
Months.

They have several sorts of excellent Fruits, as Oranges, Dates, Mulberries
both white and red; in the Trees whereof, breed abundance of Silkworms, which
produce much Silk. There is also plenty of Tortoise, whose Flesh is very
delicious. There is good store of Hogs, and great variety of Fowls and Birds.
There is also a sort of Cedar Trees, which differ from all others in the world,
the Wood whereof is sweet and well-scented.

Their chief Commodities are Oranges, Cochineil and Tobacco, with some kind of
Pearls and Ambergreece; of which last, it is reported, that the three Men left
there, after the Death of Sir George Summers, found, in Somerset Island, as
much of it as was worth 9 or 10000 Pounds Sterling: And now they keep Dogs for
the finding of it out by its scent.

These Isles are now divided into Tribes or Counties, and the whole reduced to
a settled Government, both in Church and State, and is still improving to
greater perfection.

Place this between page 544 and 545.
Of the LVCAYES.
ARE so called from Lucayon the name of the biggest, which is amongst them.
Bahama lends its name to a very rapid Chanel, running from South to North, and
is remarkable for the passage of the Spanish Fleets, in their return from
Mexico into Europe. A Passage as fatal to the Spaniards by many Shipwracks of
their rich laden Plate Ships; as kind to some English Undertakers of late
years, who, by Diving get up vast quantities of that Plate, which for many
years have laid close hugged in her rocky and precipitous embraces. Binini,
hardly accessible, is said to have a Fountain that renews Youth, being stored
with handsome Women, for whose sake it is much resorted to. Guanahani is that
Island, which was discovered by Columbus, for which reason he called it St.
Salvador, in regard it saved him from the Conspiracy of his Men, who a little
before would have thrown him over board.

New Providence, a late erected Colony of the English, by Patent from his
Majesty to the Proprietors of Carolina, and is found to produce the same
Commodities, Fruits, Plants, Beasts, Fowls, Birds, etc. Of an Air healthful and
agreeable to English Bodies, that, since their Settlement, few or none have
died of the Distempers or Diseases incident to other Colonies.

map of Mexico Mexico or NEW SPAIN by Robt. Morden


THE Indians call this Country Mexico; the Spaniards, New Spain; the Latins,
Nova Hispania; a Country abundantly enriched with inexhaustible Mines of Gold
and Silver, the Air exceeding Temperate, though seated in the Torrid Zone: Its
Soil is so fertile, that no Country in the World feeds so much Cattle.

The Riches of the Country, besides their Gold and Silver, Copper and Iron, are
their Grains, as Wheat, Barley, Pulse, and Mayz. Their Fruits, as Pomegranats,
Oranges, Lemmons, Cittorns, Malica^ons, Cherries, Pears, Apples, Figs,
Coco-nuts, and variety of Herbs, Plants and Roots. There is also Wool, Cotton,
Sugar, Silk, Cochenel. From thence is likewise exported the Grains of Scarlet,
Feathers, Honey, Balm, Amber, Salt, Tallow, Hides, Tobacco, Ginger, and diverse
Medicinal Drugs.

Among the rarities there is the most admirable Plant called Magney, of whose
Leaves they make Pepper, Flax, Thread, Cordage, Girdles, Shoes, Mats, Mantles,
Stuffs, etc. Its Bark, if roasted, makes an excellent Plaster for Wounds; from
the top branches comes a Gum, which is a Soveragin Antidote against Poison,
from the top a juice like Syrup, which if boiled, will become Honey; if
purified, Sugar; they make out of it also Wine, and Vinegar, and it affords
good Wood to Build with.

As also two Mountains, one of which vomits Flames of Fire like Aetna; the
other sends forth two burning Streams, the one of black Pitch, the other of
red, to which I may add their fine Pictures made with the Feathers of their
Cin^ons (which is a little Bird living only on dew) so excellently are their
Colors placed, that the best Painters of Europe admire the delicacy thereof,
far exceeding a piece of Painting.

It was once an Elective Kingdom, full of great Cities, well governed,
civilized. Should we, says Acosta, parallel the Politics of the Vncas, or
Kings of Peru, and Mexico, with those of the Greeks and Romans, these would
have the advantage, but the best of these good Laws and Policies were
abolished, when the Spaniards became Masters of the Country, dividing it into
several Parts or Provinces, viz. New Galicia, Guadalaira, New Biscay, Mexico,
Mechoacan, Panuco, Jucatan, Guatimala, Honduras, Nicaregua, Costaricca,
Veragua, and others; they have established Parliaments at Mexico, Guadalaria,
and Guatimala. New Mexico properly so called lying round about the City of
Mexico, is the best, and best peopled part of all America; that City suffered a
dreaful loss in the year 1629, all the Dams, and most part of the Houses, being
carried away by the violence of the Streams, for it is situated upon a salt
Lake about twenty five or thirty Leagues in compass, into which falls another
Lake of fresh Water, and both together are forty five or fifty Leagues circuit,
in which are said to be fifty thousand Ferries continually rowing about to
carry Passengers, having about fifty Towns on their Banks, some say, eighty
Towns, many of them count five thousand Houses, some ten thousand. The salt
Lake Ebbeth and Flows according to the Wind, yielding no kind of Fish. In
Mexico are said to be four thousand Spaniards, and thirty thousand Indians, it
is the Residence of the Viceroy, and Archbishop. Before the Spaniards took
possession of the Country, there were several considerable places near to
Mexico.

The Siege of Mexico lasted about three Months, wherein Cortez had near 200000
Indians, nine hundred Spaniards, eighty Horses, seventeen or eighteen Pieces of
Ordnance, sixteen or eighteen Vergantines, and at least six thousand Canou's,
where were slain fifty Spaniards six Horses, and about eight thousand Indians
on Cortez side: Of Mexicans were slain 120000, besides those that dyed with
Famine and Pestilence.

The Vergentines wherewith Cortez besieged Mexico by Water, were brought by
land in pieces from Tlaxcallen to Tezcuco, and 400000 Men fifty days employed
in the finishing of them, and making a Sluice or Trench, and lanching of them
into the Lake.

At that Siege Montezuma the Emperor was taken by Cortez out of his own Palace,
and made Prisoner, which caused the Mexicans to rebel against Cortez and the
Spaniards, and fought a fierce and bloody Battle two or three days together,
crying out for their Emperor; whereupon Cortez desired him to go to the Window
to show himself, and command his Subjects to cease their fury, who so doing,
was hit on the Head with a Stone, with which blow he fell down dead to the
Ground, and this was the end of that great Emperor, who was of the greatest
Blood, and the greatest King in Estate that ever was in Mexico, slain by his
own Subjects against their wills, in the City of his greatest Glory, and in the
custody of a foreign and strange Nation.

After the death of Montezuma, they made Quabutamoc their Emperor, and
persisting in their furious Battery against Cortez his Palace, caused him and
all his Spaniards to fly out of Mexico: But the Spaniards having made sixteen
or eighteen Vergentines at Tlaxcallen, and got new Supplies; they again so
besieged Mexico by Water and Land, that it was reduced to great necessity with
Hunger and Sickness, and though in this extreme misery, yet they would not yield,
no not when they saw the Kings Houses burned, and the greatest part of their
City consumed, so long as they could keep one Street, Tower or Temple; and
though the Spaniards had won the Marketplace, and most of the City: And though
their Houses were full with dead Bodies, and all the Trees and Roots gnawn by
those hungry wretches that survived, yet would they not accept of peace, but
desired death; so that when the Spaniards thought there had not been five
thousand in all the City, yet were there that day slain and taken Prisoners
400000 Persons, and Quahutamoc their King taken Prisoner, who told Cortez he
had done his best endeavor to save and defend himself and Vassals; but
considering you may now do what you please with me, I beseech you to kill me,
which is my only request: But Cortez comforted him with fair words, and
required him to command his Subjects to yield, which he did. And at that time
after so many were slain and starved, so many Prisoners taken, yet there were
about 700000 who threw down their Arms and submitted. Thus did Cortez win the
famous City of Mexico on the thirteenth day of August, An. Dom. 1521.

Chulula, enclosed about twenty thousand Houses, with as many Temples as there
are days in the year. And the Inhabitants sacrificed every year above six
thousand of their Children to their accursed Idols. Tezcuco, was said to be as
big as Mexico, which was said to contain sixty or eighty thousand Houses, and
is famous among the Spaniards, for that it was the first that received a
Christian King, H^rnando son to Nezavalpincintli, Cortez being his God Father.
Quaretaro had a Fountain out of which the Water flows for four years
together, and the next four years seemed to be empty. Los Angelos, upon the
Road from La Vera Cruz, first built and inhabited in the year 1530, by Don
Antonio de Mendoza, Viceroy of Mexico, famous for the Cloth that is there
made, as good as any in Segovia, which is the best in Spain: And a Glass House,
which is the rarity in all those parts. It is a City containing six thousand
Inhabitants, to which there belongs a Bishopric, endowed with sixty thousand
Crown a year.

Guacocinga is the chief Town between the City of Mexico, and Los Angelos
consisting of above five thousand Indians, and one thousand Spaniards, and is
privileged by the Kings of Spain, for that it joined with the Tlazcellans
against the Mexicans.

Acapulco, upon the South Sea, is a well sheltered Bay, distant from Mexico one
hundred Leagues; from hence the Spaniard drives a rich Trade to the Philippine
Isles, and to China, from whence they are distant three thousand Leagues.
Jucatan is a Peninsula, between two Gulphs, where stands the ancient Merida.

In Panueo, the Castillians have only three Colonies, of which Saint Steven del
puerto is the Metropolis, twelve Leagues from the Sea, and a Town of great
Traffic; next is Saint Jago de los Vallos; thirdly, Jews de Tempico.

They have Mines of Gold in the Country, which are not wrought; Salt Pits, out
of which they draw the greatest profit. Mechoaian, the Metropolis of the
Province, so called, now the seat of the Archbishop, since removed from
Valadolid, seated upon a Lake as large as that of Mexico. This Country is said
to be so healthful, and of so sweat an Air, that Sick People come thither to
recover their health.

Near Colima, is found the Plant Cozometcath or Olcacazan, which takes
blood-shot from the Eyes, preserves the strength of the Body, cures the Tooth
and Headache, resists all poisons, and is most excellent against all Diseases.

This Province is of a fertile Soil, yielding great increase of all sorts of
Grain, Fruits, etc. It produces Cotton, Ambergris, Gold, Silver, Copper,
Black Stones so shining, that they serve instead of Looking-Glasses, store of
Plants, medicinal Herbs, Silk, Honey, Wax, etc. It is well stored with Springs
and Rivers of fresh Water, Cattle and Fowl are in great plenty, and other
Lakes, and Rivers afford store of Fish.

Thascala or Los Angelos, is a Country very plentiful, both of Corn and Cattle,
full of rich Pastures, well watered with Rivers, and wonderfully stored with
Maize, which they make their Bread of

Places of most note are, first Thascala, Situate on an easy ascent betwixt
two Rivers, encompassed with a large, pleasant and fruitful plain, said to be
so populous before the arrival of the Spaniards, that it could number above
three hundred thousand Inhabitants: Second, Angelos, a fair City distant from
Mexico twenty two Leagues, and thirty from Latera Cruz: Thirdly, La Vera Cruz,
built by the Cortez, a place of great encourse situate near the Gulf, from
whence there is a throughfair to Mexico, from whence it is distant about fifty
two Leagues. In May 83. about nine hundred or a thousand Privateers at Night
landed, and through the negligence of the Spanish Sentinels, surprised the Town
and two Forts, the one of twelve, the other of eight Guns: They plundered the
Town for three days, where they got a great deal of Plate, Jewels, etc. and
might also have taken the Castle, which is seated about three quarters of a
Miles into the Sea, and has thirty Guns mounted.

Saint John de Vlloa, at Vlhua, the most noted Port of this Province, fenced
with a Peer against the fury of the Winds and Sea, defended naturally by Rocks
and Quicksands, and by two Bulworks well fortified on both sides of his
entrance. Famous, for that it was the first beginning of that great Conquest of
the Valiant Cortez: Here he first sunk the Ships that brought the Spaniards
from Cuba, to the intent they might think of nothing but Conquest; and here
five hundred Spaniards ventured against millions of Enemies, and began the
Conquest of the fourth part of the World.

Xalappa de la Vera Cruz, made a Bishops See in the year 1634, said to be worth
ten thousand Ducats a year.

La Rinconada is a House or Inn, which the Spaniards call Venla, seated in a
low Valley, the hottest Place in all the Road to Mexico, plentiful in
Provisions, and the sweetness and coolness of the Water is a great refreshment,
but the swarms of Gnats in the Night are most intolerable.

Segura de la Frontera was built by Cortez in his Wars with the Culhuacans and
Tepeacaes.

Tlaxcallan, a Commonwealth: The Inhabitants whereof in one Battle against
Cortez had 150000 fighting Men, afterward joined with Cortez, and were the
chief Instruments of his unparalled Conquest, being mortal Enemies to
Monte^uma the Mexican Emperor, and therefore are free from Tribute by the Kings
of Spain.

Nixapa is a Town of eight hundred Inhabitants, Spaniards and Indians, where is
a rich Cloister of Dominican Friars, and one of the richest places in the
County of Braxuca.

Tecoantepeque is a small and unfortified Harbor on Mar del Zur.

Aquatulco and Capa^ita are great Towns in a plain Country.

Taponapeque is a sweet and pleasant Town well stored with Flesh, and Fish, and
Fowl.

In this Province are said to be two hundred Towns, one thousand Villages,
twenty five thousand Indians, which are privileged and exempted from all
extraordinary Charge and Imposition, because of their assisting Cortez in his
Conquest of Mexico. In the Valley of St. Paul was a Country Man possessed of
forty thousand Sheep, which were the product of two only, which were brought
him out of Spain.

Guaxaca is a Province of a healthful and a sweet Air, of a fertile Soil, not
only in Corn, but also in Fruit, Cochineil, Silk, Cassia; the Earth well stored
with Mines of Gold, Silver, and other Metals, and most of the Rivers stream
down Sand-Gold.

Its chief places are Antequera, a Bishopric adorned with stately buildings,
and a Magnificent Cathedral Church. Aquatul^o is a noted and convenient Port on
Mar del Zur, from whence is transported the Merchandise of Mexico, to Peru,
plundered both by Drake, and Cavendish in their Voyages about the World.

Gage tells us, that Guaxaca is a City, and Bishops Seat fair and beautiful,
sixty Leagues from Mexico, and consists of two thousand Inhabitants, n t far
from the Head of the great River Alvarado, upon which are Zapote^as and St.
Idlfonso: That from thence they went to Antequera a great Town.

Tavasco or Tabasco, is a Coast of one hundred Leagues between Gu^xaca and
Jucatan, of an excellent Soil, abundant in Maiz, and Cacao. There are Vines,
Fig Trees, Oranges and Citrons, great quantity of Cattle and Fowl, besides wild
Beasts, Apes and Squirrels. The Spaniards have but one Colony here, which is
called Newstra a Signiora de la Victoria, so called from the Victory Cortez
gained 15 9. The first City in America, that defended it self, and suffered the
Spaniards sword.

Jucatan is a Peninsula of about four hundred Leagues in compass, Situate
between the Gulf of Mexico and Honduras, whose Cape Catoche is opposite to
Cape Saint Anthony in the Island Cuba, and distant from it forty odd Leagues.
In the middle of the Land are to be seen Scales and Shells of Sea Fish; its
chief Cities are Merida, distant from the Sea on either side twelve Leagues,
the Seat of the Bishop and Governor, adorned with great and ancient Edifices of
Stone, with many Figures of Men cut in the Stones, resembling those at Merida
in Spain. 2. Valladolid, beautified with a fair Monastery of Franciscans. 3.
Campeach, Situate on the Shore of the Gulf, a fair City of about three
thousand Houses, which in Anno 1596, was surprised and pillaged by the English,
under the Command of Captain Parker, who carried away the Governor, and the
riches of the City.

The Audience of Gaudalajara, or Kingdom of New Galicia, makes the most
occident part of New Spain, and contains the Provinces of Gaudalajara, Xalisco,
Los Zacatecas, Chiamettlan, Culiacan, and New Biscany.

The Air of Gaudalajara is temperate and serene, except in Summer, which is
most troubled with Rain. The Land rather mountainous than plain, very fruitful,
well furnished with Mines of Silver, Copper, Lead and Margasites; the Pastures
are rich, feeding abundance of Cattle, they have Cittrons, Oranges, Figs,
Apples, Pears, Peaches, Olive Trees, whose Fruit is often destroyed by Ants, as
their Corn, Maize and Pulse is by the Pies, which, though no bigger than
Sparrows, are so numerous that they destroy whole Crops.

Its Cities are Guadelajara, the Residence of the Kings Treasurer, dignified
with the Courts of Judicature, the Sea of a Bishop, beautified with a fair
Cathedral Church, watered with many Fountains, and little Torrents not far from
the River Beranja.

In the Province of Xalisco, the chief City is Compostella, built by Guzman
1551. Situate in a Barren Country, and bad Air.

In the Province of Chiametlan is Saint Sebastian, nigh to which are many rich
Silver Mines.

The Province of Culiacan has Saint Michael, and that of Chinaloa Saint John,
where are rich Mines of Silver.

In Los Zicatecas, are several famous Lodges near the Mines, and some Cities,
as Zacatecas, Durango, etc. In new Biscany there are no Cities, but only Mines
of Silver, as Saint John, Barbara and Ends.

The Audience of Gautemala, is divided into these Provinces, Gautemala,
Soconusco, Chiapa, Vera-paz, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costarica, and Veragua.

Gautimala is a Country hot, but rich, subject to Earthquakes, and has
excellent Balms, Amber, Bezar, and Salt and Indigo.

Full of rich Pastures, stocked with Cattle, plenty of Cotton Wool, excellent
Sulphur, store of Medicinal Drugs, and abundance of Fruit, especially Cacao, in
vast plenty, that it lades many Vessels which serves both for Meat and Drink.

Chief Cities are Saint Jago de Gautimala, Situate on a little River betwixt
two Vulcano's, one of Water, the other of Fire; that of Water is higher than
the other, and yields a pleasant Prospect, being almost all the year green, and
full of Indian Wheat, and the Gardens adorned with Roses, Lilies, and other
Flowers all the year, and with many sorts of sweet and delicate Fruit. The
other Vulcan of Fire is more unpleasant, and more dreadful to behold; here are
Ashes for Beauty, Stones and Flints for Fruits and Flowers, for Water
Whisperings and Fountain Murmurs, noise of Thunder, and roaring of consuming
Metals; for sweet and odoriferous Smells, a stink of Fire and Brimstone. Thus
is Gautimala seated between a Paradise and Hell; other chief Towns are Mixco,
Pinola, Petapa, and Amatitlan. The Residence of the Governor, the Seat of the
Bishop, and Court of Audience. In 1541 it was almost overwhelmed by a Deluge of
boiling Water, which descended from that Vulcano, which is near it, out of
which it cast Fire in abundance.

Soconusco has only the little City Guevetlan, on the Coast nothing of
particular, or worthy to be noted in it.

Chiapa is not very fruitful in Corn, or Fruits, but well stocked with lofty
Trees, some yielding Rosin, others precious Gums, and others Leaves, that, when
dried to Powder, make a Sovereign Plaster for sores It Is full of Snakes, and
other venomous Creatures.

Chiapa exceeds most Provinces of America in fair Towns, it is divided into
three parts, viz. Chiapa, Zeldales, and Zoques.

Chief Places are Chiapa Real and Chiapa de Indies, twelve Leagues from the
first upon the River Grejavalva. St. Bartholomews at the foot of the
Cuchumatlanes Mountains, Copanabastla noted for its Cotton Wool.

Near Chiapa are several Fountains which are strange; near Acaxutla is a Well,
whose Water is observed to rise and fall according to the flowing and Ebbing of
the Sea, though far from it; near St. Bartholomews is a pit, into which, if one
cast a stone, though never so small, it makes a noise as great and terrible as a
Clap of Thunder; another Fountain, that for three years together increases,
though there be no Rain, and for three years after diminishes, though there be
never so much; another that falls in rainy weather, and rises in dry; another
that kills Birds and Beasts that drink it, yet cures the Sick.

The entrance into Golfe Dulce is straightened with two Rocks or Mountains on each
side, but within a fine Road and Harbor, wide and capacious to secure a
thousand Ships.

Honduras, or Comayagua, is a Country of pleasant Hills and fruitful Valleys,
has Fruits, Grains, rich Pastures, brave Rivers, and Mines of Gold and Silver,
but its greatest profit is Wool. Its chief places are Vallad l^d, equally
distant between the two Seas, situate in a pleasant fruitful Valley. 2. Gr^tias
a Dios, near the rich Mines of Gold. 3. Saint Juan del po^to de los Cavallos,
once a famous Port. 4. Traxillo, both pillaged by the English.

Nicaragua called Mahomets Paradise, by reason of its fertility and store of
Gold, a Country destitute of Rivers, the want whereof is supplied by a great
Lake, which Ebbs and Flows like the Sea; upon its Banks are seated many
pleasant Cities and Villages, the chief is Leon near unto a Vulcan of Fire
where a Friar, seeking for Treasure, met with the end of his design, and of his
Life, the Residence of the Governor, and Seat of a Bishop. Grenada, beautified
with a fair Church and Castle. Jaen Segovia, and Realeo, near Mar del Zur.

The City Granada is one of the richest places in the India's.

The passage of the Lake Granada, or Nicaragua, called El Desaguadero is very
dangerous.

Costarica, and Veragua, are the two most Eastern Provinces of the Audience of
Gautimala, in the first, are the Cities of Carthage, seated between the two
Seas. In the other, La Conception, La Trinadad, and Sancta Fe, being the place
where the Spaniards melt, refine, and cast their Gold, into Bars and Ingots.

map of New Mexico and California New MEXICO vel New GRANATA et MARATA et
CALIFORNIA by R. Morden.


WEst of Florida, and North of New Spain, there are numerous Inhabitants, and
various Provinces and Countries little known by the Europeans, which I call in
general New Mexico; others comprehend them under the name of New Granada,
however there have been observed diverse people very different in their
Languages, Manners and Customs, some having fixed and settled Habitations,
others wandering after their Flocks, some dwelling in Cities or Towns, others in
Herds or Troops like the Tartars. This Country was first made known to the
Spaniards by the Travels of Friar Marco de Nisa, inflamed by whose reports
Vasquez di Coranado, in the year 1540, undertook the further discovery thereof,
where not finding what they looked for, Gold and Silver, hungry honor yielding
but poor subsistence, the further search of these Countries was quite laid
aside, almost as little known now as before, New Mexico, California, Anian,
Quiviria, and Libola, are the principal parts of it: St. Fe or St. Foy is the
principal City, distant from the the Old Mexico, above five hundred Leagues,
being the Residence of the Spanish Governor, where they have a Garrison and
Silver Mines.

California, once esteemed a Peninsula, now thought to be an Island, extending
in length from the twenty second Degree of Northern Latitude to the forty
second, but the breadth narrow, the Northern Point called Cape Blance, of which
there is little memorable; the most Southern called Cape St. Lucas, remarkable
for the great prize there taken from the Spaniards by Captain Cavendish, in his
Circumnavigation of the World, Anno 1587.

Where is also Nova Albion, discovered by Sir Francis Drake, Anno 1577, and by
him so named in Honor of his own Country, once called Albion, who caused a
Pillar to be erected in the place, on which he fastened the Arms of England.

Opposite to Cape Blanco, and the utmost North parts of America lies the
supposed Kingdom of Anian, from whence the Straits of Anian, which are by some
thought to part Asia and America, do derive their name.

The riches of Quiviria consist in their Oxen, whose Flesh is the ordinary food
of the Inhabitants, their Skins serve them for clothing, their Hair for Thread,
of their Nerves and Sinews they make Cords and Bowstrings; of their Bones they
make Nails and Bodkins; of their Horns Trumpets; of their Bladders, Vessels to
keep Water in, and their Dung when dried serves for Fire.

In Cibola, Granada, Acoma, and some other places the Natives live in
Fortresses upon the Mountains with Palisadoes and Moats, calling their Villages
by the names of their Cacicks, which last no longer than their lives, therefore
to us uncertain.

The River of Nort, which in all other Maps is made to fall into Mar del
Vermejo, or Mar del California, falls with three Mouths into the Mexican Gulf.

map of Florida A Map of FLORIDA and ye Great Lakes of CANADA By Robt. Morden


FLorida was first discovered by the English, under the Conduct of Sebastian
Cabot, 1479. Afterward, farther searched into by John Depony a Spaniard, who
took possession of it in the name of that King 1527, by him called Florida: Its
Coast is on the Gulf of Mexico, which flows on its South; it extends it self
now from the River Palmas, which bounds it on the Province of Panuco, in New
Spain, unto Bay Saint Matheo, on Mar del Nort between this Gulf and the Sea.

Florida stretches out a Peninsula toward the South, where the Cape of Florida
is not distant from the Island Cuba, above thirty five or forty Leagues. Others
only give the name of Florida, to the Peninsula of Tegeste, which advances to
the South, and contributes to form the Great Gulf of Mexico, and the Chanel of
Bahama. The Air of Florida and Carolina is so temperate, that Men live to the
Age of two hundred and fifty years, while the Children of five Generations are
all alive at the same time. The Soil is very fertile, full of Fruit Trees, and
the Towns the best peopled in all America. The principal River is that of the
Holy Ghost, which falls into the Gulf of Mexico. The Coast is very
inconvenient for great Vessels, by reason of the shallowness of the Water. The
Inland Country is possessed by the Savages, under the Jurisdiction of
Paroustis, who are their Lords. They are of an Olive Color, great Stature,
well proportionable their Hair black and long, their Women of good shape and
handsome, they adore the Sun, and the Moon, and though they make War one with
another, nevertheless the Europeans cannot master them.

They have public places, where they meet for the distribution of Corn, which
they give to every Family that stands in need of it. The Spaniards are
possessed upon the Coast of Saint Austins, and Saint Mathews, two
inconsiderable Colonies, though there is a Castle belonging to each of them.
Saint Austin is of most consequence, by reason of the Bahama, through which the
Spanish Fleets usually pass, when they return from Havana into Europe. The
Situation of this County may be seen in the Map; containing all those Lakes and
Rivers of Canada, as they have of late years been discovered by the French and
English. I had long waited for a new Description of the Country, and of those
vast Inland Seas and Rivers, so advantagiously situated for Trade and Commerce,
that it must needs be one of the finest Plantations in the World. But at
present, the Proprietors, and those that are concerned, are not willing to
publish any thing of it, and therefore I must be silent.

map of Carolina A New Map of CAROLINA By Robert Morden


CArolina about the year 1660, was by his Majesty, the King of Great Britain,
etc. united to his Imperial Crown, and he by his Royal Grant established it a
Province or Proprietorship, dignified it a Principality, and granted it by
Patent to the Lord Chancellor Clarendon, to the Lord Duke of Albemarle, to the
Earl of Craven, to the Lord Ashley Cooper Earl of Shaftsbury, to John Lord
Barkley, to Sir William Barkley, and to Sir John Colleton Knight and Baronet,
and to their Heirs and Successors, etc.

It contains that part of the Continent of America, which by the French was
called Florida from her florid and fragrant Fields, verdant Meadows, delightful
Savana's guarded with stately Woods. It extends it self from the River St.
Matheo to Caratue, inlet near Virginia.

In this large Tract of Land are many Navigable Rivers, the chief whereof are
Albemarle River, Naratoke River, Pentego River, Neuse or Nus River, Clarendon
River, Watere River, Craven or Santee River, Ashley River, Cooper River, Stono
River, Edisto River, Colleton River, Cambabe and Westro River, May and Matheo
River, many safe, commodious and spacious Harbors, and for lesser Rivers and
Brooks it has innumerable.

It contains two principal settlements, the one called Albemarle, otherwise
Roanoke situated in about thirty five Degrees of Northern Latitude, from whence
as good Beef and Pork have been stored, and sent to other Plantations as Art
and Industry can improve, it is a large and spacious settlement, consisting at
present of some two or three hundred upon a fertile Soil. But the late and
flourishing Plantation or Settlement lies more Southerly, upon the Navigable
Rivers of Ashley and Cooper, known to the Natives by the Names of Wando and
Kiawah.

Carolina is of a fertile and fruitful Soil, where the Natives are a strong,
lively, and well-shapen People, well-humor'd, and generally kind to the
English. They live a long and pleasant life, taking little care for the future.
Their old Women plant their Mays: And for the rest, the Rivers afford them good
Fish enough. And in the Woods they have plenty of Provisions. Its chief place
is Charles Town.

Neither is the heat so sultry nor offensive as in places of the same Latitude
of the old World; nor is the Winter so pinching: Yet enough to correct the
humors of Men's Bodies, to strengthen and preserve them in health; and enough
also to put such a stop to the Rise and Sap, and the budding of Plants, as to
make them Bud and Blossom in their distinct Seasons, and keep even pace till
they be gathered. Which makes it also proper for Wine and Oil; of both which
they may in time have good quantities.

Liberty of Conscience is there allowed also; but Atheism, Irreligion and
vicious Lives are condemned. The English Proprietors have a Register of all
Grants and Conveyances of Land to prevent Suits and Controversies. And in sum,
their frame of Government is generally so well put together, that judicious Men
that have seen it, say, it is the best for the People that live under it of any
they have read.

To conclude, here the Savana's are crowded with Deer, large and stately Herds
and Cattle parol the Meadows. Here the pleasant Pastures abound with Sheep and
Oxen, the Fields are replenished with English and Indian Corn. The Gardens, as
in Asia and Europe, are imbellished with the choicest Fruits and Flowers: Here
the Heavens shine with a Sovereign ray of Health, a serene Air and a lofty Sky
defends it from the noxious Infections, and common Distempers that are incident
to other parts of the World. In a word, it is a salubrious Air to the Sick, a
generous retirement and shelter to the injured and oppressed. It Is a Fund and
Treasury to them that would be Rich.

map of Virginia A New Map of VIRGINIA. By Robt: Morden


NO sooner had Colonus, alias Columbus, made his prime discovery of the Western
World, when seconded by John Cabot a Venetian, the Father of Sebastian Cabot,
in behalf, by the encouragement, and at the charges of Henry the Seventh, King
of England, who in the year 1497 discovered all this Coast from the Cape of
Florida in the South, beyond New Foundland; in the North as far as to the
Latitude of 67 and half: Causing the Sachims or Petit-Kings to turn Homagers to
the King and Crown of England.

This discovery by the two Cabots, Father and Son, did first entitle he Crown
of England, to the right of that vast Tract of Land.

This design was after seconded by Mr. Hare, bringing thence certain of the
said Petit-Kings, who did homage to King Henry the Eight.

Rediscovered by the Direction, and at the charge of Sir Walter Rawleigh, Anno
1584; who sending Mr. Philip Amadas, and Mr. Arthur Barlow, did take possession
thereof in Queen Elizabeth's name; in honor of whom, he caused all the said
Tract of Land to be called Virginia.

Some say, it was so called by the Queen her self, by the Natives called
Apalchen, but Virginia is now circumscribed by that space of Land that lies
between Maryland, which bounds it on the North, and Carolina on the South.
New England, New York, New Jersey, Maryland, Carolina and Pensilvania, have
since been separated from it by particular Patents, and made distinct Provinces
of themselves.

The entrance by Sea into this Country, is by the Mouth of the Bay of
Chesapeac, between Cape Henry and Cape Charles.

The chief Rivers of Virginia, are, 1. Powhatan, now called James River, on the
West side of the mouth of the Bay of Chesapeac; this River is at its entrance
about three Miles wide, and Navigable about one hundred and fifty Miles. 2.
Pamaunkee, termed York River, fourteen Miles Northward from James River;
Navigable now sixty or seventy Miles, but with small Vessels about thirty or
forty Miles farther. 3. Rappahanoc, anciently known by the name of Toppahanoc,
Navigable about one hundred and thirty Miles. Besides these Navigable and more
principal Rivers, there are other smaller Rivers, and of less note, which fall
into some, or other of the forementioned: Into Powhattan falls Apumatuc
Southward; Eastward Quyonycahanuc, Nunsamund and Chesopeac; Northward
Chick^mabania. Into Pamuunkee fall Poyankatank.

That part of the Country now planted by the English, is divided into Nineteen
Counties, viz. On the Eastern Shore, the Country of Northampton in Acomack; on
the Western Shore the Counties of Caratuck, Lower-Norfolk, Nansemund, Isle of
Wight, Surry, Warwick, Henrico, James, Charles, York, New-Kent, Gloucester,
Middlesex, Lancaster, Northumberland, Westmoreland, Rappahanock, and Hartford.
Of the few Towns hitherto erected in this Colony, the chief is James Town, the
principal seat of the English, and so denominated from and in honor of, King
James of Great Britain. This Town is situated in a Peninsula, on the North-side
of James-River, and has in it many fair Houses, whereof some are of Brick; and
at a little distant from the City is a fair Brick House called Green-Spring,
when e the present Governor himself usually resides. The other English Towns of
most considerable note are only three, viz. Henricopolis, or Henry's Town,
situated about eighty Miles from James's City, farther within Land; Dales Gift,
so named, from Sir Thomas Dale, Deputy Governor, in the year 1610, at whose
charges it was built and planted; and Elizabeth's City, containing several good
Houses of Brick and Stone, and lying on the same side of the River with James's
City, only nearer the mouth of the River.

Though English, and other Foreign Coyns, are not wholly wanting here upon
several occasions, yet the usual way of Traffic, is, by exchange of one
Commodity for another; but the general Standard, by which all other Commodities
receive their value, is Tobacco; which of all other Commodities this Country is
capable of producing, has been hitherto the Subject of the Planters Industry,
of which there are two sorts, one called Sweet-Scented, the other called
Oranoac, which signifies as much as bright and large; the first is of the
greatest price, the other more in quantity. The Plantations that are judged to
produce the best sort of Sweet-Scented, are upon York River; Of this Commodity
of Tobacco, there is so great a quantity planted in Virginia, and imported from
thence into England, that the Custom and Excise paid for it in England, yields
the King about 50000 or 60000 Pound Sterling yearly; for there are bound hither
every year above one hundred and fifty Sail of Ships from England, and other
English Plantations, merely for the taking off of this Commodity, which they
barter for Clothing, Household Stuff, and all manner of Utensils, and the only
thing which lessens the value of it, is the great quantity that is planted of
it, which if it were in less abundance, it would be of much more esteem, and
yield far greater profit.

The Government of Virginia is by a Governor and Council, deputed and
authorized from time to time by the King of Great Britain; the Legislative
Power being in the Governor, and a General Assembly which he calls to advise
with; and which consists of two Houses, the upper House which is the Council it
self, and the lower which consists of chosen Bug^sses.

The chief Court of Judicature, where all Civil and Criminal Causes are heard
and determined, and where the Governor and Council are Judges, is called the
Quarter-Court, as being held every quarter of a year. There are also Inferior
Courts which are kept every Month in each of the forementioned Counties, where
matters not of the highest moment, that is to say, not relating to Life or
Member, or exceeding a certain limited value are tried, and from whence in such
Cases Appeals are made to the Quarter Courts. There are likewise appointed by
the Governor, for the better administration of Justice in every respective
Country, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, and other Officers, of whom being deputed
by the Governor to sit there, these Country-Courts chiefly consist.

The Climate of Virginia is generally healthful, and since the rectification of
Diet and Lodging, not disagreeable to English Bodies; however at the first
Plantation they were subject to a Distemper called a Seasoning, though of late
not frequent, and much less mortal.

A Description of Maryland.
Maryland is a large and fertile Province lying between thirty eight Degrees,
and forty Degrees of North Latitude upon both sides, of Cheasa-peak-Bay, which
is Navigable near two hundred Miles. The Southerly Banks of the River
Patow-meck divide it from Virginia on the South. The Atlantic Ocean and
Delaware Bay bounds it on the East, Pensilvania on the North, and the Meridian
of the first Fountain of the River Patow-meck on the West.

This Province of Maryland, his Majesty King Charles the First, Anno 1632,
granted by Patent to the Right Honorable Caecilius Calvert Lord Baltemore, and
to his Heirs and Assigns, and by that Patent created him, and them the true and
absolute Lords, and Proprietors of the same (saving the Allegiance and
Sovereign Dominion due to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors;) likewise
granting thereby to them all Royal Jurisdictions and Perogatives, both Military
and Civil; as Power of enacting Laws, making of War and Peace, pardoning
Offenses, conferring of Honors, Coining of Money, etc. and in acknowledgements
thereof yielding and paying yearly to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors two
Indian Arrows at Windsor Castle, on Easter Tuesday, together with the fifth
part of all the Gold and Silver Ore that shall be there found.

The Rivers of Maryland are Patowmeck, Patuxent, Ann Arundel, alias Severn,
Sasquesahanough, Choptanke, Nantecoke, Pocomoke, with several other lesser
Rivers and Rivulets, to the great Improvement of the Country, and Beauty of the
Province, which is now very healthful and agreeable to the Constitutions of the
English. And such is the temperature of the Air, that the Heats in Summer are
so allayed by gentle Breezes, and fresh Showers of Rain, and the Cold in Winter
is so small and short, that the Inhabitants are not incommoded by either.

The Country is generally plain and even, yet not without its small and
pleasant Hills, which heighten the Beauty of the adjacent Valleys. The Soil
rich and fertile, naturally producing all such Commodities as are found in New
England or Virginia, or in any other part of this Continent.

The Government of Mary Land is by his Lordships Care and Prudence brought to a
good Order and Settlement, and framed much after the Model of the Government in
England. Upon Emergent Occasions, his Lordships Governor there advises with
the two Estates of the Province, which consist of an upper and lower House, and
is called a General Assembly the upper House consists of the Governor and
Council, and such Lords of Manors, and others, as his Lordship or his
Lieutenant shall by Writ from time to time call thither; and the lower House
consists of Delegates, chosen by Inhabitants in the respective Counties in the
said Province; which Assembly his Lordship, or his Lieutenant, Convenes,
Prerogues, or Dissolves at pleasure; and whatsoever is Decreed or Enacted by
this Assembly, with his Lordships assent, is of the same force there as an Act
of Parliament is in England, and cannot pass or be repealed without the
concurring assent of his Lordship, with the other two Estates.

Next to this Legislative Council, is the Provincial Court, which is held every
quarter of a year at St. Mary's City; this is the chief Court of Judicature,
where the most important Judicial Causes are tried; of which, in the absence of
the Lord Proprietary, the Lieutenant, or Governor, and Council are Judges; and
this is for the whole Province; but for each particular County (for a great
part of the Province where any English Men are seated, is divided into ten
Counties) there are other inferior Courts which are held six times of the year,
in each of these Counties, for the Trial of Causes not relating to Life, nor
exceeding the value of three thousand weight of Tobacco; with Appeals from them
to the Provincial Court.

Of the ten Counties, five lie on the West side of the Bay of Cheasapeack,
(viz.) St. Mary's, Charles, Calvert, Ann A^undel and Baltimore Counties; the
other five on the Eastern Shore, (viz.) Somerset, Dorchester, Talbot, Cecil,
and Kent, Counties; in some of which there are several Towns built, as
Calverton, Harrington and Harvy-Town; on the East side of St. George's River,
is St. Mary's City, the Original and chief Town of this Province, where the
General Assemblies meet, and the Provincial Courts are kept, and also the
Secretaries Office, it being erected into the Privilege of a City, by the name
of St. Mary's, which gives denomination to that County. The Ground plat of a
Fort and Prison was long since laid here, upon a point of Land termed
Windmill-Point, (from a Windmill which formerly stood there) being a very
proper situation for the commanding of St. George's River; this Fort will make
a secure Harbor for Ships to ride in from all danger of Hostile and Piratical
Invasions.

Besides the House which belongs to the Governor there, by the name of St.
John's in this City, the present Governor, Mr. Charles Calvert, his Lordships
Son and Heir, has of late years built him a very fair House, partly of Brick,
partly of Timber, where he and his Family usually reside, about eight Miles
from St. Mary's at Mattapany.

The Natives of this Country are generally well proportioned, and able-bodied
Men, delighting chiefly in Hunting, being generally excellent Marks-Men, while
the Women not only manage their Domestic Affairs, but also Tillage,
Plantation, and all manner of improvement of their Land.

To conclude; the Impeopling and Trade of this Province, by the vast Expense,
Care and Industry of the Lord Proprietary, has been improved to that height,
that in the year 1670, there were reckoned near twenty thousand English planted
there.

And that which keeps them together in the greatest Peace, Order, and Concord
imaginable, is the Liberty of Conscience, which his Lordship in prudence allows
to all persons that profess Christianity, though of different Persuasions, so
that every Man lives quietly and securely with his Neighbor, neither molesting,
nor being molested for difference of Judgment in Religion; which Liberty is
established there by an Act of Assembly, with his Lordships consent to continue
for ever.

map of New Jersey A New Map of New JARSEY and PENSILVANIA By Robt. Morden


FOR the Province, the general Condition of it take as follows:

I. The Country it self in its Soil, Air, Water, Seasons, and produce, both
Natural and Artificial, is not to be despised. The Land contains diverse sorts
of Earth. God in his Wisdom having ordered it so, that the advantages of the
Country are divided.

II. The Air is sweet and clear, the Heavens serene, like the Southparts of
France, rarely overcast; and as the Woods come by numbers of People to be more
cleared, that it self will Refine.

III. The Waters are generally good, for the Rivers and Brooks have mostly
Gravel and Stony Bottoms, and in Number hardly credible. We have also Mineral
Waters, that operate in the same manner with Barnet and North-hall, not two
Miles from Philadelphia.

IV. For the Seasons of the Year. First, Of the Fall, I found it from the 24th
of October, to the beginning of December, as we have it usually in England in
September, or rather like an English mild Spring. From December to the
beginning of the Month called March, we had sharp frosty Weather; not foul,
thick, black Weather, as our North-East Winds bring with them in England; but a
Sky as clear as in Summer, and the Air dry, cold, piercing and hungry. The
reason of this Cold is given from the great Lakes that are fed by the Fountains
of Canada. The Winter before was as mild, scarce any Ice at all; while this for
a few days Froze up our great River Delaware. From that Month to the Month
called June, we enjoyed a sweet Spring, no Gusts, but gentle Showers, and a
fine Sky. From thence to this present Month, which ends Summer, (commonly
speaking) we have had extraordinary Heats, yet mitigated sometimes by cool
Breezes. And whatever Mists, Fogs or Vapors foul the Heavens by Easterly or
Southerly Winds, in two hours time are blown away by the North-West; the one is
always followed by the other: A Remedy that seems to have peculiar Providence
in it to the Inhabitants.

V. The natural produce of the Country, of Vegetables, is Trees, Fruits,
Plants, Flowers. The Trees of most note are, the Black-Walnut, Cedar, Cyprus,
Chestnut, Poplar, Gumwood, Hickery, Sassafrax, Ash, Beech and Oak of diverse
sorts, as Red, White and Black; Spanish Chestnut and Swamp, the most durable, of
all which there is plenty for the use of Man.

The Fruits that I find in the Woods are the White and Black Mulbery, Chestnut,
Walnut, Plums, Strawberries, Cranberries, Hurtleberries, and Grapes of diverse
sorts. The great red Grape is in it self an extraordinary Grape, and by Art
doubtless may be cultivated to an excellent Wine, if not so sweet, yet little
inferior to the Frontiniack, as it is not much unlike in taste. There is a
white kind of Muskedel, and a little black Grape, like the Cluster Grape of
England, not yet so ripe as the other; but they tell me, when ripe, sweeter,
and that they only want skilful Vinerous to make good use of them. Here are
also Peaches, and very good, and in great quantities, not an Indian Plantation
without them; but whether naturally here at first, I know not, however, one may
have them by Bushels for little; they make a pleasant Drink, and I think not
inferior to any Peach you have in England, except the true Newington.

VI. The Artificial produce of the Country, is Wheat, Barley, Oats, Rye, Pease,
Beans, Squashes, Pumkins, Water-Melons, Musk-Melons, and all Herbs and Roots
that our Gardens in England usually bring forth.

VII. of living Creatures; Fish Fowl, and the Beasts of the Woods here are
diverse sorts, some for Food and Profit, and some for Profit only.

VIII. We have no want of Horses, and some are very good and shapely enough,
two Ships have been freighted to Barbados with Horses and Pipe-staves, since
my coming in. Here is also plenty of Cow-Cattel, and some Sheep; the People
plow mostly with Oxen.

IX. There are diverse Plants, that only not the Indians tells us, but we have
had occasion to prove by Swellings, Burnings, Cuts, etc. that they are of great
Virtue, suddenly curing the Patient: And for smell, I have observed several,
especially one, the wild Myrtle; the other I know not what to call, but are
most fragrant.

X. The Woods are adorned with lovely Flowers, for Color, Greatness, Figure
and Variety: I have seen the Gardens of London best stored with that sort of
Beauty, but think they may be improved by our Woods.

XI. The first Planters in these parts were the Dutch, and soon after them the
Sweeds and Finns. The Dutch applied themselves to Traffic, the Sweeds and
Finns to Husbandry.

XII. The Dutch inhabit mostly those parts of the Province that lie upon or
near to the Bay, and the Sweeds the Freshes of the River Delaware. As they are
People proper and strong of Body, so they have fine Children, and almost every
House full; rare to find one of them without three or four Boys, and as many
Girls; some six, seven and eight Sons: And I must do that right, I see few
young Men more sober and laborious.

XIII. The Dutch have a Meeting Place for Religious Worship at New Castle; and
the Sweeds three, one at Christiana, one at Tenecum, and one at Wicoco, within
half a Mile of this Town.

XIV. The Country lies bounded on the East, by the River and Bay of Delaware,
and Eastern Sea; it has the advantage of many Creeks or Rivers rather, that
run into the main River or Bay; some Navigable for great Ships, some for small
Craft: Those of most Eminency are Christiana, Brandywine, Skillpot, and
Skulkill; any one of which have room to lay up the Royal Navy of England, there
being from four to eight Fathom Water.

XV. The lesser Creeks or Rivers, yet convenient for Sloops and Ketches of good
burden, are Lewis, Mespilion, Cedar, Dover, Cranbrook, Feversham, and Georges
below, and Chichester, Chester, Toacawny, Pemmapecka, Portquessin, Neshimenek
and Pennberry in the Freshes; many lesser that admit Boats and Shallops. Our
People are most settled upon the upper Rivers, which are pleasant and sweet, and
generally bounded with good Land. The planted part of the Province and
Territories is cast into six Counties Philadelphia, Buckingham, Chester, New
Castle, Kent, and Sussex, containing about four thousand Souls. Two General
Assemblies have been held, and with such Concord and Dispatch, that they sat
but three Weeks, and at least seventy Laws were past without one Dissent in any
material thing. And for the well Government of the said Counties, Courts of
Justice are estabisht in every County, with proper Officers, as Justices,
Sheriffs, Clarks, Constables, etc. which Courts are held every two Months: But
to prevent Law Suits, there are three Peacemakers chosen by each County Court,
in the nature of Common Arbitrators, to hear differences betwixt Man and Man;
and Spring and Fall there is an Orphans Court in each County, to inspect and
regulate the Affairs of Orphans and Widows.

XVI. Philadelphia, the expectation of those that are concerned in this
Province, is at last laid out to the great content of those here, that are any
ways interested therein: The Situation is a Neck of Land, and lies between two
Navigable Rivers, Delaware and Skulkill, whereby it has two Fronts upon the
Water, each a Mile, and two from River to River. Delaware is a glorious River,
but the Skulkill being an hundred Miles Boatable above the Falls, and its
course North-East toward the Fountain of Susquahannab (that tends to the heart
of the Province, and both sides our own) it is like to be a great part of the
settlement of this Age. But this I will say for the good Providence of God,
that of all the many places I have seen in the World, I remember not one better
seared; so that it seems to me to have been appointed for a Town, whether we
regard the Rivers, or the convenience of the Coves, Docks, Springs the
loftiness and soundness of the Land and the Air, held by the People of these
parts to be very good.

Of West New Jarsey.
THIS Province of West Jarsey, with that called East Jarsey, among other Tracts
of Lands and Territories, was granted by the late King to the present King
James the Second, (when Duke of York) and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever;
who granted the whole Premises entire unto John Lord Berkley, and Sir George
Carteret to be holden in common. And the Lord Berkley being minded to dispose
of his Moiety or half part, Edward Byllynge bought the same of him. Whereupon
that each Party might hold their Country in severalty, it was mutually agreed
by Sir George Carteret, and the said Edward Byllynge, that a partition should
be made thereof: The which was accordingly done by Deed interchangeable
enrolled; which Partition begins on the West side of a certain place upon the
South Sea, called by the Name of Little Eag Harbor, and which runs from thence
by a straight Line to the most Northerly Extent of the whole Premises: Upon
which Partition it was agreed, that Carterets part should be called the
Province of the East New Jarsey, and Byllynges part should be called the
Province of West New Jarsey. East Jarsey is bounded from the Line of Partition
Eastward, part with the Main Ocean, and part with Hudsons River (which
separates it from New York.) And West Jarsey from the said Partition Line
expands it self Southward and Westward, unto that famous Bay and River of
Delaware; which also separates that Province from Pensilvania, in which Bay and
River, its well known Ships of the greatest Burden may Ride at Anchor, and pass
with safety a hundred Miles up into the Country: And in which River, from the
Mouth of the Bay, are not less than twenty Creeks and Harbors, some whereof
issuing five, ten, fifteen, if not twenty Miles into the Province. The
Partition being thus made of the two Provinces. The Government of West Jarsey
was thereupon given and granted by the present King, when Duke of York, unto
the abovenamed Edward Byllynge, and his Heirs, with the same Jurisdictions,
Powers, Authorities and Government, as fully and amply to all intents and
purposes, as the same was granted to him, his Heirs and Assigns, by the late
King his Brother, who was also pleased to approve thereof by Publication, under
the Royal Signet and Sign Manual, Thereby, and therein, commanding the present
and future Inhabitants, within the Limits of the said Province, to yield all
due Regard and Obedience unto him, the said Edward Byllynge as their Governor,
and to his Heirs, Deputies, Agents, etc. This Province from the Mouth of
Delaware Bay, along by the Sea side, to the Line of the Partition, appears in
the Map to be about sixty Miles in breadth: And from the Mouth of the said Bay,
to the Head or most Northerly Branch of the River of Delaware, likewise appears
to be about two hundred and fifty Miles in length.

This Province is divided into one hundred Shares or Proprieties, as may be
seen by the Registered Deeds of every person or persons, who have already
purchased a whole or part of a Propriety jointly with others, which Register is
kept by Herbert Springet in George yard in Lumbard-street, London; unto whom
any persons, who are minded to buy one or more Proprieties, may repair: The
said Edward Byllynge having above twenty of those hundred yet to sell. As to
the Government, out of each Propriety, a Freeholder is to be Annually chosen
by the Inhabitants thereof, and to Meet and Sit as a General Assembly upon a
day certain every year, which with the Governor, or his lawful Deputies are the
Legislative Power of the Province to make and alter Laws in all times coming:
But not contrary, or in any wise repugnant, to Liberty of Conscience in Matters
of Faith toward God, or the Religious Exercise thereof: Liberty and Property,
both as Men and Christians being established in West New Jarsey, by an
irrevocable Fundamental Law, never to be extinguished or invaded by any
subsequent Law hereafter to be made whatsoever: As also not any the least Tax,
Talledge, Subsidy, Rates or Services, to be imposed upon the People; but by
the consent of these their Representatives in the General Assemblies. The Towns
and Plantations already settled in this Province, for the most part are upon
that Noble and Navigable River of Delaware, or upon some Creek or Harbor
contiguous thereunto, or upon the South Sea. And upon both, are the like
conveniences for thousands of more Families. Its chief Towns and Rivers are
noted in the Map: And it certainly enjoys all the advantages that the other
parts do.

The Description of East New Jarsey.
THE Province of East New Jarsey lies next to New York Southwestward, having on
the South, the Main Ocean, on the East, that well-known Bay for Shipping,
within Sandy Hook, to the North, part of the Province of New York and New
Albany, and is bounded by that vast Navigable Stream, called Hudsons River, to
the forty one Degree of Northern Latitude, and from thence crossing over in a
straight Line, extending to the most Northern Branch or Part of Delaware River;
then to the West, West Jarsey, from which divided by a partition Line; it takes
its beginning from a place upon the South-Coast, called Little Egg-Harbor; and
so runs in a straight Line to the aforesaid Northernmost Branch of Delaware
River. This Province is very pleasant and healthful, a great part of the back
Land lying high.

As to the Trees, Fruits, and most other products, its not inferior to any of
the neighboring Colonies. And for the fertility of Soil, fresh Water-Rivers,
Brooks, and pleasant Springs, it is highly esteemed.

The Country along Rariton-River, is a place so delightful, and fruitful, that
Ogilby in his Volumn of America, folio 181, 182, many years ago has given the
World an extraordinary account thereof.

The Situation of this Province has a very great and apparent advantage, for it
lies even in the Center of all the English Plantations on that Continent, near
to an equal distance from the South-parts of Carolina, and the North of
Pemaquid, the aforesaid Bay of Sandy-Hooke being very notable, both for the
convenience and security of any number of Ships: And the Seacoasts of this
Province are very commodious both for Trade and Fishing; especially the Whale
Fishing.

Within the said Bay, upon the North side of the Mouth of Rariton River, there
is an excellent Tract of Ground, called Amboy Point, where a Town or City is
building, called Perth: In which Town, several good Houses are already built,
and inhabited, and more daily are building, by the Proprietors and others, that
are come to settle there. Nothing can be better and more advantagiously
situated than this place for a Town of Trade, which lies about sixteen Miles
within the aforesaid Bay, into which there may go in Ships of the greatest
Burden, and come out again at all Seasons, as well in Winter time as in Summer,
and lie safe in Harbor, without any inconvenience of Winds or Tides, and close
to the Wharf before the Houses; in this Town of Perth, can lie Ships of three
or four hundred Tun, with their fasts on Shore at low Water.

There is besides the forementioned New Town, seven Towns more built in this
Province, viz. Elizabeth Town, Newark, Woodbridge, Piscataway, Bergen,
Middletoune and Shrewsbury, in which, and in the out Plantations, many thousand
People are settled, who possess their Lands, etc. some by purchase, most upon
very easy Rents, payable to the present Proprietors, there being all sorts of
excellent ^ands undisposed of, enough to plant many more thousands of Families,
who shall desire to transport themselves thither.

As to the right, which the twenty four Proprietors have to this Country, it is
derived from the Title of the late Sir George Carteret, by conveyance from the
Earl of Bath, and other Trustees, joining with the Lady Carteret, and is since
granted and confirmed in the year ^^82, to them, their Heirs and Assigns for
ever, by his present Majesty King James the Second, under his Hand and Seal,
with all the Royalties, Powers and Governments thereof. The late King Charles
the Second, was also pleased to approve of the said Grant and Confirmation, by
publication under his Royal Signet, and Sign Manual, dated 23d of November
1683. therein, and thereby, commanding all Planters, and Inhabitants within the
Limits of the said Province, to yield all due Regard and Obedience to the said
Proprietors, their Deputies, Agents, etc, 1686.

In this Province are some Noblemen, and several Gentlemen of the Scotch Nation
interested, (as well as those of England) some of which are gone themselves,
and Families, and are settled there, and many hundred others are sent from
thence, who have made good Farms and Plantations there, and sundry persons are
concerned in Shares under several of the Proprietors, some have half, some a
quarter, others an eighth, or tenth Share, etc. and these have Tracts of Land
laid out to them by the Surveyor General, according to the proportions of their
respective Interest, upon their sending over Families and Servants to settle
there.

The Traders in the Towns being furnished with such Goods and Merchandise from
England, as are proper for those Parts, where the ^lanters and Farmers may be
supplied with all such necessaries: They having good Stocks of Corn and Cattle,
not only for Commutation at home, but for Exportation abroad, to other places
that want. The Town of Newark alone, in one year, made ready a thousand Barrels
of good Cider out of the Orchards of their own Planting. And the Town of
Woodbridge above five hundred Barrels of Pork, this Province affording Corn and
Cattle, and other product to ship off to the Caribbe Islands, etc. to supply
those Neighbors, who have not that plenty.

In this Province of East Jarsey is this further encouragement, there is such
good Provision made for Liberty of Conscience, and Property in Estate, by the
Fundamental Constitutions or great Charter, on behalf of all the Inhabitants,
as Men and Christians, that very many from other parts of America, as well as
from Europe, have chosen to go thither to live, where they do not only quietly
and freely enjoy their Estates, but also an uninterrupted freedom in the
Exercise of their Religion, according to their particular Persuasions.

Such as desire to Transport Themselves and Families, or be otherways concerned
in this Colony, may be directed at the Sign of the Star in George Yard in
Lombard Street, where, and when, to meet with some of the Proprietors, who will
give them further Information.

map of New England and New York A New Map of NEW ENGLAND and NEW YORK By Robt.
Morden.


NEw England is a vast Tract of Land, happily Situated, reaching from forty to
forty five Degrees of Northern Latitude in the middle of the Temperate Zone,
and parallel to some part of Italy, in the Eastern Hemispere.

The Country for many Miles it not Mountainous, yet intermixed with pleasant
Collines, Plains and Meadows.

For Rivers, it has in its largest extent Delaware River, navigable one
hundred and thirty Miles: Hudsons River Navigable above one hundred Miles:
Connecticut River Navigable above fifty Miles, Marimeck River, Pascataway, and
many others conveniently Navigable; and for less Rivers and Brooks, you can
hardly travel a few Miles without passing one.

The Soil is fruitful, and yields Wheat, Rye, Pease, Beans, Barley, Oats,
Indian Corn, Flax, Hemp, and all sorts of English Herbs, and excellent Simples
proper for the Country. For Food, it has Beef, Pork, Mutton, plentiful,
besides Goats, Deer, etc. For Fish, Fowl, and good Cider, it excels, with good
Cellarage to preserve all, which is not common in Virginia. The South side of
their Houses are in many places begirt with Hives of Bees, which increase very
much.

For Fruit, it has Apples, Pears, Plums, Quinces, Cherries, Apricoks, Peaches
in standing Trees, and many sorts of wild Blew, Black and White Grapes, and
their wild white Muscadine Grape makes a pleasant Wine.

For Timber, it has several sorts of Oak, and their white Swamp Oak; (whereof
they have great quantities) is esteemed near as tough as any in Europe, besides
Walnut, Ash, Pine, Cedar, etc.

For Trade, they have all sorts of Provisions for the Belly, as of Flesh, Fish,
and all Grain, as Corn, Pease, etc. And Masts for Ships, Dealboards, Iron, Tar,
Bever, Moose-skins, Furs, and some hundred Vessels and Ships of their own, and
Merchants who disperse their commodities to the West Indies, and from thence to
England.

The Country is capable of many other Commodities, as Wine, Salt, Brandy, etc.
When labor grows more cheap by the farther increase of their own Children, or
purchase of Negros. They have many Towns supplied with good Ministers, and have
two Colleges at Cambridge; they train their Youth when past sixteen year old,
and so make them bold and resolute.

As to their Government, they had fourteen Magistrates, and were not to exceed
eighteen Assistants by their Patent, whereof one is annually chosen Governor,
and another Deputy Governor by the People, who are jealous of the infringment
of their Privileges.

For Religion, they are Protestants, much as Perkins, they pray for the King,
and the English Nation, and for the Protestant Religion throughout the World.
As to the Weather, the old Planters say, that fifty years since, when the
Country was not so much opened (by the felling of the Woods) they had much more
heat in Summer, and more cold in Winter, then they had since; and that they
find the Winters still lessen as the Country is more opened. Their Winter
begins in December, and commonly ends in February. The North West Winds blow
very keen, and sometimes hold forty eight hours. After that with the change of
the Wind, they have moderate Weather. So they reckon to have ten or twelve cold
days in a Winter, which days are colder than in the same Climate in Europe.

Their Summer is hotter, and that heat more certain, and yet more tolerable
than this of England, being moderated and allayed with often Breezes; and is
very peculiar and agreeable to the Bodies of those of our Nation, the Air being
most generally serene, sweet and exceeding healthy. And if any Fogs arise, the
North West and West Winds do quickly disperse them; and the Country sends forth
such a fragant smell that it may be perceived ere we make Land.

The Metropolis of New England is Boston, commodiously seated for Traffic on
the Seashore, a very large and spacious Town, or indeed City, composed of
several well-ordered Streets, and adorned with fair and beautiful Houses, well
inhabited by Merchants and Tradesmen; it is also a place of good strength,
having several Fortifications raised on the Hills adjoining, well mounted with
great Pieces, and well guarded. Secondly Cambridge, formerly Newtown, is
beautified with two Colleges, and diverse fair and well built Houses, other
Towns are Amsbury, Andover, Barnstable, Beverly, Billerica, Bradford, Braintre,
Bridgwater, Charlestown, Chensford, Concord, Dartmouth, Dedham, Dorchester,
Deerfeild, Dover, Duxbury, Exeter, Eastham, Falmouth, Gloucester, Grotton,
Hadfield, Hadly, Hampton, Hartford, Haveril, Hingbam, Hull, Ipswich, Kenecbeck,
Keteri, Lancaster, Lime, Lin, London, Maldon, Manchester, Marshfield, Malborow,
Mendon, Medfield, Milton, Midleton, Monimoy, Newbury, Newton, Newport,
Northamton, Norwich, Penicock, Portsmouth, Plymouth, Providence, Portsmouth in
Rode Island, Reding, Rowly, Roxbury, Salsbury, Salem, Sandwich, Saybrook,
Scarborougb, Situate, Seaconk, Springfield, Stoniton, Squabaug, Squabeey,
Sudbury, Swamfield, Tanton, Watertown, Wethersfield, Windsor, Wick-ford,
Warwick, Woodcock, Wamsick, Worcester, Wenam, Wells, Yarmouth, York, most of
these Towns are of good account, and well inhabited, being commodiously seated
either on the Seashore, or on Navigable Rivers, as may be seen in the Map.

The English Inhabitants are in Color, Features, Husbandry, Navigation,
Cohabitation in Towns and Language, much as in England, and have an eagerness
of Courage and yet lasting.

They purchased their Lands of the Sachems, which were the heads; and the
eldest of the Indian Families, the Ancient Proprietors, most of which were,
about the first English settlement, swept away with the small Box: Another part
by Wars among themselves, and the remainder almost destroyed by their late
Treacherous War with the English, being either sold, slain, or dead with the
Flux; so that there now remains but few of them in the Massachuset, and
Plymouth Colonies, except some Christians and other Indians, who were true to
the English against those other bloody Barbarians; these indeed deserve
encouragement. A good part of which were under the Government and Discipline of
worthy Major Goetkins, and Mr. Eliot, whose care and Charitable Endeavors for
their Conversion may not be forgotten: And as to the Indians lately destroyed,
they were several little Nations, living under the Sachems or Sagamors in
Hamlets, consisting of Wigwams or Cottages; and for the most part were clothed
with Mantles and Deer-skins; they were a timorous, rash, and unfaithful People,
judging all others by themselves, such as had no tie, but what fear or interest
drove them to, and grew insolent by the English indulgence, yet some of them
confessed they did not begin the War merely upon Indian instigation, and the
English found they had Powder and Shot enough, that they were good Marks men,
and generally well-armed, especially with Fusies; which, they said, they bought
of the French in Canada.

The manner of their Wars was by Incursions, Surprises and Ambuscades; and
their Contrivances very subtle, but if once discovered, they would be greatly
dismayed. And this is certain, they were at last overcome, and in a sort
extirpated by an apparent and distinguishing hand of Gods Providence. And as to
their conquered Countries, (now under the English Jurisdiction) they are large
and fruitful, and have many spacious Cornfieldsd, Plantations, pleasant Rivers
and Brooks, fit for delight and human sustentation.

As to New England, it is observable, that within the Compass of sixty years
past, near two hundred Gentlemen, Ministers and Merchants, carried their Wives
and Children thither, and about forty hundred Husbandmen and Mechanics, with
their Wives, and Children, and Servants, and near two hundred thousand pound
value.

That Stock of people is said to be increased to about one hundred thousand:
And that more Persons for condition and number of the increase of the said
first Planters have come for England, than have gone thither since their said
principal settlement.

And that the People of New England have some years annually imported and
exported to and from old England to as great value in commodities, as they
first exported hence.

And as to that which has kept them low, they thought if they bought Negro's,
and had them Baptized, that they were then free, and upon this mistake omitted
it, and then so much indulged their English Servants, (because themselves could
not work) that they gave them almost what they would have; and thus enriched
them, and impoverished themselves.

And when others came afterward, (if any thing likely) they were soon tempted
by inferior Planters to Marry and become Freeholders: and seeing a goodly
Country before them, these also quickly made their service uneasy to the
intolerable damage of their Masters, who were at great chargs about them.

But some may object, that Barbados Merchants, overmuch minding their profit,
have twenty Negros to one English Servant, to the now great hazard of their
Lives. As to that, it is very remarkable that the long patience of the first
New England Gentlemen has at last wrought this happy effect to their
Posterity, that should they now stock their Farm with Negros and Indians, and
mix them in Marriage, (such Mulato's being found the best Servants) in some
years they may make them Copyholders, as the Villains were of old in England,
and so may make a great improvement of their Land.

Nor is it likely, that (were a few thousand Negro's slaves in this sort now to
increase there) they could rationally prejudice so great a body of English
already bred and naturalized, besides so vastly more increasing in that
Country, which alters the Case from that of Barbados.

Moreover, should any Negro's run far into the Woods, they are sure the wild
Indians would destroy them.

Now for its advancement, some Barbadoe's Merchants have lately calculated,
(and those of their most experienced Planters also) that twenty Negro's in New
England, (being taught, for they are found as capable to learn as the English)
with fifteen hundred pound stock in Iron, Mills, Charcole, Bog-iron, Oar, etc.
would bring their Masters as good and clear an Annual Income, as the same stock
of Money and Negro's will produce by their Sugar-Mills in Barbados.

And that such a number of Negro's, being taught the way of raising Corn,
looking after Cattle, to make Cider, Wine, Brandy, and the art of Carpentry for
Houses, of Saw-Mills, making of Brick, and Brick-laying, building of Vessels,
and Ships, and the Craft of Fishery, etc, may rationally with a less stock of
Money produce as much advantage to their Masters as the former

It is also considerable, that the Land it self of the first Gentlemen Planters
in New England does begin to make a good recompense to the Children for the
losses of their Parents. Besides it imports into England Bever, Moose skins,
Furs, Bullen, and many other Commodities which they bring from the West Indies
in their own Vessels, and do export Cloth, Stuffs, Cordage, etc which is
considerable to His Majesty's Customs, and to the Manufacture of England. And
they yearly build many good Ships and Frigates, and sell them at London.

It is the Granary and Magazine, and lies most ready to supply Barbados,
Jamaica, Mevis, etc. with Provisions, etc. being a thousand Leagues nearer than
England or Ireland.

It is a well situated and settled Emporium, having many excellent Harbors in
the great Bay.

It is the best prepared place to build Navies at easy rates, (at his
Majesty's pleasure) since they are of late something more choice in their
Timber then formerly they were, and specially since Ship-Timber is so generally
wanting in England and Ireland, and the Eastland Oak (as some say) is so very
spungy.

It carries the most aw and countenance, and can (best with a little
encouragement) defend it self against a Foreign assault; and is most fit and
ready to help and relieve His Majesty's other Colonies, if such a distress
should happen.

And it is the grand Nursery that breeds, and indeed that is found most proper
to breed Men in great numbers of resolute, bold and lasting courage (and all
other Creatures in like manner) nearest unto those of old England in the World;
and their Men most fit for Navigation, Merchandise, or War by Sea or Land.

A Description of New York.
NEw York contains all that Tract of Land, which is seated between New England,
Virginia, Maryland, and the length of which Northward into the Country, as it
has not been fully discovered, so it is not certainly known, but in general it
extends to the Banks of the great River Canada, East and West, its breadth is
accounted two hundred Miles, comprehending also that Tract of Land, which is
between Hudson's River, and Delaware River, called New Jarsey.

Its principal Rivers are Hudson's River toward the East, Raritan River about
the middle, and Delaware River on the West, its chiefest Islands are
Long Island, Manahattens-Island, and Staten-Island.

It was so called from his Royal Highness the Duke of York, the Proprietor
thereof by Grant from his Majesty, Anno 1664. Who the same year grants and
conveys out of it all that aforesaid Tract of Land, and Premises which is
between Hudson's River, and Delaware River, unto John Lord Berkley, and Sir
George Carteret, jointly by the name of New Caesarea or New Jarsey. So that New
York now contains only that part of New England, which the Dutch formerly
seized, and called it the New Netherland, and Nova Belgia, lying between
Hudson^s and Conecticut Rivers on the Continent, with the Islands of
Manahatten, and Long Island, opposite thereunto.

Manahattens Island, so called by the Indians, it lies betwixt the Degrees of
forty one and forty two North Latitude, and is about fourteen Miles long, and
two broad, whose chief place is New York, seated upon the South end of the
aforesaid Island, having a small Arm of the Sea, which divides it from Long
Island, on the Eastside of it, which runs Eastward to New England, and is
Navigable, though dangerous.

Hudson's River runs by New York Northward into the Country, toward the Head of
which is seated New Albany, a place of great Trade with the Indians, betwixt
which and New York, being above one hundred Miles, is as good Corn-Land as the
World affords, enough to entertain hundreds of Families, in the time of the
Dutch-Government of those Parts. At Sopers was kept a Garrison, but since the
reducement of those parts under his Majesty's Obedience, by the care of the
Honorable Colonel Nichol's, Deputy to his Highness, such a League of Peace was
made, and Friendship concluded betwixt that Colony and the Indians, that they
have not resisted or disturbed any Christians there, in the settling or
peaceable Possession of any Lands with that Government, but every Man has sat
under his own Vine, and has peaceably reapt and enjoyed the Fruits of their
own labors, which God continue.

New York is built most of Brick and Stone, and covered with red and black
Tile, and the Land being high, it gives at a distance a pleasing Aspect to the
Spectators. The Inhabitants consist most of English and Dutch, and have a
considerable Trade with the Indians, for Bevers, Otter, Raccoon skins, with
other Furs; as also for Bear, Deer, and Elk Skins; and are supplied with
Venison and Fowl in the Winter, and Fish in the Summer by the Indians, which
they buy at an easy rate; and having the Country round about them, they are
continually furnished with all such Provisions, as (...) needful for the life
of Man; not only by the English and Dutch within their own, but likewise by the
Adjacent Colonies.

The Commodities vented from thence are Furs and Skins beforementioned; as
likewise Tobacco made within the Colony, as good as is usually made in
Maryland: Also Horses, Beef, Pork, Oil, Pease, Wheat, and the like.

Long Island, the West end of which lies Southward of New York, runs Eastward
above one hundred Miles, and is in some places eight, in some twelve, in some
fourteen Miles broad; it is inhabited from one end to the other. On the West
end are four or five Dutch Towns, the rest being all English to the number of
twelve, besides Villages and Farm-houses. The Island is most of it of a very
good Soil, and very natural for all sorts of English Grain; which they sow, and
have very good increase of, besides all other Fruits and Herbs common in
England, as also Tobacco, Hemp, Flax, Pumpkins, Melons, etc.

There are several Navigable Rivers and Bays; which put into the Northside of
Long Island, but upon the Southside which joins to the Sea, it is so fortified
with Bars of Sands and sholes, that it is a sufficient defense against any
Enemy, yet the Southside is not without Brooks and Rivulets, which empty
themselves into the Sea; yea, you shall scarce travel a Mile, but you shall
meet with one of them, whose Crystal Streams run so swift, that they purge
themselves of such stinking Mud and Filth, which the standing or low-paced
Streams of most Brooks and Rivers Westward of this Colony leave lying, and are
by the Suns exhalation dissipated, the Air corrupted, and many Fevers and other
Distempers occasioned, not incident to this Colony: Neither do the Brooks and
Rivulets premised, give way to the Frost in Winter, or Drought in Summer, but
keep their course throughout the year.

Toward the middle of Long Island lies a Plain sixteen Miles long, and four
broad, upon which Plain grows very fine Grass, that makes exceeding good Hay,
and is very good Pasture for the Sheep or other Cattle; where you shall find
neither stick nor stone to hinder the Horse Heels, or endanger them in their
Races, and once a year the best Horses in the Island are brought hither to try
their swiftness, and the swiftest rewarded with a Silver Cup, two being
annually procured for that purpose. There are two or three other small Plains
of about a Mile square, which are no small benefit to those Towns which enjoy
them.

Upon the Southside of Long Island in the Winter, lie store of Whales and
Grampusses, which the Inhabitants begin with small Boats to make a Trade,
catching to their no small benefit. Also an innumerable multitude of Seals,
which make an excellent Oil; they lie all the Winter upon small broken Marshes,
and Beaches, or Bars of Sand beforementioned, and might be easily got, were
here some skilful Men would undertake it.

Of Canada or Nova Francia.
CAnada, so called from the River Canada, which has its Fountains in the
undiscovered parts of this Western Tract; sometimes enlarging it self into
greater Lakes, and presently contracted into a narrow Chanel, with many great
windings and falls; having embosomed almost all the rest of the Rivers. After a
known Eastern course of near fifteen hundred Miles; it empties it self into the
great Bay of St. Lawrence over against the Isle of Assumption, being at the
Mouth thirty Leagues in breadth, and one hundred and fifty fathom deep. On the
Northside, whereof the French (following the Tract of the said Cabot) made a
further discovery of the said Northern parts, by the Name of Nova Francia.

The Country is full of Stags, Bears, Hares, Martins and Foxes, store of
Conies, Fowl and Fish, not very fruitful or fit for Tillage, the Air more cold
than in other Countries of the same Latitude.

The chief places are Breast, Quebeck and Taduosac, a safe but small Haven. The
French Trade here for Bever, Mouse-skins, and Furs, and are said to be about
five thousand; what discoveries have been made of late years of the Southern
parts of this Country, may be seen in the Map of Florida, etc.

Nova Scotia,
COntains that part of Land, which the French call Accadie or Cadie, being so
much of the main Land, as lies between the River Canada, and the large Bay,
called Bay Francoise, from the River of St. Croix, upon the West to the Isle of
Assumption on the East, first discovered by Sebastian Cabot; who, setting sail
from Bristol at the charge of King Henry the Seventh, made a discovery of it
unto the Latitude of sixty seven and a half.

Which being neglected, after this the French planted on the Northside of the
River Canada. And after that Monsieur du Monts settled on part of that Land
called Nova Scotia, but in the year 1613, was outed by Sir Samuel Argal: And in
the year 1621, King James, by Letters Patents, made a donation of it to Sir
William Alexander, afterward Lord Secretary of Scotland, calling it Nova
Scotia, in pursuance of which Grant, he in the year 1622, sent a Colony
thither: And I am informed, that it was after by Acts of Parliament annexed to
the Crown and Kingdom of Scotland, however I think the French have now a Colony
at Port Royal, and are the only possessors of that Country.

Of Newfoundland.
THIS was first discovered by the two Cabots, John and his Son S^bastian,
employed by King Henry the seventh 1497, the business laid aside was afterward
revived by Thorn and Elliot, two of Bristol, who ascribed to themselves the
discovery of it, and animated King Henry unto the enterprise, Anno 1527. In the
mean time, the French and Portugals resorted to it.

But the English would not relinquish their pretensions to the Primier Seisin,
and therefore in the year 1583, Sir Humphrey Gilbert took possession of it in
the name of the Queen of England, who being Shipwrack'd in his return, the
sending of a Colony was discontinued till the year 1608, when undertook by John
Guy, a Merchant of Bristol, and in the year 1626, Sir George Calvert Knight,
then principal Secretary of State, afterward Lord Baltimore, obtained a Patent
of part of Newfoundland, which was erected into a Province, and called Avalon,
where he caused a Plantation to be settled, and a stately House and Fort to he
built at Ferriland.

It Is an Island for extent (they say) equalizing England, from whence it is
distant about five hundred and forty Leagues, situate between the Degrees of
forty five and fifty three Northern Latitude, and is only severed from the
Continent of America by an Arm of the Sea, as England is from France.

It is famous for many excellent Bays and Harbors, it has great plenty of
Fish, Land and Water Fowl, and is sufficiently stockt with Deers, Hares, Otters
and Foxes, which yield great Fur, it affords stately Trees fit for Timber,
Masts, Planks, and other uses. The Soil is esteemed fertile, the Climate
wholesome, but the rigor of Winter, and excessive Heats of Summer much detract
from its praise.

Before the Island at the distance of twenty Leagues from the Raze, lies a
long Bank or Ridge of Ground, extending in length about two hundred and forty
Leagues, in breadth in the broadest place about five and twenty Leagues, by
Cabot, called Bacalaos, from the great multitude of Codfish, which swarmed
there so numerous, that they hindered the passage of the Ships, and is now
called the Grand Bank, where our Ships salt and dry their Fish.

There is no part of Newfoundland more happy for multiplicity of excellent Bays
and Harbors, than the Province of Avalon, and there are vast quantities of Fish
yearly caught by the English, at Ferriland, and at the Bay of Bulls; though the
whole Coast affords infinite plenty of Cod and Poor John, which is grown to a
settled Trade, and were the English diligent to inspect the advantage of settling
Plantations upon the Isle, and raising Fortifications for the security of the
place, they might ingross the whole Fishery.

Of ICE-LAND.
ICe Land, or the ancient Thule, supposed by some to be as large as Ireland.
Our English Masters, who have fished there many years, give this Account of it,
That the most Southerly part of it, called Ingulf foot, is in the Latitude of
sixty four Degrees and twenty five Minutes. And the most Northerly part is
Rag-point, in the Latitude of sixty six Degrees and five Minutes, whereas our
Maps, as also the Great Atlas makes the Island above eighty eight Degrees of
Nothern Latitude, which gross mistake is refuted not only by Observation, but
also by the Suns continuance two hours above the Horizon, in the middle of
December, in the most Northern part of the Island. It is seated North Westerly
from the North of Scotland, viz. from the Start or Head Land of Orkney, to the
S. W. Head of Fero is fifty five Leagues, and from thence to Ingulf-foot is
eighty five Leagues more.

It has four remarkable Mountains in it, of which Hecla is the most famous,
which burns continually with a Blew, Brimstone-like, and most dreadful Flame,
vomiting up vast quantities of Brimstone, and that when it burns with greatest
vehemence, it makes a terrible rumbling like the noise of loud Thunder, and a
fearful Crackling and Tearing that may be heard a great way off. See more of
this in Martineres Northern Voyage, page 134.

In the Philosophical Transaction, Number 103, Dr. Paul Biornonius Resident
informs us, That it abounds with hot Springs, of which some are so Hot, that in
a quarter of an hours time they will sufficiently boil a piece of Beef.
Arugreim Jonas tell us, It was inhabited by the Norwegians, Anno 874,
afterward by the Danes, under whose Government and Religion it now is. The
Island is well peopled, but they live only in the Valleys, and toward the
Seashore. Their Dwellings are rather Caves than Houses. The Inhabitants are
said to be a Lusty, Comely, Affable People, faithful in their Dealings,
addicted to Learning, having three Universities, such as they are: But their
Law allows of no Physicians, but admit of some Chyrurgeons to cure their
Wounds. The Air is healthy, but the changes of Weather are very uncertain, for
sometimes it Snows and Hails in the midst of Summer, and the Winds are often in
that season most furious.

Their Commodities are Sheep Cows and Horses. Great plenty of most sort of
Seafish all the year round their Coast. There are Lakes upon the high
Mountains, well stored with Fresh-Water-Fish, and their Rivers with Salmon. In
Summer time they have plenty of of Wild Fowl, as Mallard, Duck, Teal,
Partridge, Wild Geese, Plowers. In Winter time Ravens, Eagles, Wild Ducks,
Swans, etc. Their Drink is Milk mingled with Water. Their Bread is Cod caught
in the Winter time, and dried in the Frost, commonly called Stock Fish, as also
Hokettle, or the Nurse-Fish, with the Livers they make Oil to burn in their
Caves under Ground; the other parts they cut into pieces, and bury them four or
five Weeks under Ground, then wash them, and dry them in their Stoves, and this
serves instead of Bread, if broiled on the Coals it serves for Meat; and of the
Skins of the Fish they make their Shoes.

The general Employment of the People is either Fishery, or the making of
Wad-moll, or a course sort of Woollen Cloth, of which they make Gowns, Coats,
Caps, Mittins for Seamen and Fishermen. There is also little Shock Dogs said to
be the Whelps of ordinary Bitches, lined by Foxes, that come on over the Ice.

There is only one Fort, which is upon one of the chief of the West M^^ny Isles
ten Leagues from Merchants Foreland, with twelve Iron Guns in it, and there
their Courts are held, and the Bishop has his Residence: As for their
Government and Laws, see Dithmar, Belfkins and Arugreine Jonas, or Purchase in
his Pilgrimage. Sometimes Danes, Hamburgers, and Lubekers, put into the Island,
and furnish the Islanders with such Provisions as they want. The chiefest
places where the Ships stay, are the Havens of Haneford and Keplawick, and the
Governor resides at Belested; the Danes bring from thence dried Fish,
Train-Oil, Butter, Tallow, Sulphur, Raw Hides, and particularly a sort of
Whales Teeth, which some esteem as much as Ivory.

Betwixt Cape Farewell, and Cape Sumay, lies a great Sea dilating it self, both
toward the North, South, and West, giving great hopes of a North West passage
to China, and the East Indies, much searched into by many English Worthies,
Frobisher, Weymouth, Hudson, Button, Baffin, Smith, James and others, who have
sailed therein some one way, some another, and given names to many places, as
may be seen in the Map, and in the year 1667, an Honorable and Worthy Design
was renewed, and undertaken by several of the Nobility of England, and diverse
Merchants of London, for the discovery of this North West passage, and to
settle a Trade with the Indians there. Captain Zachariah Gillam being
Commander, who in the Nonsuch Ketch passed through Hudsons Straights, then into
Baffins Bay, from thence Southerly into the Latitude of fifty one Degrees, or
thereabouts, in a River now called Prince Ruperts River, he there found a
friendly correspondence with the Natives: Built a Fort called Charles Fort,
returned with good success, and laid the Foundation of an advantageous Trade in
those parts. But in the year 1687, seized upon by the French.

map of Northwest America The North West Part of AMERICA by R. Morden At^^
Atlas in Cornhill


Of GREENLAND.
GReenland is a Country of vast extent, an unknown Tract, and not yet fully
discovered, for notwithstanding several Voyages, and many Ships have touched
upon its Coasts, yet it still lies obscured in a Northern Mist; unless the
names of certain Bays, Capes, etc. viz. Cape Farewell, Cape Comfort, Cape
Desolation, Warwicks Foreland, and Bearsford, where it is said the King of
Denmark has a Governor.

Of GREENLAND.

Toward the North East lies a Tract of Land, called Greenland by the English,
Spitsburg by the Dutch, seated between seventy six Degrees, and eighty two of
Northern Latitude, but whether an Island or Continent, is not yet known. The
whole Land is so compassed with Ice, that it is difficult to be approached,
sometimes in the middle of June, though ordinarily the Ice breaks in May.

The Soil is in most places nothing but Rocks, or heaps of vast Stones, many of
them so high, that the upper half seems to be above the Clouds. The little
Valleys between them are nothing else but broken Stones and Ice heaped up from
many Generations. About Roefield and Maple Haven is the greatest quantity of
low Land, which also is full of Rocks, Stony, and for the most part covered
with Snow and Ice, which when melted, as in Summer, discovers nothing but a
barren Ground, producing Heath, Moss, and some few Plants, as a kind of
Cabbage, Lettice, Scurvy Grass, Sorrel, Snakeweed, Hartsease, a kind of
Strawberry, diverse sorts of Ranunculus, and of semper Vives in the Mountains,
that are exposed to a warm Air and Sunbeams; in the Holes and Rocks infinite
quantity of Fowls Nest, whose Dung, with the Moss washed down by the melted
Snow, makes a Mould in the Valleys or Clefts, which produces those Plants
aforesaid.

For though it has the Sun for half a year, yet never about thirty three Degrees
and forty Minutes above the Horizon; the power of its Beams are insufficient to
dispel the Cold, or dissolve the Ice, so that the Vapors from the Earth are not
hot enough to warm the Air, nor thin enough to rise to any considerable height,
but hang continually in thick dark Mists about the Land, that sometimes you
cannot see the length of your Ship. It Is also remarkable, that at Cherry in
June 1608, it was so hot that melted Pitch ran down the sides of the Ships, and
that the Ice is raised above the Water many Fathoms, and many times above
thirty Fathom under Water, and sometimes it is frozen to the bottom of the Sea.
The freezing and breaking of the Ice makes a great and terrible noise,
sometimes it breaks into great pieces, and sometimes it shatters at once into
small pieces, with more noise, but less danger.

The Beasts of the Country are Foxes of diverse Colors, Raindeer, Bears six
Foot high, and fourteen Foot long.

Of Water Fowl there is great variety, and in so great abundance, that with
their flight they darken the Sun, viz. Ducks, Willocks, Stints, Sea-pidgeons,
Sea-Parrots, Gulls, Noddees. There are also great quantities of Fishes, as
Seals, Dog Fishes, Lobsters, Gernels, Star-Fish, Macarel, Dolfins, Unicorns,
Whales, etc.

Our Men that wintered in Greenland, Anno 163^, lost the Light of the Sun,
October the fourteenth, and saw it not again till February the third.

Those that staid there 1633, say, that October the fifth was the last day they
saw the Sun, though they had Twilight till the seventeenth, and on the twenty
second, the Stars were plainly to be seen, and so continued for all the Winter.
January the fifteenth, they perceived so much Light as to read by it; February
the twelfth, they saw the light of the Sun on the tops of the Mountains.

Those that wintered in Nova Zembla 1^9, in the seventy six Degree, on October
the twenty third saw the Sun not fully above the Earth: After October the
twenty fifth, they saw the Sun no more till January the twenty fourth; they saw
the edge of the Sun above the Horizon. These also tells us, That in seventy
four Degrees, the Water was as green as Grass. And that at Cherry or Bear
Island in the seventy fourth Degree and thirteen Minutes, the variation was
thirteen Degrees.

The first we read of that searched for the North-West passage, was Martin
Frobisher, in Anno 1576, with two Barks, coming to the Latitude of sixty two
De^rees, sound a great Inlet of sixty Leagues in length, and Main Land on both
sides, called by him Frobishers Strait. He found there a certain Oar, which he
thought to be Gold, and the next year made a Voyage to fetch a quantity of it,
but it proved but black Lead. And upon Smiths Isle they found several Stones,
out of which they melted Gold, but in very small quantities. They found also a
dead Fish of about twelve foot long, in shape like a Porpoise, having a Horn
six foot long growing out of his Snout, which is still kept at Winsor.

In 1583, Sir Humphry Gilbert went to the great River of Saint Lawrence in
Canada, took possession of the Country, and settled a Fishing Trade here.

In 1585, Mr. John Davis was employed for search of the North-West passage: The
first Land he came to, he called the Land of Desolation, then he arrived in
Gilberts Sound, in the Latitude of sixty four Degrees and sixteen Minutes.
Thence they went to sixty six Degrees and forty Minutes to Mount Raleigh,
^otnes Sound, etc. In 1586, he made a second Voyage to the same place, found
amongst the Natives some of Frobishers Oar, as also Lapis Specularis, Copper
Oar, as also black and red Copper, and returned, after search of many places,
with hopes of discovering the desired Passage: So that in the year 1587, he
made a third Voyage to seventy two Degrees and twelve Minutes, where the
Compass varied to eighty two Degrees Westward, the Land he called London Coast,
and there they found an open Sea, forty Leagues between Land and Land, which he
called Fretum Davis.

In the year 1610, Mr. Hudson proceeded one hundred Leagues further than any
before had done, and gave names to certain places, viz. Desire-Provokes, Isles
of Godmercie, Prince Henrys Cape, King James Cape, Queen Anns Cape, etc. but
the Ice hindered him from going further, and the mutiny of his Men from
returning home.

In 1612, James Hall, and with him William Baffin discovered Cockings Sound, in
the Latitude of sixty five Degrees and twenty Minutes, which differed from
London sixty Degrees and thirty Minutes, where James Hall was killed in the
Boat by a Native, pretending to trade.

They saw Rocks of pure Stone, finer and whiter then Alablaster, and Angelica
growing plentifully.

1615 Baffin was sent again, he found Fair-point to differ from London seventy
four Degrees and five Minutes, and found that there was no passage through
Davis Strairs, it being only a great Bay.

1626, Baffin went again. And in Sir Thomas Smith's Sound, their Compass varied
fifty six Degrees Westward, but finding no passage returned home.

^^^l. Willoughby, 1553, in his discovery for North-East passage, (...) by a
large Country, by the Westside whereof he sailed for (...) days together, and
therefore could not be a small Island as the Dutch make it: We have nothing of
the Voyage, but those short Notes which were found lying upon his Table after
his Death; which was, that in August the second they parted from Seynam; August
the four^^^^th, they were one hundred and sixty Leagues North Easterly from
Seynam; that they continued sailing till September the fourteenth, where they
landed on a Country, high, Rocky and uninhabited, from whence the Cold and Ice
forced them to return more Southerly; which they did, till they came to Arzina,
a River in Lapland, where the next Spring they were found all frozen to death
in the Ship.

1556, Steven Burrows, who searching a passage by the North-East unto the
Indies arrived in ^^2 Degrees and twenty five Minutes of Longitude, seventy six
of Latitude, and so sailed to eighty Degrees and eleven Minutes, and thence to
Nova Zembla.

1580, Arthur Pet and Charles Jackman sailed all over those Seas.

And that no Nation but English frequented those Northern Seas, till 1578, that
a Dutch Ship came to Cola, and a year or two after another, to Saint Nicholas,
and that by the encouragement of an English Man that set himself against the
Russia Company which was Incorporated in 1553.

Afterward the Dutch crept in more and more, and in 1594 they employed Barents
and others to find out a passage, Barents separating from his Company sailed to
the North East of Nova Zembla, where he lost his Ship, and himself died: In the
Latitude of seventy four Degrees and thirteen Minutes, the variation of the
Needle was thirteen Degrees which was at Cherry or Bear Island.

In 1608, Henry Hudson was sent forth to discover the North Pole, who went to
eighty two Degrees, as did also Thomas Marmaduke of Hull 1612, who saw diverse
Islands beyond that.

And in the year 1610, the Company set out the Ship Amity, Jonas Pool
Commander, for Whale fishing, who fell upon the Land, formerly discovered, and
called it Greenland, and gave names to many of the eminent places, viz.
Horn-sound, where they found a Unicorns Horn, (as they called it) Ice-point,
Bel-point, Black-point, Lowns Island, Cape Cold, Ice-sound, Knotty-point,
Fowl-sound, Deer-sound.

And in Cross Road, (seventy nine Degrees and fifteen Minutes Latitude, the
Variation was eighteen Degrees and sixteen Minutes North-West) he seized upon
the Country to the use of his Masters, by setting up a Red Cross, and fastening
a Writing to it, there he made the first Oil.

And in 1611, the Company sent out two Ships and six Barques to fish for
Whales, where the first Whale they killed yielded them twelve Tuns of Oil.

In the year 1614, the English set out thirteen great Ship^ and two Pinnaces
well armed, and the Dutch eighteen, whereof four were Men of War. The English
took possession of diverse parts of the Country for the King, setting up a Cross
and the Kings Arms in Lead: And the Dutch did the like afterward in the same
places for the Prince of Orange.

In the year 1615, the King of Denmark sent three Ships, Men of War, to demand
Customs for Fishing upon this Island, which was denied, and the Island affirmed
to belong to the King of England.

In the year 1616, the Company sent eight Sail of great Ships, and this year
discovered Edges Island.

In the year 1617, the English sent out fourteen Ships and two Pinnaces April
24, they set sail from Gravesend, and May 28, they arrived at Greenland, and
met with eleven Sail of Dutch, fishing in Hornfound, whom they forced away, and
took from them all they caught, and also the English that were in their Ships,
and made 1900 Tuns of Oil, and discovered Wy^hes Island in seventy nine Degrees.

There are some Discoveries of Land, which cannot be said to belong to any of
the four grand Divisions, being separate (...) Seas of vast extent; viz. New
Guinea toward the Equator so called, because thought to be opposite to the
African Guiny. New Zelan^ the Antipodes almost to ^ngland, discovered first by
Fernando de Quier, but both of the East India Companies in Holland now pretend
to it, though they were but ill used, when they attempted to settle themselves
there. About three hundred Leagues from it lies another Tract of Land called
Antony Van Diemens Land, discovered by the Dutch. The Land of Parrats (if any
such) was part of Terra Australis incognita. In the year 150^, one Gonneuille a
Frenchman sailed thither, and was well entertained by a petty King, called
Arosea: Who also brought away with him some of the Natives, amongst the rest
the Kings Son Essomeric, of whose Race there are some yet in Normandy, (says
Du Val.)

New Holland is so highly esteemed by the Dutch, that they have caused the Map
thereof to be cut in the Stones of their Magnificent State-house, though I
could not afford one Map for it here. It is a Tract of Land containing about
1600 Leagues.

Not far from Greenland lies Cherry Island; thirty Degrees to the North
Eastwards, whereof (says our Sea Waggoner) is the Island of Nova Zembla, and
twenty Leagues to a Degree is the Scale made in the Chart, so that thirty
multiplied by twenty makes six hundred Leagues, which is three hundred more
than the true distance. This also is certain, that in all the Land Maps, that I
have seen, it is laid down above one hundred and twenty, and 50 Leagues
Eastwards farther than it ought to be. And I have the rather instanced in this
particular, for that I have reason to think, that this was the chief cause of
the misfortune of that venturous and worthy design of Captain Wood in his
Attempt for a N. E. passage to China.

I cannot also but mention the Opinion of some, who tell us, that Nova Zembla
is the Isle Carambice of the Ancients, from whence Men may go upon the Ice as
far as Greenland and further, so that its, thought that the people that first
inhabited America went over this way.

The Land of Jesso lies between Asia and America, where they are separated by
great and wide Arms of the Sea; though others think, they excur and meet almost
together, and by this way was America first peopled, but utrum horum mavis,
accipe. The Inhabitants of Jesso exchange their Fish, their Tongues, their
Whales Oil, in the Cities of Japan, which are next to them. The Planks of their
Barks are not nailed but sowed, together with Ropes made of the Rinds of Cocos.
The Relations of the Dutch in the year 1643 tells us, that part of the Country
acknowledges the King of Japan, and that the Governor who resides at M^zimay,
carries him every year Silver, Feathers of sundry Colors, and fine Furs.

Thus briefly have I described all the most known parts of the Earth, but must
leave that of the unknown to the discovery of future Ages; only give me leave
to say a word or two to our English Planters, etc. And I have done:

To advance an happy Plantation, the Undertakers, Planters, and Place it self,
must contribute their Endeavors.

Let the Undertakers be Men of no shallow Heads, nor narrow Fortunes, such as
will be contented with their present loss to be Benefactors to Posterity. Let
the Planters be Honest, Skilful and Painful People; for what hope is there,
that they, who were Drones at home, will be Bees abroad.

Let the Place be naturally strong, or at leastwise capable of Fortification;
for though at first Planters are sufficiently fenced with their own Poverty,
yet when once they have got Wealth, they must get Strength to defend it.

Islands are easily shut, whereas Continents have their Doors ever open, not to
be bolted without great charges.

Let not the Towns, where there is choice of Ground, be built in places of a
servil nature, as being overawed, or commanded by some Hills about them.

Let it have some Staple Commodity to balance Traffic with other Countries,
few Countries can stand alone, the Luxury of our Age has made superfluities
necessary.

Let the Planters endeavor to be loved and feared of the Natives, using Justice
and Honesty, being as naked in their dealings with the Natives, as they are
naked in their attire, embracing all occasions to convert them, each Convert is
a Conquest, and it is more honor to overcome Paganism in one, than to destroy
a thousand Pagans; for an extirpation of the Natives is rather a supplanting,
than planting a New Colony.

I am confident, said Dr. Fuller long since, that America is now grown
Marriagable, and hopes to get Christ for a Husband by the preaching of the
Gospel.

I shall only add, that no Nation has spread her Sails for Traffic further
than the English: And that our Foreign Plantations upon the Asian, African and
American Continents, are so many, and so conveniently seated, that no Christian
Nation has opportunity of piercing deeper into those vast Heathenish Islands,
than the English.

And yet can we say, we have improved the Advantages God has put into our
hands, to his glory, and the propagation of his Gospel? have we made so much as
one solemn Mission of Pious and Learned Men to preach the glad Tidings of
Salvation in Jesus Christ, so much as to those ignorant Heathens and Idolaters,
that confine upon the English Pale; yea, or the poor Negros, that are detained
in cruel slavery in our own Plantations? I cannot say, what Glory and Advantage
this would be to the English Nation: Pardon me therefore, Great Sirs, the
Proposal of his to your pious considerations, whom it does most concern: For
your faithful management of the opportunities entrusted to you for the Service
of God, and the enlargement of his Kingdom at home and abroad, you may be
assured, will not only make an Accession of Renown and Honor to your selves and
generous Families, but bring in also eternal prosperity and Happiness from God
the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. As, I pray God, it may. Amen.

FINIS.

