

THE FAMOUS HISTORY Of the Life of the Renowned Prince PALMERIN OF ENGLAND: OR,
The Glory of Knightly Prowess. In Three Parts. Containing his Parentage, Birth,
Education, Travels, Strange Adventures, Noble Exploits and Victories; Combats
with Monsters, Giants, Armies, and Armed Knights, Dissolving Enchantments,
delivering Distressed Ladies; and his success in Love.

The whole being a complete Series, inter-woven with the Heroic Actions of
many Valiant Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Knights of undoubted FAME, whose
Matchless Deeds have won them immortal Honor. A Book Worthy the Perusal of
either Sex.

Written originally in French; and now faithfully done into English (for the
better satisfaction of the Reader) by J. S.

London, Printed for William Thackeray, in Duck-Lane and Thomas Passinger on
London Bridge. MDCLXXXV.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
YOU have before you a Book that has been in great Esteem in most Nations,
there being but few Europian Languages, in which at this day it is not Extant:
therefore seeing it written by others, in the honor of our Country, I thought
it highly convenient that my Countryman should express himself in his native
Language, or stand or fall by the Censure of the Judicious Natives of this
famous Sea-surrounded Isle. I must confess there are many tracts of this Nature
abroad in the world; but amongst the number that have proceeded, if I may
freely pass my judgment, none have exceeded, if any have hitherto Equalized it.
The subject is Arms and Love, to which are joined State-Policies, Stratagems
and Machavillian-Machinations, things worthy to be observed by the wisest and
worthiest of Mankind; yet was it not so much written for profitable practice,
as Pleasure and Recreation, though it may more then indifferently serve for
both, being fitly quallified for all Capacities of either Sex, no where charged
with Obscenity, or any thing misbecomming the persons, whose Charracters it
lively represents, but handing their same down to future Ages. If I presage
aright, it shall live till time is no more. If brave Exploits in War, or
single Combats, if you seek here, you may behold it lively represented, as if
you hazarded your self in the bloody field of Mars to satisfy that curiosity.
If Courtship please you, Venus her self, nor her winged Son, have not the power
to give you a better satisfaction. If Beauty, behold it as in a Mirror, If
Constancy and Inviolate faith. rewarded with all terrestial felicity, you
prize, here it is to be found. If State-pollicies, etc. you are desirous to
dive into, see the Councels of Emperors and Kings laid open, and all mysteries
worthy the highest Earthly thought unraveled. And to be brief, there is nothing
of this nature that can be reasonably desired, but it is to be found in this
pleasant misterious Arcania; which makes him the bolder to recommend it to your
good likeing. Who is

READER, Your Friend to serve you, J. S.

THE Famous History OF The Renowned PRINCE Palmerin of England, Part, the First.
CHAP. I.
How Don Edoard (Son to Frederick, King of England) having obtained in
Marriage the Princess Flerida, Daughter to Palmerin Emperor of Greece;
returning home, was lost in pursuing an Enchanted Boar; How he was led to the
Castle of a Giant called Dramusia^d, and there underwent a tedious imprisonment.

DOn Edoard, having a long time left his Native Country to War against the
Turks and Sarazens that invaded the Greek-Empire, fell in love in the end with
a beautiful Lady, Daughter to Palmerin the Greek Emperor, and so won upon her
affections by his Behavior and many Noble Achievements in Feats of Arms, that
she (with the consent of her Father) surrendered her self into his arms, to the
great joy of all men; when having with his fair Princess stayed a while in all
manner of Delights, he greatly desired to return into his own Country, to do
which, he procured leave of the Emperor his Father-in-Law, and so with a great
Train of Nobility Imbarqued; When after being some time detained by contrary
Winds at Sea, they Landed in Enlgand, to the great joy of Fredrick the aged
King, and all his Nobles; so that the Feasting was so great, that the like in
any age had not been known: Yet the sudden change of Air, and long Voyage at
Sea, together with her Teeming, so altered the fair Princesses Constitution,
that falling into a Fever, it much abated the former joy; but especially of
Don Edoard, who sending for the most Skilful Physicians, he commanded them to
use their utmost skill for her recovery: Whereupon, after much observation,
they told him, the pleasantest Air that could be found, would be the most
contributing to her Health; and that none could be better than near some
Forest, River, or in a pleasant Meadow: In compliance with which, he that
would spare no Charge to give her ease, who was as dear to him as life,
commanded a Royal Pavilion to be made, and afterward to be carried with all
things necessary and fit for the Entertainment of the Princess, to the Verge of
a pleasant Grove, by which run a Silver trill of Water, Meandering the flowery
Meads: And hither was the Princess brought in a Chair of State, and things made
in as ample manner for her Reception as if she had been in her Lords Palace:
But as Fortune would have it, when she began, through the means that were daily
used to recover her Health and Strength, a fearful noise was heard in the
Forest, which the Prince and his Nobles supposing to be made by some Wild
Beast, Armed and Mounted on Horseback, when immediately they espied amongst
the Thickets, a monstrous Wild Boar, with horrid Tusks and flaming Eyes;
whereupon the Dogs were uncoupled, and the Prince followed swiftly after the
flying Beast, insomuch that his Nobles soon lost sight of him; nor could they,
notwithstanding the loud shouts they made, have any answer; so that night
coming on, they resolved to return to the Pavilion, for thither they imagined
their Lord would come; yet were they greatly perplexed least he should sustain
any damage: Howsoever, return they did, and comforted the Princess in the best
wise, least through grief, she might Relapse.

The Prince separated from his Nobles as aforesaid, and night coming fast upon
him, he having wandered in vain to find the Pavilion as long as the night
continued; by this time being weary and faint, having also lost his Game,
descended from his Horse, and fastening him to a spreading Beach, laid himself
down upon the Grass, thinking with the mornings Dawne to be upon his way; when
restlesly passing over the tedious Dark, in often considering the affliction
the Princess would be in for want of his Company, up he gets the next morning,
and passes along the side of a pleasant River, till he espied a fair Castle, at
which he intended to inquire his way: Where upon his arrival, he found the
Gates open, and a Porter standing before them, who welcomed the Prince,
desiring him to enter, which he did, and found it to be a spacious place,
richly adorned, and in such good order, that he could not refrain wondering
thereat; when as he no sooner passed through a great Hall, but entering the next
Room, he was encountered by a beautiful Lady, who appeared to be Governess of
the Castle, to whom he made low obedience, and she returning the like
Complement, welcomed him in a courteous manner, demanding his Name, Country,
and the occasion of his coming thither; all which he told her; whereat she
seemed wonderfully pleased, and entreated him in all love, to honor her Castle
for that night with his presence, and that the next morning she would dismiss
him with a guide to the place he sought. The Prince invited in this manner by a
beautiful Lady, could not in point of Generosity, refuse such a Courtesy,
though his heart was still with fair Flerida: And thereupon the Tables were
spread with Provision of every sort, and Wine in abundance, all brought in by
invisible ways; and over and above, the most Melodious Music was heard, but no
persons or Instruments seen; which raised an admiration in the Prince what it
should mean; yet being a Man of a daring resolution, he resolved if possible,
to see the utmost of the Adventure verily believing, as indeed it was true,
that the Lady was an Enchantress; and that whatever he had observed was created
by the power of Magic: Yet down he sat, and immediately perceived all the
Seats filled with either Sexes, in rich Attire, who to his thinking, were
really so; and that they fed heartily as himself imagined he did. The Banquet
tnded, they rose up to Dance, and after that vanished; whereupon the Lady came
to the Prince and bid him be of good cheer, entertaining him with amorous
glances, and night being come, she demanded of him, whether he would be
conducted to his Lodging? To which, by reason of his long Travel, and
all-nights Lodging before, he readily consented: When diverse seeming Gallants
attended him, as also did the Lady and her Damsels; so that in his Fathers
Court he never was more Nobly attended; when entering his Chamber, he found
diverse Lamps of Gold burning, whose flames were fed with Naptha and Apthaltis,
all the Ceeling appearing to be fretted Gold, and the Walls hung round with
curious Pictures, representing Wars and Stories of Knights: The floor was
Cedar, and the Bed of Purple Velvet, Fringed with Gold, and all Embroidered
over with Pearl and Stones, that dazzled by reflected Light, the admiring
Princes eyes, who had never seen the like before: Yet to Bed he went, and soon
by Magic Spells, was Charmed into slumber; when as Eutrope the fair
Enchantress, sent her Virgin to fetch the Princes Sword which he had put under
his Beds-head, to resist any Enchantment that might be practiced upon his
Person; that Sword being of such virtue, that no Spells had power to injure him
whilst it was in his possession; the which the Damosel having effected, the
Enchantress sent it to Dramusiande her Kinsman, a Monstrous Giant, and one that
sought the ruin of Don Edoard for the death of his Father, slain in an attempt
by Fredrick the Princes Father; who upon notice of what had passed, hasted to
the Castle, and rudely pressing into the Princes Chamber with many
Exclamations, awaked him, threatening to revenge what had happened by the hand
of the Father, upon the Son; whereat the Prince starting from his slumber, and
perceiving himself in danger, groped for his Sword, but finding it gone, he,
like a Lion beset with Hunters, scorning to be afraid, grasped a Pillar of the
Bed, and tearing it down, laid at his Monstrous Foe, but being oppressed by
multitudes, was forced to yield; and thereupon the Giant at the instance of
Eutrope, granting him his life, cast him into Irons, and conveyed him into a
strong Prison on the top of the Castle, where in great misery he continued many
years, as will in the sequel appear.

CHAP. II.
How Don Edoard suffered in Prison, and who the Giant was: How the Princess
Flerida was delivered in the Pavilion of two fair Sons, which were taken thence
by a Savage Man, to feed the Lions; and what happened to Sir Fridos, Son to the
Duke of Gauls, during his riding in quest of Don Edoard.

THE Prince being thus taken as it were in a Snare, bewailed not so much his
Captivity as it grieved him to think how the Princess and his Father would
take his absence; yet with a Manly Courage he resolved to brave his Fate,
seeing sorrow would be nothing available. Now the cause why the Grant
Dramusiand's Father fell, was this: The Emperor of Greece, named Palmerin, and
Trineus, Son to the Emperor of Germany, being in England, the latter fell in
love with the fair Princess Agricola, Daughter to Fredrick, and Sister to Don
Edoard, who so far prevailed, that he was in great likelihood to have her in
Marriage: But so it happened, that the Princess and diverse Knights and Ladies,
attending the Queen and Princess Agricola to a neighboring Forest, there to
Recreate themselves: Frenaque a monstrous Giant, Father to Dramusiand, desirous
to get the Princess in Marriage, and having been taking the opportunity of
their being unarmed, came upon them with twenty of his followers, and in spite
of the resistance they made, took from them the Queen and Princess; of which
King Fredrick having notice, caused them all to Arm themselves, and pursued the
Giant, when overtaking him, a fierce Combat began, in which the Giant and
almost all his followers, were slain, and diverse of the Princes and Knights on
the other hand, sore-wounded; so that the Queen and Princess were at that time
rescued, which made the Enchantress Eutrope, Sister to Frenaque, vow revenge,
and incite the Son to take satisfaction for his Mothers Blood upon any of the
Kingly race, where ever he could conveniently meet them; the Enchantress in the
mean while using her utmost endeavor to bring them into his power, which she
first effected upon the Prince, as is before said: Yet soon after, the Giant a
little relenting, took off his Irons, and gave him liberty to walk about the
Castle; yet so great was the grief of the Princess for his loss, that after
diverse Knights had searched for him in vain, and chiefly for Sir Pridos, Son to
the Duke of Gauls, who had notice of his being alive, by Argonida the
Enchantresses Daughter, but not of the place of his residence, she fell in
Labor, and was delivered of two fair Sons, one of which was, by her express
command, Baptized by the Name of Palmerin, according to the Name of her Father;
and the other Florin du Deserta, or Florin of the Forest; the better for the
future to put her in mind of the hardship she had sustained: At what time being
persuaded by her Ladies to leave that solitary place, and retire to the Court,
she resolved upon it; when in the mean time, by the power of the Enchantress,
the two Infants were taken from her by force in this manner.

A Fellow, who from his Infancy being nourished amongst Wild Beasts, with whom
he became so familiar, that the fiercest would fawn upon him: Espying the
Pavilion on the Verge of the Forest, in which he had a Cave, came boldly into
it, and seeing the two Infants lying in the Cradle, took them in his arms and
bore them thence in spite of the weak resistance the unarmed Knights and
shrieking Ladies made; which redoubled the Princesses grief, who weak as she
was, crept out of her Bed, and sent her eyes after him, till by speedy flight
he was absconded amongst the thickest Trees.

CHAP. III.
How Sir Pridos came to Court, and declared the unwelcome News, and of the
grief that thereon ensued; what became of the young Princess, and how upon
notice of Don Edoards Loss at Constant^nople, Prince Primalion, Son to the
Emperor, went in search of him.

SIR Pridos having a long time in vain searched after his good Friend, and not
being able to discover the place of his abode, and having acquainted the
Princess with the words of the Damosel, he went to Court as to prepare for the
beautiful Flerinas Reception, and to give the King and Queen what information
he could, when during his absence, the Children were taken away.

This good Knight arriving at the Court, and affirming what before was rumoured
with much uncertainty, filled every Breast with grief, especially the Queens,
who for loss of her Son, took on beyond measure; so that long it was e're the
King could comfort her; yet in the understanding he was alive, and that in time
his deliverance would be wrought, she began to be more temperate, and to expect
the best: Whereupon order was taken to fetch the disconsolate Princess to the
Court; upon whose arrival, the loss of the Royal Infants being known, drew
second streams of tears from many eyes: Nor would the Princess be comforted,
but as often as she might, retired, and greatly bewailed her sad misfortune;
desiring that the Emperor her Father and Prince her Brother, then residing at
Constantinople, might be made acquainted with what had happened: Which Request
of hers was granted; and Sir Argolant, Son to Duke Horten, charged with the
doleful Message, Embarquing, soon arrived; and to the great grief of all that
heard it, became the relator of the doleful News, as will hereafter appear.

Now the Savage-Man that took the young Children being about to give them to
the Lions that he kept to Hunt with, moved with remorse, became more mild,
pitying the Innocents, who smiled upon the grim-fac'd Wretch, and opened their
pretty Arms, as it were to Embrace him; insomuch, that altogether altering his
determination, he delivered them to an Old Woman that lived in a Cave in that
Forest, to do with them as she pleased; not knowing to whom they appertained,
brought them up as well as she might, in whose protection I shall for a while
leave them.

Argolant, as it is said, arriving at Constantinople, it so happened, that at
the same time great Triumphs were acting for joy of the Birth of Polinarda,
Daughter to the Prince Primalion; there being present diverse Kings and Princes:
But when he produced his Letters of Credence, and related the doleful Story,
they was turned into Mourning, especially the Emperor and his Son made great
moan; the latter vowing in the presence of them all, that he would spend the
greatest part of his life in search of the worthy Don Edoard; and with him
joined diverse of the Nobles; nor could the tears of their Ladies, nor any
persuasions of their Friends, obliege them to alter their determinations.

The Prince not to be less then his word, having settled his Affairs, and taken
leave of his Friends, Armed himself as did the Nobles that attended him; and so
furnished in the best manner, they secretly left the City, each Knight having
his Esquire; when being without the Gates, they took several ways, resolving to
search in the Courts of Princes for the absent Prince, and not return till they
had heard tidings of him; and so Sir Argolant was dismissed with many rich
Presents.

CHAP. IV.
How Prince Primaleon in his Adventures, met the sorrowful Funerals which
Pendritia made for being rejected by Don Ed^ard, why he led a solitary life,
and how young Florin straying from his Nurses Cave, was found by Sir Pridos,
and brought to the Court.

PRimaleon now separated from his Company, Traveled (only attended by his
Esquire) through diverse Countries, inquiring and making diligent search for his
absent Brother-in-Law; when in the end, arriving in the bottom of a Valley in
the Territories of Lacedemon, about the Suns declining, it on a sudden grew so
dark, and the Shade so high, that he was minded not to enter the Forest which
stood in his way: But whilst he was musing, and Night coming fast on, there
issued out of a small Lodge, a Troop of Ladies all in Mourning, with Torches in
their hands, following a Mourning Coffin; at which the Prince much wondered,
especially in such a solitary place; wherefore approaching them, and espying
one more Beautiful then the rest, he addresses himself to her in this manner:

Fair Lady, let me as a Stranger, entreat you to suffer me to understand the
reason of this Mournful Object, in a place where I deemed no Mortal had dwelt;
and why those Clouds of sorrow sit on a face so lovely, which nevertheless is
beautiful in Tears; and if you have been injured, I swear by my Knighthood to
do you Justice, at the hazard of my Life.

Upon this Request, the Lady having well noted his comely Personage, modest
Speech, and courteous Deportment, fetching a deep sigh, replied: Sir Knight, my
Name is Pandritia, Daughter to the King of Lacedemonia, whose unfortunate ha^
it was, to fall in Love with Don Edoard, who delivered my Brother King Ternaes
by his Valor, out of the Enchanted Castle of Des noires Oiseaux: But that
Prince having before given his heart to the happy and fair Flerida, instead of
the Substance, left me only his Picture, which being dressed in Funeral Weeds,
I am about to Interr, hoping by that means, to delude my grief for the absence
of him I love as dear as life. This said, Primaleon lifting up the Paul, saw
there, to his amazement, the lively Portraiture of his dear Friend; insomuch
that at first he verily believed it was: he Whereupon comforting the Lady, he
himself attended that Fantastic Funeral to a dolesome place covered all with
black. and hung round with the Pictures and Tragic Stories of Unfortunate
Lovers; but into it the Prince was denied entrance, unless he would devote his
future days to Mourning; which he refusing, kindly took his leave, and passed
on in search of the Substance, whom Pardri^ia upon notice of his loss, supposed
to be dead, where we must leave them for a while, and return into England,

Don Edoard not being yet released from his confinement, though twelve years
had passed, great search was made after him; when as Sir Pridos coming to the
Forest, near unto which the Princess Flerida had lost her Children, he espied
a Beautiful Youth sitting very Pensive, resembling Don Edoard so much, that at
a distance he verily believed it to be him; when coming closer, he demanded the
cause of his sadness, and what brought him to that desolate place? To which he
replied, That he had been Hunting in the Forest, and had lost both his Game
and himself, not knowing how to find the way to his Cave. Cave! said Sir
Pridos, Why! do you live in a Cave? Yes, replied the Youth, I was brought up in
this Forest ever since I can remember, by an Old Woman and a Savage Man, who
daily Hunts with Lions, and Shoots Wild Beasts.

By this means Sir Pridos verily conceived it was one of the Princess Fleridas
Sons; wherefore he so dealt with him, that mounting him behind him, he brought
him to the Court clad in a Hearts Skin only, and presented him to the King, who
seeing the lively Image of his Son portrayed in his face by Natures Pencil,
comforted the Princess, and assured her, that it must by all Circumstances, be
one of her Sons: Whereupon she greatly rejoiced, and Dressing him in Princely
Attire, caused him to be instructed in all things necessary for accomplishment,
so that it soon appeared by his singular Carriage and Demeanor, that he was of
Noble Birth; and did afterward happen to be Florina du Deserta, the youngest
Son of Don Edoard, and his Princess Flerida, as shall in the Series of this
History, be made manifest.

CHAP. V.
How the Savage-Man was grieved for the loss of Florina: How the young Prince
Palmerin, walking to seek his Brother, departed thence with Polendos, King of
Thess^lia, who carried him to Constantinople; and how it was revealed by a
Damosel, what he should afterward be.

YOung Florina as aforesaid, being taken from the Forest, the Savage-man was
extremely grieved for his absence, supposing his Lions, who returned all bathed
in the blood of a Heart, had slain him; so that in a desperate mood, he slew
them by way of Revenge: But what did more increase his Rage, was, for that
young Palmerin going with Sylvan the Savage-mans Son, to seek his Brother, was
soon after wanting, being carried away in the following manner. The two Youths
Traveling till weary, beheld a fair green Bank, which overlookt from a rising
Hill, the Calm and gentle Ocean: Where reposing themselves, and falling asleep,
a Gally came to shore, in which was Polendos King of Thessaly, then in search
of Don Edoard and Primaleon; who viewing a pair of such lovely Youths in so
desolate a place, took them on Board; and having caught some Venison, and taken
in fresh Water, set Sail, and Coasting many Countries, at last returned to
Constantinople, where all was yet in heaviness; when upon their Landing, the
King presented the Emperor with young Palmerin, who for his Beauty and
Strength, was admired by all: When as the Emperor conceiving an unusual joy at
the Reception of such a Present, sent him to his Granddaughter, the fair
Polinarda, who Entertained him as her Servant, and for the love of whom the
Prince did Wonders, as in the Sequel will appear.

The young Prince now flourishing in the Grecian Court, and gaining the esteem
of all; it happened on a day, at a high Feast where a number of great
Personages were present, that a Damosel in Armor came riding upon a White
Steed, and (...) lighting in the Yard before the Palace, desired an Officer to
introduce her into the Emperors presence, which being done, she delivered a
Letter from Thrasmenia the Inchantress, wherein was presaged the future
Greatness of young Prince Palmerin, as follows.

To the Most Renowned and Invincible Palmerin, Emperor of Greece, Salutations.
Renowned Emperor,
AT whose Name the Enemy trembles, and good Subjects rejoice; in whose Court
Fame is the Riches of the Valiant, and Friendship the reward of the Virtuous
and Venterous: I wish thy State as permanent as thy Deeds have been Puissant,
and the Unanimity of thy Friends to prosper in long amity of happy Fortune. The
young Prince you have received into your Court, although you may judge it
incredible, yet shall you find it certain, (when Fate is ripe for Birth) is
descended of two of the most Puissant Princes the World affords; and himself
shall prove as great and Victorious: wherefore let his Entertainment be such as
his Honor Merits, and his Estemation according as his Valor does declare; for
he it is that must defend your Imperial Diadem when it shall be in greatest
danger, and render you the Darling of Fortune; beloved of thy Enemies as of thy
nearest Friends. By his means likewise, shall two Unfortune Princes enjoy their
Liberty, none (himself excepted) being able to deliver them; forasmuch as he
shall mount highest in the favor of Fortune, and be the Glory of Knighthood.
So leaving what has been premised, to be fulfilled when time has Circuled the
Minutes set by Destiny, wishing all Felicity to your Imperial Majesty, I rest

Your assured and faithful Friend and Servant, THRASMENIA.


This Letter did not a little amaze the Emperor, though inwardly he greatly
rejoiced; for he had heard much of the Skill of this famous Inchantress, and
therefore relied the more upon the verity of her Predictions, so that changing
the Prince from that of a Servant to a higher Degree, he caused him to be put
in a splendid Equipage, and recommended him to the Tuition and Society of his
Nobles; insomuch that he greatly profited, not only in Feats of Arms, but
Learning, to that Degree, that none in Court exceeded him; which made the
Emperor more and more place his affections upon him; insomuch that he highly
recommended him to his beauteous Granddaughter, advising her not to slight the
motions of his Love if he offered it; yet she being of tender years, did not so
well regard him as she ought, but made him for her sake, undertake many
difficult and dangerous adventures, which he performed to such admiration, that
in the end, with the consent of all, he gained the entire affections of that
incomparable beauty, as in this History will at large appear.

CHAP. VI.
How Vernar Prince of Germany, riding in search of Don Edoard, met with many
strange Adventures; and what happened between him and Belcar Duke of Duras, in
the Unfortunate Forest, etc.

AMongst many Princes and Noble Knights that were in search of Don Edoard;
Vernar the Emperor of Germany's Son, was one who undertook it at the instance
of his Mistress the fair Bazilia, being likely to run the hazard of her
displeasure if he succeeded not: When the Prince having been in diverse
Countries and heard no Tidings, he began to despair of accomplishing his
Mistresses desire and thereupon thought it shame to return to her again if he
should fail; which caused troops of melancholy thoughts to muster in his
Breast, and to revolve many things: But whilst he was Riding in that mood, only
attended by his Esquire, near the Unfortunate Forest where the Prince was
lost, he at a distance, beheld a Knight, attended likewise by a Squire, ride
toward him, but minding his way, he did not much regard him, though he
perceived he had Guilt Armor that glittered, by the reflections of the Sun,
and upon it diverse Leopards portrayed; his Shield was Silver, and in it the
Figure of a fiery Serpent.

The aforesaid Knight coming up to the Prince, Saluted him, but he regardless
of any thing but his Mistresses commands, returned not the like Salutation,
which caused the Knight to give him many unbecoming words; yet the Prince made
him no other Answer, but that he had other Affairs to trouble his mind, then to
addict himself to complement; nor believed he it was in the power of any
Knight, to oblige him to any thing contrary to his mind: Then would the Knight
of the Serpents know what Secret possessed his breast: Then said the Prince, I
shall not let you know, neither by fair means nor force shall the secret be
wrested from me. Upon this, high Words arising, they betook them to their
Spears, and running a full Course broke them, so that the Shivers flew into the
air; whereupon they drew their Swords, and began the Combat so fiercely, that
many Wounds were given and received; insomuch, that through loss of blood, they
were obliged to pause a little: at what time the Knight of the Serpents well
viewing the Princes Shield, on which was portrayed to the Life, the Picture of
the Beautiful Bazilia, with many other quaint Devices, which made him suppose
he had formerly seen that Shield, and that it was with some Friend of his he
fought; wherefore with gentle words, he began to persuade the Prince to
discover himself, who as strongly refused: So that having breathed, they began
the Fight again so furiously, that they had certainly slain each other, had not
their Esquires come running in and besought them to forbear, for that they had
either of them sufficiently tried their Strength; and so it happened, that the
Princes Esquire dropped such words, as gave the Knight of the Serpents,
knowledge with whom he fought, so that laying down his weapon he ran and
Embraced him in a most loving manner; insomuch that the Prince marveliing
thereat, returned the like Courtesy, and then drawing up the Beavers of their
Helms, they, to their great joy, knew each other, and grieved that they had
made that rash Encounter; when having suffered their Wounds to be dressed, and
refreshed themselves at an adjacent Castle, they rode in search of the strayed
Prince.

CHAP. VII.
How Eutrope gave Dramusiand to understand, the approach of Prince Primaleon;
and how upon his arrival, he Justed against Don Edoard; and by what means they
came to know each other: How the Prince in attempting to deliver him, Combated
with the Giants, and was himself taken Prisoner.

PRince Primaleon, Son to the Emperor of Greece, having sought his beloved
Brother-in-Law in diverse Countries, at length came to the English Court, where
he was highly Welcomed, as well in respect of his Nobility as Valor; yet not
being at quiet till he had heard some News of him for whose sake he had
undertaken many Adventures, he resolved to search every corner of this Island;
of which, by the secrets of her Art, Eutrope the Enchantress having notice,
advized her Kinsman, that one of the Valiantest Knights of the World would
suddenly approach his Castle, and try strange Adventures for the recovery of
Prince Edoard: Therefore she counseled him to put himself and his Castle into
the best posture of defense he might, lest he run the hazard of loosing it:
Which Counsel the Giant neglected not to observe; So that Arming his two
Gygantick Brethren, viz. Pandare and Alligan, with diverse other of his Friends:
He also obliged Don Edoard, upon the Oath of his Knighthood, which he knew he
would not violate, to oppose in Arms any that should attempt to enter the
Castle; Barring all, unless one Gate that opened to the River, on which the
Castle was situate, yet only a narrow Bridge to pass; and here the Giant
placed the Valiant Prince, who sat mounted on Horseback in Sable Armor,
having for his Device, a Flaming Heart portrayed in a Silver Shield.

The Prince Edoard had not long been upon the Bridge, with his Spear ready in
his Rest, e're Primaleon came Riding up in Green Armor, and for his Device, in
a Gold Shield he bore the troubled Ocean, so artificially drawn, that to the
beholders the Waves seemed to move: When addressing himself to Don Edoard, he
said; Sir Knight, What place is this? or how is it called? This is, said the
Prince, the Castle Perilous. Then said Primaleon, I must enter it: That you may
not do, said Prince Edoard, unless I first am Vanquished; no, nor then neither,
unless you fight against and overcome diverse Monstrous Giants. All this will I
attempt to do, said Prince Primaleon, rather then lose my desire; whereupon the
Princes prepared, and run so fiercely at each other, that they both fell from
their Horses, to their great amazement, neither of them before that time having
felt such Prodigeous strength; when drawing their Swords they Charged again,
but long they had not fought, e're some words falling between them, Don Edoard
knew Primaleons voice, and said, Most Valiant Sir, I would not, trust me,
injure you for any thing, I might thereby aquire, and am sorry I have opposed
the most accomplished of Minkind, and my beloved Brother, both by Marriage and
in Arms. Primaleon hearing this, stood no longer doubtful who it was, but
casting down his Sword, would have Embraced him, had he not been hindered by the
coming of Panda^e, a terrible Giant, who commanded Prince Edoard upon the Oath
of his Knighthood, which he had given to Dramusiand, to retire, which he did;
and then Prince Primaleon would have followed, but the Giant churlishly thrust
him back, and stood to oppose him, which so enraged the Prince, that Charging
upon the Monster with his Glittering Sword, that giving him a fierce blow, he
made him stagger three Paces back; whereat the Giant smoke the Prince on the
Shield and clove it in sunder, leading him unguarded unless with his Sword; yet
nothing daunted, he fought so manfully, that he soon brought his Foe into great
distress, and had slain him, had not Alligan his Brother, a Giant more fierce,
come to his assistance: Then wished the Prince for his Brothers aid, who by
reason of his Oath, could not assist him, though in his heart he wished him
success; yet not dismayed, the Grecian Prince obstinately continued the
Combat, till this second Giant was greatly distressed; insomuch, that
Dramusiand doubting to whom the Victory would fall, came Armed to the Combat;
yet admiring the Valor of the Heretic Prince, he first by smooth deceitful
words endeavored to win him to accord, that so he might have him in his power,
but finding his Rhetoric no way forcible to work upon an invincible
resolution, for he had set down his Resolution, either to free his Friend, dye,
or remain Prisoner with him; the latter of which, after a dreadful Combat, and
many wounds on either side fell to his Lot, for the Prince having maintained
the Combat against so many freshmen (at last fainting through loss of Blood)
was seized by the three Giants and carried into the Castle, yet having him in
their power, prizing his Valor at a high rate, they used him courteously,
comforting him, and dressing his wounds, not forbiding him to see his dear
Friend Edoard, for whose sake he had hazarded his Life, with hopes in time of
has their deliveries; and so for many years they continued together, till they
were delivered; as the Sequel of this History will appear.

CHAP. VIII.
How Palmerin the Emperor Knighted Prince Palmerin, and diverse other young
Princes and Lords, and appointed a Turnament, which they began, where two
Strange Kts. arrived in Green Armor, and what else befell during the pastime.

THe Young Prince Palmerin is now grown to man's Estate, and having well
approved his Strength and Courage, the Emperor resolved no longer to withhold
him from the Order of Knighthood, and that he might be the more Graced thereby,
he caused a Royal Feast to be made, and Assembled diverse Noble Princes and
Lords, and upon Easter Day, after Divine Service was done, the Emperor took the
Prince in his hand, and declared his intent. Whereupon all the Ensigns of
Knighthood being brought, Frizel King of Hungary fastened on his Spurs, and what
most pleased the Prince, the Fair Polinarda Girded his Sword about him by her
Fathers command, for whose sake afterward the Prince did wonders. Then were
diverse other Princes and Lords Knighted, as Gracian Son to the French King,
Berolde Prince of Spain, as also were Onistalde and Dramian his two Brothers,
Estrelant Son to the Hungarian King, Don Rousel, Blesart, Son to Belcar,
Belizand Son to King Tersius, Lyman of Burgundia, Son to the Duke of Tyrole,
Francian, Son to the King of Thessaly, Francilinus Polinardus, Son to the
German Emperor, Adrian Son to Majortes, German Son to the Duke of Orleance,
Attenebrant, Son to the Duke of Tirendos, Attremoran, Son to the Duke Lecesin,
Frizold, Son to Duke Drapos of Normandy, and Nephew to the King of Hungary,
with many others that had been trained up in the Emperors Court.

The Order of Knighthood conferred on the aforesaid Heroic Youths, Suits and
Armor was ordered for them, of the Richest that might be had, when as in
honor of them, a Sumptuous Feast was made, and every one of them placed in the
Great Hall, acording to their degrees; which ended, they prepared for
Turnament; the place for that purpose being before allotted, diverse expert
Captains being ordered to Marshal them, the Emperor having appointed Palmerin
to Lead the Gallant Troop, who in bright Armor Studded over with Diamonds and
other Precious Stones, showed like a Star, when as to see them the Emperor,
Empress, and the Beautiful Princess Gridonia and Polinarda, with diverse other
of Quality, and Transcendent Beauty took their places, at what time, all the
Princes being in a readiness, Young Palmerin Advanced, and Couched his Spear
against Libusan, a reputed Famous Grecian Knight, and in his full Career,
hiting him on the Breast, tumbled him from his Horse, which greatly rejoiced
the Emperor, but more, the Beauteous Princess Polinarda: by his example, all
the other Knights Iusted, and did brave Exploits, to the pleasure and amazement
of the Spectators; but above all, the young Prince Palmerin bore away the
Prize, not only at the Lance, but at the Sword, using it so Dexterously, that
it was admirable but in the height of the Pastime, entered two strange Knights
in Green Armor, who dealt so furiously, that they overthrew diverse of the
Princes Train, which he perceiving, bowed to his Fair Mistress Polinarda, and
setting his Spear in his Rest, advanced to oppose them; one of these Knights
had Portrayed in his Shield a Savage Mare, leading a Brace of Lions, and from
thence was Styled the Knight of the Savage man, but the other bore no device:
against the former the Prince addressed himself, but found such opposition,
that he wondered greatly, for either of their Spears shivered in the Air, yet
neither of them were so much as moved; upon which, drawing their swords, they
began a fiercer Combat, which the Emperor fearing might end in the hurt of
either of them, sent to require them to forbear, for that they had sufficiently
proved each others strength; but they made it their supplication that they
might try it, and so continued without gaining upon each other, fighting to the
Amazement of the Spectators, till it was duskish, at which time the Emperor
caused the retreat to be sounded, and that every Knight should retire to the
Palace, as for the other Green Knight, he was Encountered by Platire, Son to
Primalion, and soon overthrown.

This days Iusts being ended, and night come on, all but the two Green Knights
returned to the Palace, where disarming themselves and feasting sumptuously,
they fell to dancing with the Ladies, performing it with great Dexterity, but
here the Prince through bashfulness missed of his wish, for he verily hoped to
have been honored with his Mistresses fair hand, but whilst he stood doubting,
her Brother chose her, and so each by his example taking the Lady that fell to
his Lot, or that he best liked; all that night was spent in pastime and Iolitry.

CHAP. IX.
How the Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley, sent a Shield to the Prince
Palmerin, which was taken from a Damosel on the way, by the Knight of the
Savage man, and how the Prince recovered it: Who Sage Aliart was, and why she
sent the Shield.

MOrning come, as all the Knights were preparing for the Turnament, a Damosel
both Beautiful and Richly attired came into the Hall, and having well viewed
the Knights, made Obeisance to the Emperor, and in words addressed her self as
follows:

Mighty Sir, said she, having been lately much abused in your Dominions, and
knowing that it is the Flower of Knighthood to revenge the Quarrels of injured
Damsels, I come to your Court to have Redress, then know dread Sir, I being
sent by Sage Aliart of the Obscure Valley, who wishes all happiness to you,
and your Posterity, with a Shield, as a present, to the Noble Prince Palmerin.
As I passed through the Forest of Clear-Fountain, I met with a Knight in Green
Armor, having a Savage man leading two Lions, Portrayed in his Shield, who
unkindly took it from me, saying, that if any of the Knights of your Majesty's
Court was so hardy as to win it from him, he would abide their coming in that
place for the space of three days, wherefore that it may be adventured, for I
make it my request. The Damsel having made this Relation, the Emperor and all
the Knights present were greatly troubled, but Prince Palmerin was at that time
waiting upon his Mistress; when as every one did offer to undertake the
Adventure, yet the Emperor would suffer none to do it till he had acquainted
the Prince therewith; but diverse envying his rising Glories, contrary to the
knowledge of the Emperor, stole from the Court, and finding the Green Knight.
Iusted with him, but were not able to stand before him; when in the end, the
Damsel being highly Rewarded, the Prince attended by diverse Knights, mounted,
and Rode to the place; where he found those that had advanced without order,
overthrown, Horse and man; which caused him to make ready for the Charge, but
the Green Knight who before had tried his strength, and having knowledge from
the Damsel that the shield could be worn by no other Knight, he retired, and
suffered him to take it down, by which means he found it appertained to him.
Then they kindly embraced, and the Prince caused the Green Knights Wounds to be
dressed, and favorably Invited him to the Court, but he refused to go, as not
being at that time willing to be known.

The Prince having recovered the Shield, in the midst of which was a Palm Tree,
Lively Portrayed; returned in Triumph, and was highly welcomed, and honored of
all: When as a second Turnament began, in which he behaved himself more
Valiantly then before, and at that time entirely won the Affections of the Fair
polinarda, on whom he was extremely Enamoured, though she long hid her Love,
which caused him to undertake many great and dangerous Adventures. The Sage
Aliart of whom we before made mention, Son to Manoda a great Sorceress, who
from his Infancy trained him up in her Devilish Art, so that by that means, he
soon exceeded her in Witchcraft, insomuch that he had perfect knowledge from
all places what had happened, and of future Fate. This Aliart, for his better
retirement, Built him a Castle in a dismal gloomy Valley, overspread with
Trees, and Walled on either side with Craggy and inaccessable Mountains, where
he Studied, and by Spirits had frequent notice what Eutrope and Dramusiand did,
whose Enchantments he strove to frustrate, and deliver the Knight by his
Superior power, but found that the Fates had perfixed a certain time, and the
man that was to effect it; wherefore that Prince Palmerin might be free from
all enchantments, he sent him the aforesaid Shield.

CHAP. X.
How Prince Verner, and Duke Belchar, in the Company of Polendos, King of
Thessaly, arrived at Dramusiand's Castle, where entering Combat, they were all
taken Prisoners: How Recinde King of Spain, and Arendos King of France,
traveled in Search of Don Edoard, and of the Adventures that befell them.

PRince Verner, and Duke Belchar, having cured the wounds they received
fighting against each other, resolved to pass on thorough the Perilous valley
in search of Don Edoard, and so long they rode, that they came within sight of
the Gyant^s Castle, who standing upon his Guard, determined if possible to take
them Prisoners; when as they were musing, so it happened; Polendos King of
Thessaly, came Riding up to them, with whom being formerly acquainted, and
knowing his Task was the same with theirs, they kindly Saluted him, and he
them, so that discoursing together, they came to the Castle Gate, where upon
the Bridge they perceived a Knight in Black Armor, who did them deffante, this
Knight was Don Edoard, who by Dramusiands appointment was set to guard the
passage; when as these three Knights strained Complements with each other who
should begin the Encounter; but in the end, Prince Verner obtained his wish but
in the first Encounter he was unhorsed, whereupon he drew his Sword, but Don
Edoard refused him, saying, it was the pleasure of the Lord of the Castle that
he should have no more than the first Onset, then Belchar came against him, but
was overthrown as the former was, as also the third; then he retiring, the
Giant Pandare came against Prince Verner who was entering the Gate, and forbid
him further access, which he perce^ving, drew his Sword, so that between them
began a dreadful Combat, but whilst Belchar and Polindos were coming to his
relief, the Princes Sword with a mighty Stroke he gave the Giant, broke in the
middle, whereupon, his Shield being cleft and he left defencless, Pandare gave
him such a stroke over the head with his Mate, as brought him to the ground,
and laid him in a Trance, but by this time, Belchar and Polindos came up, and
gave the Giant diverse wounds, which Aligant his Brother perceiving, came
running to his Rescue with a mighty Battle-Ax, and so laid about him, that
though himself received many wounds, and that Pandare through loss of blood was
fallen to the ground, he brought the King and Duke to his mercy, when disarming
them, he carried them by main force into the Lodging of Don Edoard and
Primaleon, who pitying their hard misfortune, comforted them in the best
manner, and used such means as soon cured their wounds, acquainting them with
the nature of the Castle, and all that had happened from the time of their
coming thither, till that day. Now it happened that four days after came
Recinde King of Spain, and Arendos King of France, in search of the Princes,
viz. Edoard, and Primaleon, who having searched diverse Courts and Countries, at
length arriving in Britain, and hearing that many brave Knights were lost in
the unfortunate Forest they greatly fancied the Princes might be there,
confined by some that dwelt therein; whereupon entering, they rode so long till
they came to a Broad way that led directly to the Castle of Dramusiand, when
approaching it, they beheld two Knights come against them the other way, one of
which had Armor spotted with Crimson, and the other all black, bearing for his
device a Greyhound; these Knights likewise came in search of the Princes, when
at the bridge where Don Edoard stood prepared to receive them, they all met,
and resolved upon the Combat; but so it happened between Arendos and the Black
Knight, that they could not agree about prehemenency, who should first enter
the Bridge, but passed so many sharp words, that at length though Don Edoard
used many words to persuade them therefrom, they prepared for the Combat,
which Recinde and the other Knight perceiving, did the like, insomuch that in
the first Encounter being all unhorsed, they with great fury drew their Swords,
and gave and took so many deadly wounds, that through loss of blood they
fainted, whereupon the Giants came upon them, and by strength of Arms taking
them Prisoners, carried them into the Castle, where their wounds were dressed,
and they entertained with Civil respect by their friends they found there, and
their Helmets being off, the two strange Knights proved to be Majortes, and
Belagris, both Valiant Knights.

CHAP. XI.
How Prince Palmerin departed secretly from the Emperors Court to seek
adventures, stiling himself the Knight of Fortune; how he came to the Enchanted
Castle, and what adventure befell him.

PRince Palmerin being now twenty years of age, greatly desired to win Immortal
Fame abroad, as other Renowned Worthies had done, and thereby increase the
esteem Polinarda had of him, yet loath was he to go without her consent;
wherefore he watched all advantage to find all time to speak to her, which was
not long wanting, for finding her one day fitting melancholy alone, he sat
down by her, and after much discourse, surcharged with passion, thus began.

Fair Mistress of all my thoughts; that I love you above any earthly Creature,
and would willingly prove it, at the hazard of my Life, I hope you are not
Ignorant, for certain it is, none can better deserve my service then your
Incompareable self, who are Natures Chief Masterpiece, and the wonder of your
Sex; but such is the thirst of Glory that reigns in Mortals Breasts, that to
tell you my secret thoughts, I have determined for a while to forezo so great a
blessing, and seek Renown abroad, when with louder Victory, and gread
Achievements I shall return with joy, to lay my self and Trophies at your feet.

This Speech, greatly surprised the Princess, who entirely loved him, and
caused rears to over cast her Starry-eyes, when fetching a Sigh that almost
rent her tender Breast, she made this Reply; Sir, that I have given you
manifest hopes of obtaning my favor, I must Blushing own, and yet conjecture,
that such freeness in me, has created dislike in you, or else you would not
mention leaving my Fathers Court. Not so, said the Prince, for it is for your
sake I would adventure, that so I may in some sort render my self worthy of so
great and Inestimable a Jewel; therefore by you Encouraged, I shall be the more
Fortunate; but I shall not, replied the Princess, consent to your departure: I
beg, said the Prince, that you would alter your resolves, and in that make me
happy* can that make you happy then said the Princess? nay then e'n take your
course, it is a slight excuse to leave me, because you Love me not; therefore
since you light such true affection, I here renounce the Love I bare you, and
from henceforth charge you to see my face no more, and thereupon, in a great
Rage, she flung away, not giving the Prince leave to respond, but left as one
Thunderstruck, so far amazed at what he had heard, that it was long e're he
recovered his stupid Senses, when Recollecting manly Virtue, he resolved upon
what he had determined, not doubting to perform such Noble Exploits, as might
render him worthy of his Mistresses Love, and overcome her anger; whereupon,
revealing his mind to Sylvian his Esquire, who had vowed not to leave him in
any Adventure, he secretly armed himself, and taking the Shield, sent him by
Sage Aliart, mounted, and in the twy-light left the City undiscovered, to the
great trouble of the Emperor and the whole Court; and so under the name of the
Knight of Fortune he rode through many Deserts, without finding any Adventure;
but coming at last to a Castle surrounded with Trees, and overgrown with green
Moss, and hearing Music therein, he alighted, and gave his Horse to his
Esquire, and entered, where he perceived a Knight in mourning Weeds, tuneing to
a Lute his Mistrisses praise, who being highly offended at the Prince's hold
instruction, laying aside his Music, ran to arm himself, vowing to chastise
him, which the Prince perceiving, went out and mounted, there expecting his
Adversary, who was not long wanting, so that a fierce Encounter began; but the
Prince, whose Courage was highthened by the thoughts of fair Polinarda, soon
disarmed him, and brought him to his mercy; when as he commanded him (seeing
that he had so unjustly quarrelled with him) to unsay all that he had said in
the praise of his Mistress, or prepare for Death; but finding him resolutely
bent, rather to dye than do it, and at the same time considering his own case,
he not only pardoned him, but commended his fidelity, and so mounting, left the
place.

Now this Knight was called The Knight of Death, and bare the Portraicture of
Death in his Shield, holding himself before that time invincible.

CHAP. XII.
Who The Knight of Death was, and the cause of his solitary Life: How Prince
Palmerin fought for the Passage of a Bridge; and of other Adventures.

THis Knight of Death was Son to the King of Sardagina, who falling in Love
with fair Altea, one of his Mothers Ladies of Honor, and Daughter to the Duke
of Goelicia, his Father, to cross his love (having designed to marry him to the
Queen of Sicilia, and he being avers thereto) caused the beauteous Altea to be
Poisoned; whereupon this Knight (named ^^oriman) stiling himself the Knight of
Death privately retired from the Court, and betook himself to the solitary
place where the Prince found him, singing Songs in praise of her to her
Picture, as if she had been alive: And there he continued in like manner after
the departure of the Prince, till his Father hearing where he was, compelled
him to return.

The Prince having left the Knight of Death in his solitary retirement, much
grieving at his foil, passed on, till coming to a Bridge, he found three
Knights striving against a single Knight, for the passage, who bare for his
Device a Bull-head, and so puissant was he, that he foiled them, tumbling them
to the Ground, which the Prince perceiving, addressed him against, but they both
meeting with force more than humane, fell from their Horses, when drawing their
Swords, they fought with great fury, till in the end the Knight of the Bull (by
a wound he received on his Head) fell to the ground, upon which the Prince
stood up, and bid him at the peril of his Life disclose his Name, and the
reason of his keeping that passage, which he did as follows: viz.

That his Name was Pompides, Son to Don Edoard and Argolanta Queen of the
Enchanted Island; and that he having received diverse wounds from two Knights,
whom he had slain, a beauteous Lady living in a Castle close by cured him, and
enjoined him to keep that Bridge, till he met a Knight in red Armor, with a
Lion painted in his Shield, the whom if I conquered, to bring into her
presence; and that having obeyed for three weeks, he had not in many Encounters
been foiled before.

The Prince having received this satisfaction, passed on his way; together with
his Esquire, having before obtained License for the other Knights to pass.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Knight of the Savage Man came into the Tristfull Valley, and fought
against Blandidon the Knight of the Swan, and of the sorrowful Lady Pandritia:
How Floriman the Knight of Death, coming to Constantinople, pitched his Tent,
and in Honor of his Lady Altea, combated and conquered diverse Knights.

THe Knight of the Savage Man having reresigned the Shield, as aforesaid, rode
on in search of Adventures, when coming into the Tristful Valley (where the
sorrowful Pandritia dwelt) he espied a Cave, and at the mouth of it broken
Spears and Swords, as also a Tree fast by, on which hung the Shields of such as
had been vanquished; at which whilst he was wondering, there came a Youth to
him and demanded his Shield, unless he would retire or try the Combat, and that
if he retired, and would carry his Shield with him, he adjured him upon his
Knightly Oath to own his Cowardice wherever he came; to which the Savage Knight
replied, That to retire he intended not, but to try any Combat, if he might
meet with a Combatant; when upon the (...) a Knight ^^ed at all points came out
of the C^^^ and (...) whereupon the Windows of an (...) diverse sorrowful Ladies
looked (...) see the issue of the (...) with the overthrow (...) his name,
owning That the Lady of the Castle was his Mother and the sorrowful (...)
discovered, and that by her command, (...) some, he undertook to encounter all
Knights that passed that w^^, that so they being vanquished, might simpathise
with his Mother in sorrow, and be bound by Oath to assist all sorrowful and
distressed. Then would the Knight of the Savage Man (after he had told him who
he was) have had him gone with him to the Forest of Great Britain, to try the
strange Adventure of the Castle, but he not being willing to have his Mother in
her disconsolate, condition, it was not accorded, whereupon the Knight of the
savage man passed on, and ^landi^on kept his Post.

By this time ^^orima^ the Knight of Death having left (by his Fathers command)
his solitary Mansion yet restless in the place where his beloved Altea had lost
her life, he hasted to the City of Constantinople, where he pitched two Tents
before the Emperors Palace all of black (...) wrote with Gold, and having of
the Emperor obtained leave to Just with the Knights (...) his Court, in honor
of his deceased Lady, upon condition, that such Knights as ventured to
vindicate or justify these Mistrisses beauty, should (if vanquished) resign
their (...), and have their names put into the Sepulcher of Love. The ^^^nament
began, in which diverse were overthrown, and amongst the rest, Prince Gratian,
and Gueren his Brother, ^lavian, R^^^ndor, and Emerauld, all which were
accordingly disarmed, and their names put into the Sepulcher of Love, who (...)
the contrary had won a Rich Tent of Silk, Sables, and Gold.

The Emperor perceiving the prowels of the Knight of Death, and understanding
who he was, highly applauded and approved his valor; and ^^ding none of the
Knights of the Court could stand before him, caused the Iusting to cease for
that day, when retiring into the Court, Prince Floriman was highly feasted, and
commended of all the Ladies, but his affection could fix on none, the
remembrance of his beloved Altea being still fresh in his memory; yet would he
not lodge in the Palace, though invited thereto, but (evening being come)
returned to his Tent.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the second days Just, and what happened therein; How the Knight of Fortune
met with the Green Knight, that accompanied the Knight of the Savage Man, and
what befell.

THe Knight of Death bearing away the Palm, caused many Knights (who had been
foiled in the presence of their Lady) to grieve, and wish they had been better
advised, than to have entered the List against so approved a Knight: Yet the
next day the Turnament was renewed, and diverse Knights tried their fortunes in
favor of their Ladies, as Polinardus, Berolde, the Knight of the Sphere, and
diverse others, but their success being no better than those that had Iusted
before them, they were unarmed and lead into the Tent, to offer their name at
the Sepulcher of Love.

The Knight of Death by these Adventures increasing his Fame, resolves no
longer to wear his black Armor, but changed it for one more glorious, studed
over with Gold and Diamonds, having Branches enameled on, then Pellicans with
Lovers hearts in their Beaks, and in his Shield he bare the Picture of his
Lady, being highly honored for his prowess and noble resolution of all the
Court; where I shall leave him in his change of Fortune, and follow Prince
Palmerin under the disguise of the Knight of Fortune.

The Knight of Fortune having performed many strange Adventures, in the end
came into a large Forest, where he met a Knight in Green Armor, who was in
quest of the Knight of the savage man, which Knight (proud of his strength)
would needs obliege the Prince to fight, unless he would tell him the cause of
his travel and sadness, which he utterly refusing to do, the Combat fiercely
began, and continued doubtful for the space of an hour, at what time the green
Knight (sor^ wounded) fell through loss of blood) to the Earth; when as the
Prince demanded who he was, as also the Knight of the savage man, the former of
which declared, viz. That he was son to Sir Pridos of England, had to name Don
Rosian de la Bronde; but as for the later, he refused it, saying, He was
obliged to keep it secret, upon his Oath of Knighthood, and therefore would
rather dye than reveal it; which satisfying the Prince, he left him to the Cure
of a Lady that lived hard by, to have his wounds cured, and rods all he came to
another fair Castle.

CHAP. XV.
How Palmerin having notice that the Knight of Death in honor of Altea had
overthrown all the Knights that Justed against him, he in honor of his
Mistress the fair Polinarda, returned to Constantinople, and overthrew him.

THe Knight of Fortune coming to a beautiful Castle, kept by the Lady Rianda,
intered, and was there (by the Ladys order) splendidly entertained, and those
few wounds he had received in the Encounters dressed, and well regarded: When
pleased with the pleasant citivation of, the place, he continued there so long,
till in the end Lucinda (a Lady of the Emperor's Court, and attendant on the
fair Polinarda) arrived there, being Ne^^^ to the Lady of the Castle, who
knowing the Prince, saluted him kindly, and told him what had passed, since his
sudden and unexpected departure, and what censures had passed thereon, both by
the Knights and Ladies; but above all, informed him what the Knight of Death
had done to the disgrace of all the Grecian Beauty; nor did his own Mistress
the fair Princess suffer less, for want of one to defend her cause. This news
did not a little trouble the Prince, by reason he knew not how to return so
suddenly, without a blemish to his Honor; yet considering it might be a means
to reconcile him to his love, he resolved to return in disguise to the place
where his presence was so much desired, and from whence he had been so long
absent; when as early in the morning taking leave of the Lady and Damzel,
without acquainting them which Road they intended to take, Sylvian and the
Prince departed, through many Deserts and Forests, till such time as they came
within sight of the City, where the Prince attired himself in a rich suit of
Armor, though without any Device, that he might be the better concealed: When
riding before the Palace, he espied his beautiful Mistress in the Balcony, with
many other Ladys, and found at that time the Knight of Death had overthrown a
Grecian Knight named Titubant, who justed against him, in the honor of his
Mistress the fair Cardignia, and was leading him into his Tent to unarm him;
when as entering the List, he bid the Knight of Death defiance, who (angry that
his task was not done) made ready to receive him, when meeting with their
Spheres, the Knight of Death was cast to the ground and sorely bruised, which
caused a great shout, especially among the Ladies; and by this means the Prince
got the rich Tent, and was loaded with infinite praises, every one being
desirous to know who he was, but he resolving to keep himself secret, withdrew,
and changed his Armor, so that he could not be known: When as that night the
Emperor made a great Feast in honor of his Court-Ladies, and the revenge that
had been taken on their behalf, by the unknown Knight; but though search was
made for him, by his Command, yet was he not discovered, though he fate amongst
the other Knights, and had the happiness to see his fair Mistress dance, yet
durst not speak to her. Then was the Sepulcher of love brought amongst them,
which the Ladies spoiled, every one taking her own Picture thence, which her
Knight had forfeited, in attempting to vindicate her beauty; yet Altea's
Picture was set up amongst other beautys.

Whilst this was doing, the Prince finding great enquiry was made after him,
took his Horse and Arms, and with his Esquire departed the City; where in
search of new Adventures I shall leave him a while, and return to the Knight of
the savage man.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Knight of the savage Man landed in Ireland, and fought with the Giant
Calfurnine, slew him, and delivered three Ladies he kept Prisoners in his
Castle, and gave the Castle to them.

NOw the Knight of the savage Man having left Blandidon in the Tristful Valley,
rode through many Countries, with a resolution to try the Adventure of the
Unfortunate Forest of Great Britain, which by this time began to be Famed in
all places, for the loss of so many Knights as entered into it; wherefore
imbarquing for England, and a contrary wind arising, he was driven upon the
Coast of Ireland, where beholding the pleasantness of the Countries cituation,
he was greatly desirous to land, but the Master of the ship endeavored to
persuade him therefrom, by telling him a monstrous Giant inhabited a Castle
near the shore, who was wont to kill or take Prisoner such as unadvisedly
passed that way; but this discourse was so far from displeasing the Knight,
that it (on the contrary) made him the more desirous, resolving to combat the
Giant if possible; whereupon causing the Vessel to put into a Creek, he leaped
on shore, and having gotten his Horse, rode toward the Castle, only
accompanied with his Esquire, but arriving there, he found he could not ride to
it, but with great hazard and difficulty, by reason it was placed on the top of
a steep Rock, that had but one visible ascent; wherefore leaving him below, he
mounted, only with his sword; when being on the top, three armed Knights that
attended on the Giant issued out against him, and bid him defiance, swearing
his life should pay for that bold attempt; but he little regarding their
menaces, drew his dreadful sword, and began the Combat so fiercely, that two of
them fell dead, and the other being sore wounded, retreated into the Castle;
whereupon the Giant in a great rage came fo^th, being armed with a mighty
Battail-Ax, staring dreadfully, and vowing revenge, to avoid whose fury the
Knight of the savage Man guarded himself as well as might be, still avoiding
his mighty strokes, till at last the Monster growing faint through heat, was
the less able to weild his weapons, yet had he grievously wounded the Knight in
diverse places, broke his Shield in pieces, and loosened his Armor; but he
being nimble, watched his opportunity, and struck him a full blow on the
Temples, which peirceing his Helmet, brought him to the ground, who falling,
made the Earth tremble; then he stood upon him, and hewed off his monstrous
Head; which the Ladies that he held Prisoners in the Castle perceiving, greatly
rejoiced, and coming down into the Court, (where by this time the Knight was
entered) they fell on their knees, giving him ten thousand thanks, praising him
and calling him their Deliverer; which the Knight perceiving, took them up, and
comforted them in the best wise; when as they lead him into the Castle, and
having dressed his wounds, they showed him the pleasantness of the place, with
which he was greatly delighted, the Castle having been (not many years before)
the Palace of one of the Irish Kings: But that which he was most desirous to
know, was, how and by what means they came thither, and what they were; to
which the beautiful Orianda, eldest of the three, replied, That they were
Sisters, and Daughters to the Marquess D' Baltamor, inhabiting Castles and Rich
Possessions near that place, but so it happened, that being in the company of
six Knights, making merry upon the Verge of an adjacent Forest, in a Rich
Pavillion, the Monster whom he had flain, with his Knights, came upon them as
they were unarmed, and slew three of the Knights, sorely wounding the other
three, and so by force of Arms brought them and the wounded Knights to the
Castle, and then themselves were designed for his lust, and the other as a
Sacrifice to his revenge, as soon as their wounds were healed, but that through
his happy arrival Heaven had prevented so great a wickedness.

The Ladies having thus far discovered what the Knight desired, they lead him
to the place where the Giant had cooped up diverse Knights in Iron Cages, and
kept them in extreme misery, torturing them for his pleasure, and often
threatening them with death, all which he set free, commanding them to give
their attendance upon the Ladies, and not to suffer any to in^^re them after
his departure: And so having committed the keeping of the Castle to fair
Orianda, he departed, in order to his visiting the Unfortunate Forest,
traveling toward which for a while I must leave him, and return to
Constantinople.

CHAP. XVII.
How the Emperor comforted the Knight of Death, and obliged him to forget his
heaviness, for the loss of Altea; And how it was made known by what hand he was
foiled.

THe Knight of Death greatly grieving at the disgrace he sustained, fell into a
violent Feavour; but being well recovered thereof, the Emperor caused him to be
brought to Court, where he Communed with him, and comforted him in the best
wise; laysing before him the folly of his grief, for a Lady that could not be
recovered from the cold embraces of Death, desiring him not so vainly to
misimploy his Valor, but to use it in great atcheivements, worthy the same of
so good a Knight; so that by these and such like persuasions he wrought upon
him so far, that he agreed to lay aside his pensive mood, yet not to forget his
Lady, vowing never to set his mind upon any other.

During these persuasions, Lucinda arrived at Court, and made great inquiry
after Prince Palmerin, which made the Emperor very desirous to know the reason
why she inquired for him, who was departed long before her self; wherefore he
sent for her in private, and demanded the reason, which she no ways hiding,
declared as follows: viz.

That the person who conquered Prince Floriman was no other than the Prince
Palmerin, though disguised under the Title of the Knight of Fortune; for so it
happened: That he coming to the Castle of my Aunt Rianda, at what time I went
to visit her, I found the Prince (whom I well knew) very pensive, when
inquiring into the cause, he would not tell me, but I who had been no stranger
to the love he professed toward my Lady Polinarda, guessed it proceeded (as
also did his surprising departure) from some repulse received at her fair
hands; when soon I informed him how all the Ladies beauties were eclipsed by
the Knight of Death, (which now proves to be Prince Floriman) in honor of his
Altea, whereupon the Prince without any more words taking his leave, came to
this City, attended with his Esquire, and took off that stain, by overthrowing
Floriman, in honor of his fair Polinarda, as he told me, when I met him upon
his return from the triumph, and then enjoined me that the Tent he won should
be delivered to the fair Princess, to be kept by her in remembrance of his true
affections till his return from the Unfortunate Forest of Great Britain,
whither he said he was going, to try that great Adventure. At this unexpected
news the Emperor and all the Court greatly rejoiced; nor was the Princess a
little proud, that her Servant had performed such a noble Adventure, geeiving
that she had so unkindly rewarded his true service.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Recaman came to the Emperor's Court, to maintain the Beauty of his
Mistress Lucinda, against the Knight of Fortune; And how Tremerion on his
behalf combated against him: How the Knight of Fortune arrived in England,
entered the Forest, and what there befell him.

IT being noised abroad who it was that overthrew the Knight of Death, and for
what Beauty it had been adventured, diverse of those that had been foiled were
angry in themselves; and others hoping to win the good affections of their
Ladies by so hold an undertaking, resolved to try their force against the
Knight of Fortune, whom they supposed not to be far from the Court; and amongst
those that were so minded, the chief was Recaman, Son to the King of Bohemia,
who resolved to vindicate the Beauty of his Lady Lucinda above all others, but
not finding the Knight of Fortune there, he grew impatient, earnestly inquiring
after him, and desiring to Just with him, vaunting of his Valor at such a
rate, that Tremerion Son to Duke Laciffin, and friend to Prince Palmerin, was
evil at ease to hear it, and desired the Emperor that he might undertake the
Quarrel of his absent friend, which with much difficulty was granted, and the
List made, where after the first course shivering their Spheres, they betook
them to their Swords, and fought so long, till through loss of blood Recaman
fainted and fell; when by the Emperor's command the Combat was stayed, and each
of the Combatants carried to their Lodgings, to be cured of their wounds, and
after recovery being made friends, they traveled to try the Adventure of the
Unfortunate Forest.

The Knight of Fortune, as aforesaid, having left Constantinople, traveled so
long, till arriving in France, he shipped himself for England, where landing,
after refreshing himself, he entered the Forest, not unknown to him, he having
been a part of his Life brought up therein; the which he had no sooner done,
but a Heart fleeing before a Lion, came running and couched at his feet, begging
as it were his protection, when soon after the Lion came, to oppose whom he
drew his Sword, but seeing his submission, and that he fell down as the Heart
had done, he took compassion on him, but had no time to pause, e're the savage
Man, that had been his foster-Father, came in, and according to his rude nature
(not discerning him at a distance) let fly an Arrow that pierced his Shield,
and still pressing on, the Prince opposed him with his Sword, but upon his
nearer approach, he having a better view of him, threw down his Bow and
embraced him, leading him to his Cave, and inquiring many things of him, to
which he amply answered; but above all, was inquisitive after the welfare of
his Son, whom he told him was near at hand, and that he had left him with the
Horses: Then was the savage Man desirous to tell him whose Son he was, and how
he came by him, but was interrupted by a great cry they heard in the Forest;
upon which the Prince taking his Sword, went toward it.

CHAP. XIX.
How Palmerin found Sylvan in great distress, and by what means he delivered
him: How he slew the Giant Camboldam, and met Sage Aliart of the Obscure,
Valley; and what else befell him in that place.

THe Prince hastening toward the outcry, found four men armed, beating and
draging Sylvan in a most tyrannical manner; whereupon advancing toward them,
he commanded them as they loved their lives to release him; but they little
regarding his words, commanded him likewise to render, himself their Prisoner,
which the Prince (who had not been used to such kind of language) disdaining,
they struck furiously at him, which occasioned him to draw his Sword, and lay
courageously about him, insomuch, that they soon repented meeting with such a
bold Champion, for within less than an hour three of them were slain, and the
fourth upon his knees begged life; which the Prince had no sooner granted, but
up came a dreadful Giant with two men leading the Horses Sylvan held, and
finding his men slain and wounded, with great fury ran at the Prince, who as
nimbly avoided his stroke and gave him a wound on his right arm, that made him
drop his Sword, of which the Prince taking the advantage, smote him upon the
Helmet with such force, as cleft it, and the Sword passing three Inches into
his Scull, brought him to the ground, which advantage the Prince perceiving,
stood upon him, and smote off his Head; which the men that held the Horses
perceiving, fell upon their knees and begged their lives, saying, That they
were constrained to attend the Giant, who was Brother to Calfurnine, slain by
the Knight of the savage Man, and for that cause had vowed revenge on all he
met: Upon this submission the Prince taking the Horses, dismissed them, and
rode toward the Unfortunate Forest; where he found by the side of a Grove
four Knights combating, the which he endeavored to part, but could not, till
Sage Aliart, by the power of Mageck, cast a Cloud over them, that they could
not see each other; and then placing them in a Chariot, bare them through the
Air, and cured their wounds; at what time the Sage appeared to the Prince, and
informed him who the Knights that fought were, ( viz. Pompides, Platire,
Floriman, and Blandidon;) and afterward conveyed him to his Castle, where he
instructed him in future fate, and let him understand what great and amazing
Achievements he should undertake and perform, and that all the wounded Knights
should recover.

CHAP. XX.
How the Knight of the Savage Man arrived in England; And what befell him by
the means of Eutrope the Inchantress.

EUtrope the Inchantress hearing that a great number of good Knights were come
into England, to finish the Adventure of the Castle, and that the Giant her
Nephew would be hard put to it, to defend himself, used her utmost diligence to
create a wrong understanding between them, and by that means set them at
variance to destroy each other: Whereupon she sent one of her Damsels with
feigned stories, who so exasperated them, one against another, that they
frequently fought, to the great effusion of each others Blood: And amongst the
rest, flying before Polinardus, Son to the Emperor of Trincus; and meeting the
Knight of the Savage Man, (who by this time was arrived from Ireland) she
begged him to rescue her out of the hands of one that attempted to ravish her;
which he undertaking to do, she found two other Knights, ( viz. Francian and
Gracian) and set them upon the Knight of the Savage Man, saying, He had
treacherously slain her Father, and now was about to do the like to her
Brother; who fighting together, had been most of them slain, had not Fredrick,
King of England, been hunting in the Forest, and came in to pacify them in
time; yet such was the cunning of the Damzel, that she was withdrawn quite out
of sight, and could not be heard on afterward. But so it happened, that the
wounded Knights being well regarded, recovered their healths soon after; as
likewise did Onistaldus and Dramian, who by the like delusion had combated each
other; and to know the reason thereof Polinardus had followed her, when she met
the Knight of the Savage Man, and she falsely informed him.

CHAP. XXI.
How the sage Aliart brought the Bodies of Floriman, Platire, Pompides, and
Blandidon, having healed them of their wounds, and set them in the same place
again, where he found them fighting: How they got new Horses and Armor; And
what happened to the Knight of Fortune in the Castle of sage Aliart.

SAge Aliart having conveyed the Bodies of the aforementioned Knights, to his
Castle, committed them to the care of diverse Damsels, who so well tended and
dressed them, that within two days they were all perfectly cured; when as he
cast them into a deep sleep, and in the same manner as he brought them,
conveyed them to the place where they fought; at which they awakeing, greatly
wondered, and stood long gazing upon each other, e're any of them broke
silence, much marvelling to find themselves unarmed, and that the place was in
a manner paved with their broken Weapons, Blood, and Armor.

But whilst they mused upon the matter, a Virgin approached them, and demanded
how they came into that condition; but they not being able to relate the
matter, and she perceiving as much, proffered them Horse and Arms, if they
would undertake to finish on Adventure, on the behalf of a sorrowful Lady, who
must otherwise (as she avered) fall into great calamity; the which they
unanimously undertook to do; whereupon leaving them a while, she returned amply
furnished, and to attend them, brought for each an Esquire; whereupon having
returned their thanks, they mounted, and followed her; in prosecution of which
Adventure, I shall for a time leave them, and return to the Knight of Fortune.

Prince Palmerin, commonly called The Knight of Fortune, having continued for
some time with Sage Aliart, and obtained from him a promise to be ever at hand,
to assist him, when need should require; as also that he should e're long
finish the Adventure of the enchanted Castle, and know his Birth and Parentage:
He having taken leave, departed toward the Kings Palace; when being belated,
he betook himself to the House of an Aged Gentleman, who gave him entertainment
to his satisfaction; but long he had not been there, e're a strange Lady
arrived, in search of him, who no sooner beheld him, but with her eyes
brim-full of tears, she fell at his Feet, and desired he would undertake to
revenge the Injury she had sustained; at what time gently raising her, he bade
her be of good comfort, promising her to comply with any reasonable request,
desiring her to relate the cause of her grief, which she did after this manner:

Know, Worthy Sir, whose Fame is raised above the Clouds for Matchless Deeds,
That I had once a Son, hardy and bold, who performed many Noble Feats in Arms;
but at last it so fell out: That he falling in Love with a Beautiful Lady, and
gaining her good Will, a Knight, that had been her former Suitor, was so
exasperated thereby, that he defied him to combat, wherein my son was
Conqueror, which heightened the Ladys good esteem more and more, and made the
Knight's envy increase, so that through many false suggestions he procured the
Knight of the savage-Man to fight him, who having brought him to his Mercy,
without all pity, unkindly sundered his Head from his Body, to my unspeakable
Grief. Now my request is, That you would undertake the Combat, on my behalf,
against the Knight of the savage-Man, who now resides at London, and revenge
his uncourteous dealing.

The Lady having said thus much, the Prince greatly pitying her, vowed by his
Knighthood to undertake her Quarrel, resolving to be at London the next morning.

CHAP. XXII.
How the Knight of Fortune arrived at London; And of his kind entertainment:
How he challenged the Knight of the savage-man; And the issue of the Fight
between them.

PRince Palmerin having promised to undertake the aforesaid Quarrel, hasted to
London, to make short of the matter, and the rather he covered to be in action,
by reason that Knights great Deeds began to eclipse his Fame; wherefore he sent
Sylvan his Esquire, to bid him defiance, and to give and receive the Gages;
which done, the Knight of Fortune retreated himself with an ancient Hermit,
till the time appointed came discoursing of various matters: But when the King
understood that those courageous Knights resolved upon a combat, fearing the
loss of one or both of them, he would be hardly induced to admit of it, nor
would he have done it, but at the earnest request of the Knight of the
savage-Man, who pleaded, that his Fame and Glory would suffer by refusal;
whereupon at the day appointed they met each other, and after some parley, took
a full curreir, shivering their Spheres in a thousand pieces but neither
dismounted nor lost their Stirups; whereupon they drew their Swords, and fought
like Tygars, hewing and cutting each others Armor in pieces, in so piteous a
manner, as made the hearts of the spectators tremble, and each one fear that
they would both have dyed in the place, e're either would have yielded; for
when they were weary of striking, then would they graple with each other, so
that they lost Blood in abundance, which made the King and Princess Flerida
step between them, and entreat them to Sheath their Swords, to do which with
much difficulty they prevailed; whereupon the Knight of the savage-Man was
conducted to the Court, and the Knight of Fortune returned to his former
Lodging, where his wounds were cured: But coming to inquire after the Lady who
had occasioned this Combat, they found her not, for it was altogether
fictitious that she had said, and a contrivance of Eutrope the Inchantress, to
endanger the lives of those Knights she knew to be designed for finishing the
Adventure of the Castle, where the Princes were detained; who likewise by
another device assembling diverse Knights that were in quest of the strayed
Princes, before the Castle, and by the means of false rumors, she divided them
into two Parties, ready to engage in mortal Battle, which they had done, had
not Sage A^a^o counterplotted her Enchantment, and removed the occasion of
Quarrel.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Knights (after skirmishing with each other) were enchanted, and all
taken Prisoners: How Eutrope practiced with the Soldian of Babylon to invade
the Greek Empire: Of the Adventure of the Knight of the Savage-Man, at the
Castle of Dramusiand; And how he sped in that doubtful and dangerous attempt.

THe Inchantress Eutrope being greatly desirous to frustrate the designs of the
Adventurous Princes, by Spells, spread such dissension amongst them, and at the
same time changing (to appearance) their Armor, and Devices, by casting a Mist
before their Eyes, that they supposing each other to be Enemies, charged
furiously in Partys, and laid on such heavy strokes, that their Armor and
broken Swords flew in the Air; of which Sage Aliart having notice, covered them
with darkness, and so stupefied their senses with Spells, that they fell to the
ground, and there lay grovelling, as not able to rise, till such time as the
Giant with his noble Attendants came out of the Castle, and took them
Prisoners; when taking off their Helms, they found them to be Friends and
Kinsmen; whereupon they embraced each other with great Joy, yet grieved to find
themselves in bondage.

Eutrope the Inchantress greatly maligning Palmerin the Emperor, who was one of
those that slew her Brother, sent diverse Letters, full of insinuation, to the
Soldian of Babylon, to let him know, that he could find no fitter time to
invade the Emperor's Territories, for that she had all his best Knights in her
possession, and that those that remained in his Court, were of no account, and
that if he would come down with an Army, he might easily take the City of
Constantinople; of which the Soldian took the advantage, though to little
purpose, as shall be hereafter related.

The Knight of the Savage-Man being by this time healed of the wounds he
received, in the combat against the Knight of Fortune, resolved no longer to
delay trying the Adventure of the Forest; and thereupon furnishing himself
with all things necessary, he solemnly took his leave of the King, Queen,
Princess, and all the Nobles, and mounting, rode to the Valley of Perdition, so
called, by reason who entered it, returned no more, but were detained in the
Castle, all the ways being set with Spells of Enchantment. When being entered,
he rode pensively, till he came within fight of the Castle, in the Court of
which he perceived diverse Knights, gloriously attired, preparing to Just, which
made him verily believe (as indeed it was true) that this was the Castle,
wherein the Princes, and Flower of Europian Chivalry, remained; so that passing
on, he found the Bridge guarded by diverse Knights, at what time (contrary to
custom) Recinde King of Spain, had obtained of the other Princes to have the
first Encounter, if the Knight approached; so that couching his Spear, he ran
furiously against him, but met with such resistance, that he recoiled diverse
paces, and was thrown over and over; whereupon Arnedes King of France, grieving
to behold his Companion in that plight, addressed him in like manner, but fared
no better than the former; which Prince Primalion seeing, and doubting the
event, with a strong Spear came against the Knight of the Savage-Man with
great force, but was overthrown as the first. This made Prince Edoard much
marvel, yet resolved to try that Force, that had effected such wonders, and
thereupon ran against him with a strong Spear, when being received in the like
manner, both their Spears shivered in the Air, and their Horses recoiling,
fell to the ground, though the Knights kept upon their backs, but soon
recovering their feet, they would have drawn their Swords, but by Dramusiand's
command Don Edoard was obliged to retire; Pandare advancing to supply his
place, bade the Knight of the Savage-Man yield to his mercy; but he with
disdain refusing it, a dreadful Conflict began, which continued with such
fury, that after many wounds given and received, the Giant fainted, and fell,
when as the Knight stood upon him to take off his Head, but was prevented by
the sudden intrusion of Aligan, who defied him to the fight, so that leaving
the wounded Giant, he charged upon the other, who often bade him yield to his
mercy, though in vain, for our courageous Knight within a short time brought
him into as bad a plight as was the other, though himself at the same time was
not free from wounds; so that now there remained no more than Dramusiand to
combat with, who came fiercely upon the Knight, yet (having taken breath) he
received him more fiercely than he could expect from one in his condition, when
after a furious Combat their Swords broke, whereupon they grapled, and fell
(sore bruised and wounded) to the ground; when as Sage Aliart being at hand,
cast so dark a Fogg over them, and having separated them, snatche the Knight of
the Savage-Man up, in a flaming Chariot, carrying him in a Tempest through the
Air; which the Knights and Giants perceiving, in great amazement came to
Dramusiand, and carried him into the Castle, in order to the healing of his
wounds.

CHAP. XXIV.
How the Knight of Fortune, leaving his Host, found the Knight of the
Savage-Man in a Pavillion, lying as dead: How he came to know him to be his
Brother; And wherefore he was borne thence; With what else happened on that
occasion.

THe Prince, (or Knight of Fortune) after the ^a^^an between him and the Knight
of the Savage-Man, being cured of the wounds he had received the^en^, took
^eave of his Host to search new Adventures; when traveling with his Esquire,
late in the Evening, by a Forest ^ide, he at a distance espied diverse Lights
on a heap, whereupon he made toward them* and found them placed in a little
Pavillion, which he entered, and there found a comely Knight, lying upon a
Bier, and an armed Knight standing by him, who made great moan; when looking
upon the armed Knight, he knew him to be Don Rosian D' la Bronde, Nephew to
King Frederick; whereupon he demanded who the Knight on the Bier was, to which
the other replied: It was the Knight of the Savage-Man; who trying the Adventure
of the Unfortunate Castle, had (by the force of diverse Knights and monstrous
Giants, after a terrible Combat, in which much blood was shed) been so
misused, but how he was brought thither he could not inform him, as being
himself arrived at the Pavillion but a little before.

This news made the Knight of Fortune sad, who greatly esteemed the Knight of
the Savage-Man for his Valor, and was desirous of nothing more, than to enter
into Friendship with him; wherefore he vowed revenge on those that had so
abused him, for he well perceived by his mangled Armor, the fearful Combat he
had sustained; then with a Torch looking more wishfully on his face, many
thoughts arose in him, that it could be no other than his Brother Florian,
under the disguise of the Knight of the Savage-Man; which opinion of his was
more and more confirmed by Sylvan, the Savage-Man's Son, who had been nourished
with the Princes; so that hiding his sorrow as well as he might, he demanded of
Don Rosian D' la Bronde what the true name of the Knight was, who replied, he
was ignorant therein, but that he had told him, he was in his younger days
brought up by a Savage-Man, though he could not believe him to be his Father,
and therefore he had named himself the Fatherless, till he could have further
knowledge of his Birth; and that straying out of the Forest, he had been
carried to the King's Court, by one Sir Pridos, where he had been liberally
educated, and of the King received the Order of Knighthood.

This Speech absolutely confirmed the Knight of Fortune's doubt, and it grieved
him extremely, that his Brother Florian should be so untimely slain, e're he
had knowledge of him, yet vowed Revenge, though at the hazard of his Life; but
so it happened, that whilst he was musing, the Tent and Bier were in a Whirlwind
carried into the Air, and so out of sight; whereupon the two Knights stood
gazing at each other a long time, e're they broke silence, which in the end
they did, and then the Knight of Fortune demanded of the other, whether he
would accompany him in the Adventure, to which he replied, That he had been
enjoined to bear the Armor of the Knight of the Savage-Man to King Frederick,
and inform him of all that had happened; whereupon after friendly salutation
they departed, the Knight of Fortune on his way to the Adventure, and D' la
Bronde to the Court; where, upon his arrival, the Death of (as he supposed) the
Knight of the Savage-Man being made known, so great was the Grief, that it is
almost unexpressible; yet in Honor of his Fame, the King commanded his Armor
to be hung up in the house of Ensigns, amongst the Armor of the Kings and
Noble Knights, and underneath in Characters of Gold his Noble Exploits to be
recorded to Posterity.

CHAP. XXV.
How the Knight of Fortune arriving at the Enchanted Castle, undertook the
Adventure, killing Aligan, and overcoming the others that opposed him, whereby
he dissolved the Enchantment, and delivered the captive Princes; And of the
universal Joy that insued upon that occasion.

THe Knight of Fortune leaving D' la Bronde on his way to the Court, entered
the Perilous Valley, where having rode a whole day, he had sight of the Castle,
the which (by the description he had of it) he knew to be the same in which the
Princes were confined; whereupon he determined to rest that night, that he
might have the whole day before him, to finish that great Adventure, on the
performance of which his Honor and Immortal Fame was staked. The night he
spent upon a Mossy Bank, under a spreading Beech, in contemplating on the
Beauty of his fair (though cruel) Mistress, the Princess Polinarda, as also on
the Task he was to undertake: But when Aurora's Blushes ushered in the Sun's
bright Beams, he arose, and took a survey of the dangerous place, which he
found environed with Monstrous shapes, the Works of Enchantment, and that the
passage was exceeding narrow; yet resolving at the hazard of his Life to prove
his Prowess, he advanced, having the Shield of the Palm Tree on his Arm, which
was sent him by Sage Aliart; so that coming to the Bridge, he found his unknown
Father, Don Edoard, ready to receive him, whom in the first careir he unhorsed,
and alighting, would have engaged him with his Sword, but that Pandare the
Monstrous Giant advancing, interposed his mighty Shield, so that a fearful
Combat between the Knight of Fortune and him began, insomuch that the Giant
was grievously wounded, by reason his Sword would not enter the Enchanted
Shield, whereupon the Giant roared like an enraged Bull, yet could get no
advantage, but fainting at last, through loss of Blood, fell down, which Aligan
of the Obscure Cave seeing, came running to his Brothers rescue, whose Head had
else been sundered from his monstrous Trunk: Then the Knight of Fortune
addressed against him, and after the exchange of six blows, smote him so full
on the Helm, that cutting it through, and the Sword entering three Inches, down
he fell, like an Earthquake; when as the Knight of Fortune being nimble, stood
upon him, unbuckled his Helm, and ever Dramusiand could come in, cut off his
Head.

Dramusiand observing this evil success, concluded that this was the Knight,
his Aunt had so often told him, should finish the Inchanment, wherefore he
(greatly feared) yet came forward, and commanded the Knight of Fortune to yield
himself Prisoner, who replied, with a noble disdain, That he could not hearken
to any such terms, whilst he was able to weild that Sword, that never in any
Adventure had failed him: Whereupon so strong an Encounter began, as made the
Earth (with the forcible strokes) to tremble, and the Echo to resound from the
Hills, Caves, Rocks, and Castle-wall; Dramusiand, who had never felt the like
force before, greatly wondered at the Prowess of the Knight, and supposing him
more than Mortal, began to repent he had entered the Battle against him, for
growing faint, the sweat and blood flowed from him in such abundance, that he
was little assured of his Life; wherefore thinking the Knight of Fortune as
much spent as himself, he again moved him to a submission, but found his
admonition no ways forcible, to work on him, who was resolutely determined
either to end the Adventure or his Life; and so much Fortune favored her
Darling, and was averse to Dramusiand, that the Giant (spent with loss of
blood, weariness, and wounds) fell to the Earth whereupon Voices, Thunder, and
Lightning, filled the place, at which whilst the Knight was wondering, the
Captive Princes came and besought him to spare the Gyant's life, for that he
had of late used such kindness toward them, that they could (in honor) do no
less than interceede for him in his extremity; to which request the Prince (as
he was going to strike the dreadful blow) hearkening, withheld his hand, and
yielded to their desires; immediately in a Tempest, as loud as Fighting, Winds,
or cattling Thunder, the Enchantments vanished; whereupon all the Princes
returned their thanks to the Knight of Fortune, for their deliverance, and in
triumph conducted him into the Castle, whither by this time they had brought
the wounded Giants, all whose wounds were soon after cured, unless Aligan's,
who returned no more to tell his Tale.

This happy Deliverance wrote, Prince Floriman was chose by the rest to go to
Court, and inform the King, Queen, fair Flerida, and all the Noble Lords and
Ladies, of all that had happened, who joyfully undertaking the Task, armed him
and rode with speed: When upon his arrival, having from point to point declared
his Message, and averred the truth of it, upon the Oath of his Knighthood; the
Joy was so great, that it is impossible to express it every man praising the
Knight of Fortune, and singing him Triumphant and Victorious, sounding loud
Music, ringing Bells, and turning night to day with shining Fires; but above
that of the King, Quam and Princess, exceeded the rest, as does the Suns bright
beams the pale and watery glimering of the Moon; whereupon at the request of
the later, that the satisfaction might be general, the King sent Argolant to
Constantinople with more welcome tidings than he had before been Messenger of;
and so far they pleased the Aged* Emperor Palmerin, that upon the relation of
all the Princes safeties, tears of Joy bedewed his Eyes, his heart being too
full other ways to express it. And now Polinarda did not repent the wondering
of her Love, but highly applauded his brave Exploits; wishing she had been
kinder to him than she was yet hoped at his return so to be have her self,
toward him* as became her Modesty and High Decent.

And, thus may we behold how true Valor and courteous Behaviour^mounts Men on
the Wings of Fame, and sets them on a Piramide.

CHAP. XXVI.
How Eutrope's Enchantments being finished, the Princes restored Dramusiand his
Castle, and came to King Frederick's Court, where they were Nobly entertained,
and were there visited by diverse Pontentates.

NOw the Prince having thus long continued in the Castle, had at the entreaty
of Prince Edoard, consented to restore it again to Dramusiand, upon condition
that he should not retain it to the prejudice of any Knight, nor hearken to the
malicious advice of his Aunt Eutrope, and that from that time, it should in
honor of the noble Knight that finished the Adventure, be called The Castle of
Fortune; to all which, when he had consented, and solemnly sworn* to observe,
they delivered him the Keys, and then taking their leaves, rode toward London,
where the King and his Court resided, whose approach being known, thousands of
people of all Capacitys flocked to meet them, greatly rejoicing, and highly
applauding them as the Flower of Chivalry; but greater was the Triumph at
Court, for there the King, Queen, and all the Nobilitys Arms were open to
receive them; and when the Princess Flerida beheld her Lord, from whom cruel
Fortune had so long divorced her, she ran into his Arms, and sunk down in
aswound, but he raised his beauteous Love, as dear to him as Life, comforting
her in the best manner, promising to make amends for the defects of envious
Fortune, and so with many kind kisses and embraces revived her fading spirits;
when as a sumptuous Feast was made, accomodated with odoriferious Perfumes, and
melodies of Music, nor was the night Crowned with less Iollitry of
Masque-Dancing, and each rare delight; when in the morning the King determined
to send a Power, to overthrow the Castle of Dramusiand, and utterly raise it;
but the Princes interceding on his behalf, and declaring the kind usage they
had received at his hands, the King was content to lay aside his purpose, yet
was he greatly desirous to see him, promising, notwithstanding the trouble he
had put the whole Nation (nay all Europe) to, he would, upon his submission,
grant him a Pardon: Whereupon Sir Pridos and four other Knights were sent to
fetch him, having the Kings Letter for his safe conduct, upon notice of which
leaving the Castle in the Custody of his Brother Pandare, he accompanied them
to the Court, where (at the instance of the Princes) he, upon his submission,
was received into favor, and had the order of Knighthood conferred upon him.

Whilst this Iollitry lasted, Trineus the German Emperor, with his Empress,
arrived in England, to complete the general Joy, and were received with all
respect and reverance, and for their better entertainment, a Turnament was
ordained, wherein none but young Knights should try their Valor; and so well
was all things managed, that they afforded high satisfaction to the spectators.

CHAP. XXVII.
How a second Turnament was held by the Prince; And of the Adventure of three
strange Knights, who proved to be the Sage Aliart, the Knight of the
Savage-Man, and Pompides: And how it was made known, that Palmerin and Florian
the Knight of the Savage-Man, were the Sons of Don Edoard and Flerida.

THe first days Turnament having been performed with applause, it was resolved
amongst, the Princes, That in Honor of their respectivee Countries, a
Turnament might be held amongst them, to which the King according, all things
were put in a readiness, and the place prepared; the Knights bravely mounted,
entered the List, and divided into two Partys, the one stiling themselves the
English, and the other the Grecian Knights; whereupon they ran their courses
with various success, insomuch, that many a courageous Hero was tumbled on the
ground; but in this Turnament was neither the Princes Edoard, Primalion, nor
Palmerin. When as they having strove long, and those of the English part being
in a manner put back, three strange Knights came in, and did such wonders, that
unhorsing all they met, the entirely restored the Turnament, when as the
Grecian Knights went to wrack on all sides, lying on the ground, both Horse and
Man; which the King perceiving, (least that friendly Diversion should create
Emulation, and be the ground of future Quarrels) he caused the Retreat to be
sounded on either side, all the spectators highly applauding the Courage of the
three Knights, and were as desirous to know them: Nor was it long e're it was
made known who they were, viz. The Knight of the Savage-Man, (who had been by
Sage Aliart recovered of his wounds) Pompides, and the Sage, who in his
Youthful days addicted himself wholly to Feats of Arms; upon this news the Joy
was redoubled, forasmuch as the Knight of Fortune had declared Florian, the
Knight of the Savage-Man, who was supposed to be dead of his wounds, to be his
Brother; so that the Triumphs were renewed, and all the Tables spread for such
as would be at the entertainment. When amidst the Iollitry, Sage Aliart taking
the King by the hand, lead him into the Presence Chamber, promising to reveal
such a secret, as should greatly rejoice him; when being there, he entreated
him, that he would send for the Queen, Prince Edoard, the Princess Flerida,
Primalion, and the Knights of Fortune and of the Savage-Man, which being
accordingly done, he took the two later by the hands, and leading them to
Prince Edoard and his Princess, said: Behold, you Royal pair, the Noble Issue
of your Happy Wedlock: These are the Princes, who in their Infantsie were taken
from the Princesses Tent, and have been ever since preserved as the pledges of
Fortune, and the Honor of Knighthood. This unexpected discovery caused so
great amazement, that the like before had not happened; nor could it gain
belief, till he had related all the passages, from time to time, how they were
snatched away, and nourished by the appointment of a Savage-Man, who dwelt in
the Unfortunate Forest; and the better to confirm the truth, he had caused to
be brought thither (by his Art) the Wild-Man, and by Spells so allayed his
wildness, that he was become calm: This man (by the Kings Command) being
introduced, stareing round about him, and at length esyying the Princes, ran to
them and embraced them with such fervent affection, that he wanted words to
express it; after which, the Sage Aliart commanded him to relate to the Royal
Assembly, from the first to the last, what had befell them, which he
accordingly did, with such a feeling sense of sorrow, for the loss of their
company, that he confirmed the Auditory in the truth of what was said;
whereupon the King ordered he should live in the City, and have an hundred Mark
a year for his maintenance, but he (more desirous to continue his savage life,
and spend the remainder of his days in solitariness) refused the offer, and
obtained leave to depart, having first seen and embraced his Son Sylvan, whom
he recommended to the King and the Princes present.

Upon this discovery the Princess Flerida embraced her sons with tears of Joy,
as likewise did the Prince her Husband, and they (as in submissive duty bound)
humbled themselves at their feet, when being raised, they were embraced by all
present, and Proclamation made of their Birth, Names, and Parentage, which
caused the City to ring with acclamations, so that no triumph was ever more
complete, after so long Misfortunes and Anxiety.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the King and his Nobles, together with their Ladies, passed to see the
Castle where the Knights had been captivated; And of the strange Adventures
they met with.

THe Joy of the Court being daily heightened with so many happy discoveries,
and the Triumph being pretty well over, it was resolved, that (to please the
Ladies) they should be attended to take a view of the Castle, where the Knights
had been confined, and in order thereto all necessaries, as Provision,
Pavillions, Horses, Armor, etc. were provided, and sent before; so that the
first night they pitched by the River where the Princess Flerida resided, when
the unhappy misfortune befell her self, her Lord, and her Children, when
delighted with the change of Fortune, she was greatly desirous to see the Cave,
wherein her Royal Offspring was nourished, which she signifying to her Lord, he
consented to satisfy her therein; and the next morning they were conducted
thither by Aliart, where they found the Savage-Man, who perceiving them, came
forth, and cast himself at their feet, when as the Prince raising him, he
opened wide the doors, which discovered many spacious Rooms, hung round with
the Skins of Beasts, so that entering, they found it contrived Labyrinth-wise,
with many goodly Lights, descending through Thickets of Bushes, that could not
be discerned above, and upon inquiry, found it to be the Cave of the
Inchantress Mellia, who left it at her decease to her Son, and he not (from his
Infantsie) understanding Civility lived wild in the Wood with his Sister* on
whom he begat Sylvan, but would not practice. Enchantments, being affrighted
therefrom in his Youth, by the appearance of ugly Spirits; yet so stout was he,
that all the wild Beasts trembled at his presence.

The satisfaction abovesaid being had, the Princes and Ladys returned to their
Pavillions, and from thence set forward toward the Castle of Dramusiand; when
coming within sight of it, as they began to admire the stateliness of its
building, they beheld a Knight, attended only with one Esquire, bravely
mounted, and well appointed at Arms, standing before the Bridge, which made
them marvel, especially by reason he was not then known; in his Shield he bore
the Portraicture of a beauteous Lady naked, which appeared so lovely, that
Venus Picture, drawn by Appelles, could not compare to it. This Knight, as the
glorious Train approached, sent his Esquire to inform them, that he having
heard wonders, of the Enchanted Castle, for his Ladys sake had left his
Country, to try the Adventure, but finding the Enchantment dissolved, he would
not return, if he could otherways help it, without a Wreath of Laurel,
therefore made it his Request, that if any Knight esteemed his Lady, and would
maintain her Beauty, he would Just with him. This Challenge was soon accepted,
and every one strove who should first enterprise the matter; but Prince
Floriman being nearest, and having his Spear in his Rest, got the start of the
rest, so that rushing furiously together the Prince was dismounted, whereat
Berolde advanced, but had the like misfortune, as also had diverse others, until
it came to Florians turn, who in the careir overthrew the Knight; whereupon in
great anger he departed, supposing none had known him; but the Sage Aliart
discovered him, and who the Lady was, as follows.

May it please this Noble Company; The Knight you have seen is of Noble Decent,
and his Name is Don Bonoricadius, who traveling into Spain, had a view of a
beauteous Lady, Daughter to Prince Arlae, called Miragarda, whose perfections
so inthralled him, that he vowed to accomplish her desire; whereupon she
enjoined him to finish the Adventure of the Enchanted Castle, which he
undertook; but finding it ready done to his hand, was greatly displeased;
wherefore that he might not return without any Adventure, he desired the Combat
with some of this Company.

This being known, they were highly satisfied, and thereupon in good order
entered the Castle, which they found builded in a stately manner, replenished
every where with Gardens, Fish Ponds, Dove-houses, and pleasant Fountains; when
having Feasted there in the best manner, they left it to the Charge of
Dramusiand, and departed; when by the way the Sage Aliart conducted them to his
Mansion, where by his Art he showed them such rare Devices, as highly pleased
them; for at once he raised Fountains of Water, and stately Bowers, covered
with clustering Vines, and accomodated with all Rich Banquets, the Trees
distiling every where odoriferious Gums, and the Birds warbling their sweet
Notes, then diverse airy Phantomes danced to an invisible Harmony; and so
delighted were they with this Recreation, that they stayed two days, at the end
of which they departed.

When as diverse of the Princes, desirous to see their own Countries, especially
by reason they had notice that commotions were risen amongst their Subjects,
they solemnly took their leaves and departed, declaring in all places what had
happened, by which means the sorrowful Pandritia had notice of Don Edoard's
deliverance and welfare; wherefore hoping that she might again enjoy his
company, she left her Castle, called The House of Mourning, situate in the
Tristful Valley, and betook her to one more pleasant, called The Garden of
Virgins.

CHAP. XXIX.
How Primalion (seeking Adventures) met the Knight he encountered before
Dramusiand's Castle, who proved to be his Son Flor^ndos, and of the combat he
had with him: How they left the Mansion of Pandritia, the one returning toward
Constantinople, the other toward Spain: How the Soldian Bellagris certified
the Emperor Palmerin of the Treachery of the Soldian of Babylon.

PRince Primalion having taking his leave, passed the Seas, and traveled so
long, that arriving in Lacedemonia, he happened on the Tristful Valley, where
the sorrowful Pandritia dwelt, at the entrance of which he beheld a Knight
sitting under a Cypress Tree, greatly bewailing himself, when drawing near, he
listened, and heard him complaining to the Portraicture of his beautiful
Mistress in these words:

Divinest Creature, how have you captivated my Heart! how have your Beauteous
Eyes shot Beams of Love into my Soul, and made me all over transport! Yet you
know not your power, nor the Fever that I endure, but may, when I have proved
my self worthy of so much Felicity: O my Miragarda! well thou art styled The
Mirror and Perfection of Beauty, that with one look could captivate a Soul
like mine. And here he ended with many sighs; whereupon Primalion, who had
stood all this while unseen, advancing, saluted him and desired him to desist
and relinquish such vain passion; which so enraged the Knight, that he hid him
defiance, and having his Horse at hand, mounted, upon which both couching their
Spears ran furiously at each other, insomuch, that they were both unhorsed;
when drawing their Swords, they encountered with great fury, giving to each
other many grievous wounds, so that in the end Primalions Helmet unbuckling,
fell off, upon which he being discovered to his Son the Prince Florendos, he
cast down his Sword, and falling at his feet, begged his pardon, and confessed
an entire sorrow for opposing, through ignorance, his Princely Father;
Primalion hearing this, and perceiving the Knight he fought with to be his Son
Florendos, raised him from the ground in his Arms, and embraced him, greatly
rejoicing he had found in him such haughty courage. Then want they to the
Castle of the sorrowful Lady, who upon notice of what they were, came down and
saluted them, in loving wife, causing her Damsels to dress their wounds, and
inquired after diverse Knights, but above all after Don Edoard, for whose sake
she had betaken her self to that solitary manner of living.

To the Request of the Lady, Prince Primalion answered, That the Adventure of
the Unfortunate Castle was finished, and that the Knights that had long been
imprisoned therein, were fat at liberty; and amongst the rest, Prince Don
Edoard, in search of whom so many Knights had left their Country; and that he
at present flourished in his Father's Court, in the embraces of the fair
Flerida. This news greatly revived the sorrowful Lady, who said she joyed in
nothing more than to hear of the Princes safety, whom she long since supposed
to have been dead, though he had proved most unkind to her, in leaving her
after she had fixed on him an unalterable love; yet stace there were some hopes
left that she might once more see him, she would from thence forward mitigate
her grief; And so, soon after the Prince's departure, she betook her self to
the Garden of Virgins, a place so called for its pleasant situation.

The Princes (cured of their wounds) in a respectful manner took their leaves
of each other, as also of the Ladies, the one for Constantinople, and the other
for Spain, where his fair Miragarda resided. Prince Primalion riding through
diverse Countries, without meeting with any Adventure, at length arrived at the
Fanous City of Constantinople, which in the evening he entered Incognito, and
continued till the next morning, at what time he gave notice to the Secretarys,
that they should inform the Emperor, that a Knight arrived from the Court of
England, was desirous to wait upon him; this known, the Emperor greatly
rejoiced, forasmuch as he had not heard from thence of a long time; yet
Primalion keeping his Helmet clasped, delayed to discover his knowledge, till
such time as the Empress Gridona and all the Ladies were present, who being
immediately sent for, and greatly desirous to hear the long expected news, the
Prince declared from point to point all that had happened, and above all, how
Palmerin, who finished the Adventure; was Son to Don Edoard and his Daughter
Flerida. Then the Emperor earnestly inquired after his Son Primalion, saying he
could have no rest since his departure; whereupon the Prince, loath to suffer
his Father longer to grieve, pulled off his Helmet, and discovered himself, to
the Joy of all present, and of the whole Empire.

But long it had not continued, e're a Messenger came from the Soldian
Bellagris with Letters-Credentials, to inform the Emperor, that the Soldian of
Babylon (at the instigation of Eutrope the Inchantress) had leavyed a great
Army to invade the Imperial Territories, but had been diverted by some of his
own Subjects, who caused a mutiny, by reason of the excessive Taxes he had
raised on that occasion; therefore he advised his Majesty to be upon his Guard.

This occasioned no little consternation in the Court; but in consideration the
Princes were released, and upon their re-return, the most Valiant rather
desired a War than feared it; yet preparation were made on all hands, not only
defensive, but offensive.

CHAP. XXX.
How Florendos became Amorous of the Lady Miragarda: And what Adventures befell
Prince Palmerin, upon his second departure out of England.

FLorendos (before mentioned to be the Son of Primalion) upon notice of his
Fathers being lost in the Forest of Great Britain, leaving Constantinople,
and by cross Winds being driven upon the Coast of Spain, traveling by a
Forrest-side, at length came within sight of a fair Castle, to which he
purposed to go; but as he was passing on in a fair Arbor, under a Tuft of
Trees he espied diverse Ladies, tuneing their Voices to melodious Lutes; when
amongst the rest, one appeared more lovely than Venus or Diana, which made such
an Impression in his soul, that pouring out his passion to himself, he stood
like a lifeless Statue, not daring to approach them; so that being unseen of
them, he kept his post, till such time as they arising from their shady Bower,
entered the Castle, the which when they had done, he followed, but found the
Gates fast closed, which made him repent his bashfulness; but casting his eyes
about, he in the end espied a Shield hanging upon a Tree, with the Portraicture
of the beautiful Lady he had seen, so lively painted, that it seemed to want
nothing but Life and Motion, and under it in Golden Letters MIRAGARDA, with
this Motto: Let the Takers beware: But he had scarce time to view it, when
Almorol a monstrous Giant approached, and bid him defiance, at which the Knight
(little daunted) drew his Sword, and fought with him so long, that the Giant
through wounds and loss of blood fainted; when as he was about to stand upon
him to strike off his Head, the Gates of the inner Court opened, and out of
them issued the Lady he before had seen, with her beauteous train, and
shreiking bade him hold his hand, who not being able to deny her (on whom his
heart was so firmly fixed) any thing, desisted, and laying down his sword,
kneeled at her feet, begging her leave to love her and be her Knight, which she
granted, and gently raised him up; then he entreated her to tell him how she
came thither, and for what cause the Castle was guarded by that Giant; (to
which she consented, provided he would help to carry the Giant into the Castle,
whose request he readily obeyed.

The Giant being in the Castle and committed to her Damsels, to cure his
wounds, she sat down by Prince Florendos, and said: Sir Knight, seeing your
demands are just, I answer you; That I am Daughter to Prince Arlae, a Prince of
Spain, and was brought up in the Court of King Recinde, till the Nobility fell
at strife for me, and fought many mortal Battails; when to prevent farther
mischief, my father committed me to the custody of this Giant, till his further
pleasure is known, who was never foiled before; my picture you have upon the
Shield, which you may bear for my sake; and if you can finish the Adventure of
Great Britain, or any other Noble Exploit, I am at your devotion. This fireing
the Prince, made him vow to her the future service of his life: But leaving him
a while, I shall return to Prince Palmerin.

The Adventure being finished by the Noble Prince Palmerin, and he having
obtained leave of his Father and Mother, and of the Aged King Frederick,
resolved to leave England, in search of new Adventures; when passing the Seas
with his Esquire, he came (after a long travel) into a desolate Valley, where
he found a Knight lie wounded, without any attendance, which not a little moved
him to know the Adventure, when to his amazement he found it to be Prince
Gracian, who informed him, that he having fought against a Troop of Kis. and
Giants, in defense of two Ladies they were ha^ing to a Castle, not far distant
thence, it fortuned as he fell, Platire and Floriman came, who having notice of
what had happened, swiftly pursued the Varlets. Upon this news Prince Palmerin
left his Esquire with his Cozen Gratian, and followed hard after them, where
when he came, he found the Knights combating with the Giant Dramacon and his
Companions, having slain diverse of them; wherefore the Prince, not to defer the
matter, seeing his friends sore wounded, ran with his Spear at the Giant, and
overthrew him; then drawing his dreadful blade, he so laid about him, that at
every stroke one or other died, or fell much wounded, which made the Ladies
tremble and look pale; when by this time Prince Gracian having gotten a Sword
of Sylvan, and mounted on his Horse, came (feeble as he was) to the assistance
of his Friends, Revenge inspiring him with Courage; so that Dramacon and most
of his men being slain, those that remained begged their lives on their knees,
excusing themselves on the compulsion of the Tyrant their Master, and by that
means obtained (at the entreaty of the Ladies) their pardons; when entering the
Castle, they found only two old women, whom they they spared; then setting it
on Fire, they departed in the company of the Ladys, who straying in the Woods,
had been surprised by the Tyrant Dramacon.

CHAP. XXXI.
How Palmerin sailing toward Constantinople, was by Storm driven upon a
strange Island: And of the strange Adventures he met with, contained in his
Fight with Wild Beasts and many fearful Monsters.

THe Prince having left his three Companions to conduct the Ladies to the
Castle of their Mother the Lady Diamesia, rode to the Seaside, where he found
a Ship ready to set Sail, on which imbarquing, together with Sylvan, he sailed
before the Wind toward Constantinople; when about midnight such a Tempest
arose, that all Creation seemed unhinged, which in spite of the Master drove
the Vessel upon a strange Island, where Landing, he could perceive no
Inhabitant, which occasioned him to walk on foot for recreation, the storm
being now allayed: But far he had not gone, ever entering a fair Meadow, he espied
a Pillar of Jasper, on which was engraven, Take heed thou pass no farther this
way: at which the Prince marvelling, and not seeing any to let him, resolved
not to suffer his courage to faint, but on he went, till coming to a Tuft of
Trees, under whose spreading Branches he espied a pleasant Fountain, spouting
Waters as clear as Crystal out of the mouths of many Beasts of dreadful form,
Artificially engraven in Marble, and close behind it live Dragons, Lions and
Tigers chained which somewhat apaled him; when looking about he espied a
Pillar, with Letters of Gold engraven thereon, viz. Behold the Fountain of the
wished Water: and near to that another, with this inscription: He that has the
Courage to drink of this Fountain, shall bring to pass any Enterprise of Honor
and Fame; but over against it was likewise engraven these words: Pass, and
drink not. These Inscriptions made the Prince muse with himself what it should
mean, yet in the and he resolved to try the Adventure; wherefore taking
courage, he drew his Sword, and passed toward the Fountain, when as the cruel
wild Beasts slipping their Chains at will, furiously withstood him and in
spite of all his force, plucking his Shield from him, sorely rent his Armor
with their Claws; yet furiously laying about him, he in the end brought them so
under, that some he flew, and others being wounded, fled with hideous cries into
an adjacent Grove, of whom he never after heard; whereupon passing to the
Fountain, he took up the Water in his Helmet, and having therewith refreshed
himself, followed the path, which brought him to a fair Castle, before which
stood four Pillars, and on them four Shields; when going to the first of them,
he found engraven on it these words, viz. No Man dare conceive the courage to
take me down; but he not standing to complement, (having before resolved to
finish the Adventure or lose his life) snatched it from its place; whereupon
the Gates flew open, and out came a Knight on foot, strangely Armed, speaking
many big words to the Prince, but he nothing dismayed, prepared to receive him,
when as a fearful combat began between them, but in the end the Prince
prevailed, and laid the Knight for dead. When going to the second Shield, he
found engraven thereon these words, viz. I am more perilous, and therefore
worthy to be feared, for in me cons^steth the greatest danger; but not standing
to pause, he drew it from its place, as he had done the former; when as a
second Knight advanced, with a dreadful countenance, demanding how he durst
remove the Shield, for which presumption naught but his life could make
satisfaction; but the Prince (not to be out-dared) standing upon his guard, bid
him come on, so that a fierce combat insued, whereas either received wounds,
but in the end the Prince forcibly striking him on the Head, his Helmet flew in
pieces, and the Sword entering, down he fell dead upon the ground. Then going
to the third Shield, he found thereon engraved, By me is to be gotten the
Honor of this Adventure; yet without any Ceremony, down he rent it; whereupon
the third Knight advanced with many dreadful menaces, but soon was queli'd.

The Prince supposing the other Shield would finish the Adventure, boldly
stepped to it, to have the sooner done, when he found engraven on it, In me
remains the Happy Victory, which he soon took down, and prepared to encounter
the fourth Knight, which after a long and dreadful Fight he did. And now being
tired, he rested him a while, and then entered the Castle, where supposing he
had no more to deal with, he unexpectedly found a monstrous Giant, armed in a
Coat of Mael, who with a Battail-Ax in his hand, came in with great fury
against him, but the Prince in a place of danger ever standing upon his Guard,
avoiding his stroke, smote him on the head so fiercely, that redoubling his
blow, he brought him to the ground and smote off his Head; when as he heard a
lamentable voice, proceeding from a Woman, following the Direction of which, he
came to a place, where he found two Knights cooped in an Iron Cage, whom he
delivered, and found to be Baziliart and German of Orleance, who had been taken
Prisoners in attempting the Adventure, and greatly rejoiced at such their happy
deliverance, for that the Giant every day threatened them with death and had in
his fury slain diverse Knights of the Emperors Court, who were driven in by
Tempest, and had essayed to finish the Adventure.

CHAP. XXXII.
How the Ship (upon the Prince's Landing) was driven to the contrary Shore; And
how diverse Knights upon knowledge of what had happened, went in search of him.

SO it happened, that the Prince was no sooner on shore, but the Wind suddenly
turning about, the Cable whereby the Ship was fastened to the Rocky shore,
broke, and it (ever any could land) drove to Sea, where, after many days
uncertain sailing, they came to the selfsame Port from which they brought the
Prince; whereat Sylvan greatly bewailed the absence of his Lord, acquainting
all Knights he met with what had befallen him, which caused diverse to go in
search of him, as they had done of Don Edoard, his Father; during which time,
he was finishing the great Adventure: For having freed the Knights, he still
followed the Female voice, till passing up many stairs, and through diverse
spacious Rooms, at length he espied upon the Pinnacle of the Castle, a Woman
standing, with dislevell'd Hair, exclaiming in this manner: Wretched me! How
have the fates deceived me, who thought by my Art to have accomplished my
Revenge, for the Death of my Brother Frenaque, but now have been twice foiled
by one and the same Knight, therefore I will no longer keep this hated breath;
and with that crying out* I come ye Furies, spirits of Eternal Night; she cast
her self headlong into the Lake that was on that side the Castle, and there
sunk like Lead, ending there her wicked life.

The Prince, by what he had heard* knowing her to be Eutrope the Inchantress,
was satisfied that the Adventure was finished; and so taking leave of the two
Knights he found there, was about to return to his Ship, when as he saw two
Knights riding toward him, which made him doubt there was more work to do; but
he was soon undeceived, by knowing them to be Francian and Onistalde, who
greatly rejoiced to have found him, and more that the Adventure was finished;
and he by that means knew what had happened to the Vessel he left at Author,
and how he had lost his Horse and Esquire, yet resolved to leave that Perilous
Island, and pass the Seas in the Ship those Knights had brought, which he
accordingly did, and having a good for-wind, arrived upon the Coast of Spain,
which made the Prince desirous to have a v^^^ of the fair Miragarda, of whose
Fame so much had been blazed ^broad.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How Prince Palmerin arriving at the Castle of Almorol the Giant, overcame the
Tristful Knight; And what else happened: How Dramusiand arrived there, and
overcame Almorol, etc.

PRince Palmerin, after long travel, arrived at the wished Castle, where he
perceived a Knight bravely mounted, ready to receive him; when coming near to
each other, they ran with such fury, that both of them fell to the ground; when
drawing their Swords, they charged upon each other with great courage and
bravery, neither resolving to yield, so that their Armor (shattered by the
forcible strokes) fell peice-meal to the Earth, and in the end (through loss of
blood) the Tristful Knight gave back, not being able longer to maintain the
combat; whereupon the proud Lady (though he had expressed his manhood to a high
degree, and been victorious till that time) sent to demand his Shield, and
charge him to depart the Castle; to whose commands (though with a heavy heart)
he yielded obedience, and with a mournful countenance departed to the adjacent
Valley with his Esquire Armillo, and there uttered many heavy complaints, that
might have melted Marble to relent; but the ambitious Lady, though she had
notice thereof, would not restore him to her favor; wherefore sending his
Esquire (who was greatly unwilling to leave him in that condition) every where
to proclaim his death, he betook himself to the solitary company of a Shepherd,
who fod his Flocks in the Flowery Vales; where for a while I shall leave him.

Prince Palmerin having obtained this, the Shield was offered him, but he
refused it, resolving in that nature to defend no Beauty, but that of his fair,
Mistress Polinarda; wherefore having taken leave of the Lady, he departed
toward Constantinople.

Long it was not after the departure of the Prince, e're Dramusiand the Giant
having notice of the Prince's loss in the Perilous Island, came in search of
him, and so traveled, that he fortuned to happen on the Castle of Almorol,
where he found that Giant standing before it, with the Shield that she had
given him upon the Prince's refusal; whereupon after defiance bid, a dreadful
combat happened between those Monsters of Men, but in the end Dramusiand (who
had been trained up in Feats of Arms from his Youth) prevailed, yet at the
Ladys request spared Almorol's life, and had the Shield bestowed on him, which
he accepted and became her Champion, upon notice that the Prince had finished
the Adventure of the Perilous Isle, and was returned in safety.

CHAP. XXXIV.
How Dramusiand combated Don Rousel and Prince Gracian; And how Prince Palmerin
falling asleep in a pleasant Valley, was bound by four Ladies, and carried to
their Castle: How Don Florian entreated the King, on the behalf of the Ladies
he had delivered from Calfurnine the Giant; And how they were restored to their
Inheritance: How taking leave of his Father, he arrived at Miragarda's Castle,
where he combated Dramusiand; And how in the combat they came to the knowledge
of each other, and were reconciled.

DRamusiand had not long kept the Shield ever Prince Gracian and Don Rousel
seeking Adventures, came before the Castle, and understanding the custom,
Prince Gracian prepared himself for the combat; whereupon a sharp conflict
began between them, insomuch that the Prince's Helmet was burst, and fell from
his Head, which gave Dramusiand opportunity to know him when laying aside his
sword, he cried, Hold my friend Gracian, I am Dramusiand; whereupon they all
three embraced each other, which made the Lady Miragarda, who was a spectator
of the combat, greatly wonder: Then began they to discourse of diverse affairs,
but above all of the Adventure of the Castle, and what the Prince Palmerin had
achieved in the perilous Island; and so after diverse discourses the Knights
passed on, to overtake the Prince, and the Giant remained to guard the Castle.

The Prince Plamerin riding alone, having lost his Esquire in the Adventure of
the perilous Island, at length came to a pleasant Valley, over-shaddowed with
Trees, and enamelled with fragrant Flowers, where reposing his weary Limbs, he
unloosed his Helmet, and fell into a slumber; at what time came four Ladies,
who kept a Castle not far distant, who beholding his rare perfections, one of
them became so enamored of him, that she persuaded the rest to assist her in
conveying him into the Castle; which being agreed on, the better to do it, they
sprinkled an Enchanted Juice over him, which cast him into a dead sleep, then
binding him hand and foot, they conveyed him to their Rocky Mansion, and laid
him on a Couch, feasting their eyes with his Beauty and Warlike shape, till at
last the Charm being finished, he awoke, and looking round about him, found
himself environed with beautiful Ladies, whereat being somewhat abashed, he
began to excuse his sluggishness; but attempting to arise, found himself fast
bound, which made him begin to suspect some treachery; when as the most
beautiful amongst them addressed her self to him in this sort:

Sir, you have wounded a Virgins heart so deep, that nothing but your Love (or
Death) can cure the Fevour she indures. Alas (replied the Prince) fair Lady,
you speak so mysterious, I understand you not. Nay Sir, (said she) if you are a
worthy Knight, as you seem, you cannot but be sensible of my meaning, Know
then, That (breaking the Rules of Modesty) I am the Virgin you have wounded,
and unless you grant me your Love, I must languish and dye, so irresistible is
the flame that has surprised me. Forbid it Heaven, that any Virgin should dye
for me (replied the Prince); but as for my love in that way, Madam, it is the
only thing I cannot grant, because it prepossessed; the Lady on whom my
affections are linked, though distant from hence, so charms my heart, that
except her fair self none can have entrance. Upon this the (...) one self into
a great passion, weeping bitterly, and still (...) presence, whereupon two
Giants entered, and (...) the Prince, conveying him to a deep ^ungeon; where
for a while I must leave him bewailing his sluggishness, and return to Prince
Florian, so lately known by the Title of The knight of the Savage-Man.

Prince Florian, as yet remaining in the Court of King Frederick, beg^n to call
to mind the three Ladies that were in the possession of the Giant Calfurnine,
whom he delivered, and thereupon related that Adventure to the King, making it
his request, that they might be sent for to the English Court, and be restored
to their Father's Inheritance, which (for some high misdemeanour by him
committed) had been sequestered; to which request the King condescending, they
were brought over and entertained by the Queen; when as their beauties grew
into such great esteem, that within short time they were all married to persons
of Honor.

The Prince, grown impatient of ease, made it his second request, that he might
depart in search of new Adventures; but long was it e're he could get leave,
yet at length he prevailed; and crossing the Seas, traveled so long that he
arrived at the Castle of Miragarda, and there encountered with the Giant
Dramusiand, but after a hard skir^sh they knew each other by their voices, and
so desisted, the Conquest falling to neither side, which made the Lady
Miraga^da wonder more than before: Yet after they had embraced, the Prince
having notice from Sylvan that his Brother was Prisoner, left Dramusiand, and
accompanied with Sylvan only he rode to adventure his Deliverance; and so long
he traveled, till he came to the Castle of Ar^^te, he^^ to which he found
Po^pides, who came upon the same adventure; when having discoursed about the
matter, they came to the Gate and sounded a Horn that was hanging, said by,
which (...) do all the Castle each, when open flew the gate, and out burst two
Monstrous Giants, with Iron Clubs of an exa^^ (...) whicht, and d^manded what
^^prudence provoked them to disturb the Quiet of these Ladies, but the Princes
nothing abashed, (...) their Swords, and furiously charging those Monsters of
Men, brought them in a short spa^e to the ground, when hewing off their Heads,
they entered the Castle, and with their drawn-Swords passed through diverse
places, till at last they came to an Iron Gate, which they burst in sunder with
one of the Giants Clubs, when descending into a dismal place they beheld the
Prince lie bound in Irons, and almost famished; (so cruel is Woman's revenge,
when love turns into hatred, or that they cannot aquire their ends;) when
having unbound him, they inquired how that misfortune befell him, which he
related in the manner before recited, which so enraged the Princes, that had he
not entreated the contrary, they would have fired the Castle; for the Ladies
knowing their guilt, upon the Giants being conquered, were fled through a Vault
into the Woods: So that refreshing themselves with what provision they found
there, they departed to seek more honorable Adventures.

CHAP. XXXV.
How some days after Prince Palmerin was departed from the Castle of Arnalte,
he met a Damosel, who entreated him to finish an Adventure; And how he was
followed by Florian and Pomoides: How the Prince delivered three Ladies out of
the Castle of Duke Ronsilion, who were to be put to death; And what else
remarkably happened in that Adventure.

PRince Palmerin, Pompides, and Florian, traveling together, met a beauteous
Lady named Florinda Daughter to Arnedes King of France, who in the company of
twelve Knights was traveling toward her Father's Court, when as one of them
advancing said, It was his Ladys pleasure, that a Tent should he pitched, and
that the Knights should Just before her with any that durst encounter them;
this offer was soon accepted, so that three ad^^^ing, the three Princes (...)
against them and cast them to the ground Horse and Man; as likewise a process
of time they did the othermine; whereat the Prin^^^^ marvelling, would know
their ^^^es, but they refused to declare them, but having a^s^ed her hand,
passed on, promising if they came that way* to visit her Fathers Court. When no
sooner they had left her, but they espied a Damosel in Mourning, come toward
them, making great laments, and no sooner she approached them, but she with
floods of tears implored them to follow her, which they promised; and so swift
she rode, that she and Prince Palmerin out-stript the other two, and arrived at
a great and well-fenced Castle, wherein the Damzel informed the Prince, three
Ladies of singular beauty were kept prisoners by Duke Ronsilion, and that he
severely threatened them, having murdered their Father for refusing to give
them to him and his two Brothers in Marriage; swearing likewise, unless they
could find a Knight within a month to fight with and vanquish his three
Knights, himself, and his two Brethren, or consent to the marriage, (which they
greatly disliked) he would clap them up in Dungeons, where? (during life) they
should never view the light; therefore had she at their earnest tears sought
for a champion that might deliver 'em.

This hard usage to Ladys highly offended the Prince; wherefore entering the
Bridge, he overthrew the first Knight. and with his Sword (after a hot dispute)
laid the other two breathless; when mounting a pair of stairs, he entered a
spacious Hall, and there he found the Duke and his Brethren, threatening the
Ladies with many cruelties; whereupon with a loud voice he cried, Turn hither,
vile wretches! who dare thus abuse the tender Sex, yet dare not fight with
their avenger: This sound amazed the Duke and his Brethren, especially when
they knew the Knights were vanquished; yet running to their Arms, they came
furiously to charge the Prince, who resolutely defended himself, till by many
grievous wounds he had brought them to his mercy; yet upon their falling
prostrait, and begging their lives he (who won more Fame by clemency, than by
the sword) spared them; when as the sorrowful Ladies, now ravished with joy,
time and fell at his feet, stileing him their Deliverer, but he that was not
used to behold Ladies ^^^el, took them up, and comforted them in the best wise,
commanding the Duke and his Brethren to (...) them forgiveness, and be heartily
sorry for the injury they had done them, which accordingly they did, and then
having sworn never to injure Ladys more, they had their pardon.

By this time Prince Florian and Pompides were arrived at the Castle, where
seeing a Knight lie dead, in much the same Armor that Prince Palmerin wore,
they supposed it was he, and thereupon vowed revenge: But entering the Hall,
just as they were about to fall upon the Duke and his Brethren, the Prince
appeared and desired them to hold their hands, saying, He had pardoned them;
when at the Duke and his Brethrens humble supplication the Prince so wrought
with the Ladies, that they giving up themselves wholly to be governed by him,
he concluded a Marriage; so that what the Duke's threats could not procure, the
Prince's bravery and noble temper accomplished; when having joined their hands
in wedlock, he and his companions left the Castle, being highly rewarded by the
Duke at their departure, who took their way toward Constantinople.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How Targiana, Daughter to the Great Turk, sent her Knight Albayzer to fetch
the shield of fair Miragarda; And how he (not being able to overcome
Dramusiand) stole it away by night; And how he was pursued by the Giant: How
Florendos hearing of what had passed, together with the shepherd, bent
themselves to travel.

THe Great Turk's Daughter being much offended that some Knights had praised
the Beauty of Miragarda above hers, resolved to disgrace her if possible;
therefore calling to her Albayzer her devoted Servant, she commanded him upon
pain of her displeasure to fetch the Shield that was so much famed, which he
(proud of such an opportunity to increase his Mistrisses favor toward him)
joyfully undertook, and providing all things necessary, departed, and passed
through diverse Countries, without meeting any Adventure, till he came to the
place where the Shield hung; when essaying to take it down, Dramusiand came
against him; whereupon he prepared for the Encounter, but was the first onset
overthrown, so that coming to the Sword, he being worsted infinitely more than
before, yielded himself conquered, and resigned his Shield, seeming to depart:
But so it happened, that he not daring to return without his own Shield, or
that which had the Portraicture of the Lady, watched in the adjacent Wood, till
he perceived the Giant retire to dress his wounds, approached, and hid himself
in the hollow part of the Tree till evening, at what time coming forth, he took
that Shield and his own, and fled into the Wood; when as Dramusiand, as his
custom was, attended by diverse Damsels with lighted Torches, came to convey it
into the Castle, he found it gone, as also the Shield of the Knight he last
conquered, wherefore he concluded he had stole it away, and therefore made
great sorrow, declaring what had happened to his beautiful Mistress, who on
pain of her displeasure commanded him to pursue the Cowardly Knight, and take
severe revenge, whose commands he instantly obeyed.

Florendos, who had resided in the pleasant Valley near the Castle, and had
heard day by day what had passed, hearing the Shield was lost, betook himself
to travel; and with him went the Shepherd, who was so delighted in his company,
that he had vowed never to leave him; and passing through diverse Countries,
they met with many Adventures, though none as yet worthy of note. Wherefore
leaving them, I shall follow Palmerin, Florian, and Pompides.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How Palmerin, Floria^, and Pompides traveled under the guidance of a Damosel
to the Castle of Dramorant the cruel, where they found Albayzer with the Shield
of Meragarda; and of the Exploits he had performed: How Florian and Albayzer
challenged each other; And how the Combat was decided in the Emperor's Court.

Three Princes traveling long without meeting any considerable Adventure, in
the end met with a Virgin, who seemed to be in great distress, of whom they
demanded the cause, but she appearing to be in a fright, ^^d them flee, or they
would be all slain; Not so, fair Lady (said the Prince) flight is a thing we
are not accustomed to; but let me entreat you to tell me the cause of your
fear. O sir! (said she) Twelve Knights set upon me, to carry me into the Castle
of Dramorant the cruel, a man who delights in Blood and Villainy, when as a
Knight came to my rescue, and behaved himself so well, that I found means to
escape; but I fear, in endeavoring to save me, himself, e're this, is slain,
or in great danger. Show us (said the Prince) where we may find the combatants:
That will I do (said she) with a Good Will; whereupon she lead them to the
place, where they found the combat very unequal, yet had the single Knight
slain diverse of them, and desired the Princes that they would stand Newters,
and not eclipse his glory; and in ^eed he so well behaved himself, that he soon
brought them into subjection; whereupon Dramorant with a mighty Battail-Ax,
being armed in a Coat of Mael, advanced, against whom Prince Palmerin would
have tried his fortune, but the Knight would not suffer it, but began the fight
with fresh courage; so great prowess was showed on either side, till at length
the Giant, (being a burly man) through sweat and effusion of blood, fainted,
insomuch that the Knight taking the advantage, (notwithstanding the
intercession of the Princes) hewed off his Head, which greatly grieved Florian;
upon which disgust of his, the Knight (who became haughty through his conquest)
bid him defiance, and in justification of what he had done, promised to fight
him in the Emperors Court, whither he was going; which challenge the Prince
accepted, and so they parted. When not long after they understood it was
Albayzer, and that he had taken away the Shield of Miragarda, boasting that he
had overcome Dramusiand.

The Princes now riding to seek Adventures, they chanced to meet a Coach
covered with mourning, in which lay a dead Knight. in green Armor; whereupon
Florian was very inquisitive to know how he came dead, and of the Adventure;
but those that were about him being in haste, would give no other answer, but
that if he would go with them, he might see; wherefore taking leave of his
Brother and Pompides, he followed that mournful Bier; and not long after a
Damosel coming to Palmerin and Pompides, the later undertook the Adventure she
related.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Florian's Adventure; And of the Adventure that happened to Palmerin, in his
way to Constantinople; And that of Pompides.

FLorian accompanying the Coach still, was inquisitive to know the reason of
what had happened, and who it was lay slain; to which one of the Esquires with
a deep sigh, and tears in his eyes, replied, That the Knight he saw dead was
Sortibran, Son to K. Frisol, whose enemies laying wait for him, had unawares
set upon him and slain him; whereupon the Prince vowed revenge, but had scarce
determined, ever a Damosel came running to assure them that their Lords death
was revenged by the good Knight Pompides, who had slain the Murderers as they
were about to ravish a beauteous Lady in the Unfortunate Wood; which made them
greatly rejoice; whereupon they passed on to interr their Lords body, and the
Prince to meet Albayzer; but in his way met Arduramant, bastard-Brother to
Albayzer, who was in search of him; when understanding the Prince had promised
to encounter him at Constantinople, he with a stern countenance charged him to
avoid him as his death, for that there was not a Knight upon Earth, that could
stand before him; but this not at all dismayed the Prince, but rather
encouraged him; which the Pagan perceiving, grew in wrath, and proffered
presently to try the combat with him, which was accepted by the Prince, but
then the Pagan would not fight, but in the Great Turk's Court, where he said
the said Targiana resided; to which the Prince replied, that if he departed
suddenly, he could not keep his word with Albayzer; to which Arduramant made
answer, that he would excuse him to his Brother; whereupon the Prince, desirous
to get Fame abroad and try strange Adventures, consented, whither we will leave
them on their journey, and return to the Noble-Prince Palmerin of England.

The Prince Palmerin traveling through many Desaris, at length came into a
great Plain, where he beheld a great many Knights and Ladys near a Fountain, as
he thought, in merriment, when on a sudden a fierce combat began between them,
whereupon he bare up, being desirous to know the occasion, when he perceived a
monstrous Giant and ten Knights fighting against two, who were conducting
several beautiful Ladys, whom the Giant would have from them, which unequal
dealings (and especially because one of the Knights was fallen dead) so moved
the Prince, that couching his Spear, he ran against the Giant and overthrew
him, and so dealt with his sword, that he brought the Knights into subjection
by killing some, and mortaly wounding others; when as Astapardo and ten other
Knights issued out of the Castle, to revenge what had happened, who had certainly
distressed the Prince, had not Albayzer at that time come to his assistance,
who knowing the Prince, dealt so furiously, that the second comers were soon
sent to keep their fellows company.

The Fight being over, they upon inquiry found the first Giant to be Bracandor,
Lord of the adjacent Castle; and that the chief Ladys were the Duchess of
Pontus and Durachium, who were traveling to the Court of their Father, under
the conduct of Prince Datree, and Abdumelech their Brother, and that they had
been set uyon by that cruel Giant, who designed to dishonor them. When having
thanked their deliverers, and heaped a thousand good wishes on them, they
departed with the body of the slain Prince, which they got some Country
Peasants in the neighboring Villages, to carry on a Bier.

CHAP XXXIX.
How Prince Florian arriving at the Turk's Court, entered the Combat against
Arduremant, and vanquished him; And how Albayzer came to Constantinople, and
what conditions he made to begin his adventurous intent.

ARduramant having by one of his Esquires certified his Brother why Prince
Florian could not m^^t him at Constantinople, they hasted to the Great Turk's
Court, where resided fair Targiara, when arriving there, they were received in
courteous wise, and introduced into the Princesses presence, where Arduramant
having the honor to kiss her hand, vainly boasted, that he had brought a
Knight with him out of a strange land, to chastise him in her presence, for
that he had abused her servant Albayzer, in saying, he had not by his valor
won the Shield of Miragarda, but taken it by fraud; then began he to extol
that Princes Fame, saying, that in his travels he had heard of such wondrous
achievements wrought by him, as no Knight in the world could boast the like.

Prince Florian hearing the Pagan vaunt at this rate, replied that he must
confess great things might have been done by Albayzer, but as for the shield of
Miragarda, it was taken by him from Dramusiand by fraud, and not force, for
that Albayzer had been vanquished by him; and that he was ready to defend what
he said at the point of his Lance, either against him or Albayzer. This speech
of the Prince's so enraged Arduramant that he had no patience, but began to
curse and blaspheme at a strange rate, desiring immediately the combat, which
was granted in the presence of the Princess and the Great Turk, together with
the Bassa's and their Ladies: When as the combatants running furiously at each
other, Arduramant was sent to the ground, and the Prince a little shaken in his
Saddle, who seeing his Foe on foot, alighted also, and drew his sword,
whereupon a dreadful combat began, in which the boasting Pagan was infinitely
worsted; yet ashamed to yield in his Mistrisses presence, though the Prince
offered him life, till fainting, through loss of blood, he fell; and being
carried off upon his Shield, soon after dyed of his wounds.

The Battle finished, the Princess sent for Prince Florian, and highly
commending his Valor, desired to see him unarmed, to which request of hers
(after saluting her fair hand) he consented; when as his youthful beauty and
manly limbs appeared so brave, that from that time she became amorous of him,
and ordained him her Knight. giving him at the same time many rich presents, to
keep for her sake; so that in her service leaving him a while, I shall return
to Albayzer, who hasted to Constantinople.

Albayzer parting with Prince Palmerin, hasted toward Constantinople, to keep
his word with Prince Florian; but riding through a Wood, he met the Esquire of
Arduramant, who informed him, that he was gone to the Court of the Great Turk
and the cause; yet dismissing the Esquire he kept on his way, till arriving at the
Court, he was known to be the Soldian of Babylon's son; whereupon he was
presented to the Emperor, who with his Nobles was fitting in a great Hall; when
having done his reverance, he declared, that his coming was to that end, that
he might prove his valor against the Knights of the Court, upon these
conditions, viz. That every Knight, who entered the Just, should bring his
Ladys picture on his Shield, and that her name should be written under it; and
if they was vanquished, that Shield to be hanged up, under the portraicture of
his fair Mistress Targiana; and that they should run with the Lance only; and
those that had no Mistrisses, should (upon being foiled) deliver the names of
those, in writing, to whom they were well wishers, and might in time be such.
These conditions agreed on, and the Judges of the field appointed, every one
prepared, and the day following the Iusts began, which day Albayzer kept the
field, foiling all that entered, or ran against him, to the great grief of the
Ladys, who were ashamed theie servants should be so handled.

The first days Just over, and the night spent in Feasting, Music and Dancing,
as soon as morning arose, the Trumpets sounded to the field, where the Just was
again renewed, which day Albayzer likewise won; whereat Prince Primalion being
in the Court, and desirous to recover the honor of his Fathers Knights, armed
himself, but the Emperor would not suffer him to enter, reserving the Conquest
for some other hand.

The Emperors Knights thus foiled by a stranger, caused a great heaviness in
the Court, and exceeding joy and pride in Albayzer, who proudly vaunted that he
had taken away the shield from Dramusiand; therefore he would carry that and
all the other Shields he had won, and lay them at his Mistrisses feet: In which
haughty exaltation, for a while I shall leave him, and return to the Turkish
Court, to visit Prince Florian.

CHAP. XXXX.
What happened to Prince Florian in the Turkish Court; And of other adventures
that befell him.

THe Prince daily increasing in the favor of fair Targiara, resolved to show
his utmost prowess, that so he might be the deeplyer grafted into her
affections; but finding no adventures there worthy his Sword, he resolved to
make her acquainted with his sincere affections, and then depart in search of
Adventures, for her sake: Wherefore one day being in private with the Princess;
he declared what he had determined, which caused tears to stand in her fair
eyes, who by this time loved him as life, which he perceiving, said:

Fair Lady, and Mistress of my Thoughts, grieve not that I desire to depart
hence, for I shall ever bear you a true and sincere Affection; and for your
Glory and Renown is it that I make this Request; What shame is it for me to
spend my time in Ease and Idleness, whilst your former Servant Albayzer is
laboring to Wing himself with Fame? It is not his force, fairest of Creatures,
that gives him Victory, but the Banner he fig is under, which is the hopes to
obtain and in joy you? O that you would give me but so ^a^ge^ Commission! soon
should you find me as great and glorious; nay, with this hand would I take from
him all the Trophies he has won.

This speech of the Prince, dried his Mistress eyes, when cheering up, she
said, Indeed Albayzer had done wonders for her sake, yet she could in no wise
affect his person; wherefore if he might be conquered, all the obligations then
would vanish, and that (if he thought fit) she would in disguise accompany him
to Constantinople, sending Albayzer word beforehand, that he should not stir
thence till further order. This resolve was highly approved by the Prince, and
urged to be put in speedy practice; whereupon the Princess feigning a Letter,
from her Aunt the Queen of Assyria, that she was sick, at the point of Death,
instantly desiring to see her, she showed it to her Father, and by many
entreaties so prevailed, that he consented to her going; when to accompany her,
she chose no other train than Florian, called in that Court the Christian
Knight, four Esquires, and six Damsels, all which mounting early in the
morning, left the City, and rode without meeting any interruption, till they
came into the confines of Constantinople, where meeting four Knights, and they
beholding the beauty of the Princess, would have taken her from Prince Florian,
which so enraged him, that running one of them through with his Lance, he slew
the other two with his sword, whereat the fourth fled: When riding a little
further, and entering a pleasant Valley, he caused the Tent to be pitched for
the Princess, and there, by reason it was late, he continued with her all
night; when in the morning they set forward and rode till they came to a
pleasant fountain, at which they alighted to drink the water; when as two Kts.
riding by, who had been conquered by Albayzer, knew the Princess by the
resemblance of her Picture, when alighting, they laid hold on her, swearing,
that since for her sake they had received the disgrace, they would carry her as
a Prisoner to their Mistrisses, thereby to make an attoanment for them, which
rudeness so offended the Prince, that drawing his sword, at one blow he cut off
the hand of him that grasped the Princess, and afterward slew the other, which
he that was wounded seeing, entreated the Princess to beg for his life, which
at her request was granted; and his Esquire having bound up his wound, he departed
in a heavy condition.

These mischances so afflicted the fair Targiana, that she willed the Prince to
hasten thence; but long they had not traveled ever they beheld a Knight lying
under a fair spreading Tree, greatly bemoaning his misfortune, for falling
under the displeasure of his Mistress; to whose amorous complaints they
listened so long, that the Knight. turning about, espied them, when rising in great
anger, he bid the Prince prepare for the combat, since he had heard his fond
discourse, he should no where report it to his disgrace, but at that time he
should remember his Valor; whereupon he left the Lady to be spectator of the
dreadful combat; for although they received wounds on either side, yet neither
gained a foot of ground, which made each of them wonder; but so it happened,
whilst they so earnestly like Lions or Tygars fought, a Knight came riding up,
when beholding the fair Princess, and knowing her by her portraicture, he
caused his Esquire by force to cast her behind him, and rode as fast as he might,
undiscerned of the combatants, who through eagerness to strike and guard,
neither heard nor saw her; yet her train that was some distance, followed hard
after their Lady: But so it happened, that a while after Dramusiand riding in
search of the Shield, and seeing two Kts. hotly engaged, suddenly came up, when
by the Dragon one of them bare in his Shield, he knew him to be Prince
Palmerin, who the better to be unknown, had altered his Device, when crying
aloud, Prince Palmerin, what means this mortal combat? And what occasioned it?
Now Florian no sooner heard that name, but he recoiled, and threw down his
Sword, discovering who he was, whereupon the two Brethren (no longer Foes)
embraced each other, and begged pardon, that so ignorantly they had shed each
others Blood: But when one of the Princess Esquirs, who returned from following
his Lady, reported what had happened to the Princess, Florian (overcome with
rage and grief) fell to the earth in a swound; when recovering, he poured out
diverse lamentations, blaming hard fate, vowing revenge on him that had conveyed
her thence; when as his Brother and Dramusiand comforted him in the best wise,
declaring that they would make it their business to search for her; whereupon
they all departed to an adjacent Monastery, where the Prince's wounds were by
an aged man, well skilled in Chyrurgery, cured.

CHAP. XXXXI.
Who the Knight was that carried away the Princess Targiana; And how he was
vanquished, and the Princess taken from him by a Knight, who carried her to
Constantinople, and in her presence vanquished Albayzer.

THe Princess Targiana being carried away, as aforesaid, it was soon known to
be Albanis of Freeze, Son to the King of Denmark, that had offered the
violence: For riding with her through a Forest, he met with a Knight. in black
Armor, having a flaming Heart portrayed on his Shield, when Albanis, willing
to show his Valor, so affronted the Knight. that he obliged him to the combat, but
it turned to his disadvantage; for upon the first Encounter he was tumbled from
his Saddle, and in the fall, his Arm being under him, it broke; whereupon the
Knight. in black Armor finding him incapable of the sword combat, left him to his
Esquire and was about to depart, at what time the Princess desired him out of all
kindness, that he would not leave her in that desolate place, in the hands of a
man who had before violated the order of Knighthood; whereupon inquiring into
the matter, he took compassion on her tender beauty, and undertook to conduct
her and her Train to Constantinople, which accordingly he did, where upon his
arrival he found Albayzer about to depart with all the trophies he had won from
diverse Knights of Fame, to the great grief of the Court Ladies, but glad he was
not gone before his arrival, he (after having disposed of the Princess in the
best manner, who had by this time put her self into Princely habit, after the
Turkish Fashion) desired the combat with him, who proud of his many Victories,
with a disdainful look threw down his Gage, vowing to lead him in triumph to
his Mistress, if he conquered him; Nay, said the Knight, let it be also agreed,
that if I conquer you, I shall bear the Shield you stole from the Castle of
Dramusiand, in the night, when the Knight. that guarded it was not aware of you
This affront made Albayzer fume extremely, and vow revenge, when casting round
his fiery eyes, he espied (contrary to his expectation) the fair Targiana, yet
supposed it impossible she should be there, till being further satisfied, he
relinquished the doubt, and falling at her feet, gave her a thousand thanks for
vouchsafing in person to view those actions of his, which he doubted not but
Fame would have let her known, without giving her self the curiosity and
trouble; for which Oration having obtained the favor of her fair hand, he
espied the black Knight prepared to receive him, wherefore not to delay, he
mounted, and so in full careir they ran at each other, with such force, that
Albayzer, to his great amazement and disgrace, was tumbled from his Horse, and
the black Knight. by the force he met with shaken in his Saddle; whereupon the
former urged the later to the combat of the Sword, which he as willingly
accepted, so that a bloody Encounter began, till such time as Albayzer,
fainting through loss of blood, fell to the ground, whereupon the black Knight.
unclasped his Helmet, to have taken off his head, but that the Princess (not
forgetting her old servant, who for her sake had so often hazarded his life)
running in, upon her knees begged his life, which was accordingly granted, and
he forced to forgo the many Trophies he had gained; whereupon the black Knight.
(who upon his discovering himself, proved to be Florendos, Son to Primalion)
required that the Shield of Miragarda might be placed in the middle, as Chief;
which accordingly was done, and then both of them were conveyed to appointed
Lodgings, to be cured of their wounds.

CHAP. XXXXII.
Of the adventure of the CUP, and what the meaning was.

GReat was the Joy of the Court-Ladies, whose beauty Albayzer had eclipsed,
that he carried not the Palm to his own Country, and as great was the Emperors,
when he knew the fair Targiana was present, whom he recommended to the Empress
and Princesses, to be used according to her Estate: When during these passages,
a Lady richly attired, arrived at Court, attended by a Knight who carried a
Rich Casket; when coming into the presence of the Emperor, Empress, and diverse
great Lords and Ladys, after salutation made, she thus began:

Most Mighty and Puissant Emperor; Having for the sake of a fair Lady traveled
through many Countries, in order to the finishing of an Adventure, and hitherto
failed therein, I have at length attained this happy place, hoping to find a
Knight. that may accomplish it: Then know, that thus it is, viz. There lately lived
a King of Thrace, named Sardamant, who was exceedingly skilled in Magic, and
having a Daughter of excellent Beauty, she was courted of many Knights, which
made him (least contrary to his knowledge she should Marry) to shut her up in a
Castle, into which, notwithstanding, one of her Servants, whom she entirely
loved, usually got by a Rope Ladder, which she drew up by a Silken Thread; but
at length being discovered by his corival, he was cast into Prison; when soon
after the Lady, whose name was Brandisia, conceived with Child, which so
enraged the K. that as soon as she was brought to Bed, he cut off her Lovers
Head, and sent his heart to her in this Cup, which she took so hainously, that
having filled the Cup with her Tears, and sent it to her Father, she bound the
Heart to her own, and crying, I come my dear Love, to meet thee in Eliziums
happy shades, she threw her self from the Battlements, and so expired; upon
notice of which, the King repenting of such his hard usage, caused the
Offspring of his Daughter, the young Princess Leonarda, to be brought up after
her Estate, having none beside to Heir his great Wealth: Yet least in her
Infancy she should be conveyed thence, or in riper years betrayed into the
snares of unlawful Love, he by enchantment so surrounded the Castle wherein she
resideth with Mists and deluding Phantomes, that when any one approaches; it
seems to vanish; after which congealing his Daughters tears (which you behold
in this Cup) into a Stone, he, before his Death, left these directions: That
the fair Leonarda can be married to none but him, or by his appointment, in
whose hand the Cup being, the congealed matter dissolveth to its proper
liquidness; and such a one it must be whose Valor and Virtue surpasses most
Knights upon earth; therefore if such a one there be, let him essay to deliver
the distressed Princess out of her confinement.

This Adventure made all that were present greatly wonder, yet resolved they to
essay it; whereupon it went from hand to hand, but the effects were not
wrought, insomuch that the Lady began to despair, till at length Palmerin being
healed of his wounds, came to try the Adventure, when immediately the tears
dissolving, a new wonder insued, which put the spectators into a great fright
which was, that a flame of Fire seized the Prince invironing him on every side,
which they vainly endeavored to extinguish, till the Lady sprinkling a few of
the Tears on him, it was extinguished and he found entirely well, whom they
supposed to be consumed to Ashes; and at the same time, the passion he had so
long conceived for fair Polinarda increased; and the Lady pronounced him the
man that was worthy of the fair young Princess, and that must deliver her; and
so the admiration of all vanished.

CHAP. XXXXIII.
Of another strange Adventure, and what insued; And of the Fight against the
Giants.

THe first Adventure being over, there soon after happened another as strange,
which was as follows: The Emperor and his Nobles sitting in the Hall of his
Palace, unexpectedly entered a Lady, attended by 3 fearful Giants, and
addressing her to the Emperor, spoke in this manner: Emperor of Greece, I am
sent to you, from the Soldian of Persia, the Soldian of Babylon, and the
Emperor of the Turks, to demand your consent to diverse things which I have in
charge; and if it so happen that you refuse to comply, these my attendants have
commission to denounce War against you. This strange and unusual discourse did
not a little amaze and consternate the Emperor, yet he bid her make her
proposals. Then know, Sir, (replied the Lady) that in the first place it is
required, that you send your Granddaughter, the fair Polinarda, to my Lord the
Soldian of Persia; Secondly, that Florendos her Brother shall swear to marry
Armenia, Sister to Albayzer, now Crowned Soldian of Babylon; and as for my
Lord, the Emperor of the Turks, he requires you, as you tender the welfare of
your Empire, that you would send him the Knight. Florian, sometimes resident in his
Court, who has conveyed thence the fair Targiana. These are the demands; and
now sir I expect your answer.

The Emperor, who was never wont to be braved at this rate, by any Potentate,
was not a little angry, yet concealing his displeasure, he made reply: That
those proud Lords she mentioned, did ill to send him conditions of Peace or
War, for that he nothing expected any thing in that nature; yet seeing it was
their nature, they might give him at their pleasure, for never in a better time
could they do it, adding, that what they so peremptorily demanded, or rather
commanded, they should have humbly sued for, yet had they done it, he could
not, nor would not have gratified their desires.

The Emperor having made this answer, the Giants with dreadful and deformed
countenances advanced, when as Berocant, the Soldian of Persia's Champion, in
the name of the rest pronounced War, with all its attendant miseries, and then
defied the Kts. present, desiring that the place might be assigned, where he
and his two Companions might fight ten or twelve of the best Kts. which proud
speech so fired young Palmerin, that preventing others that attempted to reply,
he in this wise began: Monsters of Men, know that words nor fearful faces can
never dismay the Valiant, who have and dare meet Death in all his grisly forms;
you know not against whom you vent your pride; no numbers shall oppress you,
only three Kts. shall teach your tongues from henceforth better order. He
scarce had ended, when Florian and Dramusiand begged that they might be his
partners in the combat; but the Giants seeing the inequality in the stature,
said, They would not fight where so little glory was to be gained by
conquering; Nay, said Horian, it is rather cowardly fear that deters you, than
ought beside, therefore, to spur you on, know, I am the Knight. you demand, to
deliver to the Turk; 'twas I that lead away the fair Targiana, though not
against her will. This being heard, the Giants raged like a Tempest, each of
them vowing the bloodiest revenge he might, resolving to sacrifice those
Knights to the pleasure of their Lords, but failed in what they aimed at; for
the three Kts. entering the combat against them, after a dreadful sight, the
three Monsters of Men, Berocant, Albarocco, and Arbusar, each ten cubits high,
were made shorter by the Heads, which caused the Emperor and all the Christian
Knights greatly to rejoice.

CHAP. XXXXIV.
What happened in the Court of the Emperor after the combat: How Palmerin ended
the Adventure of the Enchanted Castle.

PRince Florian having renounced his love to the Princess Targiana, upon her
freshly entertaining the amors of Albayzer, who had been vanquished by
Florendos, care was taken to send her to her Father's Court, which was done,
with a great train, suitable to her Birth and Fortune; of which Albayzer having
notice, came thither, and with the consent of her Father married her. As for
Florendos, he having obtained leave, departed to the Castle of Almorol, with
the Shield he had recovered, hoping thereby thereby to be restored into the
favor of his fair Mistress Miragarda.

These things passing, Palmerin's mind was wholly taken up for finishing the
Adventure of Thrace; wherefore arming himself, he rode in search of the Castle,
having had directions of the Lady where to find it: When coming to a spacious
Plain, he beheld diverse dark Clouds overspreading the midst thereof, when
advancing nearer, he met diverse wild Beasts, which can at him with great fury,
against whom he prepared himself, but in his blows wounded nothing but Air, for
they were only Phantoms of terror, formed by Magic; wherefore passing through
the skirts of the thick darkness, he found it like a small shower of Rain, till
at length he saw a glimmering of Light, as if it proceeded from flaming
Torches, twards which he approached, still encountering with airy Spectrums,
which in their careir (much like blasts of wind) gave him such buffets, that he
could fearcely fit his Horse; yet at length, having pretty well passed the
darkness, he beheld the Castle (being a most stately building) Walled and
Moated round, before which stood two Knights, to his seeming, well appointed,
but as they came fiercely on, they vanished; whereupon espying the Bridge about
to be drawn up, he rode furiously and passed it, when as a doleful cry arising
within, two Giants came with fearful gazing eyes, and strong Maces in their
hands, and gave him many heavy strokes, but still as he struck at them, they
avoided him, and in the end vanished; then entered he the Castle, which he had
no sooner done, but a mighty Earthquake shook it, that it seemed to be falling
about his ears, yet (nothing daunted) the courageous Prince passed on, till he
came to an Iron Gate, before which lay a Serpent of monstrous bigness, spitting
fire, and with his forked sting threatening destruction to any that approached;
and beside him lay a great parcel of Keys, which the Prince supposing to be
those that unlocked the Castle doors, assaulted him with such violence, that
bursting through a window he took wing and flew over the City adjacent, by
which the Citizens knew that the Enchantment was dissolved; then flew open all
the doors of their own accord; whereupon entering a Garden, he found the fair
Princess, attended with diverse grave Matrons, who approached with great joy to
congratulate his happy success, in performing so great an adventure; the
Princess yielding her self to be wholly governed by him in all affairs. But
long they had not discoursed, ever a great number of the Nobles of that Country
came to pay Homage to the Princess, and to seat her upon her Fathers Throne;
and having sufficiently expressed their thanks to Prince Palmerin, they
conveyed her to her Father's Palace, which was till that time held by Queen
Carmelia her Aunt, and there made feasting, and all manner of disports, where
the Prince (at their request) was present; then the Queen brought the fair
young Princess to him, desiring that their hands might be joined in sacred
Marriage-bands, but he excused it* saying, his heart was firmly linked another
way, and that none but Polinarda must possess his love, which the Lady that
brought the Cup to the Emperors Court affirming, he was then required to
appoint her a Noble Knight to espouse her, which he promised to do, and such a
one as should be worthy the Diadem of Thrace.

THE FAMOUS HISTORY Of the Renowned Prince. PALMERIN of ENGLAND. PART, the
Second.
CHAP. XXXXV.
What happened to Prince Florendos, in his travel toward the fair Miragarda;
And to the Knights that were sent to accompany Targiana to the Great Turk's
Court.

PRince Florendos had not far passed, ever he met with a Damosel, who in a
piteous manner demanded his assistance to deliver a Lady, who was doomed to dye
by Astribor a Giant, Brother to Dramorant the cruel, slain by Palmerin,
Pompides, and Florian, to which the Prince consenting, she lead him to the
Castle, before which he found two Knights standing ready with their Lances,
who (as he attempted to pass the Bridge) came against him, but were received
with such courage and bravery, that the Prince's Lance lighting upon the
breast of one of them, pierced his Armor, and bore him dead to the Earth,
which the other seeing, drew his Sword, and charged upon the Prince with great
fury, but long survived not; for by a stroke he received upon his Helm, it
burst, and the Sword entering his Brain, down he fell; which evil hap the Giant
from his station perceiving, was greatly enraged, and with a strong Battail-Ax
came forth, menacing the Prince with Death and Ruin; but he nothing affrighted,
prepared to receive him in the best wise; when as a dreadful combat happened
between them, till at length, through swear and loss of blood, the Giant
fainting, the Victory fell to the Prince, yet not without many wounds on his
side; but having loped off the Head of the Monster, he entered the Castle, and
in a deep Dungeon (directed thither by the laments of a woman's voice) he found
a fair Lady, whom he set at liberty, and demanded the cause of her cruel usage,
to whom she faintly replied, that (the Giant, in revenge of his Brothers death,
slain by the valiant Knight Albayzer, in order to the delivery of her self and
two Sisters) she had been taken captive by Astribor, who vowed, so soon as he
could take that Knight. they should be both sacrificed to his brothers Ghost. This
lamentable story greatly moved the Prince, that having had his wounds dressed
by the said Lady, he departed with her to her Fathers Castle, where leaving
her, he passed on toward the Castle of Almorol.

The Prince riding three days without any adventure, in the end beheld a fair
Castle, when approaching it, a Damosel came forth, and informed him it was the
Castle of Arnalte, Princess of Navar, and that her Lady demanded, that he
should fulfill what she should desire, or swear never more to bear Armor, or
else abide the danger that was likely to befall him, of which hard conditions
he chose the last; whereupon six Knights well armed issued out, running at him
with great fury, most of whose Lances he cut in sunder with his Sword, and
then charged them so furiously, that four of them fell a sacrifice to his
revenge, when as the other two being sore wounded, and in danger of death, the
Princess came forth, and upon her knees begged their lives, which the Prince,
upon condition she would reveal the cause of the evil custom, granted; when
being lead into the Castle, she caused him to sit down by her upon a Couch of
Velvet, and with a sigh she thus began: Alas ^ir! said she, it was once my hap
to find a noble Knight sleeping in a Valley not far distant from this place,
whose youthful Beauty and comely shape so fired my heart, that I was all a
Fevour; when being no longer able to resist the Power of Love, to ease my
torment, I conveyed him sleeping (as he was) into this Castle, with the help of
my Sisters; but cruel he disdaining my tears and entreaties, on the account of
one Polinarda, to whom he said he had vowed his affections, my love, so
slighted, turned to anger, yet gently mild, so that hoping by keeping him under
restraint, I might oblige him to take compassion on me; but soon after came one
Florian of the Desert, and another Knight, who overcoming my Guards, set him
free, and burnt part of my Castle, which I since repaired, and ordained this
Adventure to bring him hither again, obligeing by promise, or by for many
Knights to combat him, wear no Armor, or become (...) Prisoners, of which I
have many in confinement, who d^^^t prefer their Mistress Beauty before mine,
and refuse my demands.

At this narration the Prince greatly wondered, declaring to her who the Prince
was, and informing her it was not in the power of any Knight to conquer him,
much more contrary to his mind, to make him yield to her desires, though he
confessed she was fair, to a Miracle, yet his heart was already fixed beyond
recall; and thereupon desired to see the Knights she held Prisoners, to which
she consenting, they proved to be Blandidon, Te^ebrant, and Recamon, Kts. of
the Emperors Court, all which, at the request of Prince Florian, she set at
liberty, who together with the Prince, taking leave of their fair Jailer,
departed, on their way toward the Castle of Almorol; on which Journey for a
while we will leave them, and pass to the Court of the Great Turk.

The Princess Targiana having been honorably dismissed, and in her Train
diverse Princes of the Emperor's Court, and Kts. of great worth, who
encountering many difficulties by the way, at last arrived at Adrinople, where
the Emperor of the Turks resided, who understanding what happened to his Giants
and that Prince Horian was not sent, as he expected, caused all the Knights,
Christians, as also King Polendos, and many others, to be conducted into a
large Hall, whither in great state he came, attended by his Guards, putting it
to their choice in many haughty and raunting words, Whether they would choose to
be Prisoners or instantly dye? This unexpected welcome amazed the hardy
Knights; yet scorning to be afraid, after some pause, the King stepped forth,
and demanded the reason of such their usage, seeing they had not offended him;
But (replied the haughty Turk) Florian of the Desert has, and unless he
speedily be sent to me in Chains, I will revenge the injury on you. That will
not be, (replied K. Polendos) for the Emperor esteems him at the price of half
his Empire; and know, That we being Christian Kts. scorn base Servitude, and
will rather dye, than suffer ignominious Bondage; which words so encouraged
Prince Belcar, and the rest, that drawing their swords, and standing together,
they resolved to sell their lives at a price too high for the Turk's puny
Guards to purchase; but just as their dreadful hands began to move, in came the
beauteous Princess Targiana, with dislevel'd Hair, and falling at her Fathers
feet, begged he would spare them, that had done her so much honor and
preserved her life, but the angry Mohammedan would consent upon no other
conditions, than that they would surrender themselves his Prisoners; whereupon
the Princess besought them, that they would at that time submit to fatal
necessity, promising so to deal with her Father, when his passion was over,
that they should be soon set at liberty, or if he refused, she would work other
means for their Release; at what time they (considering their case to be
desperate, after some conference amongst themselves) consented to lay down
their weapons; whereupon they were conveyed to diverse strong Castles, where
they continued in prison many days.

This news coming to the ear of Palmerin the Emperor, and of the Princes, they
were greatly grieved at the barbarous ingratitude of the Infidel, vowing
revenge as soon as possible, to consult of which I shall for a while leave
them, and return to Prince Florian, whom I left on his way toward the Castle
of the fair Miragarda.

CHAP. XXXXVI.
What happened to Prince Florian, after he left the Castle of Arnalte; And how
the Princess of Thrace her Damzel arrived at the Court of Constantinople.

PRince Florendos departing from the Castle in the company of those Knights he
had delivered, at length came into a pleasant Grove of Trees, where he espied a
Knight at all points armed, standing between two Oaks, who upon his approach
sent his Esquire to him and his company, to command them not to pass that way,
unless they would confess and maintain, not only there, but in all places, that
the Princess Arnalte of Navar, was the most beautiful of all Ladys living; to
which Floriman (preventing Prince Florendos) replied, That he could not,
neither would he so much wrong his Conscience, as to give the Lie to himself,
for that although she was fair, she was cruel and uncourteous, and that there
were many fairer by far, which he was ready to maintain, if the Knight. consented;
whereupon couching their Spears, they ran at each other with such fury, that
they both fell to the ground; but recovering their feet, they drew their Swords
and charged each other with great fury, the Victory for a long time being
doubtful; but in the end such was the force of Floriman, that he brought the
Knight. under, and would have slain him, had not the Prince interposed, at what
time unclasping his Helm, they found it to be Albanis of Freeze, Son to the
King of Denmark, whereat Floriman was greatly grieved that he had so ignorantly
wounded his friend; yet no signs of death appearing, they went to the house of
an old Knight. hard by, where his wounds were cured, and there (at the request of
Florendos) he declared how he became amorous of the Princess, and had taken an
oath to maintain, she was the fairest Creature living, having under the favor
and protection of her Beauty conquered many a good Knight: When having
refreshed themselves, they passed on toward the Castle of Almorol, in which
expedition I shall again leave them, and return to Palmerin of England.

The Nobles of Thra^e, desirous to have their young Princess given in marriage,
sent the Lady who had been entrusted in the management of the Adventure of the
Cup, to the Court of the Emperor, who undertaking it, arrived there at such
time as Prince Palmerin had retired to recreate himself, when entering, and
seeing him not amongst the other, she began to be heavy, as fearing some mishap
had befaln him, but being satisfied to the contrary, she desired Audience,
which being granted, she thus began:

Most puissant Emperor, Ladys, and worthy Knights, My Charge is from Queen
Carmelia, and the Nobles of Thrace, to let you know the Worthy Exploits of the
Renowned Prince Palmerin, least his Modesty hiding his great Exploits, Fame
should therein be silent: Know then, that the Prince has worthily finished an
Adventure, that may amaze the World, conquering Monsters, Giants, and all
difficulties, thereby delivering the beautiful Leonarda, whom he yet refused,
and with her the Diadem of Thrace, offered him by the Princess, and all the
Nobles of the Kingdom, so firm and constant was he in his Love to the fair
Polinarda, your Granddaughter, and Daughter to the Worthy prince Primalion;
yet has he promised (according to the Will of her deceased father) to provide
her such a prince, as may be worthy of her Love; Wherefore in the Name of the
Queen, Princess, and all our Nobility, with Letters-Credentials, I come to
require, That the fair princess (my Lady) may be brought to your Court, and
there Received according to her Estate.

This motion highly pleased the Emperor, as it did all the Ladys, who were
desirous of nothing more, than to see her, for whose deliverance the Noble
Prince had adventured such hazards; wherefore with many Rich Presents the
Damosel was dismissed, and earnestly desired to hasten her Lady thither; in
which undertaking I shall leave her, and return to Prince Palmerin.

The Prince delighting himself in a pleasant Forest, to shun popular applause,
after his late expedition, so it happened That he beheld diverse Kts. galloping
cross through a by-way, when being desirous to know the occasion of their
haste, as imagining they were posting to some Adventure, he followed so long
till he overtook one of them, who laged behind, by reason his Horse was fallen
lame, of whom he demanded the cause of such haste, but he for a long time gave
him doubtful answers, yet in the end, hoping he might lend him his Esquire Horse,
thus began:

Know Sir, (since it is not in your power to hinder the Ente^pr^ze) That
Felistor, a Noble Man of this Country, falling in love with a beauteous
Damosel, living not far distant from his Castle, whose eyes all along promised
him love and good liking; but so it happened, that through the persuasions of
her Mother, she married one Ridamur, who is now repairing with her to his own
Castle, when to prevent it, and take her by force, and kill her Lord, this
company is provided, as also another laid in Ambush by the way they must pass;
But such is my misfortune, that my Horse falling Lame, I fear will disappoint
me of being there to assist my friend; therefore (since I have freely told you
all) I hope you will suffer me to change Horses with your Esquire. Nay, (said
he) you rather deserve to be chastized, for daring to undertake so Villainous an
attempt, in going about to force free minds, and dishonor an Innocent Lady,
which all good Kts. ought to protect: But no longer to spend my breath upon
you, I Will follow the Adventurers, and (perhaps) make them repent the
undertaking of so rash an Adventure. This being said, he rode forward with
great eagerness, whereat he who had informed him laughed.

CHAP. XXXXVII.
What happened to the Prince in the Adventure of the rescue: As also to Prince
Florian in another Adventure.

PRince Palmerin, fired with a desire to give assistance to the distressed,
hasted to overtake the Troop, but was not so speedy, as to come before Ridamur
was slain, and the Lady, together with her Mother, taken prisoners, who made
many grievous laments, insomuch, that the Prince riding up, commanded those
that held them, upon pain of forfeiting their heads to let them go; but they
being six in number besides Felistor, began to flout him, saying, What means
this mad fellow, to intermeddle in our affairs? I Will warrant (replied another)
he being some foolhardy Knight, and desirous to get him a name, now means to
purchase it at the hazard of his life; but above all, Felistor began to rave
exceedingly, threatening him with death, for presuming to intermeddle with his
affairs; to which the Prince replied, That as for his threats, he feared them
not but was come with a resolution to correct his insolence, and set free the
Lady he had so cowardly taken, and about to deprive of her honor; wherefore
with his Lance running against him, he overthrew him, and the Lance piercing
quite through his body, he fell dead; then drawing his Sword, he so laid about
him, that killing two of his Knights, the other four fled to the Castle of the
Lady, and took possession of it, till such time as it was regained by the
Prince and two of them slain.

The old Lady and her Daughter perceiving themselves entirely at liberty,
greatly rejoiced, and coming before the Prince, would have humbled themselves
on their knees, but he would not suffer them, but gently raised them, and
saluted their fair hands; then came they to the place where the body of Ridamur
lay, which he caused diverse Country Peasants to convey to the Castle adjacent,
but when he and the Ladies arrived there they found the Bridge drawn up, and
the Castle possessed, which made them g^eatly wonder, whereupon they desired
the Prince to lie in ambush a while, to see if any that were within would come
forth, but he not finding it, passed the Moat upon a Float of Timber he found
therein, when entering a fair Hall, he found four armed Kts. whom he knew to be
those he had vanquished and put to flight; yet they seeing him an foot, and
supposing him through long travel and loss of blood to be faint, set upon him,
but soon found their mistake; for after a sharp dispute, two of them fell dead,
and the other two upon their knees begged mercy, which they received at his
hands, whose clemency won his applause greater than his Sword; whereupon he
commanded them to let down the Bridge, and ask pardon of the Ladies, which done
he suffered them to depart. The Ladys being entered, with great joy again
saluted him, and entreated him to stay so long, till they had interred the body
of Ridamur, to which he consented, and then departed toward Constantinople, on
whose way thither for a while I shall leave him, and return to Prince Florian.

Prince Florian having again taken his Device of the savage Man, departed in
search of Adventures, so far, that at length arriving in France, he was
desirous to pass over into England to visit his Father and Mother; but as it
had once before befaln him, so it happened to him now: For he having no sooner
imbarqued, but a wind arising, which long troubled the Ocean, he was driven
upon the Coast of Ireland, where going on shore and reposing upon a green Bank,
he was suddenly awaked by the shreiks of a Damosel, whereupon starting up with
his sword in his hand, he saw her flying before a monstrous Giant, at which
interposing his Shield, he bid her be of good comfort; but soon the Giant
(whose name was Br^calon) came up with a stern countenance, and commanded him
to deliver her, or he was a dead man; to which the Prince replied, He had ever
born Armor to succor distressed Ladys, and at the hazard of his Life would
venture to preserve her; whereupon the Giant in a great Rage struck at him with
his Batttail-Ax, but missing his blow, the Prince saluted him with his sword,
so that a hot Encounter happened between them, which made the Damosel stand
trembling and almost ready to give up the Ghost, for fear the Prince should be
slain; but such was his good fortune, that (after much blood shed on either
side) the Giant fainted, and retiring in sight, struck his heel upon a stump
and fell, when the Prince not thinking it prudence to let any advantage slip in
a combat with such an Enemy, stood upon him and cut off his head. Then rejoiced
the Damosel greatly, and conducted the Prince to a Hermit's Cave not far
distant, to cure his wounds, and there attend him, informing him that she
appertained to the Empress of Germany, and had been cast on shore by Shipwreck
in her passage to Denmark.

CHAP. XXXXVII.
What happened to Prince Florendos upon his Arrival at the Castle of Almorol.

THe Prince Florendos having finished many Adventures, arrived at last at the
Castle of Almorol, with the Shields of Miragarda and Targiana, where against
him came the Giant Almorol, but knowing him to be the Prince, he threw down his
Spear, and embraced him in his arms with joy, demanding how he had sped since
his departure? when as the Prince informed him of all that had happened, but
above all, of the Adventure against Albayzar, producing the two Shields, the
sight of which greatly rejoiced him; whereupon he hastily ran into the Castle,
to inform the Princess, That her Servant was returned, and had brought the
Shield; as also the Shield of her who had dared to stand her Rival in Beauty:
This news highly pleased her, yet being of a haughty mind, she showed it but a
little outward, though the Giant urged, That she ought to be kind to the man,
that had suffered so much, and endured such hardship for her sake; but all she
would grant, was, the favor of kissing her hand, and readmitted to guard the
Shield; which made him very pensive, and greatly to bewail her hard hap, often
repeating his amorous passion to his Ladys Picture, at the feet of which he had
placed the Shield of Targiana.

When having stayed there some time without meeting with any adventure, at
length he espied coming toward him three Knights; the first in silver and
green Armor, having on his Shield in Greek Letters of gold, the word Normandy:
The second had Armor white and Azure mingled artificially with streams of
green interchangeable, bearing in a Field of Sinople the god Apollo: The third
had his Armor of a Carnation color, beset with Croslets of Gold, and for his
device, Orpheus tortured in the flames of Hell: And as they approached the
Castle they sung this following Song.

The SONG of the Knights.
(1)
FAir Madam, if you can vouchsafe to see
The lively Picture of a careful mind
Forlorn with grief, then do but look on me,
And judge if Fortune be not most unkind,
That he who sues and serves faithfully
Should be repaid with extreme cruelty.
(2)
What greater Torment to a gentle mind
Than to be scorned where he likes most?
What state of Refuge can he hope to find
where each thing does at his misfortune boast?
Condemned, confounded with rebuke and blame,
Yet ignorant from whence the Causes came.
(3)
So heavy is the weighty yoke of Love
When quaintest looks afford discourtesie,
Then wise is he that does the passion prove,
And yet can keep himself at liberty:
But he whose wits are ravished by stealth,
Had need of Physic in his greatest health.
(4)
Some men in love commend their happiness,
Their quiet sweet, and delicate delight;
And I can boast of Fortunes frowardness,
Her extreme rigor, and severe despite;
But for the sweetness other men have felt
I came too late, my part was elsewhere dealt.
(5)
Yet can I say, no man has been more just,
Nor served his Lady with more due regard;
But she being governed by her own mistrust,
Denies her Servant his deserved reward:
Thus my Misfortune waxes more and more,
Yet I will suffer, though I dye therefore.
This Song greatly pleased the Prince, and because it nearly related to his
condition, he engraved it upon the bark of a Cypres Tree; by what time the
Knights were advanced to the Tree where the Shields hung; when the first Knight
beholding the beautiful Picture of the fair Miragarda, he began to contemplate
thereon, saying, That she whose Portraicture it was, might well command all
Hearts, and was indeed the sovereign Empress of Beauty, and that it was no
wonder, that for her sake so many Adventures had been undertaken, and that
those that defended her Cause were so prosperous.

Having said thus much, he desired Prince Florendos to break a couple of
Lances with him in Honor of the Lady, whose Picture he pretended to guard; to
which the Prince readily consenting, they prepared for the Just, and run so
furiously against each other, that the Knight in the green Armor was
overthrown; whereupon the Prince alighting, they drew their swords, and began a
furious Combat, wounding each other in a desperate manner, insomuch, that the
blood issued out, and the green Knight at last fainting, the Combat was given
over. Then would the two other Knights prove the Turnament with their Spears,
against whom ran Prince Floriman, who was a little before arrived to bear
Florendos company, who overthrew them both, at what time it so happened, that
they were known to be Prince Platier the sage Aliart, and Beroldo Prince of
Spain, upon which they embraced each other, and stayed diverse days at the
Castle of Almorol, in hopes to see the far-famed beautys of Miragarda; but she
being of a haughty temper, would not vouchsafe to give them that satisfaction;
whereupon having taken leave of each other, they departed.

The Princes gone, soon after another strange Adventure happened, which was,
that down the River, on the side of which the Castle stood, there came two
Boats, one covered with a Canopy of Silk embroidered with Gold, in which sat
a Lady of incomparable beauty, and at her feet, between two Matrons, a Knight
in green Armor, intermixed with Gold, who had for his device, in a Field of
Sinople, god Cupid bound in Chains, with his Bow and Arrows broken: When in the
other Boat were diverse Damzels, with three Esquires playing upon Lutes, and
tuneing their voices to the melodious sound: At which the two Princes stood
wondering so long, that rowing to the side of the Castle, a Damzel and an
Esquire came on shore, and advancing to the Tree where the Shield of Miragarda
hung, they gazed upon it a considerable time, and seeming somewhat displeased
that the Portraicture was so exceeding fair, they left it, and having obtained
leave of the Princess and the Giant Almorol, the Damzel entered the Castle, and
had access to the presence of the Princess Miragarda, when (having paid her
respects) she in humble wise made it known; That her Lady Arnalte Princess of
Navar, being in her Boat under the Castle Wall, desired that she might enter
the Castle and confer with her, that so face to face, comparisons of beauty
might be made: But the Princess Miragarda would by no means consent, excusing
it upon the Giant Almorol and the Prince Florendos, whom (as she said) had it
in their power to refuse, if she consented; therefore in hearty commendations
to her for her kindness, and the trouble she had given her self, she desired to
be excused, as to what was desired: With which unpleasant answer the Damzel
returned to her Lady, who upon the report thereof, was out of patience,
insomuch, that in a great rage she commanded her Knight to fetch the Shield,
which accordingly he enterprized, but upon his arrival at the place where it
hung, he found it was not to be obtained by fair words, but by Combat;
wherefore not daring to return without it, he (after many words had passed)
defied the Prince to the Combat; whereupon a dreadful Fight began, which for a
long time held bloody and doubtful, but in the end the Prince (by a stroke he
gave him on the Helm) brought him to his mercy; which the Princess Arnalte
perceiving, in a great rage caused her Mariners to Row up the River, leaving
her Knight to quit himself as well as he could; but the Prince pitying him as
a Lover, spared his Life, and referred him to the Sentence of Miragarda, who
enjoined him upon the Oath of Knighthood, never to serve any Princess but
Arnalte; and that he should alter the device in his Shield, that instead of
Cupid's being bound, he should paint him as victor, leading a Knight fast
menacled in Chains of Silver: to the performance of which being sworn, he was
dismissed, being grieved at nothing more than that his Lady had left him in
displeasure.

CHAP. XXXXVIII.
Who the Knight was that came with the Princess Arnalte: And of the splendid
Entertainment made in the Court of Constantinople, upon the Arrival of Leonarda
Princess of Thrace.

TO let you understand who the Knight was that came with the Princess Arnalte,
know that his name was Dragolant Son to the Duke of Normandy, who arming
himself, and setting forward in search of Almorol's Castle, to win the
affections of fair Miragarda; when happening on the Castle of Arnalte, and
overcoming her Knights, she became so amorous of him, that she entertained him
as her Knight; and he on the other hand contemplating her beauty, which was not
much inferior to Miragarda's, and on the other hand considering she was
Heiress to the Kingdom of Navar, became her sworn servant; but as she was a
Lady that was soon angry, and as soon pleased, she left him vanquished, as you
have heard: But upon his being dismissed, overtaking her, and in her presence
trying his Valor upon diverse Knights that would have offered her violence, he
recovered her favor to such a degree, that within a short time they were
married together, and he invested with the Title of a King: In which happy
estate I will leave him, and return to the Princess Leonarda.

Leonarda Princess of Thrace being on her way toward Constantinople, the
Emperor with a great Train of his Knights went to meet her, which they having
done, highly welcomed her, who sat in her Sun-bright Chariot, attired in Gold
and Jewels beyond value: When as the Complements having passed on either side,
and a happy Repast taken in a Royal Pavillion, they all hasted toward the
City, where they were that evening earnestly expected; but had not traveled
far e're they beheld a Knight standing in the way, with his Lance in his hand,
well mounted, and attended with two Esquires, one of which he sent to the
Emperor, to require the Just with his Knights; which the Emperor (though loath
to lose so much time, yet for the credit of his Knights, and honor of the
Princess) granted: whereupon the strange Knight (who bore for his device a
Cyprus Tree in a Field of Azure) advanced, and was met in full Carreir by
Prince Beroldo, but he (too feeble for his force) was dismounted; as likewise
were Prince Platire, Pompids, and all the Knights which attended the Emperor;
which greatly grieved him, that so great a disgrace was befallen his Knights in
the sight of the Princess, and were in a manner altogether out of conceit with
themselves, who before had hopes to gain the esteem of so beautiful a Virgin:
But whilst they were musing, the strange Knight seeing no more to deal with,
came before the Emperor, and unclasping his Helm, appeared to the great joy of
them all, to be Prince Florian of the Desert, who had left the English Court,
and passed through Germany, and diverse other Countries, seeking Adventures,
till arriving near Constantinople, he understood the Princess was on her way,
and having had knowledge of her excellent beauty from his Brother Palmerin, he
was resolved to divertize her with the prooff of his Prowess.

Upon this discovery the Prince (after having submitted himself to the Emperor,
and his Uncle Prince Primalion, who at that instant arrived,) came to the fair
Princess, and obtained the favor of kissing her delicate hand; and from that
time, though before unconstant and wavering in Love, he became so amorous of
her, that for her sake he enterprized many dangers and difficult hazards.

The Noble Train arriving about Sunset at the City of Constantinople, all the
Ladies attended the Empress, who came forth of her Palace to welcome her
Guest, so that what with the perfections of Nature and adornments of Art, a
glorious and ravishing spectacle was there to be beheld; and all night long the
Streets and Palaces were illum^ned with Tapers, and Fires made of fragrant
Wood, as Cedar, Cyprus, and what else might consist with the Magnificence; when
in the morning early all manner of Music sounded, and every thing else that
could procure delight was to be seen.

When as the Princess Leonarda being in the company of fair Polinarda, began to
express her high esteem of Prince Palmerin, but above all his constant love,
from which the Diadem of Thrace could no ways charm him; which raised a conceit
in the Princess Polinarda, not only of his worth, but a fear of losing him, if
she hid her passion from him, as she for some time had done, and seemed
outwardly to be displeased with him she inwardly loved and admired; wherefore
she determined with her self to give him better encouragement for the future:
But whilst this thought lasted, in came Prince Florian, and having made his
reverence, sat down by the Ladies; when fixing his eyes on the fair Princess
Leonarda, and she the like on him, they found such a mutual simpathy of love
and liking, that from that time their Hearts were firmly united; yet blushes
restrained their speech, till at length Florian taking courage, addressed
himself in this manner:

Bright Mirror of Beauty, whose Charms have power to make the hardest Marble
relent: Behold the Victim that must bow before the Alter of the Almighty, and
pay his Vows at your fair shrine: Grant, most Excellent of Womankind, to own
the Conquest you have made, and pity the conquered: Yet all that I dare
presume to ask, is, That you would daign to allow me the Honor of being your
Knight, that under the Banner of your rare perfections, I may amaze the world
with deeds worthy to be attributed to so much Excellency as shines in you.

This unexpected Complement made the Rosy blushes arise in the Princesses
Cheeks, so that the Lillys that before were striving for mastery, were quite
vanquished; when re-collecting her self, she thus replied:

Sir, your Praises of my Beauty might have been spared, by reason that I can
allow your Comments thereon to be no other than a Complement: Yet the request
you have made, being so small, for this fair Princess sake, whose Cousin you
are, I cannot in point of Honor nor Civility deny your request; yet should
blame my self for so doing, if (adventuring for my sake) any misfortune should
befall you.

The Prince (overjoyed at this concession) took the boldness to approach his
Mistress and salute her fair hand; at what instant a Messenger came in search
of him, to inform him, that the Emperor expected him in his Chamber: whereupon
humbly taking his leave of the Ladies, though with some regret, he departed,
leaving them to their freedom of discourse.

CHAP. XXXXIX.
What happened to Prince Florian upon his being sent by the Emperor in a
strange Adventure.

PRince Florian (as aforesaid) having left the company of the Ladies to attend
the Emperor, found there an Aged Man of large stature bedewing his reverend
Beard with tears, and greatly complaining against the adversness of Fortune:
When being by the Emperor ordered to declare the sum of his Grief, he replied,
As to the particulars, he had sworn to hide from any but the Knight who would
be so hardy in getting himself Fame and Renown in undertaking it, and by
atchieving it, ease him of infinite misery.

The Prince hearing this, and supposing for that purpose the Emperor had sent
for him, began greatly to rejoice, that he had such an opportunity to oblige
his new Mistress the Princess Leonarda; whereupon he joyfully offered his
service, though the Emperor was altogether unwilling he should hazard himself,
unless the Adventure was known; but upon the often Asseverations of the Old
Man, and the earnest of the Prince, he at length gave his consent; insomuch,
that the Prince (accompanied only with his Esquire, and the Aged Man) departed
the Court in great haste: So that although the Emperor afterward repenting, and
sending after him Beroldo, Platire, Blandidon, and many other good Knights, to
succor him, if occasion required, they could not overtake him; for coming to a
River over-shaded with Trees, and passing it in a little Boat, e're the Boat
could return to fetch his Esquire, and the Horses as the Aged Man promised it
should, such a Tempest, (together a dismal and gloomy Fogg) happened, that the
Boat was over-set as soon as ever the Prince landed. But being safe on shore,
and seeing the Castle before him, where he had notice from the person who had
required his help, that the Adventure was, he came before it; but finding it
seated upon an high Rock, and but one way, very narrow to ascend, he drew his
Sword and mounted, (by reason of the height, he was obliged to rest diverse
times;) when looking for the Old Man, whom he supposed to have followed him, he
found him missing, whereupon he began to suspect some treachery; yet nothing
daunted, he resolved to try the utmost: So that arriving at the top of the
Rock, he came to the Gate, which he found open, when instead of Armed Men, whom
he expected, he met with three beautiful Damzels Richly attired, who came
forth to welcome him, which increased his wonder; yet scorning to fear such
fair Enemies, he followed them into a stately Hall, at the upper end of which,
in a Chair of State, sat a beautiful Lady of great stature, who upon his
approach arose to meet him, giving him leave to salute her, then she welcomed
him in a kind manner, feigning much joy to have so much Honor as a visit from
a Knight so high in the favor of Fortune, telling him he must repose there
that night, and that on the morrow she would inform him of the Adventure to be
undertaken, with which he seemed well content; whereupon he was lead into a
stately Parlour, where the Tables were spread with all manner of provision, and
after some Complements made, sat down, frequently casting his eyes upon one of
the Damzels that served at the Table, whose beauty he fancied to be carer than
what he ever had seen before; nor was she wanting to entertain him with amorous
glances: Supper ended, he was by that Damzel conducted to his Lodging, who
laying bashfulness aside, promised to yield her Honor to be at his disposal,
so soon as convenience would permit; and so giving him a flattering kiss, she
slipped a King upon his finger (as she said) in pledge of her future good will:
But so it happened, That it had a Stone in it, the Virtue of which suddenly
cast the Prince into a dead sleep, when the large-sized Lady, whose Name was
Arleucia, entering the Chamber, and beholding the Prince o'rewhelmed with
drowsieness, she thus began to rejoice:

Happy am I this day, that Fortune had delivered into my hands the Man I so
long wished for; now is the time that my Revenge for my Brethrens Blood must be
wrought: O Brocalon! Baleato! Calfurnine! and Camboldam! Three of you fell by
this Prince's hand, whom I am about to sacrifice to your Ghost.

And thereupon taking a strong Sword in her hand, she was about to strike the
fatal blow, in order to take off the Prince's Head, when beholding his
exquisite beauty and manly grace, her heart began to fail her, so that letting
fall her hand, she paused a while; but Revenge overcoming her passion, she a
second time resolved his Death, and had put her bloody intent in practice, when
(as Fate, or rather Fortune, would have it) the Aged Man that had decoyed him
from the Court entered, and entreated her to hold her hand, saying, There could
be nothing more pleasing to her sorrowful Mother, than to have it in her power
to take the Prince's life, whom she might not otherwise perhaps believe to be
dead: Yet hardly could he persuade this Virago to hearken to his entreaty, she
was so fired with Revenge.

This Prince by this means obtaining a Reprieve, it was agreed, that her Mother
should be sought for, and made acquainted with the prey that Fortune had sent
her, and that she should haste to pass Judgment upon the destroyer of her Sons:
In search of whom we will leave them, and return to Prince Palmerin.

CHAP. L.
Of the Grief conceived for the loss of Prince Florian; And how his Brother
Palmerin went in search of him; and what befell him.

PRince Florian's Esquire staying with the Horses on the other side of the
River two days, and not perceiving his Master return, was for want of provision
constrained to return; when far he had not rode, e're he met with two Knights,
who by their Armor to be sage Aliart, and Prince Palmerin, to whom he related
what had befallen his Lord, which did not a little perplex them; yet the Sage
betaking him to his Art, assured the Prince, that he was detained by Necromancy
in the profound Island, and that it would cost some time to recover him out of
the hands of his Adversaries: whereupon the Prince sending the Esquire to the
Emperors Court, to certify the Emperor of what had happened, resolved to go in
search of him.

The news known at Constantinople, caused a general grief, but especially the
Emperor was greatly afflicted, because he had so rashly consented to his
undertaking an Adventure he knew not, what, nor where. The Ladies could not
refrain from weeping, but especially the fair Leonarda, who had so soon lost
her new servant, on whom she had impressed such deep affections; but in
consideration that his brother had undertaken his deliverance, they were
somewhat comforted, yet knew not what to think, seeing Sage Aliart had given
out, that he was in danger of his life.

Prince Palmerin having attained the River, where the Esquire had informed him
his Lord passed, found there neither Boat nor Bridge; yet riding along the
hither bank, he at last found a place where it was fordable; when coming to the
Castle, which by the description the Sage gave of it, he well knew to be the
same, whereupon with his drawn Sword he mounted the Stairs, meeting by the way
with many airey Fantomes, but no humane opposition, which made him boldly
enter, when all he found, was a Damzel, who seeing him approach with his drawn
Sword, shrieked aloud, and was about to fly; but the Prince taking her by the
arm, charged her upon her Life to inform him what was become of the Knight,
that not many days before came to the Castle? Whereupon she trembling, and
faultering in her speech, replied: That that morning he was conveyed by her
Lady Arlutea, and Alfernao, who (in a Trance) having put him on Skip-board, had
carried him (at the Request of Collumbra her Ladys Mother) to the Profound
Island, where they intended to put him to death, in revenge of the Death of the
four Giants slain by him and his Brother; the said Giants being Sons to
Collumbra, and Brothers to Arleucea; who had left her Country to be nearer the
Emperors Court, that she might the better effect her purposed Revenge. This
news greatly disturbed the Prince, but considering there was no time to be
lost, he made the Damzel swear to the truth of what she had said, and to
describe the Castle of the Gyantess Collumbra; as also the Ship wherein they
were imbarqued: Which done he hasted to the Seaside, and made all the haste
imaginable to imbarque, dismissing his Esquire, to expect him at
Constantinople, and bear his respects to the fair Polinarda, desiring her good
wishes for effecting the Enterprise he had undertaken.

Now so it happened, that Aliart knowing what had passed, and that they were
upon the Sea, as soon as they came within sight of the Island where the
Gyantess lived, raised such a storm, that by contrary Winds they were driven
upon a strange Coast, yet could not (by reason of the mighty Rocks) Land, but
were forced to ride it out at Sea, when they were carried up to Heaven and down
to Hell, so tempestuous were the Winds, and so dreadful the surface of the
Deep, that every moment they expected to perish; whereupon Arleucea began to
repent of what she had undertaken, wishing she was again in her Castle, and
that Prince Florian had not come thither: Yet often was she determined to kill
him on Shipboard, but feared to be let, by reason the Mariners were
ignorant of the Conspiracy against his Life; but in the end imagining that
Heaven was offended at her unjust determination, and that all were at the brink
of Ruin; after diverse cogitations, ruminating in her mind how her Brethren fell
in single Combat, and the Princes only defended themselves, she (after having
consulted Alfernao) resolved to take off the Charm, and keep the Prince in
ignorance of what had been designed against his Life: Wherefore going to the
Cabin where he lay, and having taken off the Ring, she sprinkled a certain
Juice upon his face, which soon restored him to his senses; and as soon the
storm began to cease.

The Prince finding himself on Shipboard, began to marvel how he came there;
when gazing about him, beheld Arleucea, knowing her to be the same Lady that
had Feasted him in her Castle; whereupon he took her by the hand, and causing
her to sit down by him, after many gentle speeches toward her, demanded how he
came thither, and what the Adventure was he should finish? But she dissembling
the matter a while, in the end (seeing his Princely Carriage, great Beauty, and
wonderful Civility) gave such scope to her passion, that earnestly repenting of
what she before intended, falling on her knees, she first with tears begged his
pardon for the Body-Treachery designed against his life, and then related from
point to point what had happened, and what was further intended; whereat he
Marvelling fell likewise on his knees, and gave thanks to Heaven; then rising,
he pardoned Arleucea, but she laying all the contrivance of the matter to
Alfernao, he could be hardly entreated to spare his life; but in the end,
considering Age, and that by taking his life he should render himself
inglorious, he was content, he should be confined a perpetual Prisoner in a
Castle on the Coast of Spain, belonging to King Recinde, whither by this time
the Tempest had driven them; and there landing, he with the young Gyantess, and
four Damzels he found on board with her, traveled so long, that coming into a
pleasant Valley, they espied two fair Tents, and by them walking four Ladies,
who seeing them approach, one of them merrily said, Sir Knight, you are well
stocked with Ladies, and may well spare some of them to our Knights, who have
more occasion for them. Nay, said the Prince, I shall in no wise forgo my
Charge; but if your Knights dare contend with me, and take them, or any of them
by force, I shall gladly submit to the chance of Fortune. Nay, said the Lady,
it is the custom of this place, that you must try the Just e're you depart, or
leave your Lady; and if you become Conqueror, then we are all at your divotion,
to be disposed of as you shall think fit. If this be the custom, said the
Prince, I am contented; but where are those I am to contend with? It will not
be long (replied she) e're they will be with you. When as at her command, a
Dwarf that remained in one of the Tents sounding a Silver Trumpet, the Knights
came riding out of the Forest, when to receive them the Prince prepared; and
meeting the first, (who pretended to the Lady that made the challenge) he threw
him from his Horse with such force, that he lay breathless: Then he prepared to
meet the rest, and served them in the like manner; which so enraged them, that
contrary to their custom, they (resolving to be revenged) drew their Swords,
and came upon him very furiously, to the great grief of his late acquired
Mistress; but so stoutly the Prince behaved himself, that in a short time he so
disabled them, that they were not capable of using their Swords: Wherefore
(according to contract and custom) he caused the four Ladies to mount the
Knights Horses, and (leaving their former Guardians in the Tents sorely to
bewail their misfortunes) rode with him, whom he carried away as it were in
Triumph.

CHAP. LI.
Of the Adventure that befell Prince Florian, in conducting the Ladies to the
Court of Spain: And what happened to Prince Palmerin of England in the Profound
Island.

THe Prince being proud of his beautiful Troop, resolved to convey them to the
Court of Recinde King of Spain; whereupon riding merrily through diverse
pleasant places, discoursing of sundry affairs, his new acquired Companions
greatly delighted in their Guide, but above all Arleucea became so passionate
of him, that she could not keep her eyes from off him; but he having a design
to bestow her upon his friend Dramusiand, would not show her such countenance
as she expected. Long they had not rode toward the Court of Spain, but the
Prince began to inquire of the Ladies that he had won at the Iusts, what, and
who they were, and the cause of their coming to that place? when as one of them
named Artesia made this Reply: Sir, since you use us so courteously, it is but
reason I should satisfy you in so small a request: Know then, that we are
sisters, who, by the License of our Mother, came with these Knights (who were
desirous of us in Marriage) to the place where you found us, who (to please us,
and create in us a better esteem of them) would often oblige such Knights as
passed to forgo their Ladies, if any accompanied them, or confess we were
fairer than any they adored; in which (before this time) they never was
unsuccessfull.

This Story pleased the Prince, so that continuing their former mirth, they
merrily rode on: On which way I will leave them a while, and see what became of
Prince Palmerin in searching after his Brother.

The Prince (as is said) having taken Shipping, after a while being tossed on
the Seas, came to a Port of the Profound Island, near to which he found a small
Cottage, where entering he espied a grave person, who arose up and welcomed him;
when as the Prince sitting down, began to inquire into the state of the
Country, and received answer, That it was an Island plentifully stored with all
things; and that over it not long before ruled a Gigantick Tyrant named
Bravorant, who committed all manner of Murders, Rapin, and Violence, but kind
Heaven in the end cut him off: Yet left he by his Wife Collumbra four Sons,
viz. Calfernine, Camboldam, Brocalon, Baleato; the two former of which glorying
in their strength and tyranny, leaving the Island, went in search of
Adventures, making great spoil in all places, till at last they were slain in
single Combat by the Sons of Prince Don Edoard; of which the other two Brethren
hearing, contrary to the will of their Mother, went to seek the Princes, and
revenge their brothers death; but (as fate would have it) meeting with one of
the Princes, known by the Title of The Knight of the savage Man, they fell by
his sword, as the former had done: Which news so enraged their Mother, that
(out of all patience) she leagued with one Alfernao, skilled in Magic, who
promised to deliver that Knight into her hands, that she might glut her self
with torturing him to death, so that he is by her daily expected; as also by
her brother Espouvantable, a monstrous Giant, who (as her Substitute) greatly
Tyranizes.

The Prince upon notice that his brother was not yet arrived, greatly rejoiced,
desiring to know the Castle of the Giant and Gyantess, and the nearest way to
it: When having received direction, and rested that night, the next morning
early (having largely rewarded his Host) he took his leave: When passing a
Forest, he came to a Haven of the Sea, where he espied a great Combat of ten
Knights against three, yet the later maintained their ground to a wonder; when
making up to them, he soon knew the three Knights to be Berold Prince of Spain,
Platire Son to Primalion, and the Sage Aliart; and those that fought against
them were the Knights of the Gyantess, who, upon their landing, came to take
them Prisoners: But as the Prince was about to come to their assistance, he
espied the monstrous Giant Espouventable close lurking behind a Tree to expect
the event of the Combat, who seeing his men so hard beset, came forth with a
dreadful noise, much like the roar of enraged Seas, crying, Kill, kill the
Varlets: which the Prince perceiving, advanced against him with great courage
and bravery, saying, Stay Monster, and combat me, permitting those that are
over-matched by number, though not by Valor, to finish their Combat. The Giant
beholding the Prince with disdain, reylyed, That he would chastise him with
death, and feast with his flesh the Fowls of the Air: which nothing amazing
the Prince, he drew his Sword, so that a dreadful Combat ensued, and so long
lasted that after great effusion of blood, and many wounds, the Prince his
unconquerable Fortune prevailed, and the Giant was brought on his knees to beg
his life; but the Prince having knowledge of the many Cruelties he had
committed, contrary to his wonted clemency, smote off his Head, and hanged it
by the Hair upon a Bough in the Forest; when turning about, he perceived his
Companions had killed five of the ten, and brought the other five into
subjection, who upon their declaring they were forced to do what they did by
the Giants compulsion, they had their lives.

Whereupon having rested themselves, and bound up their wounds, the Prince with
his three Companions rode toward the Castle of Collumbra, resolving to rid the
Island of such a curb: When as the Islanders having notice of what had
happened, came to meet them with branches of Palms and Garlands in their hands,
stileing them their deliverers, and animating them to destroy all the Lineage
of the Tyrant; but e're the Prince arrived, they in great numbers assaulted the
Castle, swearing to revenge the many injuries they had received on Collumbra,
and the cursed Kindred that yet remained; whereupon she being in great
distress, and expecting the Rabble every moment would force the Gates open, and
show her no mercy, she sent a Damzel of hers out through a private Vault, to
fall at the Prince's feet, and implore him to take her into his protection, not
suffering her to fall into the hands of the multitude; when as the Prince
considering she was a woman, and that she would be greatly outraged, interposed
with the people, promising them that she should for the future be so well
secured, as never after to injure them; whereupon in a short time they were so
well pacified, that they drew off; when as the Prince and his Companions
entering, found in a great Hall the disconsolate Collumbra, overwhelmed in
tears, greatly bewailing her many misfortunes, and wishing to dye, which moved
the Prince to such compassion, that he began rather to comfort than rebuke her,
for her many Tyrannies, and cruel Intentions against her Brother. Yet to keep
his word with the people, and to preserve her from their fury after his
departure, he caused her, and her Damzels, who were not unwilling to be
conveyed on Shipboard: And then having settled the Island, though refusing the
Sovereignty thereof, which was earnestly pressed upon him, he imbarqued for
Constantinople; having first promised to send the people such a Governor, as
should greatly advance their felicity.

CHAP. LII.
What happened to Prince Palmerin, after his departure from the Profound-Island.

THe Prince having settled the Affairs to the content of the Islanders,
dismissed sage Aliart in one Vessel, and with another that he found in the
Port, accompanied with Berolde, and Platire, he Coasted so long, that in the
end he fell in with another Island, called, The Perilous Island; where going
on shore, he found it well peopled, and very opulent: For after the Inchantress
Eutrope was dead, by the Adventurous Prince's means, diverse of the Islanders
belonging to the adjacent Islands, flocked thither, by reason of the fertilety
of the place, and mightily improved it.

Here the Prince going on shore, knew by the many Monuments, that was the place
in which he had undergone such danger; and carrying his Companions from place
to place, he (to their great admiration) showed and related the many strange
Encounters, but especially that of the Fountain, where they found lying the
bones of the Beasts he had slain; and at the Castle the Shield which (as a
Trophie) he caused the subdued Knight to hang up, as a Memorial of that
Adventure: The which done, they passed in a fair Garden, replenished with all
the Pride of Flora, and adorned with Fruits, so lovely to the Eye, that a rarer
sight could not be found; when in the midst thereof there stood a Crystal
Fountain, imbossed with Silver Sculptures of many Stories, and rare Device. But
whilst they were musing and admiring it, (to show that all the Enchantment was
not finished) like an Exaltation up there sprang a stately Fabric, seeming to
the Eye of Lucent Stones, and Massy Gold, the Gates wide open, yet guarded by
two monstrous forms, between them standing an Image of Gold; when to see this
Rarity all flocked, but were withstood entrance with many terrible blasts,
which overthrew such as approached; till the Prince (ordained to finish great
Adventures) advancing, went to the Image, and took a Golden Key out of its
hand; whereupon the Giants vanished: So that entering the Mansion, and opening
(as they supposed) diverse Doors, at length they came to a fair Closet, hung
round with Pictures of the rarest Beautys in the World, so lively, that at
first they started, each supposing to have seen his Mistress there. But long
they contemplated not thereon, before a dreadful murmuring was heard, and
instantly a Clap of Thunder breaking over this Airy Mansion, it vanished in a
Flash of Lightening, leaving the Spectators in consternation and amazement;
when well considering it was the device of some Magician, they immediately
imputed it to sage Aliart, or Urgandia, who had erected it to please them; and
so considering about other affairs, they returned to the Castle; when as a
number of the Inhabitants knowing the Prince to be him that had finished the
Enchantment of Eutrope, came to congratulate his second Arrival, and offer him
the Homage of the Country, which he would not accept in Person, but allotted it
to the sage Aliart, who soon after took possession thereof, in the Name of the
Emperor of Constantinople.

Then the Prince, desirous to leave that place, took his farewell of his
companions, and embarked with his Esquire, who by this time having notice of
his Adventure in the Profound-Island, was come to him. When in search of new
Adventures I shall for a while leave him and the rest, and return to
Constantinople.

CHAP. LIII.
How the News of what had hapened arrived at Constantinople: And what befell
the Gyantess Collumbra and Alfernao.

Whilst the Court of Constantinople was in great suspense for the absence of
the Princes, nothing but Clouds of sorrow appeared on every Face; but long that
obscurity of Mirth and Iollitry lasted not, before News was brought, how the
Treachery of Alfernao was defeated; and that Prince Florian, who had in his
company Arleucea, was safe in Spain, intending in his way to that Court, to
visit the Castle of Almorol; so that upon certain notice thereof, the Clouds
vanished, and restored the face of things as formerly. Yet Leonarda could not
tell what to think, that her entertained Servant had soon betaken himself to a
fresh Beauty; but above all, she feared least he should be Captivated by the
eyes of Miragarda, of whom Fame had every where so well spoken, celebrating her
for the most accomplished Beauty upon Earth: But being comforted by her dear
Companion and Confidant, the beauteous Princess Polinarda, she lost her fears,
and rested assured of his worth and virtue; in requital extolling the Deeds of
Prince Palmerin above the Skies.

Whilst matters were at this pass, news was brought that the Gyantess Collumbra
was arrived as a Prisoner, to be disposed of at the pleasure of the Emperor;
upon which Orders were given to introduce her: But such was her large and
monstrous size, that the Ladies at her first approach looked pale, and stood
aghast; but seeing her in tears, and that she had deformed her self with her
Nails and violent blows, wishing rather to dye than live, after the loss of
her Progeny; they commiserated her, and began to intercede on her behalf, till
such time as they were acquainted with the cruelties she had used, and what
devices she had laid for the Lives of the Princes: Whereupon after she had been
long examined, and confessed each particular, justifying what she did as legal,
and that she still would do it, was it in her power, cursing Fortune, and the
senister Stars that ruled her Birth, for rendering her so wretched and
unfortunate: So she was conducted to a Chamber, and a Guard set on her, least
she should offer violence to her self. But whilst they were discoursing with
each other, armed with fury and a deep despair, she tore the Bar out of the
Window, and by that means having made room for her vast body, she cast her self
out, when falling on the Pavement, she with the fall extinguished life, to the
grief of the Emperor, and all the Ladys of the Court.

Alfernao in his Confinement hearing of what had hapened, and finding himself
(through his Treason) fallen into disgrace and contempt, at the same time fearing
he should be brought before the Emperor, and there be sharply punished for his
treacherous dissimulation, he took a Dose of Poison, which he usually carried
about him to mischief others, and so in Death followed his Friend and old
Companion Collumbra.

CHAP. LIVE.
How King Polendos, and the Knights that were made Prisoners being set at
Liberty, arrived at Constantinople: And how Prince Florian, with his Ladys,
arrived at the Court of Spain; and what insued.

NOW whilst the Court was filled with compassion for the unfortunate end of
these Persons, the Emperor was informed, That four Turkish Galleys were arrived
in the Port; which made him conjecture (as indeed it was true) that the Turk,
at the Instance of his Daughter, had sent home King Belcar, and the rest of the
Captive Knights; upon notice of which he was so overjoyed, that mounting on
Horseback, he with such of his Nobles as were at hand, passed to the Port,
where he found them about to land, which gladed him beyond measure; but their
countenances were so changed by the growing of their Beards and ill usage, that
but by their Voices, he could not have known them; yet taking them in his Arms,
he embraced them with tears, not suffering them to kneel before him, as they
were about to do; but having a Chariot at hand, caused them to enter
thereinto, by reason of their weak estate, and so conveyed them to the Court,
where they were highly welcomed with loud acclamations, and the sound of Drums,
Trumpets, and Clarions, and feasted in a most plentiful manner, the better to
recover their faded strength. But in the midst of this Iollitry the Emperor had
notice, that Almancer the Turkish Ambassador, was on board the Admirals Gally
with a Charge from his Lord: Wherefore the Emperor sent a great Train to desire
his Landing, and to conduct him in the best manner to the Court; but he refused
it, saying, He would not come on shore till the ensuing Day; with which answer
they returned to the Emperor, who ordered great preparations for his reception
against the morrow, inquiring in the mean time of King Polendos, and the rest,
how they had fared, and by what means they were delivered? When in the name of
all, the King made this Reply: That they had been hardly dealt with by the
Infidel; and that many times their Lives were in danger, by reason Prince
Florian was not sent, but through the incessant Prayers, Tears, and Entreaty
of fair Targiana, they had at last obtained their liberty.

Time sliding apace, the weary Courtiers desired repose, whereupon every one
retired to his chamber, till light (awakened by circling hours) began to dawn,
when as (not unmindful of the entertainment due to the Ambassador) they clothed
themselves in rich attire, causing many costly Pageants and goodly sights to be
erected: When as Polendos, Belcar, and the rest of the returned Knights, with
many others, arriving at the Port, entered a Barge, and rowed to his Gally
side, and there received him with many Complements, and from thence rowed him
to the shore, all the Air being filled with sounds of Harmony; when coming to
the Court, he was conducted by King Polendos, and Prince Primaleon, before the
Chair of State, where the Emperor was seated in his Emperial Robes; when after
complements on either side passed, and the Ambassador had taken his place, he
first delivered his Letters, Credentials, under the Ottoman Seal; after which
he thus began:

Know, Most Puissant Emperor, that from the Mighty Ottoman Emperor (my Lord and
Master) I am sent to salute you in his Name, and to give you knowledge, that
his Emperial Diadem has been stained, and its bright dazzling Luster much
impaired, by the Indignity offered him, in the Person of his Daughter, conveyed
from his Court by Florian, a Knight of your Court: Wherefore, if you expect
Peace at his hands, it can be preserved at no other rate, than by delivering
him up to be deservedly punished, who has offered such insolence to his Turkish
Majesty, as to give the World occasion of discourse, and blot the Name of that
fair Lady, who is the solace of his Life.

This having said, he ended; and the Emperor made this reply:

Know, Sir, I am desirous of your Lords friendship, and seek not War in my
declining years, but rather wish to spend the small remainder of my life in
Peace, therefore expected no such Command to be laid on me, which (if I judge
aright) is to no other end designed, then to create a new ground for War: If
so, I might more justly seek Revenge for the injury and ingratitude my Knights
have sustained in recompense of my Commands and their good will. As for the
Princess, I own my self obl^ged to her for their deliverance; but for the
injury offered her by Florian, I see none, since with her Fathers leave
(without compulsion) she left the Court, and chose the Prince to be her Guard,
and was as honorably received at my Court, as she could be regarded in her
Fathers. As for the Prince you speak of, though he is my Grandson, yet he is
not my Subject; nor can I compel free minds, if that I would; but surely rather
than I would deliver him up to your Masters Rage, (were it in my power, and he
would consent) I Would freely hazard my Empire in Fortunes chance: And now you
have my Answer, you may stay and have the Freedom of my Court, or depart at
Pleasure.

The Emperor thus ending, with a Majestic frown greatly dismayed the
Ambassador, who without replying was about to retire to his Gallys, but that
the Princes stayed him to make merry, and received the Emperors Letter, to
which he consented; and so after three days tarryance, he returned to him that
sent him; where I shall leave him, and return to Prince Florian.

The Prince, with his Troop of Ladies, having reached the Court of Spain; sent
his Esquire to the King and Queen, to implore them that they would permit the
Knights of their Court to Just against a strange Knight, in the behalf of their
Ladies, for that he would maintain the Beauty of those that accompanied him
against any of the Court-Ladies, if so be it any Knights durst maintain the
contrary. The King, who had delighted from his Youth in Feats of Arms, appeared
no way averse, but rather desired that the Valor of his Knights should be
tried, whereupon he dismissed the Esquire with a promise that his Masters
request should on the morrow be granted, and that for that night Lodgings
should be provided for him and his Lady. The Prince having now an opportunity
to try his force against the feeble Knights of Spain, made no doubt but by his
Prowess to Eclipse the Glory of that Court, in Honor of the Emperor, and
therefore returned King Recinde great thanks.

The night being spent in Mirth and Iollitry, the next morning they prepared
for the List, the Trumpets loudly sounding thereto, which awakened the Knights;
when mounting their Steeds, they advanced, and found the Prince in the List;
whereupon a Spanish Knight, in white Armor, with a wounded Heart in his
Shield, confronted him, at what time the Prince sent to acquaint him, That if
himself was conquored, the Knight should choose from amongst his Train the most
beautiful Damzel; but if he vanquished the Knight, he would have his Mistress,
and therefore required him to assign her; to which the Knight whose Name was
Gonzales, sent this Reply; That he doubted not but the strange Knight was weary
of his Female Company, and therefore came to put them off at any rate; but as
for his Mistress, his power was so little over her, that she was altogether at
her own disposal. This answer so displeased the Prince, that he gave signal for
the Just, without any conditions: When running furiously at each other, the
Spanish Knight was thrown from his Horse, with his Heels upwards, which so
grieved him, that he required the Combat of the Sword, which the Prince as
readily granted, but the King forbad it: Yet a second Knight running against
the Prince, fared no better, and so a third, till all his Lances were broken,
so that he was obliged to entreat of the King a new supply, and with them had
the Just six hours, none being able to unhorse him, which sore abashed the
King, to see his Knights disgraced, and the Fame of his Court Eclipsed by one
Knight, insomuch that he repented he had granted the disport, and thereupon for
that day caused it to cease, intending it should be no more; but upon the
entreaty of some Knights, that upon the fame of the Exercise newly arrived
there, it was renewed the next day; when as the Spanish Knights fared no better
than the day before, which cooled their courage.

Matters going thus, the Prince resolved to depart to the Castle of Almorol the
next morning, of which Arleucea having notice, watching her opportunity, when
her companions were asleep, she stole into the Prince's Lodging-Chamber, where
a Taper was burning, and sitting down upon his Bedside, began to sigh out her
passion in this order:

O unfortunate that I am! How am I captivated in the snares of Love, and forced
to do at upon the Man that slights my passion? O that I had never seen his
face, unless he would have more regarded me, and pitied the Feavour that
consumes me. This said, she began to weep tenderly; whereupon the Prince
awaking, wondered to see a woman in his Chamber, but by the light discovering
who it was; and she still continuing her lamentations, he comforted her in the
best wise, promising that allthough himself intended not to marry her, yet he
would bestow her upon such a Husband, as should please her: This absolute
denial disturbed her more than before, so that casting her Arms about the
Prince, she lay as one intranced for a pretty space; but recovering he senses,
and modest bashfulness, she left him, and retired to her Chamber; where awaking
one of her Damzels named Polephemia, she imparted to her the Secrets of her
Heart, desiring her to go to the Prince, and persuade him that night to receive
her into his Arms, and satisfy the desires of a longing Virgin. But this
Damzel, who was the same that put the enchanted King upon the Prince's finger,
having the opportunity of being alone with him solicited her own (instead of
her Ladies) cause so long, that he having born her good will ever since he
first beheld her, laying niceties aside, so dealt with her, that to both their
contents he possessed her Virgin Treasure, and sent her blithe and gay with
Loves refreshments, when the morning dawn, to carry Cordial words to her
disconsolate Lady, who little suspected what had passed, yet desired no greater
happiness.

In the morning early the Prince and his beautiful Female Troop taking leave of
the King, Queen, and Court-Ladies, departed toward the Castle of Almorol; but
coming into a pleasant Valley before them, they beheld a Knight of a monstrous
slye come riding on a Horse greater than Beaucephalus, with two Esquires of his
attendance: When coming near the Prince, and beholding the Ladies, he rudely
laid hold of Arleucea, swearing she should hear him company, and that two
others should be allotted to his Esquires: This rough and unseemly action so
moved the Prince, that drawing his Sword, he came at him to revenge the Injury,
which the Knight (or rather Giant) perceiving, let go his hold, and drawing his
Massy Blade, a dreadful Combat began; but so eager was the Prince to revenge
the affront, that the Giant received many wounds, till in the end fainting,
through the loss of blood, he fell; when taking off his Helmet, the Prince
being about to smite off his Head, his Esquires fell on their Knees, and with
tears begged him to spare their Lords Life, which the Ladies perceiving,
interceded so much on his behalf, that the Prince was contented to spare his
Life, conditionally, that he would tell his Name, and go to the Court of Spain,
and there relate what had befallen him; both which he swore to do, saying, He
was called Trofolant the Fearful; And as for the other part of his Oath,
though it would redound much to his disgrace, yet would he faithfully perform
it: Whereupon he was suffered to depart.

The Prince having chastised the insolency of the Giant, passed on till he met
three Knights, completely armed, passing a little River, who espying one Knight
conducting so many Ladies, agreed amongst themselves to take each of them one;
whereupon coming up, one chose Arleucea, another Poliphemia, and the third
Artesia; Nay, Gentlemen, said the Prince, you must first ask my leave, which
(assure your selves) you will not obtain, e're any of these Ladys fall to your
share. That needs not, said one of the Knights, for we will be our own Carvers;
yet (trust me) we will so kindly use the Ladys, that they shall have no cause
to repent the change. I see (said the Prince) you are resolutely bent to lessen
my Train, if possible, therefore prepare to win them, and they are freely
yours, for unless you purchase them at the price of my overthrow, you must not
expect to have them.

The words of the Prince greatly pleasing the Knights, they began to contemn
his force, and vaunt of their own Valor beyond measure; but so it happened,
that in the Just they were all overthrown, and remitted for a punishment of
their presumption to the Ladies they had claimed, who enjoined them to tell
their Names, and go to the Court of Spain, as had the Giant, and there (in the
presence of the King and his Knights) declare what had befallen them, and by
whose hand; to which with a mournful voice one of them replied: That allthough
the Sentence was severe, yet seeing it was their misfortune to be conquored,
they would not decline it; As for our Names, said he, I am called Grovanel,
this other Knight is my Brother Brabazan, and the third Claribard; all of us
Knights of the Spanish Court, which makes us the lother to make our disgrace
public there; yet upon the Oaths of our Knighthood, seeing the Ladys have
enjoined it, it shall be performed: And thereupon the Prince dismissed them,
and kept on his way toward the Castle of the Giant Almorol.

CHAP. LV.
Of the Giant and three Knights arrival at the Court of Spain: And of the
arrival of Prince Florian at the Castle of the Giant Almorol; and what ensued
thereon.

THe Giant Trofolant (according to his Oath) arriving at the Court of Spain,
after admittance had to the Kings presence, began to declare the occasion of
his coming, and tell the whole matter, which did not a little perplex the King
to know who the Knight with the Damzels was; but whilst the doubt lasted, the
other Knights came in, and became Relaters of their own misfortunes, which
still increased the wonder, and somewhat lessened the disgrace of those Knights
that had been overthrown in the presence of their Ladies, but in the end they
concluded it must be one of the invincible Sons of Prince Don Edoard, and
thereupon rested themselves satisfied as well as they could.

The Prince riding on in the company of his Ladies, traveled so long, that he
came within sight of Almorol's Castle, when to his beautiful Companions he
thus began: Ladies know that we approach the Castle where dwells the fair
Miragarda, whose Beauty is famed for excellent throughout the World, therefore
agree amongst your selves whose Banner I shall fight under: when as a murmr
arose amongst them, every one thinking her self the fairest, till Poliphemia,
who had a wonderful conceit of her beauty, thus broke silence: Sir Knight, if
you fight under Beauty's Banner, it behooves you to be loyal and constant in
your Love, for I persuade my self, if the Knight that protects the Shield of
Miragarda was not so, Fortune would not favor him as she does, for we cannot
believe but some of us are as beautiful as she; therefore if you are
unfortunate in the Enterprise, attribute it to your unconstancy, and not to the
Defect of our Beauty. The Prince hearing her say thus much, could not refrain
smiling to think of the esteem she had of her self, and what had passed between
them; yet giving her and the rest many Complements, they at last came to the
River Thesin, that encompassed the Castle, on which they beheld Miragarda and
her Damzels in a Boat, whose beauty was so excellent, that it had well nigh
conquored the Prince, but he who was altogether unconstant in Love, soon shook
off her Chains.

The Prince had not long stayed before the Castle, but Florendos sent his
Esquire to him, to acquaint him with the custom of the Castle; Nay, (said
Prince Florian) tell thy Lord I am very well acquainted with the custom, and
came hither on purpose to break a Lance with the Guardian of Miragarda 's
Beauty: Upon notice whereof Florendos advanced, and prepared for the Just; but
the Prince (not desirous to injure his Kinsman) declared that he would not
undertake the Combat of the Sword, but came to show his Ladys Pastime, not
being Emulus to bereave him of his trust; whereupon Florendos saluted him, and
was desirous to know his Name, but he refused, so that the Just began with
great vehemence; yet such was the regard that Florian had for his Nephew, that
he would not disgrace him in the fight of his Lady, who stood in the Window to
behold the Iusts, whereupon they broke three Lances without any advantage,
which so enraged Florendos, (who was altogether ignorant of his Adversaries
strength) that he would have tried the Combat of the Sword, but Prince Florian
with gentle words persuaded him to the contrary, desiring that that might be
referred to Almorol the Giant, against whom he was desirous to try his
strength; which made the Ladies that bore him company to smile, mis-doubting
the Courage of their most valiant Knight.

Almorol having notice that the combat was required against him, went to his
fair Mistress, and required her consent, who (because the Iusts were not
decided) accorded to his Request; whereupon the Giant came forth, and defied
Prince Florian to the combat of the Sword, who (now at liberty to use his full
strength) greatly rejoiced; insomuch that the combatants being in a readiness,
charged each other so furiously, that wounds were received on both sides, but
the Prince (whom Fortune ever favored) brought the Giant to his mercy, yet
would not injure his Life, allthough in his power, but suffered him to be
carried off, and his wounds to be healed, having engaged, that if himself had
been overcome, to have bestowed Arleucea in Marriage upon the Giant.

During the time that Florendos and the attendants of the Castle were carrying
off the Giant, and looking to his wounds, two Knights came riding up to the
Shield of Miragarda, and laying hold on it, would have conveyed it thence, but
Prince Florian, observing his Rinsman to be absent, forbad them on their peril,
yet they regarded not his Menaces, but dared him to the combat to defend it;
whereupon he prepared himself for the Just, and ran one of them with a strong
Staff through the Body, and laid the other on the Earth; by which time
Florendos was arrived, greatly displeased that the Just should be performed in
his absence; but when he knew that his Kinsman Florian had done him that
service, he greatly rejoiced, and would have conducted him into the Castle, but
could not persuade him to stay, for that he had promised to return to the Court
of Spain, to give those Knights a further satisfaction of his Prowess;
whereupon taking leave, he departed with his Female Train, every one of which
striving to be highest in his favor.

But far he had not rode e're he heard the piteous shreiks of a Lady on the
other side of a River, and because he could not conveniently come nearer, by
reason of the depth of the water, he unarmed himself and cast it over,
when-leaving the Ladies he had in guard, he swam cross the Flood, and entering
the Thicket, beheld a Knight forcing a Damzel, whilst another Knight was
binding her Esquire to a Tree; which unmanly abuse, so enraged the Prince, that
he commanded them upon pain of Death to desist, but they being two to one
seemed little to regard his threats, though afterward they repented it: For
the Prince being enraged at so great a wickedness as they were about to commit,
having given them leave to put themselves in a posture of defense, charged them
with such fury, that he laid one of them breathless, and brought the other to
his mercy, obligeing him to ask the Lady forgiveness, and taking an Oath of
him, to go to the Court of Spain, and make report of his Villainy, and what had
befallen him; and so unbinding the Damzels Esquire, he passed along the Bank of
the River till he found a place fordable, over which he passed with the Lady
and her Esquire, demanding the cause why they used such violence, and how she
came to meet with them? to which she answered, That being a Damzel, Attendant
upon the Princess Miragarda, she obtained leave to go to the Court of Spain, to
visit her friends, when as these Knights having been foiled at the Castle of
Almorol, to revenge that disgrace, resolved (upon their knowing who I was) to
deprive me of my Honor, having cast Lots who should have the first Essay, and
had succeeded in their Wickedness, had not kind Heaven happily sent you to my
rescue.

The Damzel had scarce ended, when an Outcry and Female Shreiks was heard,
when the Prince looking up, beheld a Knight with Arleucea behind him, riding as
fast as possible away with her; whereupon he hastened to recover his Horse,
which done, he rode after him, crying, Stay Uncourteous, and be chastized for
the Insolence you have offered to a Lady under my protection: Whereat the
Knight turning about in great fury, set down the Lady, saying, He would be
revenged for such his bold interruption; whereupon drawing his Sword, he
advanced, but received such a welcome, that after six or seven exchanged blows,
the Prince brought him under, and would have taken off his Head, but that he
begging for life, Arleucea pittyed him and interceded on his behalf, yet made
him swear to go to the Court of Spain, as the other had done, and there make
his Confession, and own what had befallen him, and not for the future to bear
Arms, unless the Ladies of that Court would permit him so to do; which done, he
departed in great heaviness; and soon after both he and all the rest performed
their vows, to the glory of the Prince, and their own shame.

CHAP. LVI.
How Prince Florian returned to the Court of Spain, and thence departed to the
Castle of Arnalte, and what befell him.

PRince Florian having hitherto secured his Ladies from all injury, brought
them once more to the Court of Spain, where upon their arrival they were
received by the King and Queen with many expressions of Joy, but he greatly
envied by diverse other Knights, whom he had foiled, wherefore they stirred up
such Knights as were newly come, to try with him the Just, and combat for his
Ladies; of which number, Lustramar, Grandian, and Arpiam undertook it, but were
miserably foiled; wherefore the King would not suffer any more of his Knights
to enter the Just, but caused a sumptuous Feast to be made, obligeing the
Prince and his Ladies to sit with him at the Table: When he being unarmed,
(which was the Kings policy to know him) appeared to be Florian of the Desert,
Son to Prince Edoard; whereupon the King embraced him, as afterward did the
Queen, and all the Chief Nobility, in such a manner, that great was the Court;
the King declaring, that it was no disgrace to be foiled by such a Knight.

But having stayed there diverse days, he resolved to depart toward the Castle
of Arnalte Princess of Navar, to try the Adventure of the Castle: Whereas his
new acquired Ladies finding him unconstant in Love, were resolved to leave him
which he perceiving, was not at all discontented, for that they were
continually wrangling amongst themselves who was highest in his favor,
insomuch that they greatly disturbed his quiet; so that departing with Arleucea
and her Damzels, he left the rest in the Spanish Court, and rode toward Navar;
when without meeting with any adventure, he came to the Castle of the Princess
Arnalte, where a Shield with her Picture hung upon a Tree, and was guarded by
Dragolant Son to Duke Drapos of Normandy, as that of Miragarda was by Prince
Florendos.

The Prince arriving at the Castle, and being known by the Device of his Shield
to the Princess, who bore him mortal hate for rescuing his Brother, urged her
Champion to destroy him, and that no less than himself should be the Reward;
which so exalted his mind, that he promised to bring the Prince bound, and lay
him at her feet; in order to which he prepared himself, and came to the Just;
but before he began, commanded him to render himself and the Ladies in his
Train to the pleasure of his Lady, at which the Prince smiling, made reply,
That he exacted so largely, that he could not aquiess with his demands, but if
he could win them, they were then his own: Whereupon he retired to fetch the
greater compass, when meeting with extraordinary force, their Lances were
shivered, and both of them shook; but at the second Course Dragolant was
tumbled from his Horse with his Heels upwards, which so enraged him, that he
drew his Sword, and came toward the Prince, who (to be upon equal terms with
him) alighted, and after a fierce combat of the Sword, brought him into such a
feeble condition, that he fainting through weariness, wounds, and loss of
blood, fell to the ground, which Arnalte (that had all the while beheld the
combat) perceiving, came running in great haste, and begged his life of the
Prince, who (upon condition she would promise to marry the vanquished Knight)
promised to condescend to her request; which she perceiving, and considering
the many Services of Dragolant, and that although Fortune at that time proved
averse, yet he was a valiant Knight, consented it should be so; whereupon the
Prince helped her and her Damzels to carry the Knight into the Castle, where
his wounds being dressed, and he refreshed with Cordials, he soon recovered,
but was greatly grieved, as fearing he had greatly disobliged the Saint he
adored; but understanding what Conditions had been made on his behalf, (after
having humbled himself before Arnalte, for her Gracious condescension) he with
much endear affection embraced the Prince, giving a Thousand thanks for the
tender Regard he had of him: Whereupon the day for the Nuptials was appointed,
and all things in order put, insomuch, that great was the Solemnity in its
Celebration; where in the height of Mirth and Iollitry I will leave Prince
Florian, and proceed to relate the further Adventures of his Brother Palmerin.

CHAP. LVII.
The Adventures of Prince Palmerin, after he left the Perilous-Island.

PRince Palmerin imbarquing, with only Sylvian in his company, sailed so long,
that in the end he arrived upon the Coast of Scotland, where he went on shore,
but had not traveled far e're he came to a Bridge that was guarded by a Knight
in green Armor, with a Bulls Head in his Shield, which made the Prince guess
him to be Pompides, whereupon he stayed to pause a while, when as he understood
by the discourse he had with a Damzel, that that Knight kept the Bridge for the
love he bears to Armisia, Daughter to Meliadus King of Scots: But whilst he
was considering whether he should enter the combat against his Friend or
forbear, a strange Knight came proudly riding up, and offered to force the
Bridge, but was stayed by Pompides, when soon the Encounter of the Lance
began, in which the strange Knight was dismounted, and much bruised in his
fall, yet he drew his Sword, and came toward Pompides, which made him alight,
so that between them a dreadful Combat insued, till at length the strange
Knight (through loss of blood) fainted, which Pompides perceiving, bid him
yield and surrender himself to fair Armisia, but with many proud words he
refused, and began to charge on Pompides again with all his force, but in the
end was totally vanquished, having received many desperate wounds; whereupon
Pompides taking off his Helmet, told him, That since he would not fairly yield
to his request, he should now be compelled to beg the Princess pardon, and
reveal his Name; but he again refused to do either, saying, He would sooner dye
in the place, than cast himself upon the merciless Cruelty of Armisia: These
words made Pompides suspect the Knight to be Adraspe, Son to Duke Sizani, who
slew the Prince Doriell, Brother to the Princess; whereupon he sent to the
Princess, to come thither, and pass her Sentence upon a Knight, that would not
obey the custom of the Bridge; who upon her arrival, with abundance of tears
declared it was Adraspe the Murderer, to be revenged on whom the Bridge was
ordained, earnestly commanding Pompides to strike off his Head: But whilst he
delayed, and was persuading the Princess to more mildness, Prince Palmerin (who
had beheld what had passed) came and joined with Pompides in persuading her,
saying, It became a Noble nature to be kind and merciful to the vanquished,
sparing those Lives that fortune or fate throws into their hands; but the
Princess still Iusted (with a Rivolet of tears flowing from her eyes) that his
Head might be taken off; but whilst it was delayed, Adraspe (through grief,
shame, and loss of blood) dyed; yet so angry was the Princess, that she was not
obeyed, that she flung away in a great rage, yet her passion being alayed, she
again came forth; and understanding Prince Palmerin was present, she invited
him into her House, and related to him, How that Adraspe once pretending
Courtship to her, upon her refusing for his ill nature, became so troublesome
to her, that she was obliged to acquaint her Brother Doriell with it, who
sharply rebuked him for his insolence, which created in him such a hatred
against her Brother, that watching his opportunity, and taking him at a
disadvantage, he slew him, and retired to his Fathers Strengths in the
High-lands, whereupon the King her Father, her self, and the Peerage of the
Kingdom, were brought into great heaviness, and ordained that Bridge for
Revenge, as well hoping that the haughty Adraspe would out of a conceit of his
Valor attempt; when to encourage my Knights against him, I pledged my self as
the price of his death; nor did our expectations fail: For often he came to
upbraid me with my Brothers death, vanquishing and slaying diverse of my
Knights, till such time as this good Knight came, who has revenged my Brothers
Murder: Therefore in requital I render my self to be at his disposal, and
desire you (Sir) to accompany us to my Fathers Court at Edenburg, where great
will be the Joy, upon notice of what has happened.

Upon this Relation of Armisia's the Prince highly approved of her undertaking,
promising that she should be obeyed in all things: But Pompides, who had doated
upon her Beauty, was so transported at what he heard, that he could not forbear
expressing himself in Rapsodies; yet attended with a Noble Train, they passed
to the Scotch Court, where so great was the Joy, that the like before had never
happened. When the King being acquainted with the Conditions his Daughter had
made, gladly accorded, insomuch, that the Nuptials were celebrated with
extraordinary Pomp and Royalty. After which the Prince taking leave of the
Court, left Scotland, to go in search of new Adventures, being desirous of
nothing more, than to be at Constantinople, there to have a sight of her, for
whom he underwent so many hazards.

CHAP. LVIII.
How Prince Palmerin departing Scotland, after some contest by the way, arrived
at Constantinople; and of the Adventure he had proposed to him.

THE Prince having assisted at the Ceremony of his Friend Pompides, left him to
sport in the dear embraces of his lovely Bride; and taking leave of the Court,
resolved for Constantinople, to see what entertainment his beauteous Mistress
would give him; but by the way passing through many Countries, he met with
diverse Adventures, but none of them worthy of note, till he came into Hungary;
where reposing at a Fountain that stood by a Forrest-side, he beheld a Damzel
in a distracted manner crying, and making piteous mean, when coming toward
him, she fell at his feet, and besought him, To save her from an ill-natured
and monstrous Giant, that sought to slay her; but she had scarce time to utter
these words before the Monster came puffing like a Cyclops, having almost spent
himself with running, when with a dreadful countenance he thus began:

Wretched Woman! You have betaken your self to a feeble Protector, whose Life
you have likewise cast away, for had I not been directed to him in pursuing
you, I might have missed him; wherefore he has reason to curse you for his
untimely fate. Nay, replied the Prince, b^ast not before you know who you have
to deal with, for if my sword fail me not, which failed me never, I shall soon
let you see your error, and chastize your Insolence, in revenging the affront
offered this Damzel. Whereupon a fierce combat insued, which continued bloody
and doubtful for the space of an hour, all which time the Damzel stood
trembling in doubt whether to fly or attend the end of the combat; but in the
end, Fortune favored the Prince so far, that striking the Giant between the
Joints of his Harness, his Arm was parted by the Shoulder, yet fought he with
the other Arm, till through loss of blood he fell down; whereupon the Prince
parted his Head from his Body, and then understood by the Damzel, that it was
Vascalion, who sought first to ravish, and afterward to put her to Death,
because she belonged to the Princess Gridona, whose Husband Primalion had slain
Lucran his Father at Constantinople, when he entered the fight against him, in
hopes to take from him his Princess.

The Prince having ridded the Damzel of her fears, accompanied her to
Constantinople, and then dismissed her, because he would not presently be
known, sending his Esquire to take him a private Lodging for that night, that
he might the better understand how affairs went in the Emperors Court; when as
he had notice from a Knight that lodged in the same House, That one Arnolf a
Giant, and Lord of the Astronomical-Island, was come to defy the Knights of
the Emperors Court, in hopes to find amongst them Florian of the Forest, that
conveyed away Arleucea, whom he said Bravorant her Father had betrothed to him
before his death. This News was not a little joyful to the Prince, who by this
means hoped to be restored to the favor of his fair Polinarda, to whom he
resolved to address himself, not doubting but to recover her favor: So that
the next morning mounting in disguised Armor, and bearing in his Shield a
Golden Tygar, he attended the Trumpets sound, when as he beheld Arnolf highly
mounted to enter the List, yet he stayed to permit other Knights to Just before
him, that his Conquest might be the more approved: And such was the Giants
force, that although diverse encountered him, they were thrown to the ground,
and sorely bruised, and at the Combat of the Sword fared no better; whereupon
the Giant proudly prancing about the King, demanded If any durst find him yet
more work? or, if none durst, he would report them Cowards through the world:
This Braveado highly incensed the Prince, so that setting Spurs to his Horse,
he entered and confronted Arnolf, letting him know, That he came to chastise
his insolence; and to inrage him the more, declared, That he was near Kinsman
to Prince Florian, and would now undertake his Quarrel, but if Fortune declared
against it, he would undertake Arleucea should be put into his possession.

The Giant having heard the words of the Prince, between Joy and Anger was
greatly transported, insomuch, that without reply he set Spurs to his Horse,
which the Prince perceiving, did the like, and ran so forcibly against him,
that he threw him to the ground, and was himself much shaken in his Saddle:
This disgrace greatly enraged Arnolf, insomuch, that drawing his Sword, he came
toward the Prince, when to be upon equal terms he dismounted, so that between
them a fierce Combat insued, with great effusion of Blood; for by the forcible
blows their Armor was broken in diverse places; whereupon the Emperor offered
to part them, but they refused, saying, Nothing but Death or Conquest should
decide; which greatly grieved the fair Polinarda, who from a Window beheld the
fearful Encounter, and more than suspected her much-loved Lord was fighting in
disguise: Nor was it long e're he espied her, and conjectured the cause of her
fears, which put fresh vigor into him, at such a rate, as redoubling his force,
he with a stroke full on his Crest, felled Arnolf to the ground, where
(refusing to beg his Life at the Prince's hands, and none interceeding for him)
he was slain.

CHAP. LIX.
How Palmerin discovered himself; and of his amorous Addresses to the fair
Polinarda.

THE Prince having (to the Joy of the Court) subdued his Adversary, was by the
Emperors Command, conveyed into the Palace, and unarmed, when to the high
satisfaction, he appeared to be what he was, and the Emperor and all the Nobles
embraced him, but nothing gave him so much content as the kind looks of his
fair Polinarda, who was present; yet bashfulness at that time made her
dissemble her affection as well as she could.

But the Prince having received diverse wounds in the Combat, it was the opinion
of his Chyrurgions, that he ought to retire to his Chamber, which he did,
studious in thought, how he might have an opportunity to converse with his
beloved Polinarda: But whilst his thoughts formed a Thousand devices to
accomplish his desire, Dramaciana a Virgin, attendant on the Princess, and her
chief Confidant, came to visit him, being privately sent by her Lady so to do,
which did not a little revive him, insomuch, that (having complemented her) he
entered into discourse with her, opening the secrets of his Heart, and desiring
her, That she would without flattery inform him how she found her Lady affected
toward him; to which she replied: That he need not (if he had the Courage to
prosecute his Love in his proper Person) fear, but his desires would be
accomplished, for that she had not failed in his absence to solicit his Suit,
and did not find the Princess averse any further than Modesty and a tender
regard of her Honor restrained her. This News (like an Angels Voice) in a
manner transported the Prince, but especially when Dramaciana promised so to
order the matter, that he should be privately conveyed into the Princess her
Lodging, and lay open his mind before her, and that the time should be at six
of the Clock in the following Evening: And so taking her leave, she went to
obtain leave to perform her promise.

The Prince being in an ecstasy of Joy to think the Reward of all his Toiles
were at hand, forgot his wounds, not regarding their smart, but attiring
himself in the best manner, went at the time appointed, where he found a
private door open, when passing through the Ante-chambers, he found the
Princess (to his wish) reading alone, who at his approach arose blushing, and
seemed somewhat discomposed, as if she had been surprised, (such Art has Woman,
to seemingly neglect what they most covet) which the Prince perceiving, bending
with one Knee to the ground, with low submission begged her pardon, if in
thought he had offended, saying, That on her smiles or frowns his Life or Death
depended; and that but her beauteous self, amongst all the Beauties that the
Sun beheld, had power to make him happy or miserable: At which pausing, and
seeing the Princess stand abashed, he arose, and taking her by the fair hand,
caused her to sit, and fate himself down by her, still holding her by the hand,
when recollecting himself, he thus proceeded:

Beauteous Lady, whose fame has spread all Lands, behold the Man with pittyings
who for your sake has shunned no danger, but exposed himself in every hazard
that might advance your Renown; and now with low submission implores that he
may lay himself and his Trophies at your feet, since inspired by you, his great
Achievements were performed; the force of your Transcendant Beauty more than
any force in him acquired; His small Renown a price too low to purchase such a
peerless Beauty; But considering (Madam) your great Goodness, and Compassion,
with boldness I presume to ask your Love, that blessed Elysium of Transporting
Rapture.

Thus having said, again he paused, expecting his fair Mistress should reply,
who after struggling long between bashfulness and true affection, thus broke
silence:

Sir, that your Achievements have been brave and great I own, and must grieve
to think, that for my sake you should have been exposed to so many dangers, but
know the fault is your own, for (certain it is) I would have had you stayed in
my Father's Court, but (seeing passed things cannot be recalled) I would not
for the future have you hazard your self for my sake. And here she ended;
whereupon the Prince replied.

Madam, not for your sake, say you, that I must not hazard my self? Know, thou
only center of my Love, no danger is too great to enterprise, if by acquiring
it the least Honor may redound to you, who (like a Goddess) ought to have the
fates of Nations in your hand, and be the Universal Empress of Mankind:
Consider then, that such a Love as mine (which burns as bright as Phoebus
gaudy fires) can think no Task too difficult, to pleasure her on whom it
center: Therefore let me with submission beg you let that rest, and give your
almost dispairing Servant some hopes to feed upon, that so his Life may for
the future be discumbered of a Thousand wracking Fears, and all the Tortures
that can seize a doubtful Lover's mind.

My Lord, replied the Princess, you are not ignorant of the affection which
with blushes I am constrained to own, yet must consider Princes Fames are
tender, and the least stroke soon wounds them, yet be assured, I am your own,
if the Emperor and my Father Primalion condescend; but if not; allthough I may
have cause to grieve at their aversness, yet must I be so conscious of my
Honor, as not to pass the limmit of Obedience: Therefore take it for my full
determination, if they Bar not the Gate to bliss, I have no further argument
against a Prince of so much merit.

This unexpected answer so extasied the Prince, that (by reason of the
transport of his senses) he stood long time like one amazed, not being capable
to utter his abundant joy, but gazing with eager eyes upon his lovely Love,
till in the end Leonarda Princess of Thrace entering, caused the Prince (though
much unwilling) to retire, having first promised she should be obeyed.

CHAP. LX.
How Mansia, Torsia, Telansia, and Latrania, four beautiful Ladies of the
French Court, ordained the Adventure of their respective Castles, and what
happened therein.

ALL the Ladies aforesaid being emulus of each others Beauty, and thinking it a
disgrace to have their Fame eclipsed, obtained leave of King Arneedes to erect
four Castles, and there cause Iusts to be held by such Knights as would
undertake to defend their Beautys against all strange Knights: Which being
done, many Knights came thither, and tried their fortunes, being greatly
enamoured of the Ladies, who would have their Knights try for each singly, not
approving any united Force; when in the end Prince Floriman coming thither, and
having a view of the fair Mansia, he became greatly enamoured of her, and
undertook to defend her beauty against all that should oppose him, performing
so well, that he became Victor in all Encounters, till in the end Dramusiand
the Giant arrived there, and undertook to defend the beauty of Torsia,
overthrowing Prince Floriman, but long enjoyed not the Honor; For Prince
Florian traveling toward Constantinople with Arleucea, and hearing of the
Adventures of those Ladies, came thither and had a sight of them, resolving to
enter the Combat for each of them, and so prevailed, that Dramusiand and all
the other Knights were worsted; yet being much unconstant in love, he greatly
regarded not the Prizes he had won, yet resolved to stay there a while, that so
he might increase his Renown, as indeed he did: For Iusting against all that
attempted the Adventure, he still remained Victor; but being desirous to be at
Constantinople, as well to be present with the fair Leonarda, as to counsel and
comfort the Emperor in what related to the state of War, threatened by the
haughty Turk; whereupon taking leave of the four Ladies, who were greatly
enamoured of him, and loath to lose the company of so Renowned a Knight, he
departed with Arleucea and her Damzels, and Dramusiand (for the great love he
bare him, but more to Arleucea) would needs accompany him; and so they rode on
till they came near to Constantinople, where they had sight of a gallant Troop
of Knights and Ladies, being not long ignorant that the Emperor was in,
whereupon they rode up, and alighting, made their obedience, and were received
with great Joy; but scarcely had the Complements passed on either side, before
a Knight attended by diverse Esquires and Damzels approached, and desired the
Just, which was granted, and first undertaken by Bilizant, who in the first
Encounter was tumbled from his Horse, as likewise were two more, which Florian
perceiving, prepared against the strange Knight, but he knowing him by the
device of his Shield, refused him, and sent to acquaint the Emperor, that he
was Dragolant, Son to Frisol, who was come to his Court with Arnalte his
espoused Wife, and Queen of Navar; whereupon the Iusts were ceased, and they
received with all expression of kindness, the fair Arnalte being conducted to
the Palace, upon her entering the City, by the Princess Polinarda, and
Leonarda, so that sumptuous Feasts and Disports were held for many days; but
that which eclipsed the Joy, was the News of King Fredrick of England's death,
in whose stead his Son Prince Don Edoard was Crowned.

CHAP. LXI.
How Arnedes King of France, and Recinde King of Spain, came accompanied with
the Princess Miragarda and Almorol, to the Court of the Emperor; and of the
celebration of diverse Marriages.

THE Emperor Palmerin being stricken in Years, and desirous before he dyed to
see his Friends, and consult them in relation to the Turkish War, and other
matters, he sent for the Emperor of Almain, Don Edoard King of England, Recinde
King of Spain, Arnedes King of France, and diverse other Potentates, together
with their Wives and Daughters, who obeyed his Summons, and were upon their
arrivals highly entertained, with Feasting, Music, and all manner of Iollitry;
upon notice of which, most of the Knights that were abroad seeking Adventures,
came thither, insomuch, that the Court was full of the chief Chivalry of
Europe. When after diverse days passed in merriment, the Emperor (to Crown the
general joy) called an Assembly of the Kings and Potentates, to know whether
they would bestow their beautiful Daughters in Marriage, upon such Princes and
Knights as long had loved and faithfully served them? when finding none averse,
and knowing the Knights and Ladies were in the Court, (and opportunity, no time
better to be taken) he took his Son-in-Law [King Edoard] aside, and gave him
command to divulge his pleasure, which he did in this manner.

KNights, and Ladies, Renowned in Arms and Beauty throughout the World, be it
known unto you; That the Puissant and most Renowned Emperor Palmerin, Emperor
of all Grecia, has (in Consideration of the many Glorious Achievements) made
it His Request, That this Court may be Honored with the Nuptials He desires to
be celebrated; He for His part, undertaking for the Princes, and His Empress,
and her Ladies, for the Princesses and Ladies.

First. It Is his Will, that Prince Florendos be made happy in the Embraces of
fair Miragarda.

Secondly. That Prince Palmerin should enjoy his beloved Polinarda

Thirdly. That Prince Gracian should be blessed with Claritia, Daughter to King
Polendos.

Fourthly. That Prince Berolde should Wedd fair Onistalda.

Fifthly. That Francian should Match with Bernada.

Sixthly. That Prince Platire should enjoy his fair Sidelia, Daughter to King
Tarnaes of Lacedemon.

Seventhly. That to the Renowned Florian of the Forest, the beautiful
Leonarda should be Espoused.

Eighthly. That Don Rousel, Son to Duke Belcar, should have his beloved
Dramaciana.

Ninthly. That Bilizant should be made happy with fair Denisa.

Tenthly. That Dramian should be blessed with fair Clariana.

Eleventhly. That Frisol should be Married to Leonara, Daughter to the Duke of
Pera.

Twelfthly. That Dramusiand should have Arleucea, whom he most coveted.

And that since Pandritia had been mistaken by the Soldian Bellagris, who had
begat on her (in the disguise of Don Edoard) a Son called Blandidon, she should
in recompense of her long sorrow, be rewarded with the said Soldian, who was
Lord of great Countries, and had for that purpose received the Christian Faith.

These and diverse other Marriages being proposed, they were left to the
consideration of the Ladies, the Emperor being before well satisfied, that the
Princes and Knights were desirous of no greater happiness on this side Heaven.
When after some pause, Modesty and Blushes striving with Passion, and a
thorough Inquiry made by the Empress, Princess, Gridona, and Flerida, the
Emperor was certified, that his pleasure in all he had proposed, should be
joyfully obeyed: Whereupon (being impatient of delay) he caused the Feast to be
renewed, and all manner of pleasant Recreations to be invented, insomuch, that
the like had not been seen: So each Prince (attended on in a splendid manner)
were in the Great Cathedral of Constantinople espoused to his fair Princess,
to all their hearts content, so reaping (with increase of Joy) the blessed
Reward of their renown and undertakings; when the remaining part of the day was
spent in Triumphs and Delight, till wished-for darkness came, when as the
blushing Ladies, beautiful as the Morning Star, were lead to their respective
Chambers, to pay Love-Tribute, and encounter with their Warriors in the field
of Venus, amidst a Thousand soft Love-sighs and pantings of Joy, whilst
(struggling there 'twixt willing and unwilling) they resigned their Virgin
Treasures to those, who (blessed now in the height of Elysium) lay raptured in
a thousand transports 'twixt their Ladies Arms.

CHAP. LXII.
How the Princess of Thrace was taken away by a strange Adventure, and how
recovered by the means of Prince Florian her Husband, and sage Aliart.

THE Court being filled with Joy, as aforesaid, early with the Morning dawn,
the blushing Brides discovered their Rosy cheeks with a lovely fear, well
knowing what an alteration some few hours had wrought, and longer could have
been content to have been shrouded in the Mantle of black night; but after many
kind Carresses from their amorous Bridegrooms, who could not sufficiently gaze
upon those Beauties they so long desired, up they arose, for change of
Recreation; when as the Hunters (who by the Emperors command were sent to seek
for Game) brought the glad news, that they had found the hugest Boar their eyes
e're saw to chase; at which the Emperor and all his glittering Train of either
sex mounted their fiery Steeds, and soon arrived at the Thicket, where he lay
with glowing eyes that seemed like two living Coals of Fire, when being
roused, the Dogs pursued, and Iavelings thick, were thrown; when in the midst
of the chase the Heavens grew, and Clouds of darkness seemed to descend frought
with Thunder and blasting Lightening, which so amazed the pursuers, that they
knew not where they was; when on a sudden a Chariot descending like a flame of
Brimstone, caught the beauteous Princess of Thrace from her Palfrey, (crying in
vain for help) and wrapped her through the Skies, that both she and the Chariot
were quickly out of sight, and with her all the darkness vanished: But when
Prince Florian understood who it was that was so taken thence, he grieved
beyond measure, and would not be comforted, till sage Aliart told him, that it
was done by the effects of Enchantment, and that Targiana had procured it, in
revenge of his slighting her love, and that she might be yet recovered;
whereupon he vowed never to leave the search, till he again possessed her, in
whose dire hands soever she were; and then taking leave, he suddenly imbarqued,
leaving the Court in some heaviness for his departure. And having searched many
Lands, and often endured the wrath of Skies, at length he came to a high Rock,
cut into a Castle, standing in the deepest Ocean, when to try who dwelt therein
he landed, and mounting the narrow passage, found it curiously framed, and all
the Gates wide open, and in Letters of Gold over the Porch was wrought, This is
the Castle of Queen Melai; but finding none to oppose him, that had corporal
shapes, (though often he met with dismal gusts of wind, and heard sad groans,) he
passed through many stately Rooms, till in the end he came where he beheld an
Altar flaming, and near it a Serpent of Brass, of wondrous size, on which
(whilst he gazed) he espied a Key of Gold hang round its neck, and (as it were)
a light issue through diverse crevises that represented a door, which made him
think, that the monstrous Effigies was hollow, and in it some rare wonder
included; when taking hold of the Key, he snapped the Chain asunder, at which
murmures, like Thunder almost spent, were heard, and hellish shreiks; yet into
the Keyhole (which at last he found) he thrust the Key, when open slew a door
with dreadful sound, and there to his amazement he beheld the beauteous
Princess, charmed in a dead sleep, with four Wax Tapers burning, two at her
head, and a like number at her feet, but not being able to come at her, he
called aloud, My Love, my Joy, my life, awake, and here behold thy Guardian
(Angel) come to rescue thee: In vain he called, for answer none was had, nor
could he perceive a motion of her breath, which so enraged him, that drawing
his Sword, he laid upon the Brazen Monster, thinking so to sunder it, but
still his Sword, without making any impression, rebounded from it as from a
Rock of Adamant, which made him rage extremely; yet whilst his fury lasted
looking round, he saw behind him the sage Aliart, which did not a little
rejoice him, as well knowing Art and Policy often availes where force is
deficient, when embracing him, he desired his counsel in the matter; whereupon
the sage thus answered:

These Tapers that you see, contain the Princesses life, and when they expire,
or are extinguished, she dies; but since Heaven has brought us timely hither to
preserve so bright a Beauty, fear not, but her deliverance shall soon be
wrought: Whereupon lighting a Magic Taper at one of those bright flames, he
held it to the Nostrils of the Serpent, when as a dreadful noise was heard, of
loud laments and cries, and soon the Serpent burst in sunder, upon which (as
from a Dream) the Princess did awake, and at her awaking the Tapers vanished,
when gazing round, she espied her Lord, and with much Joy ran to his Arms,
inquiring how she came in that dismal place, when having been informed in every
circumstance, she greatly marvelled, and on her knees blessed Heaven for her
deliverance.

So taking leave of the enchanted place, which soon after their departure
vanished into Air, they imbarqued, and sailing before a prosperous wind,
arrived at Constantinople, banishing with their presence the sadness their
absence caused: Where for a while I will leave them, and proceed to the Third
Part of this Famous History.

FINIS.
THE Famous History OF The Renowned PRINCE Palmerin of England. Part, the Third.
CHAP. LXIII.
How the Princess Targiana sent the Emperor notice, how her Father the Great
Turk Albayzer, now made Soldian of Babylon, and the Sultan of Persia, were
coming against him with a powerful Army: Of the arrival of those Armies at the
Port of Constantinople, and the conflict between them and the Emperors Forces
upon their Landing.

THE Princess Targiana observing the great preparations that were made to War
upon the Emperor of Greece, for refusing to deliver up Prince Florian, and
weighing the kind entertainment she had received in the Court of
Constantinople, she sent a private Messenger, to acquaint him with all that was
intended against him, not having been able, by her Prayers and Entreaty, to
divert her Father and Husband from the War.

This News greatly consternated the Emperor, and many of the Princes, but like
valiant men, inured to bear the worst of Fortune, they resolved to provide
against the Tempest that was bearing upon them: Wherefore the Emperor caused
Forces to be raised in all parts of his Empire, and provided Arms in
abundance, resolving to give the Enemy such a welcome as they should but badly
relish.

But e're the preparations were fully finished, the Enemy's Fleet came before
the City, and from the Chief a Herald was sent, to bid defiance of War, unless
Florian, and the City of Constantinople would be surrendered. But the first
being accepted, rather than the later, the Christian Army drew out in this
order:

King Edoard being made General of the Forces, lead Ten Thousand choice
Knights, whose Rear was brought up by Dramusiand; next him marched Arnedes King
of France, with Five Thousand; on whose Right advanced Recinde King of Spain
with Three Thousand, his Rear being brought up by the Giant Almorol; and to
strengthen them, Verner the German Emperor advanced with Eight Thousand; and by
this time the Soldian Bellagris was arrived with Five Thousand Horse, having
ordained his Son Blandidon his Leivetenant; after him marched King Polendos
with Four Thousand Thessalian Archers on foot: As for Palmerin, Florian,
Platire, Florendos, Berolde, Gracian, Gurein German of Orleance, Pompides, Don
Rousel, Onistaldus, Floriman, Belcar, and diverse other Flowers of Chivalry,
they would be confined to no settled place, by reason that upon all occasions
they might assist where need require. The Rear of this Army was brought up by
Tarnaes King of Lacedemon, and the City committed to the charge of Prince
Primalion, who acted there as the Aged Emperor's Leivetenant, who by by reason
of his Years and Infirmities, was not capable of managing affairs as he ought,
in such a necessity.

The Army being drawn out, hasted in good order to the Port, where they found
the Enemy under the leading of Albayzer, (who was made Captain General of all
the Heathen Forces) about to land; when as between them began a dreadful
Encounter, insomuch that all the shore was dyed with blood, and the waves
discolored; For King Edoard, his Son Palmerin, and Dramusiand, fighting
against Albayzer and his Giants, made a dreadful destruction, killing two
fearful Giants, and about an hundred common Soldiers, but not without
receiving many wounds: Nor were the rest of the Knights idle, but employed
their whole force for the Honor of Christendom, the Glory of the Empire, and
the keeping up their Renown, so that dreadful deeds in Arms were done; yet the
Pagan Host was so numerous, that the places of the slain was still filled up
with fresh supplies; which the Emperor and Prince Primalion from an high Tower
perceiving, the later (by the appointment of the former) issued out with Seven
Hundred chosen Knights, to recrute his friends, and coming freshly on, he made
great slaughter: But Night casting her dark Mantle over the Earth, King Edoard
caused the Retreat to be sounded, retiring and incamping under the Walls of the
City, being desirous of nothing more than, that the Enemy might land, that so
they might come to a pitched Battle.

CHAP. LXIV.
How the Turks, etc. Landed and encamped their Forces; And of the supplys that
arrived at Constantinople, to succor the Emperor Palmerin.

THE Emperial Army retiring, and strongly incamping under the Walls of the
City, the Turkish Army consisting of upward of Two Hundred Thousand men,
forcibly running their Ships on ground, leaped on shore, and drove back such as
were left to hinder their landing, though not without great loss on their side,
and not losing time (under the covert of the night) they encamped along the
shore strongly, insomuch, that the Emperor did not think fit presently to
hazard a Battle, but to stay till the supplys that were on their way, from the
Countries of those Kings that were in his Camp, arrived; which accordingly did
in seven days arrive, to the number of Twenty Thousand, besides Eight Thousand
Horse and Foot under the leading of Esterlant King of Hungary; and Four
Thousand Footmen, sent by Roramant King of Bohemia: Who having refreshed
themselves, prepared to give Battle; when in the mean time leave was given, to
view the Camps on either part. And Prince Florian understanding, for his sake
the War was made, relying upon his strength and fortune, resolved to go in
disguise to the Heathen Camp, and require the Just and Combat, which he
accordingly did, overthrowing and putting to the foil all that he encountered,
and then returned to his beloved Leonarda, who was bedewing her beauteous eyes
with tears for his absence: And after that diverse Encounters happened by
agreement, wherein the Turks were always worsted; but most dreadful was that
(upon a challenge) between Dramusiand and Framustant a Persian Giant; but after
a dreadful Combat, and great effusion of blood on both sides, at the earnest
Instance of Targiana (who fortunately arrived during the Combat) they were
separated, the one retireing into the City, and the other into the Heathen Camp.

When the Empress and her Ladies had notice, that the fair Sultaness was
arrived there, she sent to invite her into the City, who accepting of her
invitation, came Nobly attended, but stayed not there, as being sent for back
by her Husband, by reason the dreadful day of Battle was at hand, on which the
fates of Nations did depend.

CHAP. LXV.
Of the Dreadful Battle fought between the Turks and the Christians, before
Constantinople; and what happened therein.

NOW the Captains and Soldiers, being impatient of inglorious ease, urged the
Battle, and so prevailed on both sides, that the day was appointed, which came
quickly on; when as King Ed^ard General of the Field, divided his Battle, and
reduced it under the Leading of the following Commanders.

The first Squadron he committed to the Soldian Bellagris, consisting of five
Thousand Horse and foot; the second to Recinde King of Spain, consisting of
Three Thousand; the third to Arnedes King of France, consisting of five
Thousand; the fourth to Polendos King of Thessaly, consisting of four Thousand;
the fifth to Verner Emperor of Almain, consisting of Eight Thousand; and the
last consisting of four Thousand, he lead himself; all these being Horsemen:
The body of Foot that was to fight in the middle, and consisted of Fifty
Thousand men, was reduced under the Standard of King Tarnaes, and diverse of the
Princes, and great Captains, such as himself should appoint; when in a glorious
Troop, to succor all parts as occasion required, rode Palmerin, Florian,
Gracian, Platire, Pompides, Majortes, Drapos, Belcar, Blandidon, Berolde,
Floriman, ^lorendos, Don Rousel, Francian, Billizant, Onistalous, Tenebrant,
Esterlant, Albanis, Rodomant, Dragolant, Luyman, Germane, Tremoran, Don Rosian,
D La Bronde, Dramusiand, Almorol, and diverse others, who obtained the Honor of
the first Onset, the better to encourage unexpert, and by their furious Charge
dismayed the foe: When as King Edoard in Scarlet Armor, enamelled with white
and black, and fastened with Chains of Gold, bearing for his Device a flying
Griffin in a field of Silver, bravely mounted, after silence made, cheered his
Warriors as follows:

Sacred Fellows in Arms, whose matchless deeds have hitherto made your Renown
to reach the utmost Orient, now is the time to make your fame immortal, in
preserving this Empire from the spoil and havoc you Barbarous Nations threaten
it withal, for sure the flower of Christendom can never flag in Courage at the
light of those, whom we and our Fathers have so often subdued; therefore let us
on, and thorough the Lanes of Death, and over the heaps of slaughtered foes,
and force way to Victory, that so the terror of our Arms may spread through
all their Coasts, and haughty Babylon, Tauris, and Iconium, the Regal Seats of
these three Tyrants that make War on us, may tremble at our Names: Now in your
Ladies sights have you just cause to try your Prowess, and bravely highten
their esteem of you, that so they may bless the happy moment wherein Fortune
sent such a Happiness.

Thus having said, he ended with such stern regard and a Majestic frown, that
his Warlike Eyes seemed to glance Destruction on the Foe, and give his own
fresh vigor to assail them. The Generals Speech so fired each Breast, that
with a shout that rent the Sky, each undividual Soldier cried, Lead on.

While these things passed, Albayzer and his Captains were not idle, but
divided the Horsemen into nine Companys: The first Squadron he gave to the
Souldian of Persia; the second to the King of Trebezond; the third to the King
of Caspia; the fourth to the King of Armenia; the fifth to the King of Cambia;
the sixth to the King of Sparta; the seventh to the King Bethinia; the eighth
to the Prince Argela of Africa; and the ninth he lead himself, having seven
monstrous Giants for his guard; when as Albayzer (Armed in green Armor, beset
with Golden Spheres, and his Ladies Picture in a field of Sinople portrayed in
his Shield, mounted on a Persian Horse) thus cheered his Soldiers:

You the flower of Asia, ever Renowned in Arms, behold the day you wished is
come, your foes are at hand, and the Battle; certain now is the time to try
your Valor, on whose Matchless courage depends in part my fame and high
Renown; As for me, I shall in all parts perform the Office of a Soldier and a
General, resolving rather to dye under these Walls, than to depart without
Victory; for know, with Honor I can never return into my own Country, unless I
perform my promise, which was to level the Walls of this proud City, which
dares affront me and my great Allies.

This having said, he paused, but found not any applause that answered his
expectation; whereupon least the Courage of his men should cool, and all their
Valor faint, he having Marshaled every Squadron, lead them on to encounter the
Emperors Forces, who came like enraged Lions to meet them, so that the
dreadful blast was scarcely sounded, e're the fight began on all hands cruel
and doubtful; for there might be seen the brave Exploits of War, each Soldier
being sufficient to lead an Army; but the most famed Encounters were these:
Prince Primalion having left the City in charge of diverse Knights, bravely
encountered the King of Caspia with such courage, that he bore him to the
ground, and would have slain him, had not fifty of his choice guard came to his
rescue; whereupon passing forward, he made great slaughter of the foe, cutting
off Arms and Heads, to the amazement of those that beheld; when being seconded
by Prince Palmerin, none durst stand before them, insomuch, that the King of
Aetolia came with a choice band to oppose their fury, but was overthrown, and
hardly escaped with Life. Florendos breaking into the thickest, pressed on that
side where the King of Armenia fought, gave him diverse wounds, and threw him to
the ground, insomuch, that he was carried by his Servants as dead to the Camp.
Berolde and Floriman leading a valiant Troop, bravely charged the power lead by
the King of Bythinia, and breaking their Ranks, seized the King with so hard a
hand, that he had at that time been taken or slain, had not succors from all
parts of the Army come to his rescue, yet was he grievously wounded, and
obliged to retire. Nor was the Fight less bloody where Dramusiand, and Florian,
Recinde, Arnedes, and the other Princes fought, insomuch, that nothing could be
heard, but clashing of Armor and dying groans, nor seen on the ground, but
Blood, dead Bodies, and hewed off Limbs; when as Dramusiand piercing the
Squadron of his foes to his wish, met with Framustant the Persian Giant,
between whom a dreadful Combat began with the Sword, these Giants being
reputed of equal strength, and on whose Arms depended much the fortune of the
War; when in the mean while the Battle on all sides waxed hot, the great
Captains every where encouraging their Men by words and example, striving all
they might to keep them in good order; whilst Argelao and the King of Bythinia
being dismounted, fought against Prince Floriman and Berolde Prince of Spain,
but being infinitely worsted, the Soldian of Persia came to their assistance,
which the Soldian Bellagris perceiving, broke through the Ranks, with diverse of
his courageous followers, and fought so valiantly, that the Persian was obliged
to retire with the loss of an hundred of his best Knights. (...) nor being free
from wounds: But new supplys (...) moment pressing forward, found more work for
War, is that the shou^s of the vanquishers, and the cries of the vanquished,
reached Heavens highest Con^er making the Hills and Valleys all about (...),
but in the end the Pagan Battle on that side gave back, which Albayzer
perceiving, where he fought, ordered the King of Trebesond with Eight Thousand
Horse to reinforce them, and (if possible) restore the ^^ght; which Platire,
Polinardus, Pompides, Majortes, and other valiant Knights perceiving, drew up
the Court-Regiments, wherein were the best Soldiers, and breaking through the
Ranks of the Enemy, made such slaughter, that the field was afresh bedewed with
blood, and the Trebesonians routed in all parts, which brought such a fear upon
the whole ^agan Army, that they began to shrink together, and were only
restrained from flight by pure shame.

During this Battle, King Edoard rode through all parts, succouring his men
where he saw most need, and making great slaughter of the Enemy with his own
hands, being attended every where he rode with an hundred choice Knights; when
as the Emperor Palmerin (who from a Tower beheld the fight, together with the
Ladies) greatly marvelled at the Prowess of the Warriors; desiring nothing
more than to have been amongst them, had his Age permitted; as not, in his
Youth being accustomed to be an idle spectator, whilst others fought; yet
mindful of the charge of so great a Potentate, he hourly sent such succors as
could be spared to reinforce the fainting Regiments, and charge the Enemy with
fresh vigor, and to give such orders as he thought convenient.

The Battle being in the highth; the chief of the Princes dismounted, and with
their Swords cutting their way, entered the Battalian of the Foot men, where
Primalion and the King of Trebesond meeting, a dreadful Combat began; but such
was the fierceness of the Fight between them, that for want of breath, and
through loss of blood, they were obliged to pause a while: When as Palmerin
with a Thousand Knights charged the Battalian of the Souldian of Babylon, and
made exceeding slaughter, insomuch, that they fled from him as from their
certain death, none being able to resist his force. On the other side fought
Florian, whose death the Great Turk had strictly enjoined; when those that had
it in charge perceiving him far entered amongst the Ranks of his Enemies,
enclosed him on every side, and gave him many strokes that bruised his Armor,
which roused his Courage to that degree, that with a force exceeding, he so
dealt, that soon they opened on every side; yet fought he so long, till
ramparts of dead Bodies hemmed him in. But so well fared not Prince Majortes,
for being enclosed by a Squadron of Persian Horse, he fought (in hopes of
succor) till through wounds and loss of blood falling, he gave up the Ghost,
whose death much grieved the Christian Princes, especially Prince Palmerin, who
entirely loved him, insomuch, that to revenge his death, he so furiously
charged the King of Trebes^nd that breaking his him Armor in many places, and
infixing diverse wounds upon he (in spite of his men, who labored to rescue
their Lord) brought him to destruction. And so long and dreadful did the fight
continue between Dramusiand and Framustant, that through loss of blood, and
weariness, they fainted, and were carried out of the Battle by their friends on
either part.

Great was the sorrow of the Ladies, who from the Battelments beheld the fight,
there being few of them but had a Husband, Relation, or Friend engaged, so that
some of them seeing the field bestrewed with slaughter, swounded away, and
others retire their beauteous eyes, not being able longer to behold the Tragic
action, not knowing what to think of the Battle, or to whom fortune owed the
Victory: During the fight, the City was strongly guarded on all parts, to
prevent a surprise.

King Edoard retiring from the foiles of War, to take breath and dress a wound
he had received, within a short time came on afresh with a commanded party of
Horse, and made great slaughter, insomuch, that the Infidels gave back, and the
Christians on that side recovered the ground they had lost, taking new vigor,
and charging courageously, insomuch, that Albayzer coming thither to restore
the Battle, was over-set with the furious Charge of the Greecian Horsemen, and
himself thrown to the ground, but soon recovering his Legs, he drew his Sword,
and killed diverse Knights, yet was so strongly resisted, that there he had been
taken or slain, had not his Giants (who always guarded his Person) bestirred
themselves with their mighty Battel-Axes, yet one of them fell by the Sword of
Prince Primalion, and another was carried off sore wounded, of which wounds he
soon after dyed.

By this time the Right Wing of the Turks was broken and disordered, being
pierced by Recinde and the Giant Almorol, to rally which Albayzer strove in
vain, till such time as he had reinforced them with Ten Thousand fresh men, and
clapped into the front two of his Giants, viz. Dromorant and Tramfamore;
between whom, and King Recinde, seconded by his trusty Servant Almorol, began a
fierce Combat; but being hemmed round by the Infidels, the King (after two
hours fighting against infinite odds, and no succor coming) fell wounded from
his Horse, and was slain by the Giant Tramfamore, which so enraged Almorol,
that leaving the side where he fought, he came to revenge his Masters death,
overthrowing with his Mace all that stood in his way, when coming upon
Tramfamor with a fierce blow, he bruised his Helm and Head so much, that he
fell dead, with a horrible groan breathing out his last.

Prince Palmerin and Primalion hearing of the death of Recinde, were greatly
enraged, and to revenge it, redoubled their strength, fighting like Lybian
Lions, so that all the ground where they fought was covered with blood and
slaughter; but Primalion having lost much blood in the fight, and finding
himself faint, by the advice of his friends (after having killed above an
hundred Turks with his own hands) retired into the City: Yet the Fight waxed
hot on all sides, upon the coming in of fresh supplies, so that Victory hovered
doubtful over either Army.

Arnedes King of France having notice that his Cousen Recinde was slain, came
with Onistaldus to revenge his death, but after a long fight, in which many of
the Turks, Persians, and Babylonians were slain, the King having his Horse
killed under him, and his Helmet burst, was slain; as also was Onistaldus, in
endeavoring his rescue; but long their Deaths were not unrevenged: For King
Edoard and Prince Florian coming with a fresh Troop of Horsemen, pierced the
Squadron of the Turkish Horse, where they found many of their friends enclosed,
yet valiantly fighting against Dromorant and diverse others, upon which the King
and his Son put themselves between, making great slaughter of the Enemy, though
not without some wounds received; but so eager was the Prince against the
Giant, that after a dreadful Combat with him, he gave him a wound on the right
side of his Head, which brought him to the ground, when setting his Foot upon
him, he divided his Head from his Body. Whilst this was doing, King Polendos
and Belcar entered the Squadron of the King of Aetolia, and made great
slaughter, insomuch, that Prince Berolde, desirous to revenge his Fathers
death, coming to their assistance, the routed Pagans in great disorder fled,
not regarding the Person of their King, who laboring to restrain their flight,
was overborn with the trampling of the Horses. Then came on Prince Florian with
a strong party, and charged furiously upon the reinforced Squadron of
Trebesond, making great slaughter, insomuch, that Albayzer was glad to leave
his station, and come to that part with his most approved Knights, but was not
able to restore the Battle on that part; wherefore he returned to keep firm
such as on the other hand began to waver; for the main Battle being charged by
Floriman, Berolde, Florendos, Belcar, Francian, Don Rousel, and diverse others,
gave way apace, as not being qualified to sustain such fury; yet at the sight
of their General, the Captains so bestirred themselves, that they brought their
men to make a better resistance, so that great was the slaughter on either
part; but so strongly the Princes pressed on, that through a lane of
slaughtered foes they at length came, where they found the Giant Almorol
fighting against a number of the Enemies, in defense of the dead body of
Recinde, which he resolved not to leave as a prey to the Enemies, but with his
Life; nor could the Princes (though he was extremely wounded, and had his
Helmet broken in diverse places) persuade him to retire, but in the end falling,
he (through the many wounds he received, and extreme loss of blood) dyed upon
his Masters body, covering it with his own, which Prince Berolde perceiving,
and greatly lamenting the death of his Father and his most faithful Servant,
charged upon the Giant Gramalo (who had most in damaged Almorol) with such
force, that he soon brought him to the ground, and smote off his Head, whilst
he in vain cried out for mercy; and following the advantage, he fought against
the Souldian of Persia, who was come thither, and had slain him, had not the
Persians in great number ran between, and hazarded their lives to save their
Lord; yet so wounded was he, that he was carried out of the Battle doubtful
whether to recover or not, which gave the Christians opportunity to carry off
the body of the King and Giant Almorol, with many others of note that were
slain since the fight began. Yet no sooner had they done it, but Albayzer
taking breath, came on with his chief strength, and charged the Squadron lead
by King Edoard, but was bravely resisted by those that came from the Right Wing
to reinforce him, and again obliged to give ground; when as the Souldian
Bellagris and the Emperor Verner came on with a fresh party, and made infinite
slaughter; but whilst the later charged too furiously, his Horse received a
shot in the eye with a Persian Arrow, which made him cast his Rider, who in the
fall had one of his legs broken, yet fought he courageously, till such time as
Polinardus and others carried him off, yet dyed he soon after of his fall,
whose death was greatly lamented in Camp and City.

Primalion being grieved at the hard fortune of the Emperor, fought with great
fury, insomuch, that heaps of the slain encompassed him about, and was seconded
by his Son Florendos, with as brave a resolution; so that the King of Bythinia
coming to the aid of such as were hard put to it, ended his days in that
place, being slain by the hand of Prince Floriman, which his men perceiving it,
retired with all convenient speed; which made the King of Armenia advance with
Four Thousand chosen Soldiers, hoping to advance the War, but found himself so
hardly charged, that he would have retired but being pressed by the Christian
Princes, he fell (together with five hundred of his best men) by the Sword.

During these Encounters, King Edoard fighting through the Ranks, came upon
Albayzer, who was at that time making havoc of the Christians, and charged him
with great fury, so that a dreadful Combat happened between them, in which
Albayzer had been slain, had not the Giants that still attended his person made
great resistance, even till night came on, which hindered the Christians of the
Victory, and caused each General to sound the Retreat, the one retiring to the
City, and the other to his Camp.

CHAP. LXVI.
Of the Truce taken for six days; And of the Sorrow in the City and Pagan
Camp; And the order taken for a Second Battle.

THE Great Captains retiring with their Forces into the City, a Muster was
taken to know who was wanting, which being once understood, great was the
laments of the Citizens, some having lost a Father, others a Brother, some a
Cousen, and diverse women their Husbands, Sons, etc. so that nothing was heard
but sighs, laments, and vows of revenge; but above all, most deplorable was
the grief of the Court Ladies, many of whom had lost their Lords almost as soon
as enjoyed, such is the cruel chance of Fortune, in disappointing true Lovers
of their happiness, when they suppose themselves most sure, and laugh at
Worldly felicity: There might you behold one bedewing her beauteous face with
Tears, yet made by Grief more lovely; here another tearing her Amber Tresses,
and complaining of her hard-Star'd fate; yonder another privately retired, and
sobbing out that grief, that could not in words find utterance; in another
place a bright Angel fallen in a swound, and struggling for life, yet desirous
to dye, that so she might have to Elysium, to find her departed Lord; in this
Chamber in melancholy darkness another sat sighing, and in groans expressed
her inward anguish; which sad estate so moved the hearts of all to pity, that
they besought the Emperor and Empress to use their diligence in comforting the
distressed Beauties, which they did in the best manner they could, as not being
capable of effecting it to their wish.

Whilst these things passed, the Princes and great Captains were putting all
things in good order, resolving in the morning early to take the Field, and
revenge the loss they had sustained: But whilst they were consulting, a
Trumpet from Albayzer desired to be admitted to the Emperors presence, where
being come, he (in the Name of his Lord) demanded a six day Truce to bury the
Dead, and dispose of the wounded men; to which the Princes would in no wise
hearken, saying, Albayzer did it to gain time to recrute his broken Army; and
that (as for themselves) they could not undertake to stay their forward
Soldiers from the field, so desperately were they beat to finish the War, or
dye under the City walls. But the Emperor considering that many of his Knights
were wounded, and that it would be dangerous so soon to hazard them in a new
engagement, as also that the bodies of diverse of his friends lay in the field
unburyed, together with the common Soldiers, which would greatly annoy the
City, he so tempered the resolution of the forward Princes, that they in the
end submitted it wholly to his pleasure; whereupon a Truce was concluded, and
the Dead on either side accordingly buried with great solemnity, the Chiefs
having Monuments of costly work reared to their lasting Memories and eternal
Fame.

The Truce being expired, early the succeeding morning King Edoard and the
Princes Primalion, Palmerin, and Florian put the Army in Array, and with many
Heroic speeches encouraged the Soldiers to revenge the death of their
friends, and drive the Enemy from their Camp; when in good order they marched
out with loud shouts, wounding the Air with Drums, Trumpets, Clarions, Flutes,
and Phyfes, which greatly alarmed the Pagans, and made them instantly betake
themselves to their Arms; yet so discouraged were they, that their General was
long e're he could draw them out of his Camp; when standing in Array, he
mounted upon a little Rising, and from thence began to encourage them in this
manner:

Fellow Soldiers, you see Fortune has brought us to this place, to revenge
Injuries, and try our Valors, which we have already done, and the Enemy not
gained (as yet) any considerable advantage over us; Therefore this day let your
prowess witness you men of daring resolution, and the price of your labor
shall be the spoil of you Wealthy City, which I design to leavel with the Dust,
and race out of the memory of succeeding Ages. This said, he ended, and did
sound the Charge.

CHAP. LXVII.
Of the second Battle between the Christians and Infidels, with their
overthrow, and the Emperor Palmerin.

THE Charge sounded on both sides, the Armies (after a flight of Arrows) joined
with the Sphere and Sword in a dreadful manner, insomuch, that the field was
again strewed with new slaughter, and many worthy Knights sore wounded, the
Turks being now desperate to overcome; which Palmerin and Florian perceiving,
charged the Squadron lead by Albayzer with great fury, insomuch that it gave
back, Albayzer himself in the Encounter being unhorsed, and in much danger of
his Life; when as the King of Caspia coming to his relief stayed the fury of
the Princes, and slew diverse of the meaner sort of Greeks, who adventured too
far in the Battle: But King Edoard coming to that part, fought so courageously,
that he pierced the Caspian King's Array; and being seconded by the aforesaid
Princes, put the Infidels again into disorder; to reinforce whom advanced
Prince Argelao, with Eight Thousand Africans; but being received at the point
of the Lance by Palmerin of England, he was ran quite through the Body, and
tumbled dead from his Horse; in imitation of whom Prince Florian encountering
another of Albayzers great Captains slew him.

The Fight being at this pass, Dramusiand and Framustant charging through the
Squadrons, at last met, and encountered each other with great fury; when as
another Turkish Giant named Dramator, came to the assistance of Framustant,
whose puissance was little inferior to the former; which Florian, from the
Squadron where he fought, perceiving, came to the assistance of his friend, so
that leaving him again upon equal terms, a dreadful fight continued, which
ended in the Death of Dramator, slain by Prince Florian, and the disorderly
Retreat of Framustant.

The Soldian of Persia fighting in the Right Wing, and finding his men worsted
and greatly slaughtered by Prince Floriman, came resolutely to engage him, but
was welcomed with such noble force, that had not his men again rescued him, he
had there been slain. Yet the fight waxed hot on all sides, and loud were the
cries and groans of the dying and wounded men, so that they were plainly heard
into the City; yet both sides animated with hope of Victory, stood stoutly to
their Arms: But upon the arrival of a fresh Squadron of Horse, and a strong
Battailian of foot, under the leading of Esterlant King of Hungaria, the
Christians redoubling their Courage, made great havoc of their Enemies;
whereupon Albayzer (who had his eye upon every place) came thither, and brought
Three Hundred Knights to succor his friends, being desirous of nothing more,
than to be revenged of Prince Florian, whom he beheld slaughtering his men;
whereupon he addressed himself to the Combat, and laid many strokes upon him,
which made the Prince recollect his force, and leave fighting with such as
shunned Death, to charge his Capital Adversary, which he did with such fury,
that he tumbled him from his Horse, when alighting to unclasp his Helm, the
Pagans on all sides came running in throngs to the rescue of their General,
that the Prince was constrained to relinquish his purpose, and remount; during
which Albayzer was conveyed thence: Yet so dealt the noble Florian, that his
anger fell not in vain, but with such fury he charged all that fell in his way,
that they dreaded him worse than Death, flying from him on every hand; but at
length being weary with subduing, he retired to refresh himself; when as
Albayzer having recovered from the amazement he was in, came and restored the
Battle on that part.

King Edoard perceiving the Battle at a stand, Victory as yet inclining to
neither side, commanded his reserves to charge the Left Wing of the Enemy,
which they did with such vigor and bravery of mind, that the battle soon began
to swerve: When Prince Palmerin, and his Uncle Prince Primalion, coming on the
King of Cambia, who commanded that part of the battle, was slain, and the Wing
roured, notwithstanding a reinforcement of Three Thousand Parthian Archers came
in, whose Arrows gauled the Christian Horse, and caused diverse of them to cast
their Riders; and now was the body of the Pagan Army (consisting of Forty
Thousand Foot) left open, amongst whose Ranks the Horse entering, put them into
such confusion, that they lost all order, and shrunk together, notwithstanding
the endeavor their Commanders used to prevent it; and so far pierced they that
came upon the Soldian of Persia, who was retired thither from the Right Wing,
against whom Prince Palmerin addressed himself, and fought with him so long,
that (fainting through wounds, and loss of blood) he fell dead; which so
dismayed his men, that they fled from that part, and left the Victory there
entirely to the Christians: But the Right Wing fighting strongly, and the Left
reinforced with Eight Thousand Scithians, newly arrived to the assistance of
Albayzer, Polinardus was overborn and slain by Ferrebroque, Captain of the
Scyths, which greatly grieved the Princes, and gave the Infidels occasion to
take heart, and the rather because with these new supplys came Pandolf a
monstrous Giant; but Florendos coming to the aid of his friends, and finding
the Giant with a mighty Mace slaughtering the Greecian Soldiers, bore upon him
with great fury, and after a terrible Combat, burst his Helm, at what time
falling, he cut off his Head, and gave him an unlooked for welcome, for that
this Giant boasted himself of ability to contend with ten of the Emperors best
Knights, all at once.

Berolde Prince of Spain, yet seeking to revenge his Fathers Death, desperately
charged into the thickest of his foes, and there had been slain, had not the
Soldian Bellagris come timely to his rescue, and brought him out of the Battle;
but so wounded was he, that his Soldiers constrained him to retire to the
City, to have his wounds carefully regarded.

Yet the fight continued hot on all sides; for now came Blandidon on with fresh
Troops, being the Subjects of the Soldian Bellagris, newly arrived, and with
these he charged the Enemy in the Rear, where fought the King of Sparta, with
his Uncle Antistes, and his Son Luimeno, but his battle being overborn, they
were all slain; to revenge which Marlearque a Spartan Giant advanced against
Blandidon, and charging him at unawares, smote so forcibly upon his Head with
an Iron Mace, that he cast him dead to the ground; which so enraged the Soldian
Bellagris, that with all his fury he charged the Giant, not leaving him till he
had made him shorter by the Head: And soon after fell the King of Cambia and
his two Brethren, with the Giant Pisistrato, the later of which had a little
before slain German of Orleans.

And now Albayzer fighting with Florian, and carried wounded to his Tent, the
Pagans began again to shrink together, which King Edoard perceiving, drew all
the Forces out of the City, and charged upon the Right Wing so furiously, that
broken and disordered the Turks and Persians (of which it was composed) fled,
and in flying over-bore a Battailian of their own foot, which advantage the
Christians laying hold on, followed so fiercely, that all the Plains were
strewed with the dead bodies, and the Ditches and Ponds colored with blood,
Albayzer himself hardly escaping in a Chariot to his Ships; so that the Camp
being quite abandoned, the Christians entered, and found infinite Riches, as
Gold, precious Stones, Embroideries, rich Carpets, bars of Silver, and
Embroidered Ensigns, together with an Emperial Crown, with which Albayzer
intended to have Crowned himself Emperor of Constantinople. When having pursued
the Enemy out of the Emperor's Territories with incredible slaughter, the
Princes entered the City in Triumph, being met by the Emperor, King Tarnaes,
(who had the charge of the City committed to him) and diverse others, they were
conducted to the Palace, and the Soldiers highly rewarded; yet some grief
remained for the loss of so many Valiant and Renowned Knights; for this War
cost the Christians no less than the Lives of Twenty Thousand men of all
degrees, and the Infidels thrice the number. But that which augmented the
sorrow, was the death of the Emperor Palmerin, who through Age and Infirmity
gave up the Ghost; his last words being, That now he was willing to lay aside
the ponderous weight of Empire, blessing God that he had lived to see his
Enemies overthrown, and his Empire left in quiet; whereof he commended to his
son Primalion, desiring his Nobles, from that time, to acknowledge him their
Emperor; which they promssed to do with the same reverence and service that
they had ever respected and served him with.

CHAP. LXVIII.
How Primalion was Crowned Emperor of Greece: And of the Counsel taken for the
Invasion of Babylon.

THE Emperor Palmerin being dead, and his Death greatly lamented, his body was
intered in a stately Sepulcher of Marble Ivory, and Gold, erected in the great
Cathedral of Constantinople, after the solemnizing whose Funeral, the Princes
and States of the Empire assembled to place the Emperial Crown upon the Head of
Prince Primalion, Eldest Son to the Emperor: In order to which great Pomp was
provided, and he Crowned in the following manner:

In the Morning, ten days after the Interment, all the Princes in Cloth of Gold
and Rich Embroidery of Pearl and precious Stones, came to Prince Primalions
Chamber and saluted him Emperor, the Great Master of the Household; laying
before him upon a Velvet Cushion embroidered, Gold and Diamonds, the Emperial
Crown, Scepter, and Regal Globe; whilst his High Chancellor held the other
Ornaments of Majesty; on which Primalion laying his Right hand, in token of
having taken possession thereof, the Trumpets and loud Instruments of Music
sounded, which the people that were crouding round the Palace hearing, with
universal shouts proclaimed the Choice; Then being again saluted Emperor, he
was lead by King Edoard and King Esterlant, to the Great Cathedral, in this
order: Before him went a Horse in rich Traping of Gold; then followed a
Herald, proclaiming his Titles, and bearing the Arms of the Empire; after
them followed the Servants of the Household, leading many Horses in Silver
Trapings, sounding all manner of loud Music; next went the Nobles, two and
two, according to their degree; then six Ensigns, bearing the Arms of the six
Provinces his Father and himself had anexed to the Empire: After them four
Esquires, one bearing his Sword, the other his Shield, the third his Helmet,
and the fourth his Armor: Then went the Great Master of his Household, and High
Chancellor; the first bearing the Emperial Crown, Scepter, and Globe, and the
later a Coronet done of Gold for the Empress: After them followed the Emperor,
lead by the aforesaid Kings, and was followed by the Empress and her Ladies in
a Chariot covered with Cloth of Gold, and she succeeded by a number of other
Chariots, covered with Gold and Silver interwoven. And in this order passed
they through a Lane of Armed Knights to the Cathedral, where they were
received by the Archbishop, and all the Clergy of the City, singing Anthems,
and conducted to the High Altar, where a Chair of State being set, the Emperor
and Empress placed themselves, and were by the Bishop Crowned after the manner
and custom of the Empire; when having received the benediction of the Church,
they returned in the same order, and were all the way saluted with the Joyful
Acclamations of the People; when as all manner of Pastimes were ordained,
together, with feasting in abundance, for all that would come; with many new
and pretty devices, ordained to divert the Ladies, and make them forget the
sorrow they conceived for the loss of their friends, but the impression in most
of their minds was too deep to be so soon obliterated. Twenty days lasted this
feasting, and pastime, at the end of which a Grand Council was called, to
settle the Affairs of the Empire: When after a long debate, it was resolved,
That since Albayzer had so treacherously dealt, as to invade the City of
Constantinople without cause, ingratefully requiting so the kind entertainment
he and his Princess Targiana had received at the hands of the Emperor Palmerin,
the wary should be carried into his Country, and the Siege laid to his City of
Babylon.

This resolution greatly pleased the Princes, and Knights at Arms, who swore
they would (as much as in them lay) assist the Emperor in the undertaking;
whereupon great preparation were made against the Spring, both of Shiping,
Arms, and Provision; yet did they what they could to hide the Design from the
Ladies, lest it should administer new cause of Grief, so that every Prince sent
secretly into his Country to leavy Forces, to be ready at the time appointed.

CHAP. LXIX.
Of an Adventure that happened in the Court: And how the late married Ladies
were delivered of diverse fair Sons and Daughters.

THE Face of Joy being a little restored at Court, and the loss of Friends by
little and little passing out of Memory, it so fell out: That (whilst the
Desports lasted) there came to the Court a Damzel, attended on by a Dwarf,
bringing with her a Rich Mantle, fringed with Gold, lined with Ermins, and
embroidered over with Pearls, Diamonds, Sapphires, Iacinch, Jasper, Crysolites,
and all the Glory of the Indies, desiring it might be viewed by all the Ladies
of the Court, and that they would give their opinion of it, which they did,
acknowledging it to be the fairest that they had ever seen; when viewing it
well, they saw diverse Characters upon it, of which they earnestly desired to
know the meaning; whereto the Damzel replied: That It was wrought by the Hands
of the Enchantress Mirza, for the Beautiful young Princess Luceana, Daughter
to the King of Egypt, whose Father left her in Custody with my Lady Mirza,
giving it her in charge, That she should bestow her upon the Wisest and most
Valiant Prince of her time; the Princess not exceeding Ten Months old at
present: Wherefore my Lady contrived by her Art these Characters, assuring her
self, that none but such a one as is worthy the Princess (with whom likewise,
when she comes of Age, he is to have the Kingdom of Egypt,) can interpret
them; wherefore she directed me to this Court, knowing there are many beautiful
Ladies lately contracted, as hoping from the effects of such Nuptials may
spring a Prince, who may effect the desire of my Lady. Then know further, that
each of you having seen it, whosoever it is that Dreams the ensuing Night, so
as to describe the Beauty of the young Princess, and the place wherein she is
kept, that Lady shall bring forth a Son, who is to enjoy the Happiness
designed, and prove one of the wisest and valiantest Knights in the World,
being likewise able to read and expound these Mistick Characters.

This greatly encouraged the Ladies, every one being desirous to have the
happiest Offspring: When after various delights, night covering the Earth with
darkness, each retired to their Lodgings big with expectation, hoping next
morning to reveal Wonders: Nor was the night altogether unpleasant, for they
dreamed of various matters: But amongst the rest, the Princess Polinarda being
overpowered with slumber, and sweet sleep hanging on her eyelids, (well
pleased to favor so rare a Beauty) fancied her self to be delivered of a fair
Son, when together with him she was carried through the Air, in a Whirlwind,
over Citys, Forests, Sea, and Rivers, till at last coming to a high Mount,
whose top seemed to transcend the Clouds, she was set down; when gazing round,
she beheld a spacious Castle, Watered round, and graced with pleasant Groves,
Gardens, Orchards, and all that could any way appear pleasant and delightful to
the eye, every Shrub and every Flower yielding odours, and the Fountains every
where spouting purling streams of Water into the Air: But whilst she was
admiring every part, a grave Matron in a Mantle of Crimson Sattine, spangled
with Roses and Lillies of Gold, come out of the fair Fabric, having in her
hand a Silver Wan^, and after salutation, conveyed into it; where she no sooner
entered, but she beheld a stately Palace, adorned with Cedar, Gold, and
precious Stones, which glittered like Lamps; and all round were hung Pictures
of Knights and Ladies, renowned in Arms and Beauty; where (amongst the rest)
she fancied she beheld her Lords and her own, with diverse others, resembling
the Knights and Ladies of the Emperors Court; when passing on through a
spacious Gallery, of vast length, supported with Alabaster Pillars, at the end
thereof two folding Doors of Cedar, hinged with Gold, and wrought with diverse
works of Imagery; interposing, the sage Matron took from her side a Key of
Gold, and turning in the Intrecacys of the Lock, open they slew, with a
resounding Harmony, as if a Symphony of pleasant Music had wound the Air, and
straight discovered a Room furnished out most gloriously, all over perfumed
with Lamps that consumed Spicie Oils; when at the upper end she beheld a
Cradle, glittering with Gold and Gems, and by it three beauteous Damzels,
singing Songs of Love and brave Exploits, ever and anon looking into the
Cradle, as if some mighty Charge was there; and so it proved: For being
desirous to satisfy her Curiosity therein, lead by fancy, she approaching, saw
(or supposed she saw) the Royal Infant, of whom the Damzel had made her
relation, smiling in innocent Beauty, and adorned with all the perfections of
Nature, sympathising with her Son, that she fancied she held in her Arms,
which greatly joyed her; and whilst she remained as it were in an ecstasy, she
heard a voice like the sound of a Trumpet, saying, Behold the Wonder of
Chivalry, and Mirror of Beauty: happy and glorious will be the Court, wherein
these flourish; when looking about her to see from whom the sound came,
suddenly a Dragon descending from the Roof, snatched her Son out of her Arms;
whereat she shreiking, awoke, and all the illusion vanished; yet greatly was
she concerned at what her imagination had impressed on her memory.

In the morning the Ladies rising, and the Damzel yet waiting for the relation
of their Dreams, great was the expectation of the Court: Many related what
their fancies had contracted; but some again (blushing) refused to tell, by
reason of some obscenety, or wanton thoughts, that the foregoing actions of
Love and dalliance had caused them (sleeping) to fancy over again; others
dreamed of the many hazards and dangers their Lords had undergone for their
sakes; and such Ladies as were deprived of their happiness, imagined they
embraced for them their empty shade, and saw their Ghost tempting them to
follow to the blessed Elysium shades: But when all had related, except the fair
Polinarda, and none approved, she in the manner aforesaid delivered the roveing
of her fancy; at which the Damzel greatly rejoicing, fell at her Feet, saying,
She alone should produce a Prince worthy her Mistrisses Love, who should be
renowned above Mankind, and do such Wonders, as had not in any foregoing Age
been known; but that she would lose him in his Infantsie, but find him again
when she had greatest need of his aid.

This having said, she presented the Mantle for his use, when born, also diverse
Jewels of value; and after leave taken, retired without the Court, where
suddenly she was caught up in a pitchy Cloud, and conveyed out of their sight.

This strange Adventure being known, caused various discourses; but above all,
the thoughts of losing the young Prince (when born) greatly troubled Prince
Palmerin, and his fair Princess Polinarda, yet they comforted themselves as
well as might be, in hopes that he would be carefully disposed of and provided
for. Now whilst such thoughts lasted, Nature having accomplished her work, the
fair Princess fell in labor, and after some struggling pangs, (the effects of
the forbidden Fruit tasted in Eden) she was delivered of a fair Son, who was
christened by the Archbishop, and named Palmerin, after the name of his Father
and Great Grandfather: The same day the fair Princess Miragarda brought forth
to Prince Florendos a Son likewise, who was at the Fount named Primalion,
destined to succeed him in the Empire, as will hereafter appear: And the next
day Leonarda was delivered of a Son, who was called Florian, after the name of
his Father: To Dragolant Prince of Navar the fair Arnalte brought forth a
beautiful Daughter, and named her Athenia: Nor was the beautiful Sidalla
behind, to bless Prince Berolde with a Son, who was afterward known by the name
of Burnamissa the renowned King of Spain: Armesia brought forth to her Lord
Pompides, a beautiful Son and Daughter, the former of which was named according
to his Father, and the latter known by the name of The Fair Castoria: Arleucea
likewise overjoyed Dramusiand with a Son, who was christened by the same name.
Nor were any of the Nuptial effects in vain, for these Heroic Knights were as
dexterious and active in the soft Wars of Venus, as in the dreadful Field of
Mars, and could as well and surely aim the one Lance as the other.

The Court being thus replenished with young Princes and Princesses,
considerably abated the sorrow, conceived for the loss in the late War, all of
which were put into the hands of the most skilful Governesses, during their
tender years, and Tutors appointed, to educate them in accomplishments, when
their years were capable to retain it; so that now Feasting and Mi^th abounded
in every place, the better to obliterate the dismal effects of the War: But the
Princess Polinarda deating on her Son, whose promising Beautys and smiling
Innocence greatly wrought upon her fancy, and remembering the saying of the
Virgin, she ordained two Knights and four Damzels to guard and attend him night
and day, thinking by that means to prevent his being conveyed from the Palace,
but all proved in vain, for the Enchantress outwitted them, as will hereafter
appear.

CHAP. LXX.
The Expedition against Babylon; and what happened before the Emperor Primalion
and the Princes Laid Siege to it.

SPRING approaching, and a great concourse of armed men arriving daily at
Constantinople, to attend the pleasure of their Lords, the Ladies began to
suspect what was intended, and with tears intermixed with sighs, kisses, and
earnest entreaties, so dealt many of them with their Beloveds, that they got
the secret from them, which again administered new cause of grief; yet many
reasons being given for the necessity of the War, as That the Soldian was again
leavying huge Forces, and to suffer him again to lay Siege to the Emperial
City, would eclipse their Glory, and the Glory of the Empire; That they should,
by carrying the War (so much sought by him) to the Walls of his Babylon, save
their own Country from spoil and desolation, and live upon the spoil of their
Enemies, being the better enabled thereby to maintain a vigorous Encounter, and
revenge the many injuries and Disgraces that Albayzer and the Great Turk,
together with the Soldian of Persia, had put upon the Emperor Palmerin, and by
dint of Sword convince them of their treachery and base ingratitude.

These and many the like pregnant Reasons so wrought upon the Ladies, that upon
their Lords promising to make as speedy a return as victory, would permit they
were somewhat pacified, being as desirous of revenge as themselves, especially
those that were left as Widow-Turtles, to mourn for the Loss of their Dead. And
now the Army being mustered of all Nations, there were found One Hundred
Thousand fighting men, the valiantest, and most hardy, Europe could boast of;
who imbarquing on Three Hundred sail of Ships, with the sounds of all manner of
Warlike Instruments, passed the Helespont, to the Asian Coast, where Landing,
they covered the affrighted shores, on which for three days they encamped, to
put themselves in order to march, for that fresh news arrived that Albayzer and
the Great Turk were on their marth, with what Forces they could raise, not
doubting to surprise the City of Constantinople.

During the Armies stay, the Princes took leave of their Ladies, who with tears
in their eyes intermixing sighs and soft kisses, (as loath to leave them, some
of whom they must never more behold) followed them to the shore, and then
returned to their respective Chambers, to weep out the grief that overwhelmed
their tender souls, and pray for the safety of their Lords. ^f this Army King
Edoard was appointed General, as before, and Prince Palmerin appointed his
great Leiutenant; Pompides lead Six Thousand Horse; as the forlorn Florian had
the Command of Ten Thousand Foot, Dramusiand Charge of the Right Wing,
consisting of Grecians, Germans, French, and English; Florendos being bravely
mounted, was joined in Commission with Prince Berolde, to command the Left
Wing; and the rest were divided into four Battailians; one lead by King
Polendos; another by Palmerin, who kept his station to the Rear-ward; a third
by the Soldian Bellagris; and the fourth by Prince Floriman; and in this order
they marched through the Emperors Asian Terretories, till they came into the
Countries of the Great Turk, who then possessed all the lesser Asia, called now
Aenatolia, and all that part of Asia the greater, that borders upon Persia,
even to the Walls of Tauris, on the one hand, and Babylon the other, where they
took diverse Towns, and enriched themselves with great booty, causing the
fearful people to fly into the Mountains with what substance they could carry,
although the Princes had given strict order, that no Soldier (upon pain of
death) should kill Man, Woman, or Child, that resisted not, but might take such
Goods as fell to their share.

The news of the Christian Armies approach having by this time reached the ear
of Albayzer, and alarumed all his Provinces, he in as much haste as might be
increased his Forces, compelling by force his unwilling Subjects to the War,
who for the many Cruelties his Father had used toward them, greatly hated the
Son: Yet such and the like means, together with the supplys sent him from
Judea, Palastine, Egypt, and Armenia, he forced a huge Camp of Babylonians,
Turks, Jews, Sarazens, Egyptians, Armenians, and the like; with which (well
Marshalled, and in good order) he marched, hoping to meet the Great Turk, his
Father-in-Law, who was marching at the head of his Forces to his aid, as being
greatly desirous to revenge the affront put on him by the Emperor Palmerin, for
refusing to send Prince Florian of the Forest: But e're the Turk could arrive,
he was encountered by a detached power under the Command of the Soldian
Bellagris and Prince Florian, who laying an Ambush for him, as he was about to
pass a huge Forest, burst out with such fury, that over-setting his Battle,
the affrighted Turks lost all their courage; so that after a bloody fight,
wherein the Great Turk himself, and most of his Nobles were slain, they in
great confusion betook themselves to flight, and were followed with dreadful
execution, till Night sheltered them from the fury of their pursuers; at what
time some got into fenced Cities, others to Albayzer's Camp, filling all with
fear and consternation at the news of that dreadful disaster.

These great Captains having made so successful a beginning, with the loss of a
few of their own men, returned with huge spoils to their General, who highly
welcomed them, and caused public thanks to be given to Almighty God, for the
Victory he had been pleased to grant them, over the Enemies of his name: And so
having refreshed themselves, they set forward to meet Albayzer, whom they
understood, by some scouts of his, to be on his March toward them: Nor were
they misinformed, for the next morning they could from the tops of the Hills
discern the forerunners of his Army: Whereupon the General called a Council of
the Princes and great Captains, to resolve what was to be done, whether they
should pass the hills to meet the forward Enemy, or imbattail themselves there,
to expect him in the Plain? The reason for the former were, That the
forwardness of the Christian Army, in attempting to meet them, would in some
sort discourage the Enemy, and give new vigor to the Soldiers on their part:
But it being urged on the contrary, That they were in a strange Country, with
which they were altogether unacquainted, the Enemy might lay ambushments to
entrap them, or might hide his power in diverse Forests, and thereby by
perpetually renewing his Battle, might greatly discourage the Soldiers, who
would be apt to suppose, that (like Hydra's heads) the more they cut off, the
more they increased: Whereupon it was agreed, that the Battle should be fought
on that Plain, if the Enemy durst attempt it; and if he delayed, then should
they March on toward the City of Babylon. VVhereupon all that night they kept
great Fires, and a strict watch, to prevent any surprise that might happen to
their prejudice.

CHAP. LXXI.
Of the great Battle fought in Asia, between the Christians and Infidels; And
of the great Victory obtained by the former.

THe aforesaid resolutions being taken by the Princes, Albayzer early the next
morning (as they wished) drew up his Army on the top of the Hills, and there
incamping, sent down a Herald to defy the Christians, and to denounce to them
all themselves attendant on War, swearing by Mahomet, that not one of them
should remain alive; but had answer returned him by King Edoard, in the name of
the rest, That the Princes were come so far to seek him, that so they might
finish that revenge his flight would not permit them to do under the walls of
Constantinople; and that if he refused or shunned the Battle, they would
besiege him even in his Capital City of Babylon.

Albayzer having received the answer aforesaid, groaned with anger, and
thoroughly fired in hopes of revenging the indignity put upon him, caused his
Army to be set in array, dividing it into six Divisions: The first consisting
of Twenty Thousand Horse, himself lead; the second of Thirty Thousand Footmen,
he gave to the King of Cambia; the third consisting of Ten Thousand Horse, that
made the Left Wing, he gave to Tomandarus his Cozen, at that time Prince of
Palastine; the fourth consisting of Fifteen Thousand Horse, he committed to the
Charge of Gondrominus, Son to the Soldian of Persia, slain in the Battle
before Constantinople, and these he ordained for the Right Wing; the last
Battle he committed to Salmanzer Son to the Great Turk, and Brother to the
fair Targiana, consisting of Twenty Thousand Foot, which he ordered for a
Reserve, setting Framustant the Giant as Guardian to his Person, by reason but
young, and unexperienced in Feats of Arms.

All things being in a readiness, Albayzer commanded the two Wings to move, as
also the gross Body of his Foot, and that the rest should keep their station,
till further order. The Christians beholding them descend the Hills in great
haste, stood from in their order, to prevent being overborn; when each Captain
encouraging his men, to incite them to noble and brave Exploits, King Edoard
commanded the Charge to be sounded; whereupon the Armies jointly moved, and
King Pompides with his Six Thousand Horse charged the Enemies Left Wing with
great bravery, over-bearing all that stood before him, and with his Spear
wounded the Prince of Palastine, to whose rescue on all sides his Men came in,
and pressed so furiously, that Pompides (weary with killing) was obliged to
retire within the Ranks of his Men, to recover breath.

By this time the gross of the Armies joined with such fury, as made the Earth
beneath them tremble, and the Hills echo with the shouts of the vanquishers,
and cries of the vanquished: There might you at once behold Men fighting like
Lions, and others flying like timorous Deer; when to give the more
encouragement to his men, Albayzer left the command of his Squadron to
Orcadamus his Lieutenant, and accompanied with Morcador, Arock, and Gramandor,
three terrible Giants, he went from place to place to give orders, till at
length he came to the Right Wing, where he found Prince Palmerin fighting at
the head of Six Thousand chosen men, making piteous slaughter, which so moved
him, that he interposed between the Prince and such as were in confusion, that
they ^ight have the better leave to put themselves in a posture, and ^^t-face
their fear; of which the Prince was very glad, as desirous of nothing more,
than to be revenged on him, that had been the cause of the death of so many of
his friends; when without any words a sharp Combat ensued, so that wounds were
given and received in a plentious manner, till their Armor was discolored
with their blood; their men fighting the mean while as eagerly on either side
them, so that the slain lay scattered round them; which Prince Palmerin
perceiving, and w^ll noting the havoc the Giants made of his men, redoubled
his force so furiously, that with a full blow on Albayzer's Cre^, he so dented
his Helm into his Head, that (stunned thereby) he staggered six paces backward,
and fell to the ground; but e^^e the Prince (who labored to take him Prisoner)
could effect his desire, the Giants came to his rescue, two of them carrying
him off, whilst the third (viz. Gramandor) combated with the Prince, but had
not so good luck as his Master: For after a terrible fight, he falling through
wounds and loss of blood, had his head smitten off in spite of the endeavors
that were used to rescue him.

The disaster of Albayzer greatly disheartened his Soldiers, insomuch, that
they began to shrink together; of which he having notice, wounded as he was,
would again have taken the Field, but his great Favorites that were about him,
would not permit it; yet immediately he sent orders, for the Reserves to
descend, and if possible, by wheeling about, charge the Christians in the Rear;
which stratagem being perceived by Florian, he drew of Ten Thousand men, and
went ^o meet them, giving them a furious charge, till breaking through the
Ranks, he found Framustant and Salmanzer, against both whom he fought with such
fury, that in the end he slew the Giant, and carried off the other Prisoner,
though his ^an labored at the expense of many of their lives to prevent it.
And now come on Berolde and Dramusiand, making fatal havoc; whilst Prince
Florendos with a detached party brake through the advanced Squadrons of Horse,
and entering the Ranks of the F^t ushent, put them into confusion, opening a
passage to charge them on every side; which they perceiving, and that the Right
Wing was almost all cut in pieces* gave ground amain, of which the Christian
Princes taking the advantage, advanced with Ten Thousand fresh men and put all
it confusion; Prince Floriman like Lightening breaking through the thickest
Squadrons, but being unfortunately wounded between the joints of his Harness
with a Persian Arrow impoisoned, he soon after (to the grief of all the
Princes) ^yed in Babylon.

The Infidels now in rout, slaughter raged so dreadfully, that all the Plains
were crimsoned afresh with the blood of the slain; Albayzer (weak as he was,
and in a mad mood) in vain endeavoring to rally his men; when finding he must
yield to necessity, he retreated in the best order he could with his broken
Troops, being pursued till the Christians (tired, and night coming on) were by
the order of their General restrained, least the Enemy taking the advantage of
their struggling, should turn Head, and again dispute the Victory.

In this Battle the Soldian lost Thirty Thousand of his best men, amongst
which were many of his Chief Commanders, and Twenty Thousand the night
following deserted him, and privately retired to their respective Countries,
filling all places with fear and amazement, upon rumouring the approach of the
Christian Army: Which Albayzer well noting, and finding himself far too weak to
hazard a second Battle, in great perplexity returned to Babylon, to encourage
the Citizens by his presence to defend it till new supplys should come from his
Alys, if the Princes should approach; as also to have the company of his fair
Sultaness Targiana, whose beauteous eyes during his absence were never dry from
tears. But scarcely had he put things in a posture of defense, e're he had
notice, That the Christians approached, having all the Towns in their way put
into their hands.

CHAP. LXXII.
How the Army of Christians besieged Babylon, and took it by storm; And what
happened during the Siege.

ALbayzer from the Watchtower (weak as he was) taking a view of the Christian
Army, and in what order they marched, resolved to sally with the chief of his
strength, for two reasons, the one to amate the Christians, least they should
conclude him utterly vanquished; and the other to keep up his credit with the
Ladies and men of War, to whom at his setting out he had promised such great
things: Whereupon with Forty Thousand well appointed men he Marched out at Four
Gates; when placing the Persian and Median Archers in the Front, he caused the
Charge to be sounded, and with a dreadful shout charged the Avaunt-Guard, but
they (being seconded by Prince Florendos) fought so manfully, that many on both
sides were slain; which horrible conflict made the Ladies (who from the Wall
beheld it) fill the Air with shrieks and cries. And now Prince Florian (desirous
to let his quondam Mistress the fair Targiana, know what he was able to do)
laid on so furiously, that being seconded by the Squadron and Battailian lead
by his Brother and Dramusiand, he caused the Enemy to retire to their main
Battle, where stood the Standard of Albayzer, when killing the
Standard Bearer, and diverse that undertook to rescue it, they threw it down,
which so disheartened the Pagans, who supposed their General was killed, that
they began to retire under the City Walls, and had presently fled, had not
Albayzer showed himself, though fatal it proved: For being about to draw up his
men, a Greecian shot his horse into the head, who falling on him, bruised him,
that of the bruises, and through grief for the disgrace he sustained, he in
three days after dyed, filling the City with Lamentations for his Death.

This second misfortune of the General caused the rest of the Pagan Captains to
despair of success; whereupon sounding the Retreat, they retired in as good
order as they could into the City; but being furiously pursued, Palmerin,
Florian, and Dramusiand with Six Thousand men, pressed in with them before they
could close the Gates, or let down the Portculls, and fought bravely for the
passage, insomuch, that the streets ran blood, the Citizens and Soldiers
earnestly laboring to destroy the Princes and their followers, having for that
purpose by this time enclosed them on every side; but their danger being known
to the remaining part of the Army without the Walls, they in a great fury
stormed the Bulwarks at Twenty several places; to defend which the Pagans
running from every part, Dramusiand with a strong Bar of Iron forced the Gate,
and let in the Squadron under the leading of the Prince Florendos, making good
his ground; but as he advanced to his station, (where the Princes fighting,
drove whole streets before them) a huge stone was cast from a Turret, which
falling upon his Helm, burst it in sunder, and cast him dead upon the place, so
that he (who was never but once vanquished in fight) dyed, by the cowardly hand
of some base Artifice.

The Death of Dramusiand known, the Princes gave order to fire the City, which
was done in diverse places.

During which consternation, King Edoard, the Soldian Bellagris; and diverse
other great Commanders, had seized on the Towers and Bulwarks, and planted
their Ensigns thereon: Yet the defendants fought in every corner, hurling
Stones, Tyles, melted Lead, Pitch, Tar, and Rozen on the assailent, insomuch
that many brave Captains were killed and wounded; King Edoard himself having
received a wound in the Arm by an Arrow from a Loop-hole, and Prince Florendos
grievously hurt by the fall of scalding Sulpher, which almost roasted him in
his Armor: But in the end the streets being paved with the slain, and Albayzer
not present, by reason of the great grief he sustained to animate them, they
threw down their weapons, and begged quarter; yet such was the fury of the
Soldiers, that notwithstanding the Generals express order to the contrary,
that they killed a great number of them: But in the end, the slaughter being
stayed, the General drew up before the Palace, (which yet held out) and
summoned it, but was answered by a shower of Arrows and Stones from the Walls,
Loop-holes, and Towers, which greatly enraged the Soldier, so that having
prepared combustable matter, they fired it in diverse places; whereupon
(contrary to the mind of Albayzer, who lay grievously ill of his bruises) a
parley was sounded; when as the Princes pitying the loud laments and dismal
shreiks of the Ladies, who were for their safety retired thither, drew off;
whereupon giving their promise that no violence should be offered, the Gates
were opened to the Conquerors, and they as many as thought convenient entered:
Of which Albayzer having notice, in a desperate mood snatched a sword from one
of his attendance, and wounded himself so deep in the breast, that by reason of
it, and through the anguish of his bruise, and the greater anguish of his mind,
he expired, which many of his friends seeing, fell upon their swords,
accompanying him in death, whom they had so faithfully served in their
lifetime, leaving the fair Targiana and her Ladies in tears; yet so
compassionate were the Christian Princes, that they comforted them in the best
wise, promising that no further harm shall befall them; especially Prince
Florian, for the love he bare to Targiana.

The Princes having been thus far revenged, thought it sufficient: And after
having refreshed themselses, and settled the affairs of the City, in the
possession of Targiana, and at her request releasing her Brother, in
consideration that a Camels load of Gold should as Tribute be paid to the
Emperor of Constantinople, they with such spoils as they had taken (after
having honorably buried their friends) returned to Constantinople in Triumph.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Of the Death of the Emperor Primalion, and Florendos his Son; And the Loss of
young Prince Palmerin, Son to Prince Palmerin of England; And what else
remarkably happened.

THe Princes thinking themselves sufficiently revenged for the Injuries
sustained, and desiring to keep their promises with their Ladies, in triumph
returned the same way they came, and in a short time arrived upon the shores of
the Helespont, where they found the Royal Fleet ready to waft them over: When
upon their approaching the City, they were met in great Triumph, and conducted
to the Palace; where after they had Feasted liberally, and discharged the
Soldiers with large Rewards, they ordained a Turnament for ten days: But
before it began, the Emperor Primalion falling sick of a Feavor, caused by the
inflammation of the wounds he had received, that were not thoroughly healed, he
after three days sickness dyed to the great grief of the Court; but so
excessively grieved his fair Empress Gridona, that refusing to be comforted,
she fell at last into such a melancholy, that she soon after followed her Lord
to the happy Elysium of bliss, both of them being buried in a stately
Sepulcher, near the Emperor Palmerin their Father, whose death Prince Florendos
(whose Right it was to succeed his Father in the Empire) took so much to heart,
that leaving his young Son under the tutorage of Sage Aliart, he together with
the fair Miragarda, who would not leave him for the pleasures of the Greecian
Court, traveled to the Holy Land, and never returned more; so that young
Primalion being grown up to Maturity, was Crowned Emperor, and for a long time
peaceably enjoyed that Empire.

Affairs being settled as well as might be, the Princes were desirous to depart
to their respective Country: King Edoard and his fair Queen Flerida were for
England, having persuaded their Son the Renowned Palmerin to accompany them; As
likewise did King Pompides and his Queen Armisia. But Prince Florian having the
Kingdom of Thrace, in right of his Wife the fair Leonarda, he took his Journey
thither, with a splendid Equipage; where upon his arrival he was received by
all the Nobles, and solemnly Crowned KING, where for many years he Reigned
gloriously.

King Edoard his fair Queen Flerida, Prince Palmerin and his Princess
Polinarda, with their young Son, Pompides and Armisia, being by this time put
to Sea, a great Tempest arose and scattered the Fleet, consisting of twenty
ships, and continued so terrible for the space of three days, that neither Sun,
Moon, nor Stars appeared, which greatly troubled the Ladies (now altogether
Sea-sick, and out of order); but at the end of the time aforesaid, the Heavens
(to their great comfort) cleared up, and they found themselves cast upon an
Island, where stood Mountainous Cliffs, that seemed to reach the Clouds; when
going on shore to refresh themselves, and pitched a Royal Pavillion, but had
not long reposed, e're the Heavens again blackned, and such Thunders and
Lightning happened, as if the dissolution of all things were at hand, which put
them into a great consternation: But whilst they were wondering at many
dreadful sights in the Air, as fircy Drakes, Pillars of Fire, Metors, and
Comets, that blazed horrible, a huge flame descended and environed the
Pavillion, making it seem all on a flame, which caused the Ladies to fall into
a Trance, and somewhat amazed the stout hearts of the Heroic Princes: but that
which wrought more terror, out of the flame issued a dreadful Dragon, whom in
vain they sought to wound, and seizing in his paws the Cradle, wherein young
Prince Palmerin lay, he spread his Wings, and bore it through the dreadful
Gloom in spite of all resistance. This unhappy accident greatly troubled all
present, and the Prince his Father would have gone in search of him; but being
persuaded to the contrary, and remembering what had been foretold, as also the
Princess Polinarda's Dream, desisted.

And now all being clear and calm, and most of the ships that had been
separated, brought in by the wind, they set sail, and arrived at England, being
received with great Joy: But soon after King Edoard dyed, his Renowned son
Palmerin was Crowned in his stead, flourishing gloriously many years.

FINIS.

