A TREATISE, Showing the Liberty and Bondage of the Will of Man.

Or, A TREATISE Showing the Bondage of the Will of Man by nature and the
Liberty thereof by Grace.

printer's or publisher's device Dum Spiro Spero

LONDON, Printed by W. B. for Anthony Nicholson in Cambridge. Anno Domini 1652.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
BEloved Christian, my desire is, that none of us that profess our selves
Christians, and in that respect brethren; may be found walking in that evil way
mentioned, Psalm. 50.19, 20. much more that we use not the same as our weapons
to maintain our opinions, and to beat down what we fancy to be error, for its
an evil and dangerous way, and Truth needs no such weapons for its defense, nor
to confute error, and sure this can be no other than evil speaking, and false,
to give out of any that understand, and believe, Jesus Christ by the grace of
God to have tasted death for every man, and to be the propitiation for the sins
of the whole World, and the enlightner of every man that comes into the World.
That they therefore exalt the nature of man fallen, and would that man by
nature has freedom of will to that is Spiritual good: Surely this report has
risen in the first raisers of it, from ignorance of the very voice of that
Doctrine of grace, and from conceits of foolishness in the Testimony of Jesus,
in the plain sayings thereof, and malice against such as believe to stick close
to the same, and will not be waved by Philosophy and vain deceit to prefer men's
garnishings before the plain Text: Hence such envy and strife, and charges of
holding such goodness in nature fallen. But whence such wisdom comes, and what
accompanies it, see in James 3.14, 15, 16. And it is to be feared there is some
secret magnifying of willing and running where they are; in this rash censure
of some to assert them where they are not, and so a putting them out of place,
or else an overcontempt in denying their use where they ought to be, for surely
the attainment of remission of sins, justification, righteousness, and eternal
life, It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy, Romans 9.16. For choosing, willing, yea and running too, to attain
satisfaction to fleshly and sinful lusts. I believe we all think this in the
nature of man as fallen full enough; and the end woeful also. But to will and
run to attain the knowledge of God, and peace, and righteousness, and life with
him, surely such a thing as this springs not from fallen nature only, but has
some light, or knowledge of truth, to occasion it, though happily abused, or
imprisoned by some advancing their own wisdom with it, Joh. 1.4, 5, 9, 10, 11.
Romans 1.18, 19, 20, 21. Yet such a willing and running may be found in natural
men, and how highly esteemed soever by them, yet not aproved of God; Luke
16.15. as to say when men's willing and running is to establish a righteousness
of their own by the works of the Law, to get the righteousness of God, Romans
9.31, 32. and 10.1, 2, 3. Or to get Christ and Faith in him, that they may
believe He died for them, and is theirs, and they his, and shall have eternal
life by him, if their willing and running for this, be either in and by the
Traditions and Doctrines of men, Matt. 15.8, 9. Or by their own wisdom and
strength from a self-principle to avoid the second death, and get eternal life,
1 Samuel 2.9. Ezekiel. 4.6, 7. Joh. 1.13. All Devotions, Conversions, Reformations,
and Seize got in and by such willing and running is but fleshly and
unprofitable, Joh. 3.6. and such in their hopes prove either Ismalites the seed
of the bondwoman; or Edomites, that as profane Esau that preferred a mess of
pottage before his birthright, or as those boasters, Pro. 30. and wandering
Stars and Clouds without water Jude. And howsoever in words they may ascribe
this their willing and running to the grace of God, to call it the effect of
his Almighty power, yet will not God justify them in it, nor can they obtain
the Righteousness of God by it, or yet are they any better than natural men,
what ever they profess, Luke 18.9, 14. 2 Cor. 10.12, 18. But I suppose this is
not the willing and running that is meant in the strife, but there is a willing
and running that is good and approved: Commanded, Isai 1.19. and required in
all that render service to God, Exodus 35.5, 21. 1 Chronicles. 29.5. Professed of the
Saints. 1 Cor. 9.24, 26. which is wrought in the belief of the Gospel, Romans
1.16. Ps. 11.3. in which every good endeavor is accepted, 2 Cor. 8.12. and
without which none come to the use of understanding, do obtain the Kingdom,
Matthew. 11.12. Now this willing and running, as appears in the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, is such as first is produced by the rich and free mercy of God held
forth in the death of Jesus Christ, Romans 5.8, 10. Tit. 3.4, 5. And secondly, is
carried on in dependence on God for his performance of the good he has
promised, Gal. 5.5. And thirdly, seasoned with submission, and patience to wait
on God for his performing of his promises, Heb. 10.35, 36. And fourthly,
exercised in such ways and means as God himself has appointed and approved,
Isai 64.5. 1 Cor. 2.9. Yet the obtaining is not of him that thus wills and
runs, nor is it in the power, or for the desert of such willing and running;
but of God his free gift, who freely first prevented by showing mercy, and so
effected the will, and in the series of his goodness both drew and answered:
And if willing and running were understood and put in their right place, it
would abate the strife, but I fear that Satan has a more mischievous design in
raising the contention, and casting that foul Aspersion on believers: For he
knows how deeply he has overthrown us; And how far we fell in our first
Father, and how by reason thereof we are as we come forth from him, blind,
deaf, dead, in respect of Spiritual life, and favor, and Communion with God;
so as we can neither help our selves out of our misery, nor take hold of help
though wrought for us, and tendered to us by another.

And he knows, that the Son of God has taken the nature of Mankind, and was
in that nature made under the Law for them, and so died the death and wrought
Redemption for them, that whoever believe in him might not perish, but have
everlasting life.

And he knows that God has immeasurably filled Jesus Christ with spirit in
the nature of Man, even for the rebellious, and that in certain mediums he
thereby gives forth some Testimonies of his goodness, and in the Gospel a full
Declaration: that men might believe and so turn in to him.

And he knows that God through Christ, and for his sake has given to men an
understanding above the beasts of the earth; and some light, that they might
discern and attend the means, in which his goodness is testified and his Spirit
working.

And he knows that if such mediums abide unclouded and unperverted before
them, and that if they according to the light given them, do in seeing see, and
attend to that discovered in the means; The grace discovered would enlighten
their minds, draw their attentions, and work willingness and desires in their
hearts to receive, and God would convert and heal them.

Therefore this enemy of Mankind exercises his malice in many wiles, to
withdraw men from beholding and attending the truth, as presented in those
mediums, especially in the Gospel. And this he does sometime like himself as an
Angel of darkness, with presentation of necessities, or worldly honors, and
riches, or persecutions; but sometime counterfeiting as if he were an Angel of
light, pretending light, holiness, and greater attainment, and for this cause
has his Ministers appearing as Ministers of righteousness, to oppose the
Testimony of Christ, as set forth in the plain sayings of the Gospel, and also
in the extent of it: knowing if that be hid from men, the door of saving
knowledge, the foundation of sound repentance and faith, the medium to set
their will at liberty, and make free to choose life is hidden from them, and
then they are liable to be taken in his snares and seducements. But that he is
mischievous end may not be seen, and that he may prevail to put men by
attending to such plain declaration of the Gospel, he will color over his
business with a pretense of magnifying free and particular grace in a more
excellent way, and cry down the plain Testimony of the Gospel if received in
the plain import of the words, as exalting the nature of Man, and attributing
free will thereto, to the derogation, or abating the honor of the grace of
God, and so scare men from attending that in which they might meet with life;
For the preventing of which mischievous design, and removing that false
aspersion cast on the truth and lovers thereof. I have writ these ensuing
lines, which I desire may be read, and the homeliness of the style pardoned,
but the things themselves tried and received so far as they appear consonant to
the Testimony and sayings of the Gospel, and no farther: The Lord in mercy sill
us with the blessing of the Gospel and make us of one mind therein, as prays
the Well-willer in Christ.

THO: MOOR.

A TREATISE About the will in Man; and what freedom is in it to any thing truly
good, and whence that comes.
THe great love of God to fallen mankind, in giving his own Son to take the
nature of man, yea to be the public man, and under the law, for, and in the
room of all men; and so to dye for them all, that first and accursed Death, in
which all mankind had else for ever perished: And Gods being so well pleased
with this Death of one for all that he has raised, and exalted him, and made
him Lord of all, and given them all over into his dispose, and born witness of
him, and set him forth in the Gospel to be the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world, that whosoever believes in him, may receive forgiveness of sins,
and have eternal life; and that such as when means are used toward them rebel
willingly against him, may be justly judged by him.

This is fully, and plainly recorded in Scripture, and declared as the ground
and foundation of repentance, faith, love to God and men of preaching the
Gospel to all; of asserting the Resurrection of all, and of Christ his judging
all, as is plain in the Scripture, and has thereby been clearly proved by many.

Yet by some, and such also as are in esteem both for learning and godliness;
this truth is not only opposed with many subtilties, cavils, and invention of
absurdities to fasten on it, but even the clear contrary Assertion affirmed, as
to say; that God never loved all men; Christ did not dye for all men; he is not
the propitiation for the sins of the whole world of mankind, calling these
their negations Truth, and the contrary affirmations of the holy Ghost, Error,
and Heresy, and although the best of them can find but carnal weapons, as
misreporting the words they should answer, wrong and cloudy stating the
question, multiplying queries, scholastical flourishes, Rhetorical chidings;
scoffings, pervertion, and wresting of Scripture-sayings; and not one plain
saying of the holy Ghost, to avouch and countenance their negation withal; but
such expositions, limitations, and exceptions; as tend as much to deny Gods
creation of all men by Christ his making all men righteous in the first public
man; that all have sinned, that there is any cause for, or door of repentance
for all men; That there is any real truth in the Gospel to be preached to all
men, that all men are obliged to Jesus Christ for any saving good, why they
should live to him, or that they shall all rise and come to judgment before
him, nor have they any clearer testimony in the Scripture for these or any of
these than for that which they deny; I hope God will one day give them to see,
and so bring them from opposing to acknowledging the truth, and for that cause
I have writ these few lines, if it may be to remove one of their great
pretended stumbles, in answer to a groundless slander, which is this, that such
as believe Jesus Christ to have dyed for all men do also therewith hold, that
men have free will by nature, and so magnify the nature of man, and free will
in man, Derogating thereby from the honor of the rich, and free grace of God.

By what reason, or learning this should be raised to be a consequent of the
belief of Christ his having dyed for all men, I know not, nor believe that any
can show, but I shall endeavor to clear that part of opposed truth from giving
any cause at all; or having so much as any show for such an absurdity to be
cast upon it, and I am sure many believing the truth are slandered; And for the
clearing the truth, and them, I desire that these four things may be
considered, and what the Scripture says of them may be believed.

1. The distinction the Scripture holds forth between that which Jesus Christ
as the public man, distinct from all other men, undertook to do, and has done
in his own personal body with God for men, without reference to the knowledge,
will, or acting of other men, and as and while they were enemies: and that
which as the public man, by virtue of that done in his own body, being filled
with power, authority, offices, and spirit, he has undertaken to do, does, and
will do, for, to, and in men, that they might know, will, act, and enjoy the
virtue and blessing of that he has done in his own body: The first of these
being done, perfect, completed, without the knowledge, will, or act of any
other man in his undertaking, and Gods acceptance, and whether men know, and
believe it, or not; yea, while they are enemies, and declared that men might
know, and so will, act, and enjoy; and so demonstrates men by nature, dead,
enemies, and wanting both knowledge of, and will to any spiritual good before:
the other to be after done and where begun, yet not completed fully; till the
visible return of Jesus Christ in glory. 2. Cor. 5.14, 15, 19, 21. 1 Pet.
2.24. and 3.18. Col. 1.20, 21. and 1. John 3.1, 2. which things having largely
discoursed into Treatises now public I forbear here, only I mention this to
show, that the right understanding, and belief of Jesus Christ the free gift of
God, and his death for all men, and that while enemies; and his ascending to
receive, and send forth spirit in the Gospel to make the same known, that men
might discern, believe, will and does wholly oppose and deny any knowledge of,
or free will in any man by nature, to that which is truly and spiritually good.
And such conceits of free will proceed from want of the right knowledge and
belief of the death of Christ for all men; And so I shall here only enlarge in
the other three things following.

1. What will, or free will in man is.

2. What diverse considerations of men yet natural the Scripture affords

3. When men are other, and more than natural, and what difference then.

1. The will of man, or man's will, is one of the faculties of the soul of a
man; The soul, as I conceive may be comprehended in these three heads, viz.

1. The understanding, or mind of a man; by which he knows, discerns, and
judges of things, good or bad, true or false, real or imaginary, and so
inventeth, or infers, all which may be called Reason.

2. The will of a man, that is his bent, and inclination, leading to elect and
choose, or to reject and refuse, with purpose, and resolution, approving, or
condemning according to the judgment of the mind concerning things, good, or
bad.

3. The affections of love, joy, desire, etc. Which in a right tempered soul
follow the verdict of the understanding, and so the choice, or rejection of the
will; But if the appetite, and sensual part get victory over the affections and
so lead the will, the soul is in a distemper, and it is a troublesome evil like
that, Prove. 30.22, 23.

So that without these three, there is not as I conceive a whole soul, the will
being as I conceive the middle part, to be governed by the understanding, and
to govern the affections, that all may agree in one; now the freedom of the
will is, that liberty and freeness it has in it self above any discoveries,
objects, and proffers to incline to or from, to choose or reject, according to
what the understanding discerns, good, or bad without any force, or violence,
to constrain it one way or other, without any necessitating enforcement, or
band withholding; but only as that seen in the object, and approved or
disaproved by the judgment does move, and so far is, the will free ended; and
so the heart, and mind make free and willing; and such a free, ready and
unconstrained will, or willingness is free will indeed, and so far the will is
free in it self, and so accounted in Scripture Language also Exodus, 25.2. and
35.5, 21, 22.29. 2 Cor. 8.3, 12.

Yet here is to be noted; that discovery of objects, giving forth of commands,
and directions, lays no constraint, or hinders; but that the will of it
self inclining is still free, and so accounted in the Scripture, Lev 1.3. and
19.5. and 22.19, 26. Nor does want of power to do, or avoid, and so accomplish
according to the purpose, inclination, and choice of the will, hinder the
freedom of the will; But that the will may be free, and freely willing; when
yet there is not power to do, or attain that which is willed, Matthew. 26.41.
Ioh. 21.18. Romans 7.18. So that freedom of will is one thing, and power of doing
another; and so let us hold close to our business in minding what is free will,
and in what sense the will is said to be free, whether in things that are
lawful, or unlawful, good or bad, that we mistake not freedom here for
liberty, or Authority given of God, for he gives none to evil, nor for power of
acting, which is another thing; But for that freedom from constraint, or
necessity, In which the will, as it is a will does, or may incline, and choose,
or reject: more need not be said of the will what it is.

2. But now it is meet to ponder, and rightly to conceive of man according to
the diverse, and manifold considerations given us of him by the Scripture; of
which I shall point out five considerations of man, as yet a natural man, and
they are these.

1. As God made him in his creation of him, when he made all men in one public
man, whom also he made male and female, and called their names Adam.

2. As man by eating the forbidden fruit, in sinning made himself.

3. As man through the propitiation made by Jesus Christ the second public
man; has his natural life a time preserved, and mercies extended.

4. As by the virtue of the death, sacrifice, and mediation of Jesus Christ,
man has some light, understanding, and disposition given unto him, by Jesus
Christ.

5. As Jesus Christ does by his Spirit, with some supernatural light, and
motion, at some seasons visit a man, and touch his heart, striving with him:
and in all these considerations, we have several things to acknowledge about
the will of man, and the freedom of it.

1. In the first consideration, we find God made man upright, even in his soul
according to his own Image, in righteousness, and holiness, Ecles. 7.29. Genesis
1.26. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.

Then was man indeed a living soul, and in honor, and had his understanding
clear to discern the mind of God, in what appertained to man, and his will
free, and at liberty in it self (though by the command of God bound to the
best) to choose one way, or other; and his affections suitable, no sober man
that I know denying; and so, and then man had freedom of will, to that which
was natural good, and to that which was morally good, and to that which was
spiritually good, and all had the same in him, as in a Root out of which they
were to spring, and as in a public man that stood in their room, else they
could not have lost it in his fall, and loss.

But for those things that are since man's fall called in Scripture
supernatural, and spiritual good, as the spiritual man; the Lord from heaven,
the quickening spirit, life from the dead; remission of sins through the blood
of the Son of God, enjoying his righteousness, union with him, and conformity
to him in death, and resurrection, in his holiness, privileges, and glory,
these things were unknown to the first Adam in his Innocence, nor could they
stand, or be in that first estate he was in; these being no part, nor
privilege of the first creation, that is now old; but a new creation of things
belonging to the second and spiritual man; 1. Cor. 15.45. So that of these
heavenly, supernatural, and spiritual good things, as they were not known, so
there could be in man no will, much less free will to them, and so Adam, not
having it could not loose it, nor could we loose such free will in his fall, as
we never had in him in his standing; so that thus far I hope none will say, we
magnify the nature of man; For that freedom he had in his will, to natural,
moral, and spiritual good, was not deserved, nor acquired by him, but freely
given, and wrought in him by God, whose the praise is; But that which is indeed
freedom of will, to that which is supernatural, and spiritual good, he had not;
and the knowledge of this will help to understand that which follows.

2. In the second consideration, as man by his abuse of free will, did in his
transgression make himself; he not abiding a night in honor, became like the
beast that perishes, Psalm. 49.12, 20. His soul was not annihilated, no more
than his body, but his understanding, will, and affections he had still; but
the Image of God therein, the uprightness and holiness thereof was lost; and
many evil inventions, found by him and us, all in him; Eccles. 7.29. Yea, he
and we as far as could be in a public one did in him become sinful, and
guilty of death, and by virtue of Gods sentence condemned, and in that respect
dead, Romans 5.12, 18. And by nature, and according to this consideration, such
we come forth from him: Romans 5.19. So that all men by nature, and as considered
in Adam, and as come forth from him, in respect of all we receive from him, and
so are, and have by nature, are all ungodly sinners, enemies to God, void of
judgment in that which was truly good, and therefore destitute of will, much
more of freedom of will to it; yea, dead in treaspasses and sins; Romans 3.9, 19
and 5.6. and 6. Ephesians. 2.1, 2. And they that rightly believe Jesus Christ to have
dyed for all do therein, and therewith believe all to have been thus dead; 2
Cor. 5.14. And therefore, in respect of any thing by nature, or from Adam
wholly destitute of any freedom of will, to that which is truly good much more
destitute of any free will, to that which is supernatural and spiritual good,
which nature never had in the first Adam, nor can have but by some higher, and
more glorious grace, than was conferred on him in his first estate; So that
sure in affirming this, is no exaltation of nature, and such as talk of free
will, to that is truly and spiritually good in men by nature, must have it in
man thus considered, or not at all.

Object. But here I fear some, that with many words cry down free will in man
to good by nature, will yet be offended at me as abasing nature too much, and
object against me that in Rom 2.14, 15. That the Gentiles do by nature the
things contained in the law; etc. And show the work, or effect of the Law
written in their heart; where if by nature they mean the nature of man, as from
Adam; and by the work of the Law written, they mean the Law it self as some do,
and the bringing it in for such an end, would argue such a sense to be meantt:
hen and so to this Objection I answer.

Answ. Though I reverence their learning and godliness, yet I receive not their
sense of this place, because I find the word nature otherwise used sometime,
than for the nature of man; and the nature of man in another consideration also
than hitherto set forth; And I find a great difference between the law and the
work, or effect of the law in the heart; and the taking the words here in such
a sense, would contradict many, plain sayings of Scripture For those that
understand not, Do no good, are ungodly, and enemies to God, and by nature dead
in trespasses, and sins, have not the holy and righteous law written in their
hearts; nor do freely by their own nature the things contained in the law,
which if they had, and did, then had they free will indeed by nature; yea, and
which is more freedom, and power of doing also; and this is strange, that such
as cry down free will in words and accuse others to hold it, should by their
own interpretations in doctrine so highly avouch, and teach it.

But it is clear enough, if the Apostles business, and scope from chap. 1.16.
to this chap. 2.16. be well viewed, and understood: which was to set forth the
goodness of God according to Gospel testimony, and the means he used for men
to to know it; that believing they might be justified and sanctified by his
grace; and the equity of his proceedings against those that willingly disobey
against goodness so made known about making forth his knowledge; he tells us of
two mediums or books; the book of creatures; God in and by natural things
created, and ordered by him manifesting his power, goodness, etc. and giving
them in some measure to know, and calling and moving to repentance, Romans 1.19,
20, 21. and 2.1, 2, 3, 4. and God teaching by these mediums; it is in respect
of the instruments used, called the teaching of nature, or natures teaching:
and the other is the book of Scriptures, which was not by nature, or natural
mediums, but by a spiritual revelation from God; so the law to and by Moses;
and the Prophesies; and the Gospel as now come forth; Rom 1.16, 17. which to
whomsoever it comes, it brings more clear revelation of the mind of God than
can be seen in nature, or those visible works of God in creation, and
providence; and it is not the enjoyment of greater, or lesser means, but the
yiedling up thereto, according to the light therein vouchsafed, be it more, or
less, in which goodness is received: again if we mind the Scripture, and man
in the first consideration; we shall find; that man in his innocence had the
Law, that is the knowledge, and love of God, and man writ in his heart; but
sinning he lost this, and became as the beasts in that respect. Yet though man
lost his uprightness; God and his Law lost not his authority; man by the Law
was as much obliged still to know and love God and his neighbor for the grace
he had conferred on him by creation, etc. And such the force, power, and
authority of God in this Law, that it entered into the heart of man, convincing
him, as bound to it, and that it was his duty to adore God, and love man;
though he had neither light, nor strength, nor will to either; yet according to
what he conceived himself to do right, or wrong; his conscience, or thoughts
within would excuse, or accuse; and such an effect, or work of the Law, is
more, or less in every man's conscience, till he by custom of sinning, and
hardening his heart be seared, and so past feeling, Romans 2.5. Ephesians. 4.18. so
that in all this is no such commendation of the nature of man that he has the
Law writ in his heart, and so by nature does the things of the Law, the
contrary being largely testified in the first chapter, and in the beginning of
this: But now for our understanding what that Doing the things of the Law by
that light extended by nature or natural mediums, even by such as have no
distinct revelation of Christ is, which is here spoken of. It is needful that
we first receive the Gospel-testimonie; that Christ dyed for all men, and
extends by virtue of his death some light to all, and so consider man in some
other consideration, than as fallen in the first Adam; namely as redeemed in
the second, and as mercies and means are extended by and through that second
public man even Jesus Christ: and those means made effectual in him also by
Jesus Christ: though for want of the Gospel, and spiritual revelation he have
no distinct knowledge of this Jesus Christ: through whom he receives all this,
and by whom he is now more accepted of God than such as enjoy those greater and
spiritual means that give the distinct knowledge of Christ: and are not
prevailed with thereby, as is to be seen in the example of Cornelius; Act.
10.1, 4, 31, 34, 35. And the following part of this whole chapter, Romans 2. So
that in all this the grace of God shown in greater, or smaller means, by
spiritual, or natural mediums is magnified; but the nature of man, and that
which of himself as Adams Son he wills, and Does, is reproved, and abased, as
is evident throughout chapter. 1. and 2. and 3.

3. But now in the third consideration of man, as Christ: the second and
public man has in his stead, and for his sins dyed and so wrought a
redemption, and made a peace for him; and by virtue thereof does preserve his
life for a time, and in that time extends mercies and means to him that he
might repent, Romans 2.4. and seek him; Acts. 17.27. and live to him, 2 Cor.
5.15. and so participate of the redemption and peace. Here in this
consideration of man; as his soul, and body is preserved in the natural life by
Christ: Psalm. 75.3. Col. 1.16, 17. John 1.4, 5. We have something else to
consider about the will in man, being one of the faculties of the soul, of the
soul so preserved: For man in the former consideration was so fallen and dead,
that he was so shut out, that there was no liberty to him for any good to
choose, nor yet for evil to choose or refuse; for he was necessitated to it, and
so his will wholly imbondaged, but now through this redemption wrought by
Christ: and grace given by God in him, and manifested through him; that
necessity of perishing, and impossibility of being saved; that which stood
cross against man in the midway between God and man, is removed, and that
which held man captive is by Christ captived, Col. 2.14. Ephesians. 2.13, 16. and
4.8. and here is remission of sins, and eternal life prepared for men, and
given by God in Christ: that in receiving him men might receive it, and this
set forth in the Gospel, that men might choose life, Joh. 3.14, 15. Act. 13.38,
39. 1 John 5.11, 12. So that now the winter is past; and here is good,
spiritual good, to be chosen, and liberty from God to choose the same; Deuteronomy.
30.19. Joh. 6.27, 29. but yet nature blinded cannot see; and so the will is not
moved nor free to choose this spiritual good, unless some supernatural light be
given into it, Joh. 1.4, 5. but now in natural things, suitable to the good,
and well-being of the natural life which is preserved by Christ, the will is
also herein so preserved by Christ: as there is some freedom in it touching
natural things, and here I may say; the will has as much power, or freedom to
choose, or refuse, as the man has light, or understanding to discern what is
good, or evil in things tending to the natural life; and this I gather from
that change of expression, where knowledge, and knowing to choose, or refuse are
put one for another, Isa. 8.4. with Isa. 7.16. and so in, and about things and
actions natural, and humane, for the preservation, safety and well-being of the
natural life, and suitable profits, pleasures, and honors, with that contrary
thereto; according to that which the understanding and mind of a man, judges
to be good or bad, best or worst, the will of the natural man is free, and does
freely choose, or refuse; Genesis 6.2. and 11.3, 6. and 13.9, 10, 11. Although
through a deluded judgment; he may be mistaken in his choice, Act. 27.11, 12,
13. yea, and though he want power to attain, and do, or to avoid all that he
chooses, or refuses; which may befall in this to spiritual men also, Joh.
21.18. so that in fallen man that is yet natural, and of himself inclined, and
imbondaged to his own ruin and harm; (he is yet through the grace of God by
Christ, so preserved, that) there is such a freedom in his will about things
natural, as is said the holding of which persuasion attributes nothing to the
exaltation of nature, no worth, no desert, no power for good; but abaseth it,
and magnifieth the grace, and power of God in Christ; to such weak unworthy
ones, to whom in their distress he also so speaks, What will thou that I
should do unto thee, Matthew. 20.32. yet is this freedom of will many ways abused
by natural men to their harm.

1 Some not knowing the grace of God through Christ: that dyed for them and
bought them, and so preserves this freedom of will in them, as they count
their tongues their own, Psalm. 12.4. so their will, and this liberty, and
freedom they find in it to be of themselves, and so what they attain of things
they choose and pursue, tending to furnish their natural life, they attribute to
themselves; and so sacrifice to their own wisdom, choice, endeavors, etc. And
make idols thereof, which if they knew, and believed the death of Christ, for
all, with the ends and virtues thereof, they would not do, Ezekiel. 28, 2, 6, 17.
Hab. 1.15, 16. An evil that God warns his people to beware of, Deuteronomy 8.11,
12.14, 17. Jer. 9.23.

2. Some through the same Ignorance, and unbelief, yet finding this liberty of
will, not knowing whose gift it is, and to what end given, do yet in self-love,
and desire of riches and honor, choose that which to them apeareth the best;
and so choose a sober, and temperate use of the creatures, and a civil and
modest behavior in converse with men about them, and then in a secret
hypocrisy pretend this temperance, sobriety, etc. to be for God, and to him,
and so challenge, and hope for heaven thereby, agrievous, and dangerous deceit,
and of as woeful an issue, Prove. 14.12. and 16.25. and 21.2. and 30.12. And
this reproved in Gods people, Zach. 7.5, 6.

3. Some through folly, setting the servant to rule, suffering their appetite,
and sense to command their will, do freely choose those worst things, and ways
by which they lay Bars, and Blocks in the way of their own conversion; and so
fore-stall themselves from harkening to better offers, when tendered; and so
provoke God to leave them to such folly as is folly in the eyes of natural men;
as to hire, or buy a farm before they see it, Luke 14.18.

Yet this freedom of will given by Christ, will serve to leave men that so
abuse it without excuse, seeing they were not necessitated to choose the worst,
but did it freely without constraint, and such as use it, but as they may; do
avoid many rubs, and blocks from being in the way of their conversion; and yet
in all this is no free will to that which is spiritually good; nor any exalting
of the nature of man; but the grace of God for that freedom that is given.

4. But to proceed farther: to consider man according to the fourth
consideration, viz. As by virtue of the death, sacrifice, and mediation of
Jesus Christ; there is by him some light, understanding, and disposition given
into the soul, the mind, will, and affections of man; yea every man that
comes into the world.

But because this will not be believed by some; but is questioned, and denied,
it is much to produce some instances of Scripture, where the Spirit of truth
affirms the same; that it may appear unquestionably true, John 1.4, 5, 9.
Jesus Christ is said, to have life in him, and that life in him to be the light
of men (that whence issues that discovery of the knowledge of the goodness of
God, and that life, mercy, etc. which men have, and might further enjoy) and
the light shines (note it, not only to, but) in darkness (in the blind
understandings, and minds of men, and their ways) and the darkness
comprehends it not (but then it follows that more means is used, and then
verse. 9. He was the true light (namely from the beginning, as still he is, the
light of the world, John 8.12) which lights every man that comes into the
world; and, what this light is, see, Prove. 20.27. The spirit of man is the
candle (or lamp) of the Lord (which he has given him, and set up and lighted
in his heart) searching (and so discovering) all the inward parts of the belly;
and this also is avouched by good Elihu, Job. 32.8. there is a spirit in man,
and the in spiration of the Almighty gives them understanding and that this
spirit, or light, and inclination, though in the soul, is neither the soul nor
the body of man as from Adam, but some infusion by the means of Christ:
appears, in that it is said to be given of God, that men by it might inquire
after, and discern the goodness of God their maker, Job. 35.10, 11. and also
that it is expressed as a third thing distinct from soul and body, Luke 1.46, 47.
1 These. 5.23. And let men call this what they please it is such a light
understanding, and disposition, as in which men are said to have eyes to see,
and ears to hear, so as they might discern between that which is morally good,
and morally evil, and discern many of the attributes of God, and much of his
mind in his works, and word; yea and that testimony of his Son being the
Savior of the world, when it is brought to them if they close not the eyes,
and ears given them, and refuse to use them to the end for which they were
given them and that is it they are reproved for, as is clear Gal. 3.1. Acts 28,
27 Jer. 5.21. Ezekiel. 22.26. And hereby it is; that many natural men have so
discerned, the being and attributes of God, in his works, and have been so
inclined to many moral good things, and disapproved moral evils; which though
some of good esteem calls the Relics of Gods Image left in Adam after the
fall, and therein unwittingly magnify nature; and asscribe some light and
freedom of will to it, and deny man to be dead in sin by the fall: yet the
truth is, those things are the fruit of that life in Christ, for men, and by
him given in to them, John. 1.3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10.

So that as man is thus considered he has from Christ such light or spirit, as
if heeded, and suffered would make his will free to moral good things, Exodus
35.5, 21, 26. So as in this respect, there is given by Christ so much freedom
as the will is not constrained; but might choose the best, in respect of moral
good, or evil presented unto it and in respect of attending to, or withdrawing
from the Gospel, which attended to, would work a better freedom, whence in
their not so choosing, they are charged, (not with a necessitous turning aside,
but) to have chosen their own ways, and that which God delighted not in, and
65.12. and 66.3, 4. Prove. 1.29, 31. And all this is no affirmation of free will
in man by nature to that which is supernaturally, and spiritually good; for
that it yet is not, nor of it self can be, without some farther grace than here
mentioned, though in right use of this shown, even that might be met withal,
Prove. 8.32, 36. But this serves still, to abase man's nature as fallen, and to
magnify the grace of God in Christ; and to aggravate the finfulness of evil
chusers of their own ways; yet this freedom of will, though graciously given by
Christ, to men for their good, is by many diverse ways abused to their greater
harm, for.

1. Some even when God appears, and the knowledge of God is tendered, and they
discern the same, right, and good, and might choose to behold the light, and
attend the means of knowledge tendered, in which they should meet with
blessing; yet because it reproves, and calls off from some Idolatry, or
uncleanness, or worldly lusts, which they exceedingly love; they without
constraint do freely refuse, to hearken to such instructions, and yield to such
acts of worship, and justice, mercy and sobriety, as would hinder the
satisfying of those lusts, and as freely choose the contrary which they might
have refused, but would not, and in this their evil choice, they say to the
Almighty, Depart from us we will not the knowledge of thy ways; whence these
are said, to be the wicked indeed, Phil. 3.18, 19. 2 Timothy 3 4. Job. 21.14, 15.

2. Some when light and truth is extended, discovering the vanity of Idols, and
false worship, and men's doctrines and ways, and the goodness of truth, so as
they begin to see what is right, and good, and like it, as good to be followed;
yet because they love peace to the flesh, and the approbation of man in
authority, and in fame for learning, and devotion; they not by any necessity or
constraint, but willingly stick to their commands and doctrines, and refuse to
embrace the truth, that would endanger to their displeasure and reproach, Hos.
5.3, 4, 9, 11. John 5.44. and 12.42, 43. whence that Isa. 51.12, 13. Neither
will this Plea help them, or be found true; their wills were so chained, they
could not choose to accept the better part in this; they were for want of
liberty, and freedom of will necessitated to choose the worse part herein, and
whoever help them with this Plea, God will reprove it, Isai 5.1, 4. Mic. 2.7.

3. Some there are, that for want of the right knowledge of Christ, having dyed
for all, and the ends, and virtues of his death stoop not to come in at that
door, wherein they will be found no better than others, and choose not that
efficacy of the death of Christ, that they might be quickened by him; yet make
some use though a wrong one of this liberty, and freedom of will given them by
Christ, and that is this; that being convinced of sin, and their guiltiness of
it by the Law, and the wages to be death, and so terrified by the Law, with the
apprehensions of Gods anger and judgment, and so of hell, and believing the
Law to be holy, just, and good, as indeed it is; they set themselves to the
Law, and choose to work sorrow on their hearts for their sins, and so to leave
them, and to learn the knowledge of those righteous affections, and services
commanded by the Law hereby to get the righteousness of God, and as by use, and
custom, they attain to some inward frames, and promptness in duties; they would
from thence conclude themselves alive to God, but finding wants, they will look
to Christ, as one that dyed for such; that so what is wanting in them, may be
made up by him; and being come to this, they trust, there are Christ's; they
have faith, they are righteous, and have some free will to that which is
supernatural and spiritual good, but in this they are not wise, but farther off
and unjustified still, 2 Cor. 10.7, 11, 12, 13. Luke 18.11. Romans 7.9. and 9.33.
and 10.1, 2, 3, 4. Job 9.30, 33. And yet in this is something that is worse;
for they yet not knowing that which is indeed supernatural and spiritual good,
and so having as yet no freedom of will to choose that. But only this freedom
forementioned to that is morally good, and all the zeal, and exercise being an
act of their will though helped by that freedom in it given by Christ to men;
yet this now they call, an act of supernatural grace, and say, it is a begun
freedom of will to that which is spiritually good; and that it was wrought in
them by the free grace and the almighty, and unresistable power of God, without
which they say, they could not have had it. And they acknowledge it, the work
of his grace, as did the Pharisee; Luke 18.11. And of this act, and fruit of
their will, they make a great Idol, and mysteriously worship it, for from hence
they fetch their knowledge, and on this they build their faith and hope, that
they are elect, that Christ dyed for them; that Christ is theirs, and they his,
that the promises belong to them and that they shall have eternal life, and can
never fall away; and though they think and to others say, Christ is their
foundation, yet the truth is, the first and bottom matter is the foundation,
and that to them is this act produced by their will, without which they know
not whether Christ dyed for them or no; so that they build that persuasion
hereon also; and hence is their assurance, etc. raised; though every whit as
much deceived as they, Prove. 30.12. Luke 18.11. Rev. 3.17, 18. 2 Cor. 10.12.
And as high-thoughted of themselves as they, Prove. 30.13. Isai 65.5.

Yet do they blind themseves and others from discerning this, by earnest, and
zealous crying down all free will in man to any such good as they have, as if
there be any, it must needs be by nature; and so as persuing others as
magnifiers of nature, and holding man has free will to that is spiritually
good, therefore you may be sure they are far from any such thing: and yet all
this while, they have no more but that freedom of will that is by Christ, given
to all men, though not so to work with, and build on, the Lord help such as are
snared with it out of this mysterious Deceit, that they may not be as those,
Prove. 30.12, 13. or he, Luke 18.11. Lamentable it is, that so good, and
gracious a gift given to man, should be so abused, but it will leave at last
the abusers excuseless.

5. But I will now add, the last consideration of the natural man, and that is
as Jesus Christ by the virtue of his death, sacrifice, and mediation, does by
his spirit in, and according to the Gospel, visit and move the heart with some
supernatural light, and motion at some seasons striving with him; that there
are such seasons of gracious visitations, and especially where the Gospel is
plainly preached (and I need not in our Nation stretch my Assertion any
farther) is evident; for the plain preaching of the Gospel is it self a
gracious visitation to a people, and the mean, yea the choice, if not the only
outward mean to enlighten men's minds in, and make their wills free to choose
spiritual good things, Luke: 68, 78, 79. and 19.42, 44. And Christ by his
spirit is graciously present in such ministration of the Gospel, Prove. 9.1, 6.
Matthew. 28.20. whence it is called, a ministration of life, spirit, and
righteousness, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9. And yet moreover at some seasons more than
others, and sometime to one, and sometime to another he does more clearly, and
forcibly visit with some supernatural light and motion, discovering his
goodness to the heart, and moving it with convincement and alurement, so
striving with them by his spirit, as appears, Rev. 3.20. 1 Pet. 2.12. John
16.8, 13. And in such seasons, he is making the will free, laying grace and
life before it, moving with loving alurements, so as they might be free to
choose, and have then an opportunity to receive that freedom, yea in one season
or other, before he leave striving with them; he takes off the yoke of
thraldom, that there is so much freedom given to the will, (I say not that they
shall necessarily, and by constraint, but that) they might in that season,
while his presence is so with them even choose life; yea spiritual good things,
though many undervaluing it do not, as is evident, Hos. 11 4. Ezekiel. 24.13. Isa.
5.1, 4. I say not, this freedom wrought in the will of the natural man is
abiding, or dwelling in him, but only that it is given into his will at and in
such a season of visitation; and yet that this mercy of God given in such
seasons is by many diversely abused is too evident.

1. By some in a willing withdrawing, and turning aside after such knowledge,
and operations of truth given; a fearful, and dangerous evil, Hos. 11.1, 4, 7.
Ezekiel. 24.13. Prove. 1.24.

2. By others, though not prevailed with to receive the love of the truth, to
save, renew, and cleanse them yet lifting up themselves to high conceits of
themselves as more excellent than others because of such visits, shines, and
motions, and even on that ground also boasting of their enjoyments of free
grace, and peculiar favor; a dangerous evil, Prove. 30.13. Jude 5.6. 2 These.
2.10, 11, 12. the Lord give such timely repentance.

3. Yet lastly that we may fully, and rightly understand this business, there
is one thing more to be considered, namely, how long any is to be reckoned in
the number of natural men, and that according to Scripture account is; until,
by the grace of God in Christ discovered, they be brought in to believe in
Jesus Christ; and then they are something else, and better than mere natural
men, or till for persisting in resisting this grace they be left, and so given
up, and reprobated of God, and then they be something else, and worse than mere
natural men; the first of these have a begun freedom of will not only to choose
spiritual good things, for that they have already, but also to pursue, abide in
and follow after the same, which no mere natural man has; and the latter have
lost that freedom they have before given them to moral good things, and
attention to mediums for spiritual good, being void of judgment therein: and
till men become one of these two sorts, they, even all men besides, both rich
and poor, wise and simple, learned and unlearned, in offices ecclesiastical or
civil, and out of office, within or without the pale of the professed Church;
Jews or Gentiles, civil or deboyst, idolatrous, superstitious, devout or
profane, and scoffers, meek or furious, chaste or unchaste, liberal or
covetous, etc. They are all of them natural, and but natural men, until as is
said.

1. That by the love, or grace of God in Christ, that dyed for sinners,
discerned, and believed, they be brought to deny, and disown themselves, their
own sins, purposes, and ways, so as they believe on God in Christ, therein;
accepting this grace to save, comfort, renew, and guide them, the bent of their
heart being set to depend on God, to enjoy, honor, and please him; waiting on
him for preservation, and eternal life, these though men, and in a sense
natural men still, Acts. 14.15. yet also indeed and in truth, they are
something else, more and better than natural men, even the Sons of God by
faith, Gal. 3.26. Born of God, John 1.12, 13. of water, and the spirit, John
3.3, 5. By the grace, and spirit of God, in and by Christ, Romans 5.6, 8, 10.
Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. 1 Pet. 1.21. And so all that by the freeness of Gods love
appearing in the death of Christ are brought to believe in Christ, and so have
him, by his Word, and Spirit abiding in them, and they by faith, and love
abiding in him; these all these; whether babes, strong men, or fathers, all are
the sons of God, members of Christ; and in some degree spiritual, yea though by
reason of some weakness, and oppositions of flesh, and world, some be more
carnal than spiritual, Romans 7.14. 1 Cor. 1.2, 3. So that such believers all and
every one of them have not only such a freedom of will, as that they might
choose that is good, according to their understanding in things natural and
moral, and attention to the outward mediums for spiritual good things and so
such a light, or spirit, as God by Christ and for his sake gives to every one
that comes into the world, but they have received an ointment from the holy
One, even the word of grace, and therein the spirit of grace into their spirit,
and so have a new heart, a new spirit; and so have not only that by which
attending their will might be made free, or an opportunity in which they might
have it, or such a freedom only in some spiritual visit, that they might choose
life and spiritual good things, but much more; for by the election grace has
made in their hearts they have chosen life and spiritual good things, Isai
56.45.1. These. 2.13.2 These. 1.10. And now have in their heart by the operation
of God a begun freedom, not only to choose, yea and to will, but even also to
do spiritual things, Phil. 2.12, 13. And it is behoofull, and gainful for them
to walk out in this grace as they have received, Col. 2.6. Phil. 2.12, 13. And
in this freedom they are differenced from all natural men, and much more from
them that are worse than natural: namely,

2. Those who by continual lifting up their own understandings thinking to be
wise, and preferring their own thoughts, purposes, and lusts, before the
receiving, and retaining the knowledge, and teachings of God by nature or
Scripture to turn at his reproof, but follow the delusions of Satan, till they
have closed their eyes, and stopped their ears, and hardened their hearts, in
resisting the spirit, and blotting out the light, which God by Christ had given
them, and so resisted the truth declared, and the holy Ghost in his visits, and
strifes therein, till they be left and given up to Satan, and so reprobated,
and given up of God: these, and all, and every of these, though in a sense they
be natural men still; yet they are also some thing else, and more, and worse
than natural men, even the Sons of Belial, of the wicked one, the seed of the
Serpent emphatically; the reprobate, and wicked indeed, that now cannot
believe, Prove. 1.24, 36. Ezekiel. 24.13. Jer. 6.16, 30. Genesis 4.5, 13. with 1 John
3.12. Romans 1.18, 28. John 12.38, 40. And these having lost that light they had,
and despited the spirit that would have given them more, and for that given up
of God, they are not only destitute of all freedom of will to spiritual but
even to moral good; and set with a full resoluteness in their will to do the
works of their father the devil, being void of all right judgment John 8.41,
44. Romans 1 24, 28. And in this they are differenced not only from believers,
but from all other men, that are reckoned in the number of natural men.

And now having been so large in opening this business; let all this be brought
together; let the will be considered, as one of the faculties of the soul; and
the freedom, for a liberty (not from a command, or lawfullness, but) in it
self to choose the one or the other in things proffered; let the things be
considered as distinct, natural, and moral, and spiritual; and of what, and to
which is spoken in any affirmation: let the natural man be considered as he was
righteous, but is fallen in and through Adam, and redemption wrought for him by
Christ, and some light given him, and in some seasons liberty and opportunity
for more: and let those born of God be considered as distinct, and those
reprobated as excluded the better part. And then I am persuaded, all that are
not prejudicated through envy, and malice will confess that the hearty
believing that Jesus Christ by the grace of God did dye, and give himself a
ransom for all men, and that God so accepted this death of his for all, that he
has exalted him, and made him Lord, and Judge of all, and filled him with all
fullness of grace and truth, to bestow; and that if one died for all, then were
all dead, and that he died for all, that those that live should not live to
themselves, but to him that died for them, and rose again, that Jesus Christ is
the Savior of the world, the propitiation for the sins of the whole world;
that he is so displaied, and set forth in the Gospel that all men might
believe, and that such as do indeed believe on him shall not perish but have
everlasting life, this being the foundation of repentance and faith; the door
to come in to the knowledge of God and Christ: the ground of the faith, and
certainty of the resurrection of the dead, and of the equity and certainty
of Christ his judging all men, and the ground and motive of true love to God
and men; that this doctrine, and the belief and preaching of it, will lead no
man to magnify the nature off man as from Adam, or to think that any man has
by nature free will to moral, or spiritual good; yea or that any man that is
but natural has any freedom of will to spiritual good things, much less power
to attain, and do; and we that believe thus protest against it.

But this we believe, as we are led to in the belief of this doctrine, namely,
That as Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, and that the world
might be saved, 1 Timothy 1.15. John 3.17. And uses means and sends his Word to
that end that men might seek him, repent, and believe, and so be saved, Acts.
17.27. Romans 2.4. John 1.7. and 5.24, 34. Psalm. 78.5, 6, 7, 8.

So he has done that for men, and by virtue thereof does that unto men by
which in his operations they might repent and believe, and so be eternally
saved; and if they be not, it is not through mere impotencie and necessity,
but their willfullness so far, that their destruction is of themselves, not in
or by the weakness or want of any thing done by Christ, but by their own
willing disobedience, refusal, and evil choice, Prove. 1.24, 29, 30. and 9.12.
Isa. 5.2, 6. Jer. 6.16, 19. Hos. 13.9. 2 These. 2.10, 11. And so from the same
doctrine, and these instructions of it we believe as is said.

1. That the natural life of man is by Christ, preserved for a time that he
might repent.

2. That by Christ: some means are used, and some light vouchsafed to men for
the same end; tending toward Salvation.

3. That some light disposition or spirit is extended, and given into men, by
which they are endued with some discerning that may be called an eye to see, an
ear to hear, that so in seeing and hearing they might understand what is
naturally, and what morally good, and what of God is declared to them in his
works and word about his eternal being, and Godhead, his wisdom, power,
justice, truth, and his love, and kindness to man-ward, and what he has done
for them, and how he looks, and calls for their return to him, and what in
mercy he stands ready to confer upon them in their return; according to his
discovery they may see; and with this discerning such a suitable liberty, or
freedom in their will is also given them by Christ, that they might choose and
see in seeing, and so to view and incline, and choose to seek, and yield to that
which is naturally, and morally good, and to attend that word, and those means
in which spiritual good things are declared and tendered to them, and in which
attention to them they should meet with that which would inlighen their minds,
and give so much freedom to their wills, as that they might choose that which is
spiritually good, which yet is wanting to them.

4. That Jesus Christ, by his Gospel where it comes, and by his Spirit therein,
at some seasons, does even lay meat before them and so far take off the yoke of
thraldom that by his operations in such seasons they might choose life; and then
is this freedom also given them, which because they accept it not, and so use
it not in that season to choose life as they might, it abides not in them, and
so they cannot be said to have it, but as coming in that season, and passing,
because it was not laid hold on in that season, and well used.

And all this being the free gift of God by virtue of the death of Christ, to
unworthy men, and a fruit of his love, and kindness to man-ward, it magnifies
not at all man's nature, as in and from Adam, nor affords any praise to man;
but sets forth still the glory of the rich grace, and bounty of God to unworthy
man, and how they are still more obliged to God for this helpfulness afforded,
and to Christ the spiritual man, by virtue of whose death and sacrifice, this
also is extended, being a fruit thereof, and it serves much more to abase
corrupt and fallen man, and to aggravate his sin and folly, that being in
misery, and life tendered him by a Redeemer, and such help given him that he
might incline to hear, and attend to the means he uses, who would save him
eternally, and yet men willingly to close, or refuse to use the eye he has
given them, and to choose to follow lying vanities, and so forsake their own
mercies, rejecting the Lord of life, Oh, great ingratitude, and inexcusable
folly.

As for the freedom of will in unfeigned believers; though it be but in part,
yet confessed by us all that believe in Christ; I will here say no more to
that, and for them that for willing resisting the Spirit till they be given up
of God and reprobated; that they are hardened, and totally destitute of any
freedom of will, or possibility thereto in things truly and spiritually good,
I suppose there is in this no difference among us that believe in Christ.

But about natural men, not yet born from above, nor wholly overcome by Satan
and so given up, and reprobated by God; but yet in their natural estate; of
these is the question, and concerning these, the question is not of free will
to God by nature, or as we come of Adam, for that is denied by us all that
believe in Christ; nor is the question of free will in man to things
supernaturally and spiritually good; for that is denied to be in, or have any
abiding in natural men, while they remain only natural; but the question is,
of a freedom procured, and given into he will of man by Jesus Christ, in which
so much liberty is given into the will of man, that according to the
declarations, and tenders made in things naturally and morally good, and the
declaration of Gods love to mankind, in his works, and in his word, the
mediums to discover supernatural and spiritual good things when attended to,
and believed; he might incline to, and choose to mind, attend to, and embrace
such natural and moral good, and such outward mediums for spiritual good as are
set before him, in which is attendance to that better freedom, which in such
attention should be met with; of this and this only is the question, and the
affirmative I have testified to, in such a sense and so far as is affirmed in
the four last mentioned particulars: and I suppose fully and clearly proved in
the Scriptures forecited in the three last of the five considerations of the
natural man: And yet for more satisfaction I will instance proofs more
distinctly.

1 Proof. The Apostle professes that the word of faith which he preached, and
that which the righteousness of faith says, and which Moses spoke, is the word
that is nigh thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart, and that nightness, and being
in thee, the testimony of the word it self: now this word which they preached
was neither Adam, nor Adam-like, and natural things, nor a Law of works, but
the word made flesh, the Lord Jesus Christ, and remission of sins, and life in
him, to be received by believing, and testified by confession; and this word
says he, is not so far out of sight and reach but it is very nigh thee in thy
heart (that thou may believe) In thy mouth that thou may confess, as is
evident; compare Romans 10.4, 10. with Deuteronomy. 30.11, 15. And upon this ground,
Moses professes to have set life before them, and exhorts them to choose life,
verse. 15, 19. Surely this testimony is true, in some plain and full sense;
without wresting dominition, or addition, and it cannot hold forth less than
what is before affirmed in the last four forementioned particulars.

To take it in such a fantastical sense as if the personal body of Christ were
in us, and dying, rising and ascending in us, is contrary to the whole
testimony of Scripture and the foundation of our faith, and the drift of the
place it self.

To take Nigh and In for his spiritual in-being in the hearts of believers by
his word and Spirit, and the riches of the mystery in forgiveness,
righteousness, etc. By and in which manner, he is in believers the hope of
glory, is against Scripture, which makes that peculiar to believers, and
against the place it self, which affirms this nightness, not because, but that
men might believe; Yet sure a truth there is in the affirmation, and that in a
full, and plain sense, whether:

1. We take [in] for, for, as it will well bear and signify, and is sometime
so used, yet then the first word Nigh implies a redemption for man, and made
known and fit, and this implies good will to him, and so for him, and he so far
made capable that he might so attend that he might believe, or:

2. If we take [In] for in, or within, as being added to Nigh, it seems to be
taken, then we must take [In] for such a being in as may be in an unbeliever
that he might believe; and that can be no less than by virtue of his
propitiation made, and mediation continued, extending such mercy and light
into men; as through him they live, and move, and have understanding above the
beasts; and so an eye to discern, and such motion in their will, that upon his
tenders of life in the means they might choose to behold and attend to him in
them; and then though they have no power to save themselves, yet he would save
them, Isai 45.22.

And both these senses are true, and answer to the words fully and plainly, and
less than both these cannot be taken, without injury to the words: and he that
denies this preaches not the Gospel the Apostle preached, but runs at an
uncertain; and this holds forth as much as I have affirmed.

2. Proof. It is affirmed plainly in the Scripture, that Jesus Christ lights
every man that comes into the world, John 1.9. and so that there is a spirit
in man, etc. Prove. 20.27. Job 32.8. and 35.10, 11. and that they have eyes, and
ears that they might see, and hear, though they refuse in seeing to see, etc.
the wonders in the works and word of God, Jer. 5.21. as is before shown; and
this is as much as I have affirmed.

3. Proof. The Lord calls upon men to look to him, to hear his voice, to
understand, to turn at his reproof, to repent, to believe, to choose life, etc.
Isai 42.1. and 45.22. Prove. 8.4, 7. and 1.23. Acts 2.38. and 16.31. Deuteronomy.
30.15, 19. If any say that such exhortations imply not power in the exhorted to
turn, etc. I answer, I say not that it does; but implies power and will in the
exhorter, he being the Lord, and a capacity given by him to the exhorted, to
hear and see, and understand, and so to attend and incline, which if they do,
according to what they may by his gift, he will add more, and save as his word
assures: a wicked servant he is that says, the Lord gathers where he has not
sown, etc. If any say, they say not God does so, for he gave them power in
Adam, which they have lost, and he may justly require that of them he once gave
them power for: I answer, he gave power to Adam, to as much as the Law of ten
words requires; and that power he lost; and this Law serves to discover sin,
and sentence to death, which use was not for Adam in his innocence; and I hope
such as know the Gospel, know that Christ will judge according to it, himself
having been judged for us according to the Law, but the power to acknowledge
sin, repent, and believe in Christ, and so choose life, that way was not in Adam
in his innocence, and so not lost by him, and so as the first power men never
had in themselves, though in Adam; so this they never had in him; and if God
graciously give not forth some power, in which men might look to, and receive
his power, he should require of men absolute impossibilities, and then his yoke
were not easy, but in Gospel declarations he gives that by which men might
hear; the end of his declaring and calling being that men might repent and be
saved, John 5.24, and 34. which will evidence as much as I have affirmed.

4. Proof. God every way by his word, cleares himself from being the cause of
men's destructions, either in his will or pleasure taking in their death, Ezekiel.
33.11. or tempting them to evil, Jam. 1.12. or in want of any means used for
their good that may stand with his wisdom and holiness, and expresses his
heart for their coversion, and appealeth to their conscience, what could have
been done more that he has not done, Isai 5.2, 6. which had been easily
answered, if he had not done as much for, and in them, as I have affirmed.

5. Proof. God that is merciful, wise, and holy, will not look for that in his
creatures for which he never gave them any power or fitness, or means by which
it might be brought about; he would not look down from heaven upon the sons of
men to see if they did understand, etc. If he had done nothing for them by
which they might understand, etc. Psalm. 4.2, 3. nor would he look for fruits if
he had not done that by which fruits might have been brought forth, Isai 5.3,
4. which could be no less than I have affirmed.

6. Proof. God in convincing, reproving, and condemning men as sinners in this
respect charge them neither with Adams fall, nor weakness, and inability in
that sense, but with willfulness, and gross neglect or rejecting his word,
Prove. 1.24, 29, 30. Ezekiel. 24.13. And says not, they were chained in, or
necessitated to, but chose their own ways, Isai 66.3. And are in this foolish,
having eyes and see not, Jer. 5.21. which argues as much as I have affirmed.

7. Proof. The convinced, that are convinced by the holy Ghost, shall
experiment and acknowledge as much, when they shall see it their sin, that they
have not believed in Christ, which could not be, if there were nothing in
Christ; for them to believe in him for, nor that done by Christ, to them, by
which they might have believed, John 16.8, 9. which proves as much as I have
affirmed.

8. Proof. The complaint or reproof of, or lamentation for the fool, Prove.
17.16. wherefore is there a price put in the hand of a fool, seeing he has no
heart. There is a price and the price is put in his hand, and he values and
loves it not, and herein he is a fool; not that he has no eyes, or ears, or
hand, and so cannot see, or hear, or receive; but that he having these neglects
to use them, when so good occasion is given, not that there is no price for
him, or that it is far out of his reach, but the price is put in his hand, and
he wants wisdom, or a heart to set such price on it as to part with his lust,
etc. For it is this is folly, Jer. 5.21. Hos. 11.3, 4, 7. And this also carries
forth as much as I have affirmed.

9. Proof. And to come to right reason, subdued to, and ordered by the word of
God, this affirmed tends more to the glory of God and the abasement, and good
of men, than that opinion that denies this; let them be weighed together.

That all the preservation of man's life is by virtue of the death of Christ;
and that God has provided life for them in Christ, and that he uses means to
bring them to the knowledge of it; and that he gives them an understanding that
they might discern his goodness in those means, and that he gives so much
freedom to them that they might incline to attend those means and so look to
him, and turn at his reproof; and that in so looking and turning he will give
them supernatural and spiritual light, and save them; that they for all this,
not minding his goodness, nor turning to him, he should not only forbear
tumbling them down into destruction, but also strive with more means and more
force of spirit, so stretching forth his hand as to remove the yoke from their
jaws, setting their will in some seasons at such liberty that they might choose
life, and he in such seasons also laying meat before them and calling them,
what says all this to us, does it not say that God is infinite in love, wisdom,
and mercy, to give such a Savior by whom such mercy is procured? that his
love, and bounty to mankind, yea his patience, forbearance, and long suffering
is very great? the revelation of his mind, that all might be saved, very true?
and does it not say likewise that God is just, and righteous, and his ways equal
in condemning such for and to whom he has done so much? and they so willingly
rebel against him, and refuse such salvation; does it not also speak forth the
truth of Gods words, that he wills not the death of the wicked that dies, but
rather that he turn, and live? and that those that perish, do forsake their own
mercies, loose their own souls, and in their calamity, eat the fruit of their
own ways? and for such as believe; they may herein see all the mercies they
have from first to last, the free gift of God by Christ, and does not this say
likewise, that men were wholly lost, corrupt, and dead, that by Christ a
restoration is wrought, and mercy extended? that they are beholding to him, and
his blood and spirit for all the good motions that come to them? that he having
so freely dyed for them and now doing so much to them; it is their own fault,
and a foul, and inexcusable fault, that they remain impenitent, unbelieving,
and disobedient? yea and speaks not this also for the good of man, of
believers to preach the Gospel, and therein to use reproofs, and exhortations,
seeing that they may speak to men in their own language, in a tongue that God
gives men to understand? and it speaks good for others to encourage men to
hearken to the word of God, and attend to his Ordinances, and yield up to his
teachings, and motions, according to the light and strength vouchsafed, and to
watch to all opportunities, and lay hold on the seasons of Gods visitations
seeing he is nigh to them therein, and much blessing to be met within them, and
great danger in neglecting them: yea, yet again; this truth about so much grace
extended by God to men, would if believed, free men from those evil thoughts of
God, as that his will is the prime cause of most men's destruction that he sends
Gospel, and uses means, and proclaims love to men, and calls them to repent,
but neither intends good to them, nor gives them any power or freedom by which
they might come to repentance; yea it would free them from those vain excusings
of themselves; when they neglect to hear the Word, to attend the Ordinances of
God, to show mercy to men, or to forbear such evil courses as they run into, by
pleading, we have no power of our selves, and God has given us none, and were
it his will, we should do these things, and repent, etc. He would not only use
outward means, and put in a motion, but overcome us with an almighty, and
unresistable power, and till he so do, we had as good sit still as strive to no
purpose, we are blind, and deaf, and dead, and nothing; it is God that does
all; therefore the blame is not ours, from all which unsavorie stuff this truth
believed would free; yea it would also free from the conceits of harshness, and
contradictions in the sayings of the Gospel, and from murmuring against God;
all which the contrary opinion lead to. But I have yet heard some say, that
this opinion of Gods extending such grace to natural men, that they might
believe, it does magnify some men as better than others, that is, such as by
such light and means are brought in to believe, when others by the same were
not; and to this I answer, that some are brought in by such means as others are
not; and that it is the fault of them which are not, and by that fault they
become worse, is true, else how shall that be righteous judgment when one
shall be produced against another in judgment, Matthew. 10.15. and 11.22. and
12.41, 42. And that he that believes is better than he that did not is true,
but that any betterness in himself made him a believer is false; but by grace,
he is better in believing: this may be illustrated by a comparision though all
are too scant for spiritual things; suppose two men by their own folly become
blind, deaf, dumb, and so dead; here is both their sin and their misery; If
one carry good things to them, to see, hear, etc. They are both alike unworthy,
and unable, but if one be helped with sight, hearing, etc. and the other not,
and then both called, if he that has his sight, etc. behold not, it is his
sin; but the other, it is not his sin, but his misery; if both have sight,
hearing, etc. given, here is grace alike to alike unworthy, if both be called,
and they heed not to see, hear, etc. both are faulty alike; but now if the call
be continued, and greater discovery of good things made, and by the excellency
of the grace and riches disovered, one be drawn to behold, and mind that he
sees, and hears, and so come to receive those free offers, and the other
willingly close his eyes, and stop his ears, and so refuse, and be punished,
here is free grace to the one that deserved no more than the other; yea grace
more obliging him still, and here is equal, and just punishment to the other,
who is willingly now become worse, so that man is no way exalted in this: and
indeed when and whosoever God hardens, blindes, and reprobates, he does it
equally in righteousness, judicially, and justly, when, and after he has given
eyes, and ears, to see, and hear; and touched the heart, and then called, and
they closed their eyes, and ears, and hardened their hearts till God left them,
as is shown in opening the particulars of the truth affirmed, in all which it
appears to tend to the abasing of man by nature, and the glorifying Gods grace:
But yet to clear the business, I shall endeavor to answer some scruples, and
objections, that some think the Scripture occasions to be made against it, 1
Cor. 2.9, 14. Eye has not seen, etc. The natural man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, etc. Neither can he know them.

Ans. This is wholly and verily true, and there is nothing in the affirmation
that does so much as seem to unsay any part or word of these verses, for here
is not expressed those things that God has done for the sons of men, in creating
of them righteous, in giving his Son to dye for them, when fallen, in
promiseing remission of sins to such as repent and believe in his Son, in
calling, and using means: that men might repent, and believe; in stretching out
his hand by his Spirit, working in them, that they might believe, and promising
great happiness to them belie^ing; these are the things to be set before all
men, and God gives them eyes that they might see, and in discovery they do
see, though they will not see, that is, use their sight, Matthew. 13.14, 15. And
it is not the will of God, though the Gospel, and grace of God, and house of
God be shown them; if they be not by that sight, and grace seen, humbled, and
converted; that they should see within the excellencies of the house, and
kingdom of God, Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. the Prophet must first show the house to the
children of Israel that they may be ashamed and repent, etc. and if by that
sight they be ashamed, then show them the excellencies, etc. And so our Savior
says, Except a man be born of water, and the spirit, he cannot enter into (and
so not see) the the kingdom of God in the excellencies thereof, and it is no
where affirmed, that the natural man has given him, while he remains natural,
either discerning, or freedom of will to choose such supernatural and spiritual
things as these; yea the believers discerning of these, is but in a little
measure in respect of what is in them, they being such things as are not yet
fully given to them by way of possession, but prepared and laid up for, and so
to be waited for by those that love, and wait for Jesus, as 1 John 3.1, 2. Tit
2.13. All which agrees with, and confirms what I have affirmed, Joh. 15.4,
5. without me ye can do nothing.

Ans. This is also very true, and there is nothing in what I have affirmed
cross to this; for all that which is given into the mind, or will of a natural
man, to fit him to attend, and yield to those means Christ uses to him for
good, is affirmed to be the work of his own grace; and so this saying is a
caveat to humble them, and that they may not think to help themselves by the
mountain he has made them; but knowing their imbecility use rightly what they
have, to abide still looking to him, and waiting on him, to perfect all that
concerns them, and so receiving, and yielding up still to his instructions, and
motions, that so his word may abide in them, and they in this grace of his;
suitable to that is said, Romans 10 8, 9, 10. with 1 John 3.5. Though they here
spoken to were more than mere natural men to whom yet even this caveat and
instruction was needful; so that this agrees with that I have affirmed, and
instructs and presses to the right use thereof, Romans 9.16. It is not of him
that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy.

Ans. A heavenly truth, and blessed instruction, and nothing in it crossing any
thing in the affirmation I have made, and set down: the people of whom Moses
spoke, and for whom he interceded, God had showed mercy to already, saved them
out of Egypt, and through the sea, and set his promises before them of bringing
them into Canaan; and they had heard his voice, seen his miracles, etc. And God
had done as much for them, as I have affirmed, done to, and in natural men, and
because they continued not believing his word, and setting their hearts to his
wonders shown, as they ought, and might; therefore God gave them not that,
which I have all the way affirmed, peculiar to believers, a heart to perceive,
and eyes to see, and ears to hear the mysteries of God, that in spirituals they
might follow him; and that Moses that affirms the former given them, and from
thence exhorts them, Deuteronomy. 4. and 6. and 7. and 10. Does yet affirm this not
given them of God, as yet, Deuteronomy. 29.4. and that sure not to excuse their sin,
and lay the blame on God, but to aggravate their sin, and rebellion to be very
great, in not seeing and heeding what they saw, etc. Else sure the merciful
God that had done so much for them, and promised so much to them freely, would
have given them such an heart before now, so that it was sin, they had not that
gift, even as it was the sin of those, John 16.8, 9. they had not believed,
though faith be the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. And thus those that had received
much mercy, did so provoke God, that he might justly forbear to show them any
farther mercy, but have consumed them all, but yet he would not, but to whom he
pleased of them to show mercy, and be gracious to them he would, and who they
were and are, he has shown, even them that are humbled by this his reproof,
and so forsake their own thoughts, or purposes, and ways; and by the
discoveries of his goodness turn to him, Jer. 18.1, 7, 8. Psalm. 55.7. And this
to be the meaning of God, and Moses is evident by the whole scope of
Deuteronomy, and this, 29. and the 30. chapter, which else had been in vain and
to no purpose to such a people.

Again note the things of which the Apostle speaks, in making use of that
saying of the Lord in Moses writings; and they appear to be supernatural and
spiritual things, as the new birth, the birth effected by the promise, and so
the appearance, efficacy, and election of grace therein: and so of the
communication, of remission of sins, justification, righteousness, peace, etc.
verse. 8. Such as the discerning of, and freedom of will in choosing is not
affirmed to be in the natural man, much less that these things should be in
him, or of him by any natural power, or by his willing, or running to work out,
or reach to himself, they being things to be received upon the free gift, and
tender in believing.

Yet again, note that he says, these things are of God, it is in his power,
love, mercy, and faithfulness still to give, and work in us to receive; he has
not limited himself, nor set bounds to his will to hinder him from being
gracious when he will, and to whom he will, that from him it may be looked for:
and yet farther note, that he says, that God of whom it is shows mercy, so
that he has not yet excluded such persons as will, and run; but still shows
mercy, gives them (who of themselves are blind and deaf) some sight, and
hearing that they might see, and hear, and so in seeing and hearing be
convinced of the vileness of their sins against so good a God, and the vanity
of their own ways and strifes in willing, and running, and so fall down before
him, accepting the freeness of his grace receiving it to be saved by it; see an
example of a receiver, Phil. 3.3, 7, 8, 9. and of refusers 2 These. 2.10. So
that this place agrees with and directs to the right use of that I have
affirmed to be given by Christ to natural men, and is a like pressing caveat,
instruction and exhortation to that mentioned, John 15.4, 5. John 6.44, 65. No
man can come to me, except the father which has sent me draw him; except it
were given unto him of my father.

Ans. Surely this is altogether true, and a sweet instruction, motive, and
reproof; but here is nothing in it denying, or crossing any thing I have
affirmed; for,

1. That I have affirmed, that it is of Gods working to draw to Christ, as is
seen in all said.

2. God draws many with the cords of a man, and bands of love, that yet do
not come in to him, but draw back, Hos. 11.3, 4, 7. and our Savior said not,
that all that the father draws do come to me; but every one that has heard,
(in which hearing the bands of love do fasten; and learned (that is received
his instructions, and so renounced himself and accepted of Christ, and therein
chosen life) comes to me.

3. This saying of our Savior is used as an admonition to them, because of
their own imbecility that cannot of themselves come to receive his instruction,
and lay hold on the opportunity afforded, receiving the love of the truth
appearing, and the heavenly bread now given them by the Father that sent the
Son, that is now calling on them, that by his grace they may believe on him,
and so come to him, who will give them life, John 6.27, 29, 32, 33. for if he
withdraw, and give them up for contempt, then they cannot believe, or come, as,
John 12.35, 40. with Mat. 13.14, 15. Suffer not the day of visitation to pass
by unminded, take heed of being found the murmurers against him, as, John 6.43.
least that be verified, Matthew. 23.37, 38. Luke 19.42.

4. Lastly, this saying of our Savior is not used to lay the blame of their
not coming upon God, but on themselves, whose fault it was, John 5.34, 40. as
Moses did the like, Deuteronomy. 29.4. and 30.15, 16. And so to reprove them for not
accepting his words, and coming while his Father was drawing, and to show the
faithfulness of his ministration to them, who had forewarned them of this; and
their departure to be of themselves, because they refused to come in the
Fathers drawing, without which he had taught them they could not come, he
minds them, that therefore he had said this unto them, verse. 65. So that this
saying agrees well with, and leads to the right understanding, and use of that
I have affirmed like that, John 15.4, 5. Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in
you both the will and the deed, etc.

Ans. This is nothing against any thing I have affirmed; because in that
affirmed, all that is good, is shown to be the free gift, and work of God by
Christ: But the text is not as it is here aledged; nor so as will bear such a
sense, but thus:

For it is God that works in you both to will and to do of good pleasure (or
as some) both to will, and to accomplish according to his good pleasure, (or as
others) both to will, and to do of good will, all these having one and the same
sense; the will being theirs, though given them of God; and the doing
appertaining to them, though by that strength given them of God, and that grace
discovered, and given, which moves the will to that is good, being another
gift of God, and his work; and that strength enabling them to do being a fruit
of the same grace and Spirit, and so of God, inabling them for to do that is
spiritually good; so as if they yield up to it, they have the favor and
strength of God going along with them to assist, bless, and safeguard them; but
if they neglect and smother the light and motion, turning aside, and rebel
against him, then can they without him do nothing that is good, but resisting
against God they may fear decays, and chastisements; whence those admonitions,
Ephesians. 4.30. 1 These. 5.19. 1 John 3.17.

And upon this ground the Apostle exhorts them to work out their own
Salvation (that which wrought within them, and this) with fear and trembling,
and to do all things (this grace requires) without murmurings, or disputings,
that they might be blameless, etc. So that this all the way opens, confirms,
a^^ leads to the right use of what I have affirmed, like that in John 15.4, 5.
though in this place also, believers, and men spiritu^ are spoken to who have
some portion of the Spirit of grace and so some discerning of, and begun
freedom in their will for, and to that which is spiritually good, and
supernatural; yea, and working in them; and are directed about, and exhorted to
the right use of that, as Col. 2.6. which because natural men want, therefore
it is requisite that the Gospel which discovers that which will work it, if
attended to, be discovered to them; and they exhorted according to that light
and freedom God gives them, to believe, and receive the love of the truth to
save them, that so they may receive that which yet they have not.

And thus have I faithfully and plainly in homely phrases declared our
persuasion in this business: and if in this any that love Jesus Christ, and
seek the glory of God in Christ, and the good of men be otherwise minded: I
hope wherein soever either of us come short of the fullness of truth, our
gracious God will reveal the same to us, only whereto we have already attained
let us walk by the same rule; let us mind the same thing, and not judge or
despise, defame, and slander one another. But with all humbleness of mind,
endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and jointly
seek the glory of our Master Christ Jesus, and the good of those he has dyed
for, and the prosperity of those whom by virtue of his death he has brought in
to believe in him, which is the desire, and shall be the prayer of the meanest
and unworthiest of that number.

Thomas Moore.
Whittlesee, December. 12. Ann. 1651.
FINIS.

