The Great TRUMPET OF THE Lord God Almighty OF HEAVEN and EARTH, Blown, and
sounded out unto those that are ready to perish, that they may return to the
Lord Jesus Christ, (the Light) and be saved.
OH all ye Inhabitants of the Earth! My soul pitties you, because you are
walking in the Land of darkness, and under the shadow of death, and unto you
has the light shined which shows you sin and iniquity; and if you will but own
that light, and as it shows you sin, so deny it, you will come to rereceive the
light of life, and so come to be brought out of the land of darkness which the
Lord will destroy; and the day is now dawned wherein neither their silver, nor
their gold shall Zeph. 1. 18.
be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath; but the whole land
shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy, for he shall make even a speedy
riddance of all them that dwell in the land; for many people in this Nation are
in the land of darkness, which is sin and iniquity, and their destruction will
come upon them in a day and an hour when they are not aware of, and in that day
if they shall cry for help, they will find none.

Awake, awake unto righteousness, for the glory of God is come, and his light
is risen which searches the heart, and tryes the reins, and shows unto man what
his Works are, for every man is to receive a reward according to the deeds done
in the body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil; and them whose
deeds are evil, are them who are deceived, and the wages of sin is death; so
all people consider what you have profited toward salvation; For many there be
who follows them who does not profit them toward redemption, and those can
cry, Lord, Lord, but they are found workers of iniquity, and so doing the will
of another; and the teachers of this people never brings them to know Gods
salvation; but teaches the people to speak against it, and so the people and
themselves remains in their sins, and ignorant of Gods salvation, which he has
prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the glory of thy people Israel; So all to mark and consider the false prophets,
they cry up the letter, and says that is the way unto God, and to bring man
unto Christ; and I say, the letter brings no man unto God, nor to the knowledge
of Christ; for the Scribes and Pharisees they had the letter and Scriptures of
truth, and neither knew God nor Christ; for Christ said, If ye had known me, ye
would not have crucified me; And said, No man comes unto me, except my Father
draws him; [mark] It was the Father that drew unto the Son, and not the letter,
for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life; and many there be that can
read the letter, but does not know the way unto eternal life; and these are
them who profess God and Christ in words, but deny him in works; for all who
denies perfection, or that which is perfect, they deny the Father and the Son;
and them who hates Judgment, they hate Gods Way: And people, do you not see
and know that the Ministers of England (so called) do hate and deny perfection,
or to be perfect? So herein they deny Christ, which is Perfection, and his
Work, which is perfect; Deuteronomy. 32. 4
he is the Rock, his work is perfect, [mark] his work is perfect; for all his
ways are Judgment, a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right: So
herein they do deny the Workmanship of his hand, and so denies the Lord that
bought them; and these are them who declare of God and Christ in words, but
their hearts are far removed from him, following after the love of money, which
is the root of all evil; and this is more followed and sought after by the
Ministers of England, then perfection, [mark] money is more sought after then
perfection, by the deceivers who join house unto house, and land unto land, and
these called the proud, happy; them who calls the proud, happy, their Works
stand against the Lord; yea, and they that work wickedness and Isa. 5. 8*
abomination are set up; but the hand of the Lord is lifted up against them,
and will dash them to pieces like a Potter's Vessel. And if they should say,
What have we spoken so much against the Truth? Ans. Thou have spoken against
the Truth, and in rebellion against the Light; for thou know not the Way
thereof, which Way is pure and holy, where the defiled cannot walk Job 2^*
therein; and from this were the Scriptures of truth given forth, and by the
same holy and perfect life they come to be known and witnessed; and by this
light nd life comes all the false Prophets and Deceivers to be seen and denied,
who rebel against the light, and this is not strange unto many; all which
rebels against that light which shows sin and iniquity, they rebel both against
the Father and the Son; and this is the Message which we have heard of him, and
declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. And
Christ Jesus who is the light of the world, and lights every man that comes
into the world, who says, Ye shall know the false prophets by their fruits;
[mark] it is by their fruits that people should know them, which are fruits of
Wickedness: Now we looking into the World to see what fruits the Ministers
thereof brings forth, which fruits are these, Pride, Covetousness, Drunkenness,
Swearing, Lying, and Envy, these are the fruits of the false prophets, and the
Ministers of England, who keep the people ever learning, but never able to come
unto the knowledge of the truth; for of this sort are they that creep into
houses, and leads captive silly women, laden with sin, led away with diverse
lusts, pride and wantonness, heady, high-minded 2 Timothy ^^
people, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, men of corrupt minds, who
resist the Truth, and speak evil of the Light; but now the time is come that
these men will not endure sound Doctrine, but walk after their own ungodly
lusts, and this is plainly made manifest unto many; for they do not cause so
many to be put into prison for the unsoundness of their Doctrine, for this is
the cause, their Doctrine is sound and wholesome, and the Ministers of England
cannot endure it because it is sound Doctrine; But all people learn Wisdom, and
let your Ministers make good by Scripture their practices, or else take heed of
upholding them, lest you partake of their sins, and so partake of their plagues
also; for it is one thing to talk of the deceivers, and another thing to know
them, and so deny them; for no man can be greater deceived then to live in sin,
for that is the broadest way that man can find upon earth, and mamany there be
that walk therein; but strait is the way that leads unto life, and few there
be that find it; which way is a perfect way. So all people call unto
remembrance what you know or have found, which is pure, holy and perfect, which
is the way unto eternal life; for many there be that finds the Bible, and reads
the letter, and are ignorant of the power of God, and is found without God in
the World; and these are them who will not come unto Christ that they might
have life, neither do they believe the (...). 5. 40.
Work of God, which is perfect, but they run to do their own Work, and in their
own name, and the World receives them; but he that comes in the Name of the
Lord, they hate, revile, and persecute, for they that will live godly in this
world, must suffer persecution, but many that live in pleasures, and following
the Ministers (so called) day by day, and from time to time, and from place to
place, until they were many years old, and always sin and iniquity remaining,
and they are at this day saying, Oh that we knew the truth! So here it appears
that these people are ever learning, that say, Oh that we knew the truth! These
are the deceived people: And this I can really say, That these followed not the
truth, nor the Lamb of God, for as many as followed him, he takes away their
sins, and brings them to sit down with him in heavenly places; but the
deceivers they please the people with crying against sin, and tells them they
must live in it; But now Christ Jesus the light of the World is come, and is
making manifest himself unto them that fear him, to the destroying of sin and
iniquity: And this is the testimony which I am sent to bear witness of unto the
World, that they through his name might believe and be saved, for there is no
other Name under Heaven whereby any man can be saved* but by the Name of Jesus
Christ, which is pure, holy, and perfect, without spot or blemish; and this is
he who is God's righteousness and salvation to the end of the Earth; but many
of this World are ignorant of this pure and perfect Way which leads unto
eternal life. All people consider, do you not hear and know that them who are
called Ministers of England do deny purity, holiness, and perfection in this
life, that man cannot come unto it; Christ says, Come and learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly; And all that come unto Christ, they come unto him that is
perfect, and who is the end of all perfection, God of Heaven and Earth: And
this we hold forth unto all people, the gift of God, and the perfect way and
life; but them that denies perfection, we can say no less, they deny both God
and Christ, and also the blood of the Covenant, and accounts it an unholy
thing, and tramples it under foot; do you not see with your eyes, and hear with
your ears, that perfection is cried against by many in this day? and all that
speak against it, speaks against the truth and Gods righteousness, these are
the deceivers, from them that are ignorant of perfection, they are ignorant of
Gods righteousness, and so they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, are going
about to establish their Romans 2.
own; and these are them who preaches against sin in words, but practices it
in their lives and conversations, and preaches against perfection, for that
which is of faith is perfect, and of God; and that which is not of faith, is
sin: Now if any should say, Who are these that are the deceivers, and they that
know not Gods righteousness? Ans. I have found many in this Nation who are
ignorant of perfection; for all who live in sin and ungodliness, are out of the
Way of God, and are in the broad way which leads unto destruction. I have more
to say against the blind guides of the world, who tells people Scripture is
their rule, and finds them acting contraray unto Christ and the Scriptures, who
said, Try all things, hold fast that which is good, which is the gift of God by
which man is saved, as says the Scriptures; For by grace are ye saved, through
faith, and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of God; but the
Ministers Ephesians. 2.
of England do counsel the people not to hear them who are called Quakers, and
so would not have them to try all things for fear they should see their
ignorance and errors, and deny them, and no longer uphold them in their
ungodlypractices, which is covetousness, and persecution, and many evil
practices more then is here mentioned; but if there be any who love the truth,
they will love that which proceeds from the truth, which is the holy
Scriptures, and will search them, to see if the Ministers of England live the
same life as they did who gave forth the Scriptures, who were holy men of God,
and their Faith gave them victory over the World, and that Gospel which they
preached, was the Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God unto salvation to
every one Romans 2.
that believes, to the Jews first, and also to the Greeks; And now people
consider, you have long gone to hear the Ministers of England, and has
believed that Gospel which they have preached, but you always remain in your
sins, and ignorant of the power of God, and so it is manifest that they preach
another Gospel, and so you should not uphold them in it, neither in their pride
and covetousness, and ungodly conversation which they live in.

And now people, have not your eyes seen this, That as long as we followed
them, to hear them tell their imaginations and their dreams, and put into their
mouths, they spoke peace unto us, as they do unto you in this day? But do not
you hear, that when we cannot put into their mouths, and uphold them and their
Wives in pride and covetousness, then they prepare war against us, and causes
some to be put into prison, and others to stocks, and others they cause their
means to be taken from them violently, to uphold them and their Wives in pride,
and that which is taken violently, is the Wages of unrighteousness? Oh people!
this is an abominable thing, and deserves to be declared against; for the
people of God in all ages delared against the Wages of unrighteousness, which
is to take men's means, and they having nothing for it, as these do who are
called Ministers of England; and yet further they go in their wickedness,
besides taking their means, they often cast them into prison, and takes their
means from them who learns not of them, neither do they buy any thing of them;
and herein it is plainly manifest, that the Ministers of England exceed all
other Trades for falsehood and dissimulation, for they force men to buy of them,
or else they cause their means to be taken from them by force, of those people
who deny either to learn of them, or to buy any of their stuff. And
furthermore, they cause men's means to be taken from them to uphold their Idols
Temple, (which they call their Church) of those men who denies their Worship,
and when that man comes and declares against their Worship, they will draw him
out, and put him into prison; and this is abominable, to cause a man to pay
toward the repairing of a House, and when he comes there, they will pull him
out, and put him into prison; but the day of the Lord is springing, that people
will not buy their stuff so willingly as they have done in times past; and now
they are inventing and devising a way, which is a Law to enforce people to buy
of their stuff, and to compel them to their Worship, the same it is now as it
was with Nebuchadnezar, who caused the people to worship the Image. So all
people consider whom you worship, and what you have bought of the Ministers of
England, and what it is they have sold unto you; for if it be truth, then they
do act contrary to the Scriptures, which says, Prove. 23.
Buy the Truth, and sell it not; [mark] sell it not; for whoever sells the
truth, (God's Word) is one with Judas, for he sold the Truth, and the life, and
the Word of God; and if any should say he sells not Romans 23.
the Truth, then does he sell lies, (for what is of faith, is of God, and what
is not of faith, is sin) and a divination of their own brains, and the
imaginations of their own hearts; and these men speaks peace where the Lord
speaks not peace unto them, and will say, Is not the Lord amongst us? And all
this is but to have the people to uphold them and their Wives in covertousness
and pride; and these are them that deceives the people, who joins house to
house, and lays field to field, as the deceivers in all ages did, Isa. 5. 8.
Now if it were so, that the Lord were well-pleased with their doings, and were
amongst them, and they received him to whom all power is given, Why then have
they not power over sin? for that which destroys sin is much wanting amongst
the Priests and people of England, for they can cry out against sin in words,
as the false prophets did, but in life, practice, and conversation, they live
in sin and unrighteousness; now we can truly say that these Priests and people
have not the truth, though they have the true Words; for the Scripture says,
As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even
to them that believe in his Name, John 1. 12. If they had but come so far as to
believe in his Name, he would have given them power over sin and uncleanness,
but they wanting power, they want the truth, and remains in their sins, and so
are found false Witnesses, 1 Cor. 15. 15. and ever lives in ungodliness, and
the pleasure of the World, and wantonly upon earth, and so man comes to commit
sin and iniquity, and so becomes ignorant of God; for whosoever sins, has
not seen him, neither known him, John 3. 6.

Now all people to the truth, the light of the Lord Jesus Christ which shows
sin and iniquity, all take heed, and hearken to it, and it will show you
whether you have profited more unto salvation then the deceivers, and the
deceived people did, for they could say Lord, Lord, but did not the will of
God, but did their own wills, and took pleasure therein, which Works are these,
Pride, Covetousness, High-mindedness, Envy, Drunkenness, and Whoredom, Lying,
Stealing, and Swearing; and them that follow or live in those practices, are
deceived; and when we come and declare against these evil practices, then those
that live in these evil practices do rage, and cannot abide sound Doctrine, and
so they will go about to plead for sin and wickedness with all their strength
and might, and strive to uphold it; these are not in the truth, but out of it;
Whosoever abides in him who is the Truth, sins not, John. 3. 6. And because
we say, that all people upon earth should come to that which is pure, perfect,
and holy, and this is the gift of God, Christ Jesus, who says, Come learn of
me, I am meek and lowly in heart, and thou shall find rest unto thy soul; and
all that comes to learn of Christ Jesus, will deny such as goes for gifts and
rewards, or set-maintenance, and this causes the false Prophet and Priest to
rage that they can no longer be upholden after men come to learn of Christ; for
he teaches purity and holiness, and so brings man to God, and so man comes to
see the end of all perfection: But thy Commandments are exceeding broad, O
Lord, thy Testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep them, Psalm.
119. 96.

And further, this was I moved to make known unto the World, That in that time
the Lord God Almighty did visit me with weakness, insomuch that I did lie for
dead, the Lord God Almighty made known unto me that the day of destruction
draws nigh, and will shortly come to pass, that all the Wicked (both Priests
and People) God will utterly destroy, and burn them up both root and branch;
for the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and the proud, and all that does
wickedly shall be as stubble; and then what will the wicked and ungodly Priests
and people do in the day of Visitation, and in the day of Desolation, which
will shortly come? Then to whom will ye fly for help? and where will you leave
your glory? So this have I made known to the World, that some of them may fear
and dread the Name of the Lord God Almighty, against whom they have sinned, and
whose Name they have greatly dishonored, and turn unto him with speed, and
forsake their sins, and the evil of their Ways, that they may find mercy to
help in the time of need, and be saved.

John Moon.

FINIS.

