A MOTIVE TO HAVE SALT Always in Our SELVES, AND PEACE One with another.

Whereunto is annexed

Some Considerations on Rev. 22. v. 14. To do his Commandments.

LONDON: Printed by H. Brugis for L. Southwood at the Star next to Sergeants
Inn; in Chancery Lane, 1671.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, this Discourse being writ near five years since, to some
Friends at London, in the time of the great and spreading Pestilence* has by
some been thought to be in all Times Needful and Useful. And so I was inclined
to Copy it out again, desiring what is by the Testimony said, may be received
and no more* if any may receive edifying by it, I have my desire; and so
praying that we all may be rightly framed and edified in the Faith and
preserved in suitable walking; I commit my writing to the Lords dispose and
rest,

Thy Welwiller Thomas Moore.

A Motive always to have Salt in our selves.
CHAP. I.
The Preface.
Mark. 9. 49, 50. For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice
shall be salted with salt.

Salt is good, but if the salt have lost its saltness, wherewith shall it be
seasoned, have salt in your selves, and peace with one another.


SUch and so great the infinite grace and Free Love of God in Christ, to
manward: in the cost he has been at for us, in such xcellencies and fullness of
Grace, Truth, Spirit and life, he has received in the man, and is empowered as
mediator to bestow on us: And such his faithfulness in his mediation for and
mercies extended to us; And such the glory he will after give to those that
receive him in his gracious teachings, that it justly requires, and if
beleivingly minded, forcibly moves, to love him with all the heart, and above
all things, so as to love his ways and love to be like him, and to love as he
loves, and that he loves etc. 1 John 4. 9, 10, 11, 19. Psalm. 116. 1, 2, 7, 8,
12. So as what ever any man knows or professes of Christ, yet if the love of
Christ known, gain not the heart to love Christ, even to love Christ above all
things: And so to love whom he loves, and as he loves, he knows nothing as
he ought to know, nor is approved of God, not meet to be Christ's Disciple. 1
Cor. 8. 1, 2. 3. Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26. And this love issuing from his love
believed, abiden and walked in, does show forth it self, in denying a man's
self, in his own humane wisdom, righteousness, strength, confidence and
designs, for Christ's sake, and that in him discovered, yea in every thing, that
will not stand with this love of Christ and the Services of it, as is seen in
the places last cited and Mat. 10. 38. Mar. 8. 34. Luke 14. 26. 27. Ier. 9. 23.
24. Phil. 3. 7. 8. 9. Ioh. 12. 25. 26. So he that from the knowledge and belief
of this love of Jesus Christ, heartily does love him, as is said, would rather
submit himself to bear any shame or affliction, and to lose any Honor,
Reputation, Gain, Relation or life, then for the getting and retaining them to
offend Jesus Christ in deviating from the Faith, love and services of Christ,
in and according to the Gospel* or occasion others so to do, and so to take
offense at Christ, and his Word, way and Cross, so as to deviate or give
occasion to others so to do; knowing also from our Saviors one affirmation,
Whatever any man seeks to save, or saves that way, he certainly loses more
abundantly* and incurrs unspeakeable loss, verse. 42. Matt. 18. 6, and 11, 6,
and 16, 25, 26. Mar. 8. 35, 36. Our Savior therefore as he exhorted them to
continue his love, and how to continue in his love, he also showed them even by
keeping his commands, in believing on his name, and loveing one another as he
has loved us and that such love him, Joh. 14. 21, 23 and 15, 9, 10. 1 John 2.
24, 25. and 3, 23, 24. So in this chapter, he councils, directs and charge
them to avoid such things, as if closed with, will certainly deviate them from
this love of Christ, and so from loveing him: And so he says, in verse

43. And if thy right hand offend thee (thy best humane wisdom and furniture,
or that which is dearest to thee, and appears as most necessary and gainful,
and occasions thee to offend, or moves thee for the getting or retaining
thereof, to a slighting of, or deviating from Christ in his mind, and ways
discovered in the Gospel* or to cause or occasion others so to do) cut it off,
(or cast it from thee, reject and put by all such thoughts, motions, and
council arising therefrom, and suffer what ever deprivation or loss may come to
thee thereby, etc.)

45. And if thy foot offend thee (thy power and strength, affections and
demeanor for persuing such and such a design) cut it off (cast aside the use of
such power, and satisfying such affection and the use of such demeanor, for
persuing such a design, what ever loss or suffering comes to thee thereby.)
verse. 47.

47. And if thine Eye offend thee (any beholding or looking on any thing below
for any goodliness, beauty, gainfulness, etc. that appears in it) pluck it
out (reject such views, and suffer not thy eye to gaze on it) and the same
council and charge given on the same ground, M^^. 18. 8. 9. namely with this
advise. It is better for thee to enter into life* halt and maimed, and so with
one hand, or one foot, or one eye, then having too to be cast, etc. That is,
its better with suffering any loss or damage in things below, and with enduring
any shame, suffering* or death to enter into life, and into the Kingdom of
God, then with having enjoyed all desierable here, to be after cast into hell
into fire unquenchable* where the worm dies not, and the fire never goes out:
the same also here, verse. 43. to 48. implying that what belief soever men
profess, yet unless they do cut off, the hand, the foot, the eye in that
wherein they cause to offend, by denying themselves in that whatever it be,
Honor, Lands, Riches, Relations, Life, etc. when the getting, retaining o^
saving thereof, leads and canseth to offend etc. (as aforesaid) if he do not
then reject it, lay it aside and submit to suffer the loss thereof, it will
turn him aside from the Faith, And so he will be cast into unquenchable fire.
And as our Savior has in all this, intimated, Trouble recoverable, fire,
quenchable, and expressed a loss irrecoverable and fire unquenchable; so least
any should deceive themselves, in conceiting and hoping by their wisdom to
avoid both that fire here, and that hereafter also, and so slight ^his council
and charge of our Savior: Ou^ Savior here shows the vanity of such thoughts
and hope, and presses to receive his council and charge, and this by a
threefold affirmation, and an exhortation joined: the two first affirmations
plain and absolute, and the third conditional: And from all the exhortations or
commands: the affirmations are three.

1. For every one (that is, every man one and other) shall be salted with fire*
2. And every Sacrifice shall be salted with salt. 3. Salt is good (that is, if
it retain its saltness) but if the salt have lost its saltness wherewith shall
it be seasoned.
And from these three affirmations, and all foresaid, he gives this two^old
exhortation and command, namely,

1. Have salt in your selves, look to this at all times, in all things with
whomsoever you deal, have salt in your selves.

2. And have peace one with another, or then, and so you shall, or else you
cann^^ have peace one with another*

CHAP. II.
The first affirmation.
1. For every one shall be salted with Fire, This affirmative is general and
absolutely affirmed of all, there is no escape for any, every one shall be
salted with fire: and rightly to understand this, the testimony of Christ will
help us. For as Jesus Christ susterd and dyed and rose again, and gave himself
a sacrifice to God for us, and so in himself as the public man, compleately
wrought Redemption for all mankind from perishing in the first death: and yet
did not this to such an end, as wholly to free and exempt mankind, or any of
them, from partaking at all of sufferings and death, but to take out the sting
and poison out of both, and make them beareable, and san^ti^y them for to be
corrections, and a passage to immortallity, and so to redeem and bring them out
of both, the sufferings and Foret^^ners of this death, and to raise them out of
this death it self, so its appointed to men once to dye, Heb. 9. 27. And man is
born to trouble as the sparks that fly upward, and this from the ordering hand
of God also, Job 5. 5, 6, 7. and 14. 1. 2. And trouble and afflictions are often
expressed by fire, Psalm. 66. 11. 12. and 78. 63. Hos. 4. 11.

2. Even so also Jesus Christ in making known and dispensing of the grace and
virtue of this Redemption and Salvation, wrought by and in himself for men, and
in his means used to bring men to confess him Lord to the glory of God, he does
also salt them with fire, he assayes it here in the means he uses,

1. By spiritual convincements and reproofs of their guiltiness, and the
vileness of their personal sins* the folly of their wisdom, the vanity of their
own wrought righteousness, and of their own desires designs and hopes, etc. 1
Ioh. 7. 7. and 16. 8. 9. 10. Ephesians. 5. 12. 3. And the spirit in the word in such
convincements is as fire, Psalm. 39. 3. Jer. 20. 9. And with this

2. Movings, To strip deprive men of that which was precious to them, as
Applause, Honor, Riches, Ease, Wo^ldly friendship, and that in near relations,
yea the natural life, so as they must adventure, yea part with, and undergo
the loss of All, any or every of them, when and so far, as they do not stand
and suite with the approbation and good pleasure of God, and their abiding and
walking in the faith of Christ, and love of him, and the service^ thereof,
Matt. 10. 37. 38, 39. and 19. 27, 29. And in both are such pu^gations, as in
which the flesh feels smart and pain, or punishment, and the outward man
suffers shame and damage, Heb. 12. 11. 2 Cor. 4. 10. 16. And such sufferings
likewise are as fire, Psalm. 66. 11. 12. And thus also shall every one be salted
with fire, a fire that certainly burns.

And so those that here receive his convincements, and turn at his reproof, and
yield up to accept and endure this fire, with the efficacies of it, though it
may heat and something pain the flesh, yet it will burn up nothing, but what
would harm and destroy them, nor deprive them of any thing, but what would then
be prejudicial to retain; those that refuse to receive his convincements, and
to turn at his reproofs: and so will not accept to endure this fire with the
effica^ies of it, it shall certainly seize on them after they have persisted in
refusal till the day of Grace be over, in another day, and burn both on soul
and body, so as it can neither be resisted nor quenched: and our Savior having
so often spoken of a fire unquenchable, and that cannot be quenched, and here
affirming that every one shall be salted with fire, gives us to understand,
that there is a fire that is quenchable with which it is good to be salted, and
there will be a fire unquenchable, with which those that refuse to be salted
with the formet in this day of grace, shall certainly be salted with the
latter, after that day of grace is past: And so as the wrath and judgment of
the Lord in and according to that w^ath, is often called fire; Even so,

1. There was a fire that is quenched, wrath that is appeased, a judgment that
is execu^ed, a curse suffered and overcome. And that was the wrath and
displeasure of God against mankind, as having sinned in the first public man,
and being necessitated to sinning thereby, destitute of any remedy, and so to
have perished for ever in this first death, this wrath appeased, this fire
quenched by Jesus Christ the second public man Romans 3. 23. 24. and 5. 12, 18.
Gall. 3 13. Ezeck. 11. 2. 3. 4. its the deceit of sin and Satan and his
ministers, that fright the Conscience with this.

2. There is a fire that is quenchable, wrath that is appeasable, judgments,
and punishments that are healable and curable, and so but for a moment or short
time. And this is the wrath and displeasure of God, against, and judgments and
punishments inflicted on men for their willing and personal sinning against
light and knowledge with grace extended in the means vouchsafed through Christ,
in not turning at his reproof, but refusing his counsel, hardening their hearts
against that which leads to repentance, and so refusing for his sake, to deny
sinful lusts, that they may walk in the teachings of his grace: and such yet
abide under wrath, though many insensible of it, Pro. 1. 23, 24, 30, 34 35. and
8, 36. Ioh. 3. 19, 20, 36. Romans 8. 13. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. And
this the sin of the world which Christ is yet taking away, so as he mediateth
for them, so as to procure patience, forbearance, and means still to them, Ioh.
1. 9, 10 29. Luke 13, 8. 9. and 23, 34. He being the propitiation for their
sins, 1 John 2. 2. and their Savior. And it by this means in this day of
Grace, they do repent* and come into him, they shall be forgiven and healed,
And so will his wrath be appeased, and fire quenched, Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7. But,

3. There is a wrath to come that never can be appeased, a fire that never can
be quenched, that is an everlasting fire, And this is that wrath of God, and
that judgment, and those torments to be executed on such, as in all his means
used through the day of grace rebelled against him, refusing his salting in his
convincements and corrections* and willingly walked after the lusts of the
slesh, which wrath and fire is everlasting, and without ceasing, tormenting for
ever and ever, And so cannot be quenched. Heb. 9. 27. Revel. 20. 15. and 21, 8.
And so first or last every one shall be salted with fire, as to say,

1. The spirit in the word and discovery of the grace in Christ convinceing and
reproving of sin, of want of righteousness, and of evil designs in a man and
his ways (as has been shown) is a fire to burn up that filth, and heats to
the acknowledgement of Christ the Lord, Ioh. 16. 8. 9, 10. which is now
received and yielded to, so as it may have its perfect work, would burn up
that, and nothing but that, which would destroy the man, and heat with desires
and fitness to receive the teachings of the spirit, Pro. 1. 23, and 6. 23. But
if refused and rejected, till the day of Grace be past, the same spirits,
convincements now rejected, shall after seize on them so as they cannot avoid
it, but it will kindle a fire that shall everlastingly burn on soul and body
for ever, and cannot be quenched, Isa. 45. 23. Phill. 2. 9. 10. 11. Isa. 30.
33. 2 These. 1. 7. 8. 9.

2. Corrections and punishments added where convincements and reproofs are not
readily received, to set them home to the heart, and take down man's pride, and
break him off his enterprise, and bow him to hearken, and to submit to, indu^e
such shame, loss and pain in the flesh, as is to be endured, in receiving such
convincements, Job. 33. 14. 24. 29, 36. Prove. 6. 23. Yea for Christ's sake, to
forsake all a man has to be his Disciple, Luke 14. 33. In which they will be
received and blessed, and enriched with better life, etc. by Christ. But if a
man refuse his convincements and corrections and prize not the Grace of Christ,
so as to bear that laid on them, and undergo the loss of natural life, and all
the comforts of it, as required by Christ and for his sake, but then and in
such cases seek to save his life, etc. he shall certainly lose it, and undergo
that loss and pain here if ever brought to repentance, or else, hereafter to
his eternal woe, lose all favor with God and Christ, and Saints, and all
enjoyment of the inheritance and eternal life: and yet confess Christ the Lord,
and then endure the torments of everlasting fire. And this often affirmed Matt.
10. 31. 35. and 16. 25. 26. Mar. 8. 35. 38, and 9.

So that this is a most certain truth, that to bring men to acknowledge Jesus
Christ to be the Lord to the glory of God, and every one shall be brought to
it, and that in bringing to confess it rightly here, there must be a self
denial and sorrow with shame and grief for sin, and loss of some things
desirable to the natural life, in Honor, Ease, Riches, Friendship, and
relations below, and it may be in some cases natural life it self, which if for
Christ's sake not accepted, but refused, and not undergone, they shall lose and
undergo all, and lose a far better use, Riches, Friend and Relations, and yet
be brought to this confession to their shame, and then suffer eternal torments.

Use. 1. For every one shall be salted with Fire, which shows both the truth
of our Saviors, saying, Its better to endure the pain of this salting here,
(what ever losses be in it) then hereafter, verse. 43. 45. 47. And the necessity
of taking and obeying our Saviors counsel given, seeing there is no escape but
this salting with fire must be endured now or hereafter: And this also shows,

2. The vanity and deceivedness of those that think to follow Christ, and yet
when his name or service requires this self-denial, suffering and loss, seek to
save themselves in these things and yet think to be saved by him also, and so
to serve God and Mammon, and enjoy their desires in these things here, and life
with Christ hereafter and this also, shows,

3. To warm and admonish us when a price is put in our hand to get wisdom, not
to think it too costly, what ever is to be parted with for it, or undergone to
enjoy it, whatever reproofs* to be received, or whatever self denyals, and
shame or sufferings to be undergone, part not with the p^ize that is in truth
for it! Oh let not lying Vanities, withdraw us from receiving our own Mercies*
but let us turn at his reproofs, forsake the Foolish, abase and Judge our
selves in this World and so believe in his Mercy, that we may not be condemned
with the World, but receive this Salting with Fire here, that we may not be
Salted with Fire hereafter.

And this is the first Affirmation given by our Savior here in this Case, to
move us whatever it be that causes us to offend, how dear to us soever, to cut
it off and suffer the loss of it now in this Life, for every one shall be
Salted with Fire, the next is.

CHAP. III
The Second Affirmation.
ANd every Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt, he speaks here in the Plural
Number, every Sacrifice: And so as Christ himself in his own body was abased
and made despicable, and despised and suffered much, and so was Crucified, and
died for our sins, and overcame death and rose again righteous in that very
body: And then through the eternal Spirit offered himself in that body a
spotless Sacrifice to God, and so made Peace, and completed Righteousness, and
obtained eternal Redemption and an Inheritance; And the Sacrifice, that one
Sacrifice, offered by him once for all, and by which he is able to perfect all
comers to God by him, Heb. 10. 1. 14. and 9. 12. 14. 25. 28. and 7. 25. And so
offers and presents them in himself before God blamless, Col. 1. 22. And makes
them, enabling them, to offer Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by him,
Heb. 8. 5. 1. Pet. 2. 4. 5. and every Sacrifice here meant is of these many
Sacrifices, and so they are, and it verily is both.

1. Every unfeighned Beleiver, that in belief of this Sacrifice of Christ is
thereby brought unto him, and so into Covenant to be the Lords, to have their
Life in him and live to him.

2. And every Spiritual Sacrifice by such Beleivers offered to God by Christ,
or in the name of Christ.

1. And every unfeighned Believer, that in belief of the Sacrifice once offered
by Christ, is thereby brought into him, and so into Covenant to be the Lords,
to have their life in him, and live to him: In which respect they are said to
have made a Covenant with God by Sacrifice, Psalm. 50. 5. And so to be the
Lords, and have given themselves to the Lord according to his will to be his,
Psalm. 116. 8, 9, 16. Romans 14. 7, 29. 1. Cor. 6. 19. 20. 2. Cor. 5. And these
are called his Offerings by virtue of his own Sacrifice, the fatness whereof is
manifested therein, Psalm* 20. 3, 4, 5. And as this was tipyfied in the High
Priest presenting before the Lord, and offering the Levites for an Offering to
the Lord, Numb. 8. 13. 14. So in this sense Christ is said in the body of this
Flesh through death, to present Believers, holy, unblameable, and unreprovable,
in his sight, Coll. 1. 22, 23. Though they b^ brought to him by his Servants
ministration* Romans 15. 16. 2. Cor. 11. 2. So every of these Believers, he thus
offers and presents to God in himself, shall be salted with Salt, with that
which has a fiery and ^^rging nature, to consume filth, and to make savory that
which is presented. And every Sacrifice, every Believer without exception of
any, shall be salted with Salt: And this,

1. Not only in their first being brought into belief by reproofs and
corrections* brought to* turn at his reproof, and denying themselves, and
letting all go for his name sake and therein* exercising Sorrow, Repentance,
and Self denial, etc. But,

2. Also when Believers in their abiding and walking in the Faith and Services
of Love, and in reci^e o^ more grace and savor from him: Forasmuch as they are
not yet wholly Spiritual, but partly Carnal having no good thing dwelling in
their Flesh but the Lusts of the Flesh, warring against the Spirit, Romans 7. 14
24. Gal. 5. 17. So as there is still need of reproof, and turning at them, and
o^ corrections and receiving the same, that Flesh may be still purged, that
they may still abide and go on in the Services of Faith and Love for there is
no one of them in mo^tal Bodies, that is without sin* or that does good and
sineth not. 2. Ch^on. 6. 36. Prove. 20. 9. Eccles. 7. 20. Job. 15. 14. 1. Joh.
1. 8, 10. And so Jesus Christ in his meditation by ve^^ue of his Blood and
Sacrifice* is still about that work, ( not only interceding for Trangessours
and taking away the sins of the World* Isaiah 53. 12. Joh. 1. 29. but) even for
Believers that are coming to God by him, Rom* 8. 34. 1. Ioh. 1. 2. Heb. 7. 25.
and 9. 15. And so by the freeness and greatness of his Love* commended in his
Blood* and by his Word and Spirit, therein teaching* washing and cleansing
them* etc. Ephesians. 5. 26. Both in their walking in the light as he is in the
light, cleansing them from all sin: And wherein overtaken with a fault, as they
confess and seek so forgiving and healing them, 1 John 1. 7, 9. And so as i^ is
his Office and work in which he is faithful* to sanctify them throughout, etc.
1. These. 5. 23, 24. And so as there is corruption of sin in their Flesh, and in
their Walkings, to pu^ge out the remaining filth, and make savoury his grations
teachings to them, that they may more readil^ receive them: Even so there is
dispensed Salt to them: And this.

1. From the Testimony of Christ, in that set before them of the excellencies
in him, teaching to receive of that life in him, are certain reproofs of some
things in us and our ways, to be still repented of, denied and turned from.
And the reproofs of Instruction are the ways of life, or of receiving*
enjoying and retaining that life in Christ, Prove. 6. 23. And he is wise that
learneth in his teachings, and loves and receives his reproofs: and he that
does not so is brutish, what ever he boast to know and believe, Prove. 9. 8. and
20. 3. and 12. 1. and 13. 1. And so Job that was such an upright and perfect
man, Job. 1. 1. 8. and 2. 10. Yet discerning the power and excellencies of the
Almighty, was mightily abased, and sitted to lay down himself and seek
knowledge of, and pray to God, Job 40. 3, 4. 5* and 42. 2. 5. Yea Isaiah the
Prophet in beholding a glymphs of the glory of the Lord, cried ^ut of his
uncleanness, and was sitted to hear and ^eild to what ever God would send him
about, Isa. 6. 1, 8. So he dispenses Salt in his word: And ^et.

2. To boar the Ear, and bow the mind, to drink in these reproofs, and yield
more readily to his teachings, he also even to Believers uses his Rod of
afflictions and punishments, to take down their Pride and break them of their
own enterprise, to reduce them, etc. Job. 33. 14, 15. 24. 29, 30. Psalm. 94. 12.
and 119. 66. 67. And so corrects every Son that he receives, etc. Prove. 3.
11, 12. Heb. 12. 6, 7. Revel. 3. 19. And by these afflictions to prize home his
reproofs, for purging out their follies* Isa. 27. 7. To humble and make them
poor and low in themselves, that they may not look to or rest on, or glory in,
or of any seen or sencible things, or any of their Wisdom Parts* Gifts, or
Seize but in his strength and salvation only* Psalm. 20. 5* 9. Jer. 9. 22,
23, 24. 2 Cor. 12. 7, 10. To vehement them more to pray to him, Hos. 5. 16. And
make them more ready to keep his Testimonies, Psalm. 119. 66. 67. and 9^. 12.

3. And so both by these reproofs and afflictions, to salt and season them, in
their believing and confidence, that they may receive no instruction that
causes to err from the words of knowledge, no^ believe every word, or
appearance of truth nor any thing for truth, but his word his Testimony only,
and so the truth manifested therein to rest on: that so they may not be rash in
their confidence, to rest in any thing besides or short of this truth, nor mix
any thing in their confidence, besides, or with his Word, or his Power, Mercy
or Truth manifested therein to rest on, nor presume to confide in him for
assistance, and helpfulness in walking out of his way: And this salting for
this end is also needful for ( who through the Flesh in us and Satan* and evil
Ministers assailing us* are too ready to miscarry herein,) that so our
believing and confidence may be upright, Prove. 14. 7, 15, 16. and 19. 27. Ye
that in our confidence we may be taken off from resting on, or attributing any
thing of our helpfulness to any seen, or humane things, any Parts, Gifts or
Seize received: But as Christ by death, overcame death, being raised by
the power of God so we in all straights, and for all help may give all glory to
God* trusting in him that raises the dead, 2 Cor. 12. 7* 10. and 1. 9* 10.
which if not so salted we would not do: And as.

4. An addition (to the forementioned reproofs and afflictions) even sufferings
of shame and reproach and tribulations, etc. For the name of Christ for his
sake, that we may be conformed to Christ in the fellowship of his sufferings
and death: and so through many Afflictions and Tribulations enter his Kingdom,
as he through sufferings entered his glory, and the power of the life of Christ
in the Testimony, may be manifested in our mortal and dying Flesh* Act 14. 22.
Luke 24. 26. 2 Timothy 3. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 10, 11, 16.

And so when by the Testimony of Christ, men are called and brought in* to
believe him, then as God in Christ* and so Christ, by his Spirit, chooses and
refineth such believers* seperating them from the Union and Fellowship of the
World and b^inging them into further Union and Fellowship with himself, to
receive more abundance of his Grace to b^ing them to glory: By the
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth, framing them to be
obedient to the blood of sprinkling, 2 These. 2. 13, 14. 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. So also
press home and to make effectual and prevelent this choosing work, he salteth
them with these reproofs and afflictions and ^^ery trials, and so chooses
through the Furnace of afflictions, Isa. 48. 10, 11. Gal. 6. 14. Psalm. 94. 12.
And so as often, and as much as need is, every Sacrifice, even every Believer
shall be salted with Salt: all which serves to p^ess Believers, to and recieve
this salting what ever of the flesh it fret and consume, and what ever seen, or
temporary again, we lose thereby or trouble undergo: Yea, so in ind^^ing and
feeling the smart, it causes that we may tremble in our selves, that we may
say that it is better, now and after, and find rest in the day of trouble, Heb.
3. 16* 17, 18. which receiving ou^ Saviors Council here foregiven* Suits well
with that admonition given* Luke 14. 25, 35. And as in the sense said every
Believer shall be salted with Salt so likewise in the other sense.

2. every spiritual Sacrifi^e that Believers offer to God by Christ or in his
name, shall in their offerings be salted with Salt; For ^ight understanding
this the Testimony must be our guide and attend to it, it will help us ^ightly
to understand, for in belief of the Testimony we are taught by it, that:

1. The Sacrifices here spoken of are spiritual Sacrifices though ou^wa^d, and
able and visible things be used in offering many of them, yet the Sacrifices be
spiritual Sacrifices such as are offered spiritually, and by (not bodily but)
spiritual Priests in which is neither Male nor Female, (as in Church offices
and Officers here:) but all one in Christ Jesus; And though Church chosen
Officers may be also spiritual Priests and may also so offer, yet these
Sacrifices are spiritual Sacrifices and are offered by such ^s are, and as they
are spiritual Priests, 1 Pet. 2. 4. 5* 9. Gall. 3. 27. 28. Coll. 3. 10* 11.

2. These Sacrifices are Sacrifices of Righteousness, that are to be offered to
God: And so P^al. 4. 5. Produced by the righteous Sacrifice that is the
Sacrifice of complete righteousness, Jesus Christ in his own body offered to
God: this bele^ved is the Producer, Psalm. 50. 5, 14. And so it is offered to
God by and through Christ, in the belief of his Name* who also pe^fumes and
makes them acceptable, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 13. 15. and 7. ^5. Revel. 8. 3, 4 (And
Soul so) offered to God with righteousness* and righteously in r^^dri^g to him
the glory and praise due unto his Name, Psalm. 29. 1* 2. and 15. 14, 23. 1 The^
5. 18. And affording to men and b^e^h^en that which is due to them, Isa. 26. 8.
and 16. 8. Mar. 11 24, 25: So.

3. That these spiritual Sacrifices that are acceptable to God through Christ,
first they are many, and so expressed also Psalm. 5^. 17*

1. A broken Spirit, and contrite heart, a heart from the sight and belief of
the mind* love and holiness of God, demonstrated in and through Christ, broken
of its own wisdom, well thoughts, confidences and designs, ab^sed and made
loathsome in and to it self, filled with grief and sorrow, for its contraryness
to God* and sinning against so great, holy and gtatious a God, with indignation
against ones self for such offenses, even trembling at his Word* and falling
low before them by it, to be at his dispose, and bear his chastisements,
longing for his mercy, Psalm. 51. 17. Isa. 57. 17. and 66. 2. Yea all Sacrifices
are to be with such a heart, which is a Sacrifice also.

2. Hearty Pyayers to God, for the good things he has promised, with
Thanksgiving for his mercies, benefits and good things received* that he has
extended to us, and those also promised, Psalm. 62. 8. and 65. 2, 4. and 50. 14*
15, 23. 1 These. 5. 17. 18.

3. To do good* that which is righteous and may be profitable and edifying to
men, and make for truth and peace: And with this, to communicate of what God
makes us st^ongly of, and furnishes us with, in showing mercy and relieving
the poor and needy, specially them of the Household of Faith* Heb. 13. 16. Gall.
6. 10. Phill. 4. 8. 2 Cor 9. 9, 15.

4. In and with all the former, to hold forth the word of life in word and
conversation among a wicked generation* and for edifying brethren, with desire
in all things to glorify God, and approve our hearts to him* and be found
honest and decent toward men, Phil. 2. 15, 16, 17. 1 Pet. 2, 9, 12. Ephesians. 4.
29, 32. Heb. 13. 16, 18. Romans 15. 16.

5. To aim at, endeavor and strive in all this, also to convince the
unbeleevers, that we may gain them in to believe, and so to glorify (not us
but) God, that so we may present them singly to Christ, that he may present
them to God, Acts 14. 15. 2 Cor. 4* 5. and 11. 2. Romans 15. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9,
12. Number. 5. 20.

6. In and for doing all this, by the mercies of God, to present ou^ bodies a
living Sacrifice holy (as the Lords) and acceptable (through Christ) to be the
Lords to be disposed, ordered and so offered by him, to do, undergo and forgo,
what ever h^s Mercy and Grace requires. and leads to in services of him*
which is but our reasonable service, facilating that more spiritual, Romans 12.
1, 2, 3.

These and such like are the Sacrifices, for Believers to offer to God by
Christ, and of these it is said every Sacrifice, even every of these, and every
particular offering, and every of these shall be salted with Salt. This
affirmed by our Savior: and it is needful and profitable for Believers, who
have sin yet remaining in their flesh, with its thoughts and lusts, and the
World with its Documents, Customs, Allurements* and Terrors, and the Devil
with his wises and suggestions: all ass^i^^ing them to divert and corrupt them,
and turn them out of the way yea so as if they cannot hinder them from it, yet
they will defile them so as as there may.

1. Be in our con^i^ion, a mixture of worldly sorrow, of some murmuring,
grudging and impatience for some loss deprivation and pain, yet pretended
sorrow for sin, or otherwise some mixture of rest or confidence in their
brokeness, as thereby counting themselves better then others and meeter to be
answered, and some secret hankering after some thing for helpfulness in that
which is reproved and to be turned from, all which is cross to true brokeness
and needs to be purged out with Salt, 2 Cor. 7. 9. 10* Isa. 58. 53. Zach. 7.
5. Psalm. 7^. 34, 36. Job 9. 27, 28.

2. In our prayers and thanksgiving^ may be mixtures of carnal, at last humane
wisdom griefs, desires, and confidence, and of desiring even good things to
satisfy our lusts of pride own vain glory, ease, or coveteousness: Yea, of
revenge* on Enemies, and of repaying and not forgiving such as have wronged us;
And of striving for method and words, more then the single powering out our
hearts unto God, besides murmuring at Gods silence and too much being lift up
with enlargements, besides many wandering by-thoughts and end* and other
defilements, many which defile our Prayers, and need Salt to purge them out, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Psalm. 116. 13. 14, 15, and 66, 18. Isa. 48. 2, 3, Hos. 7. 14. Iam.
1. 6, 7. and 4, 2, 3.

3. In doing good and showing mercy, may be many mixtures, of carnal reasonings
and self respects, and defaming such as need helpfulness, and herein also much
short coming, in, and grudging at that which of necessity is done and vain
glory, etc. 2 Cor. 9. 5, 6, 7. needing salt to purge.

4. In holding forth the word of life, may be mixtures of fears, fainting and
humoring men, etc. desire of applause to our selves, and thence presuming
beyond the proportion of Faith given us, and intruding into things not seen in
that testimony; conceiving by our parts and speakings to prove all, besides
other by-words which need salt to purge them out. 1 Timothy 1. 8, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 2,
4* 5. 2 Cor. 2. 17. Romans 12* 3. Coll. 2. Gall. 6. 3.

5. In respect of aiming at the right effect and striving for it, there may be
mixtures of enquiring, and looking at, and taking at, and taking content in
being assisted, to speak good things, and scurvey hearers to like them and
prize and love us, when yet the convincement of them, and drawing them in to
prize, believe in* and magnify Christ, is not discerned to be effected, nor so
looked at as that without which, we can have no content but grief, Gall. 4. 17,
19. These. 3. 8.

6. In giving up our bodies to be the Lords, what resurvations and limitations
if not as those, Luke 9. 59. 61. John 6. 26. But alas defilements exceeds all
said, the flesh anoying with so many sinful lusts, and warring against all the
motion of the spirit, and humane wisdom mixing it self to direct* and customs
of many to deviate, and we so weak of our selves that there is not a just man
upon earth that does good and sins not: Eccles. 7. 20. yea in such walking
in the light as we have fellowship with him, we need (as it is not without) his
blood cleansing us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. So as this is a
consolatory, as well as an admonitory saying, Every sacrifice shall be salted
with salt: And it may move us to see to answer that in truth, which was typed
in the command of old with all our offeri^gs to offer salt, and not let salt be
lacking to our sacrifices, Levit. 2. 13. For as the blind, the lame, or sick,
or any corrupt thing is evil and rejected, So that which has an evil savor,
will not be accepted of the Lord, Mall. 1. 8. 14. and 2. 13. And our high
Priest will not fail to afford Salt, which may move us to receive, embrace and
retain this salt, in his wholesome reproofs, so as we be framed and seasoned
thereby; and as we are found wanting in such embracement of them, to count it
good and accept his chastisments used to press them home, that they may take
place and have their efficacies in us, whatever we undergo or forgo in
enduring the same: knowing according to our Saviors saying Its better to
endure that now, then the greater torment hereafter: And farther, to press this
on us, and move us to embrace this salting work, our Savior gives another
affirmative.

CHAP. IV.
The third Affirmation with caution or condition.
SAlt is good, but if the salt have lost its saltness, wherewith will you
season it, consider both, First the affirmation, salt is good, so Luke 14. 34,
Salt is good: and for understanding this, consider,

1. What is meant by salt, and also,

2. That salt is good while it has its saltness in its efficacies.

1. What is here meant by Salt, to understand this it matters not whether we
take the term Salt as used Metaphorically, borrowed from, or alluding to Salt.
That is good, having a fiery, biting and fretring nature, both to purge out that
corruption, filth, and unsavoriness in meats to be eaten, and also to make the
same savory and relishable to the Palate of the eater, so here to signify
something in spirituals of like nature and efficacy, or whether we take the
term Salt as Alluding to our tipes that were to use salt in all their
sacrifices, and to signify and set forth that which is to be found in the
truth* or we may take the word both ways, for both come to one and the same
sense; so that by salt is here meant, that which tends to, is fit for, and
effications for purging out the corruption, filth and unsavo^iness in us, and
making relishable to us the food of life given us of God to eat, and also to
purge out of our services that which makes them unsavo^y to God, and frame us
to receive that in which they will be accepted of God: And so that primely here
to be noted is, what is here meant by salt that is spiritual salt to be
received, used and good in the use: and this may be set sorth in three things
that are salt.

1. The efficacies o^ teachings of the spirit in the testimony of Christ, in
that he became and suffered, and has door for mankind, and what he now does
for and to them, and what he has to be slow on them that receive it, and his
mind that they should receive it in his ways; this discovered and set home to
the heart, is that which received and believed will season the receiver: For
this certainly discovers in and through the Sufferings, Cross and Sacrifice of
Christ.

1* The vileness and baseness of man in and of himself as from Adam, the
immensness of his sinfulness, and woeful grievousness of his desert, the vanity
of all his own wrought righteousness, the weakness and inability of himself and
all other creatures to help him, so to take down his pride and break him of his
enterprise, Isay. 53. 3. 8. Romans 5. 6* and 8. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 14.

2, The fullness fitness and excellencies, that is in Jesus Christ for our
recovery, for escape from curse, and for peace in his blood, and acceptance in
his righteousness, and enlivning by his spirit, and also our nakedness, yea so
as without him we can neither receive nor do any good, 2. Cor. 5. 19. 21.
Ephesians. 2. 13. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Isa. 42. 1. 8. and 61. 1, 4. Ioh 15. 1, 4* 8.
and so likewise it discovers.

3. The heighnous and grievousness of sining against such grace made known, In
neglecting so great salvation and refusing to turn at his reproofs, and walk in
his teachings: Ye knowingly to do contrary thereto, so casting such disesteem
on his cost, etc. As is such a rewarding evil for good and being Adversary to
him for his love, etc. Heb. 2. 3. and 10. 29. and 12. 25. 2 Samuel 12. 7, 9. and
2. 27, 29. 1 Kings 11. 9. Psalm. 109. 4, 5, and so it discovers.

4. The infinite great Terror, Torment, and Justness and Equity of the second
death, to be inflicted on all, and every of those, that willingly persist in
retusing to turn at his reproof, and walk in his teachings, to recieve his
love, to be saved by it in his ways, or having begun to recieve it, do
willingly for any other thing depart and persist in that Apostasy, So
crucifying him again to themselves, and make him of no effect to them for
saving, Prove. 1. 24. 32. Ezekiel. 24. 13. Mat. 23. 37. Psalm. 69. 21, 28. Heb. 6.
6. and 10. 30, 31. and 12. 25. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 20, 21. Jude
^^. Call. ^. 4. 2 These. 2. 11, 12* and yet farther.

5. As it discovers Gods Sovereignty, Wisdom, Mercy, Righteousness and
Goodness in ordering and government of the world, and every particular Creature
therein, so it also therein discovers him what ever he be that faulteth his
government and ordering any thing in what ever he does, to be a hater of right
and so not fit to appoint or govern, but to be reproved Job. 34. 57, 7, 17, etc,

All which discoveries proceed from the Testimony, and so as the Testimony of
(...) is a light and gives light to the simple; and (...) a word of life and
truth, bringing salva^ion, so all these discoveries and efficacies thereof are
also as Salt to purge out of mortal men, that which hinders them from recieving
his salvation tendered, and also makes the light, life and saving* desirable to
be recieved, Prove. 27. 67. And the Salt of the Testimony being in the reproofs
of Instruction that are the way of life, are as fire and have a fiery nature,
Prove. 6, 23. Jer. 23. 29. And it has its saltness and savoriness in the
efficacies; in such as in believing the Testimony with the heart, recieve its
salting and purging reproofs, Romans 1. 16. 1 These. 2. 13. Ier. 31. 18, 19. Psalm.
119. 103, 104. And yet though it be Salt and good and has its saltness in it
self, and is purging where it comes, yet those that do not in believing the
Testimony recieve and embrace these salting reproofs, so as to yield up to
them, though he purge them, they are not purged; and so it has not its
saltness in them, but they recieve the grace tendered in the Gospel in vain, and
become hardened and lose their own mercies, Ezekiel. 24. 13. Romans 2. 45. 2 Cor. 6.
1, Jude 4. Prove. 1. 30. Jer. 3. 3. and 6. 15. And if such have any faith, it is
in them but a form of faith, a dead faith, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Tit. 1. 16. Jam. 2. 20,
21, 26. Yet will this Salt it self in its fiery nature, have its effect on them
in another day to the^r everlasting Torments. Joh. 12. 22. and 16. 8, 9. Romans
2. 16. Isa. 30. 33. Mar. 9 44. 46. 42. Thus it appears the discoveries of
reproofs, with their effects by the Testimony of Christ* are spiritual Salt,
and here meant; And so also.

2. The Testimony of Christ believed, and in that believing these discoveries
of reproofs believed, and the efficacies of them recieved and retained in the
mind and heart, so as the Believer is framed and guided suitably to these
effects, Those effects are Salt in the Believer, purging that filte in the
Flesh, (as the blood of Christ purges the Conscience, Heb. 9. 14.) so framing
and ef^ecting in him, to make savory to him the things of Christ.

1. A loathing of himself as from Adam, and so of that carnality and sinful
lusts in him, Romans 7. 14. And thence a dispising of himself and all his best
things as of himself filthy* Ioh. 14. 4. with an inward grief and melting of
heart, for his light estimate of Christ, and not answering but sining against
his light, and so great salvation discovered, and helpfulness afforded, so as
for this he counts himself the chief of siners, Ezra 9. 6. 10. 14. 1 Timothy 1. 15.

2. A discovery of ones great need, with an inward high prizing of, and hearty
thankfulness for the deliverance wrought by Christ, and the grace in him,
wrought by himself, having redeemed us from the curse of the Law, and procuted
also forgiveness of following sins, and spirit and grace to dispense, now
calling us, and mediating for us, and so procu^ing extention of means, and
grace to bring us into himself, such we needed, and yet were altogether
unworthy, which same raises desires of enjoyment of him, Prove. 27. 7. Psalm.
42. 1, 2, 3, 4* Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. and from both th^se ^ormer.

3. An inward abasement of ones self also, in respect of ones self, counting
our own humane wildome, foolishness, thoughts vain, best deeds unclean,
strength weakness and designs, decei^^^l and dangerous, and no true
helpfulness, but in and from Christ, and in the enjoyment of him for all, Prove.
30. 2, 3. Psalm. 73. 22. and 119. 13. Isa. 64. 6. ^ Cor. 3. 5. Psalm. 121. 2 3.
And so ^n^lines to deny ones self, with all ungodly, worldy and sinful lusts:
Yea, ones own wisdom, thoughts* confidence and designs for Christ sake, Tit. 2.
11, 1^. Joh. 10. 2, 3. Mar. 27. 9.

4. It breed an awful fear of believing o^ considing for life and favor, with
God in any humane or seen thing, or any thing besides the testimony of Christ:
But only from that discovered in the Testimony, to believe in God for what, in
that he has ascerted, and promised, and that also in abiding in, and not going
out of his way, that so confidence may be sencere, Isa 8. 20. 1 Cor. 4. 6. 2 Samuel 7. 21, 28. Psalm. 56. 4, 13. John 7. 37. Psalm. 37. 34. Matt. 43. 7.

5. An inward fear and d^ead of the name of the Lord so as the heart trembles,
at his word, Dent. 28. 58. Isa. 66. 2. 5. Yea even at his judgment threatened
against Trangressours, Job 31. 7, 24. Romans 8. 13. Heb. 3. 16. And at the
minding of the Truth, Verity, Righteousness, Equity, and Terribleness of the
second death, affirmed to be executedon all that pe^sist in willing refusal of,
and rebelling against the faith of Christ, or after some beginnings willingly
persist in departure from that faith and his reproofs and services required, as
discovered in the Gospel, Heb. 6. 6. and 10. 29, 30, 31. and 12. 25* 2. The^.
1. 7, 8, 9. Jade 1. 5, 14. Heb. 3. 16. Psalm. 94. 12, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11.

And these Efficacies, Persuasions and awful fears produced in the heart, by
the discoveries of the Testimony, are Salt in the Believer, and good and
profitable to the Believer* for his more hearty recieving the Testimony with
its consolations and teachings: and so for suitable walking, Psalm. 25. 9. Prove.
1. 7, 8, 9. and 9. 6, 9. Iam. 4. 6, 7. 1 Pet. 1. 6. But if any withdraw from
the faith, God takes no pleasure in him* and then his moisture dryes up, and
he loses the saltness and savoriness that was in him, Heb. 10. 38. Psalm. 32.
4. And so with the former discoveries, these Efficacies are here meant by Salt.

3. The Believer himself that has in believing recieved the Testimony of
Christ, and with it the reproofs thereof, so as he embraces the Efficacies
thereof, framing him rightly to believe with the heart unto righteousness, and
to confess with the mouth unto salvation, and so hold forth the Testimony of
Christ unto others, so as in declaring that Grace, salting Efficacies are also
declared by him, and such Believers as in respect of their having so recieved
the word of life, as it works in them* so as they hold forth the word of
life, to others they are called the light of the world, 1 These. 1. 8. Phil. 2.
16. Mar. 5. 14. So in respect of their having so recieved the reproofs and
convincements of the Spirit, with the Testimony framing them to part with their
own thoughts, and designs to believe in Christ, in whom they have life, so as
they are moved and led, so to declare the Gospel to others; that with the
convincements thereof, they may draw them from their Vanities to believe in
Christ* whence they are called* the Salt of the Earth, Mar. 5. 13. And so as
Christ testified of the world, that the works thereof are evil, John 7. 7. And
he is said to be like Refiners fire and Fullers Soap, Mat. 3. 2. And so himself
says, he came to send fire on the Earth* Luke 12. 19. that is to consume and
burn up Idolatries, Adulteries, fleshly Confidences, Desires, Designs and Ways
of pursuits, of such as mind ^arthly things, and the things of the Flesh, and
so dwell upon the face of the Earth, to separate them therefrom, that they
might come into him, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 These. 1. 9. which fire who ever so
quenches, as he refuses to be salted with it, so as he refuses to be
separate from Idols, earthy, filthy and vain Confidences, Desires, Designs and
Ways to embrace Christ in his reproofs and teachings in this day of grace, It
will kindle upon him in another day, and burn everlastingly on Soul and Body,
so as cannot be quenched: (i^ being the work of his Spirit in the ministration
of the Gospel, to convince the World, Job 16. 8, 9, 10. and will be effected
first or last) Isa. 30. 33. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. Mar. 9. 43. 49 And so the first
coming of Jesus Christ, was to suffer and offer Sacrifice, and complete
Redemption and Salvation in himself, as the public man for men, ard so to stay
the enmity and make peace and atonement for men, even sinners that they might
be saved, Isa. 53. 3, 7, 12. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 19, 21. Ephesians 2. 13, 16. John 3. 16,
17. 1 Ioh. 4 9, 10. 1 Timothy 1. 15. And so is the propitiation for the sins of
the World, Joh. 2. 2. yet for saving them by that they may partake of the
blessing, Gall. ^. 13* 14. In speaking of his ministration and preaching this
peace and salvation, which himself began, and continues it in the ministration
of his Servants, till his coming again, Ephesians. 2. 17. Heb. 2. 1. 4. He says, I
came not to send Peace on the Earth, but a Sword, he in his ministration and
extention of Peace and Grace, comes not to give the dwellers on the face of
the Earth quiet and peace, in their sinful thoughts, desires, designs, courses
and ways, that because of his peace made for them, they should have such a
liberty as to look for mercy and peace from him, and be saved by him, though
they walk after the imaginations of their own evil hearts, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20*
21. Gall. 5. 19, 20. 21. but a sword to cut off from them these evil thoughts,
desires, designs and ways, which all that refuse to depart from, will be
enraged and oppose and fight against him and his, that go on in this
ministration, Matt. 10. 16. 22. 35, 38. And so he sen^s fire on the earth, that
men yielding to be salted thereby may come into him, that came not to let
sinners be such sinners still, but to save them though chief of sinners, 1 Timothy
1. 15. Isa. 55. 7. and such as receive his words and begin to be saved by him,
he yet while they are in mo^ta^ bodies sits on them as resiners fire* Matt. 3.
3.

Even so beleivers in him, holding forth the word of life in the mids^ of a
crooked generation, are even so to hold it forth, that in ex^l^ing Christ the
Savior of the world, of sinners, the propitiation for the sins of the whole
world, they do even thereby also, so discover, and witness against the wisdom
of the world, the Idolatries, Adulteries, false confidences, evil designs and
ways, as that which God hates, and thus continuing in, cannot be eternally
saved; but in hearing his voice must turn at his reproofs, and so (for
otherwise they cannot) come into him, in which he will verily save them, Matt.
10. 16, 28, Acts 14. 15, and 17. 21, 25. Revel. 11. 10. Prove. 1. 22. 23. 31.
Isay. 45. 22. And in respect of the^^ wit^e^ing against the evil of the world
in showing the way of escape, and greatness of the sin, and danger of
neglecting so great salvation: All beleivers are rightly called, the sa^t of
the earth, as also salt in respect of wholesome reproofs and admonitions of one
another, Prove. 25. 12, Psalm. 141. 45. These. 5. 14. Ind. 23. and i^ beleivers
are salt: But if this salt have lost its saltness, i^ beleivers by of^
q^^n^hing the spirit in his reproofs, and salting efficacies, to have it in
themselves, and accordingly show it ^o^th to others, come to lose their
saltness in the savouring and seasoning efficacies of his reproofs in the
testimony, they become unsavory, and worse then other men, ^n^ir to do good in
Church or World, not fit for Land or Dunghill, Mar. 9. 5. Luke 14. 35. (as is
said of the fruitless vinetree Ezeck 15.) 2 Pet. 2. 21.

And so by all said, we may understand, what is here meant by salt, even the
discovering reproofs of the spirit in and with the testimony of Christ
believed, and the efficacies thereof in beleiving receive^s, and the beleiver
himself so far as in imbraceing the testimony, he embraces these reproving
effects, and accordingly holds forth the testimony with such reproofs from
in, and so calls men to believe, and yet as rubbing ^^lt on things meeting
it, to make the salt enter and take place for salting, so as need is*
afflictions and corrections, serve to press home those reproofs and sit for
yiedling to their efficacies, and are ordinarily used in such salting reproofs
when not redily received: And so much said for our understanding what is meant
by salt here* concerning which.

2. The affirmation is, That Salt is good (that is, retaining its sal^n^^s)
which is likewise affirmed, Luke 14. 34. As things are said to be good that are
good for the ends to which used, so salt is good, not to be a sacrifice, but to
salt or season sacrifices offered to God, Levit. 2. 13. Salt is good, not to be
the food to seed on for preservation of life and strength, but to season the
food eaten to that end, Ioh* 6. 6. so the discovering reproofs of the testimony
received, and the efficacies thereof embraced are good, Prove. 6. 23. and 25.
12. so afflictions to bow the heart, and press home these reproofs and
efficacies and fit to embrace and yield up thereto are good, Psalm. 119. 67. 68.
71. 72, 75. Lam. 31. Psalm. 94* 12. So beleivers holding forth the word of life:
so as their words be gracious, seasoned with salt, so as to convince the
unbeleivers, the world, and minister grace to such as hearken to them is good,
and a mercy to such where they are, P^o. 25. 12, and 27. 5. 6 and 28, 23. Ier.
23* and 17. Lam. 2. 14. So conformity to Christ, in suffering for his and the
Gospels sake, bearing the reproach of the Gospel is good, Acts 9* 14. 15. Gall.
6. 14. Phill. 3. 10. Revel. 7. 14* 5. And the beleivers ministering them, and
afflictions and the Cross of Christ in conformity to it is good, good not to
such or for life, and acceptance or raise confidence from Christ, and him
crucified, as now the Fountain of fullness at the Fathers right, hand is that:
but good to salt and season us for feeding on that Food, and to salt and season
our Offerings and Sacrifices and Services, that we may more readily recieve the
cleansing by his blood* and offer our Services only in his name and by him: And
so this Salt is good and embraced and retained in our selves, will season us
and all things to us, which minding the death and Sacrifice of Christ for us,
we in minding the discoveries of his Grace, do mind and recieve also its
discoveries of filth in us and our ways, and recieve the same with its
reproofs and efficacies: It will season our understanding rightly to know
Christ and his gracious mind discovered, Prove. 15. 32. and 1. 23. And sit and
lead the heart to re^^eve of the life of Christ dispensed in the Testimony,
Prove. 6. 23. and 9. 6* 9. And frame the mind and will to deny it self, and
submit to be at the dispose, and under the guidance of God, Job 42. 6. 2 Samuel
15. 25, 26. and 16. 10, 11, 12. 1 Samuel 3* 18. Isa. 6. 9* 8. and 39. 8. And it
seasons with fervor and zeal, for glorifying God, for charity to do to others
good, and for readiness to bring forth the fruits of the spirit in the services
of love, Phil. 1. 20, 28, 29, 30. 1 These. 1. 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 8. 2. And so this
Salt recieved in the heart, and so seasoning.

1. Will frame us to abase, and low estimate of out selves as Adams Sons,
unworthy the least favor, but worthy shame and curses of our sinfulness, as
odious and vile, our sinnings against such grace made known, as more heinous,
our own wrought righteousness vain and polluted, our own wisdom, folly and
strength, weakness: and so cause loathing of it, and g^o^ning under it as has
been shown, Job 40. 4, 5. and 42. 5* 6. And so breeds sense of our own need,
and high prizing of the grace of God in Christ, as he in whom all fullness and
true helpfulness is: and so edgeth and inclines the heart and afflications
with hungring and thirsting after that in Christ, Prove. 27. 6, 7. Isa. 4. 1, 2,
3, 4. Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. And so clears the Eye, to see sin foul yet
pardonable, and enclines for grace, so to deny ungodly and worldly lusts, that
they may live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, etc. as
has been shown, Dent. 9. 7, 9. Ezra 9. 5, 8. And so likewise.

2. It seasons to recieve mercy and favors, both spiritual and temporal, with
owning ones own unworthiness of the least: an acknowledgement of Gods great
mercy and free love that with the blood of Christ purchased us, and so them for
us; and for his sake freely in the same love gives them to us, and so it
preserves from being puffed up by any of them recieved, inclining to carefulness
of the right use, with rend^ing all the praise to God, Genesis 32. 10. 1 Cor. 17.
16 17. 18. Luke 1. 4. 3. 1 Cor. 4. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.

3. It seasons our recieving afflictions, as altered by Christ from being
curses and signs of hatred, to be Instruments of blessings, and Fruits of love
in Fatherly corrections, to form us to the mind of Christ, who has had
experience of them, and knows how to pity and help us, being filled with
spirit and grace, to uphold us in them and do us good by them, Heb. 12. 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7. and 2. 18. Iam. 1. 2, 3, 12.

4. It seasons our be holding the reproach of Christ, and all sufferings
undergone, for holding forth the name of Christ, and doing righteousness, as
great Riches and special favor conserred on us, in passing through sufferings,
to conform us to him in sufferings and death, that we may be conformed to him
in resurrection and glory, Acts 9. 15* 16. and 5. 41. Heb. 11. 25, 26, 27.
Gall. 6. 14. Romans 6. 4, 5. 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. And it likewise seasons.

5. To behold unbelievers, foolish and disobedient ones, and to walk toward
them, as objects of pity and compassion: as glasses to see* and remembrances
of us what we were and what in mercy God has delivered us from: As motives to
use mercy and pity and compassion toward such, as God has done to us: yea to
love and do good to Enemies, as God has done to us when we were Enemies; as
trials how far we are become like God in mercy* patience, and overcoming Evil
with Goodness, etc.

5. Discovering what Humility, Self denial, Mercy, Meekness, Patience, long
Sufferings overcoming Evil with Goodness and what thankfulness to God, and
desire to be like him, his grace has effected in us, 2 Cor. 5. 11, 14. Tit. 3.
3, 4. yea also,

6. It seasons to behold unseigned beleivers as fit objects to be delightfully
loved, tendered, helped, received into fellowship, as being not only purchased
of God by the blood of Christ; but unto God by the virtue of it believed: And
so in beleiving partakers of his grace both savouring and savouring of his
ointments, Acts 20. 28. Revel. 5. 9. 10. Romans 14. 7. 8. 9. And so sits for
charity that covers the multitude of infirmities as God daily does by us, that
so we may keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, 1 Pet. 4. 2.
Ephesians. 4. 1. 2. 3.

7. It seasons to climate highly and use humbly confidently and reverently, all
the ordinances of Christ, hearing, reading and meditation of his Word and
declaration of it, Prayer, Thanksgiving, Baptism, Supper and fellowship with
brethren therein; knowing God is not benefited by any our use of them, nor we
worthy to come into his presence; but our libery of such approach to him, in
using any of his ordinances, in which we may approach to the Throne of Grace in
and by Christ: for blessing is a great favor and priveledge purchased for us
by his blood, and through his mediation by virtue thereof, freely given unto us
with helpfulness by his spirit in the testimony, Heb. 10. 19. 26. and 4. 14.
15. 16. 17. and 7. 25. Ephesians. 2. 17. 18. Romans 8. 26.

And so having in us this salt, receiving and using the reproofs of the
testimony, in embraceing them, with the efficacies thereof, both our receiving
the testimony, and our approaching to God by Christ, and bringing forth the
services of love for his sake will be accepted of him, Cant. 5. 1, 2. And our
services profitable to men Romans 14. 17, 18. And thus we may understand the
verity of the sentence, Salt is good, it is very good for its ends, and much
profitable, if it retain its saltness; that is, if we so retain in o^^ h^^ is
the truth in our persuasions, the verity of this discovering reproof of the
testimony, embracing and yiedling to the effects thereof accordingly, demeaning
our selves, and so holding forth the testimony, that with it we hold forth the
same discovering reproofs for such convincements, that as we are in holding
forth the word of life, lights so by these reproofs with and by it we may be
salted, And so salt is good, as in,

CHAP. V.
The Caution or Condition.
SEcondly, the caution or condition, But if the salt have lost his sal^ness,
wherewith will you season it. Luke 14. 33. 35. wherewith shall it be seasoned,
it is neither fit for the Land nor yet for the dunghill, but men cast it out
(and this also a thing of so great concernment to be heeded that our Savior
calls us saying) He that has ears to hear, let him hear: so that it is a
vain objection, to say salt cannot lose its saltness; especially that which
proceeds from the testimony, and is called salt, where once received; having
its saltness the saltness cannot be lost; which needs no other answer to show
the ^alseness of it, but the very discourse and words of our Savior here, Mar.
9. 43. 50. and Luke 14. 26. 35. and Matt. 5. 13. yea this objection
contradicts plainly, and charge with vanity the Doctrine of our Savior and
his sayings, which objection may be soon answered in showing what salt is,
Chap. 4. Salt as proceeding from that by the spirit discovered in the testimony
loses not its saltness, but has and will have its efficacy now, or hereafter
as has been shown; but as in this day of Grace lightning on the heart, and
received by any in beleiving, it may by resistance and departure from
imbraceing the reproofs with its efficacies come to be lost by them: And in
Scripture we find,

1. As Jesus Christ as witnessed of in the testimony, is light, life, the
Fountain of Life, sull of efficacies, the quickening spirit; and yet some that
have been enlightened and enlivned by him, and tasted of his gracious
efficacies, have after by turning aside to some other desires, delight,
confidence, or service of some proud or fleshly lust, come to crucify Christ
again to themselves, and make him of no effect to themselves, though they
cannot Crucify Christ again in himself, he being alive for evermore, and can
dye no more, yet in respect of his living and saving efficacies, they crucify
him to themselves, and make him of no effect to themselves for saving, Heb. 6.
6. So as though the grace of God in Christ, and as flowing from him is not in
vain, yet such as recive it not rightly, to be saved by it, their receiving is
in vain in respect of saving to them, 2 Cor. 6.

2. Yea they may so pervert that which is right, and turn the grace of God (in
the doctrine of it) into lasciviousness, Job. 33. 27. Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Jude 4.
though it will one day have its effect on them to their just judgment and
perdition, as has been shown; even so also Jesus Christ is as refiners fire
and Fullers soap, and in his ministration sends fire on the earth, by the
spirits convincements in the demonstration of them, Matt. 3. 2. Luke 12. 49. as
is foreshewn, which convincements are salt, that loses not its saltness as it
proceeds from him, but does convince where it lights and is not rejected, and
in every receiver, has its saltness in its efficacies in some measure in them,
and such as re^use now, it will have it in another day, to their shame and
perdition: and those that begin to receive it, and are made base and vile in
their own eyes, to loath and deny themselves, and prize and desire after
Christ, there is of the saltness in them: But if after they look on, so as to
long after some other things, as the Glory, Riches and pleasures of this world,
or any imaginary excellencies, so as they refuse turning at his reproofs, and
so to lay aside their pride and vain desires and designs, they therein harden
themselves, and so lose the saltness that was in them, Ier. 2. 17. 22. and 34.
10. 11. 15. 16. 17. Hosea 13. 1. 2. 3. and 6. 4. Romans 2. 4. 5. Prove. 28. 13.
14. And such may yet for a time retain that in which the saltness was, the
profession of the Doctrine, though the saltness in them be lost. And so though
in notion and profession they hold the truth, yet it is in unrightousness,
Isai. 48. 1. Romans 1. 18. And though they hold and profess the Faith in all the
Fundamental Articles of the Doctrine of it, yet in and to them in respect of
the living efficacies in them, It is but a dead faith, a carcass of faith
without spirit. Jam. 2. 20. 26. professing to know God, and by works denying
him, Tit. 1. 16. And in this respect of the testimonies, reproofs begun to be
received, and therein having its saltness in the receiver, by such receivers
after departed from (what ever any say to the contrary) the salt such have
received, may come to lose its saltness in them.

2 In respect of those efficacies mentioned, Chap. 4. working in the believing
Recievers, if such Recievers withdraw, from their embracing, retaining and
yielding to such Efficacies as mentioned, Chap. 4. that so they may rightly
recieve, cleanse and follow the teachings of grace, by the Spirit in the
Testimony, but will follow their own thoughts, designs and ways: Though they
retain the notion and profession of the faith yet though the Salt they recieved
will lose its saltness in them, and they become worse then before as is
foreshown, Deuteronomy. 5. 24, 29. Ier. 2. 3, 4, 5, 41, 36. Psalm. 78. 34. 35. 36. and
10. 6. 12. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 18. 22. And in this respect the Salt in them has lost
its saltness.

3. In respect of the Believer himself, as he is said to be the Salt of the
Earth, when he has thus as aforesaid, lost the saltness that was in himself in
usefulness in his Demeanor, according to the reproofs of the Testimony, not
yielding thereto according to the effects thereof, so as in his profession and
holding forth the Testimony, he does not, because having no saltness in
himself, affirmed with the Testimony of the saltness in it, for convincing the
World of the evil of it in their Ignorance, Unbelief, Idolatry, Pride,
Coveteousness, Uncleanness, Profaneness, and evil designs and ways, nor
Believers of their strayings, but rather speaks peace where God speaks it not
then he that for his profession is called, Salt has lost its saltness as is
fully shown, Chapter 4. 23. As for that which some object, that there is no
need in holding forth the Gospel of Christ, to mention and press so many
particular reproofs, for in holding forth the Testimony, they may with one
breath, both convince men of their evils, and allure them in to believe in
Christ, and love him and his: this is confessed* in the right declaration of the
Gospel by the Scripture, when the holy Spirit goes out therein, he may do it
in such a Proclamation of the Gospel, in times of some great opposition of the
Gospel, and so has done sometimes. Act. 13. 47, 48. and 17. 8. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 1.
9. 10. And so to a people fore prepared to receive. Act. 10. 34. 44. and 16. 9.
14. And sometimes by Afflictions foregoing: before Acts 16. 27. 31. 34. But
this is not ordinary, nor for an ordinary ministration; and yet there is
intimate reproofs in it, also besides such the Pride, and corrupt disposition
naturally in men, that they need much pressing of Gospel reproofs of which are
here spoken, and a holy and right usefulness of the Law also, as subservient to
the Gospel, which reproofs are as need is, with Gospel preaching to be pressed,
as did our Saviors forerunner John Baptist, John 1. 29. with Matt. 3. 2. 7.
12. Luke 3. 4. 17. and our Savior himself in his preaching Matt. 5. and 6. and
7. and many times besides, as here, and in Luke 4. and his followors the
Apostles in their preaching, Act. 2. 23. 34. 38. and 3. 3. 15. 19. and 4. 10.
11. and 5. 30. 31, 32. and 7. 51. 52, 53, and 13. 9. 10. 11. 40. 41. and 14.
15. and 17. 22. 25. 30. and 20. 21. And in their wrightings in all their
Epistles, having set forth the Gospel, do most abundantly and largely press
particular reproofs with warnings and admonitions as every reader may see. And
to object or reply in such manner, as to charge Christ and his servants with
vanity, impressing so often, and with so many words, that which needed not, but
might have been let alone and done with one breath; and to justify, at least
extenuate the sin of those teachers, that did not discover the peoples iniquity
to turn away their captivity Lam. 2. 14. and even give way to such a preaching
the Gospel, as leaves open the way for that abuse, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Jude 4. is
evil: But we knowing this whole discourse of our Savior in this Chapter, and
this affirmation here, and this very caution, to which he calls, every one that
has an ear to hear, know that it is both needful and of great concernment, and
therefore let us heed and view our Saviors caution.

1. If the Salt have lost the saltness, wherewith you season it, wherewith will
you season it, which intimates to us, that when men have refused to recieve
wisdoms reproofs to be seasoned and savoured this way, and find themselves at
a loss, yet they would be saved some other way: and seeking and so are quiring
wherewith, Mich. 6. 6, 7, 8. 9. And though not willing to undergo shame and
selfdenyal, and mortification of the flesh, in receiving the reproofs of
instruction, yet finding loss and deadness, they will undergo and suffer and
do, to satisfy their own desires, any thing dictated by their own wisdom or
fancy, or propounded by such as in their wisdom and fancy are wise to council
them: whence also they are apt to be deluded. Joh. 5. 43. and 14. 62. 1 Thessalonians.
2. 10. 11. 12. ( though in this all their thoughts are vain. 1 Cor. 3. 18. 19,
20. Ier. 2. 22. 23.) And hence springs all that fleshly and carnal inflicting
punishments on the flesh, of touch not, taste not, handle not, whipping
themselves, etc. and cost so: Images, worshipping and offering to them
Pilgrimages, etc. Coll. 2. 21. 22. 23. Hos. 5. 13. 2 Cron. 28. 33. Yea some
building Temples and numbering of Prayers, Hos. 8. 14, and 9. 16, 17, and 10. 1.
2. Isa. 1. 11, 15. some even looking for and ready to receive any deluding
spirit. Ah fools! have you tasted the gratiousness of the Lord in receiving the
reproofs of instructions, and found his quickening and seasoning operations, and
for other things, quenched that spiritual fervor and destroyed your selves,
and now think to find help in ways of your own or others devising, your
thoughts are all vain, wherewith will you season, etc. you can by nothing do
it, Gall. 3. 1. 3. Ier. 2. 12. 13. 17. 18. Hos. 13. 8. 9.

2. Wherewith shall it be seasoned, Luke 14. 34. wherewith shall it be salted,
Matt. 5. 13. There is nothing, you or others for you, can devise or think on,
not any doctrine, or instruction or any reproofs but the testimony of Christ,
and the reproofs thereof, nor any spirit, but the spirit of Christ coming in
that testimony and with the reproofs thereof, nor any other sacrifice, but that
once offered by him, or spirit but that which in discovery of that sacrifice
produces your offering spiritual sacrifices by him, nor any works but of his
operation in the teachings of his grace, nor any self afflictions or
sufferings, but his ordered corrections, that will rightly press home his
reproofs and instructions, not any other thing, not man, nor Angel, nor spirit,
not any thing that can salt or season you, or season your heart to receive
cleansing by his blood, and so saving yea or your heart and profession, so as
you may be saved, and accepted and made edyifying to others, without Christ you
can do nothing, but wither till you come to be burned, John 15. 4. 5. 6. Heb.
10. 28. 29. 30. and 6. 6. Yea if you beg any other thing of him, or his
helpfulness in any other way then he has appointed, he will not vouchsafe it,
1 John 5. 14, and 3. 22. Prove. 21. 27. Yea though you retain the notion of
truth, and the love thereof, and make profession thereof, and do not receive
the love of the truth, in its declarations, reproofs and instructions to be
saved by it, even by it, nothing else what ever you dream can save you, but you
will be let to delusions to think to be saved by that, for which you shall be
damned, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Oh hearken to this! If the salt have lost its
saltness there is nothing else to season it: But and if this Salt has lost its
saltness

3. It is neither fit for the land nor for the dunghill, but men cast it out,
Luke 18. 36. It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden
under foot of men; note this as spoken by Christ to his Disciples, that were
beleivers, and by himself called the salt of the earth, so that said is
directly meant of them, and so of them as meant by salt; And so such beleivers
of the Gospel, as in receiving the spiritual convincements in it (which are
salt) have yielded to the efficacies in which the saltness seasoning their
beleiving and profession, so as in professing truth rightly, they were salt
also, as is foreshewn: If they lose their saltness (those efficacies mentioned
chap. 4. 1. and 2.) in their beleiving and profession, they are then fit for
nothing, they can savorily neither receive correction, it is so grievous to
them, nor the teachings of Grace, they are not savoury to them, Prove. 15. 10.
Job. 6. 6. Prove. 22. 7. nor are they profitable for ministration to others,
Matt. 5. 13. God accepts not their ministration, Psalm 50. 16, 17. and men
despise such Apostate withered ones, they are not fit to minister in the
Church, nor to the world, but to be cast out altogether unprofitable, yeatroden
under foot of men, despised, as worse, now departed from them before they know
the truth, and worse then them that never knew the truth, oh heavy condition
when the salt has lost its saltness.

4. Yet note our Savior says not, If the salt have yet effected and impressed
his saltness, for that may be for a time in receiving, but weak in some; who
yet retaining and attending to the word received, it will be further effected
John 8. 30. 36. And in affording it to others, it may be refused, and so not
take such place in others, while yet the afforder is accepted, Isa. 49, 4. 2
Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. Nor says he, if the salt be abated in its saltness, so as
the efficacies be so weakened, withered and d^yed in respect of their former
liveliness; that in that respect they that were once dead as of and from Adam,
having been enlivened once, are now again as dead, and so as trees twice dead,
yet not plucked up by the roots, the root of the matter is in them still,
something waking in the heart though they be a sleep: these though in sad and
heavy case, yet in harkening to his voice, receiving his correction, and
turning at his reproof, are recoverable, and so shall be recovered, and so
salted and seasoned again, Luke 15. 16. 17, 32. Isa. 16. 17, 18. and 55. 7. 8.
Ier. 3. 22. Jude 22. 23. But that he says is, if the salt have lost his
saltness, lost his savor, if the doctrine of Christ Crucified, be of no effect
in reprooving and seasoning them, if the reproofs of instruction have no force,
if the efficacies thereof be wholly dried up, so as it works not in them to
any self denial and abasement of themselves, and p^ising and desires of Christ
and his teachings, etc. so as they are carried about of winds, Clouds without
Rain, Trees without fruit, withered, twice dead and plucked up by the roots etc.
the salt has lost its saltness, the blackness of darkness is reserved for them
for ever, and they reserved for everlasting fire: Jude 12. 13. they are in a
fearful case, Mat. 12. 43, 44, 45. 2 Pet. 2. 21, 22. Heb. 6. 6. and 10. 30.

And now by all foresaid Mar. 9. It appears, That a man by neglecting to have
salt with its saltness in himself is in danger to fall into this woeful state,
which to warn us that we may avoid it, our Savior both instructs us and sets
the danger before us from verse 42. 42. and so move us to endure the pain of
salting here, that we may avoid it hereafter (which else we cannot) he assures
us that every one shall be salted with fire, and to move us to perseverance in
retaining this salt with its saltness, that we may feed on him, and acceptably
serve him; he instructs us, That every sacrifice shall be salted with salt,
ver. 49. And to encourage us, he assures us salt is good, and yet to warn us so
to receive it, that we may receive and retain its saltness* he tells us, if the
salt has lost its saltness, it is good for nothing: And from and with all
this, presses on us this council, admonition, charge and commandment
seriously, ver. 50. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another.

CHAP. VI.
Our Saviors Twofold Exhortation.
1. HAve salt in your selves,

2. Have peace one with another.

1. Have salt in your selves. Hive, that is, receive it, so as it may have its
impression in you, Prove. 1. 30 and 10. 17. and 4. 16. Salt that is the reproofs
and efficacies of the testimony in your understanding, affections, and
exercise, Mat. 13. 9. 12 and 25. 29. in your selves, not only to see it and
speak o^ it to others, and press it on them, but in your selves, not only in
your understanding and hearts, but thereby in your selves, your whole selves,
for seasoning and usefullness of the whole man; for though in beleiving in
Christ, we become the son; of God Yet that is yet, but by faith, Gall. 3. 26.
and though the spirit of Christ do in belief of the testimony* quicken Ephesians. 2.
4, 5. Coll. 2. 12. yet that quickening and renewing is of the spirit of the
mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. Rom 12. 2. And so that he framed is the likeness of Christ, a
new and inward man in the spirit, Ephesians. 4. 24, Coll. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 2. 16. And
that beleivers receive therein, is yet but the first fruits of the spirit Romans
1. 23. And though the spirit be made life for righteousness sake, the body is
yet dead because of sin, To. 8. 10. And so while we are not wholly spiritual,
but as natural, and naturally as of Adam and his sons, so mortal, carnal, and
sold under sin, and what ever may pass and stir in, yet no good thing dwelling
in our flesh, flesh and members, Romans 7. 14. 24. Gall. 5. 17. and so for this
foolish flesh, there is need of salt with its saltness, that our members on
earth may be mortified, and given up as weapons of righteousness, unto
righteousness, Pro. 26. 3. Coll. 3. 5. 6. Romans 6. 16. 19. Therefore in
obedience to our Saviors command, Let us have salt in our selves; that is, let
us have it in our mind, persuasion and usefulness, as habituated and dwelling
in us, as the truth and righteousness of the spirit, reprooving discoveries in
the testimonies of Christ and the efficacies of it, as mentioned Chapter 4. at
1. 2, 3. have them habituated and dwelling in us: And so have in us, even all
of them, namely

1. That low and base estimate of our selves as Adams sons, of our Wisdom as
Folly, our strength weakness, our best deeds as filthy rags, our sins vile, our
selves wretched and miserable, which was discovered to us, and effected in us,
in the appearance of the Grace of God in Christ Crucified for us, Isa. 53. 6. 2
Cor. 5. 14. Romans 7. 14. 24. 25.

2. That more vile estimate and judging our selves base and vile, in respect of
our willing sinning after we came to understanding, and had means used toward
us, which was effected in us in and by the appearance of the infinite mercy,
love and compassion of God in Christ to manward, in calling us thereby when we
were such foolish and disobedient ones, overcoming evil with goodness, Tit. 3.
3, 4, 5.

3. That fa^ther low estimate of our selves, in respect of our short answering
that grace, and great scantiness in likeness to him, and many unkind usages and
ill requitals of his love, being in this respect with the former* the chief of
sinners, which the infinite riches and excellencies of his grace, dispensed,
and continued to such unworthy and ill requiting ones, did in such appearance
of it effect in us 1 Timothy 1. 15.

4. That contempt and low estimate of the fellowship, friendship, applause,
honors, dignities, riches and pleasures of this world, and all the conceited
righteousness and privileges thereof, which was effected in us, in and by the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, as discovered in the whole of the
testimony of him to us, Phil. 3. 3. 7, 8, 9.

5. That abhorring and hatred of Idolatry, Perjury, Blasphemy, Profaness,
Murder, Adultery, lying, oppression, covetousness, drunkness, etc. which was
effected in us in the appearance and dispensation and our receipt of the mercy
of God, in forgiveness and righteousness and hope given us, Psalm. 119. 110. 128.

6. That acknowledgement of our need, that poorness of spirit, with prizing of
and hungring after Christ and his righteousness, which was by his grace
effected in us, by and in our receiving of his grace and mercy in beleiving,
Isa. 4. 2. Psalm. 119. 123, 124. And herewith that loathing of our selves and
love of him and his word and ways, Psalm. 119. 98, etc.

7. That persuasion of the terror of the Lord, and the terribleness of the
second death, with trembling at his word and judgments, that was effected in
us in our beholding and belief of the truth of his testimony, when he drew us
in to believe in him 2 Cor. 5. 10. 11. Psalm. 119. 119, 120. Let us not content
our selves to say we have had, but let us have all these habituated and
dwelling in us in usefulness, as mentioned Chap.

4. And so have salt in our selves: And to move us hereto, the command of our
deer and loving Savior so earnestly pressed, might be enough to prevail with us,
it being that which is good and equal. And yet a word or two more may be added
to warn us, as that

1. It is required in, and suitable to the teachings of the spirit in the
testimony, who in discovery of the knowledge of Christ, the wisdom, love,
mercy, riches of grace, righteousness and life in Christ, and the mind of God
in him, to be desired, beheld and received, does therein and thereby discover
folly in us, and ways (as foreshewn) with such strength of his, as in
accepting, we might in that season turn at his reproof in disowning and so
denying our own wisdom, thoughts, desires, designs and ways; which if then we
do not, the spirit will not be poured forth to us, to make known his mind in
his words and teach us, so as this is suitable to his teachings, and the way to
understand and receive the same, Prove. 1. 22, 23, 24. and 10. 17. and 12. 1.
and 15. 31. 1 Cor. 3. 18.

2. The having this saltness in us, is verily needful and necessary for us,
there being in us of that self wisdom, will, and sinful Iusts, proceeding from
the corrupt disposition in the flesh, which the spirit in the testimony
discovers sinful, and to be denied, which if not denied, on his reproofs, we
can neither receive his tendered knowledge, grace, teachings and life, nor walk
after the spirit in his teachings, but certainly err^ and go astray, Prove. 1.
29. 32, and 3. 7, 8. and 10. 17. Tit. 2. 11, 12. For,

1. The Pride and corrupt disposition in us, in the flesh, will ^ise up in its
Iusts even when we are hearing, reading or meditating of the spirits testimony,
and his mind and sayings stirring with, conceits of our own ability to
understand with readiness, to sancy an understanding, Io^ 11. 12. And a
thinking we know before, that known ^ath its saving work in us, Gall. 6. 3. 1
Cor. 8. 23. Yea a presuming to be salting and seasoning the sayings of the
testimony, which is to salt and season us, which not receiving, we count hard,
dangerous and absurd, and so would be seasoning them, to make them easy and
safe to our conceptions. John 33. 27. and 21. 22. Prove. 3. 2. 6. Isa. 40. 13.
14. with other vain thoughts and Iusts many, which if at the reproofs of the
testimony, we do not disown and deny, we certainly ert; and cannot rightly
receive his grace savingly to our selves, nor be accepted of God, Psalm. 2. 3.
nor find knowledge, Pro. 15. 12. 31. 32. and 14. 6. and 12. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 18.
19.

2. This Pride and corrupt disposition stirs and moves, when God in the
means is by and according to the testimony tendered to us, forgiveness, mercy,
peace, instruction, consolation and spiritual gifts. And when we approach to
God in hearing, prayer, praise, or fellowship with brethren. And when we are
declaring the word to others, etc. to conceit of our own furniture, and ability
to receive and do* to aspiring after more then seen in the testimony; to
desires of applanse to ones self vain glory, sel^advancement, and prehemenency
above others, and many wanderings and fleshly lusts besides, Romans 7. 21. 23. 1
Cor. 4. 6. Gall. 1. 11. and 5. 17. 4. and 4. 2. 3. which if not denied at the
reproofs of the spirit in that testimony etc.

3. In that which pertains to ones self for conversation and managing affairs
in this life, this corrupt disposition in the flesh, raises motions of Pride,
self exaltation and satisfying, and so to inordinate affections, with envy and
wrath, and malice at all that crosses the design, with other unclean lusts;
which if not disowned and denied at the spirits reproofs in the testimony, we
cannot receive the spirits teachings in the testimony, nor walk therein, Gal.
5. 17. 19. 20. 26. Coll. 3. 3. 12.

4. In our demeanor toward and dealing with others, it raises also these
former Iusts, and like wise vain glory, with motions to equivocation, subtilty,
fraud and injuriousness for self advantage, besides disdaining the poor, and
envying the prosperity of others, etc. which if not disowned and denied at the
reproofs of the spirit in the testimony, we cannot walk after the teachings of
the testimony, and so neither uprightly with God, nor unblameably toward men
Tit. 2. 11. 12. Iam. 3. 14. 15. 16.

5. In beholding the mercies and good things of this life and enjoying them, it
moves to be attributed too much to our own wisdom, strength and industry, and
to satiate our selves with them, and lift up our selves by them, and so in
fullness and forgetfulness of God, besides the other Iusts, which if not
disowned and denied at the reproofs of the spirit in the testimony, we cannot
walk after the spirit in use of such mercies, Deuteronomy. 9. 5. 12. 17. and 32. 15.
Heb. 1. 15. Ier. 9. 23. 24.

6. In beholding corrections and chastisements and feeling them, and seeing
fore judgments on men, etc. it raises motions to murmuring and impatience,
and to use of unlawful means, or to confide in lawful means, and to overlook
and count little the plauge on our own heart, and evil of our own ways; And to
be viewing the evils of other men, and judgeing them, and not ones self as the
cause of fore judgments with many other ill thoughts beside, which if not
disowned and denied at the spirits reproof in the testimony we cannot receive
correction and draw nigh to him, to trust in him and walk in the teachings of
his testimony Psalm. 78. 18. and 106. 7. 13. 14. 15. 25. Hos. 5. 2. Amos 6 9. 2
Cor. 6. 28. 29. Ier. 2. 30. and 44. 10. 11. Zach. 3. 1. 2. But why do I run
into particulars, which are endless for me, seeing always in all our ways
there is ever something of the flesh to be denied, so as from the spirits
reproofs in the testimony, we may so deny it as not to to walk after the flesh,
which if we do not so deny, we cannot walk after the spirit Romans 8. 8. 1. 8.
13. 14. Tit. 2. 11. 12. Ephesians. 4. 22. 23. 24. Therefore it is needful and
necessary for us always to have salt in ourselves, and that in usefulness
also, that it may have its saltness in us, as said in the beginning of this
Chapter, and somewhat in ch^p. 4. at 1. and 2. and so make it impress and have
its saltness in ^s, it is a great favor from God when we are remiss in
receiving it, to afflict and correct us, to make it take impression in us, as
has been foreshewn.

3. This having salt in our selves, in which it will have its saltness in us,
when by the spirits reproofs in the testimony we are in belief of that
discovered in Christ, humbled under them, and the corrections used to impress
them, so as we embrace them, and are bowed to turn at them, and framed by them,
as shown Chap. 4. it is very advantageous, beneficial and profitable to us: For,

1. God gives grace to the humble, and teaches the meek in judgment, and in
his way, and will in due time exalt them, Pro. 3. 34. Iam. 4. 6. 7. Psalm. 25.
9. 1 Pet. 5. 6. Matt. 23. 12. Luke 14. 11. and 18. 14.

2. Christ will pour out of his spirit, and make known his words to such as
receive to turn at his reproofs, and they shall get understanding and abide
among the wise, Prove. 23. and 15. 31. 32. 33.

3. Such as so receive the words of instruction with its reproofs, as thereat
to deny the lusts of the flesh ^o as they walk not after the flesh, but yield
to walk after the spirit, they shall neither fulfill the lusts of the flesh nor
be under law, but under grace. Gall. 5. 16. 18. Romans 8. 1. 2. Sin is not
imputed to them though in their flesh anoying them, and so they are so far
blameless.

4. Such as so receive his reproofs, as by his strength therein, they walk not
after the flesh, they receive from him of that life in Christ, that enliveneth
and strengthens them to walk after the spirit, and the way of the Lord is
strength to them, And their path will be as the light that shines more and
more to the perfect day. Romans 8. 13. 14. Prove. 10. 29. and 4. 18. The Lord will
look to and dwell with such, Isa. 66. 2. 5. and 57. 15.

So that though these reproofs of instruction received, nor our receipt of
them, be not our foundation, nor our builder on it, nor our food nor our
clothing, nor our life, nor our strength, nor our spiritual services of love;
yet they are the seasoners of us, to come to and receive all, and for
performance of services, and in that respect the way to life, Prove. 6. 23. as
has been shown; Therefore let us look to this, That we have salt in our
selves: And

2. Have peace one with another, This a necessary thing, To follow peace with
all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. If
possibly as much as in us lies to live peaceably with all men. Romans 12. 18.
though our speaking thereof be so ill taken by them, that they are in^aged and
war against us, yet suffer that and be we for peace, and follow after the
things that make for peace, Psalm. 126. 6. 7. That so we may give no just
occasion of strife or offense to any, 1 Cor. 10. 32. 33. And especially see
that we that believe in Christ, and profess his name, and so are breathren,
that we have peace among our selves, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. and live in peace, 1 Cor.
13. 11. yea seek peace and ensue it, 1 Pet. 3. 11. and follow after things that
make for peace, and wherewith one may edisie another, Romans 14. 19. 2 Timothy 2.
22. That so we may keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4. 3.
And so be silled and clothed with charity, that will cover the multitude of
infirmities, 1 Pet. 4. 8. That so we may be peacemakers, Matt. 5. 9. And so be
at peace one with another, which will not be, unless we have salt in our
selves: For

1. If unbeleiving and evil men, that are haters of the power of Godliness,
oppose, hate and persecute us, though the love of Christ to mankind, and so to
us, when we were enemies to him, in laying down his life for us, might and with
the heart believed, would move us to love and pity them, and seek their good by
striving to over come their evil with goodness: yet if the reproofs of
instruction proceeding from it be not so with heart received, as to make us low
and vile in our own eyes, and abase us in remembrance of our own vileness,
wretchedness and enmity against him, when he had this pity on us, and love
toward us, and extended his mercy toward us, we shall not so believe and
embrace this pity, love and mercy of God in Christ, as to be moved and led
thereby, to be like merciful to such, Matt. 5. 43. 44. Luke 6. 32. 36. 1 Pet.
2. 21. 24. Luke 18. 32. 35.

2. If men to whom means is used, and to whom we have done no injury, but
walked justly and mercifully toward them, by yet foolish and disobedient and
deceived, and live in pleasures and sinful lusts and hateful and hating, etc.
and so injuring and oppressing us, though the grace pity and love of God to
usward when we were such, in his patience toward us, forbearance of us, and
pity and love with and according to his mercy, calling and saving us, might and
if heartily minded, would move us to like patience, forbearance, love, pity and
extension of mercy and kindness to them; yet if the proofs of instruction be
not so received, as we thereby be made vile in our own eyes, and kept in an
acknowledgeing remembrance that we were such, and so p^zing Gods patience and
forbearance of us, and his pity, love and mercy in calling and saving us when
such, we shall not so believe and mind this mercy of his, as to be framed to be
like him in patience, forbearance and mercy toward such. Tit. 8. 2. 3. 4.

3. If any appear notable sinners and transgressors, such as mentioned 1 Timothy
1. 9. 10. though the great love of God to mankind in gift of his son to save
sinners, even the chief of sinners: and he having dyed for all, and being the
propiriation for the sins of the whole world might move us, and if heartily
believed and minded, would move us with love and compassion to hold forth the
Gospel so to them, as not to give them peace and hope going on in those sins,
but to admonish them to repent and believe the Gospel, assuring them therein
Christ will forgive and save them and renew them: So Christ himself preached
the Gospel to such Mar. 1. 15. yet if the reproofs of instruction be not so
received in our hearts, with its discovery of the residue of our sinfulness and
unworthiness so as we judge our selves as the chief o^ sinners, and retain in
our heart the terror of the Lord against refusers and rebellious opposers, we
shall not so rightly and heartily believe as rightly with such bowels of
compassion, fear, and confidence declare it to them, 2 Cor. 5. 11. 14. 21. 1
Cor. 15. 1. 4. So Paul preached the Gospel, Act. 17. 30. 31. and 14. 15, 16,
17. 1 Timothy 1. 9. 12, 15.

4. If we see a man living and conversing among us, commit some known sin that
is grievous to us, and we be moved and think our selves bound to reprove him
for it: Though the charity of God in his mercy extended in his reprooving us
for our offenses, and forgiving and healing us, and our present need of mercy
and forgiveness might and if heartily minded, would lead us in love ^ightly to
reproof; yet if we receive not the reproofs of instruction, so as thereby to be
abased in sight and remembrance of our own offenses, transgressions and present
annoyances with fleshly lusts, so freely forgiven us for Christ's sake, that
dyed for mankind, and so for him as well as for us, we will and shall be found
wanting in love and pity; and so not beginning with our selves to pull the beam
out of our own eye, we cannot see clearly to pluck the moat o^t our brothers
eye, and so our reproof, will be unsavory Levit. 19. 17, 18. Matt. 7. 1. 2. 3.
Romans 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.

5. If a brother through weakness or temptation be overtaken with a fault*
though the charity of God, and his free and abundant mercy, patience and so
giveness of us, if heartily believed, would in minding it, breed such charity
in us as would cover the multitude of infirmities, and lead to patience,
forbearance and forgiveness, as Christ has done to us, yet if the reproofs of
instruction be not so received, as that we be abased in respect of our own
infirmities, offenses, weaknesses, unworthiness and liableness to temptations,
we shall not so mind the charity of God, his mercy and goodness in restoring,
as to restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, Coll. 3. 8, 12, 13. Gall.
6. 1, 2, 3.

6. If some breathren be yet weak in the faith, and discern not the whole of
the testimony of Christ, though something o^ it, nor what the liberty given by
Christ is, nor the difference between the liberty for righteousness, peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost, to be steadfast in, and the liberty for meats, drinks,
days, etc. to be taken or laid aside, as may serve for furtherance of the
Gospel, and our special liberty, whence some differences of persuasions among
those that believe Jesus to be the Christ, and love him, and desire and
endeavor according to their light to serve him; though the knowledge and
belief of the redemption wrought by Christ, and his purchase and right of
Lordship, and his free dispensing of, and giving the knowledge of his grace,
and his ready acceptance of such as by it come to him; and that he will not
break the b^uised Reed, nor quench the smoking flax, he being the upholder of
all, etc. might and if beleevingly minded, would preserve in us a love and
tender care of the weakest, and so preserve from judging or dispising them, or
willing doing that which may stumble and offend them; yet if the reproofs of
instruction, be not so received, as to abase us in our selves in sight of our
ignorance of what we might have known, and of out short answering of what we do
know and have received, and our unworthiness of that we have received, and that
we have is freely given us, so as we have not acquired it, but received it of
free gi^t, and are thereby the more obliged to bear the insirmities of the
weak, in which our short coming makes us more g^ieved for our follies, if not
thus, we shall not be able so to mind his grace, as by it to be lead in love
and pity, so to love tender and care for the weak that we may not offend, but
edefy them, Romans 14. 1, 12, 15, 19, 22, 23. and 15. 1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 4. 5. 8. 14.

7. If any brethren be poor and distressed, and stand in need of mercy and
releif to be extended to them for releif, though the love and mercy of God to
us ward believed, and how the Lord Christ became poor to make us ^ich, and that
all we have is his gift; and yet whatever we give for his sake, he accepts as
given to himself: might and if beleivingly minded, would move us readily to
extend mercy according to our ability: yet if their proofs of instructions, be
not so received, as thereby we be made base and vile in our own eyes, as
unworthy to be made his stewards of any thing, and for our abuse of that
committed to our stewardship, he may justly deprive us of all, and how long it
shall continue with us, and what evil may be on earth soon, and we deprived of
power to do good, we know not; and refusing a present oppe^tunity, when ability
given (as we have too often done) deserves to be denied and deprived of it when
we would, nor can that we retain help us without his blessing, and we shall
have judgment merciless, that shows no mercy, etc, if we be not thus salted
and seasoned we shall not so mind his mercy to us, as to be found merciful, as
he is merciful, but if we show any me^cy, it will be either out of necessity or
constraint, or sparingly with scantness o^ with grudging and murmering, or as
if we gave of our own absolutely, and with desire to be seen of men, and have
praise of men, and boasting and lifting up our selves* or upbraiding and
defaming such as need it, 2 Cor. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, and 9. 5. 6 7. 1 Pet. 4. 10.
Matt. 26. 35. 45. Pro. 3. 27. 28. and 27. 1. Eccles. 11. 1. 2. 1 John 3. 17.
Iam. 2. 13.

8. If the sore judgments of God, be in the nation we live in, though the
testimony of Gods displeasure thereby, and the sins that have provoked such a
loving, merciful, patient and long suffering God to smite, and the misery of
men, if according to his word minded, might move and cause our heart to tremble
at his wo^d and judgments, and fill us with mourning for the sins that have
provoked him and for the calamities and distresses of the people, and with pity
and compassion toward the afflicted, and so to receive corrections, humbling
our selves under his mighty hand, and drawing nigh to him in confessing and
bewailing our sins, and praying earnestly for us, mercy in forgiveness and
healing, and so trusting in his mercy to turn from our evil ways, and to walk
in his way, and so give him no ^est till he he all the nation; yet if the
reproofs of instruction, be not so received, as thereby we see the corrupt
disposition in our own natural heart; and our own having two much yielded to
it, and so see the plague of oue own heart, our own sore; and how by neglect of
so great salvation and unkind requitals of his love, and g^ievances of his
spirit, and conforming in many things to the fashions of the world, since light
and mercy given us, and so a^e the chief of sinners, and deserve even the so
arest judgments; i^ not thus, we shall not be so affected in our own thoughts
of Gods displeasure testified nor in the sins of men that have provoked it, nor
with the misery, as to be filled with godly sorrow, and child like and
b^otherly g^ief for the dishonor done to God, the b^eaches of his Law, our own
and breathrens sins, and the sins of the nation, nor with compassion and pity
toward men, and such dread of Gods Judgments, as to be lead ^ightly to
receive correction and draw near to God, in confessing our sins and the sins of
others, and seeking his face for our selves and the nation, and so to turn from
our evil designs and ways, and trust in his mercy according to his word, but
rather be laying the greatest blame on others, as the greatest sinners, and
cause of the judgments, And think it more needful for them to be afflicted,
and fast and to pray for removeals (then for our selves) and so they to turn
from their evil ways of which we not so guilty, 1 Kings 8. 37. 40. 2 Corn. 6.
28. 31. and 7. 14. Iam. 4. 7. 8. 9. 10. Lam. 3. 1. 2, 3. Hab. 3. 5. 16. 2 Samuel
24. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 12. 21.

But I will proceed no farther in particulars, seeing there is that in us for
which we need the reproofs of instruction, in all our ways, and without
receiving them to be framed by them, we cannot have peace one with another, so
that our Saviors saying, and order in giving this commandment, is needful,
admonitory, and instructive: and the one observed, fits to observe the other,
which else will not be observed; therefore let us have salt in our selves, and
peace one with another* And therefore have I been so large in this, and plain,
to instruct and move us, To have salt in our selves, Though, etc.

CHAP. VII
A clearing this discourse from some supposed harshness.
I cannot be ignorant, that some conceive this harsh and not Gospel-like, for
some have plainly vented so much, as to instance and answer,

* 1. Some think it is a putting beleivers under the Law, which will gender to
bondage, Gail. 4. 21. 31.

Answ. There is great differences between being under the Law to the law, which
gendreth to bondage and without law to God, which genders to filth and
profaness, and being not without law to God, but under the Law to Christ, which
is profitable for us, 1 Cor, 9. 21. and we being yet not wholly spiritual, but
partly carnal, and though in spirit not made free from the power, dominion and
charges of the law, and the spirit of life for righteousness sake, yet the body
dead because of sin and to be kept in subjection, and no farther to be made
free by us, then by the spirits operation made free in and for services
spiritually performed, Romans 7. 14. 25. 1 Cor. 9. 27. And the law is holy just
and good, and there is good usefulness of it, if lawfully used 1 Timothy 1. 8. For
it is good to discover our sins against it, and short coming of it, to slay us
of all hopes in our selves of life, or in our own doings, and show us our
desert of curse and need of Christ, its end being for righteousness to drive to
Christ, Gall. 2. 19. Romans 10. 2. 3. 4. so as we may acknowledge the law good,
holy and just, and confess our carnality and sin and desert of curse, it
discovers, and fly to Christ, that was once under the law, and dyed, and
suffered the curse for sinners, and so redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
and so beleiving in the blood of Christ, believe in him for pardon,
righteousness and life, in which the law of the spirit of life in Christ (not
our reasonings) will make us free from the law of sin and death, and the spirit
also will afford us that righteousness which the Law required and would not
work in us, Romans 7. 14. 25. and 8. 1. 2, 3, 4. and 3. 25. Gall. 3. 14. 2 Cor 5.
21. so as even these commands also are a good role for the exercise of Charity,
1 Timothy 1. 5. 6, 8, Romans 13. 8. 9. 10. Ephesians. 6. 1. 2, 3. Gall. 5. 13. 14. And
such good use of the Law puts not beleivers under the Law, nor genders to
bondage but is profitabl^ for them; but o the reproofs of the law, which bo^ed
under and not answe^ing the end in flying to Christ, which genders to bondage,
I speak not of in this disco^^e, but of the reproofs of instruction and turning
thereat, which is the way to re^eive spirit and life, and so blessed freedom
Pro. 1. 23. and 6. 23.

* 2. Some have thought this pressing wisdoms rep^oofs is not Gospel like,
because the Gospel is good news and glad tidings of peace and salvation, an
opening the door to life and immortality. A p^eaching forgiveness, peace and
life; and all to be received in beleiving, and so cause of joy to all people,
as indeed it is, Isa. 52. 7. Romans 10. 15. 2 Timothy 1. 10. Acts 13. 38. 39. Ioh.
3. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 36. Luke 2. 10. and this agrees well with all said in
this discourse: For,

Answ. The asserting the reproofs of instruction to be received, is Gospel
language, not ungospel like, nor at all eclipseth any thing said of the gospel
in these like places, for glad tidings of salvation, pardon, peace, life, etc.
implies loss, danger, misery, sins and deserts of curse in those to whom such
tidings come; and to be acknowledged and confessed by such as believe and
receive those tidings* Isa. 53. 67. and 3. 13. 1 Timothy 1. 12. 13, 14, 15. Tit.
3. 3. 4. And indeed the affording and receiving such reproofs is very
gospel-like every way: For,

2. Jesus Christ our Savior, the object discovered to us in the Gospel, in his
working redemption and salvation in himself for us, he was first aba^ed, and
s^ffered, and made sin and dyed for us, and then ^ose from the de^d, ascended
righ^eous, and offered himself a sacrifice for us, and received all fullness of
spirit to send forth, and ^o in his ministration of gospel, he suffered and
dyed; and so through sufferings entered his glory, leaving us an example; and as
by his suffering and death he made peace for us, so by his re^u^rection it was
completed, that it might be communicable to us, for though he dyed to make
peace, yet had he not ^isen, we could not have been justified by his blood; and
suitable to this, it is that we be abased in our selves, that by him we may be
exalted, as has been shown.

2. Jesus Christ exalted, and filled with the spirit* the great Prophet in
making known his Fathers name, and the redemption wrought and salvation
procured in and by himself for men, and so having been crucified for us, and
discovering of himself the pardon, peace, righteousness and life in him, he is
therein set* forth, first for the raising again of many, and so both killing
and making alive, Luke 23. 4. Deuteronomy. 32. 39. 1 Samuel 2. 6. 7. 8. and he sits upon
unfeigned beleivers, as resiners fire and a purifier: and so is in them by his
word A spring of living waters, John 7. 38. and his spirit in the word, breaths
on the flesh and withers the flesh, and so quickens and enlivens the spirit,
Isa. 40. 1. 8. Romans 8. 10. suitable to which is that said in this Discourse.

3 In his gracious call to behold and credit him in the demonstrations of his
goodness, it is to be saved by him, and that is from goodness, it is to be
saved by him, and that is from sin and evil, as well as to enjoy quickening and
life by him, etc. Isa. 45. 22. And so from that salvation seen, first to turn
at his reproofs, and then receive the pouring out his spirit, and making known
his words, and so to repent, and believe the gospel, Prove. 1. 23. Mar. 4. 15.
And when so beleiving, yet still to be denying themselves and receiving the
reproofs of instruction, that they may be denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and so receive more abundance of life to live and walk in the spirit
Pro. 6. 23. and 9. 8. 9. and 15. 5. 31. and 17. 10. and 29. 75. and 25. 12.
Tit. 2. 11, 12. Gal. 5. 25. 26. so that receiving the reproofs of instruction,
is both gospel teaching, and gospel* like, and the way rightly to receive the
Gospel.

* 3. Some are ready to think this is a hinderance to the beleiving, rejoicing
in Christ, and so to his cheerful walking in faith and love, and his drinking
in spiritual consolations, and so makes his life sad, dumpish and unbeseeming*
But the Gospel it self does answer this, For

Answ. This has before been proved false, Chap. 3. and 4. and it is directly
contrary to the plain testimony of this spirit, that says, the reproofs of
instruction, are the way to life, Prove. 6. 23. for right knowledge of Christ
and spiritual things, The rod and reproof give wisdom, Prove. 29. 15. and the
ear that hears the reproof of life, and abides among the wise and gets
understanding, Pro. 15. 31. 32. And the humble shall see his gratiousness and
be glad, Psalm. 69* 32. ^he poor in spirit, the mourners, the meek, blessed*
etc. Matt. 5. 3, 4, 5. For God gives grace to the humble, and in due season
exalts them, that humble themselves under his mighty hand, Iam. 4* 6. 1 Pet.
5. 5. 6. And makes darkness light before them, Isa. 42. 16. And so the eyes of
the blind to see out of obseurity and darkness, Isa. 29. 18. Yea so satisfies
the afflicted soul, that their light shall rise in obscurity, and their
darkness ^e as the noon day, Isa. 58. 10. yea to purge their belief and
confidence from mixtures, he brings them to receive the sentence of death in
themselves, that they may trust only in him that raises the dead, and so fits
them with consolations suitable to their afflications, 2 Cor. 1. 4* 9* 10. Sa
as in patience possessing their souls* they rejoice in afflictions, temptations
and tribulations, Romans 5. 2. 3. 4. Jams 1. 2, 3, 4. True it is their hea^^
knows its own bitterness such as are strangers thereto, intermeddle not with
their joy. Prove. 14. 10. and to such they may well appear as unknown, while yet
well known, as dying, while behold they live, as chastned and not killed, as
sorrowful, while yet always rejoicing, as poor; while yet making many rich, as
having nothing, while possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6. 9. 10. Not did Paul's
persuasion of the Terror of the Lord in minding the first branch of the
testimony hinder his rejoicing and hope in Christ, but salt o^ season him for
^ight considering and hoping 2. Cor. 5. 11. Nor did the darkness Micha sitting
in respect of Gods ordering providence and dispensation according to the second
branch of the testimony, hinder his rejoicing hope, but season him for right
considing and waiting, Mich. 7. 7. 10. nor in looking to the third branch of
the testimony, did Habakkuks belly trembling, lips quivering, rottenness
entering into his bones, and trembling in himself at the voice of Gods
judgments, hinder his rejoicing in the Lord, and joying in the God of his
saivation Hab. 3. 16. 18. Yea so they gloryed in not appearance only, but in
heart, in deed, and truth* 2 Cor. 5. 11* 12. Yea when by reproofs and
afflictions, thus broken off from all rejoicing in seen and momentary things,
to look more purely to the unseen spiritual and ete^nal things, then will the
receiving the reproofs and corrections of wisdom and present afflictions* work
for us a far more exceeding wait of glory and therein the receiving of the
inward man in the decaying of the outward man 2 Cor. 4. 16. 17. 18. So that
this conceit that the pressing the salting reproofs and corrections of wisdom,
hinders the beleivers rejoicing in Christ (that does but season it) is
altogether false, and contrary to the sayings in the testimony, and to the
profession of unfeigned beleivers, Psalm. 23. 4.

* 4. But some are ready to say, I have not spoke and writ in this language
heretofore, but more gospel-like, from which I seem to be declined, in so large
pressing reproofs and corrections to be received from it.

Answ. That is not right, to say I have not spoke and writ the same language,
for I have both spoken and writ the same things, set forth in these reproofs
and the efficacies thereof received, as all that read my first treatise, put
forth especially the 24. Chapter, called by the Printer, The Universality of
Gods free grace to mankind: and that other, Of the discovery of the precious
blood of Christ, specially the 11 Chap. and other books and manuscripts, which
such as had read may see and know the falseness of this charge, only I have not
been so large in pressing the receiving of such reproofs and corrections, with
the danger of not receiving, which as it is no prejudice to that said here, so
I may give some reason why I thus do it now, and did not so fully do it then.

1. Because I had not salt enough with its saltness in my self, to do it
rightly, so as it might be suitable to the words given by inspiration of the
Almighty* for doctrine reproof, correction and instruction in righteousness;
First doctrine, next with that reproof, and then with both correction, and so
instruction in righteousness: And had I yet more salt in my self, with its
saltness, I should do it more profitably in this order, 2 Timothy 3. 16. which yet
in my weakness I have assayed.

2. Because I conceived some not able to be are home pressing and plain
reproofs and corrections to be received, with the terror of the Lord against
refusers, ( correction being grievous to him that is out of the way* Prove. 15.
19.) and so I was willing rather to forbear then to break in pieces, but wait
to see if God by grace would at any time humble and so fit them to receive
reproof, 2 Timothy 2. 34. 25. 26.

3. Because many inclining toward, attending and loving the gospel and
doctrine thereof, who are yet weak and tender, and ready to be affrighted with
a hard word, and such I am commanded to pity and have compassion on, and deal
with them with tenderness and the spirit of meekness, and so to speak as they
may be able to bear it, as our Savior did, Jude 22. Gall. 6. 1. John 16. 12.
And now the gospel has been by many plainly displayed, but yet notwithstanding

4. Some there are stiff and wilful in some evil way or self design, or some
open sins, or magnifying some delusions who are to be rebuked openly, and
sharply, and to be striven with, to save them with terror and fear, to pluck
them as brands out of the fire, 1 Timothy 5. 20. Tit. 1. 13. Jude 23. And if we
look at the Metaphor salt, we know it is not to be applied alike to all meats
to be eaten, neither for quantity, nor alike measure of rubbing and a pressing
it on, nor alike measure in all meats it is eaten with, but as need is, some
more some less, and the same may I say for the discovering reproofs of the
testimony with its effects and corrections to make them take place, so that
where more corruption and filth appears, to be purged out, there is need of
more large and through pressing these reproofs and corrections to be received:
And so if I see now more in my self, and others needing it, it is gospel-like
for me to assay it.

Wherefore take it rightly and stumble not at it; if I discern the appearance
of more corruption in my self, and other beleivers and professors of the gospel
then formerly, though I have been plain in this way: we have the doctrine of
the gospel made known to us, and the reproofs of instruction therewith extended
to us, he often knocking at our hearts, and yet we while these reproofs have been
gently pressed on us, have not so received them as to turn at his reproofs; no
nor yet when in love he has corrected us, we have not received correction; no
though to hide pride from us and break us of our enterprises and designs; he
has been afflicting with diverse sorts of lesser judgments, forerunners of his
four sore sore judgments to bow our hearts, and called us to humble our selves
and seek his face, before the decree come forth, that we might be hid in the
day of his anger, yet we have not so received his reproofs and corrections, as
to turn thereat, and draw nigh to him and put our trust in him, yea when in
some distresses we have cried to him he has given us peace, and we said we
would no more transgress, yet we have turned again to folly: And though he has
smitten others with the pestilence further off to warn us, yet we took not
warning, but have gone on still in our own ways, till he (though with slow
beginnings at the first) has brought the pestilence among us. And if yet those
very sins for which he has both threatened and executed the pestilence (and his
other three sore judgments Ezech. 14. 21.) be found gone on in by us, need we
not to be much salted and humbled under his reproofs and corrections? let us
try and see

* 1. When Heathens and unbeleivers oppose the power of godliness in beleivers,
and persecute them therefore, and will imbondage and not suffer them to walk
sorth, therein to serve the Lord (like as the Egyptians did to Israel) the
pestilence is threatened ^or this and will be executed if timely they repent
not: But when God thus pleads the cause of his people with such he will
distinguish between them and their pe^secutors and his people shall not be
smitten with their persecutors Exodus 9. 15. and 11. 4. 7. But i^ p^o^est
Christians, beleiving and pro^essing the same Jesus to be the Christ, shall for
the power of godliness oppose and persecute one another, and imbondage from
going forth therein to serve the Lord Christ, because of some different
persuasions in the outward form, and persecute their brethren that will not
magnify, and be tied up to that fo^m and outward order they prescribe this is
more heinous and p^ovoking then the former: And then no ma^vel though he smite
with the pestilence of all sorts of us, for such things are so biting one
another, this being worse then those evils mentioned, Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 11.
28. 32. Gall. 5. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 6. 8. Isa. 6. 6. 5. and all proceeding from way
giving to pride, Prove. 13. 10. And not discerning the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11.
18. 19. 29. 30. etc.

* 2. When beleivers are put up for their teachers, and their teachers not
content with their office of ministration, and therein to serve the Lord
Christ, to preach and magnify him as the Lord, and to be themselves the
beleivers servants ^or his sake, and as brethren with them, but will be as
Lords over Gods heritage, usurping dominion over the faith of beleivers, 2 Cor.
1. 24. and 4. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Jude 6. and so aspire to be in the
place of the mediator, the great P^ophet, and high P^iest of the house of God,
typed out of old by Moses and Aaron, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. 19. Act. 3. 22. 23. Hebr. 7.
and 5. 1. 10. and 3. 1. the sin typed out in the aspi^ing of Chorah the Levite
Jud. 11. yea some teachers palliating this sin and teaching falesly, that such
priests may bear ^ule by their means, and the people loving to have it so,
which calls for dreadful glagues Ier. 5. 30. 31. And this not in one or two
sorts of beleivers, but in any sort of them and their teachers, for we find the
perstilence sent and destroyed many thousands of those that were our types for
this sin, how much more when the truth it self is come, and we so transgress
against it* Numb. 16. 9. 10. 11. 41. 49. And these writ for our examples; that
we may fear sorer destruction if as they against the tipes, we so sin against
the truth so clearly displayed, 1 Cor. 10. 6. 11. Heb. 23. and 12. 25.

* 3. When men refuse to be under that yoke of worldly power, Governors and
Government, for the outward man which God has put them under, and they by the
covenant of God have submitted to, though he were a heathen Governor, the
powers that ^^e in being in chief authority, being of God, and his ordinance
that we should ^ubmit, and not reject not resist such casting off and not
submitting to bear this yoke, is a heinous sin against which God has
threatened, and on such executed the pestilence; how much more when governors
are professed Christians, To despise dominion, speak evil of dignities, etc.
Ezekiel. 17. 7. 13. 14. 15. 21. with Ierm. 21. 6. 8. 9. and 32. 2. Romans 13. 1. 2.
2 Pet. 2. 10. 11. 12. Jude 8. 9.

* 4. When professed christians and beleivers join with worshippers of Idols, and
fall with t^^m to commit spiritual and corporal whoredom, and so to Idolatry,
uncleanness etc, when such things committed by them, for such sins God has
smitten four and twenty thousand, yea three and twenty thousand of them in one
day with the pestilence* Numb. 25. 3. 6. 9. And this set forth for our example,
1 Co^. 10.

* 5. When on the pinching smart and fea^ of some great distress, Princes and
people have made a promise and covenant according to Gods command, to grant
Peace, Liberty and Freedom to the poor and imbondaged neighbors, subjects and
servants, and begun to do it and when some freedom from the affliction and
fear, and some rest is obtained, then they return again to oppress, and
imbondage these poor subjects, servants and neighbors; for such transgression,
the Lord has threatened and executed the pastilence, Ier. 37. 3. 11. with 34.
8. 11. 15. 16. 17. Neither will Prayer with fasting prevail till this be
repented, Isa. 58. 3. 6.

* 6. When Rulers and people grow proud of, and glory and boast of, or confide
in multitude of Warriers, Ammunition, etc. 2 Samuel 24. 2. 15. 1 Cron. 21. 3. 12,
14.

Now it appearing by Gods own word expressly, that every or any of these sins
committed, deserves and may be punished with the pestilence; how much more
when most or all of them are not only found in a nation, but so generally, that
they may be called national sins, yea and also when amongst professed beleivers,
hardly any to be found that are not guilty of one or two of these sins if not
more, yea, when hereby also, even all those sins mentioned in the whole 22.
chapter of Ezekiel is found in a nation, is not the pestilence rightly and
justly executed on us, yea to convince us that no so^t may be li^ted up to
justify themselves on some of all sorts of us, which to such as are oppose^s of
the power of Godliness, may prove an occasion of hardening themselves, because
they see some of those they oppose, smitten as well as some of themselves,
which is the fruit of not receiving reproof and cause of being judicially
hardened, which threatens still so^er judgments: And which is yet worst of all,
though all this appear, and the pestilence still slaying, yet by all this our
uncircumcised hearts are not so humbled, as by his reproofs so to receive
correction as to lay a side our Pride, and be broke of our designs and ways,
and so drawn nigh to God, in seeking his face, and trusting in his mercy, which
threatens not only pestilence but greater judgments, and desolation, Levit.
26. 25. 32.

So that I hope this considered, that not only this plain discourse, but even
by such as have in themselves more salt saltness then I. It will be accounted
necessary to press the reproofs of instruction to be received with its
efficacies, so salt and its saltness to be in us, yea for our after warning,
even when we are healed of this Pla^ge.

CHAP. VIII.
Conclusion.
TO conclude, I desire my self and others seriously to consider our Saviors so
serious admonition, and warning of danger so vehemently and often pressed with
council given here, verse 42. to 48. and his affirmations, verse. 49 50. Every
one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt,
salt is good* but if the salt have lost its saltness* wherewith will you season
it; have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another.

And for some help in this consideration, consider what is said in this whole
discourse about it, which though but plain and weak, yet may be some help it
seriously per^sed; wherefore to close up altogether, I pray and beseech you
with me, let us every one seriously attend to mind, and so receive,

1. The doctrine of Christ in what he became, suffered, and has done for us,
and what he thereby is become, and does in Heaven for us, and from heaven to
us, and what he will do at his coming again; mind this and believe for truth
every saying thereof, for this is the voice of Christ whence all the Oracles:
And it is the first thing propounded, and so in order as truth first to be
beheld and received, in all our learning of him, as has been hinted through
the discourse.

2. In beholding and belief of this, heed and believe the discovering reproofs
of it, of the filth in us, and the need we stand in of the salvation it
discovers, and so of the hainousness of the sin of neglect, of disesteem and
ill requital of so great salvation, and the equity justness and terribleness of
the second death, for contemners of so great salvation, and so receive these
reproofs, that our hear^s may be persuaded, and always retain those
persuasions as true. Of the odiousnesness of sin, and its abominableness to
God. Of the wretchedness, mysery and vileness of man, as of himself and from
Adam. Of the helplesness in our selves to come in to receive this salvation. Of
the heinousness of the sin of neglect, and ill requital of so great salvation.
Of the equity and justness of the terribleness of the lake of fire, for such as
rebel against so great grace, as is shown Chap. 4.

3. In receiving these reproofs, effecting such persuasions, let them abide and
have their efficacy in us, retaining the same in our selves, so as we be
thereby framed and continually kept in that frame. Of loathing our selves as of
our selves and from Adam. Of sencibleness of our need of the salvation in
Christ. Of a base estimate of our selves, of our own wisdom, strength,
righteousness, deeds and designs, and of abhorrency of them. Of an awful fear
and jealousy of our selves, least we should mix any thing with the grace and
promise of Christ, in our beleiving and confidence for life, as foreshewn, 4
and 5. and 3. And,

4. In all and awful fear and dread of the great name of the Lord, so as our
hearts may tremble at his word and judgments, and at the truth, righteousness,
equity, and severity of the terror against rebellious contemners of his saving
word, as shown chap. 4. that so having the true testimony in these reproofs
with their efficacies in us, we may be seasoned therewith, as shown at large,
Chap. 4. 11.

5. Let us receive all his fatherly corrections as in love to us, to sit us for
receiving, and right usefulness of his reproofs with their efficacies, that we
may gain by them, and take sufferings for his name as a favor, as foreshewn
chap. 3* And so let us have salt in our selves as shown at large, chap. 6.

And i^ we thus heed and receive the reproof of wisdom, so as we be thus
humbled and kept low in our selves, having salt in our selves, light will shine
forth to us from the testimonies, and he will be a light to us when we sit in
darkness: And so humbling our selves under his mighty hand, he will exalt us in
due time, wherefore let every of us know, and confess his own sore, and so
humble our selves, and looking up to his mercy, and so receive correction and
draw nigh to God and trust in him, and so let us pray for his people, for our
governors, for our selves and the nation, yea be afflicted, and mourn and weep
for out sins, and provoking him to lay mise^y on us: and so draw nigh to God,
and he will draw nigh to us and hear and heal us: But I will proceed no farther
in this, comfort is to be extended to the afflicted, which I assayed in the
antidote, but in this discourse to move to such a frame and path, as in which
we may in beleiving receive all the promises, and our gracious God will comfort
us: And so I desire we may always have salt in our selves, with its saltness,
seasoning us to receive his consolations, and to walk in his teachings, and
edify one another. And the God of mercy, and father of all consolations fill
us, with consolations, and afford us helpfulness according to all our needs,

Amen.
Wittlesey June 8. 1670. Your weak unworthy brother Tho. Moore.

FINIS.
A Consideration of Revel. 22. 14.
TO THE READER.
I pray in Reading mind the Scripture, and take all here written as no
withdrawing from living by faith, but as a Directory to exercise Faith, it
being a contracted some, that spoken to a plain Auditory, not so much to fill
the notion, as to stir up to motion not to please speculation, but to stir up
to spiritual Action; so as I may say what you read, to do, in beleiving the
testimony you will find motions in the testimony unto, and I pray yield up to
do them, Remember the sons of God, called by the spirit of God, And surely you
will find that in this way he leads, in whose leadings the Lord help us
always to walk, as prays

Your Unworthy Brother, THO. MOORE.

Revel. 22. 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments that they may have
right to the Tree of Life, and may enter through the Gates into the City.
CHAPTER I.
THe Apostle had in the former Chapter declared what in vision he saw
concerning the Holy City, in verse 2. 3. 4. 5. and how the City was shown him,
verse 10. 10 23. having on every of the four squares three gates, ver. 13. and
that the saved nations should walk in the light of it, and the Kings of the
earth should bring their glory and honor to it, ver. 24. but no unclean thing
shall enter into it, ver. 27. and that the nations far remote might be cleansed
and healed, and so come in to it; he tells us in this Chapter of a River of
water of Life, and of a tree baring fruit, whose leaves were for the healing of
the nations, etc. and affirming the truth of these things, and both certainly
and speedily to be done, in and at his coming, the Apostle is commanded to
publish and declare the same, though some take offense thereat, and so being
filthy, become more filthy; yet that such as willingly hear and so are holy,
may become more holy; and so this declaration is for our present usefulness:
For as the glory and manner of entering the Gates in that time which is yet to
come, it is though told yet not manifested, 1 Cor. 13. 9. 12. 1 John 3. 2, 50.
I will not presume to speak of the glory of those Gates, and the manner of
entering in thereat, but as this 14. ver. is not a part of the vision, but in it
a direction and encouragement to us for such demeanor now in the way
appointed, as that then we may have our part in that City, (like that said
Chap. 20. 6.) so it is recorded as all other Scriptures were for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Romans
15. 4. I shall therefore consider this verse in such sense as is for our
present usefulness, that we may enjoy that future hope* And so I shall consider
these five observable in it. viz.

* 1. What true blessedness indeed is, in having, whereof the haver is truly
blessed.

* 2. The discovery of the beginning and way of receipt of this true
blessedness, in keeping his Commandments.

* 3. The affi^mation of those that walk in this way to be even now blessed.

* 4. The end required and to be aimed at in doing his Commandments. Even that
we may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter through the gates into the
City, which also is the issue.

* 5. That all that do enter the City, are such as have right to the tree of
life* and must enter through the gates.

CHAP. II.
* 1. Observable
What true blessedness indeed is in having, whereof the haver is truly and
indeed blessed, that is in true happiness and welfare; and this blessedness in
respect of Adam and all that naturally come of him, may be expressed and set
forth in three branches, in which and in all and each of them is true
blessedness indeed, viz.

1. In not having sin imputed to them, but being accepted and accounted
righteous in and for the righteousness of another, even Christ.

2. In having sin purged out of them, and so wholly taken from them, and being
made conform to Christ in righteousness and healing.

3. In being intressed in, and possessed of all that happiness and durable
riches, which Christ has procured for them, and has to bestow on them, and
promised to confer on them, and so blessedness is,

1. In not having sin imputed to them, not accounted theirs, but accepted for
and counted righteous in the righteousness of another, that has satisfied for
their sins, paid their debt, and overcome death, and completed righteousness
for them in himself, even Christ, and this counted theirs, and that this is
true blessedness, is expressly affirmed from Psalm. 32. 2. in the Apostles
opening the mystery, affirming included in it, imputation of righteousness,
Romans 4. 6. 7. 8. yea in the height and completing of blessedness, this also is
affirmed to be in it, Psalm. 85. 2. Isa. 33. 24. Ier. 31. 34. yea surely this is
the first and prime beginning of true blessedness, without which there is no
true blessedness; for the time will come, when all men shall be freed from the
being of sin in them, that they shall commit sin no more, and yet the sins
freedom by them not forgiven; the guilt of sin remains on them, and they shall
suffer for it everlastingly, Isa. 33. 1. and 45. 23. 24. Phil. 2. 10. 15. so
that in forgiveness of sins, is true blessedness.

2. In having with this forgiveness of sins, sin by the grace of Christ purging
and purged out of them, and so they made conform to Christ in righteousness and
holiness, to have sin purged out of them by his power, judgments, and death,
will be to all men in the resurrection of the unjust, who as they shall be
raised in a kind of immortality, so as they can never so die again, as to cause
to be, or to be sensible, so they shall be destitute of such inclinations,
motions, and actions of sin, as sore in them; but being unforgiven, suffer
everlastingly, and destitute of likeness to Christ in righteousness and
holiness: but before that day, in the day of grace, to be by* his grace, to be
purged from the lordly and dommanding power, and so by degrees from the being
of sin in us, and so to be conformed to Christ in righteousness, in
disposition, and doing righteousness, is true blessedness, Romans 66. 14. 1 Ioh.
2. 29. and 3. 9. 10. so as they are pronounced blessed, that are undesiled
(perfect sincere) in the ways, who walk in the Law of the Lord, that keep his
testimonies and seek him with the whole heart, that do iniquiry, but walk in
his Laws, Psalm. 119. 1. 2. 3. and 106, 3. and 15. and 24. 4. Isa. 33. 16. 18.
and 56. 1. 2. and with this righteousness in both branches said, still blessed.

3. In being interressed in, and possessed of that happiness in those good
things, and durable riches and privileges, which Christ has procured for
them, and has to bestow on them, and promised to conferr on them, in receiving
and enjoyment where of is true blessedness, 2 Pet. 1. 1. 4. Ephesians. 1. 3. Luke.
14. 15. Psalm. 89. 15. and 37. 22. Revel. 20. 6. and 19. 9. And surely in this*
and so in each of these, and so in them all, is true blessedness indeed; and so
to have our sins forgiven, and not imputed to us, but to be accounted righteous
in the righteousness of Christ, To have him for righteousness, and be made the
righteousness of God in him, 1 Cor. 1, 30. 3 Cor. 5. 21. and to be made
con^orme to him in righteousness; and to be interressed in, and possessed of,
so as to enjoy his privileges and durable riches, is true blessedness indeed,
only in this description of blessebness, this is to be noted, that the whole
and full of this blessedness, is not conferred on and received by any of us at
once, but by degrees to be increasing here, and completed in the resurrection
of the just, Psalm. 84. 10. 2 Pet. 3. 18 Phil. 2. 6. 10. and 3. 10. 14.

CHAP. III.
2 Observable.
THe discovery of the beginning and way of receipt of this true blessedness, (I
say not of the deserving and procuring cause of blessedness: Christ himself and
he only is that, but of the beginning and way of receipt, and that) is the
doing his Commandments, it is expressly said. Blessed are they that do his
Commandments. If the words were here expressed as to be limited and
appropriated to those that were formerly beleivers, who in beleiving are
blessed, Romans 4. 5. and so might be the same sense, with they that are blessed
do his Commandments, and then the Commandments are as expressly comprehended in
commands: that is, to believe on the name of the Son of God, and to love one
another as he has commanded us, Joh. 14. 1. 1 John 3. 23. Ioh. 13. 34. But the
words are here expressed more largely and generally even as large as whosoever,
as verse. 17. they that do his Commandments, and so though formerly unbeleivers,
and did not, yet if on hearing they believe and do, and so beleivers that have
begun still do, they shall receive and enjoy blessedness, and so be blessed,
Jam. 1. 25. and so taken, we may consider the Commandments in more
particulars, which also may be comprehended in these sev* ^n branches, That is
to say,

1. That we believe the testimony of him, and the sayings therein, in their own
plain import, true and good and of great concernment to us.

2. That we turn at his reproof in confessing our sins, and turning from that
he reproves in us our own ways.

3. That from his pouring forth his spirit, making known his word to us, we
believe on his name for all he promises.

4. That for his goodness in that he has suffered and done, and does, and his
instruction, and example given, we confess his name, denying our selves, and
take up our cross to follow him.

5. That in belief of his love to us, and for his love sake, We love one
another, as he has loved us.

6. That we intend and seek the glorifying him in all these forementioned, and
not applause or satisfying to our selves in any self designs, nor humoring men,
but this glory and the good of men seek in all we do.

7. That in all, we in patience possess our souls, waiting for the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

1. That we believe his testimony and the sayings therein, in their own plain
import, true and good, and concerning us, as, that by one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all, for that all have
sinned. And as by the offense of one, unto all men to condemnation, even so by
the righteousness of one unto all men to justification of life, Romans 5. 12. 18.
So that Jesus Christ by the grace of God, has tasted death for every man Heb.
2. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. dyed for our fins, and rose for our justification, Romans
4. 25* 1 Cor. 15. 34. And so gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2. 6. and
is the Savior of the world, the propitiation for the sins of the whole world,
1 John 4. 14. and 2. 2. And yet that such as know not God and obey not the
Gospel of Christ, shall perish, etc. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. and such as do the
works of the flesh, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleaness, Wantonness, Idolatry,
Heresy, Blasphemy, Witchcrast, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife,
Seditions, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revelling, etc. That they which do
such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gall. 5. 19. 20. 21. Ephe.
5. 4. 5. 6, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 19. And that Christ is exalted with, and on Gods right
hand, a Prince and Savior to give repentance and remission of sins, Acts 5.
31. The true light that lighteneth every man that comes into the world, The
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, the Savior of all men, of
sinners, John 1. 9. 29. 1 Timothy 4. 10. and 1. 9. 15. being filled with spirit to
send forth to the rebellious that God might dwell among them, Psalm. 68. 18. and
in sending forth his spirit in the testimony, he convinces men of sin of
righteousness, and of judgment, John. 16. 7. 8. 9. 10. And such as turn at his
reproof he will pour forth his spirit and make known his words to them, and
such as wilfully refuse, he will reject, etc. Pro. 1. 23. to 29. and many like
sayings, all tending to one and the same end, which if believed with the heart,
it would be unto righteousness, and it is his Commandment we should believe
them: yea Christ himself says, Believe me, John 4. 21. and 14. 1. 11. believe
the Gospel, Mar. 1. 15. And by his spirit in the Prophets, says, believe God,
believe his Prophets, so shall yea prosper, 2 Cron. 20. 20. Pro. 4. 10. John
12. 36. yea unless we believe, we shall not be established, Isa. 7. 9. yea the
not beleiving these sayings in the testimony, is a giving God the lie, 1 John
5. 10. and this is the very work of the Devil, to keep men from beleiving this,
Luke 8. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 4. for to this beleiving is the blessing promised, John
7. 38. and in it the saving and powerful efficacy of the spirit met with, Romans
1. 16. 1 These. 2, 13. That in this beleiving we may believe in him, according
to his name, which is the very end of the declaration of the Gospel, John 20*
21, and for such as beleiving, his sayings, do believe on him for his promises,
they are still to hold fast the minding and beleiving of the testimony and
sayings therein, that they may still believe in him for his promises, 1 Cor.
15. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 John 2. 24 25. so that it is clear, to believe his sayings
true and good, and concerning us, is one of his Commandments.

2. hat we receive his convincements and turn at his reproofs, which in
discovery of his grace he affords, Pro. 1. 23. and 9. 4. 6. Isa. 55. 1. 2.
and so his commands report and believe the Gospel, Mar. 1. 15. true it is in
discovery of his great love in suffering so great and cursed a death for us,
and in making it known to us in the Gospel, extending them it; grace to us,
that in beleiving we might receive it, and so have peace and life in him; he
therein discovers the vileness of our sins, needing such a ransom, the vanity
and emptiness of all wisdom, righteousness and strength in us, to help us, our
being so verily dead by desert, and sentence of the Law, And Gods hatred of,
and severity of Justice against our sinfulness, that his own son the Holy one,
having undertaken for us, he would not spare nor abate him one jot of all the
curse done to us, but judged him in the flesh for it all, and inflicted it all
on him, and he suffered it for us, without which we could not have had no
escape, Heb. 9. 22. Romans 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 14. Romans 8. 3. Matt. 26. 38, 39. Isa.
53. 4. 5. 6. which is to be owned by us if we believe in him, Romans 4. 25. and
3. 10. 21. besides in discovering this, that we might live to him who has
power to take away our after sin, he ^iscovereth the more abundant vileness of
our sinnings against the light and grace extended, by such a Redeemer, and its
desert of a greater curse then the former, John 1. 9. 9. 10. 11. 29. and 3. 19.
20. and 12. 48. And such manner sinning, with our Pride and self considences
and designs, to be confessed and turned from, owning our selves as ungodly, if
we will receive the pouring forth his spirit and making known his words to us,
and to believe in him that justifies the ungodly, Pro. 1. 23. Mar. 1. 15. Romans
4. 5. in which blessedness is received; and for this end is Christ in the
Gospel set forth unto us, to bless us, in turning every of us from our
iniquities, Acts 3, 26. and 26. 18. and 20. 21. and so Christ is in the Gospel
set forth for the fall and rising again of many, which fall whoever refuses,
he proves to such, through their offense taking at his reproofs a stone of
stumbling, Luke 2. 14. Ier. 6. 15. John 3. 19, 20. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. and so the
Apostle renders it, Romans 9. 3. 32. 33. and 10. 3. compared with John 10. 38.
39. and 6. 41. 42, 60. 66. and in this owning, receiving and turning at his
rep^oofs, the blessing is met with, Pro. 1. 23. and 9. 6. and those that have
in belief of his sayings, turned at his reproofs, and met with the blessing in
beleiving on him, there is something needing reproof still found in them, and
in their ways; Romans 7. 14. 24. Iam. 3. 2. Pro. 20. 9. Eccles. 7. 20. so as it
becomes them to be still receiving of and turning at his reproofs, and
confessing their sinfulness, and the defilements of their own wrought
righteousness, and blessing therein is still to be met with, Isa. 64. 6, 7.
Pro. 28. 13. 14. and 15. 31. 32. 33. John 1. 9. That so we may still be found
beleiving in him that justifies the ungodly, Romans 1. 4. 5. which otherwise we
cannot be: for though a man believe his sayings, that Christ dyed for our sins
and rose for our justification, and is the propitiation for the sins of the
whole world, and that whoever beleiveth in him, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life, yet if this be not so with the heart embraced, that he
humbled himself to turn at his reproof, he will either in his severity, by his
consequences, turn the grace of God into laciviousness, Iud. 4. Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
20. or in his fleshly zeal set upon some deeds of righteousness of his own, to
get or claim this grace of God by, Romans 9. 32. 33. and 10. 3. Luke 18. 11. and
so deprive themselves of the blessing, for refusing reproof is bruitishness,
Pro. 12. 1 and 13. 1. and causes to err. Pro. 10. 17. for the reproofs of
instruction are the way of life, Pro. 6. 23. so that its evident and clear,
this is one of his Commandments, to turn at his reproof* and the doing it* to
be ever joined with the former, therefore let us so to do both the first, and
so this,

3. That from his pouring forth his spirit* and making known his words to us,
we believe in him, in his name, 2* Cron. 20. 20* John 14. 1. surely this is the
work of God (even his end and that for which he displayeth his name in his Son,
he has sent forth the Savior of the world, that for which he convinces and
abaseth men, to turn at his reproofs* that for which he causes his great love
in giving Christ to dye for us, when we were sinners and ungodly to appear)
that we believe in him whom he has sent, John. 6. 29. and to this end is the
Gospel declared, and recorded, that we might so believe on his name, John 20.
31. which is, when in beleiving his love in that he suffered and died for us,
when enemies, we owning our own vileness, so mind his love, and that he is now
ever living and filled with power and spirit in Heaven to do further for us,
that we believe in him for performing to us the goodness promised Rom 5. 6, 10.
and 8, 32. 34. such beleiving the testimony of Christ and his sayings therein,
as owning our own weakness, we believe in God for that promised* is that
beleiving that so receives the faith, that it is imputed to the beleiver for
righteousness, Romans 4. 17. 24, 25. And this is his Commandment, that we believe
on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3. 23. yea in and through beleiving
that he has suffered and done and completed for us in his own body, to
believe in him for all he has promised to us, this the beleiving in him, in
which the Faith is so received, that it is imputed to the beleiver for
righteousness. And so it is his Faith, Romans 4. 5. 9. 11. 17. 24. 25. that as it
is the faith of the Son of God, and so Christ and this faith of him, being his
faith, he may in all conditions live by it, Heb. 2. 4. Romans 1. 17. Gall. 2. 20.
and 3. 11. that so from the spirits testimony beleiving his love, in giving
himself for us, and thence his truth, power and faithfulness to perform all he
has promised, we through the spirit do wait for the righteousness of God, (in
his performing his promise) by faith according to the faith, and declared in
the faith believed by us, Gall. 5. 5. and this beleiving in him, beleiving in
his name, and so confiding, trusting in him, in his word, Psalm. 56. 4, 3, 10,
11. is his Commandment, Psalm. 37. 3. 4. 5. 7. Pro. 3. 5. Isa. 26. 4. and 50.
10. and such trusters pronounce blessed, Psalm. 2. 12. and 34. 8. and 37. 6. and
84. 12. Ier. 17. 7. and this is a needful and very profitable Commandment for
us, for though a man believe the sayings of the Gospel in what Christ has
suffered and done for all men, and that his love is commended there through;
yet if he receive not the love of the truth to be saved by it, so as he turn in
at his reproof, and receive the pouring out of his spirit, and making known his
word, to believe in him for that promised, he is not yet made free by Christ
the Son, as a Son, John 8. 31. 36. And so as yet liable to turn the grace of
God into wantonness, or to make up a righteousness of his own to claim the
righteousness of God by, as has been shown: yea and so to receive damnable
delusions* 2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12. yea though sprinkled with water, and moved by
spirit, yet if not born of water and spirit he cannot enter the kingdom, 2. 3.
5. But from the belief of the testimony and its sayings, turning at his
reproof, and so receiving the spirit making known his word, that he beleiveth
on him for that he kath promised, he begins to be born of water and spirit, and
to be made free, and is a Son of God by faith indeed Gall. 4. 6. 7, and 3. 26.
and being so confiding and hoping in him, he is still to hold fast this
confidence, Heb. 3. 6. 14. and so to trust perfectly in him at all times, and
for the grace to be brought us in the Revelation of Christ, for this is his
Commandment, Psalm. 62. 8. 1 Pe. 13. therefore in doing both the forementioned
Commandments let us do this also, that we may enjoy the blessing.

4. That for his great, free and rich love and goodness thus believed, we
confess his name in the Gospel in word and conversation, and in and for this
confession sake, that we deny our selves, and take up our Cross and follow
Christ, in his instruction, in example given us, Phill. 1. 27. 29. and 2. 8.
16, 17. 2 These. 1. 4. 5. 6. 7. and as to this confession of him in self denial,
and bearing his reproach before the sons of men, the blessing is promised Matt.
10. 32. Luke 12. 8. Psalm. 31. 19. and like as he was abased, despised,
persecuted, and persecuted all the days of his mortal life, and in patience
bearing it, gave us an example, 1 Pet. 2. 21. 22. 23. and as his first coming
and suffering and death, was not to exempt men wholly from feeling misery and
death, but in his fathers way and season to redeem them out of both, so as it
is appointed to men once to dye, Heb. 9. 27. and to all that believe in him, to
bear his r^proch and suffer tribulation, for his names sake Matt. 10. 22. 24.
25. Mar. 13. 12. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 12. And so this is his
Commandment, whosoever will come after me (if any man will be his Disciple) let
him deny himself and take up his Cross and follow me, Mar. 13. 34. Mar. 16. 24.
Lu. 9. 25 without which he is not worthy, nor can be his Disciple and follow
him* Mat. 10. 37. 38. and whoeis ashamed of his Cross, and for that of him and
his words, and so to confess him before the sons of men, he will be ashamed of
them and deny them before his father which is in Heaven Mar. 8. 38. Mat. 10.
33. such are enemies of the Cross of Christ mind earthly things, and glory in
their shame, their end destruction; Phill. 3. 16. 19. And whatever they save by
such denyals, they shall though they repent lose it, and if they repent not,
lose a better life also. Mat. 19. 39. and 16. 25. 26. Mar. 8. 35. and Luke 9.
24. 25. 26. whereas in denying our selves and taking up our Cross, and so
following him in confessing his name, the choice of blessing of grace here, and
glory hereafter, is to be met with, Mat. 19. 28. 29. Luke 18. 28. 29. 2 Cor. 1.
4. 5. Rev. 7. 14. 15. Romans 8. 17. 18. and this is sure if we suffer with him,
we shall reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 11. therefore let us in observing the first
Commandment in belief of his sayings, and thence the second in turning at his
reproof, and so the third in beleiving on his name for all promised, and from
and with all obey this Commandment. In and for confessing of his name deny our
selves, and take up our Cross and follow Christ in his instructions and
examples given us, for blessed are we when persecuted for righteousness sake,
for ours is the kingdom of Heaven, blessed we when men shall revile us etc.
for Christ, and the Gospel sake, Matt. 5. 10. 11. 12.

5. That in belief of, and minding this great grace and love of God in Christ,
and for Christ, and his love sake, we love one another, as he has loved us, 1
Ioh. 3 11. and 4. 11. he loved us when there was nothing lovely, nothing
deserving his love in us, when we loved not him; yea when we were sinners,
ungodly and enemies to him, yet he, he then loved us, and so loved us, that he
laid down his life for us, Romans 5. 6. 8. 1. Pet. 3. 12. And his Commandment is,
that we so love one another, 1 John 3. 16. and 4. 10. 11. yea he in this love
while we were yet enemies, foolish and disobedient, he so loved us (as he does
others still) that he uses patience and long sufferance, and extends mercies
and means leading to repentance, striving to overcome our and their evil with
goodness Psalm. 145. ^. 14. 2 Pet. 3. 9. 15. Romans 2. 4. 5. And his Commandment
is, that we should so love our enemies, and do good to them that hate us, and
strive to overcome their evil with goodness, Matt. 5. 44. 48. Luke 6. 26. 36.
Romans 12. 20. 21. and when by his love and goodness b^leived, we are drawn in to
be his, to believe in him and love him, he then loves us with the love of
delight and well pleased us as the Father loves him, and has loved him, John
14. 21. 23. and 15. 9. 10. and intresseth us, and gives to us of his own
privileges the privileges of the Son of God, John 1. 12. Gall. 3. 26. 29. and
4. 6. 7. 1 John 3. 1. Heb. 2. 12. 13. and vouchsafes the fellowship with us* 1
John 1. 3. 7. and takes the care of us, and simpathizeth with us in all our
trials and afflictions, supporting us in, and doing us good thereby, Isa. 63.
9. Heb. 4. 15. Romans 8. 28. and makes it his business to wash and cleanse and
sanctify us through it, and so to preserve us to the inheritance, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
2^. 24. Ephesians. 5. 25. 26. 27. yea he ever lives to intercede for us, and
bears our weakness, and forgiveth our sins, answers our Prayers, and
supplyeth us out of his own fullness, with all that is good for us* Heb. 25.
John 14. 15. 14. and 1. 16. and his Commandment is, that as he has loved, and
loves us that believe on him, so we should love all our breathren that are
beleivers on him, with such delightful and well pleased love, John 13. 34. 35.
and 15. 12. 13. And surely in this love of compassion and well pleasedness,
effected by the love of God believed, is charity, yea it is charity it self,
flowing from the love of God believed, and even therefore loving such as
deserve no love, yea as give occasion of displeasure, etc. and it is well
pleased with all God is well pleased with, and so springs up, and brings forth
those Christ-like fruits, mentioned 1 Cor. 13. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. and fills with
those bowels of mercies, etc. and leads to that forbearance and forgiving one
another, etc. mentioned, Coll. 3. 12. 13. 14. yea the doing of all the commands
in the second table of the Law, is done in doing this, Romans 13. 8. 9. 10. so as
in loving our neighbor as our self, all the Law is fulfilled, Gall. 5. 14. and
he that thus loves is born of God, (taught and has learned of God) and
knows (owneth and acknowledges) God, and God dwells in him, and he in God,
1 John 4. 7. 12. 16. yea this love freeth from stumbling, 1 John 2. 10. and
covers the multitude of infirmities, 1 Pet. 4. 8. and works up brotherly
kindness, 2 Pet. 1. 7. Ephesians. 4. 34. and causes continuan^e, 1 John 2. 10. 1
Cor. 13. 7. 8. and leads to follow God, and be in a measure like him, Ephesians. 5.
1. 2. Luke 1. 38. so as this a sweet and a healthful Commandment, and great
blessing met with, in doing this Commandment: but he that does it not, and so
loves not his brother as said, he is in darkness, and walks in darkness, is
not of God, not knows God, but is a Murderer, and has no eternal life in him
1 John 2. 9. 11. and 3. 10. 15. and 4. 8. 20. And this Commandment we have from
him, that he which loves God loves his brother also, 1 John 4. 21* let us
therefore in and with keeping the four former mentioned Commands, keep this
also. That we may do all things in charity and love one another, as he has
loved us, 1 Cor. 16. 14. John 13. 34. 35. and that we may do all these
Commandments securely and rightly with our heart, See,

6. That we aim, intend desire and so seek in all these commands, doing the
glory of God, and that we and others may glorify him, that all glory and praise
may be given to him both by us and others, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Phill. 1. 20. Coll.
3. 17. Psalm. 50. 14, 28. and 29. 1. 2. and in this we have two things to mind,
viz. 1. That the keeping these forementioned Commandments, is the way to
gloryfie God, and win in others to glorify him. And 2. That it must be our aim,
end, desire and endeavor so to glorify God and win in others to glorify him:
let us mind both these heedfully.

1. That the keeping these forementioned Commandments is the way to glorify
God, and win in others to glorify him; for,

1. In beleiving his sayings in his word, and so giving credit to his testimony
therein, as that which is verily and altogether true, good and of concernment
to us, we glorify God in praise of his word, Acts 13. 48. Psalm. 56. 4. 10.
whereas in nor beleiving we give God the lie, and occasion others to slight his
word as of no value, 1 John 5. 10. Ier. 5. 11. 12. 13. 2 Kings 17. 14. we
cannot glorify him if we believe not his sayings.

2. In receiving and turning at his reproofs, so as we take shame to our
selves, and so confess our sinfulness and iniquities discovered by his sayings,
and the righteousness of his judgments due unto us, we may so glorify God and
occasion others so to do a^ o, Josh. 1. 19. Nehem. 9. 31. 34. Dan. 9. 7. 18.
19. Isa. 64. 5. 6. 7. 8. but refusing thus to abase and condemn our selves, we
condemn him, to make our selves righteo^s, Job. 40. 8. and deceive our selves
and make him alyer, 1 John 1. 8. 10. wherefore let us take shame to our selves,
that so we may glorify him.

3. In beleiving in him for performance of his promise to us, acknowledging his
alsufficiency in mercy, power, and faithfulness, notwithstanding our weakness
and want of some hopes, we give glory to him and encourage others so to do,
Romans 1. 20. Psalm. 50. 23. and 11. and 31. 10. 24. let us therefore trust
perfectly in his name, that we may glori^y him and embolden others so to do,
Romans 4. 20. Number 32. 7.

4. In confessing his name among men, and therein showing forth his praises, 1
Pet. 2. 9. Psalm. 96. 1. 8. and 145. 4. 7. and in this confession magnifying the
Cross and sufferings of Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 17. 24. and 2. 1. 6. so as we bearing
his reproofs, abide steadfast in the faith and confession of it, there
suffering for his sake, we shall glorify him, and occasion others so to do
also, 1 Pet. 4. 13. 14. Phill. 1. 12. 13. 14. 27. 28. whereas in backsliding
for fear of the Cross, we put him to shame, and cause others to stumble, Ier.
2. 5. 31. 32. 73. Heb. 6. 6. therefore let us in confessing his name, deny our
selves and take up his Cross and follow him, that so we may glorify him.

5. In sowing to the spirit, in being fruitful, in good works we shall glorify
him, and win in others so to do, 1 John 15. 8. Phil. 1. 11. In Prayer,
declaration of his name, reproving evils, comforting the mourners, edisying,
etc. in works of mercy and doing good to all men, especially to the household of
Faith, in buying* selling, eating, drinking, etc. yea whatsoever we do, do all
to the glory of God, that we may glorify him and win in others so to do, so may
we glorify him etc. 2 Cor. 9. 10. 14. 1 Csr. 10. 31. so that not by devises and
ways of our own, but in walking in his ways, keeping these his Comandements,
is the way to glorify God, and that we may do so sincerely also see to it.

2. That we aim at, intend, desire and endeavor in keeping these
Commandments, to glorify God, and set forth his praise, and win others so to
do, is his Commandment, and that in which so doing he has promised
blessedness, that he has commanded, us to do all these forementioned commands,
and pronounced them blessed that so do, has been plentifully proved: But that
he has both commanded and promised blessing to this, that in doing all these
Commandments, we be sincere in our hearts, and aims, end, desires and
endeavor in doing these Commandments, to glorify God, and occasion and move
others to glorify him also, this here to be minded and proved, and its express,
Psalm. 29. 1. 2. and 10. 3. 1. 4. Matt. 5. 16. Phill. 2. 15. 16. Coll. 3. 17. 1
Cor. 10. 31. and indeed for a man to seek his own glory, is not glory but
shame, Pro. 25. 27. Phil. 3. 19. Pro. 27. 2. and he that praises himself, is
not upright but false in his zeal, and so is he that seeks his own glory,
John 7. 18. Gall. 4. 17. whence we are forbidden to do any thing for vain
glory, Phil. 2. 3. yea whosoever in any thing doing, yea though it be these
commands, has his desire and aim, for glory or dignity or esteem of men to
himself, or for their gold or silver, or apparel, or any earthly riches, is not
in that lead by the spirit of grace, not walks in charity, the spirit of
grace and charity leads as is aforesaid, 1 These. 2. 4. 5. 6. 1 Cor. 13. 4. 5.
wherefore let us be sincere in keeping these Commandments in seeking therein to
glorify God, and win in others to glorify him, together with us, Psalm. 24. 1.
3. and so in keeping the forementioned Commandments, keep this also, and that
we may persevere in all, mind and keep the next also: that is,

7. In patience possess our souls, waiting for our full rest and desired
happiness till our course be finished, and that our Lord Jesus do come, Luke
21. 17. 19. Iam. 1. 2, 3, 4. 12. and 5. 4. 8. This is needful for us, Heb. 16.
36. 37. And this grace teaches unfeined beleivers to do, 1 These. 1. 10. Tit.
2. 11. 12. 13. and to this doing is the promise of blessedness, 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8.
Heb. 9. 28. etc. This expressly and often commanded, yea even by our Lord and
Savior himself, in his ministration, Mat. 24. 42. 45. 51. Mar. 13. 35. 37.
Luke 12. 35. 40. behold he comes, etc. Revel. 1. 7. and 16. 15. and 22. 7. 12.
20.

And these Commandments thus keeping, are no law works, but the exercise of
faith and love, let us therefore be diligent to keep all these Commandments. In
beleiving his sayings, turning at his reproofs, taking shame to our selves,
beleiving in him for his promises, and confessing his name, go forth of the
Camp, bearing his reproach, and from his love believed, loving one another as
he has loved us, bringing forth the fruits of love, and in all these seeking
not esteem, applause, or earthly gain to our selves, but seeking sincerely to
glorify God, and win in others to glorify him, and so patiently wait for his
coming: and thus doing we shall be blessed in our deeds Iam. 1. 25. and yet
because of our weakness, to encourage us, mind the next observable: that is as
follows.

CHAP. IV.
* 3 Observable.
THe affirmation, those that walk in this way doing his Commandments, they are
even now blessed (it is not said only, that hereafter they shall be blessed, or
that they may be blessed, but even that) he whosoever, and so all they that do
his Commandments, they are blessed, they are even now in the present time of
doing his Commandments blessed, this absolutely affirmed, and so Psalm. 119. 1.
6. and though they have sin dwelling in their flesh anoying them, and troubling
them with its Iusts, yet while in belief of the grace in Christ, they do not
consent to and allow the same, so as to make it so their own, sin is not
imputed to them, but they are in favor with God for Christ his sake, and grace
dispensed to them, etc. Psalm. 32. 1. 6. Romans 4. 5. 8. 11. and 7. 14. 25. and 8.
1. 2. yea in doing every and each one, and all these Commandments, For, 1. In
hearty beleiving the testimony of Christ, and sayings therein, it will work
savingly, and bring unto righteousness, Romans 1. 16. and 10. 9 10. 1 These. 2.
13. John 16. 27. 2 These. 1. 10. And 2. In turning at his reproof, confessing
our sinfulness and the evil of our designs and ways, disowned by those sayings
of his, judging and condemning our selves therefore, and approving the light.
In this doing we shall come to the light, and he will pour forth his spirit to
make known his words, to us, so as we shall know what and how to believe, and
receive strength enabling thereto, Psalm. 32. 5. 6. Prove. 1. 23. John 3. 21. And
3. In beleiving on him, in his name, and word, from love and grace in Christ
discovered, beleiving and crusting in him for performance of his word and
promise to us, though in respect of all seen and sencible hope we sit in
darkness, yet he will be even then a light to us. Isa. 50. 9. 10. Mich. 7. 8 9.
And Christ and the righteousness in him, is imputed to us, and forgiveness,
Justification acceptance into favor, with quickening interest, in son-like
privilege and hope of glory received, Romans 4. 5. 11. 17. 22. 23. and 5. 1. 2.
3. 9. 10. so that blessed are they that trust in him, Psalm. 2. 12. so as they
shall be as Mount Zion that cannot be moved, Psalm. 125. 1. 2. And 4. In
confessing his name, denying our selves and bearing his reproach among the sons
of men, in suffering loss of outward and natural relations and accommodations,
yea life for his name sake, we shall therein receive suitable supports, and
consolations in sufferings, and assurance of exceeding and more abundant reward
in the resurrection of the just, Mat. 10. 32. Isa. 43. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 4. 5. Mat.
19. 28. 29. Romans 8. 18. Revel. 7. 14. 17. therefore blessed, Mat. 5. 10. 11.
12. And 5. In loving one another as he has loved us, and so bringing forth the
fruits of that love in works of mercy, where we can look for no return or
recompense from men, we lay up treasure in Heaven, and receive inward mercies
and assurance of being rewarded in the resurrection of the just, Mat. 5. 7. and
6. 14. 20. Luke 12. 31. Psalm 141. 1. 2. 3. and 112. 5. 6. 9. Pro* 19. 17.
Eccl. 11. 1. 2. so blessed are such as do this Commandment: And 6. In abusing
our selves and not seeking any applause to our selves, or our own design, but
giving glory to him and his word; and so aiming at and seeking to glorify him,
and occasion and win in others to glorify him, he will approve us, and we
shall discern his goodness, and in due season be will glorify us, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
6. Mat. 5. 8. 1 Samuel 2. 30. And 7. In patience possessing our souls keeping the
says, and finishing our course, waiting and looking for the appearance and
coming of our Lord, and his kingdom, we are assured he will appear, without
sin unto salvation to us, and we shall then appear with him in glory, and
receive the Crown of life and righteousness, Luke 21. 19. 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8. Heb.
10. 35. 39. and 9. 28. Iam. 1. 12. Coll. 31. 4 and its plainly said, blessed
are they, yea every one that does his Commandments, yea in doing them blessed:
for in respect of man's part, the doing of his commands thus is wisdom, and the
fear of the Lord that is the beginning of wisdom. And they have a good
understanding that do it, (that is, that do his Commandments) the praise of it
endures for ever, Job. 28. 28. Psalm. 111. 10. and they are even now blessed
while so doing, Psalm. 112. 1. for in keeping them there is great reward. And
this is seen also in the end required: namely,

CHAP. V.
* 4 Observable.
THe end required and to be aimed at in doing his Commandments, yea the issue
of so doing them, is express to be, That we may have right to the tree of life,
(and having that right) may enter in through the gates into the City* so that
to have right to the tree of life, and such a right, as by it we may enter into
the City, is the end and issue expressed.

The Tree of li^e is known to be Jesus Christ, the true wisdom of God. Pro. 3.
12. yea the Prince of whom that is affirmed, Psalm. 1. 3. and 52. 8. Hos. 14. 8.
And Jesus Christ in the virtue of his blood and sacrifice is one and the same,
for ever, Heb. 13. 8. But in respect of demonstration, manifestation and
appearance to usward, he is two ways considered. * First as testified and
demonstrated, and the mystery opened in a word of faith, to be seen by faith in
beleiving. * Secondly, as testified to be seen in his glory, as he is, and as
we are seen, but yet not so demonstrated as to be so seen, and according to the
testimony: So * First, behold and cons^der him as he is demonstrated,
manifested, and set forth in the Gospel, with the virtue of his incarnation and
having been made under the law for us, and suffered and overcome for us the
whole of that curse and death that was due for us to have suffered, and so
risen for our justification, and offered himself a sacrifice to God for us, and
is accepted of God, and filled with grace spirit and life, to dispense to us,
ever living to appear before God, and mediate for us, and so is declared and
set forth our peace, the propitiation for the sins of beleivers, and not for
their sis only, but for the sins of the whole world also, the possessor and
giver of spirit and grace and eternal life, and so he is the soundation of
repentance and faith, the way and door of approach, and coming in to God, and
so he is set forth for all men, and to be preached to all men, and there is a
liberty and true right for them, to look to and come to him in whom is life for
them, so far that they might repent and believe, which in his Gospel ministering
he is giving to them, and if they receive and so believe, he will not reprove
nor put them by, but receive them, and they so shall have eternal life, such
riches the Gospel brings to men, and there is blessing for them in it, John 3.
14. 17. Romans 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15. 20. 21. Heb. 2. 9. 1 John 2.
2. and 4. 14. 1 Timothy 2, 5. 6. Mat. 28. 19. 20. Mar. 16. 15. John 6. 27. 32.
Ephesians. 3. 3. 9. Though many in this respect do worse then Esau that sold his
birthright for a mess of Pottage, Heb. 12. 16. for they for some base Just fell
away their birthright in persisting in serving that Just, till they be given up
of God and so blotted out of the book of life, forsaking their own mercy, in
following lying vanities, and so losing their own souls, Psalm 69. 28. and 81.
12. Iona 2. 8. 2 These. 2. 10. 11. 12. Mat. 16. 26. And they that have thus sold
their birthright, when they would have the blessing, that is, in this right to
the tree of life here spoke of, though they cry and howl for it, shall find no
mercy nor admirtance any more then Esau did, Heb. 12. 17. Pro. 1. 24. 25. etc.
Matt. 7. 22. 23. Luke 13. 24. 27. Now in this time while God in the means is
striving with us, and Christ mediating for us, is the time, to receive, and
enjoy this right with the benefit thereof, Heb. 3. 7. 2 Cor. 6. 1. 2. and so
the doing his Commandments forementioned, is the way to receive and retain the
same as has been shown, and the receiving and retaining this right, is that in
which we come to have the right here mentioned to the Tree of life here
mentioned, and so

Secondly, Jesus Christ the Tree of life, is confiderable, as by virtue of his
sacrifice once offered, he in that very personal body of his, is now glorified
on Gods right hand, enriched with all his privileges, the sulness of the
Godhead dwelling in him bodily, he having life and immortality and dwelling in
the light that is inaccessible, whom no man has seen nor can see, Phill. 2. 9.
10. 11. Coll. 2. 9. 10. Hebr. 11. 12. and 8. 1. and 6. 20. 1 Pet. 3. 23. 1 Timothy
6. 15. 16. only the Angels and spirits of just men made perfect that are in his
presence, do see him in this glory, Heb. 12. 22. 23. Revel. 6. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 8.
Phill. 1. 23. and so in Christ and these his choice ones is Gods delight and
well pleasedness; these being those excellent ones above the Saints on the
earth, Psalm. 16. 3. Gal. 4. 26. whence also he is called, The Tree of life, in
the midst of the Paradise of God. Revel. 2. 7. who with these his Saints and
the holy Angels, will one day come down from Heaven, when the bodies of all his
Saints shall be raised and made spiritual and immortal, who also shall be the
inhabitants of that glorious City, in the midst of the streets whereof Jesus
Christ the Tree of life in which sense it is evident by all that went before in
this 22. Chap. and in the former Chap. it is here meant, and the very
expressions of having right to the tree of life (which is the utmost here
attainable) does show this to be the meaning, For as Jesus Christ the tree of
life is set forth in the Gospel to be known and seen by Faith, in the word of
says believed, so in heeding and beleiving that word he is now by faith come
to and received, and in doing these Commandments, his fruit by faith fed on,
Heb, 12. 22. 23. 24. Hos. 14. 8. Cant. 2. 3. But as he now is in the Paradise
of God, and when he comes down from Heaven will appear in the Holy City and so
be seen as he says, and known as he knows, and his fruit enjoyed in sight
and sense, this no man can yet so see and enjoy, 1 Cor. 13. 12. 1 John 3. 2. 1 Timothy 6. 15. 16. only it is promised to abiding beleivers, after they have over*
come, Revel. 2. 7. After they have been faithful to the death, Revel. 2. 10. I
am. 1. 12. 2 Timothy 4. 8. and so likewise as Jesus Christ the true bread of life,
the heavenly Manna, is set forth in the Gospel, beleivers by faith in beleiving
contemplation on and complacency in him, do feed on him now, John. 6. 47. to
58. but as he is in his glory and our glorious life hid with him in God, and so
in his glorious and bodily appearance, to satisfy and fill all out desires by
open sight in beholding that which is now hidden Mannah, It is yet but in
promise, and so as he is this living stone, as set forth in the Gospel, we by
faith being come to the comers to him, are built on him, and enabled to show
forth his praises through sufferings now, but as he shall appear in glory,
giving the total victory, and altering the name of suffers into absolute
victorers and triumphers, it is to come, and though promised yet not so
enjoyed, but shall be (of those that overcome) at his coming, 1. Pet. 2. 3. 4.
5. 9. Revel. 2. 17. so as all that abide in the faith, doing his Commandments,
enjoy their right in him, as set forth in the Gospel, Heb. ^. 6. 14. and so
enjoyment, and retaining this right, they have intrest in Christ, and so right
to him as he is in the Paradise of God, in the midst thereof, and will be in
that glorious City, but the sight and enjoyment of him, and entering in that
manner, will dot^ be till that time come, Romans ^. 23. 24. 25. Rev. 21. 23. 27.
and so the end and issue of keeping these Commandments is, That we may have
right to the Tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God, and be by says
entering now, so as when the Lord in the midst of that holy City; and when that
holy City is come down from Heaven, we may fully enter through the Gates, and
be possessed of the same, that so having now with our faith this hope in
Christ, we may enter through the gates into the City, 1 John 3. 2. 3. And in
this expressed end and issue of keeping his Commandments, we have for our
usefulness and instruction clearly given us to understand, these four following
Positions, that is to say,

1. Position.
THat no man has right to the Tree of life, as it is in the Paradise of God,
and will be in the glorious City, so as to be an heir according to promise, one
of Gods elect, having right to the inheritance, till he do the
Commandmandments* forementioned, and so while, and as he is doing them, and so
brought out of darkness into his marveilous light, Acts 26. 18. Ephesians. 8. 1
Pet. 2. 9. For,

1. Except a man believe the testimony and saying thereof, that Jesus is the
Christ, he cannot be established, but shall dye in his sins Isa. 7. 7. 9. Luke
8. 24*

2. Except one turn at his reproof, not taking offense at the light reproving
but repent, he cannot receive the pouring forth of his spirit in making known
his words, but is under condemnation and shall certainly perish, Pro. 1. 24.
31. and 12. 1. Ioh. 3, 18. 19. 20. Luke 13. 3. 5. And

3. He that beleiveth not on the Son of God, has not life, but abides under
wrath, 1 John 3. 18. 36. 1 John 5. 12. and

4. He that is ashamed of the name and Cross of Christ before men, Christ will
be ashamed of him before his father which is in Heaven, yea the end of the
enemy of the Cross of Christ is destruction, Mar. 8. 38. Phil. 3. 18. 19. and,

5. He that loves not his brother is in darkness, and abides in death, and
walks in darkness, and there is no eternal life in him, 1 John 2. 9. 11. and
3. 14. 15. and 4. 8* and,

6. Such as are set for their own glory, honor and applause with men, exalting
themselves, refusing to deny and abase themselves and their own ends, and so to
give glory to God, and so to glorify him, and bring others to glorify him, are
so far from having right to the tree of life, and hope of reward from God, that
they are hypocrites and resisted of God, Matt. 6. 2. 5. 16* 1 Pet. 5. 5. 7. I
am. 4. 4. and sure

7. Such as make have in use of unwarrantable means, and put far off the evil
day, and say our Lord delayeth his coming, are unfaithful and wicked, and a
bitter portion belongs to them, Isa. 28. 15. 16. 21. Amos 6. 3. Mat. 24. 48.
51, yet to say all in one word, or sayings such as in the means extended to
them, do not know God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, but
walk in their own ways, fulfilling the affections and lusts of the flesh, they
have no inheritance in the kingdom of God, nor are capacitated to enter it,
but another more terrible portion in flaming fire belongs to them, Ephesians. 5. 3.
5. Gall. 3. 19. 20. 21. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. 8. such are none of Gods peculiar
people, none of Gods Elect and chosen, and so have no right to the Tree of
Life, etc. And yet even such he came to save, and is exalted a Prince and
Savior to give repentance and remission of sins to such. Acts 5. 31. 1 Timothy 1.
11. 15. so that yet while the day of his grace and patience lasts, as the
voice and call comes to them, if they yet in hearing hear his voice, so as they
verily believe his sayings and so turn at his reproofs, repent and believe in
his name, and so to do these his Commandments before mentioned for the end
here set forth, they shall live, John 5. 24. 25. 26. And receive washing,
sanctifying and justifying in the name of the Lord, and by the Spirit of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. 11. And therein begin to enjoy their right in Christ as
set forth in the Gospel, and so come therein to begin to have right to the Tree
of life, as here mentioned: And so are brought out of darkness into the
marvelous light, and such only, are his peculiar people, his beloved, his
chosen, Romans 9. 26. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 3. 4. 5. 9. let none deceive
themselves, nor suffer others to deceive them in saying, though they do not his
Commandments forementioned, yet they may be his elect for ought any man
knows, for that is false; and all that believe the sayings of Christ know it
to be false* nor that he may say it is in vain* or me, to hear his voice and
turn, for if I have no right to the Tree of life and be reprobated, it is
impossible for me to be converted and come to have ^ight thereto, for that is
false also, though all remaining such as said, have no right to the Tree of
life, which may be a provocation to hear his voice and turn, and be doing there
Commandments, Romans 11. 7. 21. and 9. 26.

The second Position.
THat the right end of doing these Commandments forementioned, or the so doing
them according to his mind, that we may have right to the Tree o^ life, in the
midst of the Paradise of God, and so enter through the Care into the City: It
is to do them with this aim and desire, and to this very end mentioned, that
we may have right to the Tree of life, etc. Thus express here, and in the
Gospel plainly discovered to us: That as we must become Fools in our selves,
and believe his sayings, true and good who ever become a Liar thereby, so our
end if we would receive the blessings must be; not to conclude we are, and
shall be saved harmless because we believe his sayings, but even therefore
believe and here them, that we may be saved by that discovered in them, Isa.
45. 22. Ioh. 5. 39. 40 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Psalm. 50. 16. 17. And so our turning at
his reproofs and confessing ou^ iniquities, and judging our selves, etc. Must
be not to conclude our selves* as therefore saved and having the because that
humbled and repenting. But that in so humbling our selves under the mighty hand
we may receive the powering forth of his spirit and making known his words,
that he may lift us up and bring us to believe in him. Isa. 58. 2. 3. Prove. 1.
23. 1 Cor. 3. 7, 8 9, 10. 1 Pet. 5. 6. And so our beleiving and ^^^^ing in him
for performance of his promises must be, not to magnify and trust in our
beleiving, trusting and confiding as for that, righteousness justified and sure
of all. But that we may so magnify his words and trust (not in our trusting
but) in him, that Christ himself may be our Righteousness, and we justified by
the Faith of him, and so be strong in the power and grace that is in him, and
trust in him that he will perform his word and promises for his own word and
names sake, Psalm. 56. 3. 4. 10. 11. and 30. 6. 7 8. Gall. 2. 15. 16. 1 Cor. 4.
5. Ephesians. 6. 10. 2 Timothy 2. 1. 2 Samuel 7. 25, 26, 27. And so our confession of
his name and bearing his reproach and suffering for his names sake, must be not
to lift up our selves above others thereby, and to vant of our sufferings: But
to be baptized in to his death, to imitate him, and be conformed to him* in
suffering and death, that the life and power of Christ may be manifested in us,
and the spirit of Glory rest upon us, and we receive this salvation and
consolation and the power of his resurrection now: and be made like him in the
resurrection of the just, 2 Cor. 11. 17. 18. Romans 6. 4. 8. 2 Cor. 4. 10. 11.
and 12. 9. Phill. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 21. and 4. 14. 2 Cor. 9. 10. Romans 5. 3. 4.
Iam. 1. 3, 4, 12. And in loving and showing forth the Fruits of love in good
works, our end must be not to gain Applause, or after Riches here, not to have
them for a foundation to him, or rest on for life and righteousness before God,
but to answer his love to us and imitate him therein, to testify love and
thanks to him, Mat. 14. 48. Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 5. 14* 15. Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5.
1 Ioh. 3. 16. and 4. 11. And be laying up treasures in Heaven, and a good
Foundation (not for present to build on, but) for the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.
18. 19. for Christ and his Angels to behold that day, (like that 2 Chronicles. 31.
7, 8.) a resemblance of it in that, Acts 9. 36. 39. And I might say the same
for our end in seeking to win others to glorify him, and impatient waiting for
his coming: but I will say no more, but that our end and aim must be in all
our doing the Commandments, to enjoy him, and be established in him, that we
may know him to be our life, our righteousness, our hope, and that its all, in
him, that we may have it in having him, and so our trust and hope may be in
him, in which our interest and right to the inheritance is known, Gal. 3. 29. 1
Ioh. 2. 24. 25. and 5. 20. Heb. 3. 6. 14. For it is not any sort coming to
Christ, or any receiving no words, or any doing his Commandments, in which this
right is attained: no Crown in running unless it be lawful running, 1 Cor. 9.
25. 27. with 2 Timothy 2. 5. 6. 15. 16. For some come to Christ and to his
servants, and hear his words; and yet come not to him to this end that they
might have life in him, and so they neither do indeed his Commandments, nor
atrain this end in receiving this right, Ioh. 5. 40. Ezekiel. 33. 31. 32, 33. and
14. 3. 8. So some may receive the doctrine of truth, and boast of the love
thereof, to make a profession to gain a name, what the name of truth is in
honor (like the Samaritans that would be one with the Jews, when the Jews were
in honor, Ezra 4. 2.) And yet receive not the love of the truth, for its own
end and Efficacies, that they might be saved, emptied and renewed thereby, the
power in it they refuse, and so miss the blessedness, Isa. 7. 2. 3. 11. 12. and
48. 1. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. 11. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 5. Yea doing any of these
Commandments though of these forementioned, having some sense at his reproofs,
and doing some good things as Herod, or beleiving some of his sayings as Simon
Magus, or bearing some reproach with his People as Alexander, or loving some of
the brethren as Mitzar, yea doing some commands to be approved of men as King
Saul and Iehu, or for any false ends, to stop the mouth of Conscience, or to
make up for themselves a righteousness in this their doing, that therein they
may appear better and more holy then others, and so desire the righteousness of
God, and a right to the Tree of life, boasting themselves to be Gods peculiar
ones, that is but a kindling Sparks of their own* Isa. 50. 16. foolishness and
deceit* 2 Cor. 10. 7, 12, 18. disallowed of God, Isa. 65. 5. Contrary to the
way of those led by the holy Spirit, Romans 3. 9. and 5. 8* 1 Timothy 1. 15. seek
that reproved, Zach. 7. 5. 6. 7. and like the Pharisees of old, Luke 12. 11. 12.
of the same nature and tendance with those, Romans 9. 31. 32. 33. And will have
the same effect in keeping from submitting to Christ for righteousness, and
righteousness and life as those, Romans 10. 3. So as there is no other way of
doing his Commandments ^ightly, then doing them to this end, that we may have
right to the Tree of life, that we may en et in through the Gates into the
City, which also will be the Issue in so doing to that end, as said in the next
Position.

The third Position.
THat the doing his Commandments to this end, that we may have right to the
Tree of life, and may enter through the Gates into the City, is not only that
his present blessedness is meet with: but a sure and certain way to have right
to the Tree of life, and assurance of entering through the Gates into the City,
this is fully before shown and proved, at * 2. and 6. 1. and at * 3, and
appears in Gods direction to men, Ier. 23. 22* 23, 28. and 4. 1. 2. and his
promise to men, Amos 5. 4 5. and our Saviors word, Ioh. 6. 27. and Psalm. 19.
7. 11. only here it is needful for men to clear this to some, that this doing
his Commandments to this end, is not a seeking righteousness and eternal li^e,
by the works of the Law, or our own doings of Commandments, but the very way of
beleiving with the heart, and so receiving righteousness and li^e, and this is
clear in this, that the Commandments here before mentioned, are not
Commandments of the Law of works, but of the law of faith and grace Romans 10. 4.
10. nor is the doing of these Commandments from the obligation of the law of
works that gives not strength, and so in a man's own strength, etc. But from the
obligation and power of the law of faith and grace in love p^o^^ced by it, that
carries to the doing them all* Gal. 3. 10. 12* 13. and 5. 13. 14. Romans 10. 5.
and 8. 3. 4. and 13. 8. 9. 10. 1 Cor. 13. no^ is the end of doing these
Commandments, like that of the law of works, to make up righteousness of our
own by his deeds, but to have righteousness in another, even Jesus Christ,
Phill. 3. 7. 8. 9. 10. and so the beleiving with the heart the testimonies of
Christ and sayings therein is no law work but opposite thereto as says is to
save, and is the work of God by Christ, Romans 10. 4. 10. 1 Pet. 1, 2. John 6.
29* and in this belief of him, turning at his reproof, confessing our sins,
repenting and judgeing our selves, no producement of the Law, that opens no
door for repentance, and effects desperate and worldly sorrow, but an effect of
the grace of God discovered in the testimony and sayings thereof, reproving and
calling to turn, and so this repentance is a gift of Christ, that gives with it
remission of sins, Gall. 3. 10. 2 Cor. 9. 10. Acts 5. 31. and 11, 1, 18. and
when he that beleiveth these sayings, turns at his reproof, and so truseth
and confideth in his word, and so in him for performing his promises, and so
through the spirit waits for the righteousness of God by faith, this is no
law work but opposed to it, being the very work of Faith with power in the word
of faith believed, Romans 1. 16, 1 Thessalonians. 2, 13. Gal. 5. 5. And in this,
beleiving in him, confessing his name, and so bearing his reproach enduring
through sufferings for his name sake, this is no law work, in which men may
glory in the flesh, but not before God, but the very effect of the spirit of
faith, That is of love power and a sound mind, Romans 4. 2, 5. Gall. 6. 12, 13,
14. 2 Cor. 4. 10. 4. 15. 2 Timothy 1. 7. 8. 1 Pet. 4, 14. And with all this when
from the love of God in Christ believed, we love one another as he hoth loved
us, and so bring forth all the fruits of love, this is no lawwork, but the
fruits and exercise of love by which faith works, which though free from the
bondage of the Law, will lead to all righteousness, in afflictions and actions
commanded in the law, in every commandment of it, from the free obligation of
grace in love, Gall. 5. 6. 13, 14, 22, 23. and 6. 15, 16 Romans 13. 8. 9, 10. And
the like I might say of endeavoring in all things to glorify God and walk
honestly, and of patience waiting for his coming; but I will not further
enlarge, for surely he that with the heart beleiveth the testimony of Christ
and sayings thereof, and so turns at his reproof that he beleiveth in his
name for the good he has promised, and hence confesses his name whatever he
suffer for it, end ^ring to bear his reproach, loving his brother as God has
loved him, endeavoring to walk honestly in all things, so to being glory to
God, and so patiently wait for his coming, the word of the testimony and
sayings in it, certainly works savingly in him, And he is born of God, taught
and learneth of God, Romans 1. 16. Pro. 2. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 11. 13. 1 John 3. 9,
10, 11. and 4. 21. and 5. 1. Acts 4. 20. And he that does these things does not
believe with the heart, Romans 10. 10. For the word of Christ with his spirit
therein, and love commended there through, where ever in heart believed, does
work the motions and inclinations to the willing and doing these things, so as
no more is required of us but this, that in his so moving, to will* and do, we
without murmering or disputing, so will and do, which in his strength in such
season we may so will and do, Romans 1. 16. 1 These. 2. 13. Phil. 2* 12. 16. and
4, 12. And where the heart is exercised in beleiving, how can they but readily
yield up thereto, Psalm. 116. 10. 16. 2 Cor. 4. 13. and thence the exhortation,
to work out this in working salvation, Phil. 2. 12, 13. which teaches as said
Ti^. ^. 11. 12. 13. and so by his mercies, as the motive and motion, to give up
their bodies as a living sacrifice to him, and their members as weapons of
righteousness unto righteousness* being changed, and reformed by the renewing
of the mind, Romans 12. 1. 2. and 6. 19. so as all that with the heart believe
Jesus Christ true in his sayings, and so believe in him, as the Scripture has
said, find in some measure the springs of these things in their heart, and so
may know that the right doing of these Commandments to this end, is not
law-work* but an exercise of faith that works by love, John 7. 38. Gall. 5.
5. 6.

Nor does the term Commandments darken this at all, for the whole Gosp^l given
Christ to preach is called his Commandment, John 12. 50. And his giving it to
the Apostles to preach* is called his giving them Commandments, Acts 1. 2. and
the Gospel made known to any, and they helped to believe, is called the holy
Commandment delivered to them, 2 Pet. 2. 21. and so beleiving on his name, and
loving one another, are called his Commandments, 1 Ioh. 3. 22. 53. 24. Ioh. 14
1. and 13. 34 and 15. 12. And so it is clear, that this doing his Commandments
to this end, as it is no Law work but an exercise of faith, so also it is a
sure way to have right to the Tree of life, yea right and life is found and
received in so doing them, Romans 8. 13. Gall. 6. 8. and this is evident and
plain in the Apostle* showing the end of their preaching the p^etio^s promises
given them: To be that the heareis in beleiving might partake of the divine
nature ( in Christ risen from the dead, Isa. 55. 3. 4.) and shows how
Beleivers come to partake of this Efficacy of the word and promise of
blessedness and faith. First, having excepted the polution that is in the world
through lust, And then in that which fol^oweth and goes together with it he
says, and besides this giving all diligence: Add to (which implies giving up,
and using and working together) to your faith, that object of and doctrine of
faith, you in beleiving have received, and is moving in you) virtue (zeal and
courage to bring forth its teachings and operations) and to this virtue
knowledge, (in minding and understanding his mind, discovered in his sayings
for the manner, ends, and seasons of venting forth virtue; And least your
knowledge of your liberty, in all outward lawful liberties and things, be
abused to some snare) and to your knowledge temperance, (that you be neither
ino^d^nate in your desires not immoderate in persuit, nor unseasonable or
unsober in use of lawful liberties, and because in so doing you must exercise
self denial, and meet with depravations and reproofs from some others,
therefore) to your temperance add patience, (that in patience you may possess
your Souls, letting patience have its perfect work, and that you abuse* not
patience to stupidity and sloathfulness, but that it may leave its perfect work
indeed,) to patience add godlyness, (in both a right worshipping of God, as he
has discovered himself in Christ, adoring him and calling on his name, etc.
And conforming to him in Holiness, Humility, Meekness, Mercies: And as in this
you will be moved so) to this Godliness add Brotherly kindness, (in delighting
in the Saints, and ready showing forth the fruits of Brotherly love to them,
and seeing there are imfirmities to be forgiven and covered, and others besides
them to show love and mercy to, that are yet enemies to you) to Brotherly
kindness add Charity, (which is the Bond of perfectness, and full of good
fruits and leads to constancy therein) for if these things be in you (that is
as God in his word tenders and works them, so you in beleiving receive them*)
and abound (that is have their perfect work, so as you yield up thereto, to
bring them forth,) they make you that you shall neither be barren (not empty of
good fruits in your selves) nor unfruitful, (without some profits to others) in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: But he that lacks these things (as
those that smother the motions in his teachings and yield not to obey in doing
them will soon die) Is blind (purblind) and can not see a far off (to the hope
set before us in Christ, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old
sins, (which when he first saw and believed, did work thus effectually in him,
but he has forgot this, he once so highly prized, and so the efficacies are
withered and his understanding darkened (wherefore the rather Brethren give
diligence to make your calling (that grievons operation of Christ, in which you
were brought out of darkness into his marvelous light, to believe in him and
live to him,) and election (that is, that gracious operation of his, by the
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, choosing you out of the
love and fellowship of the world, into union conformity and fellowship with
himself,) sure (that is stable and certain) for if you do these things (which
are all done in doing his Commandments as aforesaid and proved) yea shall never
fall, for so an abundant entrance shall be ministered unto you, into the
everlasting Kindome of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 6. 11. So
that it is clear, that in this manner doing his Commandments, right to the Tree
of life, and so entrance through the Gates into the City, will be verily
attained, and enjoyed in the first Fruits of the Spirit, now and fully in Soul
and Body hereafter.

The fourth Position.
THat men must first have right to the Tree of life, before they can enter
through the Gates into the City, this is clear in the words, and sh^own in the
beginning of * 4. This third observable with the first and third Position in
it^, and may be seen in that fruit of Abraham's faith that did not only believe
in God in what he had formerly discovered to be done for him, but also there
from believed in him for what he had promised And so walked in the steps of
that Faith, Romans 4 9. 25. Heb. 11. 8. 16. whose Sons and seed ^^ are, if we be
of, and walk in the steps of his Faith, Gall. 3 29. Rom 4. 12. and so are heirs
according to promise, Gall. 3. 29. Yea it is not enough to believe that Jesus
is the Christ, and and has died for our sins and risen for our justification,
and offered himself a Sacrifice to God for us, and is therefore the
propitiation for the sins of the whole World, unless we there through believe
in him for his promises of those good things to come, and by virtue of his
mediation to be conferred on us, with complete and unfeighned Faith in
unfeighned beleiving had till it come to this, Romans 4. 24. 25. and 5. 1. 2. 8 9
10. and 8. 32. 34. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. true if the former be believed with the
heart, it will b^ing to this Rom 10. 8. 9. 10. 1 Cor. 14. 1. 2. 3. 4. in which
we have right to the Tree of life, so as to hope in him for the inheritance,
which hope preserves in the Faith even to abiding, 1 Cor. 15. 19. 20. 23. 1 Timothy 4. 10. supporteth and ^^eareth in afflictions, 2 Cor. 4. 17. 18. and 5. 1.
and: Romans 2. 17. 18. Heb. 11. 23. 26. and leads to persevere to death, 2 Timothy
4 7. 8. Heb. 11. 9. 10. 13. etc. Yea he that has this hope in Christ,
purifyeth himself as he is pure. 1 Ioh. 3. 3. and all this enjoyed doing his
Commandments as aforesaid, nor can we be doing them or entering the Gates
thereby, unless in beleiving we hold fast this hope, Col. 1. 23. Heb. 10. 35.
36. so that without this right we cannot enter through the Gates into this
City, which leads to mind the last observable which is.

CHAP. VI.
* 5 Observable.
THat all that desire to enter into the heavenly City, and so to eat of the
hidden Mannah, and of the Tree of life, that now is in the midst of the
paradise of God, and will be in that City when it is come down from Heaven,
they must if ever they will enter through the Gates into the City, of the City
when it is come down from Heaven, and the Gates as then they shall be, that is
so glorious and beyond our apprehention, only unquestionable because affirmed:
so it shall be that I may not presume to explain that, but as this is spoken,
not only for our hope, but also for our present usefulness, and so I may
consider of the Gates spiritually, as in exercise of Faith to be entered and
gone through: And so what these Gates now are; and they must needs be such as
are suitable to the Commandments forementioned. For the doing the Commandments
to the right end is, that we may have right in Christ, and so to the Tree of
life we may enter, and so in doing them is our spiritual entering now, so that
without doing even these forementioned Commandments no entering, nor any right
doing them, but so far an entering spiritually now, and hope of that full
entrance into that glorious City after, so that in some sort, the Commandments
and Gates are one, and though in outward things this is strange, and to our
sense could not be, yet in Christ and the doctrine of Christ, and so in
spiritual oneness, in many things of this nature is affirmed, Ephesians. 1. 3 16.
And whereas Gates are here mentioned in the plural number, where as the Gate,
Door or Way to the Father, is one and but one and the same: By considering
Christ who is one with the Father, and we may come to understand both what the
Gate is, and what these Gates are. For,

As the door by which Christ came and completed righteousness for us, and
obtained redemption, and prepares a City for us, it was one love, the will and
appointment of the Father, 1 Heb. 10. 7. 8. 9. 10. Psalm. 40. 8. Ioh. 7. 28. and
8. 42. and 10 2. 18. so he as having completed that righteousness: obtained
the redemption and the inheritance, and is in the virtue of all, now mediating
for us with God, that we in beleiving might partake, so he and he only, is by
the same will and appointment of the Father, the one and only Gate, Door and
Way, for our approach to God for grace and spirit and life, etc. Ioh. 14. 6.
and 10. 7. 9. Ephesians. 2. 18. Heb. 10. 19. 20. and 7. 25. and 4. 15. 16. yea and
with that grace of him to enter into the Church, and be profitable to others:
and yet Jesus Christ coming in by his Fathers will, and doing it in completing
his first great work, passed through many Gates without which he could not have
completed the will of his Father, in that first work, as to say taking our
nature, partaking with us of the Flesh and Blood, 'and bebecoming under the Law
for us, Heb. 2. 14. John 1. 14. Gall. 4. 4. 'And in that body lived by faith
immediately on his Fathers power, truth and faithfulness, that set him about
that work, Psalm. 22. 9. 10. Isa. 50. 7, 8, 9. John 8. 29. and 6. 37. 'And in
exercise of that faith, went through manifold afflictions, Isa. 52. 14. and 53.
3. 'And persevered to the death, even in death giving up his spirit into the
hands of his Father, Luke 23. 46. 'And then after buried and overcame death,
and rose in that very body that died, and after ascended into Heaven and
offered himself in that Body a Sacrifice to God, and is now accepted of, and
glorified with the Fathers own self, with the glory he had with the Father
before the world was, and is now alive for ever more, Luke 24. 6. 7. Acts 1.
10. 11. Joh. 17. 5. Revel. 1. 18. And so he as the public man for us did
through sufferings enter into his glory, Luke 24. 26. Even so as we approach
and get to the Father, through him so made known, for receiving all grace, and
promises in him; so in this our approach through him, there are diverse like
gates to pass through, that we may follow him, and receive and partake of the
same glory with him, for without entering these gates, we cannot enter the City,
and so as we read of the way Psa. 119. 1. and the gate, Psalm. 112. 20. so we
read likewise of right ways and right paths, Prove. 3. 17. and 4. 11. and of
the gates of Zion, Psalm. 87. 2. and the gates of the Lord to enter in and give
him thanks, Psalm. 100. 4. and so have gates which includes all the Commandments
forementioned and more: but I will comprehend them in as small a number as I
may, in three or four that may comprehend the rest, and so to the,

1 Gate.
THat we exercise and abide and walk in that faith and confidence in Christ
which was given and begotten by his word in our hearts, and works through
love, This the appointed Gate or way, Gall. 3. 11. 14. Heb. 2. 4. Col. 2. 6.
and that which the Apostle professed to be their gate, way or rule, Gall. 5. 5.
6. and 6. 15. 6. and this includes all the Commandments forementioned, and so
as they are to believe his sayings, to turn at his reproof, to trust in his
name, to confess it and bear his reproach to love one another, as he has loved
us, to seek to glorify him, and to wait for his coming, so all included in
this way or gate to go through, in our abiding thus walking in this belief,
confidence and love, till we have finished our course, in which we are his
house and partake of Christ, and receive of his teachings, Heb. 3. 6, 14. 1
John 2. 27. 28. in which also we find, and enter rest in Christ, Heb. 4. 3. and
so are in the way, and have right to that glorious rest with Christ, Heb. 3.
10. 11. and this gate we are to go in, but it is not gone through, till in our
abiding we have finished our course, in resisting sin and keeping the faith,
and then we are infallibly sure of entering into the glorious City, Heb. 10. 3.
6. and 12. 2 Timothy 4. 4. 7. 8. Revel. 2. 10. 17. and 3. 12. Mal. 24. 13. this
one gate, the next is,

2. Gate.
THat in this exercise of Faith and love we possess our souls in patience, in
enduring and holding faith and love in and through all sufferings in his
fatherly chastisements: and all reproaches and sufferings that may befall us in
this life for his name sake, Luke 21, 16, 19. For as one of the forementioned
Commandments is to let go desire of applause from men, to go without the Camp,
bearing his reproach, so this commander gate is for patience, and perseverance
with faithfulness therein, till we have done the will of God in finishing our
course, and then we shall be sure to be crowned and receive the promises, James
1. 12. Heb. 10. 36. 2 Timothy 1. 7. 8. for as our Savior to procure it for us
through sufferings, entered into his glory, so we to receive it must through
much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God, Acts 14. 22, Romans 8. 17. 1
These. 3. 3. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 12. And through this gate our forefathers passed, Heb.
6. 12. and 11. And so did such as in vision were presented as receivers, Revel.
7. 13. 27. and these gates gone through, the next is,

3. Gate.
That when our course is finished, we yield up our spirits into the hands of
God, and so die with faith or according to the faith; and then our work and
labor for entering is ended, and our spirits shall be with the Lord, and our
bodies at rest and in covenant with the Lord, some to enjoy the holy City in
soul and body, in its season, Luke 23. 46, Psalm 31. 5. Isa. 26. 20. Heb. 11.
13. Isa. 57. 2. 2 Cor. 3. 8. Phill. 1. 23. Revel. 14. 13. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. and
as the keeping these forementioned Commandments to the end foresaid, is the way
of entering and going through these gates, so they that enter and go through
these gates, shall be surely without their own motion or endeavor, raised in
their bodies again spiritual and immortal, and have them received of, and
united with their own spirit again, and then both in soul and body be as the
Angels of God, 2 Cor. 4, 14. and 5. 1. 4 John 5. 29. 1 Cor. 15, 23, 42, 43. 44.
and this shall be in the coming of Christ and the resurrection of the just,
Luke 14. 14. 1 Cor, 15. 23. and this called the better Resurrection, Heb. 11.
35. when we all with our forefathers that have dyed in the faith, shall meet
the Lord and be ever with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. 17. and be equal to the Angels,
Luke 20, 35. 36. and so be made meet to enter in and be of that glorious and
holy City together, Ephesians 4, 13. Heb. 11, 40. Revel. 19 7, and 21. 23.

Now the opening these gates, as they are made known by the Gospel that calls
also for entering in at them; so the opening is as God calls and gives furniture
and opportunity for any particular, on which opportunity, laying hold according
to the furniture given us, Gal. 6, 10. Heb. 3. 13, in doing his Commandments as
foresaid, we may be entering the first mentioned gate always, the second as
called to it, and the third likewise: and so till we have gone through all
three: and thus entering the first at all times, and the second as called to it,
and keeping in preparedness to enter the third, we shall be fitted to enter the
other to be named in all oportunities, which though they be many, I will
comprehend them in one; that is to say for help of any weaknesses and exercise
of grace according to light, ability, and opportunity given us during our
natural lives.

4. Gate.
IS entering in, attending and waiting at the Gates and Posts, he has appointed
and set up for us, which are (not any ordinances or devises of men which are
vain to use, Isa. 29. 13. Mar. 7* 2. 7. but) the ordinances of his own
appointments, which though not all to be so continually gone on and done, as
the first and second with the Commandments included in them, as often
foreshewn (yet to be frequently come to be watched and waited for, and all for
waiting with them, to receive of him teachings and supports etc. to go through
the forementioned Gates, as hearty and real prayer and hearing and reading his
word, and also frequenting the assemblies of the Saints, and fellowship in his
Gospel with them to that end, etc. which also will be done in doing the
forementioned Commandments, and of which also he says: Blessed is the man
that hears me watching daily at my Gates and waiting at the Posts of my
Doors, for whos^ finds me finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord,
Prove. 8. 34. 35. which will be no less then to fit him with blessings, and lead
him in doing of these his Commandments, to have right to the Tree of life, and
so to enter through the Gates into the City, Psalm. 65. 4. And to keep his
Commandments for such a blessed end, and so to enter these foresaid Gates, now
that at his coming we may enter through these glorious Gates into the holy
City. and as the Text it self is a strong motive, so also to encourage and move
us, hereunto we have a cloud of witnesses (of examples) of such as in keeping
his Commandments, have passed through all these Gates, that have lived on this
earth as strangers in it by faith, and walked in that faith, Heb. 11. 1. 2. 8.
9. 10. etc. that have endured and gone through great trials and sufferings,
Heb. 11. 24. * 27. 34. 35. And that have died in the faith, Heb. 11. 13. 14.
15. 16. And of whom it is ascertained they shall be raised and enjoy the City,
Luke 20. 37. 38. Heb. 11. 16. 40. But especially and above all, we have the
example of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, now in the Gospel set before us
who is the object, foundation, author and finisher of our faith, the witness
Leader and Captain to behold him, who having such Gates to pass though, which
required greater abasements, and greater sufferings, and greater strength to go
thorough then these before us, and yet he longed for them to be opened, that he
might go through them, and now has gone through them and shown forth the
praises of the Lord, Phill. 11. 8. 19. who for the joy that was set before him,
(not for addition to themselves, Psalm. 16. 2. 3. but to bring us to glory)
endured the Cross, despised the shame: and it is set on the right hand of God,
who having overcome the World, and the Devil and Death, an answered the law,
yea abolished death in himself, and taken out the sting and curse out of the
remainders of these afflictions, and first death left us to pass through, John
16. 33. Heb. 2. 14, 15, 2 Timothy 1. 10, Gall. 3. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 35. 36* 37. And
sanctified sufferings and death, as means to purge us, and a way to pass
through the Kingdom, Isa. 27. 8. 9. 10. and 58. 10. Acts 14. 22. And has both
traced out the way for us, and given us promise of spirit and presence with us,
1 Pet. 2, 23. 24* Isa. 43. 2.

And he is on the right hand of God making intercession for us, and able to
suppo^t consolate and make us gainers, and give us deliverance and glory in due
season, therefore let us look to him, and in beholding and considering him, lay
aside every weight, and the sins that does so easily beset us, and run with
patience the race that is set before us, having such a Leader and Captain, Heb.
12. 1. 2. 4. 5. surely such a Savior Leader and Captain, and the gracious
example and call, and the blessing pronounced, and the hope set before us, and
such a cloud of his servants is this way so blessed by him, might prevail with.
-To believe his Testimony and saying; therein, as verily true and good and
spoken by him to us for good. -To turn at his rep^oo^s, in repenting of and
abandoning every thing in our designs and ways, discovered by the light in his
sayings, to be evil and loathsome to him. -To trust in his word and name, for
his performing gracious promises to us, and not to be ashamed of his name, but
to confess it before men, willingly bearing his reproach, and suffering for his
names sake, and -in all loving our brethren as he has loved us, even our
enemies with pity and compassion and all that love him with love of delight,
and to bring forth the fruits of that law, in works of many righteousness and
goodness* and -in all seeking to glorify him and win others to glorify him,
and so -in all patiently waiting for his coming: and yet when we have done all,
say we are unprofitable servants, putting not trust in our own righteous doing*
but in doing all such to enjoy him and have our righteousness and life in him,
and so right to the Tree of life that so in doing the Commandments we may be
entering the Gates into the City: and that we may go through these Gates, so as
we may after enter through the glorious Gates into the glorious and holy City,
-to abide and walk in the faith always, and -in patience possessing our Souls.
To persevere in confessing his name, and bearing his reproach in keeping the
faith till our course be finished, and -wait to be always in readiness to die
in the faith, and be ready for his coming: and that we may do all and - to be
hearty and diligent in frequenting and using his ordinances foresaid and
continuing our fellowship with his People in the Gospel: and if we thus do
walk, it will frame us to be of one mind with the first, and give us some
experiment of the truth and goodness of that we may set to our Seals that God
is true, John 3. 33. And confess that by faith we have seen, and do testify
that the father has sent the Son the Savior of the world, 1 John 4. 14.
confessing that Tit. 3 3. 4. 5. 6, 7. and so experiment and joyfully say with
the Text, Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right
to the Tree of life, and enter in through the gates into the City* And that we
may so do, the Lord in mercy be pleased to favor us with the favor he bears
to his people, in leading us, in doing his Commandments to have right to the
Tree of life, and so to enter through the gates into the City, and so visits
with his salvation, that we may see the good of his chosen, and may joy in the
gladness of his nation, and glory with his inheritance, Amen. Psalm. 143. 10.
10. and 10. 6. 4. 5. Search the Scriptures quoted, and learn the usefulness in
the reading: and the way so plainly shown us let us up and be doing, and the
Lord be with us, which is the desire of the most unworthy speaker of these
things.

Tho. Moor.

Postscript.
THough it be hinted in this Tract in * 3 Observable ye * 4. and elsewhere, and
in that Tract of having salt in our selves: yet it was moved by a brother, that
in one particular mentioned about distress in the affairs of this life, some
farther explication needed; I will therefore assay to some explanation how
helpfulness is to be found in doing these Commands even in that very
particular: And so 1. Let us heartily believe his own sayings, yea even for
such things, as that he is gracious, full of compossion, of great mercy good to
all, and his tender mercies over all his works, Psalm. 145. 8. 6. and he cares
for us, 1 Pet. 5. 7. and knows that we have need of all these things* and
will both feed and cloth us, and add these things to us* Man. 6. 26 ^1. and
that walking uprightly, he will withhold no good thing (that is good for us)
from us* Psalm. 84. 11. yea he will never leave us nor forsake us. Heb. 13. 5.
These his own sayings, as also that in love he delivered up his son for us, who
loved us, and laid down his life for us, dyed for our sins, and rose for our
justification, gave himself a sacrifice to God for us, obtained eternal
redemption and eternal life for us, and God has given us eternal life in him,
that in beleiving in him we might receive it, which sayings if we believe how
much more may we believe the other, that he will give us all that is good for
us, Romans 8. 32. and so if we believe these sayings,

2. In minding them we shall meet with reproofs of the foolishness and vanity
of our own thoughts* our own doubting, fearing and caring for the things of
this life, and want of giving up our selves without prescribing to his dispose,
and casting our care on him, and in turning at his reproof, humbling our selves
under his mighty hand to cast our care on him he will teach us out of his law*
lift us up and make known his caring for us Psalm. 94. 11. 12. 13. 14. so that
he will verily feed us and ours, Luke 12. 24. 31. so that we thus

3. From the belief of this goodness we believe in him for the performance of
his gracious promises for this life and that to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. we shall
verily be fed, Psalm. 37. 3. 5. be preserved in safety, John 5. 11. 15. that so
we may live the life we live in the flesh by the faith of the Son of God that
loved us and gave himself for us Gall. 2. 20. so shall we wan^ nothing that is
good for us, but even (...) me of famine be fed, Job. 5. 49. 20 Psalm. 33. ^ 9
and 37. 19.

4. Yea in this faith beleiving so as we deny our selves, and confess his name
and goodness (yea also in this boldly confessing the Lord is my helper, Heb.
13. 6.) and patiently bearing his correction, and enduring the reproach the
Gospel is under, he will assuredly be with us, when we pass the fire and water,
and uphold and comfort us and make all works together for good to us, Isa. 4^.
2* 2 Cor. 1. 4. 5. 6. Romans 8* 28 Yea and also

5. If we from the love and (...) appearing in him, and by us received by and
from him, love our brethren, and be merciful as he has been and ^^ merciful to
us, we shall find mercy from him yea in such like distresses* Mat. 5. 7. James
2. 13. Psalm. 41. 1. 2. 3. And if in all our hearts be bent,

6. So that we seek not our own applause honor* or name, but his honor, that
he may be honored, and his name praised by us and others, and he will approve
us and give strength and deliverance and honor to us* Psalm. 29. 1. 2. 3. etc.
and 91. 14. 15. And if in all these Commandments doing,

7. We patiently look and wait for his coming, and the glory to be then
revealed, that will so frame and season us in every condition, that we may
always rejoice in the Lord* Phil. 4. 4. 5. 6. 7. and so in doing these
Commandments, we may with considence of being heard and answered in use of his
Ordinances as J^bes did 1 C^on. 4. 10. and Solomon P. ^. 30. 8. and that Luke
21. 36. and 2 Cor. 9. 10. 11 12. and so walk in doing* these Commandments and
let us for preservation hear and for the inheritance, and glory them, follow
that example and rule, beleiving those promises.

And thus have I scribled the sum of that sent you in writing, that you might
have the use of it in this particular mentioned, as in other particulars
beside* in which Commandments doing, our Soul will prosper, and we prosper as
our souls prospers, 3 John 2. as prays,

Wittlesey June 11. 1670. Your unworthy Brother THO. MOORE.

(...) escaped in the Press, may be thus mended.
PAge 7. l. 10* ad in, p. 16. l. 29, for shows r. serves, p* 23. l. 3, ad us,
p. 26. l. 6. for well. ^. will. l. 13, for them r. him, l. 27. for strongly r.
stewards p. 29. l. 24. for scurvey, r. discern, p. 39. l. 17* for stay r. slay,
p. 40. l. 19. for Matt. r. Mal. l. 29. for thus 1. they p. 41. l. 30. for
meeting r. ^eeding, p. 43. l. 1. for such of r. feed on p. 44 l. 12. for
afflictions r. affections, p. 51. l. 9 for cleanse r. cleansing* p. 55. l. 28.
for let r. left, p. 56 l. 27. r. from it th^n last, r. have not p. 59. l. 10.
for 0. r. of l. 20. for framed r. frame the, p. 64. l 9. for tendered r.
tendering, p. 65. l. 14. for attributed r. attributing. p. 69. l. 20. for by r.
be, p. 74, l. last r. for us ^. has, p. 77. l. 8. blot out not, l. 10. for of
r. is p. 78. l. 2. for would ^. could, p. 79. l. last, r. first for the fall,
and then for the rising, p. 80. l. 30. for beleiving r. beleivers* p. 81. l. 1.
and the Gospel, l. 26. for fits r. fills p. 82. l. 10. for considering r,
confiding, l. 30. for receiving r. reviewing, p. 87. l. 14* for put r. puffed,
and title, p. 91. 90. 91. r. 91. 92. 93. p. 94. l. 2. for called, r. are lead.

FINIS.

