OF Patience and submission to Authority.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor And the COURT of ALDERMEN, AT
Guild Hall Chapel, on the 27 th of January, 1683/4.

By JOHN MOORE, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his Most Sacred Majesty; and
Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1684.

Tulse, Mayor.
Martis xxix. die Januarii, 1683/4. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi,
Angliae, etc. xxxv.
This Court does desire Dr. Moore to print his Sermon preached on Sunday last,
at the Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.
To the Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulse, LORD MAYOR, AND THE COURT of ALDERMEN
OF The CITY of LONDON.
My Lord,
I Publish this Discourse in compliance with your Lordship's Commands, and not
without some hopes it may be of use, not only to bring men to a patient
submission to the Will of God, under the manifold troubles and afflictions of
this life, but likewise to compose their Minds to all due subjection and
obedience to the Civil Authority: In which, under his Sacred Majesty, since
your Lordship has so great and difficult a part, that you may manage it, as
hitherto you have done, with advantage to the Public, and honor to your self,
is the hearty Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Faithful and Humble Servant, John Moore.

HEB. 10.36. For ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the will of
God, ye might receive the reward.


OUR Lord made a private entry into the World, without pomp, or force, neither
attended with a numerous and splendid train, nor at the head of a great Army:
And although the design of his coming was to erect a Kingdom, and to bring men
of all ranks and conditions into subjection to it, yet he used neither worldly
polity, nor arms to accomplish it. For as his Kingdom was of a different
nature, from all those which had been before it, so he took a quite contrary
method to form and support it. He was so far from enslaving the persons of men,
and spilling their blood to increase his own glory, and from putting the
Countries about him under a contribution to carry on his Wars, and uphold the
majesty of his Court, that he did condescend to make his first appearance in a
Stable, and to take upon himself the form of a Servant.

The dominion he intended, was to be over the mind, upon which outward force
can take no place: and to transplant the desires and affections of the Soul
from this lower world, to the glories and pleasures of Heaven: for the
effecting whereof, grandeur, riches and power are so far from being necessary
means, that they often prove most fatal impediments. And accordingly Christ,
without a fund of treasure, without Soldiers, or the help of any earthly
interest, gave Laws to the World; and disposed men to be subject to them, by
the authority of his Divine Miracles, and the convincing efficacy of his
Sermons and holy life: and his Disciples preached his Doctrines, made them
spread, and be received by the power only of plain persuasion, by setting an
example according to the rules they had taught, and bearing testimony to the
truth of their Doctrine by patiently suffering persecution for it.

To tax the World, and draw the Sword, were things so foreign to his purpose,
so utterly repugnant to the great end of his coming, the redemption of Mankind
from the power and guilt of sin, that on the contrary he has declared it is a
matter, in it self, easier for a Camel to pass through the eye of a needle,
Mat. 19.24.
than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 26.52.
and that they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword.

Whereupon most remarkable was the patience of the first Christians under their
sufferings, and their peace of mind and joy, and ready submission to the divine
Will in the bitterest trials, was so beyond example, that as nothing did more
abate the rage of their persecutours, (...). Greg. Naz. T. 1. Orat. 23. p. 410.
than their cheerfulness under persecution, so they added more to the Church by
dying for the Cause of Christ, than they had done before by preaching it up.

Indeed our Savior was the first that did effectually recommend this passive
virtue to the World, and furnished men with such true arguments to bear the
Cross, as made the most afflicted state not only supportable, but to be
preferred before all the happiness of this life. It is true, the Philosophers
had deeply considered the causes of humane misery, and applied themselves with
all study and diligence to find remedies for it. But they wanted sound
principles to build their discourses upon, made to compose the disorders of the
mind, and so their rules for the government of the calamitous became liable to
infinite and unanswerable exceptions; and all their receipts, though adorned
with eloquence and the countenance of Philosophy proved dry and comfortless to
men in pain and trouble: Marcus Tullius multa quidem praeclare, and egregie de
patientia, and contemtu adversae fortunae disputare noverat; exilium tamen suum
ubique diutissime deplorat, and sui temporis calamitate lamentanda mollis, and
propemodum effaeminatus apparet. J. Pieri. de infelic. Literat. lib. 2. p. 99.
none sinking more under their burden, or making more effeminate complaints of
the weight of it, than some of these Philosophers who had writ the wisest
maxims about patience and the contempt of adverse fortune.

And that which chiefly rendered them unfit for so great an undertaking was
their false notions of God, and their ignorance of another life, which
sometimes they seemed to believe, and sometimes they denied, and when they were
on the affirming side, if we observe with what weak and unsatistactory
arguments they endeavor to prove and maintain the point, there will be reason
to conclude, that their doubts and darkness as to these things would have
continued to this day, had not our Lord brought life and immortality to light
by the Gospel.

For as it is not to be conceived that a man should bring himself to be quiet
and easy under an evil that presses hard upon him, unless it be in hopes by
his patience to get rid of it, or to mend his condition: So it is manifest that
they, who believe little or nothing themselves of a future state, cannot be
stored with true arguments to prevail upon a man to be patient under a
sequestration from the happiness and pleasures of this life. For where will
they find just motives to reduce him to a composed mind, who by a fire or a
storm has his Estate swept away, or by a malicious story his reputation
blasted, or by the acute pains of a Disease his Body weakened beyond hopes of
recovery, if neither they nor he are possessed with a persuasion, that, being
gone off this stage, they shall live again, and receive the recompense of their
virtue? and with what conscience could the Philosophers upbraid and reproach
men in distress for their grief and complaints, passions most natural to their
condition, when all they could offer to comfort them, fell short of an
equivalent to their present losses and misfortunes?

He then only can be allowed to be the true Physician for the mind, who is
able to assure his Patients, that even the malice of those, who torment their
Bodies, shall never have power to reach and harm their Souls; and that for
their sufferings in this world, they shall receive an hundred fold in the next.
And as Christ alone is the Author of those means which will uphold the Spirit
in the most sorrowful condition, so he did likewise foresee, there should be
no men exposed to severer trials than the Professors of his Religion, which is
the reason he exhorts his Disciples to possess their souls in patience, and
that the Apostles do admonish their new Converts of the need they have of
patience, that after they have done the will of God, they might receive the
reward.

In managing of this argument, I shall use the following method. I. Explain the
nature of Patience, and set down the chief instances wherein it is to be
exercised. II. Propose the means by which it is to be obtained. III. Represent
the necessity of it, and show that it is a fundamental virtue to the Christian
Life. IV. Prove that no Religion or Philosophy furnishes men with such true and
powerful motives to patience as Christianity does.


I. I am to explain the nature of Patience. By Patience, in the most
comprehensive sense of it, we are to understand that Christian virtue, whereby
with a calm and even mind, we do not only bear pains, injuries, losses and
reproaches, but perform all those duties, that are difficult, tedious and
irksome to flesh and blood, which our Religion does require, and when it is for
the sake of our Lord.

Or Patience is that virtue which disposes us not only to submit to the wrong
and misery, which by the cruelty and injustice of others may happen unto us,
but obstinately to deny the importunity of our sensual appetites, in order to
promote the interests of piety, and the glory of God. In a word, Patience is
that blessed temper of mind which enables us with all cheerfulness both to do
and suffer the will of God.

Patience then is not so properly any particular virtue, as that happy
disposition in our Souls, which has a general influence upon all virtue. It is
the keeping the Passions within their due bounds, free from commotion and
disorder, without which, a man is not capable of real happiness, or to be the
master of any one virtue.

For as we are obliged by our Religion to be meek, so what pretense can he make
to that virtue, who is uneasy to himself and others, let things go as they
will, and clamours still in what condition soever God puts him? it is our duty
to be merciful, but who so cruel as he, who will exercise no patience toward
his offending brother? blessed are we, if we be Peacemakers, but can there be
peace, if men's passions will not suffer them to yield to one another, and to
bear with each others infirmities? we are bound to be not only content, but to
rejoice, when men revile us, and we suffer all manner of evil for righteousness
sake; which we can never hope to do before we have laid up in our souls a great
stock of patience. We are commanded to watch and pray without ceasing, and we
may as well presume to see without light, as to continue the performance of
these duties without Christian patience. The many benefits of patience are
elegantly heaped together by Tertullian. Omnia enim ejus placita tuetur;
omnibus mandatis ejus intervenit: fidem munit, pacem gubernat, dilectionem
adjuvat, humilitatem instruit, poenitentiam expectat, exomologesin adsigrat,
carnem regit, spiritum servat, linguam frenat, manum continet, tentationes
inculcat, scandala pellit, martyria consummat: pauperem consolatur, divitem
temperat, infirmum non extendit, valentem non consumit, fidelem delectat,
gentilem invitat, servum domino, dominum Deo commendat, feminam exornat, virum
approbat: amatur in puero, laudatur in juvene, suspicitur in seen: in omni
sexu, in omni aetate formosa. Tertul. de Patient. p. 148.
It justifies all God's Decrees, has place in every command; strengthens faith,
governs peace, promotes charity, teaches humility, waits for the repentance of
men, and the confession of their fault, governs the flesh, preserves the
spirit, bridles the tongue, holds the hands, tramples upon temptations, repells
scandals, perfects martyrdom; comforts the poor, moderates the rich, does not
burden the weak, nor consume the strong, delights the Christian, invites the
Heathen, recommends the Servant to his Master, and the Master to God, adorns
the Woman, approves the Man; is lovely in a Child, commendable in the young,
admirable in the old; beautiful in every sex and age.

But for the more full understanding of the nature of Patience, and to render
it beneficial to us in our conversations, I will present you with some of the
considerable instances in which the Christian Man does exercise his patience.

1. The first instance shall be this, that as none of the difficulties he does
find in the duties of Religion do make him lay those duties aside, so neither
the number of temptations, nor the frequency with which they assault him, do
cause him to give over his watching, and making resistance against them; or to
fling away the spiritual weapons with which God has armed him for a defense.
His patience has given him leave to consider the whole matter, and he is
convinced, that the greatest difficulties in Religion, as in all Arts and
Sciences, do happen at the first, and that when the hardships of the beginning
are once past over, the service of God will prove not only eassie, but very
pleasant: and that with the same, or less labor, than a man can raise an
estate, get a name, or become powerful, he may fill his Soul with the solid
and sincere pleasures of Religion. A Possession incomparably more to be
esteemed than riches, fame, or power. For though a man can never so clip the
wings of his riches, as that they may not, in a moment, all fly away; never so
secure his fame, as that all on a sudden it may not quite perish by the same
fickle breath, which gave it being; never so discipline and govern his armed
powers, as that they may not all turn upon him, and destroy him, yet neither
the envy, nor the strength of the whole world can rifle his mind of that
tranquillity and joy, which springs up from the conscience of things well done,
and the faithful discharge of his duty to God.

Moreover why should we grudge at the pains to be taken in a godly life, when
the reward of them will be so great and inexpressible? it is also fit and
reasonable that there should be some hard parts in the business of Religion, to
the end that the pleasures which it does create, might make the more deep and
lasting impressions upon us, and teach us to set the higher rate upon them, and
to be very solicitous and fearful, lest by any false step we lose those
blessings, which cost us so much care and toil.

Besides, there will be still less cause to complain of the labor that goes to
the making of a good man, when we shall consider that the uneasinesses in God's
service do proceed from our own fault: for what can be more agreeable to the
native sentiments of our mind than the Laws of our God, before we contract
sinful habits and customs, and thereby alter the complexion and very
constitution of our nature, and suffer our selves to be enslaved to the lusts
of the world and the flesh? And it is but just we should taste of the fruit of
our own planting. And though the paths that lead to Heaven prove strait and
sometimes rugged, yet Christian patience will so cheer up our drooping hearts,
that we shall not return back out of them, nor go astray from them, nor sit
down in despair of ever arriving at the end of our race. We shall not fail to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, while it frequently refreshes
our memory, and animates our courage with the pleasing assurance, that it is
God who works in us both to will, and to do of his good pleasure. And the more
work lies on our hands, the greater diligence we shall give to make our calling
and election sure.

2. If the Petitions the patient man puts up to Heaven be not presently
granted, he does not grow weary of his devotions, and give them over, as if God
neither heard him, nor had any regard to what he desired. For there be many
good reasons which convince him, that God's time to answer his Prayers is the
best, and that he ought submissively to wait for it. Perhaps the thing he prays
for, is not proper for his condition, and might do him harm if he had it. Or
perhaps he does not address himself to his Prayers, with that just preparation
which may testify his sense of the Divine Presence, and that awful regard he
ought to have of the great God, with whom now he has more immediately to do.
Or it may be he does not pray with that warmth and intention of mind, which the
vast importance of the mercy, he begs for, does deserve.

Therefore he cease not to pray, although a speedy return be not made to his
Prayers; as well knowing God's Ears are always open, and his Mercies ever free,
but that the fault must lie on his own side. Which obliges him narrowly to
look into the defects of his own performance, and to mend them.

The patience with which his Soul is sustained, even when God refuses to grant
the things he has prayed for, preserves him from running into any sinful
extreme. From either being so profane, as to believe his condition may be
prosperous though he prays not at all, or so vainly fancifull, as to hope by
any superstitious practice to render his Prayers the more effectual. He is as
far on the one hand, from being puffed up with the haughty confidence of the
Stoic, who bids his wise man fac te ipse felicem make himself happy, as he is
from degenerating into the superstition of the Papists, who, lest their Prayers
should miscarry, address them to hundreds of Mediators, more than God has
either appointed, or allowed, and without one example in the Primitive Church
to justify it.

Insomuch as some honest and learned men of that Church could not forbear
laying open the absurdness and impiety of this modern practice of these
Semichristians, who pray hardly oftener to God than to the Virgin Mary, Quo
magis demiror frigus istud inusitatum Semichristianorum, in quibus non solum
refrixit dilectio Dei sed propemodum extincta est cognitio Dei: aversi
videlicet existentes a Christo ad Mariam, atque filii cultu degenerantes ad
cultum Matris, adeo ut Putent summum esse scelus, dicere orationem Dominicam,
nisi statim addant salutationem Angelicam, perinde ac si citra hanc non valeat
cassam nucem. G. Wicel. Elenc. abus. p. 124.
thinking it the highest crime to say the Lord's Prayer, if presently they do
not add to it an Ave Maria, as if that, without this, would not be of the least
value. By which course they seem to imply, that God's hand is grown shorter
than it was in the beginning, and the power and merit of Christ's intercession,
so weakened by length of time, that they find it necessary to join a multitude
of Saints to him, to be his Coadjutors. And to this purpose Henno, interprets
Genesis 2.18. Scriptum est, inquit, non est bonum hominem esse solum, faciamiss ei
Adjutorium, id est, non sufficit unus Advocatus vel Mediator humano generi in
coelo, c;um tot ac tam periculosas causas habeat coram Deo: faciamus ei
Adjutorium, hoc est, Beatam Virginem. Vid. Wicel. Elenc. abus. p. 125.
It is not good that the man should be alone, let us make a meet help for him.
That is, says he, one Advocate or Mediator in Heaven is not sufficient for
Mankind, which has so many causes of the highest and most dangerous consequence
depending before God: Let us make him a meet help, i. e. The Blessed Virgin.

Neither are opinions so ridiculous, and usages so repugnant to Primitive
Christianity, to be charged only on the weak and ignorant Members of that
Church, since these things have taken up a place in their Public Offices, and
we find Pope Pius II. directing his Prayers immediately to the Virgin Mary, to
cure his Fever, and in that Prayer Pia Dei Genetrix, quamvis tua potestas
nullis coarctetur finibus, ac totum impleat orbem Miraculis, etc. H. Tursellin.
Lauret. hist. l. 1. c. 26. p. 81.

Matrem quippe suam Praepotens ille Deus Divinae Majestatis, potestatisque
sociam, quatenus licuit, ascivit. Huic olim coelestium, mortaliumque
principatum detulit: ad bujus arbitrium, quoad hominum tutela postulat, terros,
maria, coelum, naturamque moderatur: -- ut omnes intelligant, quicquid ao
aeterno illo, augustoque bonorum font in terras profluat, fluere per Mariam.
H. Tursel. Ep. P. Aldobrand. Cardin.


acknowledging her power to be infinite, and the whole world to be filled with
its Miracles. And Leo X. Sed procedant: ne tum nos, tum etiam Deam ipsam inani
lignorum inutilium donatione lusisse videamini. P. Bembi Ep. lib. 8. ep. 17. p.
181.
gives her the title of Goddess, and Diligam te Domina coeli and terrae, and in
gentibus nomen tuum invocabo. Psalm. 17.1. Adorent te familiae gentium, and
glorificent te omnes ordines angelorum, Psalm. 21.5. In te Dominae Speravi non
consundar in aeternum, Psalm. 70.1. Bonavent. Op. Tom. 6. p. 478.
Bonaventura a Cardinal and a Saint has burlesqu'd the Book of Psalms, applying
and translating the incommunicable Attributes of God and Jesus Christ unto the
Virgin Mother.

But the humble patient Christian we are describing, he both abhors the impious
Doctrine of Epicurus, that holds God is too high and too busy to mind our
Prayers, and the false Worship of the Romanists, who go about to reconcile the
offended Deity Quamobrem exigua haec data est mihi Poenitentia. 1. Vt omnibus
patribus and fratribus pedes exosculer. 2. Humilitatis officium, quod est
cloacaes expurgare, per octiduum subeam. 3. Ollas and vasa culinae eluam. 4.
Per spatium unius horae coram venerabili sacramento culpam deprecer. 5. Per
mensis cursum quotidie ter conscientiae examen faciam. 6. Jam meipsum
flagellem, donec tertium fuerit appositum ferculum, vel Dominus Rector
sufficientiae signum dederit. E. Hasenmull. hist. Jesuit. p. 73.
with trifling and childish Penances.

He does not hope to move God to hear him the sooner by scourging his back, or
by a Pilgrimage performed barefoot. He does not cross his Body, but he
crucifies his Lusts; he does not put off his shoes, but he lays aside every
weight which may clog and incumber him, so that he cannot run with patience the
race set before him. But he has a great care that the fear of being drawn into
the senseless superstitions of Rome betray him not into a neglect of natural
reverence in his devotions, and the omitting of decency and order in the
Worship of God. Neither does he believe that the length of his Prayers will the
more recommend them to Heaven, or that he shall have a speedier grant of them,
when they are uttered in unpremeditated, and sometimes unseemly expressions,
than when offered up in a grave form of proper and well chosen words.

He is not so much concerned for the circumstances of his Prayers, as the
sincerity of them. He is even afraid of being so loud in private, as to make
the Streets the witnesses of his Devotion, lest he should only receive the
Pharisee's reward; but he retires into the secresies of his Closet, and there
pours forth his soul before God, with a profound reverence, an unfeigned
humility, and deep sense of his own wants; and though his Prayers be not always
long, yet he suffers few hours of any day to pass without sending up to Heaven
hearty and earnest supplications, with thanksgivings.

3. He does not unreasonably terrify himself with distant dangers, and
anticipate calamities before they come. For the remote evils we so much dread,
may both prove very tolerable when they come, and make but a short stay with
us. Nay, though to us they may seem insufferable, and by no humane means to be
avoided, yet the alwise Providence of God, whose ways are as unsearchable as
the great deeps, may prevent their coming at all, and scatter our proud enemies
before the wind, who boasted of their powers as invincible; contriving for us a
wonderful deliverance, when we suppose our selves on the brink of destruction.

And surely the Israelites, when they beheld Pharaoh and his Hosts floating
upon the Red Sea, could not but with shame reflect upon their own distrust of
God's wisdom and goodness, and those unjust reproaches they had cast upon
Moses, as if they had been delivered on purpose from their bondage in Egypt to
perish in the Wilderness

But such fears never more, deserve censure, than when we are so confounded by
them as to neglect our Callings, desert the stations wherein God has placed us,
and take ill courses to preserve our selves against them. When we are so
terrified about the events of things, as to seek to cunning men for a
resolution: and perhaps embarke our selves in some downright sinful methods
for our own security. We ought always to keep our eye upon our Lord's rule;
Matthew. 6.30.
Take therefore no thought for the morrow, sufficient unto the day, is the evil
thereof. It being a reproof to those impatient Christians, who are not content
with having made an honest provision for their present necessities, but are
also so anxiously and unmeasurably solicitous about the future, as to evidence
unto the World their independency upon Divine Providence.

4. The humble and patient Christian, when crosses and afflictions overtake
him, neither grows froward under them, nor stupid. He neither suffers himself
to be cast into despair by immoderate grief, nor his virtue to be stained by
getting loose from his troubles. He neither dishonours God, nor injures his
Neighbor, nor lays violent hands upon himself. He does not murmur and fill all
peoples ears with complaints for such calamities, as are as natural to his
condition, as it is for the sparks to fly upward, and of which all men taste
more or less.

He sets the good he receives, against the evil he suffers, and by a just
comparison finds his happiness far to overbalance his misfortunes. He discovers
an exact wisdom in God's Providence under the great variety of its
dispensations: and ever mildly composes himself into an entire submission to
all that is harsh and grievous in his Christian warfare: so far is he in bad
times, and when he is ill used from falling into violent fits of sorrow, and
languishing away in a melancholy retirement.

And indeed the more a man indulges his grief, the greater head it will make
against him, and in tract of time so dispirit his mind, that he shall not be
fit either to graple with his present distress, or to guard himself against any
other. For Jo. Stearne de obstinatione, p. 121.
though all other things in the world by use and custom become easy to us,
yet grief is ever to be excepted; because it is impossible to make grief become
grateful and pleasant to us, by accustoming our selves to grieve: but on the
contrary, grief by continuance, is so far from being assuaged and deposing its
sour and churlish nature, that it grows more fierce and outrageous, and by our
tame yielding to it, will bring both body and mind so low, as in the conclusion
to overwhelm and stupify all our faculties and powers.

Farthermore, although he does not allow his pains to throw him into the
excesses of sorrow, yet he is not so stupid and void of all sense, as to
pretend, or endeavor to persuade others, that he does not feel them; nor
arrived to that pitch of vanity with the Stoics, as to boast of the
indifference between the rest on a Bed, and the tortures on a Rack, just as if
the one was as agreeable to his constitution as the other. He does not
therefore think it his privilege to be without passions, whereof he knows so
good an use may be made, but he strives to govern them by his reason. He sees
no cause to judge that the several hardships and miseries which fill the world
with sighs, and groans, and lamentations, have nothing of reality in them, but
are all to be resolved into mere opinion or fancy; or that torments can be the
more easily endured, when they are called by fine names.

No, he is sensible of his pain, and it is his great business, that the sense
of it may not breed in him any unworthy apprehensions of God, or transport him
into any evil or indecent speech or carriage, such as may reflect dishonor
upon his most holy Religion. And he ever upholds in his soul a just abhorrence
of that false and wicked tenet, asserted by the same Sect of Philosophers, that
it is a piece of heroical gallantry for a man in sharp pain or great troubles
to starve himself, or cut his own throat. For so to do is a violation of the
Laws of Nature, and an usurpation upon God's Prerogative, who has a right to
that service, which by self-murder we are rendered incapable to perform: it is
an injury to humane Society, who have a claim to some share of our labor: it
is making our selves the judges in God's stead, whether it be fit for us to
live any longer or no? it is the highest affront we can put upon the Divine
goodness, since by evident construction, we declare, that it is better for us
to die, than to sub-sist any longer in that uncomfortable condition Providence
has chosen for us; and that we are so little beholden to God for all the
mercies of this life, that irreverently and unmannerly we turn them all back
upon him.

In a word, the Christian fortified by patience, as he does not think death is
to be feared, when it comes upon him by Divine appointment, so neither believes
he that life is to be despised, so long as God shall please to continue it.
Seeing it will ever be in his power by God's grace, whether in sickness, or in
troubles, to enjoy a contented and serene mind.

And to make his patience the more steady, he enquires into the causes of his
calamity: and if he happens to have been involved in it by his own crime,
neglect, or mismanagement, he neither bursts out into complaints, nor sits down
slothfully under it, nor yet does any other violence to himself than what is in
order to the cure, and may be the most effectual means to remove the cause.

But if the evil comes by another man's fault, he employs his clemency and
patience in forgiving it; and is so far from returning the injury, that he
prays God also to pardon it, and stands prepared to receive another.

And lastly, if it do not come directly, either by his own folly, or another
man's malice, he submits, and is thankful for it, as an act of Providence,
designed either to reform his manners, or to try his virtue, and the sincerity
of his love of God.

And it was the sense of the great good that afflictions may bring, and of the
joy holy men perceive in their sufferings for the cause of Christ, that did
transport St. Chrysostom into such an hyperbolical rapture, as to profess,
(...). S. Chrysostom. de Patien. Tom. 6. p. 868.
That if any one would give him the whole Heaven, or the Chain with which Saint
Paul's hands were bound, he would prefer this before that. If any one would
place him among the Angels above, or with St. Paul in bonds, he would choose the
Prison. If any one would make him to be among the Powers about the Throne, or
such a Prisoner, he would rather choose to be such a Prisoner. For nothing is
better than to suffer evil for Christ's sake.

5. When he is persecuted for his Religion, he neither deserts it, nor by any
unlawful means defends it. He will not renounce his Faith to escape
persecution, and yet he dreads by resisting of Authority to promote the cause
of Religion; he will sooner part with his life, than give up his Bible, as
those impatient Christians once did, who, by the title of Traditores, will be
infamous to all posterity. And rather than quit the hopes he has of enjoying
endless happiness by his firm profession of Christianity, he will yield up his
Body a Sacrifice to the malice of his Persecutours, and endure the utmost
misery that can come by their torturing of it. And avow to them with the
Primitive Martyr, (...). S. Greg. Nyss. de Theod. Mart. ^. 1014.
That his Body does owe patience in every member of it to his Creator.

And as above all Earthly Treasure he values the Word of God, so has he such a
just esteem for all the parts of it, as not to dare to corrupt and mangle them,
though it be for never so good an end. And therefore he cannot but detest the
impiety of the course taken by the Fathers of the Society of Jesus Mist.
Jesuit. Let. 5. p. 51.
to propagate the Christian Religion in China and the Indies, where the belief
of the sufferings and putting to death of our ever blessed Lord Jesus Christ,
being accounted an extravagance that might give great offense, as it had
heretofore proved a stumbling block to the Jew, and seemed foolishness to the
Gentile, they smothered the doctrine and scandal of the Cross, and preached up
a glorified Jesus, but not a crucified Savior. And permitted the Christians
publicly to adore the Idol Cachim choan, only fetching them off by a very
subtle invention, which was mentally to direct those adorations to the image
of Jesus Christ, which they had hid under their Clothes.

Whereas had these men possessed their Souls with true Christian Patience, such
as would have enabled them to suffer for the Cross of Christ, they would have
had the courage also to preach it up, and as then their practice would have
carried a conformity to that of the first planters of Christianity, so we might
have hoped their endeavors would have been blessed with a good measure of the
same success.

These good Fathers indeed have gone on journies, as far as the rising, and
setting Sun, to make Converts, but had their love for men's souls born a
proportion to their fierce desires of increasing the riches and splendor of
their Church and Society, they would not have confined their charity to the
places which abound with costly spices, and where the bowels of the Earth are
replenisht with veins of Gold: but their zeal would have cast some warmth upon
the poor frozen People that dwell near the North Pole, as well as upon the rich
Countries of the East and the West. And the starved Laplander, who hardly ever
heard of a Popish Apostle, should have had a share in their Christian kindness,
no less than the Inhabitants of wealthy Peru.

Moreover, as the patient Christian stands prepared for the heaviest
afflictions, rather than he will be induced to corrupt the purity of his Faith,
or add to, or diminish the number of the Articles of his Creed, so is he highly
concerned about the honor of his Religion, that the reputation of it may not
be lessened, by any faulty proceeding of his in the defense thereof, or his
doing any thing in it self wicked under the pretense and color of it. He does
not think Christianity can be spread or promoted by any other means than it was
at first set up in the world: or that the least service can be done to Religion
by acting contrary to the express Precepts thereof. And therefore he cannot but
condemn those, Sacrum Evangelium ante omnia annunciandum, curarent, mox etiam
admonerent ut foedissimis moribus relictis, cum honestis viris composite and
pacate vivere vellent, and Hispanorum amicitiam sincere colere. Quas si
conditiones acciperent, etc. sin minus, jubere eos capi and trahi in
servitutem: denique in eorum corpora, fortunas, and vitam far, flamma, and
omni Belli clade saeviri. Hier. Benzo. Hist. Nov. Orbis, p. 74, 75.
who by force of arms go about to enlarge the borders of Christ's Kingdom, and
compel men, upon pain of death, to become his Subjects, and in order to
rectify their errors in the Faith, sentence their Bodies to the flames. A
method so contrary to that taken by our Lord, his Apostles, and their next
Successors, that Richerius the Learned Sorbon Doctor confesses, Hoc obiter
notandum Christianam rempublicam mill atque amplius annorum decursu nunquam
poenas capitales Religionis ergo inflixisse. E. Richer. Hist. Genesis Conc. Tom.
1. p. 588.
That the Christian Church, for above a thousand years, never inflicted capital
punishment in the mere cause of Religion.

Neither can he pass a more favorable judgment on those, who take upon them to
absolve whole Nations from their sworn duty to their Prince, on the score of
Religion: or upon those, who under the pretense of defending their Rights or
Religion, Omnibus Christianis diligentissime advertendum, quod Deus usque adeo
hanc impietatem in Regibus detestatur, and usque adeo fidelibus populis imponit
officium hoc Reges sic deliquentes castigandi, and ab omni regali altitudine
funditus dejiciendi, ut si hoc loco populus Regi suo vel exile quid indulgeat;
Deus eo facto populum peccare, and divinam suam majestatem non leviter
offendere. G. Rossaeus alias Giffordus de just. Reip. Christ. Author. in Reg.
imp. p. 611.
resist lawful Authority. It being a blasphemy against the Divine wisdom and
power, to suppose God can ever stand in need of our sins to bring to pass his
most glorious designs.

He then in whom this virtue of Patience dwells keeps a due regard to the
commands laid upon him to submit himself to the supreme Powers, and he dares
not lift up his hand against the Lord's Anointed, or levy war upon the most
plausible account whatsoever: nay to him it cannot but seem a wonder that the
doctrine of Resistance should have gone down so glibly with any, who have read
the New Testament, and are baptized into the Christian Faith.

Now since disobedience to lawful Governors has been a frequent sin in these
times, wherein men have studied and strained to find out such numbers of cases,
in which they believe they may lawfully resist those whom God has set over
them, as that they hardly have left a place for Christian Patience to bear its
part in. I entreat leave somewhat the more largely to insist upon these two
things. 1. To prove that all resistance to the Supreme Authority is unlawful.
2. To show with what care, impartiality and patience the good Christian
searches into the grounds and causes of his persuasion, that the commands of
Authority are sinful, before he refuses to pay obedience to them.

First, To prove, that all resistance to Supreme Authority is unlawful; in
order to which we may observe these three things.

1. That there is an universal command in holy Scripture laid upon all
Christians to be subject to the Supreme Powers.

2. That this command is enforced with strong and clear reasons.

3. That the Popes of Rome were the first Pretenders from Scripture to a right
to resist the Civil Power.

1. That there is an universal and absolute command in holy Scripture laid upon
all Christians to be subject to the Supreme Powers in all cases. Now nothing is
plainer than that, if we be required to be subject in all cases, Romans 13.1.
resistance in any will be sinful. Let every soul be subject to the higher
power, to which Christian Precept there is no exception to be found for any
person in any instance, from one end of the Christian Institution to the other.
The duty of Subjection is grounded both upon the Precepts of Christ and his
Apostles, and confirmed by their constant practice. He and they not only paid
tribute to Caesar, but gave proof of their submission even to the bitterness of
death it self. And his and their examples have been faithfully copied out by
the Apostolic Church, in the lives of its pious Confessors and glorious
Martyrs. Subjection is a duty than which, there hardly is any oftener repeated
in the Christian Law, so as we cannot plead ignorance of it; it is pressed with
such evidence of reason, that cuts off all pretenses of evading it; it is set
down in such plain, easy, and full expressions, as that there can be no color
to doubt about the right understanding of it. The holy Scripture gives
permission no more to the People collected into one body to rebel, than it
does to each of them, by himself singly considered. Every Christian, in all
circumstances, is required to conform to the Laws of the Supreme Authority, if
they have no repugnancy to God's Laws; and to suffer patiently where obedience
would be a sin. Now there being in our Religion a general Precept to be subject
to our Governors, without one exception to it, what will the Sons of
disobedience urge in excuse of themselves? will they say that the Evangelical
Precepts were not to bind perpetually, and that our obligation to observe them
is already ceased? If it be, then we have done with our Religion and our
Bibles, and may lay them both aside.

It is most certain, that by the same argument they would take off their
obligation to this plain Christian Duty, they may excuse themselves from their
obligation to all the rest. Will they plead, that the Gospel is not a perfect
rule of duty, and that the inspired Writers did not foresee and provide for all
cases; and that therefore it is but reasonable there should be a supplement of
new Doctrines and Rules, where the Gospel has been defective? But is not this
rank Popery do we not justly condemn the Church of Rome for taking upon her to
make new Articles of Faith? is not this to incur the guilt of St. Paul's
Anathema, which shall pass upon whosoever preaches another Doctrine?

Or will they say that the general Laws of the Gospel bind but sometimes, and
the universal Rules hold only in particular cases? That is, notwithstanding
St. Paul does lay a strict injunction upon every Soul to be subject to the
Higher Powers, yet that some ought to be excepted. But is not this the way to
destroy all the Laws of the Christian Religion? since upon the same ground they
dispense with one Law of Christ, they may dispense with as many as they please.
Is not this to open a gap to all impiety and looseness? yet to these miserable
shifts must the Advocates of Rebellion be driven.

So it was the fate of our unhappy Nation to run it self into a most unnatural
and bloody Rebellion, by a set of distinctions that had not the least footstep
in the Christian Religion. England's distract. p. 11.
By distinctions between a power radically limited, and not only in the use
and exercise of it; between a moral power to resist, and an authoritative and
civil power; between resistance of the King himself, and of his Agents and
Officers; between resistance positive, and active; negative and passive;
between jus regiminis and usurpationis, according to God's Law and Man's Law;
between resistance of the King's Power, and of his Will; between fighting
against the Magistrate, and against the Man.

And the same ill cause, which put men upon inventing distinctions, that would
in no wise agree with the Faith of Christ, and to which the Primitive
Christians were strangers, did lay a necessity on them to do violence to the
holy Scriptures, and to extort senses out of them different from their plain
meaning.

Thus to evade this Text of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether it
be to the King as supreme, or to Governors, etc. Jo. Goodwin, in his defense
of the horrible Sentence against the late King of glorious memory, tells us,
Goodwin's Defense, p. 15.
That the supremacy here asserted unto the King, is not over the whole body of
his People, but only over inferior Officers.

Now that the King should be supreme as St. Peter declares, and yet subject, as
our Author asserts, to the whole body of the People, is a matter as hard to
make out, as it is to reconcile contradictions. And it is manifest, that St.
Peter requiring submission expressly, first to the King as supreme, then to
Governors as under him, does extend this Precept to others, besides the
inferior Officers, that is to the People.

It must be granted, that, as it is absurd speech to say, he who is the supreme
Ruler, can have any person not subject to him in his own Dominions, so also
that in this Apostolical injunction to submit to the King, there is no more a
reservation made, for the whole body of the People to resist, than for under
Officers; no more for under Officers, than for private Men.

However The true name of which Author Learned Men do conjecture, with great
probability, to be Hubert Languet. Voetius in disquisitione de auctore
vindiciarum contra Tyrannos, quae sub nomine Junii Bruti Celtae typis editae
sunt, Huberti Langueti opusculum hoc esse, verosimilius facit, quam ut amplius
ea de re dubitare sustineam. Vinc. Placc. Pseudon. Catal. p. 369. Mihi videtur
auctorem fuisse Hub. Languetum: Losannae fuit vir doctus, qui Pagellas habuit
Scriptas manu ipsius Langueti, and quidem ita scriptas, quasi composuerit,
deinde stylus cum ipsius stylo congruit. Boeclerus ad Grotium de Jur. Bell. and
Pa. lib. 1. vid. Placcium, p. 370. And no Author in print before Milton has
affirmed that Beza was the Writer of this ill Book.
Junius Brutus to escape the force of the same Text, puts a gloss upon it
contradictory to that of our other Author, he attributing the right to resist
to inferior Officers, which was given before to the body of the People. For he
declares that these exhortations of St. Peter and St. Paul to submission Sed
praterquam quod ad privatas personas adhortationes illa diriguntur, quibus
nullum aliud remedium, quam preces and patientiam reliquum esse semper diximus,
meminisse hic quoque oportet, cum dicimus, Magistratus inferiores, aut Regni
alicujus ordines posse, imo and debere Tyrannidi obsistere. Junii Bruti de jur.
Magist. p. 317.
are directed to private persons, who by his confessions have no other remedy
than prayers and patience, but that the inferior Magistrates not only may,
but are in duty bound to resist a Tyrant.

But in finding out expedients to fence against direct Precepts of Scripture,
it may be observed that his Holiness has been before this sort of men, and set
them a pattern from this very Text. For Innocent III. (who sainted Thomas a
Becket for Sedition and Treason) in a Letter to Henry Emperor of
Constantinople, puts a pleasant interpretation upon the place, viz. that these
words, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, whether to the King, Locum
hunc de ipso Petro intellegendum esse respondet: Scribebat enim (ait) Apostolus
subditis suis, etc. deinde ad illa verba Regi tanquam praecellenti addendam
esse hanc coarctationem, in temporalibus: Pontisicem enim in spiritualibus
antecellere. Innoc. Gentillet. Apol. pro Gal. Christ, p. 163, 164.
are to be understood of St. Peter himself, for that he did write to his own
Subjects, and that to those words, to the King as supreme is to be added this
limitation, intemporals; because in matters spiritual the Pope is above him.
Which is to say, either that St. Peter by the King did mean the Pope; or that
St. Peter when he taught Christians the duty of subjection to the King,
unhappily forgot to put in a clause or proviso, to secure the Supremacy of his
Successors over the Civil Power.

Insomuch as the Doctrine of the lawfulness of resistance to the Supreme Powers
must be laid aside for an unchristian opinion which can never be maintained,
unless we will suppose a right in the Pope, or some other party of men, to
interpret the Scriptures contrary to the manifest sense of the words, and
either to add to, or take from them such passages as may suit with their
present turn. And it always holds true with respect to the Sovereign Power in
any Country, what was said by Judge Creshald, both like a pious Christian, and
an able Lawyer, concerning the Royal Judge Cresh. Legacy, p. 5.
Authority in our own Nation, That the Jura Regalia of our Kings are holden of
Heaven, and cannot for any cause escheat to their Subjects; nor they for any
cause make any positive or actual forcible resistance against them: but that we
ought to yield to them passive obedience, by suffering the punishment, albeit
their commands should be against the Divine Law. And that in such case, arma
nostra sunt preces nostrae, nec possumus, nec debemus aliter resistere; for who
can lift up his hand against the Lord's Anointed and be guiltless?

2. That this command to be subject to the Higher Powers is enforced by the
Holy Writers with diverse strong and clear reasons. 1. Because the Powers are
ordained of God, so that he who resists them, resists the Ordinance of God.
Which reason will carry a perpetual obligation along with it: for if it be
always our duty submit to the Ordinances of God, then it will ever be a sin to
resist the Higher Powers. And so long as God has a title to our obedience, so
long subjection to his chief Minister will be our duty.

Now if this Doctrine of St. Paul be true, then that Doctrine must be false,
that all power being originally from the People, where Est quoque alia ratio
quare Reges justissime reprehendere possumus, atque iis etium si vim faciant
resistere. Quum enim finita sit and terminata eorum potestas, -- siquando extra
terminos sibi circundato^ evagari vult, and in alienam messem suam falcem
immittere, quia jam non ut Rex agit sed ut Tyrannus, hic gloriosum es;t regem
coarguere, eique non verbo solum, sed re quoque obsistere. G. Ross. p. 564.
the Powers exceed the just bounds of their Authority, they may be called to
account for it, and that Kings not performing their duty, the Subjects are
released from theirs.

For we may observe, that though the Roman Emperors rarely came to their
Crowns by right of succession, but received them from the hands of the Senate
or their Soldiers, yet the Apostle acknowledges them to rule by God's
appointment, and forbids therefore all resistance utterly. If then we will but
grant what with no reason we can deny, that Christian Kings have as good titles
as Heathen Emperors had, we must be bound to make the Apostle's inferences
also, that they are ordained by God, and that it is our duty ever to submit to
them. So that notwithstanding the power had first been conferred by the People,
yet they cannot resume it when they please, and make the Supreme Authority
accountable to them.

2. We are required to submit our selves to every ordinance of Man for the
Lord's sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.
i. e. for the sake and honor of the Lord's Religion, upon which some Seducers
had brought a great scandal, by teaching that it sets men at liberty from the
obligation of being subject to Authority. Neither if it was asked, What men
those were, who crept among the Christians, and would have infected them with
such pernicious Principles? should we be much surprised and at a loss to find
an answer, and to show what necessity the Apostle had to issue forth so early a
prohibition against resistance of the Higher Powers; since a little before that
time Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 18. c. 2.
Judas Galilaeus founded a Sect, of which probably were those Galileans, whose
blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifice, who did choose to suffer the most
cruel torments that could be devised, rather than they would acknowledge any
mortal man to be their Lord and Prince. And Rebellion and Sedition in those
days were crimes whereof the Jews were frequently guilty. So that by our
submission we shall assert and maintain the just credit of the Christian
Religion, which is meek and peaceable, and put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men. It being it seems in the judgment of St. Peter a mark both of
ignorance and folly to think the Religion of Jesus did allow its Professors in
any rebellious practice against their Governors.

3. We are to be subject because the Magistrate is the Minister of God to us
for good. Romans 13.4.


The benefits and blessings of government are so necessary to our well-being in
the World, that as Mankind could not subsist without them, so neither can any
Government subsist without it be allowed that the Supreme Power be
uncontrollable. And albeit it must be confessed, that it is a heavy judgment upon
a Nation for the Rulers thereof, by lust and ambition pusht on, to exercise
tyranny over it, yet it will be evident to them who have been either conversant
in the Histories of times past, or registered the experiences of their own, that
the evils which proceed from oppression by our Governors bear no proportion to
the miseries and calamities which naturally spring from Rebellion and Civil
Wars.

Where the bounds between right and wrong are all levelled, and the lives,
liberties and properties of Men brought under the Arbitrary Power of the longer
Sword: where Beggars and Servants ride on Horseback, and Princes and Masters go
on foot: where nothing appears but rapins, ruins, outrages and devastations,
Houses plundered, Towns fired, whole Countries laid waste and desolate, and the
Inhabitants slain, or sled, or confined to dark and noisome Prisons: where the
Father falls by the sword of his own Son, the Son by the hand of his Brother;
and they who were closely united by neighborhood, friendship, blood, and the
profession of the same Religion, forgetting all these sacred ties, do in a most
unnatural and salvage manner rip up, and let out the Bowels of one another. So
true is it, Judge Creshald's Legacy, p. 6.
that the King's Prerogative does in his own hand become a Scepter to protect
his Subjects from ruin; but in the hands of the Subjects becomes many times
Spears sticking in their own sides, and as Spades to dig their own graves the
sooner for death.

3. We must needs be subject, not only for wrath; but also for conscience
sake. That is, not only for fear of punishment from those in Authority, but
from the sense of subjection being a duty, which God has laid on us. So that
the love of God, as well as apprehensions of the Magistrate's displeasure, do
keep the Christian Man firm to his resolutions of not lifting up his hand
against the Sovereign Powers. And from this reason of our obligation to submit
to Authority, we may wipe off that notorious scandal, which has been fastn'd on
the Primitive Christians by Bellarmine and others, namely, that therefore they
were subject to the Supreme Powers, because they were not strong enough to
resist them: as if they had wanted the power only, but not the will to rise up
against them, and lay them aside.

Which charge, as it always was not true in matter of fact, since there be
instances Si enim and hosts exertos, non tantum vindices occultos agere
vellemus, deesset nobis vis numerorum and copiarum? -- hesterni sumus and
vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia, conciliabula,
castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium, senatum, forum. -- Cui bello non
idonei, non prompti fuissemus, etiam impares coptis, qui tam libenter
trucidamur, si non apud istam disciplinam magis occidi liceret, quam occidere?
Tertul. Apol. p. 30.
when the Christians had Forces enough to have made a dangerous resistance, if
their Consciences would have granted them a license to rebel; so it is
altogether beside the grounds of their dutiful and humble deportment, which
did proceed not from the dread of the Emperors, whom they were too weak to
oppose, but from the certain knowledge they had that resistance would be a
violation of the Laws of their holy Religion.

The truth is, Bellarmine gives out, that the Quod si Christiani olim non
deposuerunt Neronem, and Diocletianum, and Julianum Apostatam, ac Valentem
Arianum and similes, id fuit quia deerant vires temporales Christianis. Nam
quod alioqui jure potuissent id facere, patet, etc. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l.
5. c. 7. p. 891.
reason why Christians did not depose Nero, Diocletian, Julian, Valens, and
others, was not because they were destitute of a right, but of the power to do
it; that ever such a speech should come out of the mouth of a most eminent
Cardinal! but on the contrary, both St. Paul and Peter lay strict injunctions
on their Converts to be subject to their present Governors, not because they
were in no condition to resist them effectually, but for Conscience sake and
because they are ordained by God.

Now if the Magistrate be ordained by God, then it is no more lawful for an
hundred thousand men to resist him, than for twelve, and if we are bound to
submit for Conscience sake, no increase of our numbers or strength can alter
the rule of our duty, or take off the obligation of Conscience. So that had the
first Christians had more potent Armies than Nero or Julian, yet no right ever
could have accru'd to them thereby to oppose God's Ordinance, or to proceed
against their Conscience. We may perceive therefore a wide difference between
the Cardinal and the Apostles in this matter. He resolves the subjection of the
Primitive Christians into a mere point of prudence and discretion, but they
into a principle of duty and conscience. He ascribes their quiet and peaceable
behavior under Tyrants to their defect in strength and numbers; but we find
them, in what circumstances soever placed, always avowing the necessity of
subjection, as an indispensable Precept of their Religion: but, with more
modesty certainly, we may charge the Cardinal with the guilt of grievous
slander, than raise a suspicion of the least hypocrisy in the Primitive
Martyrs.

Wherefore notwithstanding the Supreme Authority of a Nation may sometimes be
reduced to such extremity, as that Rebels may be out of both the fears and
danger of the public Sword, yet they can never get out of the reach of their
own Consciences, nor free themselves of those terrible convictions, wherewith
it will ever sting the Children of disobedience, and testify that they shall
receive to themselves damnation.

2. That the Popes of Rome were the first pretenders from Scripture to a right,
not only of resisting Kings, but of deposing them, and absolving their
Subjects from their duty and allegiance. Many hundred years after our Savior's
time the Doctrine of non-resistence to the Higher Powers was constantly taught,
and universally practiced in the Christian Church. There was a great degeneracy
from the primitive strictness in the lives of Christians, and much humane
mixture in the Doctrines of Christianity, before men did claim, by a title
derived from Christ, a right to control the Supreme Authority. And as the
lusts of the flesh did more vigorously put forth themselves in the conversation
of those who professed the doctrine of the Cross, so the greater pains was taken
to corrupt a most pure Religion, that it might warp into a compliance
therewith, till at length men had near worn out of their minds the sense of
their duty to God and the King.

It was toward the end of the Eleventh Century when Gregory VII. called
Hildebrand before he was Pope, did take upon him, both to excommunicate the
Emperor Henry IV. and to divest him of all Royal Power, Hildebrandus Papa
omnes adversantes Imperatori absolvit ab infidelitate and perjurio, Sigeber.
Gemblac. Chron. p. 603.
pretending to free his Subjects from the Allegiance they had sworn. That
Hildebrand was the first Pope who usurped such an extravagant Power over all
the crowned Heads in the World, may be made evident from the ancient Acts and
Monuments of the Church, and the concurrent testimony of the Historians of
those and later times. The Church of Liege, in their answer to Paschal II.
declare Hildebrandus Papa Author est hujus novelli Schismatis, and primus
levavit Sacerdotalem lanceam contra diadema Regni, primo indiscrete Henrico
saventes excommunicavit. Leodens. ep. advers. Paschal. 2. p. 137. Ed. a S.
Schardio.

Hoc exemplo omnes a primo Gregorio contenti, utebantur gladio spirituali usque
ad ultimum Gregorium, i.e. Hildebrandum, qui primus se, and suo exemplo, alios
Pontifices contra Imperatorem accinxit gladio. Leodens. p. 138.


Hildebrand the Pope is the Author of this new Schism, and has first lift up
the Priests Spear against the Imperial Crown, and excommunicated those that
favored the interest of Henry without difference or distinction. All were
content with the use of the spiritual Sword down from Gregory the first to
Gregory the last, i.e. Hildebrand, who first did arm himself, then other Popes,
against the Emperor, by his example. Lego and relego Romanorum Regum and
Imperatorum gesta, and nusquam inverrio aliquem, ante hunc a Romano Pontifice
excommunicatum, vel Regno Privatum. Otto Frising. Chron. lib. 6. c. 35.
I read the Acts (says Otto Bishop of Frisingen) of the Roman Kings and
Emperors over and over, and nowhere find any of them before this, by the
Pope, to be excommunicated, or deprived of his Kingdom. Ipse primus est; inter
omnes Imperatores per Papam depositus. Scholastici certant and adhuc sub judice
lis est, utrum Papa possit Imperatorem deponere. J. Trithem. Chron. An. 1106.
Of the Emperors he is the first that was deposed by the Pope; and it is a
dispute among the Schoolmen yet undecided, whether the Pope can depose the
Emperor. Thus Trithemius. Nam etsi ante Romani Pontifices, tanquam Christianae
Religionis capita, Christique vicarii and Petri successores colerentur, non
tamen eorum authoritas ultra protendebatur quam in fidei dogmatibus vel
asserendis vel tuendis -- Primus omnium Romanorum Pontificum Gregorius VII.
Armis Normannorum fretus, o^ibus Comitissae Mathildis, mulieris per Italiam
Potentissimae confisus, discordiaque Germanorum Principum bello civili
laborantium inflammatus, praeter majorum morem, contempta Imperatoris
auctoritate and potestate, cum summum Pontificatum obtinuisset, Caesarem ipsum,
a quo si non electus, saltem confirmatus suerat, non dicam excommunicare, sed
etiam regno imperioque privare ausus est; res ante ea saecula inaudita. Onuph.
Panvin. in vita Greg. VII. p. 272.
For although the Bishops of Rome were reverenced as the Heads of the Christian
Religion, the Vicars of Christ, and the Successors of St. Peter; yet their
Authority extended no farther than to the asserting and defending of points of
Faith. -- Gregory VII. first of all Popes, supported with the Arms of the
Normans, and the Treasury of Mawd, a Lady of powerful interest thorough Italy,
and encouraged by the discord of the German Princes engaged in a Civil War,
when he had got the Popedom, contrary to the practice of his Predecessors,
contemning the power and authority of the Emperor, did presume, I do not say
to excommunicate, but to deprive Caesar of his Empire, by whom he had himself
been confirmed at least, if not elected. A thing before those times never heard
of.

Nimirum, ut pace omnium bonorum dixerim, haec sola novitas, non dicam Haeresis
nec dum in mundo emerserat, ut Sacerdotes -- doceant populum, quod malis
regibus nullam debeant subjectionem, and licet eis sacramentum fidelitatis
fecerint, nullam tamen debeant fidelitatem, nec perjuri dicantur qui contra
Regem senserint, imo qui Regi paruerit, pro excommunicato habeatur, qui contra
Regem fecerit, a noxa injustitiae and perjurii absolvatur. Sigeber. Gembl.
Chron. p. 606. ex. Bib. J. Pistorii.
This novelty only, not to say Heresy had not yet put forth it self in the
world, that the Priests -- should teach the People, that they owe no subjection
to bad Kings, and though they had sworn allegiance to them, that yet they owed
them none. Nor were they to be said perjured who should conspire against the
King. Nay, he who will obey the King, is to be reputed excommunicate; he who
will resist him, to be absolved from the sin of injustice and perjury.

It is true, a few of his Predecessors had made some attempts to incroach upon
the Royal Power: but what they did can bear no comparison with the Usurpations
of Hildebrand. And he to avoid the imputation of being the Author of such
unjust Innovations, and to make his ambitious designs the more prosperous, did
allege, that Pope Zachary had deprived King Childeric of the Crown of France,
and set it upon Pepin's Head. But by the stream of Writers it does appear, that
by a conspiracy of the Nobility and People Pipinus factus est rex ex communi
suffragio Principum. Apolog. Hen. IV. p. 156. ed. a M. Freher.

Romanus Pontifex respondit, illum debere Regem vocari qui rempublicam gereret,
detonso igitur Hildrico and in Monasterium detruso mox Franci Pipinum sibi
Regem constituunt. Annal. Franc. edit. a P. Pithaeo, par. 2. p. 5.

Pipinus vero per Papam Zach. ex electione Francorum factus est Rex Francorum.
Got. Viterb. Chron. p. 436.

Pro^eres Regni and Populi amplexi Pipini virtutem pertaesique regis amentiam
Zachariae Romano Pontifice prius consulto -- Pipinum Regem creant. Sabellic.
en. 8. L. 8. vid. Hottomani Francogalliam, c. 13. p. 108.


King Childeric was laid aside; and application only made to the Pope to allow
and confirm an ill deed. But the deposing of Princes by their own Subjects was
a thing in it self so wicked, and wherein there was no precedent for Popes to
intermeddle, that Zachary was to that degree confounded with this Address from
Burchardus in the name of the People of France, that Initio minime audebat tam
magni momenti cogitationem suscipere. P. Aemyl. in vit. Childer. p. 63.
at first he durst not so much as take into his thoughts a work of such great
moment. Bellarmine, a constant Advocate for the Popes in all Causes, says
indeed, Quod sane justum fuisse nemo sanae mentis negabit, praesertim cum
eventus docuerit mutationem illam felicissimam fuisse. Bellarm. de Pontif. lib.
2. c. 17. p. 655.
That no man in his wits will deny this act of the Pope to be righteous,
especially since the event has taught that the change was most happy. But if we
are to measure the goodness of the deed by the success of the event, then all
the outrages and villainies in the World, so long as they prosper, will by this
argument be justified, and victorious Rebels may believe they are carrying on
the work of the Lord.

Sigon. de Reg. Ital. l. 2. p. 57. Anno 625.
It may be here worth noting, how Honorius I. who was Pope above an hundred
years before Zachary, did reprove the Bishops beyond the Po, who were earnest
with the Nobility to set up Arioaldus in the place of Adoevaldus King of Italy,
against their oath of allegiance, and summon them to appear with their Cause
before him.

The Popes, it seems yet, had not discovered, that they had power to dispense
with oaths, and cancel the obligation of that duty of submission to Kings,
which St. Peter had laid upon all Christians. It was not in those days revealed
that that Text Antonin. Sum. vide respons. ad Tortum. p. 177.
Thou have put all things under his feet, was meant of the Pope, and the better
to accommodate it to his Holiness, that we are to understand, by the beasts of
the field, Men, by the fowl of the air, Angels, by the fish of the sea, Souls
in Purgatory. All put under the Pope's feet.

Now as to Hildebrand, though he was a publisher of new Doctrines, yet there
will be no reason to believe he brought them down from Heaven, if we may credit
the account of his morals, which is given by his Contemporaries. Cardinal Benno
Benno de vita Hildebrandi, p. 43, 44, 45, etc. edit. a R. Reineccio. 1581.
taxes him with all the deadly sins, each of which, upon the commission of it,
does immediately put a man out of a state of salvation. With murders, rapine,
adultery, and constant practice of the Black-art.

Hildebrand however passes always with Bellarmine for a Saint, and Baronius
recommends his example to the imitation of Paul V. as the most excellent person
that ever sat in the Papal Chair. And they have no names bad enough to bestow
upon Benno. Both of them also insinuate the probability of the Book being
written by a Lutheran, which goes under Benno's name: but Baronius was very
unlucky in his conjecture that Hic inquam consartor imposturarum de quo alterum
de doubus dicendum est, vel quod eas ipse commentus sit stylo mendaci. Baron.
Ann. Tom. 11. An. 1076. number. 7. p. 469.
Reinerus Reineccius was the Father of this supposed spurious Piece, when near
50 years before the Edition of Reineccius, the Life of Hildebrand by Benno, was
published among the Tracts in the Book entitled Fasciculus rerum expetendarum ac
fugiendarum. Sedis Apostolicae Baronius ita erat acer propugnator -- ut
diuturna Regum maximorum imperia non dubitaverit scriptis suis labefactare
atque convellere. Jan. Nicii Pinac. par. 1. p. 89.
It is the main business of these two Learned Men in their voluminous Works to
ascribe uncontrollable, I may say, boundless power to the Bishops of Rome, and
to maintain their right in the most unconscionable claims to a sovereignty over
Emperors and Kings, otherwise Bellarmine would never have vented it for truth,
that the Pope can change the nature of things, and that Si autem Papa erratet
praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia
esse bona and virtutes malas. Bellar. de Romans Pont. p. 803.
if falling into error, he should command vice and forbid virtue, the Church
would be bound to believe virtue to be vice, and vice to be virtue. It being
strange, that in the same period he supposes the Pope can err, he should assign
such a power to him as by reason of its inconsistency with the perfections of
the Divine Nature, we may not ascribe to the Almighty God himself. Otherwise
Baronius would not have picked out of the whole Catalogue of the Popes Gregory
VII. and Alexander the III. as Patterns for Paul V. to govern himself by. At
the later of whose Feet Friderick Barbarossa Collo ipsius prostrati pedem
imposuisse, cepisseque interim Davidicum illud super Aspidem and Basiliscum
ambulabis: Friderico autem ingentes adbuc spiritus alenti, dicentique non tibi,
sed Petro, irato similem, impressa fortius planta; respondisse, and mihi, and
Petro. Sabellic. Rer. Ven. dec. 1. l. 7. p. 200.
lying prostrate, he trampled upon his Neck, and began to sing that of David,
thou shall go upon the Asp and Basilisc: And to the Emperor, who, his Spirits
boiling within him, said, [this submission is made] not to thee, but to Peter;
the angry Pope, pressing harder with his Foot, did reply, both to me and to
Peter.

And Hildebrand, the other Pope recommended to Paul V. Henry IV. Pecunia
favorem, savore ferrum, ferro sedem pacis adisti, and de sede pacis pacem
turbasti. Ep. Hen. IV. p. 196. ex Bib. Ruberi.
upbraids with having by money got favor, by favor got the sword, by the
sword placed himself in the seat of Peace, and, when in the seat of Peace,
banished Peace from it. Gregory Ortus est magnus tumultus populi and fremitus --
violentis manibus me in locum Apostolici regiminis, cui long impar, rapuerunt.
Greg. VII. Ep. l. 1. Ep. 3. Council. Labb. Tom. 10. p. 7.
could not but confess himself advanced by violent hands into St. Peter's
Chair. In which Chair he did dictate or decree, Quod illius solius nomen in
Ecclesiis recitetur. Quod illi liceat imperatores deponere. Quod a nemine ipse
judicari debeat. Quod a fidelitate iniquorum subditos potest absolvere. Council.
Tom. 10. p. 110.

Vir dignus Pontificatu ad deprimendum Politicorum supercilium; Monarchas
terruit nominis sui and zeli claritate. Captivitatem Ecclesiae, and servitutem,
quam a principibus patiebatur restituit. Genebr. Chron. p. 582.


That his name alone should be rehearsed in the Churches. That he has power to
depose Emperors. That he ought to be judged by no man. That he can absolve
Subjects from their allegiance to unjust Princes. That he should give himself
the title of Christ's Vicar, and yet make his Kingdom to be of this World, and
by his Decrees set aside the plain Precepts of Christ! that he should pretend
to be the Successor of St. Peter, and teach Doctrines directly contrary to
those of St. Peter!

In which Chair he thundered out Curses against the Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Bishops, and demanded Tribute almost of every Kingdom in Europe. Engaging them
in bloody Wars, and setting their Subjects loose from their duty and obedience.
He contrived an Oath in such a form, to be imposed upon Kings, as no honest man
could take it.

Kings are to swear, Juramentum Regis. -- and quodcunque mihi ipse Papa
praeceperit, per veram obedientiam fideliter, sicut oportet Christianum,
observabo. Council. Max. Tom. 10. p. 279.
faithfully to observe whatsoever the Pope shall command them. Bellarmine's
Doctrine truly agrees with this Oath. For if the Pope should command a Prince
to murder an hundred of his innocent Subjects, he was bound to believe it
would be a virtue so to do. But the very rage of this fierce and haughty man
discharged its self chiefly upon Henry IV. whom he excommunicated four times,
Fuit autem hic Henricus ore facundus, ingenio acutus, eleemosynis largus, in re
militari fortunatissimus. Contra hunc Imperatorem Greg. VII. commovit and fovit
Rodulphum ducem Saxoniae, quem Electores in Phorcheim congregati elegerunt in
locum Henrici quem Papa deposuit nec confessum, nec convictum. Fell. Fabr.
Monach. Vlm. Suevic. Rer. Script. ed. a Goldast. p. 91.
deposed him unheard and unconvicted, and gave his Kingdom to Rodulphus. And,
after a terrible journey in the depth of a severe Winter, made him, without all
his Attendants, and stripped of his Royal Robes, Venit ille ut jussum fuerat, and
cum castellum illud triplici muro septum esset, intra secundum murorum ambitum
receptus, foris derelicto omni comitatu suo, deposito cultu regio, nihil
praeferens regium, nihil ostentans Pompaticum, nudis pedibus, jejunus, mane
usque and vesperam perstabat Romani Pontificis sententiam praestolando. Hoc
secundo, hoc tertio die fecit. Lamb. Schafnab. p. 249. ed. Pistorii.
to wait barefoot and fasting three whole days before he would admit him but
into his presence, he all the time caressing his Mistress in the Castle at
Canusium.

Insomuch as in his own Letter to the Germans upon this occasion, he acquaints
them, Omnes quidem insolitam nostrae mentis duritiem mirarentur, nonnulli in
nobis non Apostolicae severitatis gravitatem, sed quasi Tyrannicae feritatis
crudelitatem esse clamarent. Greg. Ep. L. 4. Ep. 12. Council. Tom. 10. p. 159.
that all wondered at the strange hardness of his heart, and some cried out of
him as not proceeding with the gravity of Apostolic severity, but with the
cruelty of brutish Tyranny.

The Church of Liege farther inform us they had read that Hildebrand, Solus
Hildebrandus Papa ultimam manum sacris Canonibus imposuit, quem legimus
praecepisse Mathildi Marchionissae, in remissionem peccatorum suorum, ut
debellaret Henricum Imperatorem. -- unde haec nova Authoritas, per quam reis
sine confessione and poenitentia offertur praeteritorum peccatorum impunitas,
and futurorum libertas? Leodens. Ep. p. 141.
the only Pope who has added to the holy Canons, had commanded the
Marchioness Mawd, as the condition of the forgiveness of her sins, to subdue
Henry the Emperor. -- but whence, say they, is this new Authority, by which
impunity of the sins past, and license for those which shall be hereafter, is
offered to the guilty without confession and repentance?

These Proceedings do indeed suppose God Commissum ei munus a Deo excelso, non
modoo articulos indeterminatos determinandi, sed etiam Fidei symbolum condendi.
Bened. in Praesat. respons. ad Tortum. p. 179.
to have committed to the Pope a power, not only of determining disputable
points, but as Benedict tells Paul V. of making new Creeds.

So that is was judiciously observed by Aventinus, Homines non peccatis sed
lege Christi, atque Sacramentis solvit, Pacem atque Pietatem Religionis nostrae
labefactat, Bella, Seditiones concitat. Stupro, Caedi, Perjuriis, Perfidiis,
Rapinis, Incendio indulget. Non solum ad Ambitionem suam occulendam fabulas
comminiscitur, Annals corrumpit, res gestas invertit, sed etiam caelestia
Oracula adulterat: Divinas Literas falso interpretando suae libidini serviri
cogit. Aventin. Ann. L. 5. p. 573.
that Hildebrand did absolve men not from their sins, but from the Law and
Sacraments of Christ, undermine the Peace and Piety of our Religion, raise War
and Seditions, indulge Whoredom, Murder, Perjuries, Perfidiousness, Rapines,
Fire; and to hide his Ambition did not only devise Fables, corrupt Annals,
pervert Records, but also adulterate the heavenly Oracles. Forcing the Divine
Writings to serve his Lust by false glosses put upon them.

And the Councils of Mentz, Brixia and Worms did great service to
Christianity, and pursued truly the interest of the Church when they deposed
Gregory VII. Quia illum constat non a Deo electum, sed a seipso, fraud ac
pecunia impudentissime objectum, qui Ecclesiasticum subvertit ordinem: qui
Christiani imperii perturbat Regnum: qui regi Catholico ac pacifico corporis ac
animae intentat mortem: qui perjurum defendit regem: qui inter concordes,
seminavit discordiam, inter pacificos lites, inter fratres scandala, inter
conjuges divortia. Council. Tom. 10. p. 389. Edit. a Labbeo.
as not elected by God, but one who impudently obtained the Popedom by fraud
and money, subverted Ecclesiastical Order, disturbed the Kingdom of the
Christian Empire, menaced death to the Body and Soul of a Catholic and Pacific
King, defended a perjured King, sowed discord among Friends, strifes among the
Peaceable, scandals among Brethren, divorces between Man and Wife, etc.

To come to the last scene of this high-spirited Pope, who put the Christian
World all into commotion, if we may believe Paul Bernriedensis a Writer on his
side, and published by Gretser the Jesuit, Vbi vero in extremo positus erat,
ultima verba ejus haec fuerunt. Dilexi justitiam and odivi iniquitatem,
propterea morior in exilio. P. Bernr. p. 240.
these were his last words, I have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity,
therefore I die in banishment: but if we will give credit not only to Matthew
Paris, but Sigebert Gemblacensis, and others: and to what Cuspinian found in
most ancient Records. Moriens Cardinalibus convocatis confessus est se valde
peccasse in cura Pastorali, ac suadente Diabolo contra humanum genus iram Dei
and odium concitasse. Matthew. Paris, Anno 1087. page 13. Sigeb. Gembl. page 605.
He dying, to the Cardinals assembled about him, did confess, he had greatly
sinned in his Pastoral Charge, and stirred up the wrath and hatred of God
against Mankind by the instigation of the Devil, Invenio in vetustissimis
annalibus Hildebrandum Monachum, qui Greg. VII. dictus est, dum moreretur
plurimum, qoud Henricum Imperatorem molestasset, doluisse, and ob id, ante
obitum suum absolvisse. J. Cuspinian. in vita Henr. IV. p. 357.
and that on his deathbed he did extremely grieve for the trouble he had given
Henry the Emperor, and so did absolve him.

And after all, why should it seem strange to any man that Gregory VII. should
use crowned Heads so coursly, when he had such a mean opinion of Royal Power as
in an Epistle to Heriman Bishop of Mets, to declare Quis nesciat Reges and
duces ab iis habuisse principium, qui Deum ignorantes, Superbia, Rapinis,
Perfidia, Homicidiis, postremo universis pene sceleribus, mundi Principe
Diabolo videlicet agitante, super pares, scilicet homines, dominari caeca
cupiditate, and intolerabili praesumptione affectaverunt. Greg. VII. Ep. L. 8.
Ep. 21. Council. Max. Labb. Tom. 10. Col. 269.
that Kings owe their beginning to those men, who knew not God, and who, by the
agency of the Devil, and by Pride, Rapins, Perfidiousness, Murders, and all
kind of wickedness got the dominion over them, who by nature did stand on the
same level with them. And in the same Epist. Quis dubitet Sacerdotes Christi
Regum and Principum omniumque fidelium Patres and Magistros censeri? ibid.
Who doubts but that the Priests of Christ ought to be accounted the Fathers
and Masters of all Kings and Princes? And Quod Aurum non pretiosius sit Plumbo,
quaam Regia Potestate sit-altior Dignitas Sacerdotalis. Col. 270.
that Gold does not more excel Lead, than the Sacerdotal Dignity the Royal
Power. And likewise Major Potestas exorcistae conceditur, cum Spiritualis
Imperator ad abjiciendos Daemones constituitur, quam alicui Laicorum causa
Saecularis Dominationis tribui possit. Ibid.
That there is more power granted to an Exorcist, since he is made a Spiritual
Emperor [i. e. Conjurour] to cast out Devils, than can be to any Layman on the
score of Secular Dominion.

Now was there ever a greater Patron of Republican Principles than this Pope,
who most maliciously and falsely lays the foundations and original of Kingly
Power in the Lusts and Sins of Men, assisted by the Devil? Could Knox, Milton,
Rutherford, Goodwin, or any Commonwealth's Man of them all, have spit ranker
Venom at Kings, or spoke with greater contempt of their Authority than
Hildebrand, who makes them Servants to the Priest, and their Power less than
that of one of the most inferior Officers in the Church?

And having made this report of the life and behavior of Hildebrand, and cited
the Authors upon whose Authority it does rely, I conceive I need not tell the
Reader, that the Writers I have dealt with were all of the Church of Rome, and
generally confessed to be the most eminent and judicious Historians in these
Matters, and that most of the notorious Crimes charged upon Hildebrand do not
appear more from others, than from his own words to be found in his Books of
Epistles. Neither will it be easy to free Bellarmine from much disingenuity in
going about to take away the credit of Jo. Aventinus's History, for that he
does not name the Authors from whence he has it, when in the period
immediately above that Bellarmine quotes Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 4. c. 13.
Col. 837.
out of Aventinus concerning the faults of Henry IV. Aventinus Extant praeterea
in Bibliothecis nostris Epistolae, Diplomata, Edicta, Rescripta Hainrici, and
Hildebrandi ultro, citroque missa, Ego horum instrumentorum Publicam sequar
Authoritatem, utriusque causam sedulo, and ex fide perorabo: vitiis utriusque
(ut homines fuerunt) notandis, amicis, in virtutibus praedicandis hostibus
credam. Jo. Avent. Annal. Boi. lib. 5. p. 563.
declares, that he followed the Public Authority of the Letters, Diploma's,
Edicts, Rescripts, that passed between Henry and Hildebrand, still preserved in
their Libraries. And that he did not charge either of them with any vice, which
was not owned by their Friends, nor praise any virtue in either, which was not
before ascribed to them even by their Enemies. But how far Bellarmine was from
relating things thus honestly, we may rest satisfied from the Citation now
mentioned. Where he has from Aventinus transcribed the Vices of the Emperor,
but concealed his Virtues which next follow.

Now had we time, it would not be hard to show, how the Bishops of Rome, who
did tread in the steps of Hildebrand, have been for the most treated with the
same sharpness, and disrespect. How the Princes have asserted their Rights
conferred by God against the unjust Intrusions of Popes. And with what contempt
and neglect they have received their insolent Messages in all Countries. I
produce an instance or two, ancient and modern. When Boniface VIII. writ to
Philip the fair of France, Bonifacius servus servorum Dei Philippo Francorum
Regi -- scire te volumus, quod Spiritualibus and Temporalibus nobis subes. --
aliud credentes fatuos reputamus. Philippus D. G. Francorum Rex, Bonifacio se
gerente pro Pontifice maximo, salutem modicam sive nullam. Sciat tua maxima
fatuitas in Temporalibus alicui nos non subesse. Les Croniq. and Annal. des
France par Nicolle Gilles, p. 132. A Paris 1562.

Mira hominis impudentia fuit qui Regnum Galliae Pontificiae majestatis
beneficium asserere ausus est. Verum multo stolidiores esse puto, qui
disceptant an tantum liceat Pontifici. J. Tillii Chron. de Reg. Franc. ad Ann.
1302.


to give him to know he was subject to him in matters Spiritual and Temporal;
and that they were Fools who thought otherwise. His answer was, Let your
Holiness's wonderful Wisdom know that in Temporals we are subject to no body.
They that complain of the indecency of the King's Language must observe it is
the same the Pope used first, and that his Holiness should not have provoked
his Son to wrath.

When Sixtus V. sent out his Bull against the King of Navar, pronouncing him a
Heretic, and that he had cut off his right of Succession to the Crown of
France. The King, in his Remonstrance, does affirm, Quod ad confictum crimen
Haereseos attinet, de quo falso and injuste ab illo Sixto, qui nomen Papae sibi
arrogat, accusatur; ait and affirmat hunc (salva ejus Sanctitate) false,
nequiter, and malitiose, mentitum esse, huncque ipsum fore Haereticum omniun
maximum. Quemadmodum recipit probare in Concilio libero and secundum Leges
congregato. De postr. Mot. Gall. p. 305.
That as to the feigned crime of Heresy, whereof he is falsely and unjustly
accused, he affirms that the Pope (saving due respect to his Holiness) does
falsely, wickedly and maliciously lie. And that he is of all Heretics the
greatest, as he undertakes to prove in a free Council assembled, according to
the Laws.

I farther observe under this head, that the Popes did take upon them first
only to confirm the Emperors by putting the Crown on their Heads, and from
thence afterward they pretended to a right to depose them. And yet among all
M. Roussel Hist. Jur. Pont. l. 7. p. 699.
the Eastern Emperors none but Justinus I. and Petrus Altissiodorus were
crowned by Popes. He by John I. and this by Honorius III. And in the Western
Empire this custom commenced but in Charles the Great, upon whose Head Leo
III. placed the Crown in grateful consideration of the excellent services he
had done the Church against the Lumbards.

Now should it be said, that the relation we make is of matters done at a
remote distance from our times, and that we may presume the Doctrines of
deposing and killing of Kings (though not yet condemned by the Church of Rome)
to be disowned by all the Members of it, since some of them have writ expressly
against them, and none of them have lately given us any occasion to charge them
with holding these wicked and unchristian Doctrines. To this it may be
answered, that although the present Pope Innocent XI. has censured sixty five
lewd and pernicious Propositions, taught by Jesuits, and other Popish Casuists,
if that may be called a censure which is so very soft and gentle, yet he has
slipped over this Doctrine so frequently taught by the same men, That a Prince
excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may and ought to be deposed or killed
by his own Subjects, or any whatsoever, as heretical, without taking the least
notice thereof. What reason can we assign for this? could his Holiness be
ignorant of a Proposition maintained by Parsons, Mariana, Rossaeus, Bellarmine,
Suarez, Becanus, Hessius, Valentia, Hereau, Gretser, Sanctarellus, and many
others? Or could he think there was not so much need to condemn this
King-killing Doctrine, and that the consequences of it were less dangerous than
those by him condemned, when yet the teaching thereof has been the occasion of
spilling of so much Christian blood, and was the foundation upon which the
Powder Plotters laid their horrible Design, and when but a few months before
this Decree of the Pope came forth, so many of the Sons of his Church in our
Nation fell by the stroke of Justice for conspiring the death of the King.

What can we then say, but that this small and harmless error of the Casuists
teaching the lawfulness and duty of killing Heretical Princes was spared by his
Holiness, when he condemned so many others, out of prudent foresight of the
good service it yet one time or other may do the Roman Church? And there will
be more ground for this conjecture, when we remember that Cardinal Perron did
solemnly profess, that before he and his brethren the Bishops of France would
by subscription declare the deposing Doctrine to be unlawful, they would die
Martyrs at the Stake.

And as for those of that Church who have writ against this Power in the Pope
of deposing Kings, we know some of them labor under an Excommunication at Rome
for their pains to this day. And whether there be fresh occasion to charge any
Papist with these Doctrines, let what follows determine.

One J. D. a Jesuit, after the late Plot, puts forth a Catechism, entitling it,
A brief Instruction touching the Oath of Allegiance. And with his Design he
acquaints us in his Preface, that it is to defend the Resusers of the Oath of
Allegiance, and to confirm them in their Christian Resolution, and to reclaim
such as have been misled. As, in his opinion, all those are, who have sworn
Allegiance to the King. And upon them he makes this odious and profane
Reflection. Some who took the Oath, have since, to ease their fault, slept at a
Minister's Sermon, and taken the cheering Cup and Lord's Supper to help its
digestion. Then as to the Oath it self he tells us, Catech. p. 15.
That to hold this Oath cannot be taken without grievous sin, and without
perjury, is but what two Popes have declared with several Breves. And
accordingly, after several frivolous matters debated, he brings his Scholar to
acknowledge Catech. p. 47.
I am ready to subscribe that you have made good the unlawfulness of the Oath.
First by reason of the Title of Parliament exacting it. 2. For want of truth in
all the Clauses of the Assertory Part. 3. For want of justice in the Clause of
the Promissory Part. Lastly, For want of necessity; there being a necessity
under a grievous sin, as the Pope declares, for the not taking it.

And yet every one knows that the very design of the Oath so much condemned, is
only to bring men to acknowledge their allegiance to the King, and to abjure
that damnable Doctrine, that Princes which are excommunicated, or deprived by
the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their Subjects or any whatsoever.

Now since in the Triennial Assembly of the Jesuits in London, April 1678. so
great a part of the late Popish Plot was sworn to have been hatched, since the
discovery thereof proved fatal to so many of them, since at their death they
did renounce the Doctrine of the lawfulness, upon any occasion or pretense
whatsoever, to design and cotrive the death of the King; and since the very
scope of the Oath of Allegiance was to preserve the King's Liege People from
being tainted with those opinions which the Jesuits in their dying Speeches did
condemn, it might reasonably have been thought, not only that no Member of
that Society for the time to come would have writ against the Oath of
Allegiance, but also that the whole English Order, in their next Triennial
Assembly, would by some public Acts, have condemned the Doctrines of deposing
and killing of Kings, and thereby have given both credit and authority to the
Declarations, upon this occasion, made by their dying Friends, and likewise
evidence to the World of their own loyalty.

But so far were they from giving the King any farther assurance of their
loyalty and allegiance, that by a Decree they condemn afresh the Oath of
Allegiance, and refuse to admit to absolution, those of their Church both that
have taught the Oath to be lawful and that have taken it, without they will
publicly recant, and give manifest signs of their repentance, and promise
amendment for the future.

The Decree of the Fathers of the Society of Jesus of the English Province, at
their Provincial Congregation made, against the Oath of Allegiance at Ghent,
the fifth day of July this present year 1681.

That we may proceed with Uniformity amongst our selves in the manner of acting
touching the Oath of Allegiance.

1. Let us all profess, that as much obedience and fidelity ought to be
sincerely sworn and exhibited to our King from every one of us, as is wont to
be sworn and exhibited to any Prince whatsoever from other Catholic Subjects.

2. That the Oath, as now it is, sprinkled with many heterodox clauses, cannot
be taken, as being condemned by many Breves of Popes.

3. If any (against the Decrees of Popes) have taught the foresaid Oath to be
lawful, let him not be admitted to absolution, without public Recantation,
either made or sacredly promised.

4. Those who against their Conscience have taken the Oath, let them be
deprived of absolution, without manifest signs of repentance, and promise of
amendment for the future. But those who with a good Conscience have taken it,
are to be instructed: and if they renounce it, are to be absolved.

5. Let care be taken, lest either too much facility, or morosity in absolving,
breed scandal.

Thus we see what opinion, not only single Members, but a whole Assembly of
English Jesuits have of the Oath of Allegiance, and how they think themselves
bound in Conscience to treat those of their Church, who either take the Oath,
or write in defense of it: and what little ground any Prince can have to hope
they ever should become truly loyal Subjects. For all their specious
professions of swearing as much obedience and fidelity to the King, as other
Catholic Subjects do to their Prince, will come to just nothing, so long as
they refuse to abjure all power in the Pope or the People to depose them.
Since, should the Pope proceed to a sentence of deposition, they that
acknowledge such a power in the Pope, must take themselves to be absolved from
all that allegiance they had sworn, and from owning him any longer for their
King. So that both the King's safety, and their allegiance will entirely depend
upon the Pope's pleasure.

Neither can the King have better hold of them, by any Oath they shall please
themselves to take, since that Oath also, according to the doctrine of the
Decree, would become unlawful, and so cease to bind them, if it should happen
once to be condemned by one of the Breves or Bulls of the Pope. Moreover,
though these Jesuits do profess, yet indeed they do not exhibit as much
obedience to the King, as other Popish Subjects do to their Prince: for it is
well known that they of the Gallican Church do pay obedience to the Laws and
Edicts of their King even against his Holiness's Bulls: and sixty Doctors also
of the Sorbon have declared, that the English Subjects of the Roman Persuasion
may lawfully and safely take the Oath of Allegiance, which this Consult of
Jesuits has condemned.

But to do the Reverend Fathers of that Order right, it must be confessed,
that notwithstanding all the affronts they have put upon Kings, they can grossly
flatter them, when it will serve the interest of their Society. Of which
egregious flattery the French Jesuits in their College at Paris, founded by the
Bishop of Clermont, have given a very late instance. Where in the place of
their old Inscription, Collegium Claromontanum Jesu, they have put up this,
Collegium Ludovici Magni, wiping out at once the names both of their Founder
and Savior.

What a change will Interest make in the Opinions and Practices of Men! Pope
Hildebrand (to whose dictates the Jesuits pay most religious respect) declares
Kings to be the Priests Servants, and even inferior to the Exorcist: but these
pious Fathers did not think they had given testimony sufficient of their
loyalty, till they had preferred their King before Jesus Christ.

And having thus proved that all resistance to the Supreme Authority is
unlawful, and that the Popes were the first abettours of it in the Christian
Church by pretended Arguments from Scripture; I come,

2. To show with what care, impartiality and patience the good Christian
searches into the grounds and causes of his Persuasion, that the commands of
Authority are sinful, before he refuses to pay obedience to them. No power on
Earth can make him withdraw his obedience to God, nor any danger awe him into
the doing of that which he believes to be a sin. Where Man's Laws stand in
opposition to God's Law, if it may be done without detriment to his Religion,
he accepts the benefit of Christ's License given to his Disciples, and makes
his escape by flying from one City to another, or else he patiently submits to
the penalty decreed to be inflicted upon him for his conscientious refusal.

But because men have refused to conform to the Laws of the Government when
there has been nothing in them repugnant to the Will of God, and have been
justly punished for their disobedience, at the same time they have thought
themselves Martyrs for the Cause of Christ; and since on the one hand it is
most unhappy for them to suffer for their mistakes, and on the other of ill
consequence to Governors, that their Laws, when just and expedient, should not
be duly observed; therefore the man, who has possessed his Soul with patience,
does not run away with the first appearances of things, as being prone to
suspect the error may lie rather in his understanding, than in the Laws of his
Superiors; nor does he forbear to comply with the will of the Higher Powers,
till upon much consideration he becomes persuaded there can be no compliance
without involving himself in sin. And if a Law chance to be enacted, the matter
whereof may seem evil to him, he does not hasten rashly into any conclusion,
but he imploys his patience, his sincerity, his prudence in all the proper
methods to inform his judgment truly, before he comes to a resolution how he
must behave himself.

And in order to prosper in a work of such importance, he begins it with hearty
prayer to God to bless his undertaking, and guide him into all truth. Before he
enters into the merits of the Cause it self, he impartially enquires, whether
he be not carried into it by prejudice, passion, profit, fame or some other
secular end. Whether he has not taken up this opinion of the unlawfulness of
conformity to the Laws, as well as many false ones, by the prejudices of a
disadvantagious education; by having heard the Arguments, read the Books, and
conversed with the Men only, who are of one side? There being reason to
believe that many of the Dissenters from our Church are mere strangers to all
the constitutions of it. They have rarely, if ever, been present all the time
of Divine Service, they have never seriously perused any one office of our
Liturgy, and fairly weighed what may be said for it.

They scarce can pretend to have read more leaves of the Book of Public
Prayers than of the Alcoran. However these men separate from us, because they
have been taught to do so, and because their Friends do, upon whom they have
such a dependence, as not to dare to displease them. And in which course while
they continue, their most dangerous errors will be incurable.

He farther considers whether his present dissent does not proceed from his
having had a known reputation in such a Party a long time, and although he
could now without any violence to his Conscience, yet he is ashamed to retreat?
or whether it be not because he finds his opposition to the Government to be
popular, and he draws crowds after him of admirers; or to be very profitable,
he gains a fair livelihood by it, and should be at a loss for his subsistence,
did he not engage himself in the interests of the Dissenters?

Lastly, He considers whether he does pass judgment in the other cases which
occur in his life, with the same scrupulosity and tenderness, he does in this?
for if he have with such art managed his Conscience, that notwithstanding it is
tenderness in the matter of Conformity, it can allow him to live quietly in the
known breach of any of the moral duties of Religion, he has just reason to
suspect his want of sincerity as to the causes for which he divides from the
Church. If notwithstanding his long refusal to join with us in our Common
Prayers, as stinting the Spirit, and not tending to edification, he yet can
submit to the forms of solemnization of Marriage to gain a person with a great
fortune, and to legitimate his issue to inherit it; and if after many years
absence from our Churches and separation from our Communion as antichristian
and unlawful, he yet can receive the holy Sacrament with us to qualify himself
for an office or employment, it will be obvious either that his Conscience is
perversely instructed, or that he is an hypocrite.

Now as none of the reasons beforementioned can justify any Man's disobedience
to Authority, seeing they owe their rise to pride, interest, or passion, so
were such heads of enquiry duly poised in the balance, and allowed their just
weight, they would discharge out of men's minds abundance of those scruples,
wherewith they have brought much charge and trouble upon themselves, and given
great disturbance to their Governors; and they would be able by these methods
to distinguish between what was done out of pure conscience, and what under the
color of it only.

But if having proceeded thus far, by a removal of those things, which, in this
case, ought to have no influence upon Conscience, some dissatisfaction sticks
still in the mind, the proper work remaining is, to try the objections of
Conscience by the rule of Conscience. The rule of Conscience is the will of
God; the will of God is discovered by the light of Nature, and revealed in the
holy Scripture. And by an application of the objection to the rule, the
Conscience may discern whether there be any strength in it. For whatsoever we
find God to have commanded, we are bound in conscience to do it; whatever to
have forbidden, we are bound in conscience to avoid it: and in matters, by God
neither commanded nor forbidden, the thing is indifferent, and the Conscience
free. A man may let it alone, without omitting his duty; he may do it, without
committing a sin. For how is it possible, that should be a duty, which God
never has commanded, or that a sin, which God never has forbidden? thus the
Apostle argues most truly, Romans 4.15.
where no law is, there is no transgression. Wherefore if upon a just
comparison between these commands of Authority, against which the meek
Christian's scruples have lain, and the word of God, there does not appear any
thing in them injoined, which by the Divine Laws is forbidden; nor any thing
forbidden which God has required, it will evidently follow, that he must acquit
the commands of his Governors from all imputation of evil, and dismiss those
scruples from his Conscience, which hitherto have been the occasion of his
disobedience, and exposed him to the lash of the Law. And this is the case of
the Church of England, for few of the sober Nonconformists have been so far
carried away with the power of prejudice, as to affirm that there is any thing
in her Constitutions expressly forbidden by any Law of God, and those few who
have been so hardy as to pass this unjust censure upon her, neither yet have,
nor ever will be able to prove their assertion. And those places of holy Writ
which some men would have pressed into the service of this Cause, when the reason
and occasion of them has been thoroughly examined, to all unprejudiced men have
appeared, to look another way.

But if the scruple against Conformity is not taken from the words of Scripture
immediately, but inferred upon some consequence which is thought to flow from
them, or bottoms upon some difficult Text, which may require learning and depth
of judgment to the finding out of its meaning, or upon a metaphor or allegory,
as many mistakes in Religion have done, or upon his ignorance of the state of
the Church, and the Controversies and Errors on foot, when those portions of
the Divine Writings were penned wherefrom he deduceth his argument, and so he
finds it an hard matter to deliver himself from his doubt; then he repairs to
some sober, grave, wise man, eminent for his piety, learning, and skill in
controversies; and having stripped his Soul from prejudices, and that biass,
which either passion or profit may have clapped upon it, with all candor and
ingenuity he opens and lays his case before him, resolving firmly to submit
himself to his reasons, so far as they shall convince him; and to order his
conversation accordingly.

And by taking this course, there will be great reason to hope he shall have
his doubts cleared, his scruples removed, and those objections dissolved, which
had he relied alone upon his own abilities, might have ensnared him in
unwarrantable disobedience to those God has set over him, and pulled down heavy
calamities upon himself.

But if after all these honest and commendable endeavors, again and again
repeated according as the difficulty of his Cause required, and he had
opportunity to do it, he cannot attain to an entire mastery of his Scruples,
and give his Conscience full satisfaction, however he will evidence to the
World the uprightness of his heart in the pains he has taken by his quiet and
humble deportment. For what Scruples soever he may have as to other things, he
is well assured that meekness, peace and charity, are essential ingredients in
the character of a true Christian. Neque multum spei apparere de Puritanis, ut
in Anglia vocantur, hominum genere turbulento and seditioso ad moderationem and
mutuam tolerantiam flectendis, animi eorum elatiores sunt, quam ut aliis
praeterquam sibi solis quidquam tribuant: n^vitatis cupidiores, quam ut
Antiquitatem, and efferatiores, quam ut tranquillitatem respiciant. G. Calixti
Judic. de Controv. Theolog. p. 138.
And although the Learned may discover the errors of his understanding, yet it
is his daily care, the good and the wise shall have no true reason to blame him
for stubbornness in his will, for haughty, perverse and unruly passions, such
as make him to contemn the judgment of others, and will suffer him to comply
with no body but upon his own terms.

He does not therefore grow peevish or censorious, and forthwith condemn all
that differ from him in opinion or practice: he does not set up for a Patron of
a new Sect, and lay aside all due respects to Antiquity, draw as many as ever
he can into his own Party, and confine salvation to the small number of his own
persuasion, as if the Divine Providence had engaged it self in securing them
alone from all damnable sins in practice and mistakes in Faith. He does not
whisper stories and jealousies into Men's ears to dispose them to turbulency and
sedition, nor speak evil of Dignities, and libel the Rulers of his People; he
does not clamor against, nor arreign the whole management of Public Affairs,
much less enter into wicked Plots, and with the same illegal violences go about
to maintain his own Religion, by which those of the Church of Rome have so
often attempted to introduce theirs. But he is meek and patient, and easy to
the Government under which he lives; he conforms to all its Constitutions as
far as in conscience he can; he is affable and courteous to his Neighbors, and
upon all occasions shows a great charity for those who have not the same
sentiments with him in matters of Religion: he minds his own business, keeps
his peculiar opinions to himself whenever they stand opposite to the
establishments of Authority, and is contented privately to enjoy them.

And having thus presented you with several instances which go to the
description of the good Christian, who in patience has possessed his Soul, I will
now briefly propose the means by which he does attain it.

1. He is daily lessening his desires of those things, whereof there is but
small use, and he may subsist well without them. And having once contracted and
confined his Appetite to what only is necessary to the comfortable supports of
life, or in the first rank of things convenient for it, as he is but a little
concerned for the purchase of whatever else the World can afford, so the loss
of it never torments him.

Now the necessaries to life, are so few, and almost in all places, through the
goodness of God, so easy to be procured, that he who has stripped himself of all
covetous desires of the vanities and superfluities, that most men spend their
time in eagerly pursuing, may have his will at a cheap rate; and there are so
few things which will come cross upon him, that he has hardly left a blot open
for even the spiteful to hit, which can ruffle and disorder his Patience.

2. He takes more care to govern his Passions, than to secure himself against
adversity. For it may always be in our power, by the grace of God and good
management to keep our Appetites and Passions under the conduct of our Reason:
but the nicest care cannot secure us from Diseases, cannot preserve the lives
of our nearest Relations, Children and Friends, or be a sufficient guard
against the effects of other Men's malice; or exempt us from our proportion in
the miseries, which a Flood, or a Fire, or any other public Calamity brings
along with it. Moreover tempests in our Passions utterly unfit us for the
service of God, and rob our Souls of all sincere pleasure. Whereas there is no
instance of adverse fortune, but by a generous patience will be conquered, and
we may turn it into an instrument of virtue, that shall either hasten our
repentance, or increase our trust in God, or make us fair examples for less
exercised Christians to imitate.

3. It is good often to suppose, that the severe hardships, which we see others
to labor under, may in a short time come to our own turn, by which course, as
we shall learn to be merciful to those in distress, and charitable in the
censures we pass upon the unfortunate, so we shall be admirably prepared to
receive all sorts of afflictions, which can never surprise and confound them,
who live in constant expectation of them.

4. When our minds are most free from the disturbances and rage of passion, let
us form judgments of all the good and evil things, which in the course of this
life may happen unto us. And then peremptorily resolve in our practice to
adhere to, and follow these deliberate and well-advised judgments,
notwithstanding afterward, our fears, or our fury, may tumultuously present us
with new measures to order our selves by.

5. That we may not be mistaken in the judgments we frame of things, let us be
careful to love every thing in proportion to it is goodness. And the true way
to rate this proportion, will be to find out how much every thing can
contribute to the peace of our mind, which is the greatest good we possibly can
receive from things. From which rule we may certainly conclude that we are
absolutely to love God only, and virtue: but to esteem and covet all things
else with limitations, with conditions, and ever with submission to the Divine
Pleasure.

For as God is the sole Author of all true Peace and joy of mind, so Virtue is
the means alone, whereby we can qualify our Souls for so great a blessing, and
prevail with God to bestow it upon us. How vain then is it to set our
affections upon any of the goods of this World, and to make them so necessary
to our happiness, as to think our selves miserable, if we suffer a
disappointment in our expectation?

6. The most powerful means to the attaining of Patience, is to carry our eyes
beyond the next and immediate causes of adversity unto the great disposer of
things, by whose sufferance, if not decree, every public calamity, every
private affliction comes to pass. So we shall discover a righteous Judge, never
punishing the wicked above their demerit, a merciful Father ever designing to
reclaim the perverseness of his Children by his gentle chastisements; a wise
Governor, still bringing great good out of all the disorders, combustions, and
disasters in the World.

Did we but take this prospect of affairs, we should discern the beauty of
Providence in the most crooked and harsh passages of this present state. We
should behold the events of the wildest jars and confusions orderly and
methodically conspiring to the glory of God, and the good of the Creation. Were
we but constantly affected with a lively sense of the wisdom of the Divine
management in all the issues of things, we should be so far from losing our
patience by being defeated in a little design, by a trifling loss, by a tedious
attendance for a small debt or an act of common justice, by a denial of a
reasonable request, by an unkindness in a friend, by a light disgrace from a
superior, by a slight from an equal, or by a neglect in an inferior and
dependant, that we should fashion our selves into an exact compliance with the
alwise disposals of Providence, even when we were ready to be deprived of the
dearest of our relations, the best part of our estate, and our own lives were
in evident danger.

Did we but reflect how uncertain an hold we have in the goods under the Sun,
should we to that degree place our security in them, as to bid our Souls take
their rest? should we so set our affections upon them, as to grieve and murmur,
upon their loss, like men utterly undone? did we but consider our dependence
upon God, not only for food and raiment, but the very breath of our nostrils;
should we thus insolently trample upon our poor and harmless neighbors, and be
so lavish of their reputation, and yet forget all moderation and patience upon
the least affront or injury from others?

Did we but remember how much God has born with the best of us, how many open
abuses of his grace he has past by, and how long he is pleased to wait,
expecting the return of his prodigal Sons, we could not, at this unchristian
rate, lock up the bowels of our charity and compassion from the needy and
distressed, and account so severely with each other for every little trespass.

Let then the consideration that God never punishes us more than we need, that
God never afflicts us but in measure, and with regard to our strength, that God
never corrects us, but with design to reform us, engage us every one, through
all the parts of our lives, readily and cheerfully to submit to his most holy
will, and to demean our selves with all patience, charity, and long-sufferance
one toward another.

THE END.

