DISCOURSES ON Several Texts OF SCRIPTURE.

BY The late Pious and Learned HENRY MORE, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by I. R. and are to be Sold by Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three
Pigeons against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1692.

THE PREFACE.
I Shall not bespeak the acceptance of these Papers, by any large Encomium,
either of them, or of the Author. This would detain the Reader too long from
the Benefit of them; and indeed to little or no purpose: For the Discourses
will sufficiently speak for themselves without the artifice of any Commendatory
Preface.

And as for the Author; His Name is so well known, and deservedly admired in
the World, upon the account of the many Elaborate Treatises which he Published
in his Lifetime, that these his Posthumous Pieces may find a welcome
Entertainment without any other Invitation.

The business therefore of this Preface, is only to acquaint the Reader with
some things which concern this Edition; and this I shall do very briefly in the
following Particulars.

1. The First and chief thing which the Reader is to be acquainted with, is the
Authenticness of these Writings; they being all of them Printed by the Authors
own Copies; except Discourse XIIth and XIIIth which were, with some of the
other, transcribed from the Originals in the Authors Lifetime, by one whose
Faithfulness and Exactness is evident in the rest, and is not in the least to
be doubted of in these.

2. The next thing which I should tell the Reader, is by whom these Papers were
committed to my care and management, in order to make them Public: But I am
forbidden to name him; and therefore I shall be silent as to this particular.

3. But here it may not be unfit to tell the Reader, in general, That I have
bestowed upon them all the care and pains which the shortness of time
determined for the preparing of them for the Press would admit of: And this is
sufficient to satisfy any ingenuous Person: Whereas to speak of all the toil
and difficulties which I met with therein, would be too tedious an exercise of
the Readers Patience, and piece of Vanity as burdensome to my self as to others.

4. And Lastly, As for any Defects therein, or for the Errors which have
escaped the Press; they are such as neither the Authors Name will suffer by
reason of them, nor the Papers be less acceptable to a Candid and well-disposed
Reader.

Thus much I thought fit to advertise the Reader of here, concerning this
Edition. As for the Discourses themselves, I shall leave it. wholly to Him to
observe the Style and Matter of them. Only this I would suggest, That they are
such as were prepared for no mean Auditory; some of them being
University-Sermons, and the rest College-Exercises.

I will conclude this Preface with a short Prayer: Which I wish the Reader may
as seriously and devoutly put up, as the Pious Author did before one of the
following Discourses.

O Lord our God, the Fountain of Light, and the Wellspring of all holy Wisdom
and Knowledge; without whose aid our search after thee and thy ways, is but
tedious error and dangerous wandering from thee; Assist us mercifully in our
endeavors after thee; Open our eyes, that we may see the wonders of thy Law;
Sanctify our hearts unto obedience, that we may unfeignedly love thee, and
worthily magnify the holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

London, Nov. 1. 1692.

John Worthington.
THE TEXTS OF THE Following Discourses.
DISCOURSE I. 1 PET. II. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul. p. 1.
DISCOURSE II. PSALM. LXXXIV. 7. They go from strength to strength, every one of
them appears before God in Sion. p. 31 DISCOURSE III. MAT. VI. 22, 23. The
light of the Body is the Eye: if therefore thine Eye be single, thy whole Body
shall be full of light. But if thine Eye be evil, thy whole Body shall be full
of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is
that darkness! p. 60. DISCOURSE IV. PROVE. I. 7. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. p. 85. DISCOURSE V. JOHN IV. 31, 32, 33, 34. In the mean
time his disciples prayed him, saying, Master, eat. But he said unto them, I
have meat to eat that you know not of. Therefore said the disciples one to
another, Has any man brought him ought to eat? Jesus says unto them, My meat
is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. p. 119.
DISCOURSE VI. JAM. I. 22. Be ye Doers of the Word, and not Hearers only,
deceiving your own selves. p. 151. DISCOURSE VII. PROVE. XV. 15. All the days
of the afflicted are evil, but a good conscience is a continual feast. p. 191.
DISCOURSE VIII. PSALM. XVII. 15. As for me, I will behold thy face in
righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness. p. 221.
DISCOURSE IX. ROMANS VIII. 17. And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and
joint-heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified with him. p. 251. DISCOURSE X. JAM. I. 27. Pure religion, and
undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world. p.
282. DISCOURSE XI. HEB. XIII. 16. To do good and communicate forget not, for
with such sacrifices God is well pleased. p. 314. DISCOURSE XII. GAL. VI. 14,
15, 16. But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ; by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision; but a
new creature. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy; and upon the Israel of God. p. 369. DISCOURSE XIII. 1 PET. I. 22, 23.
Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit,
unto unfeigned love of the brethren; see that ye love one another, with a pure
heart, fervently: Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides for ever. p. 394.
DISCOURSE XIV. PSALM. CVI. 28. They joined themselves also unto Baal-Peor, and
ate the sacrifices of the dead. p. 419. DISCOURSE XV. COL. III. 1. If ye then
be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits
at the right hand of God. p. 435. Appendix to Discourse XIII. p. 458.
IMPRIMATUR
Lambhith Nov. 2. 1692.

Ra. Barker Rmo in Christo Patri ac Dno Dno Johanni Archiepiscopo Cant. a
Sacris Dom.

DISCOURSES ON Several Texts OF SCRIPTURE.
DISCOURSE I. 1 PET. II. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul.
THE Text is an Exhortation to abstinence from the Lusts of the Flesh: Which
Duty the Apostle endeavors to fix upon the Spirits of his Auditors by a
twofold means or artifice. First, by insinuating into their Affections by a
kind and friendly compellation and humbleness of Address [ Dearly beloved, I
beseech you:] And then by convincing their Reason by solid Argumentation: Which
is fetched from a twofold Topic, from the enmity and active hostility of these
fleshly lusts against our Souls, and from the Dignity and Sanctity of our Souls
themselves; intimating that the state of this present World, with the
enjoyments of it, is, (...), a thing too much estranged from, unsuitable to, or
unworthy of a Being of so high a nature and Divine extraction, as the Soul of
Man to be engaged in, or any thing taken with. This is the sum of the Text.

WE will begin with the Duty we are exhorted to, the abstinence from Fleshly
Lusts, (...). It is too trivial to take notice that (...) does as well signify
Desire at large, or natural appetite, in which there is no hurt, as Inordinate
desire, which we ordinarily understand by Lust; though that English word also
was of an indifferent meaning in the ancient use thereof. But this honest and
allowable sense of the word we may be sure is not meant in the Text; both
because the Precept were impossible to be performed without manifest violence
and injury done to Nature; (for we cannot live without Eating, and Drinking,
and Sleeping,) and also because of that Epithet added to (...); Which yet
denotes the pravity of these Desires, rather than their Original: For Flesh, in
a natural sense, is of as harmless a signification as Desire; as where the
Apostle says, No man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it. Wherefore (...) or Fleshly Lust is taken in such a sense as it
is, where it is opposed to the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. For the flesh lasts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary
the one to the other; as appears more manifestly from their fruits or works.
The works of the flesh are manifest; says the Apostle in the same place, which
are these, Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: But the fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance.

Flesh therefore and Fleshly Lusts (in the Text) is to be understood in such a
sense as they are opposed to the nature and fruits of the Spirit. And in Romans
13. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying: But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.
Here the Life or Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, is opposed to those works of
the Flesh, and to the caressing and providing for the satisfactions thereof.

And indeed, if we examine either our own lives or others, it is manifest that
our care and forecast is pitched upon some one thing that is the leading Object
to all our Affections. In this sense therefore, so to indulge to the desires of
the Flesh as to make the Satisfactions of the Carnal Life the Joy and
Contentment of our Souls, to make it the thing we long after, and would be at,
either always, or as repeatedly as we can find our selves reap the pleasures
of such repetitions; this is truly and properly to follow, not to abstain from
Fleshly Lusts. But to keep at a due distance from all Animal pleasures, not to
resent them nor relish them with too high a gusto, or penetrating delight; not
to let these poisonous waters enter even into our Souls (as the Psalmist
complains of the Waters of Affliction) nor yet our Souls to cleave to the dust;
but for our Perceptive part to tamper with these things with a more suspensive
or collective guard upon it self, not loosening it self, nor letting it self
flow or melt into that which allures so strongly, and would captivate her will
and affections into a base servitude to things beneath her; but to admit only
so much of them, as either tend to, or are consistent with the health and
sanity of both Soul and Body; Thus to order our Appetite, were properly to
abstain from Fleshly Lusts, and to content our selves only with the fulfilling
our harmless and natural desires, with which the Apostle has no quarrel.

In brief therefore our Natural Desires then become Fleshly Lusts, when their
relish is so high, that they either extinguish or obscure our Capacities of
those Holy and Divine Joys, or exceed the end and scope of God and Nature in
planting them in us; which was not for any mischief to either Soul or Body, but
for the good of both, if Men were but either skilful, or docible to learn the
right uses and ends of them. Edo ut vivam, non ut edam vivo, was the Saying of
an old Philosopher somewhere ( Socrates I think) Whereby he intimated the true
end of Eating and Drinking, and perstringed the ignorance and enormity of
Gluttons and Drunkards. The Animal functions and delights of them are of so low
an allay, that when Men live to enjoy the exercise of these, it is an extreme
inordinacy of Life, and all the Natural Desires and Pleasures become ipso
facto, Fleshly Lusts. For surely they must be very highly taken with those
things that they take to be the very Ends of our living, and without which,
Life would not be vital: Which is such an unhinging of true Reason and Nature,
that that saying of Antisthenes will appear from hence to bear with it a more
sober and remarkable sense then we may be at first aware of, (...), I had
rather be mad than struck with pleasure; that is, in such a sense as has been
declared. For to be transported with the pleasure of Natural Fruitions to that
inordinacy, is both a madness and a piece of Immorality besides; and happily such
as does more deeply wound the Soul, than Natural Madness it self, and lay more
certain trains of her future Misery.

To abstain therefore from Fleshly Lusts, is to resist or deny the inordinate
cravings of our Natural Propensions or Desires, and to held our Soul in
suspense from being carried into too great a transport in but the measurable
use of them; that they should not pierce into the inward life of the Soul, but
let that Plant, our Body, rejoice by it self, if it can, in its grateful
refreshments. Trees and Flowers flourish well enough, supplied with Rain and
Sunshine, without any such high transports: And the cheerfulness of a pure Mind
and upright Conscience will be Sunshine enough to be added to the moderate
irrigations of convenient nourishment, due to this Plant-Animal we carry about
with us: That no Man may think it his duty to exult in the enjoyment of
corporeal pleasures for the health of his Bodies sake, when every such
perception so heartily and feelingly taken in, is either poison, or a stab to
the life of the Soul. But that will be more seasonably considered anon. In the
mean time, I hope I have made it clear enough, what is meant by (...), or
Fleshly Lusts; as also what it is to abstain from them.

WE come now to consider the Second part of our Discourse, the means or
artifice the Apostle uses to fasten this Duty I have described, upon the Hearts
and Consciences of his Auditors, His humble Address [I beseech you] and that
kind and friendly compellation [ Dearly beloved.] And indeed the one implies
the other. Non been convenient, nec in una sede mor antur
Majest as and Amor --
While, he calls them, Dearly beloved, it is more comely and suitable to
beseech them than command them: But the Prudence and Discretion of the Apostle
is very conspicuous in both, thus to insinuate himself into the Affections of
his Auditors, by such sweet and wining Rhetoric; he being to convey something
to them which is over bitter and distastful to Flesh and Blood; and therefore
he does well to besmear the brim of this cup of Wormwood with the sweetness of
Honey, that his Patients may the better take this wholesome Potion, as
Lucretius uses this Similitude, though in a subject of less moment. Sea veluti
pueris absynthia tetra medentes
Cum dare conantur, prius oras pocula circum
Contingunt meltis dulci flavuque liquore.
Hard commands given with an harsh imperiousness, befits not the Spirit of the
Gospel. And it is not so much external force, at the assurance of the kindness,
integrity, and fidelity of the Instructor, that can engage the Affections and
Conscience of the Auditor to the observance of such Spiritual Precepts as
these. Indeed the falsly-pretended Successor of Peter may by law and force keep
Men from eating Flesh in Lent, and engage them to observe such Commandments of
Men, whereby they more easily make the Commandments of God of no effect: But to
win upon Men's Consciences indeed, to set upon the true and real mortification
of our Fleshly Lusts, in such a sense as I have described; this is more likely
to proceed from the persuasion they have of him that gives this wholesome
Counsel, that it is out of sincere kindness and faithfulness to them for the
safety of their Souls, than if they discern it proceeds out of an affectation
of dominion over their Consciences; and of exposing them to unnecessary faults
and mulcts.

While the Apostle therefore lays aside all imperiousness of Command, he seems
to insinuate his sensibleness of the hardness of the task, and to suggest that
it is not out of an affectation of dominion over their Christian Liberty that
he offers this Advice, but out of the mere indispensableness of the Duty, in
order to their Salvation. For as he calls them [ Dearly beloved] so he treats
them as in that endearing respect; and seems to profess, that it is merely out
of his Brotherly Love and Tenderness toward them, and faithful care of their
highest and most important concerns, that constrains him to offer this severer
Counsel unto them. Those whom we dearly love, we cannot endure to hurt or
grieve any way: And therefore professing this tender affection to them in the
midst of severer Counsel, it is a plain manifestation that nothing but the
indispensableness thereof could extort from him the Advice; as when a tender
Mother persuades her Child to endure the Searing Iron, or Incision-Knife, and
to be content to quit some festred or gangrened part of the securing of the
whole Body. This is the genuine sense of this wise and discreet insinuation of
the Apostle into the affections of his Auditors, that his Exhortation to
Abstinence from Fleshly Lusts may take the more certain effect with them.

WE proceed now to the last part of our Discourse, which is to consider the
Apostles Argumentation, whereby he would engage them to this Duty. Which
Argumentation (as I said) was fetched from a twofold Topic, First, From the
dignity of an Humane Soul, especially Christian. Secondly, From that enmity or
hostility of the Fleshly Lusts against her.

1. The dignity and excellency of Humane Souls is intimated in those words
[(...) and (...):] The former whereof signifies such Qui sedem habent extra
Patriam; the latter, qui extra Patriam peregrinantur; as Grotius notes upon the
Text. So that according to the sense of either of these expressions, it is
manifest that we carry something about us that is of a far higher dignity than
to be accounted a Citizen or Indigena of this Terrestrial Globe. If this round
Hillock of Earth can lay claim to any thing of us born therein, or therefrom,
it is only this Earthly Body. At vero animis aeterna Coeli seeds quaerenda,
eaque propriae illorum Patria; as Cicero speaks. And something like this is
intimated by the Author to the Hebrews, who (according as Philo Judaeus also
somewhere insinuates, touching the Souls of the Patriarchs here upon Earth)
does declare them Pilgrims and Strangers in this present World upon their own
confession, which he will also have further to imply that, in thus saying, they
are Pilgrims and Strangers; that they seek a Country which belongs more
peculiarly to them; that they desired a better Country, that is an Heavenly;
and adds, Wherefore God is not ashawed to be called their God, for he has
prepared for them a City, namely in Heaven. (...). We come into his World to
sojourn, uot to dwell here; for the soul of every wise man has Heaven for its
Country, but this Earth for its land of Pilgrimage; as Philo speaks. Like that
of Cato in Tully, Commorandi enim Natura diversorium nobis, non habitandi locum
dedit. And Plato in his Axiochus, (...). And Philo de Somniis, does expressly
make the History of the Pilgrimages of Abraham and the Patriarchs, a Type or
Shadow of the Peregrination of Humane Souls here upon Earth, but that they have
their proper Country in Heaven, (...): which methinks with more elegancy the
Holy Apostle calls his Tabernacle; which alludes to the pilgrimage of the
Israelites through the Wilderness into the Promised Land, that illustrious Type
of Heaven, in which journey they lived in Tabernacles, or Booths. Yea, I think
it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in
remembrance, knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle. Which
Tabernacle being dissolved, we have a building of God, (says S. Paul) an house
not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. That was only commorandi
diversorium, This an everlasting habitation to dwell in. Wherefore the
littleness of the concerns of this Life being proportioned to our short stay
here, and the Soul of Man being capable of so high and lasting enjoyments, it
is very unworthy and unbecoming so noble a Being as the Soul, not to abstain
from Fleshly Lusts, not to be so much master of the Natural Desires of the
Flesh, as not to be enslaved to them, or transported by them; either to seek
them, or sue after them with overmuch eagerness, whether Riches, Honors, the
Pleasures of the Flesh, or whatever gratifications of the Animal Life; or to
embrace them with over much transportedness when they are offered unto us.
Epictetus expresses how we ought to be minded toward these things, excellently
well, by a Similitude taken from a Feast or Banquet. If a Dish come to thee
that thou likest, take part thereof with Modesty and Temperance: Is it to be
removed from thee, detain it not: Is it not yet come at thee, stretch not thine
Appetite out to it, before its approach. If thou shall be thus affected toward
all the things of this World, (...). But if when they are offered thee, thou
yet refuse them, thou shall not only be a worthy Guest, but even a
Fellow-Prince amongst the Gods.

And truly if we would but duly consider the Original of our Souls, from what
Fountain and Archetypon they are derived, and of what an excellent nature they
are, and how little they are intended for this Terrestrial condition; methinks
it should be no hard task to fulfill this Precept of the Stoic; or rather that
of S. John, in his General Epistle, Love not the world, neither the things of
the world; If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For
all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father but of the world. Wherefore our Original
being so peculiarly Divine, we are bound, if we bear a due respect to that, to
gather up our Affections from sinking toward the vain and transitory things of
this World, and look upon our selves as very little concerned in them:
Christian Souls especially, who by reason of their new birth, are of a noble
and divine extraction indeed; and therefore upon a double account, ought not so
to undervalue themselves as to adhere to the fading pleasures and
gratifications of this mortal Life. If in virtue of this new birth, ye be risen
with Christ, into the sense of the Divine Life. and into a true and lively
Faith, seek those things which are above where Christ fitteth on the right hand
of God. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth. For
what is there that this Earthly Life affords, which we do not enjoy but as
Tenants in common with the very Brutes? Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, hunting
after a prey, or pursuing a project for the satisfaction of our Carnal Desires,
begetting or bringing up our young; applauses, caresses, the pleasure of
dominion or revenge, and the like; These set up but on one level with the
Beasts of the field, and do not at all reach the excellency of our proper
Nature. But yet this is the guise of this Land of our Pilgrimage, thus to be
clad in the manners and habits of our fellow-Animals of the Earth, as well as
Strangers put on Turbants in the Turkish Empire. But who would put on an odd
habit in a strange Country, but merely out of necessity? Could he strut and
please himself in it, and be curious and sollicitous about a thing that he has
no conceit or opinion of? For us to make provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof (as the Apostle speaks) is as fond, as if some Slave should be
very curious to provide himself of Chains and Fetters, or other badges of his
Slavery; or a Fool should be very careful that his Coat have all the peculiar
laces or tassels of a Fools-Coat: And all this Worldly Pomp and Enjoyments are
no better, nor bear no more agreeable proportion to the Nobleness of the Soul,
than a Fools-Coat to the Body of a Grave and Wise Man. Nay, I think, that Grave
and Wise Philosopher Plotinus took his own Body to be such a Coat, and
therefore was loath to be painted in it, and so leave a durable disgrace of
himself behind him.

But suppose these Worldly things were not altogether so vile and contemptible,
yet our stay is here so short, that to us they cannot be valuable. For as both
S. Peter and Plato have told us, this Life is but (...), a kind of Pilgrimage
here upon Earth, and we are but passing through it into our own Country. How
fond a thing therefore would it be to love any thing of the World; or to addict
our Affections to it, when we must so suddenly leave it? As fond as if one
should be inveigled with the love of his Inn, or any thing there, when as he
must leave it the next morning.

Wherefore being thus in a strange Land, which we are to pass through, not to
make any abode in, let not our minds be fixed or glued to any thing from which
our Persons are so suddenly to remove. And because we are Strangers in the
Land, let us take heed how we tamper with any bewitching Objects, lest that
which looks fair may prove no safe food, but either a present or more lingering
poison, and we may find the mischief of it at our return into the other State.
It is S. Iudes Character of some in the ancient Christian Feasts of Charity,
that they fed themselves without Fear; as if they had made that perverse sense
of our Saviors Saying, That which enters into the man, cannot defile him, by
either quantity or quality. But we are environed with so much ignorance and
inexperience in this strange Land, that we ought carefully to stand upon our
guard, and take heed how over-greedily or over-heartily we close with any
tempting delight, remembering that there may lie hid the most dangerous poison
in the greatest sweetness. Let us therefore trust no strange Objects in this
strange Land, but keep close to what is nearest akin to us; that is, to our
true Manhood, which is the sense of true Honor and Virtue, the Fear and Love
of God, and whatever Graces descend from that Fountain of Light, and Giver of
every good and perfect gift. But the gifts of this World are (...), which few
can receive without parting with that which is infinitely better, a pure Mind
and a peaceable Conscience, and the assured hopes of Eternal Happiness
hereafter.

And thus much for the Apostles first Argumentation, to persuade us to abstain
from Fleshly Lusts, fetched from the Dignity of the Soul.

2. We come to the Second, which is, The Enmity and Hostility of these Lusts
against the Soul; the law of the members warring against the law of the mind,
and endeavoring to lead us captive into the bondage of sin.

This Hostility is exercised, 1. In treacherous Circumventions. 2. In violent
Assaults: And 3. in the spoil and pillage of the Soul upon Victory.

1. The treachery and stratagems of the Lusts against the Soul, are usually
these.

First, A pretense of enlarging our Knowledge and Experience in things, that it
is fit to know the World, and by real Proof to judge of the estimate of things,
and not to be cooped up within such narrow bounds, and thereby remain simple
and ignorant. This was a Stratagem of the Old Serpent, whereby he deceived Eve;
Ye shall not surely dye; but God knows that in the day ye eat thereof, your
eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, and know good and evil. ( Genesis
3.) But the Soul must take heed of such false and mischievous insinuations as
these, and remember, that experimentally to know evil, is to become evil and
miserable; and that the adequate object of our Wills or Desires, is that which
is Good, and that therefore Knowledge it self is not desirable but upon this
account, so far forth as it makes us good and happy. Who would have the
experimental knowledge of the Rack, or of the Stone and Gout, or of a draught
of Poison, though he may have his Antidote? None but condemned Persons, and the
Slaves of Mountebanks; nor they neither, but that they are forced to it. To
undergo therefore such base Experiments, in which there is so much loathsomness
and danger, is to submit our selves to be Slaves, and is unworthy the Nobleness
of an Humane Soul. But if we will be experimenting, let us not experiment
downwards, by plunging our selves into several sorts and degrees of Lusts of
the Fleshly or Animal Life, but rather try how much we can emerge upwards into
the various pleasures and perfections of the Divine. Let us taste and see how
good the Lord is, and what variety of joys and delights there is in him. All
things come to an end, but thy Commandments are exceeding large, says the
Prophet David: Here Is a field therefore wide enough to exercise our selves in,
and to try variety of experiments in the progress of Holiness; adding to our
faith virtue, to our virtue knowledge, to our knowledge temperance, to our
temperance patience, to our patience godliness, to our godliness brotherly
kindness, and to our brotherly kindness charity: Whereby we become of one
Spirit with the very Godhead it self, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and
at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore, and so great that we
cannot desire to experiment any thing greater.

Secondly, Well, but if this Stratagem will not take, the next is a fair
insinuation of kindred and friendship betwixt the Fleshly Lusts and the Soul of
man. Homo es, humani nihil a te alienum puta; or that Proverbial Phrase amongst
the Greeks, (...). But the Soul here is to remember that the True man is the
Intellectual man, made in the Image of God, according to Righteousness and true
Holiness; not the Sensual part, common to us with the Brutes; and that though
she may admit of natural ordinate desires, yet Fleshly Lusts have no pretense
to lay any claim to her, they belonging either to the worst of Brutes, or not
being to be owned at all, as any part of the Creation. Wherefore it is a
pitiful Sophisme men put upon themselves, while they plead an indulgence to
their sinful Lusts upon the privilege of their Nature; as if they were Beasts
and not Men, or as if it were a privilege to be a Beast, or Man were not to
rule the Beast in this case, and admit of no desires but such as are ordinate
and allowable.

Thirdly and lastly, These Fleshly Lusts will plead for themselves from custom
and the guize of the World; and tell the Soul it is but a piece of Humanity,
and Discretion, and due Civility to the rest of Mankind to do as they do; that
it is more creditable and plausible, and how a Man had better be out of the
World than out of the Fashion. But to stop this vain plea of the Flesh, the
Soul may oppose that of the Blessed Apostle S. Peter; Wherefore gird up the
loins of your mind, be sober and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be
brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient children, not
fashioning your selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance; but as
he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation;
because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. And to be holy, is not to be
mingled with the World, or conformable thereto, but separate and distinct from
it. What therefore have we to do to conform our selves to the rest of the World
that lies in wickedness (as S. John says) when as we are a chosen generation,
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, who are to show forth
the praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous
light. (1 Pet. 2. 9.) Why then should we fashion our selves according to the
sinful guize of the World, when as Christ has redeemed us from the earth, and
from all our vain conversation. And therefore we being the peculiar people of
God, we are Strangers and Pilgrims as to the World, and the guizes thereof; and
it would be as ill beseeming for us to conform our selves to the fashions of
the World, as it would be for a Civil European to put on the Shells and
Feathers of a Barbarous American.

2. But the Lusts of the Flesh being thus worsted and defeated in Parley, they
will attempt to do that by violence which they could not do by treachery and
circumvention: By the force and vigor of their impress they will endeavor to
carry us away captive. But against this the Soul is to listen to that Advice of
our Savior, Watch and pray, that ye be not led into temptation; and that of
the Apostle S. Peter, Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil,
as a roaring lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour. And he entered into
Judas you know upon the eating of the Sop; which seems to intimate, that
Fasting and Temperance is a good safeguard against him. We must with S. Paul,
(...); keep the Body under, lest this domestic Thief (as Trismegist calls it)
be so strong and stubborn, that he fly in our faces, and over-master us. We
must put on the whole Armor of God, (as the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians)
that we may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand,
to keep the field against our fiercest and stoutest Enemies. We must have our
loins girt with Truth; that is, with saving Truth, with the knowledge of the
best and most useful things: For this Truth lies in a little room, and
therefore will keep in, and gird up our Affections more close, and not suffer
any diffluency of our minds into folly and vanity. And we must put on the
Breast Plate of Righteousness; that is, of resolved Uprightness and Sincerity
of Heart. Above all we must take the Shield of Faith, in the power of God,
whereby we are enabled to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And we must
take the Helmet of Hope, and sure expectation of Everlasting Life, which will
keep us from being easily knocked down to the Earth by the fiercest Assaults of
our Adversaries. And lastly we must take to us the Sword of the Spirit, which
is the Word of God, whereby we may divide betwixt Good and Evil, and admit the
one, and reject the other. And being thus appointed, we must pray always with
all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, watching thereunto with all
perseverance: And especially to watch in such a sense as this, as to be
extremely shy and careful how we admit any thing under the color, or upon the
relish of Animal pleasure, but rather eo nomine to decline it: Which is an
impregnable Bulwark against the assaults of the Flesh, and such as will ever
defeat them. If we do these things we shall never fall, let the assaults of the
Fleshly Lusts be as violent as they will.

3. But if we be overcome, let us now see what a lamentable spoil they will
make of us, and how cruelly and tyrannically they will use us.

For First, They will rob us of whatever is precious, that we have: They will
take down, and carry away with them, that cheerful and delightful furniture of
the Soul, Peace and Tranquillity of mind. For the mind of man is not of so base
an Original, as to enjoy it self in things so much below it self, as are the
Fleshly Lusts; Whence it must needs be, that she will be ever and anon
disturbed with loathings and regrets of Conscience, amidst her so base
condition and practices; and instead of that steady peace and cheerfulness of
Spirit, (which are enjoyed in our adherence to Holiness and Virtue) be exposed
to many horrors and distractions, and confusions of thoughts, and an
ungrateful sense of inward shame and reproach which accompanies such unworthy
actions.

Secondly, They will disarm the Soul of that honest activity and diligence
which we ought to have in our Affairs, and make us more uncareful and more
unable to pursue and manage our Business with that discretion and faithfulness
we ought to do, to the scandal of the World, as well as to our own detriment.
This Lucretius notes of that notorious kind of Fleshly Lusts, the being
addicted to Women, Languent officia atque aegrotat fama vacillans,
But takes place also in Gluttony, in Drunkenness, and whatever other pleasure
has once overcome the Soul, and subdued her to it self.

Thirdly, These Fleshly Lusts rob a man of the safe use of his Reason: They
will make it wonderfully prevaricate in the behalf of themselves, and commit
such Paralogisms as the Soul cannot but be ashamed of so soon as she has got
out of the reach of their power. And they will in the conclusion, so weaken the
Faculties of the Mind, that they shall very fondly dote in their Verdicts, even
touching such things as the Fleshly Lusts themselves are unconcerned in. For
these Lusts bereaving the Mind of her purity, must needs dim and obscure her
Faculties more or less, in all uses of them where there is ordinarily any
difference of Sentiments amongst men.

Fourthly and lastly, These Lusts deprive us of the Life and Influence of the
Divine Spirit, and most dismally damp and dead the Power of Faith, and Sense of
Religion in the Soul, which is of more consequence than even Reason it self;
which proves very weak in the assurance of these things, when the sagacity of a
better Life is extinguished or smothered by the soul impurities of the Lusts of
the Flesh. But the Soul being once purged from these, ipso facto unites with
the Spirit of God, and by an Holy and Divine Instinct, is in a proneness and
readiness to believe such things as God is truly said to have done, or to
intend to do concerning the sons of men, by virtue of her union with the Divine
Spirit, or that Eternal Mind that immutably contains the whole Counsel of God
touching things past, present, and to come.

This miserable spoil do the Fleshly Lusts make of the poor Soul, when they
overcome her; and not only so, but they use her cruelly to boot. That they put
out her Eyes, I have already intimated, in that I noted that they bereave her
both of Faith and Reason. And that they pluck all her Feathers out of her
Wings, it is as manifest, since our being captivated with Fleshly Lusts, keeps
down the Soul, and hinders all Holy and Heavenly Aspires, and extinguishes the
pure Flames of Devotion. Nor are they content with this, but they also crucify
and nail the captive Soul to this Earthly Body; as Plato complains, (...). All
Pleasure and Grief nails (says he) the Soul to the Body.

Nor is it impertinent to name enormous Grief amongst the Lusts of the Flesh,
since no Grief is enormous but out of the enormity of Self-love, or inordinate
love of this Corporeal Personality of ours; which if we could be sufficiently
unconcerned for, and love and esteem nothing but the Almighty Lord of Heaven
and Earth, and those Divine Laws and Holy Sentiments he has implanted in our
Souls, Enormity of Grief would not be able to seize upon us.

Nor do they only thus crucify and kill that higher and Diviner Life of the
Soul, but by the exorbitant excitations of the contrary Life into several
enormous modes and forms, metamorphose men into so many abhorred Monsters, whom
they keep in the chains of this base servility and captivity, and then let them
loose upon the most villainous outrages, or the basest and most contemptible
actions imaginable. Wrath and Revenge, like a Bear robbed of her Whelps, makes
them tear apieces, and destroy all they meet with in their way. Ambition and
Avarice, like an Evening-Wolf, makes them fall upon the Sheepfolds, and suck
the blood of innocent Lambs, to satisfy their thirst. Superstition and false
Zeal, turns them into such Furies or Devils, that they destroy whole Cities
and Countries with Fire and Sword, out of pride and impatience that others do
not submit to their Wisdom, and give themselves up to their Guidance; who yet
have no Light but those Infernal Torches of an ignorant and bitter Zeal devoid
of all Christian Charity, which they could light no where but from the Flames
of Hell; nor conduct a Soul by this Light any whither, but to the place of
those Infernal Flames. The sting of Lust transforms them into such Satyrs and
Baboons, that they fly upon all promiscuously, not sparing their own Mothers,
Sisters nor Daughters. Gluttony and Drunkenness (as Circe did Ulysses his
Companions) changes their shapes into foul dirty Swine. To say nothing of those
ugly indecorums of Effeminacy, that brings some into as base a Servility as
Omphale did Hercules, who made him put off his Lyons-Skin, and sit amongst her
Maids at the Distaff and Spindle. Not to add what one would scarce dare to
name, had not the Apostle himself taken notice of it; That this Beastly
Lustfulness has made Women change the natural use into that which is against
Nature; and likewise also the Men, leaving the natural use of the Woman, burned
in their Lusts one toward another, men with men working that which is
unseemly. Romans 1.

With such base and inglorious, with such wretched and hideous Servilities do
the Fleshly Lusts tyrannize over the Soul, when they have once captivated her;
carrying her thus in triumph, and exposing her to all baseness and lewdness,
and dragging her by her chains of captivity through all filthiness and
unseemliness; and having thus besmeared and defaced her with the filth of all
manner of Sins in this Life, fit her for a delivery to her fellow-Devils in the
other, to be reserved with them in everlasting chains of darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day.

This is the lamentable success of that Warfare betwixt the Lusts of the Flesh
and the Soul, if she suffer her self to be overcome. And therefore it is no
wonder the Holy Apostle uses all the Reason and Rhetoric he has, to make us
stand upon our guard, and defend our selves from so subtle and malicious
Enemies; Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from
fleshly lusts which war against the soul.

DISCOURSE II. PSALM. lxxxiv. 7. They go from strength to strength, every one of
them appears before God in Sion.
THE Text is a Presage of admirable Prosperity and Success to some sort of
People; so that it may well excite in us a desire of searching out who they may
be: And if we begin further off at first, or go about, yet it may (according to
the Proverb) prove the nighest way home. If any one therefore demand who these
are, I shall answer him out of the 24th Psalm, (the subject whereof seems to be
the very same with this) and in the words of the same Prophet, This is the
generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face O Jacob; the God of the
People that prevail by their importunities and wrestlings with God, as Jacob is
said to do, Genesis 32. whereby he purchased to himself the name of Israel,
because as a Prince he had power with God. And David, as being one of this
extraction himself, he seems to challenge a Blessing from God on that very
account, O Lord God of Hosts, hear my prayer; give ear, O God of Jacob, in the
Verse immediately following my Text.

In this present Psalm, as also in the 24th and 15th Psalms, the Holy Prophet
so speaks of the Court, Tabernacle, Temple, or House of God, as of a place of
the highest enravishments that the Soul of man can enjoy; which Expositors
generally (and I doubt not but truly) interpret of the Mosaical Tabernacle and
Literal Temple; But that the mind of the Prophet was carried up also to some
higher matter, I do not at all question. And the first Verse of the 15th Psalm,
Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy Hill?
(which is almost verbatim repeated again in the 24th Psalm) the Chaldee
Paraphrast does expressly interpret of Heaven. So warrantable is it, not to be
tied down to the Letter, but to seek a further edifying Mystery in the Holy
Oracles of God. And such a Temple as the abode wherein will be more suitable to
such earnest breathings, and vehement expressions of the Prophet; Ver. 1. 2.
How amiable are thy tabernacles O Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea, even
faints for the courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God. And again, Ver. 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they
will be still praising thee. These things do not suit so well, methinks, to a
house that is made of any earthly materials, into which the wicked can throng,
as well as the just. Nor does God dwell in any House made with hands, according
to the Apostolic Philosophy, Acts 7. Any yet according to their Doctrine, We
are the Temple of God; at least designed so to be. And the Apostle Paul says
expressly, 1. Cor. 6. 19. What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the
Holy Ghost? And yet the same Apostle, Romans 7. 18. I know, says he, that in me
(that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing. This Earthly Tabernacle is no
House of God, as being from the Earth. From whence it is that we groan
earnestly, (as the same Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.) desiring to be clothed upon
with our house which is from Heaven. For we that are in this tabernacle do
groan, being burdened: not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon,
(or further clothed) that mortality might be swallowed up of life. Now he that
has wrought us for the self-same thing, is God, who also has given unto us
the earnest of the Spirit: That is to say, He that works us (...) into this
condition, is God himself, by the operation of his Spirit, which is the
Architect of its own House (as it is said of the Soul) the Builder of that Holy
Temple in us, in which all is, fulfilled which the Prophet David sets out in
such devotional and vehement Language. For when we are come to this state, we
are then truly the Temple of the Living God; and it is Strength to a man's
Navel, and Marrow to his Bones. So that well may the Holy Prophet raise himself
into so high expressions touching this condition, Ver. 2. My soul longs, yea
even faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for
the living God. For this Earthly Tabernacle destitute of this, is but a burden
or body of Vanity, wherein are all the Seeds and Fruits of Sin and Misery. But
of this Heavenly House, is that plentifully verified which the Prophet David
presageth, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still
praising thee. And they that are arrived to this condition, will easily fulfill
that Precept of the Apostle, ( Ephesians. 5. 18, 19.) Be not drunk with wine, but be
filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord. This is
the real participation of the Body or Flesh of Christ, the true Bread from
Heaven, which is the immediate receptacle of the Divine Spirit; so that he that
comes hither, cannot fail to be replenished with Righteousness, and Peace, and
Joy in the Holy Ghost.

And this may serve for a brief intimation, Who these Persons are, to whom such
good Success is promised in the Text, and what the place is toward which they
are journeying; viz. the Tabernacle, Temple, or House of God, mystically
understood.

LET us now consider, 1. The Country through which they pass. 2. How well
accoutred they are in their persons for the Journey. 3. What Convoy to guard
them safe. 4. Under what Influences of Heaven they travel. 5. What the more
particular degrees of their Progress: And 6. What welcome they find at their
Journeys end.

1. The Country through which they travel is expressly set down in the Psalm;
Ver. 6. Who going through the valley of Baca, make it a well; which is
ordinarily interpreted the Valley of Tears: Which though it has a sad
Appellation, yet bears with it a good Omen, according to that in 126 Psalm;
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. But Baca signifying also a
Mulberry-Tree, some would have it denominated from thence, and also that it is
so described, to set out the sterility and dryness of the Soil; as if as well
the passage to, as the place where the House of God is situated, were all dry
ground: For such indeed is Mount Sion it self; as its very name also imports,
which signifies aridity or ficcity: Which any one will admit to bear (without
forcing) an important signification, who reflects on that Philosophical
Aphorism, Anima sicca anima pura, or Anima sicca sapientissima. And David,
whose mind was so hugely taken up with the projecting for a place for the House
of God; Psalm 132. ver. 3, 4, 5. ( I will not come into the tabernacle of my
house, nor go up into my bed; I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to
mine eyelids; until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob) immediately in the following Verse, he in the Spirit of
Prophecy delivers this great Arcanum, Lo (says he) we heard of it at Ephratah:
but we found it in the fields of the wood. The common rumor indeed, and
conceit was, that it should be built in Ephratah; that is, in regione
frugifera, in a fat, rich, fertile Soil; but we find it in the fields of the
wood, in loco non tam culto nec amoeno (as Calvin notes) in a dry, barren,
mountainous place; indeed on Mount Moriah, which some would have so called as
if it were (...), alluding to that in the Canticles, as if it were a
Myrrhiferous Mountain: And such Wood indeed is a special demonstration of a dry
and barren Ground; which is congenerous with the signification of Mount Sion,
as also with what is observable in Philadelphia, a type of the best State of
the House of God in a collective sense; it was placed (...) in a region dry,
barren, and burnt up with heat: As David professes, that the Zeal of Gods
House had even eaten him up, or consumed him: But as the outward man perishes,
the inward man is renewed day by day.

But we had got to our Journeys-end, the place of Gods House, before we were
well entered into our Journey. That which I would observe is, That the Region
through which we pass to this State, which is called the Holy Temple or House
of God, is no Ephratah; it is not a Country of green Fields, rich Pastures, and
rank Flowery Meadows; but it is the Valley of Baca, a dry, barren Soil, far from
being fat, fulsom and luscious. And therefore all the self-favouring
sweetnesses, and caressings of this Terrestrial Body, or Carnal Personality,
are driven far from this Region, with all that false Wisdom or Prudence which
arises from the Flesh, or from corrupt Reasonings, touching the Sovereign
Goodness of God; the doctrine of Love being abusable to the corruption of Life,
as well as the doctrine of Faith, if men wander out of the Valley of Baca, into
Fools-Paradises, made by their own Carnal Fancy and Reason. And this for the
present, shall serve briefly for the Description of the Country, through which
these Travelers to the House of God pass.

2. Now how well they are provided for their Journey, is intimated also in this
Psalm; and mainly it is in three things, Knowledge, Faith and Sincerity.

Knowledge:] Namely, of the ways of God that they are to walk in. Ver. 5.
Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways.
(For so that Translation of the Psalms, which is appointed by our Church to be
read every day, has it; and that that Pronoun [ This] is understood, as if it
were (...), I do not doubt, and therefore rightly expressed in this
Translation.) Who have the Journey they are to take, the ways and passages
predelineated, as it were, in their hearts; which denotes the best kind of
Knowledge, even that which is accompanied with Affection, and hearty Conviction.

And surely it is not for naught that the Spirit of God so frequently in
Scripture, names the Heart for the chief seat of Wisdom; which is yet the less
mavelous, considering that the Wisdom which the Scripture drives at, is
Practical Wisdom, Moral or Divine, wherein the Heart is much concerned. And the
sense and touch of those Truths must pass the Heart, as the Colors do the Eye,
before the Mind can give a steady assent to them. For what the Eye is in
reference to Colors, that is the Heart in reference to the discrimination of
Moral Good and Evil. And for this reason it is, that as Seeing is attributed to
the Eye, so is Understanding to the Heart, so frequently in the Scripture. The
thing is so plain, I need allege no places. Out of the Heart proceed evil
thoughts, says our Savior; and consequently good ones too; For the Heart is
the Fountain of the Life and Spirits; and according as they are, so are our
Imaginations, whether sleeping or waking, such our Ideas, thoughts and
propensions to belief, especially in matters of Life, whether Natural or Divine.

And therefore we must be very careful how we let our pragmatical, light-minded
Reason, make laws of Life for us, while our Hearts have not undergone the due
measures of Purification; because the thoughts and imaginations of our Hearts
will certainly impose upon that Mercurial Faculty, till the Soul be made more
judiciously discerning in virtue of her Purity. But our safest way is with
these Travelers in the Valley of Baca, to have Gods ways written in our
Hearts, for a Map to guide us by. To the Law and to the Testimony. If they
speak not according to this word, there is no light in them. Whatever private
suggestions arise in us, and how featly soever managed by that slight Advocate,
carnal or unregenerate Reason, we are to guide our Life by the Commandments of
Christ, whom God has exhibited to the World as our infallible Guide, confirming
his Authority and Doctrine by Signs and Miracles, and by such wonderful
Prophecies, as it were madness in any man to prefer his own corrupt Reasonings,
imposed upon by an unsanctify'd Heart, before those Divine Oracles, and
unerring Laws of Life, which are given unto us by the Son of God, so declared
and manifested to the World.

The first requisite point therefore, which is Knowledge, is an hearty
admittance of those Laws of Life which are prescribed us by Christ and his
Apostles; to take up these for Principles to walk by, and not what our own
self-favouring Phancies suggest, or our vacillant Reason, blind or drunk with
the foul steams of an impure and unsanctify'd Heart, would pretend to coin for
us. Blessed is the man, whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways.

The next is Faith: By which I do not so much understand Faith in general, as
that which has for its proper Object the Power of God for the destroying of
Sin, and the erecting his Kingdom in us. For out of this arises our Strength
in God, and our Victory over the World. This is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our Faith, as S. John speaks. Which Requisite is also hinted in
this Psalm, the last verse; O Lord of Hosts, blessed is the man that trusts
in thee. And indeed, since our Faith, and Trust, and Confidence is in the Lord
of Hosts, how can we despair of the victory over any Sin whatsoever. Cannot he
that created Heaven and Earth by his Word, create in us a pure Heart, and renew
a right Spirit within us? I can do all things, (says S. Paul) through Christ
that strengthens me. Certainly it is a Contradiction, that Omnipotency should
not be able so effectually to assist a willing Soul, as to bring all her
enemies under her feet. Can he that is the Lord of Hosts, and has the power
over all Nature, be baffled in his assaults upon the corrupt Nature of any poor
Creature, so that he cannot reduce it if he will? And can we possibly imagine
God not to be willing to subdue Sin in the World, who has given us such express
Laws against it, both within and without, who expresses his Wrath and Vengeance
against it so frequently in Scripture, who is so irreconcilable an enemy unto
it, that nothing less than the Death of his only begotten Son, could make an
Atonement for it: And lastly, the Holiness of whose Nature is so contrary and
diametrically opposite to the pollutedness of it. Wherefore the fault most
assuredly lies at our own doors; viz. because we are not sincerely willing to
have our Sins vanquished and overcome by the Power of God.

Which therefore is the third and last Requisite which the Travelers in the
Valley of Baca are said to be provided with, namely Sincerity; which
comprehends not only a belief that all our Sins ought to be subdued, and that
they are all vanquishable through the assistance of Gods Spirit, but also an
unfeigned willingness to have them subdued, and an hearty endeavor, to the
utmost of that power we have received, to conquer them and subdue them. He that
is provided of all these three, is fitly furnished for a prosperous Journey
toward the House of God; and the Almighty will be his safeguard in his travel.

3. Which is the Third Particular we named, What Convoy to guard them safe in
their Journey, which is intimated in the Psalm also; For the Lord is a sun and
a shield, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withold from them that walk uprightly; that is to say, that walk sincerely.
In which Sincerity if they keep themselves, he will also be faithful unto them,
and not suffer them to be tempted above what they are able, and will deliver
them from all straits and assaults of their enemies both inward and outward.
The Lord will be their fortress and tower, their defense and shield, a present
help in the day of trouble. The Angels of the Lord will encamp round about
them, and deliver them. For such as these, as it is said of those few names in
Sardis, Christ will confess their names before his Father and his holy Angels;
namely, profess how dear they are to him, and so commit them to their safe
protection.

4. And surely the Influences of Heaven (which is the Fourth Particular) cannot
but be very benign to those that are thus dear to the God of Heaven. And
therefore for light, and warmth, and kindly dews and showers, they shall not be
destitute of these in this Journey of theirs to the Temple of God. And
therefore God is said as well to be a Sun to them as a Shield, in the forecited
Verse of this Psalm: And in Ver. 6. They that pass through the valley of Baca
are said to make it a well, and that the rain fills the pools: Like that in
Psalm 68. O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou did
march through the wilderness, the clouds dropped at thy presence, thou sentest
a gracious rain upon thy inheritance, and refreshedst it when it was weary. But
in this present Psalm, the Rain is said to be received into some hollows of the
Earth dug out; the Latin renders it cisternas: I suppose any fossae or hollows
of what form soever, will serve the turn, made by the diging away the Earth,
that this Heavenly Liquor may supply the vacuity. For that is a great mistake
in the Carnal-minded, that they think that when we empty our selves of the Old
Adam, and the comforts of that Life, that we thus stand empty for ever, and
that Religion is a forlorn disconsolate condition. No, dig away thy Earth, and
God will fill the vacuity with a substance from Heaven. Or starve away the
fulsomness of thy Flesh, by assiduous mortification and purification, and thou
shall make this arid Soil, this Valley of Baca, a springing Well, as it is
suggested in the beginning of the Verse. When our Terrestrial substance becomes
a dry barren Soil, as to the fruits of the Flesh, then will those Well-springs
of living Water bubble up in us, as our Savior has promised, unto Eternal
Life; by which is understood the irrigation of the Spirit. Non datur vacuum, is
a Maxim as true in Divinity as in Philosophy. Empty thy self therefore of thy
Earth, and thou shall most certainly be replenished with Heaven.

5. Now for the Fifth Particular, which occurs in my Text, properly so called
(for I have made the whole Psalm in a manner my Text hitherto) it is of the
greatest importance of all thoroughly to consider it; namely, our gradual
advance in this journey through the Valley of Baca. They go from strength to
strength; e virtute in virtutem, the Latin has it, from virtue to virtue. And
indeed this progress from strength to strength is nothing else but a
proficiency in Virtue; either from one virtue to another, Add to your Faith
Fortitude, to your Fortitude Patience, etc. or from one Degree of virtue to
another. And this virtue is very significantly termed strength, there being no
true Virtue which is not such: It is but the imagination of virtue if it be not
accompanied with Life and Power.

And forasmuch as Virtue and Grace are all one, let every one take notice, that
he that has no Virtue has no Grace, as well as he that has no Power has no
Virtue. Which is a plain Note to examine a man's self by, that he may not lie
lusking in his softnesses and infirmities, and in the mean time flatter
himself, that he is notwithstanding one of the Children of Grace. And besides
this, though he may have some Grace and Virtue in him, yet let him further
consider, unless he do with these Travelers in the Valley of Baca, pass e
virtute in virtutem, from one virtue to another, and from one degree of virtue
to another; so that he can say with S. Paul, that though my outward man perish,
yet my inward man is renewed day by day; he will never come to his Journeys
end, and never appear before God in Sion.

And that we may understand this point more distinctly, let us consider the
several parts of this gradual proficiency; that we may the better know whether
we be at all as yet in the way to Sion, and the Temple of God, or no.

We know in Nature, that the weaker any thing is, the stronger ought to be the
prop that is to support it; and so the less our Power is to do those things
that are holy and good, for their own sakes, the stronger that Passion ought to
be, that must carry us to, or support us in such actions and performances. And
truly the strongest and most enforcing Passion seems to be that of Fear; we
being more concerned not to be tormentingly miserable in intolerable pain and
anguish, than to enjoy the greatest Pleasure and Happiness. Wherefore the first
Degree of virtue and power is that which is so small, as if it were not
enforced with the fear of the wrath and displeasure of the Almighty, and those
dreadful punishments that ensue thereupon, could not exercise it self in the
ways of Righteousness and Piety, could not abstain from undue Pleasures of the
Flesh, or from seeking unjust gains and advantages in Worldly affairs, nor
expose it self to any hazards and hardships for the Truths sake, and for the
Interest of the Kingdom of Christ; but yet in virtue of the Fear of God, and of
his dreadful displeasure, is carried through all these Duties in some
considerable measure: Which therefore if men be not, it is a demonstration that
either the Fear of God is not before their eyes, or that they have not so much
as this first degree of Virtue, which jointly with the Fear of God should
enable them to become Travelers in the Valley of Baca, that they may at last
arrive to the Vision of God.

Every man therefore must examine himself as to this point, and observe wherein
his ways are defectuous, and what it is that makes him so slack, or fail so
much of his Duty; whether that due Fear of God has not slipped from him, which
should be a stay and prop to the small measure of Virtue he has as yet attained
to, and enforce and support the weakness thereof. Which help if men let go
unseasonably (and it is unseasonable for every one to let it go, while he finds
himself subject to fall into Sin) he will be like a City without Walls; and his
security in the notional considerations of the Goodness of God, and fond and
perverse conclusions fetched from that sweet Topic, will betray him to ruin.
For being thus fudled, as it were, and made drunk with this delicious liquor of
his own brewing, he will grow lightheaded or light-minded, and presume of
safety even when he is entering into the Jaws of Death: With Agag they will come
out delicately, saying, Surely the bitterness of death is past, when as the
Sword of the Lord stands ready to hew them in pieces. Wherefore this Fear of
the Lord is a Tower of Safety, and the strongest Garrison against Vice that is.
It is true (even in the vulgar sense of that place) Perfect Love casts out
Fear; but that Love is not perfect, that will let in any Sin, or admit of any
defect of Duty.

Indeed if a man had but so ardent a desire after the reward of Righteousness,
as that it would keep him in the performance of all Duties required by the Law
of God; that might excuse him from this less cheerful state of Fear: And it
would be the Second advance in this Journey through the Valley of Baca, to be
able upon the consideration of those Joys and Glories that are to be enjoyed
amongst the blessed Saints and Angels in Heaven, to abstain from all Earthly
Lusts, and from whatever in our Pilgrimage through this World, sollicits us to
Sin. This, I say, would be a further step in our Journey toward the House of
God. But we must by no means be content to stick here: For this is but the
state of mercenaries; and as it falls exceeding short of that Perfection we are
called unto, so he that takes up here, will most assuredly fall short of his
Journeys end. How far off then are they that endeavor no amendment of their
lives, either out of the fear of Punishment or hope of Reward; how sunk and
besotted must the condition of such Souls be, and how vastly removed from their
Eternal Happiness!

The progress hitherto in Virtue, which I have described, borrowing a term from
Plotinus we may call Political; it reaching no further than a conformity to an
outward Law upon the consideration of an external Reward or Punishment; which
yet I have made part of the Journey in the Valley of Baca, because these ways
lead to a nearer approach to the House of God, as facilitating the Soul to a
speedier attainment to higher Perfections. For Temperance, and Justice, and
chastising the Flesh, and keeping in a method of Sobriety and Abstinence, do of
their own nature better dispose the Soul to a more absolute Purification, and
quicker sensation of Holy and Divine things, and put her in a capacity of a
more clear and certain conviction of the Reasonableness of the Commandments of
God: So that though there were no External Law to direct, yet we should be
satisfied in our own Minds and Reasons, that such and such Virtues are better
than their contrary Vices, and that we have as we are Rational Creatures, an
obligation to follow the one, and decline the other.

This is still a further step in the Journey, but the state is but yet Legal,
if not Political. This is rather a Law of life and prescript (though more
intrinsecal than the former) than a Living law. For to be in that Dispensation,
which I call a Living law, it not only to be convinced of the Reasonableness of
the Precept in our Imagination or Reason, but to have it the genuine and
natural ebullition of the Spirit of Life in us; that it be not a Notion in the
Head, but the very Sentiment of our Heart, and as it were essential to our Life
and Being, that we should not deem our selves alive without it; and as the
carnal man will part with all he has to save his Natural life, so we will be
willing to part with our Natural life, and all, rather than quit this; This
being the only Principle in which we find and feel our selves to live indeed.
He that has arrived hither is not far from the House of God: For this Life and
Spirit is not drawn into the Soul, but with the Body of Christ, which is the
Holy Temple of God.

Wherefore when we come to that Dispensation, which we call the Living Law, or
the Law that gives Life; this is a main progress indeed in our Journey through
the Valley of Baca; and in this especially is that verified, that it is turned
(...) into a springing Well, which (as I intimated before) is to be understood
of the Spirit. This Spirit of Life in us, the Soul being one with it, she will
cleanse her self of all dirtiness and uncleanness; like a bubling Spring, into
which if a man fling any dirt, it will work it out again: And so will this
Spirit of Life work out all filth and falsehood out of the Soul, it not enduring
any such heterogeneous stuff in it.

Here therefore the Virtues become Cathartical in an eminent degree. But when
Corruption is laid aside and kept at a distance, when Regeneration is
completed, and the new man well knit and compacted together, then is the House
or Temple of God built, which these Travelers in Baca seek after. And this
degree of Virtue you may if you will, in Plotinus his Phrase, call
Paradigmatical, though not in his Sense; who understands thereby a senseless
(...) of the Soul, as if she had to do with no Matter at all, and was to be
reduced to a perfect Apathy. But the Body of Christ and the Temple of God,
though they be very Pure, Holy and Heavenly, yet they are not perfectly
Immaterial. And it is that Idea or Example that we are to imitate, and
according to which our perfection is; and therefore when Virtue has arrived to
this degree, it may well in this solid Sense be called Paradigmatical; for all
things are here according to the Pattern in the Mount.

And we have now brought our Travelers through the Valley of Baca to Mount
Sion; or rather to that part of that Tract so called, in which the Temple was
built, which is Mount Moriah, the Mountain of Myrrh, as some would have it
signify; which implies the dryness and sterility of the Soil, as well as the
Notation of Sion does, which has its name from aridity or dryness. For this
Temperature wherein the lubricous and luxuriant moisture of the Concupiscible,
or Desires of the Flesh of what nature soever, and pleasures thereof, are dried
up and consumed by that more heavenly heat and zealous desire after the House
of God: This is the true Terra Sancta, the Consecrated Ground in which the
Temple of God will at last be erected, and wherein those Travelers through the
Valley of Baca, will at last to their unspeakable comfort find it, and with it
the most solid Happiness the Soul of man is capable of; which is the last
particular.

6. The Entertainment of these Travelers at their Iourneys end: It is no less
than a Beatifick Vision; They shall every one of them appear before God in
Sion: For these are the generation of them that seek him, even them that seek
the face of the God of Jacob. And here they are said to appear before the God
of Gods in Sion, and so to see his face; which is the greatest satisfaction
that the Soul of man can either desire or find; according to that in the 17th
Psalm, As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be
satisfied, when I awake into thy likeness: Which men can never do till they are
brought into this Terra Sancta; the moist fumes and vapors of a foul lushious
Blood, and unsanctify'd and unpurify'd Body, will keep them fast in an heavy
Sleep, accompanied at the best but with vain and frivolous Dreams, and the
false Pleasures and Joys of this perishing Life, till they enter seriously
into this Journey through the Valley of Baca, and ascend into the Mountain of
Myrrh, which will prove to them the Mountain of the Vision of God, which is an
indubitable Etymology of Mount Moriah, in which the Temple and Presence of God
was amongst the Jews; in which God exhibits himself visible to his People.
Blessed are the pure in heart, (which is the true Terra Sancta) for they shall
see God. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness (whose
Soul thirsts after God as a thirsty land, as the Psalmist speaks) for these
shall be satisfied. These are arrived to Mount Sion, that dry hungry and
thirsty Soil, and consequently to the Holy Temple; And therefore will not fail
of being satisfied with the fatness of Gods house, and of drinking plentifully
of the river of pleasures that flows there: For with thee is the fountain of
life, and in thy light shall we see light; that is to say, we shall see God who
is light, by his communicating his Image to us, and making us Deiform.

This will be the Entertainment of these Travelers through Baca, when they are
come to Mount Moriah; the Mountain of the Vision of God, as the word signifies:
(...), The God of Gods will appear to them in Sion; The God of Gods, the Summum
Ronum.

O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us; but in
this thy Holy Temple we will make mention of thy name only. It was our
ignorance of thee, and because we had not seen the beauty and comfort of thy
Countenance, that we have served other Gods before thee; that we have sought
satisfaction in the power or riches of this World, in the honor or applause of
Men, in the lust and pleasures of the Flesh, in needless and fruitless
subtilities of Knowledge, or from any self-reflections on our own conceited
worth or precellency before others, or whatever else is rellish'd by the mere
Natural man: It was our ignorance that we were any time servants to these; or
that they were any way the guides of our Life, or the joy of our Hearts. But
they are dead, dried up and withered, and shall not live; they are deceased,
and shall not rise to lord it again over us. For thou only art Holy, thou only
art the Lord; and thou only ought to possess us, who only art able to
satisfy us and fill us; and so to fill us and satisfy us, as that as there is
no need, so there is no room left for any worldly or carnal satisfactions; that
nothing unholy or unclean may crowd into this thy Holy Temple, or approach this
thy Holy Mountain, wherein thou have appointed that day of Feasting, that Feast
of fat things, that Feast of refined Wines, and of fat things full of Marrow,
as the Prophet Esaias speaks.

This is the entertainment of our Travelers through the Valley of Baca, when
they are once arrived to the House of God. God does not only show himself unto
them, but welcome them after their long travel, with a joyful Feast and all
delicious refreshments. Behold I stand at the door and knock: If any man hear
my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and
he with me. ( Rev. 3. 20.) See how friendly and familiarly they are entertained
by Christ, as if they feasted one another at a mutual Collation: I will delight
my self by the possession and actuation of the Humane Nature by my Holy Spirit;
and they shall be delighted and transported by the comfortable and enravishing
influence of my Divine Nature, when they shall be filled with all the fullness
of God.

Of such infinite consequence is it to attain to that Body which is the proper
House of God, or his Holy Temple; that when he knocks and calls, we may yield
obedience to that voice in the Psalmist, who prophesies of this Mystery, Lift
up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting doors, that the
King of Glory may come in; that the Lord of Hosts with all his glorious retinue
may fill his own House: For he is not there alone (as it appeared by that voice
heard in the Temple of the Jews, (...)) but by his residence in us replenisheth
us with all Heavenly Graces. We are strengthened with all might according to
the glorious power of this Lord of Hosts, unto all patience and long-suffering
with joyfulness; as the Apostle speaks. And that is most eminently verified to
us, which occurs in S. John, Greater is he that is in you, than he that is in
the world.

And as for being rooted in Love (as S. Paul speaks in another place) this
glorious Lord of Hosts is also the God of Love: For God is Love, and he that
abides in Love abides in God, and God in him, as touching Holy and Divine
things. This Heavenly Love has his abode in this Ethereal Tabernacle.

And as for Truth and Knowledge, as S. John witnesses, where is it to be seen
or heard, but in this Lucid Temple of God? While we are out of this condition
we know but in part, or rather quite miss the mark, by the giddiness and
distortedness of an unpurify'd mind; we hear and understand but faintly and
unsetledly, like Thunder afar off; but in this Holy Temple, we do as it were
distinctly from his own mouth, receive the Living Oracles of God. And briefly
as for Truth, this is that state wherein all Figures and Shadows do fly away:
This is that grand Mystery reserved more especially for these last approaching
Ages, and witnessed by a great Voice out of Heaven, Behold the Tabernacle of
God is with men. Apoc. 21. 3.

These are some few strictures, or faint obscure strokes of the admirable and
ineffable Happy Condition of the Travelers through the Valley of Baca, when
once they have arrived to their Journeys end, and appear before the God of Gods
in Sion.

DISCOURSE III. MAT. vi. 22, 23. The light of the Body is the Eye: if therefore
thine Eye be single, thy whole Body shall be full of light. But if thine Eye be
evil, thy whole Body shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is
in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!
THE Text seems to be a Syllogistical Parable: The Argument is contained in
those first words, [ The light of the Body is the Eye:] From whence is this
double Inference, That if the Eye be single, the whole Body is full of light;
But if the Eye be evil the whole Body is full of darkness; with this Porisma or
Corollary annexed to the latter Inference, If therefore the light that is in
thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! That is, It is wonderfully and
unspeakably great.

The force of the Argument for the inferring the Conclusions is so conspicuous,
that it is altogether needless to say any thing toward the further clearing it.
And therefore we will only take notice of the Truths in several, manifestly
comprised in the Text.

1. The First whereof is, That the Eye is the light of the Body. 2. The Second,
That a Single Eye makes the whole Body full of light. 3. The Third, That an
Evil Eye makes the whole Body full of darkness. 4. The Fourth and Last, That if
the Eye it self be dark, the Body is left in most wretched and miserable
darkness; such as the presence of no Light, no not of the Sun it self, can
chase away: Non radii solis nec lucida tela Diei
Discutient. --

These are the external Truths of the letter of the Parable; But hitherto we do
but lambere vitreum vas, sed pultem non attingimus. We must know therefore that
every part of this Parable is but the Protasis of a Similitude, and that all
the skill will be to find out the true Apodosis in every particular. And if our
Judgment fail us not in the first, we shall not easily mistake in the following
parts of the Parable.

Wherein (I mean in the First) if we make out this Analogy, viz. [ That as the
Eye is to the Body, so the Understanding is to the Soul] it would be neither
inept in it self, nor unsupported by very great Authorities. Aristotle says
expressly, (...). Which may embolden us to make the Soul the Homologous term to
the Body: Which Galen does expressly (as Grotius cites him) (...). And to this
purpose several other Philosophers speak, and not without truth, though not so
precisely accommodate to our purpose. This Apodosis would be over-dry and
Philosophical, and such as will not reach that Diviner meaning of our Savior.

This Analogy was obvious enough to the Natural man; I mean the comparing the
Intellectual or Rational faculty of the Soul, with the Sight or Visive faculty
in the Eye of the Body.

But having regard to our Saviors Discourse in this place, it is plain he
intends not so much that which the Philosophers call (...), for the Homologous
term to that of the Eye, as what S. Paul styles (...); which is not mere notion
or perception, but implies with it a savor and relish of what is perceived.
Get thee behind me Satan (said Christ to Peter) (...) because thou savourest
not the things that be of God. And the Apostle expressly mentions (...), and
(...).

In brief therefore, respecting the scope of our Savior (as we shall see more
clearly anon) the Analogy must run thus.

1. What the Eye is for enlightening the Body, that is this (...), this relish,
savor, sense or sapience (in this peculiar sense) for the illuminating the
Soul; that is, this being so or so minded or affected. And this is the first
Analogy hinted in this Parable.

2. The 2d is, That as the Single Eye enlightens thoroughly the Body, so
Single-mindedness does thoroughly illuminate the Soul. And this is that great
and important Arcanum of Life that this Parable affords us; That that (...)
(which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 1. 12.) that godly simplicity and
sincerity, is the Eye of the Soul, not only for its loveliness, but for its
light which it so plentifully imparts unto her.

That his Godly Simplicity and Sincerity, that is devoid of all Self-interest,
of all Self-reflection, or Self-gloriation, but pursues what is simply good,
merely for the good's sake, is that which answers to the Single Eye in the
Parable, is plain from the preceding and subsequent Context; where our Savior
gives Monitions against Hypocrisy, that when we fast, we should not be as the
Hypocrites, of a sad countenance, disfiguring their faces, that they may appear
unto men to fast; and that we should lay up our treasure in Heaven, not in
Earth; that our Heart or Affection may not be distracted nor divided; for where
your treasure is there will your heart be also; and likewise immediately after
my Text, he says, No man can serve two Masters.

It is therefore that Oneness of purpose and affection, that seems here to be
aimed at, as in several other Parables of our Savior. He that lays his hand
to the plough, and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of God: Which implies
that there should be (...), and that our mind should be taken up with one thing
only. Martha is troubled with many things; but Mary has chosen the better part,
which shall not be taken from her. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a treasure hid
in the field, for which a man sells all that he has, that he may purchase
it; or like that Pearl of great price, for which a Merchant parts with all that
he has, that he may buy it.

To be at one therefore, or to have the lively savor or relish of some one
most excellent, divine and indispensable Principle, seems to be that which is
figured out by (...), by this Single Eye in my Text. Which I conceive is this;
Not to seek a man's self in any thing, but simply and entirely to follow the
will and pleasure of God, or that which is simply good; not pleasing and
grateful to our Animal relishes, or corresponding with our personal interest
and concerns; but that which comports with the Interest of the Kingdom of God,
and the real good of Mankind. To be thus affected, is to have this Single Eye,
that is, this pure and clear Eye (for so the word will also signify) devoid of
all self-tincture or self-colouring; and therefore capable of receiving the
pure Light as it is, and every Object in that Hue and Circumstances that they
are.

The being quit from our selves and all Selfishness, and having our Desires
sincerely bent to what is simply the Best in every thing, this is here that
Single Eye of the Soul which our Savior Enigmatically indigitates by that of
the Body, but is not the Light it self, as the Eye of the Body is not the
Natural light; but they both be that which receives the Light, the one the
Divine, the other the Natural.

Nor yet is either this Natural or Spiritual Eye to be said to be altogether
devoid of light: But as Plato conceived, there was an innate light in the Eye,
and that by the conjunction of this with the external light (which Union in
Plutarch is termed (...)) Vision was performed: So we may not deny, but that in
some sense this (...) we have described to be thus simply and sincerely
affected (as we have endeavored to set forth, as well as we can in words; for
what words can communicate the Sense of Life, unless to them that have it?)
that this sincere affection is the Inward Light of the Soul, her diaphanous
capacity of admitting Divine Truths, whether suggested from without, or from
the Spirit of God within; in virtue of the happy meeting together of which
inwardly pure disposition of the Soul with those outward suggestions, she is
assured of the reality of the Divine and Spiritual Objects of the
Understanding, what is to be believed and what to be done, as well as the Eye
is assured of the truth of outward Natural Objects, by the corradiation of its
innate light with the external Rays of the Sun. What the Spirits are in the
diaphanous Eye, that is (...) the relish of the Spirit in the pure Soul. And
this may suffice for the understanding the Second Analogy.

3. From whence we shall easily understand the Third, after we have taken
notice what is meant in this place by an Evil Eye, which is opposed to a Single
one. And the right meaning is easily fetched out from the Opposition. For it is
obvious to conceive, that it is that kind of Evil of the Eye that is opposed to
the clearness, purity and diaphanousness thereof, which is signified by the
Single Eye. For blindness, obscureness, or depravation of sight may come from
sundry causes; but the main is, and the only here aimed at, such as takes away
the clearness and diaphanousness of the Eye, whereby it ceases to be actuated
by its own innate light and animal Spirits, and becomes impervious and
impenetrable by the Beams of the Sun, or any other external lights; or at least
is so infected by some impure tincture, that the rays of light cannot enter,
without being soiled and contaminated by that internal infection. Now as such
an Evil Eye as this leaves the Body either wholly in the dark, or obnoxious to
perpetual error touching the right hue of external Objects; so the Carnal
relish, or Carnal-mindedness, whereby we do so affectionately savor our
personal concerns, our Animal pleasure and interest; this self-love,
self-respect, self-desire, self-will, self-gloriation, self-prelation; or
whatever touch of smack there is of selfishness, be it brutish or diabolical,
pride or lust, the inordinate desire of enjoying the pleasures of the Body, or
the desire of appearing somebody in the World, and the impatience and
abhorrence of being thrust below every body, and to be in a worse condition
than all other mortals, (though our ever-blessed Savior submitted himself to
that state:) this carnal relish, I say, (which with the Apostle we will call
(...), as we did the single Eye (...)) this Carnal-mindedness will in such sort
leave the Soul to blindness and error in things Spiritual to be believed and
practiced, as the Evil Eye does the Body in things Natural. Which is the Third
Analogy.

4. And the Fourth and last is this, That as that Darkness which is the
darkness of the Eye, is in reference to the Body, the most calamitous and
deplorable darkness that is: So the ignorance and insensibleness of the relish
of the Spirit, is the most hideous and miserable ignorance that can befall the
Soul; or (which is all one) to have no other light or sight but the (...), is
the most hideous and miserable darkness that can possess the Mind. If
Carnal-mindedness become (...), the Eye of the Soul (for so the word (...) will
signify,) (...); What a dismal darkness will there be then? For the blind then
leading the blind, both will fall into the Infernal Pit.

THE meaning of the Text I conceive is now abundantly plain; and that the scope
and end of our Saviors uttering this Parable to his Disciples was to stir them
up to a constant and earnest endeavor of utterly disentangling themselves from
all the attractions of the relish of the Flesh, or Spirit of the World; and of
joining themselves entirely and cordially with, and of dwelling wholly in the
relish, sense and life of the Spirit of God, or of that Divine Spirit, whose
suggestions are no dictates of self-love or partial interest, but the
substantial concerns of the Kingdom of God, and the good of the whole World:
For which he who has this Divine relish, will not stick to lay down his Life,
if need require, according to that endearing Example of our ever-blessed and
adored Savior.

Let it be therefore my task at this time to exhort you earnestly to endeavor
after this great and indispensable attainment of this Single Eye, this (...),
or Wisdom of the Spirit, which this Parable of our Savior points to, and is
indeed the proper Spirit of Christ, concerning which S. Paul expressly declares,
He that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. Which ought to be a
rousing Argument to awaken us into a due sense of so great a want. For unless
we regain this Single Eye, we shall never see the right way to Heaven. There is
therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; namely to such
as walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: For the law of the spirit of
life in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the law of sin and of death. For the
relish of the flesh, or carnal-mindedness, is death: But the relish of the
spirit, or spiritual-mindedness, is life and peace. But the carnal mind is
enmity against God, because it cannot submit it self to the law of God, but is
in perpetual opposition against it, ever suggesting what is contrary to it.
Wherefore we must wholly withdraw our selves out of that Principle, as we hope
to attain to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

And assuredly whosoever has that Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, it
will free him and rid him from the power of all the urgings, suggestions or
subtle insinuations of that Law of the sinful flesh, of self-love and
self-interest. Though he may feel these self-savouring suggestions, and the
more clearly discern them to be such by the perspicuity of the Single Eye, the
Spirit of Christ; yet he is so freed from their power, that he will never act
according to them, but constantly act according to the relish and suggestion of
that pure Principle of the Spirit, which has not the least tincture of
self-love or carnal interest. And there is a neceffity of perfectly clearing up
at last into this Single-mindedness, by reason of the war and enmity betwixt
the Carnal Principle, and this of the Spirit; for without this there is no
peace, nor joy, nor enjoyment in this Life, nor in that which is to come.

The Law of the sinful life of the Flesh therefore is utterly to be abrogated,
nulled and annihilated; and we are to judge and act in all things according to
the discernments of that Single Eye, or pure Principle of the Spirit of Christ.

But I will rather confine the Arguments of my Exhortation to the Text, and
content my self with what it will afford (namely, the four Analogies I have
produced and explained) and so conclude.

1. The light of the Body is the Eye.] What therefore the Eye is to the Body,
that is some vital and sensible leading Principle in the Soul to the Soul. Is
it not therefore of infinite consequence what this leading Principle is, when
it is of as much consequence to the Soul as the Eye is to the Body, and the
Soul of incomparably more worth than the Body? What man would have the Eye of a
Batt, of an Owl, or of a Mole, for the guidance of his Body; unless he were to
have his abode under the Earth with the Mole, or to venture abroad only in the
Night with the Batt and Owl? Every Animal is to have an Eye congenerous to its
own Nature: And therefore that Divine Animal which we call Man (I mean the
inward man, the Soul) is to have an Eye congenerous to hers; she is to have
this Single Spiritual Eye, unless she will converse only with Brutes, or Devils
in their Kingdom of Darkness.

2. Again, The Single Eye makes the whole Body full of light;] that is, it is a
fit and faithful guide to it which way soever it goes: And that is the law of
the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus to the Soul: Which assuredly is the Law of
Divine love, which is not the love of a man's self, or any particular or partial
Interest, but the hearty love of God, and a man's Neighbor; that is, of all
mankind; when with a single heart he wishes them, and is ready to do them all
the good they are capable of, and himself in a capacity to administer to them.

This is that pure and lovely Eye of the Soul indeed, which fills her full of
Celestial light, and enrolls her in the Book of Life and of the Children of
Light.

This is that Unction from the Holy one, even from the Father of Lights,
whereby we know all things appertaining to Life and Godliness, and that Jesus
(that stupendous Pattern of this Divine Love) is the Lord and Christ: And that
that man of sin, that exalts himself above all that is called God, and supports
his Power, Pride and Pomp, with gross Imposture and barbarous Bloodshed, is
that notorious Antichrist; he that has this Single Eye easily discerns this,
and can hardly forbear to suspect, that they that do not see it, are blind
through the Spirit of the World, or else drunk with the steames of that Cup of
abominations, and see double.

This Simple and Unself-interested Spirit of Love, is that Anointing of which
S. John says, that if it abide in us, we need not that any man teach us, but
the same Anointing will teach us of all things, and is truth, and is no lie. It
is very Truth, substantial and essential, without any shadow of vanity or
imposture in it; and such as will seal our hearts with an eternal adhesion to
our ever-blessed Savior, as being the communication of his own Spirit to us;
and be evermore a safe guide to us in our passage thorough this present life.
He that loves his brother, abides in the light, and there is no occasion of
stumbling in him.

Wherefore as we tender our safe conduct through the wilderness of this World,
through all the dangers and perils of so difficult a journey, we must earnestly
endeavor the recovering of this Single-mindedness; this amiable Eye of the
pure love of the Truth; and sincere purpose of doing what is absolutely best,
and of cleaving to what is absolutely best in all things, without any
self-relish or self-respect whatsoever.

A thing so lovely and desirable, that even the better sort of Heathen seem
vehemently to have breathed after it. (...); O my dear Soul, when will thou
become One, and naked and simple! It is the Exhortation of that excellent
Emperor Marcus Antoninus to his own Soul; as that brief monition also, (...),
Simplifie thy self, reduce thy self to perfect Sincerity and Single-mindedness.
These strains I confess are so near the Spirit and Genius of Christianity it
self, that I half suspect the Philosopher of playing the Plagiary, and that he
adorned himself at a distance with the Practical Philosophy of that Religion,
the truth of whose Mysteries, either the shortness of his Reason made him
dissent from, or the Reason of State hindered him from making profession of.
But it may be a just reproach to the generality of Christians, who though they
publicly profess the Faith of Christ, yet let the Life fall to the ground. But
I proceed.

3. Thirdly, But if thine Eye be evil, thy whole Body will be full of
Darkness;] that is, If thou be carnally-minded, and have not that Spiritual
Eye, above described; thy Soul will be wholly left in the dark, or closely
surrounded with a Cimmerian mist, or Egyptian fog; thou will have no prospect,
nor be able to see thy way at all, thou will be so closely besieged by the
powers of darkness. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned; that is, (...), by that spiritual relish
abovementioned. But he that is spiritual discerns all things, yet he himself
is discerned of no man: He has a full prospect of light, a large Horizon lies
open to his view; so that wherever he turns himself, his way is plain before
him. But he that has not that holy, divine and unself-interested Spirit of
Love, that Single Eye of the Soul; he walks in the dark, and knows not whither
he goes, because the darkness has blinded his Eyes, (1 Ioh. 2. 11.) But in
that the Apostle S. Paul says, [ Yet he himself is discerned of no man,] that
is to be understood, that no carnally-minded man can discern him; according to
what S. John writes in his Gospel, And the light shined in darkness, and the
darkness comprehended it not. For that Maxim of the Ancientest Philosophers,
is most assuredly true here, (...). There must be a corresponding Principle
within, to be able to discern what occurs to us from without. As face answers
to face, so the heart of man to man.

And hence it is, I mean from this darkness, that the wicked give such rude
justles against the truly-good, namely because they cannot discern them. For if
they could duly discern them, it were impossible that they should hate them;
as being Friends to every man's person; and out of mere care and compassion to
them, being only Enemies to their Vices.

Needless broils and quarrels, mistake upon mistake, mischief after mischief;
this is the necessary condition of him that by reason of the Evil Eye of the
Soul, cannot see his way distinctly, but is ever and anon caught in unexpected
Angiports and tedious Labyrinths, out of which he can find no exitus, but is
forced to go backwards and forwards, and to make Indentures in his gate, like a
sot and drunkard. (...), a double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. By
reason of his want of that Single Eye, he has not yet discovered that one,
simple, and indispensable object that his heart is eternally to cleave to: And
therefore his Eye being tainted and infected with the impurities of the Animal
life, as the inward Complexion of his Body changes, or the Circumstances of
external affairs alter, he adhering to nothing upon sincere grounds, may be now
a Reveller, anon a superstitious Bigot; now a Sceptick, anon an inept and
unskilful Dogmatist; make profession of one Religion to day, of another to
morrow, and next day of neither; and at last (if it prove plausible or
fashionable) of none at all. Such wild contrary sallies is he subject to, that
is under the guidance of the Double Eye. But that which is Single and One, can
never run contrary to it self, but will ever act uniformly, and correspondently
to one End, the Express whereof is the known will of God, and what is simply
and absolutely the best.

It is that only Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus according to which
we must act, if we would walk as Children of the Light: If we mingle any thing
of the self-relish or Carnal Interest, this will supplant our goings, and we
shall most certainly stumble in the dark; and if the concerns in our Interest
grow high, we shall reel and stagger like a drunken man, and be at our wits
end. Be things at other times never so plain, yet all must be now obscure and
uncertain; we abhorring, from all evidence that is evidently against our own
worldly advantage, to acknowledge and profess it.

Faithfulness and Uprightness toward God, toward our Prince, our Country,
our Friend, it cannot be denied (will some say) but they are things very
commendable; and that this Justice is to be performed to them, so far as it
will consist with our private Interest and Security: And Profession of Truth
(such especially as is of great concern to the Church of Christ) and so
Exemplarity of Life, are things in themselves worthy and laudable, and (
caeteris paribus) to be embraced before their corrivals. But if Truth and
Virtue once become ridiculous, and the object of reproach and obloquy; or the
indispensable Duties to God, our Prince, our Country, or Friend, hazardous to
our fortunes, liberty or life; then the Evil or Carnal Eye does very gravely
suggest, that the great point of Wisdom and Prudence is to shift for one, and
save a man's own silly inconsiderable self, whatever suffers through so base a
perfidiousness. No better possibly can come of this mixed and mongrel principle
of Double-mindedness. This is that ugly and hateful mode of plowing with an Ox
and an Ass, or of wearing a Linsy-woolsy coat; not more expressly forbidden by
the letter of Moses, than severely prohibited by that Law of the Spirit of life
which is through Christ; who has plainly declared in his Gospel, that he that
loves Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, more than him, is not worthy of him:
And that he that loves his life shall lose it, but he that hates his life in
this world, shall keep it unto life eternal. Which Law of Christ
notwithstanding (let the Carnal mind judge of it as it will) is not so
rigorous, but that some of the Heathen Philosophers have uttered what is not
much removed from it: Aristotle himself affirming, that some things are so vile
and wicked, that a man ought rather (...), to undergo death it self, with the
most grievons circumstances thereof, than submit to the doing of them. And is
there any thing more base and vile, than for a man knowingly and wittingly, for
the fear or favor of men, to sin against his Maker and gracious Redeemer?
Which if he can do in any case, how can he be secure but that he will do it in
all cases, where his Carnal Interest is highly concerned; and that he may not
at last be brought off even to worship the Devil himself? For they whose
guidance is by this Evil Eye, this mixed Principle, that worship God
conditionally, (if it be safe, if it be profitable, if it be plausible,) when
these conditions fail, they are naturally left in the lurch, and may easily
apostatize to the grossest practices imaginable. He that lives in this
Principle, it is impossible but that he must walk in dark and slippery places,
and can have no fast hold at all on Truth and Righteousness.

And therefore a man is never to rest till his Soul clear up into such a Simple
principle of life, that he is conscious to himself, that neither security of
his Person, nor Fortunes, nor the good opinion or applause of men, nor any
sinister respects or conditions whatsoever, move him to do what he does; but
the plain and hearty love of the Truth, and the sense of his indispensable duty
to his gracious Maker and Redeemer, according to which he will act, and for
which he will suffer, though he have no witness of either but God and his own
Conscience: This is to be a true Single-eyed Israelite indeed, in whom there is
no guile: But whatever is on this side of it, is besmeared and smutted with
rottenness and Hypocrisy.

4. Fourthly and Lastly, If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness,
(...), how great is that darkness!] Indeed it will puzzle a man to say how
great it is: It is even infinite for space, and so it will be for time, if we
be not timely cured of this blindness.

A man whose Eye is pure and entire, in a dark Dungeon indeed he sees nothing,
and in a Winter-night cannot so much as discern his own hand; but bring a
Candle into the Dungeon, or let but Daylight return, he discerns all Objects
very well; for the light in him is not darkness; that is, he is not blind. But
travel with a blind man from Sun to Sun, nay from one Vortex to another, so
that every Star may be as a Sun to him, yet in this infinite and endless
Journey, he is still in the dark and discerns nothing: Even so it is with him
that has the Evil Eye in the Mystical Sense, he that is Spiritually blind, that
instead of the (...), is under the guidance of the (...), of the Carnal mind,
he is every where in the dark, there is nothing sincere in all his actions, he
can do no Duty as he ought, neither to God nor Man; but not sensible of any
more enlarged Principle or Prospect, hugs himself every where, and seeks
nothing ultimately, but the satisfaction of his own Carnal Will and Pleasure.
Carry him from one Object to another, from one Duty to another, he is so blind,
that he will not fail of doing all things sordidly and basely in every place.
He may indeed endeavor to flatter God Almighty, and crouch to him; but he
cannot sincerely worship him. He may fear his Prince; but not affectionately
honor him, and heartily wish him well, as the Vicegerent of God. He may be
tickled with popularity; and yet set as little by the common good and welfare
of the people, as he does by his meanest Cattle, that he will not stick to kill
and flea, or sell away, for his own advantage. And lastly, he may caress his
Friend and Neighbor; but it will be ever with an eye to Himself, that he may
lay the seeds of some Worldly advantage. But if the service of these stand in
any considerable competition with his own Interest, he cannot fail, (having no
better Principle) but to betray both his God, his Religion, his Prince, his
Country, and his Friend, to serve himself: These are his acts of darkness, his
abode in which will make him so blind, that in the conclusion he will betray
himself also to that everlasting darkness, wherein is weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth for evermore. For to be carnally-minded is death, but to be
spiritually-minded is life and peace.

These short Intimations from our Saviors Parable, methinks should be
sufficient to well-disposed minds, to quicken their speed toward this great
and necessary attainment of that Single Eye of the Spirit, that we may live
according to that one simple Principle of the Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus; casting out the spirit of the World, that there may be no cross
vibrations or Paralytical motions in our Soul; but that our whole man may be
thoroughly actuated by the Spirit of God, we being born to this Divine State,
even to be members of God and Christ: to whom till we be united, we are in an
unnatural diluxation from our Body, and being devoid of this Spirit, (though we
cannot but depend of him) yet we hang off from him as dead or Paralytical
members, of which the Spirit of Life has left its due hold; which must be to
every discerning Eye a sad and calamitous Spectacle. God of his infinite Mercy
amend it in us all.

DISCOURSE IV. PROVE. i. 7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.
(...), says the Philosopher in his Metaphysics. And indeed most men are so
eager and vehement in the pursuit of Knowledge; that they either afford not
themselves time enough to consider, and deliberate, concerning the most
efficacious means for obtaining it; or have not the patience to use the means,
though they be well persuaded of it: But in the heat of their pursuit, make a
God of their own industry; and take it for the shortest cut, to be their own
carvers. Not Line upon Line; but Tractate upon Tractate; Volume upon Volume;
Ossa upon Olympus: Plainly according to the attempts of that sottish and
boisterous generation of Giants; thinking to hale away captive (...), her that
assists God on his Glorious Throne in Heaven; by Spider-web fetters spun and
twisted out of the corrupt apprehensions of Earthly-minded men. Those did not
the Lord choose, neither gave he the way of Knowledge unto them: But they were
destroyed because they had no Wisdom, and perished through their own
foolishness. Who has gone up to Heaven and taken her, and brought her down
from the clouds? Who has gone over the Sea and found her, and will bring her
for pure Gold? No man knows her way, nor thinks on her path.

What then? Is it impossible to attain unto her? No. Her delight is with the
sons of men, as Solomon witnesses of her. And S. James bids us pray for her;
If any man want Wisdom, let him ask it of God. So that when the Prophet Baruch
says, No man knows her way, nor thinks on her path; is as much as if he
should say, No man, by the Natural Spirit of a man, can reach so far. But S.
Peter faith, that we have precious promises of being made partakers of the
Divine Nature. And our Blessed Savior argues thus in the 11th of S. Luke, If
so be that men being evil, know how to give good gifts to their children: How
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?

But what? Shall therefore every one that says Lord, Lord, or that can repeat
their Pater noster, receive the Holy Spirit of Wisdom? No, in no wise: Only
they that do the will of my Father which is in Heaven; says our Savior. If I
incline to wickedness in my heart (says the Psalmist) the Lord will not hear
my prayer. And indeed the old, blind Poet, could see so far into Divinity;
(...).
He that obeys God, God hears him.
So that we see that the foundation or beginning of this great work of Wisdom,
is that which the present Text points at, viz. The fear of God.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.] The words are plain and
without ambiguity: In the English especially. The Hebrew (...) is not of so a
determinate sense, but that it may signify the principal, the first, best, or
chiefest of Wisdom, as well as the beginning of Wisdom: But the latter I take
to be the better, if not the only sense; For Fear has torment (says the
Apostle) but perfect love casts out fear: Wherefore this Fear is not the
choicest or chiefest of true Wisdom.

But if we compare this place with its parallel, we shall yet more plainly see,
that (...) signifies merely a beginning or entrance. Prove. 9. (...). The
entrance, or first impenetration, into Wisdom, is the fear of God: For the word
comes from (...) signifying to boar or pierce. So that it is evident, that the
English Translation is the only sense of this place of Scripture. In the
handling whereof I will endeavor these two things.

1. To show somewhat more largely, out of other places of Scripture, the truth
of this present Text, [That the Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom.]
2. Why there is no other entrance than this, into true Wisdom.
THE former is manifest out of many places of Scripture.

(1.) Ecclesiastie. 4. 17. For first she will walk with him by crooked ways,
and bring him unto fear and dread, and torment him with her discipline; until
she have tried his soul, and have proved him by her judgments. Then will she
return the straight way unto him, and comfort him, and show him her secrets,
and heap upon him her treasures of Knowledge.

(2.) Also Esai. 66. at the beginning of the Chapter. Thus says the Lord: The
heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: Where is that house that
you will build unto me? And where is that place of my rest? Presently after he
subjoineth, To him will I look; even to him that is of a poor and contrite
spirit, and trembles at my words. He therefore that fears the Lord shall
become the Temple of God. And it should seem no strange thing to us; being the
Apostle makes mention of the same, more than once or twice: Know you not that
your bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians: And in the same Epistle; Know you not that you are the Temple of
God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?

Now what Benefit accrues to us by being the Temple of God, we may gather by
the nature and use of these Material Temples, these Temples made with hands. In
these we know, amongst the Heathen, were the Initiations into the Mysteries of
whatsoever Deity the place was Consecrate to. But we need not straggle: We see
the use of outward Temples daily here among our selves. They are for Prayers,
Hymns, and for Instruction out of the Word of God; the literal Word of God in a
gross material Temple. Therefore in analogy; in the Temple of our Souls and
Spirits, shall the essential word, the (...), the Eternal Word of God, or God
himself, teach and instruct us. And who teaches like him? as is said in Job.
There was so great Virtue in the very presence of the Person of Socrates (as
you may see in Plato) that his Scholars profited very much, merely by being in
the same Room with him, though he spoke not unto them: How much more shall they
profit, with whom the Spirit of Christ abides, as in his own proper House and
Temple? With what joy and admiration shall they be taken; when in the Synagogue
of their Hearts he shall stand up and read; as in that Synagogue at Nazareth:
He has sent me that I should heal the brokenhearted; that I should preach
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind. When he
shall begin to say, This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears: Then
shall all the powers and faculties of a man's Soul bear him witness; and wonder
at the gracious words that proceed out of his mouth. Such a Teacher shall all
such have that truly fear God.

(3.) Again, That Wisdom is usherd in by terror, fear and horror, seems to be
the subject of the 29th Psalm. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters; the
God of glory makes it to thunder; the Lord is upon the great waters. Now that
Waters are an Emblem of the moveable and tumultuous flowings of the Earthly
Nature, that Learned Jew does teach us; when as he calls the Waters of Edom,
(...), and the Waters toward which the King of Egypt made (...). And the
Platonists make but a sliding passing dream of corporeal and sensible things;
saying of them, that they do (...), That they slide continually from the true
essence by perpetual flowing. So the Soul being united cum rebus fluxis and
caducis, dissolved as it were, and incorporate after a manner into their Watery
nature, and lost amongst it; The mighty energy of the All-powerful Voice of
God, or Word of God, does operate upon these Waters, for the producing of Light
in them, as in the first Creation. And according to this Analogy speaks the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

But to proceed further in the Psalm. The voice of the Lord breaks the
cedars; yea, the Lord breaks the cedars of Lebanon. The voice of the Lord
makes the wilderness to tremble; the Lord makes the wilderness of Kadesh to
tremble. The voice of the Lord makes the hinds to bring forth young, and
unbareth the thick bushes.

Every plant that my Heavenly Father has not planted (says our Savior) shall
be rooted out: And indeed this was the end of his coming, utterly to eradicate
what so is evil. And till he have his work in man's heart, there be not a few
ill Plants, rather a Wilderness, a Wood thick set with Trees, not penetrable by
any Star, nothing capable of the light of Heaven. But by the awful Voice of
God, the Hinds, those fearful and timorous Creatures, they bring forth; the
thick and shadowing Bushes are unbared. And what follows? In his Temple does
every man speak of his glory. Now what is that Glory of God; but the (...), the
glorious eradiation of the Father of Lights, the Wisdom of God and the Power of
God. And the Hinds, that is, those that fear and tremble, who they are, and
what they bring forth, and how presently the thick Bushes are unbared, so that
they that were in darkness see a mavelous light, I leave to any man to judge,
that is not as fraid of a Spiritual sense as of a Night-spirit.

But if they will in this Psalm (so full of life and vigor) have all Body and
no Soul: How shall we expound the next Verse, The Lord sits upon the
water-floods, and shall sit King for ever. What will you turn the God of Heaven
and Earth to some Triton or Water-Nymph? Or the great Pastor of Israel, who
feeds the Souls of his people like a Flock, will you have him, Proteus-like, to
feed Sea Monsters? It is true, that all things, according to their several
degrees, have their dependence and expectancy from God: Yet so narrow and
straitend sense as the bare letter, suits not here (I think) with the Majesty
and Divinity of the Spirit of David, or rather the Spirit of God in David.

The Sum is this: Fear and Honor goes before, and the Light of God follows
after.

(4.) I will only add this Fourth Proof, or Illustration more, and so go on. 1
Kings 19. And the Lord said unto Elias, Go forth, and stand upon the mount
before the Lord. And behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind
rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord
was not in the wind; and after the wind came an earthquake, but the Lord was
not in the earthquake; and after the earthquake fire, but the Lord was not in
the fire; and after the fire a still small voice, the voice of him that spoke,
as never man spoke.

But I would not have any mistaken, as if the Fear of God, which is said to be
the Beginning of Wisdom, were but an hours amazement; or at most, but a wonder
of nine days. Tam de repent. Which Error will easily be wiped out of their
fancy, if they observe but the description of the Fear of God in Holy
Scripture. The Fear of the Lord is to hate evil; as pride and arrogance, and
the evil way. Now that which a man truly hates, he will do the utmost of his
endeavor to destroy, or else to sever himself from it, and decline it. So the
Prophet David, in Psalm. 34. where he professes the teaching of the Fear of the
Lord: Eschew evil and do good, says he. So that a lazy, inert, sluggish hatred
is not sufficient. See how that Victorious King uses his enemies, in Psalm. 18.
I have pursued mine enemies, and taken them, and have not returned again till I
had consumed them. I have wounded them that they are not able to rise; they are
fallen under my feet. I did beat them small as the dust before the wind: I did
tread them flat as the clay in the streets. Now a man's enemies are they of his
own Household, Corruption residing in a man's own breast; which he will never
leave fighting against, till he have the victory, if he truly hate them; which
he will truly hate, if he unfeignedly fear God. So that the Fear of God is the
victory over Corruption: Which victory over Corruption makes us capable of the
Divine Nature, (as S. Peter speaks) which Divine Nature is nothing else but
Christ, the Wisdom of God.

Wherefore whosoever would attain unto Wisdom, the way is laid open, the Old
way, known to those Ancients of Renown. Trismegist long since could point it
out: (...). Be Godly my Son, for he that is Godly philosophizeth in the highest
degree, or most efficacious manner. Which Sentence of Trismegist puts me in
mind of the Septuagints Paraphrastical variation of the Text: For beside (...),
they add, (...). In which variation, that which is most remarkable, is the
substitution of (...) for (...), Sense for Wisdom.

No man I believe is so devoid of Reason, as to think the Prerogative of the
Godly to be, to have a more exquisite sense than others. Though too too many
gape after as a reward of obedience, that which proves too often the fuel of
Sensuality, sensible things. What Is then meant by Sense?

There is a swimmering superficial Knowledge; a light fantastical impression,
or abortive imagination, engendered of aerie words, which many times neither the
hearer nor speaker rightly understand; false phantasms elicited out of
misunderstood writings; notional conjectures; vain and temerarious efformations
of that which we have not yet attained to; so unlike the thing we would have
it, that if we did not do, as the old bungling Painters did in their
uuskilfully scralled pieces, write on it [ Knowledge], it would be hard to find
what to call it. But this false-nam'd Knowledge the Fear of God does not begin,
but consume: As clear Light makes all those shadows and resemblances to vanish,
that by the Optics skill had been conveyed into a dark close room. But the
Fear of God is the beginning of Sense. Which is to be understood according to
that in S. John's Epistle, That which was from the beginning, which we have
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handled, of the word of life; this declare we unto you. This is true
Science, quieting and settling the moveable mind. This is the right (...), even
according to Aristotle's Etymon; which begets (...), a rest and steady standing
in the Soul; and therefore is not to be found in Cains Progeny, nor to be light
upon in all the Land of Nod.

AND thus much of the first part of my Discourse, [ That the Fear of God is the
Beginning of Wisdom]. I will now enter upon the Reasons, Why this is the only
way that God has pointed out for the attaining to Wisdom.

1. One Reason may be the Falseness of man's Spirit. The Heart is deceitful
above all things: So that God will not trust it with such inestimable treasures
of durable Wisdom, before a fearful trial has been upon it. Deuteronomy. 8. Thou
shall remember the way which the Lord thy God led thee in the wilderness, that
he might afflict thee and humble thee, that he might try thee, (...), that the
most secret penetrates of thy Heart might be laid open, to discern whether thou
would keep the Commandments, or no.

Now if the Heart of a man be not right toward God, nor endued with requisite
previous dispositions, if this great gift of God were conferred upon them; they
would either Swine-like prefer dirt and mire before this precious Pearl, and so
quench the good Grace of God by Beastly Sensuality (which God will not suffer;
he having taught Nature not prodigally to cast away any thing of hers that is
good, whose best things are not comparable to the meanest of the gifts of the
Holy Spirit of God): Or else, if they did affect and could retain this
exceeding great Grace, they would notwithstanding wax excessively proud.

Gellius in his Noctes Atticae, tells us of a Grammarian disputing of Genders
and Cases of Nouns, tam arduis superciliis, with his Eyebrows so highly
displayed, and with so grave a composure of Voice and Countenance, as though he
had been interpreting some dark weighty Prophecy out of the Sibylline Oracles.
Now if the taking in of such superficial Learning as this, does so swell and
puff up vain man, surely more solid Knowledge would burst him. If we be
naturally given to conceit highly of our selves, (...) (as the Philosopher
speaks) so greatly to overvalue our selves for some small petty Notions, how
could we bear such a qualification of mind, as, that no sooner any obscurity or
difficulty could appear in our Souls, but the brightness of our Understanding
would consume it, as those thinner kind of Clouds vanish before the face of the
Sun?

A third Inconvenience may be added to these. There being no means so pregnant
for the obtaining any end, as a clear, subtle, quick Understanding; a wicked
man which makes Himself his End in all his actions, besides this abuse he would
make of Wisdom, ( viz. that he might strut, and take upon him with more
confidence, and be pointed at with an Hic est ille Demosthenes) he might
further abuse it for the obtaining of more mischievous and Divelish ends. But
be we assured, that that Spirit that does assert men into the glorious liberty
of the Sons of God, will not brook so unreasonable a bondage it self, as to
become vassal to the will of corrupt man: So we see it strong enough from these
inconveniences, that the all-disposing power, will not bestow this precious
endowment upon unprepared persons.

2. But here is another Argument that seems to strike deeper, which is
Incompossibility, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of
the Spirit of God: For they are foolishness unto him: Neither can he know them,
because they are Spiritually discerned. (...), (says the Platonist in the VI
Book of his I. Ennead) The Eye sees not the Sun, unless it bear the image of
the Sun in it; nor could it receive that impression were it covered with dirt
and filth. So that it is plain, that the necessary foundation of true Wisdom is
unfeigned Righteousness and Pureness.

The Lights of Heaven were made on the fourth day. Now it is observable, (says
that Learned Jew) (...) That the quaternary number is the first quadrate,
pariter par or equally equal, the measure of Justice and Equity. And the
Heavenly Light surely is begot in its holy quaternary, as those Lights of
Heaven on the fourth day.

But a further Illustration for this purpose might be gathered, if we would
further follow the explanation of this Symbol: Which I am the bolder with,
because I make account it is no strange one; it being Aristotle's own expression
of a good man, (...), Homo quadratus sine culpa. Now a Quadrate, you know,
consisting of Right Angles is a very useful Instrument for taking the height,
depth, length and breadth of bodies; and all in virtue of a Right Angle; which
is nothing else, but the demission of one straight Line upon another,
perpendicular, so that it incline no way, but stand exactly upright. And there
is an uprightness of heart and life resembled by this, which is when a man
enclines neither to the right hand nor to the left; no less needful for the
inabling us to comprehend with all Saints, what is that spiritual breadth and
length, and depth and height, (as the Apostle speaks) than that other is in
Geometrical measurings.

So we see (though in brief) that both Ethics, Physics and Mathematics, have
conspired together for the establishing and confirming of this so wholesome and
useful a Truth, That clearness of Knowledge proceeds out of Purity of Life.

To descend to a more particular handling of this matter [as to show you how
the purging of a man's Soul takes away those main impediments to truth of
Knowledge; as are Self-admiration; doting upon that, which we our selves
conceive of before the apprehension of others; Anger; Envy; Impatiency; a
pusillanimous over-estimation of others; desire of Victory rather than of
Truth; blindness proceeding out of the love of Riches or Honor; an heavy
adhension of our minds to the sluggish inertness of Sense; suffocation or
smothering the active spark of Reason by Luxury and Intemperancy; with many
others, which be general Impediments to whatsoever kind of Knowledge a man
aims at;] to descend, I say, to such particulars, would ask more time than I
am able to speak in, or you have the patience to hear. Wherefore, I omit them;
and will only add this one Argument more, to prove the Incompossibility of true
Knowledge and Iniquity in one Subject: And that is the Antipathy betwixt the
Holy Spirit of Discipline and Unrighteousness.

What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, (says the Apostle)
and what communion has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with
Belial? There is such a mutual abhorrency in their Nature, that they chase one
another; as the Night and Day about the Orb of the Earth; the approach of one
is the putting to flight of the other. Wisdom cannot enter into a wicked heart,
nor dwell in a body that is subject unto sin: For the Holy Spirit of Discipline
flees from deceit, and withdraws himself from thoughts that are without
understanding, and is rebuked when wickedness comes in.

By this time I hope it is sufficiently evicted, That Piety is the only Key of
true Knowledge. And indeed, I fear not, but that all with one consent will
confess it, so they may have the interpretation of it, and restrict it to that
which they call Saving Knowledge, which they say simple ignorant Idiots, are
capable of.

Now, what a conceit they frame out in their minds of Saving Knowledge, I will
not here discourse. But if it be granted of all sides, that Obedience and the
Fear of God, is the Begetter of Saving Knowledge; surely the practice of a
Godly Life and Conversation will notwithstanding be exceeding abundantly worth
our labor, though it had not the promise of this Life as well as that which is
to come. But if I shall show plainly, that there is a further abundant
luxuriancy of the goodness of God upon an Obedient man's Understanding,
intimated in this word [ Wisdom]; I hope there will be nothing wanting for the
inflaming of our desires to a Godly Life and Conversation.

Prove. cap. 8. Wisdom is said there to cry, and Understanding, to utter her
voice; to speak to men from the high places, and by the way of the places of
the path; to cry unto them beside the gates of the city; to speak unto them at
the entry of the doors; to take all occasions to be acquainted with them: She
would salute them at every turn: For the good Spirit of Wisdom is loving and
sincere, and would fain clasp with our Souls if they were pure; that she might
discourse with us of the wonders of the Almighty, and show unto us his
Everlasting Glory.

Now that this Blessed Spirit would reside with us is plain. What be her
operations when she does reside, will anon be as plain.

I wisdom dwell with prudence, and I find forth knowledge and counsels. I have
counsel and wisdom, I am understanding, and I have strength. I love them that
love me; and they that seek me early shall find me. This Wisdom therefore will
make a man no Idiot, when it stores a man with Prudence and Counsels. But it
affords not this only to the Souls of Holy men, but it gives them a Theory of
the hidden things of God: This Wisdom was at the making of the World; and so
can best unfold the Mysteries of the whole Creation.

When he prepared the Heavens, I was there; when he set the compass upon the
deep, when he established the clouds above, when he confirmed the fountains of
the deep, when he gave his decree to the sea, when he laid the foundations of
the earth; then was I with him as his darling, I was daily his delight;
rejoicing always before him, and took my solace in the compass of his earth; and
my delight is with the sons of men's.

But it is yet more evident out of the 7th of Wisdom: For he has given me
(says Solomon) the true knowledge of the things that are. So that I know how
the World was made, and the powers of the Elements, the beginning, and the end,
and the mids of times; how the times alter, and the change of seasons, the
course of the year and the situation of the stars, the nature of living things,
the furiousness of beasts, the powers of the winds, and the imaginations of
men, the diversity of plants, and the virtue of roots; and all things both
secret and known, do I know: For Wisdom the worker of all things has taught me
it.

It is very apposite to this purpose, that which is in Philo Iudeus (in his
Tractate (...)) upon these words of Moses, [ And God saw all that he made, and
behold it was very good] (...) etc. For none else were able to discern and
judge accurately of the things that were made, but he that was the Maker of
them. Go to now (says he) you seeming wife ones, full-fraught with Pride,
Ostentation and Ignorance: You that say not only you know every thing, but dare
so boldly and confidently avouch this or that to be the Causes of them; as
though you had been present at the making of the World, and had seen the
composure of all things as they were put together; as though the Creator had
consulted with you about the means and contrivements of his work. A just
increpation of the bold and blind attempts of those that pursue after Wisdom,
without the guidance of God the Giver of it.

Why? What (you will say) must we think to get Wisdom as Solomon did? Nay, but
I say rather, is it to be thought that we are already wiser than Solomon, that
we should have found out a better way to trafick for Wisdom, than he could
light on? Prayer, and a serious seeking after God, with industrious study, was
the way that he went to compass it. And surely it is a way no whit mis-becoming
any good Christian: Neither ought we to be inwardly ashamed of doing of that
which the Apostle openly exhorts us to, James 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom
let him ask it of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not;
and it shall be given him.

But what true Christian can with patience think upon the stupid Atheism that
is so rife in these wicked ungodly days? When as in the highest attempts of
men, the power of Heaven is held but for a Cipher. Their Philosophy certainly
has removed God into so high and remote an Excelsis, that they think him out
of the call of man's voice, and man out of the reach of his sight. He must sit
upon the primum mobile (...); so speaks Aristotle; Afraid, forsooth, that the
Godhead should be defiled, if his Presence should be among men on the Earth: So
he confines him to that fine fantastic place, the Eighth Sphere. O goodly and
profound Mystery! Like to that of Mahomet, that makes God clamber back to
Heaven, when he had finished here his six days work. O high Divinity!

And now who shall rule among men? I know well enough who does rule among men.
Verily the Devil; or that Devilish Natural Spirit of man, who sets it self up
for a Deity, attributing all to its self, with detestable arrogance. Our good
Natural parts are our Gods. Or if they chance to fail, and not answer our
desire in their performance; whither go we? Right readily to some Temple of
Bacchus, to the Sacred Tavern: Where we do devoutly magnify the miraculous
power of that sparkling Deity, enthroned in his Crystalline Heaven; and
somewhat more largely partaking of that fiery ethereal Spirit, our Eyes (no
question) are so illuminated, that we see double. All things are then
augmented and seem bigger, as the Horizontal Sun, by reason of muddy Vapors.
We find then our selves, and our Comrades, such notable Wiselins, as not we
our selves, nor others, could ever have suspected.

O the deplorable vanity of misled Youth! When it has cast off the memory of
God, and due respect to its careful Tutors, and faithful Governors. Is not
this Idolatry, in preferring the power of Sack before the Spirit of God, a
greater shame, than a timely practice of true Piety, and adorning our minds
with all manner of Virtues in the highest degree; Fighting manfully against
all manner of Passions, to the utter suppression of that Life of Darkness in
our lovver Spirit, that the Spirit of Truth may shine in our purged Souls, as
the Sun in a pure diaphanous substance?

And what hurt can come of this? Why, surely, we may come to be temperate, to
be sober, to be chaste, to be modest, to be humble, to study mortification of
all wickedness in Flesh and Spirit; being so persuaded that Wisdom will not
inhabit, where these be absent; and in conclusion (a dreadful thing to think
of) we may fall into the same Heresy with S. James and Solomon, That Wisdom is
the gift of God, and that it is a point of Wisdom to think so.

But that no men rashly and arrogantly take upon them this gift before it be
given, I could wish that all that are forward to profess themselves the
Scholars of God, nay his Secretaries, his Closet-counsel, his only Children,
born and brought up of him, the only wise and holy Offspring of God, full of
Wisdom and Celestial Understanding; that they would examine themselves by that
Rule in S. James, chap. 3. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge amongst
you? Let him show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.
But if you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not an lie not
against the Truth. This wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly,
sensual, devilish. For where envying and strife is, there is contention and
every evil work. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality and without hypocrisy.

Whosoever therefore is fervent and vehement in maintaining the Truth, let him
first be assured that he has the right Knowledge, and the true mind of the
Spirit of God. And before he ascribes this Spirit of Wisdom, or Heavenly
Understanding to himself, let him try if he have the qualifications of that
Celestial Wisdom; which are Meekness, Purity, Peaceableness, Gentleness,
Affability, Mercy, Bounty, Impartialness and Simplicity. He that has not
these, has not the Truth; but is liable to be made the habitation of seducing
Devils, and to create mischief to men, and shame and eternal confusion to his
own self.

As sure as God does impart his Spirit of Truth and Divine Knowledge to his
Children; so surely true it is, that that Spirit suggesteth no Cruelty nor
Unrighteousness; but Patience, Benignity, Compassion, and boundless and
unlimited Charity. And if men otherwise qualified, pretending to the Spirit,
(as Histories testify) have plainly shown that they were led by some Fanatic
erroneous Fury, lodging in spiritual pride and infernal bitterness and
distemper, yet this is no sufficient excuse of that common Civil Atheism in the
World, that excludes the operation of Gods Spirit in the hearts of men, and
attributes all to Nature and Humane Industry. For as nihil generat seipsum is
true in Philosophy, so, that no man can regenerate himself is as true in
Divinity. But now that this New Creature, born at this Second Birth, should
have its old Eyes, and the same sight with the Earthly Adam, seems to me a
thing monstrous and prodigious. Surely there is a renovation of the
Understanding as well as the Will; and both by the Divine Spirit, the Wisdom of
God that works all in all.

I, but here, some mischievous piece of modesty will object. Can that Spirit be
communicable to us also, that has such magnificent Titles, in the 7th of
Wisdom? She is the breath of the power of God; and a pure influence that
flows from the glory of the Almighty. She is the brightness of the
everlasting light, the undefiled mirror of the majesty of God, and the image
of his Goodness.

I Answer. Here is the treasure of those precious promises S. Peter speaks of.
And hitherto may be referred that in the Psalms, Glorious things are spoken of
thee, O thou city of God.

But I need not have gone out of the same Chapter, an answer being so nigh at
hand: As there be many Epithets of Height and Majesty, so there is one of
Humanity and Courtesy. But these words are too weak to express that affection
which is attributed there to this good Spirit of Wisdom; It is said in the
Greek Text to be (...), a lover of men. Therefore you shall find this Spirit
descending, in the 27th of that Chapter, even sliding down into the Souls of
Holy and Humble men: And that not once or twice, as if it were afraid of such
debasement; but (...), from age to age. But there is yet a more plentiful
Testimony of this (...) in the 6th Chapter, ver. 16. She goes about seeking
such as are meet for her, and shows her self cheerfully unto them in the
ways, and meets them in every thought. And at the 12th Verse. Wisdom
shines, and never fades away; and is easily seen of them that love her, and
found of such as seek her. She preventeth them that desire her, that she may
first show her self unto them. Whosoever awaketh to her betimes shall have no great
travail: For he shall find her sitting at his doors. Blessed is the man that
exercises himself in her, and he that lays up her commandments in his heart
shall be wise. If he do them he shall be strong in all things: For he sets
his steps in the light of the Lord, which gives wisdom to the godly. The Lord
be praised for evermore. So be it. So be it.

AND here I should willingly end, did I not suspect, that that which has been
spoken might move some Scruples in the minds of the Younger Auditors. As
whether wicked men have any Knowledge at all or no; whether this (...), or
rather (...) exclude the use of Books; with such others (as misapprehension is
the most ready and plentiful suggestor of doubts and difficulties): But I will
meddle only with these two I have named.

1. And first with the former. It would be a very distastful position to Flesh
and Blood, to say that wicked men are mere Ignaroes. For there being not many
that are not conscious to themselves of some dearly fosterd wickedness in their
breast, they would be put to a shreud strait; for they must either undergo the
doleful death of dying to their beloved Corruption, or else be content to count
themselves Fools so long as they live: Both which are Gall and Wormwood to
Natural Pride and Concupiscency.

But let us brook it as we can, that Spirit in Esaiah dares give Sentence in
this cause. Behold all you that kindle a fire, and are compassed about with
sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that you have
kindled: This shall you have at my hand, you shall lie down in sorrow. It Is
true, the Prophet here allows them some light; but a light of their own
kindling. And if Foolishness be the School-Mistress, the Scholars are not
likely to be very wise. Weak quickly-dying sparks they have, blindly and boldly
mounting up, though their Vehicle be but a filthy fuliginous vapor of
darkness: But the Sun of Righteousness has not yet shone upon them. Gross fire
they have for their light, as lame and deformed as the Poets Vulcan. It is fain
to be underpropt with ill rubbish, crass fuel, to be fed with the foul oil
that sweats from that active body of sinful corruption; and having so course a
pabulum, it is no wonder that it is as all Sublunary fires are, (...). Bitter
ebullitions, and gross injuriousness, are the proper effects of such
illumination.

And although this fuel and blaze may transmit some strange steam into their
Brains, that they be drunkenly merry; yet surely if they ever come to
themselves, they will fall into as deep and dull a Melancholy, to see how
horribly they have been deceived: They shall lie down in sorrow.

An Emblem of this Knowledge may be that Egypt, from which the Israelites were
delivered. This is that (...), the Earthly Wisdom, as S. James styles it; and
indeed it suits well with the Emblem. For Egypt is watered by Nilus, whose
name is from (...), as Dionysius intimates in his Geographical Poem; A River
ever affording new mud. For although it be as that Verse in Strabo calls it,
(...), a River come from Heaven (as indeed every thing, as much as is good of
it, is from the First Being) yet it abounds so with the admixture of earthly
filth, that by its overflowing it begets nothing but half-formed, or rather
deformed monsters, glued to the slimy cloth of the earth. Here is that numerous
progeny of dirty ridiculous Opinions.

This is that (...) (as the same Apostle calls it) no better indeed, than the
uncertain conjectures of misty-minded Devils: Whom, I must needs confess, I
cannot conceive to be so great Clerks, as they are vulgarly taken to be; but
rather wonder what madness possesses men's minds, that they should either say
that the perverseness of corruption is stronger than Gods Grace, or the Devil
wiser than Holy men. But I fear, such as cry up the power of Evil, and the
wisdom of that wicked Spirit so partially (as if they had sworn confederacy
with them, ar become slaves to them) magnifying them above the light and
strength of God; will then become Wise themselves, when the Devil becomes
Honest. What commission or authority these men have to set him at liberty and
enjoyment of the light of the Sun, whom God has imprisoned up in the darkest
dungeon, I know not: Sure I am, they are not able to procure him bail, they
themselves being but fettered Vassals of foulest Ignorance. But see! how basely
Disobedience contracts a man's Spirits, that through the pusillanimity of his
Soul he casts himself down before every petty Creature. How does honor,
riches, or the dull and languid beauty of sensible forms subjugate and enslave
him! Nay, how highly does he admire, and reverendly adore, with more than
American Superstition, that piece of darkness and deformity, the Devil!

So we see what small hope we have of attaining to Wisdom by any other means,
than that which that Wise King has prescribed us, The Fear of God.

2. As for that other Query [about Books] I will dispatch it in a word.

It is said in Wisdom, That it is not the increase of fruit that feeds men:
But it is the Word that preserves them that trust in God. And yet no man
abstains from these outward ordinary helps for his preservation. Therefore that
this Discourse beget in no man a lazy, superstitious frenzy; let them be
Active in good, and read such Books as conduce best for the finding of the
truth of such Theories as they aim at; having always a special care that they
never disjoin Knowledge from Righteousness; but that they ever prize such
Treatises, as point a man to Obedience, and purging a man's Soul from
wickedness, far above those that do but vex a man's Mind, and consume his Body
with unfruitful subtilties: Which indeed would be no subtilties at all, did not
our dull and slow apprehension make them so; for we are rather weak-brain'd
than they hard Theories: Or if you will, they are so subtle, that if a man
could see clearly he would not see them at all; they being indeed nothing, or
else worse: And therefore rather to seek to have our eyesight strengthened and
cleared by Purity of life; than to weary and weaken them still more by
unprofitable objects: And always to consider this, That our Labor is nothing
without the Benediction of God, and his direction. Nostra haec in literarum
studiis peregrinatio sine superna luce miserabilis quaedam erratio est, is the
ingenuous Confession of that Great Scholar Scaliger. And O! that we could
sensibly feel, as well as imagine, that the Subsistence of all things is but
liberum spiraculum, a free breathing out of the mouth of the Almighty; which if
he revoke, Things are closely again locked up and gathered in, into their
Center of Darkness: And that true Knowledge is nothing else but an arbitrarious
emission of the pure rays of God upon impolluted Souls: And therefore wholly
to depend upon him, and wait upon him in Righteousness; even upon the Fountain
of all Truth and Father of Lights, the only Wise God; to whom be all Honor,
Glory, Power, Praise, henceforth for ever.

Amen.
DISCOURSE V. JOHN iv. 31. 32, 33, 34. In the mean time his disciples prayed
him, saying, Master, eat. But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that you
know not of. Therefore said the disciples one to another, Has any man brought
him ought to eat? Jesus says unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me, and to finish his work.
OUR Savior Christ here in the Text propounds a Riddle or Parable to his
Disciples, [ I have meat to eat that you know not of.] Whatever is in the Text
may be hither referred, as the Occasion or Consequent thereof.

The Occasion of the proposal of this AEnigma is in Ver. 31. [ In the mean time
his disciples prayed him saying, Master, eat;] i. e. So soon as he had broken
off his serious Discourse with the Samaritan Woman, his Disciples then took
occasion to invite him to his seasonable repast: Which gives him occasion to
propound something to them aenigmatically, of more concernment, and of an
higher nature, than this outward perishable food. Ver. 32. [ I have meat to eat
that you know not of.] There Is the proposal of the Riddle: Of which there is a
double Consequent, The Disciples misinterpretation or false collection; and
then our Saviors own true solution: Their misinterpretation, Ver. 33. [ Has
any man brought him ought to eat?] His true solution, Ver. 34. [ My meat is to
do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.] These parts I shall
prosecute in the same order that they lie in the Text, without further preface
or more curious division.

First therefore of the Occasion. [In the mean time his disciples prayed him,
saying, Master, eat.] In the mean time; i. e. in the Interim, betwixt the
departure of the Samaritan Woman, and her return with other Samaritans to
confer with our Savior, and to see if it were so indeed, that he was the
Messiah.

But something is here to be premised, concerning the departure of the
Samaritan Woman; viz. that she was not disturbed, but staid out her time to the
full with our Savior: Which is evident from these two passages. The first in
the 27th Verse, And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked
with the woman: Yet no man said what seek thou, or why talkest thou with
her. The other is the Confession of the Woman, Ver. 29. Come, see a man that
told me all the things that ever I did. So it should seem she left him, fully
satisfied; without any interruption made by the Disciples, though there
present; or without any withholding or concealment of our Saviors side, in
those things she desired to be satisfied in.

That therefore that is considerable is this, That the Disciples waved their
inviting him to eat, till the Samaritan Woman of her own accord had left our
Savior; though they marvelled within themselves what should mean that so long
Colloquy with her: That he should converse with a Woman, 'twas a thing unusual;
but with a Samaritan Woman, worse; There being then a further incongruity in
the matter; as is plain in the 9th Verse of this Chapter, For the Jews have no
dealings with the Samaritans. But yet notwithstanding all this disadvantage and
hint of evil suspicion, They were carried no farther than a tacit Admiration,
which is the daughter of Ignorance: They could suspect no ill of their Lord and
Master, nor discern any great good in's conferring with a Woman of Samaria.
They were perplexed and puzzled in their thoughts, they could conclude nothing
in their minds concerning the nature of that business; and therefore they
concluded, it should seem, they would do nothing concerning the same.

It is a thin and somewhat exile observation I would draw from hence; a rude
finger cannot feel out the worth of it: I would commend that which makes no
noise at all in the World, Modesty and cautious suspension from acting in those
things, either by proving them or inhibiting them, where our selves have not
sufficient light to clear the nature and quality of them to our own Reason and
Judgment. For such was the Discretion of the Disciples, they being not able to
approve or disapprove of our Saviors Carriage at that time, did no way at all
intermeddle in the same, but left the business to its own issue; which when it
was dispatched, and the Woman dismissed, Then they came to him, and prayed him
saying, Master, eat.

That you may the better know how this falls in with the departure of the
Samaritan Woman, it is said Ver. 8. His disciples were gone into the city to
buy meat; while he fat, being wearied with his journey, at the side of Jacobs
well: Whither came that Samaritan Woman to draw water, whom our Savior held in
discourse till such time, and after his Disciples had returned from buying them
victuals.

And here truly our Savior Christ is represented (according to that
description of himself) (...), a man without house or harbor. The foxes have
holes and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to
lay is head. The Eternal Truth of God clothed in Flesh goes wandering up and
down in this strange Country of the World, as a Stranger and Pilgrim, neglected
and despised of all, a Man of sorrow and weariness, and of disrespect; a Man
scarce well known to his own Disciples, of no grandeur or plausibility, not at
all strengthened or countenanced by the favor, friendship and alliances of the
World, nor at all effecting the greeting in the Marketplace, or the precedence
in solemn Meetings, conversing most-what with the meanest of men, condemned and
hooted at by the great Rabbis and Sophies of the World. He has no form or
comeliness, no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of
men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs; we hide our faces from him;
he is despised, and we esteem him not. Isa. 53. 2, 3. This was the condition of
Everlasting Wisdom and Goodness of God incarnate, and conversing amongst men.

And yet such was his Humility and Patience, that he would not set up himself
by his own or his Fathers Power, to rid himself of this poor, sad, and
contemptible condition. What? Could not he that raised Lazarus's Body from the
dead, have kept his own Bones from ach and weariness? Or he that turned Water
into Wine, could not he have commanded the very Stones before him to become
Bread? Or charged the Cities of Samaria to bring him in Provision, as to their
true Sovereign and absolute Lord? And if they had discredited his Word, to have
made it good with the appearance and approach of the Heavenly Host, even
Legions of Angels to assist him? But nothing of all this is done: For indeed
our Savior did not any thing for himself, but for the Glory of God, and the
good of poor lost Mankind. Wherefore Omnipotency was not made use of to please
his own Flesh, or to show himself more than Man, and to be admired of the
World; but only then when the Father saw fit, for the gaining of lost man to
himself: Wherefore we see our Savior here in this Chapter weary, and resting
his tired Limbs on Jacobs Well, hungry also, and observing the usual hours of
repast; as it is plain out of the sixth Verse; Jesus therefore being wearied
with his journey, sat thus on the well: and it was about the sixth hour: i. e.
about noon, dinner time. (...)
(...)
As that witty Epigram expresses it, or rather the Scholion upon it, (...): He
says that we must work till the sixth hour of the day, but after that, go to
dinner. For the sixth hour of the day is the same with the twelfth with us; as
is very obvious and ordinary to observe, it should seem on the Greek Dials as
well as the Hebrew.

Wherefore we see plainly whence it is that our Saviors Disciples invite their
Master, saying, Come and eat: For it was dinner time, and they had now returned
from buying food for them, and his and their labor required repast.

But that which I would, before I pass from this point, observe, is this. Being
that our Savior Christ, was according to the outward view, but a piece of
Mortality covered with Passiveness, Weakness and Contempt; that his outside was
neither formidable for Majesty and Authority either Ecclesiastic or Civil, nor
desirable for any external specious show, and yet was the inward habitation of
the Divinity it self; let us learn from hence to contemn no man's outward
condition, as concerning spiritual truth and divine worth: But rather accept of
Heraclitus his blunt, but friendly invitation into his poor contemptible
Cottage, [ Introito, etiam hic Dii sunt.] Come in Sir; if God does not lodge
here also, [Sub sordido pallio latet Sapientia.] Wisdom sometimes is no better
covered than with rags.

BUT I leave this point for your selves to enlarge upon. I pass on from this
first Part, viz. the Occasion, with all the Circumstances thereon depending, to
the Proposal of the Parable, [ In the mean time his disciples prayed him
saying, Master, eat. But he made answer, I have meat to eat that you know not
of.]

It is usual with our Savior to ascend from sensible and Corporeal things to
those things which are inward and Spiritual. I need not look for instances far
off. Here in this very Chapter, when as our Savior had arrived at Jacobs Well,
at the heat of the day, faint and thirsty, and desired the Samaritan Woman that
came to draw water, that she would give him to drink, and she replied, How is
it that thou being a Jew, ask drink of me which am a woman of Samaria? Jesus
answered and said unto her, if thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that
says unto thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he
would have given thee living water; ( Ver. 10, 11.) viz. the very same water,
that he speaks of, John 7. ver. 37. where he is said in the last day, that
great day of the feast of Tabernacles, to stand and cry. If any man thirst let
him come unto me and drink. He that believes in me, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water. Which speech was occasioned (as is not without
Reason conceived) from the custom of the day: For upon this day, by the
Institution of Haggai the Prophet and Zacharias, and such like; they did with
Joy and Solemnity, bring great store of water from the River Siloah to the
Temple; where it being delivered to the Priests, it was poured upon the Altar
together with Wine, the people singing that of the Prophet Esaiah, Chapter 12. With
joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. From this visible
Solemnity and Natural Water, Christ took occasion to invite them to an
invisible and Spiritual Water: As he does the Samaritan Woman here in this
present Chapter, showing her that whosoever drinks of the water that he asked
of her shall thirst again: But whosoever should drink of the Water that he
should give, shall never thirst; but the water shall be in him a well of water,
springing up into everlasting life.

So at the 6th Chapter of this Gospel of S. John; when our Savior had fed them
with Natural Bread, he endeavors to raise their desire and appetite, to the
Bread of Eternal Life. Ver. 26. Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles,
but because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled. Labor not for the meat
that perishes, but for that meat which endures to everlasting life. And at
the 32th Verse; Moses gave you not that bread from Heaven, but my Father gives
you the true bread from Heaven: For the bread of God is he which comes down
from Heaven, and gives life unto the world.

I might instance in other Examples, but this point is clear. It remains only
that we imitate that Pattern we understand so well: Whether we would be
Teachers of others, or Instructers of our selves: For indeed the whole World is
ingens quoddam Sacramentum, a large sign or symbol of some Spiritual Truths
that nearly concern our Souls. Methinks when the Morning Sun rises upon us, the
Eyes of our Souls should open at once with the Eyes of our Bodies, and our
Hearts should send out this Ejaculation, Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us; and our minds presage that promised Happiness, In thy
light shall we see light. When we breathe in the fresh Air, it might mind us of
something like that of the Emperors, (...). Not only to draw in the common
Air, but also to be of one mind with that Intellectual Spirit that fills all
the World. Solitude and darkness that makes our Hearts shrink within us, and
overwhelms our Souls with horror and misdoubt, what is it in Spirituals but a
privation of perfect Love, that casts out fear, as the Apostle speaks? He
that hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows
not whether he goes. 1 Ioh. cap. 2. There is nothing that the Natural man is
sensible of in this outward World, but the Spirit of God has made use of to
prefigure and set out the condition and nature of Reward and Spiritual things;
that hence the Soul may receive hints to raise her self toward him that made
her for to inherit Spirituality, and not always lie grovelling on the Earth.
Whatsoever we see, or hear, or smell, or taste, or feel, we may in all these
even very sensibly feel some hidden mystery, and find out in those shells and
husks some more precious food than this that pleases our mortal Body, and
perishable Senses: And he that does not feel through these sensible Creatures
something better than themselves, certainly is exceedingly benumbed, or rather
Spiritually dead; and has his Conversation in the World no otherwise than the
Beasts of the field; and Nebuchadnezzars Curse is upon him, till such a Mind be
restored unto him, that he does acknowledge the most High, and find him
residing even in this lower World, the habitation of mortal men. Beauty,
Riches, Strength, Agility, Sweetness, Pleasure, Harmony; these are all better
relished in the Soul than in the Body.

Our Blessed Savior, in the midst of his thirst after the Water of Jacobs
Well, which he begged of the Samaritan Woman, was so refreshed with the
remembrance of the Spiritual and Living Waters which he enjoyed within, that he
had forgot his first request, his Soul being inebriate as it were with the
sweetness of that hidden spring in his Heart. And this Storehouse he found
within, afforded him not Drink only, but Meat also, it should seem by his
answer to his Disciples, when they invited him to eat. He did not as those
starvling Souls, that not at all being able to entertain themselves with their
own store, no not for a moment, so soon as the Bodies treasure is exhaust ( men
of this world, which have their portion in this life, and whose belly thou
fillest with thy hid treasure, as the Psalmist speaks) so soon, I say, as the
carnal or outward man is emptyed and impoverished, have their desire strait way
furiously kindled like a broad fiery Meteor, that is swiftly wasted hither and
thither, accordingly as the earthly unctuous Vapor, its proper Pabulum, is
scattered in the Air. And it is no wonder that they are thus furious and
impatient: For what is Desire but a living death, or an actual nonentity? It
is; for it is Desire: But it is not, viz. that which it desires to be. And what
Soul can endure to be in such a case? Wherefore it is too too probable that
that mind that can abstain from fleshly and bodily Desires (from their
accomplishment I mean) has some hidden Contentment within, undiscovered to the
World. The Heart knows his own bitterness, and a stranger does not
intermeddle with his joy. Our Savior Christ himself could not with such ease
have slighted the cravings of Nature, (for He was a man like to us in all
things, Sin only excepted) and disregarded his seasonable Sustenance, had it
not been so as he professes it was, in his Answer to his Disciples, I have meat
to eat you know not of.

AND thus much of the Occasion and Proposal of the Parable. I come now to the
double Consequent thereof; viz. First, The Disciples misapprehension, or false
collection, [ Has any man brought him to eat?] Secondly, Our Saviors true
interpretation of the Parable, [ My meat is to do the will of him that sent me,
etc.]

Has any man brought him to eat?] It was obvious to think so, I confess, but
not at all necessary. (...); Has any man? The Ravens fed Elijah the Tisbite, by
the Brook Cherith which is before Jordan; They brought him bread and flesh in
the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening, 1 Kings 17. 6. And not the
Fowls of the Air only, but the winged Host of Heaven might have been employed
for this purpose: They owe more than this to the Son of God. But the mistake
was not so much in the manner of the conveyance of this Meat, as in the nature
of the Meat it self. (...).
Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God will destroy both it and
them. He breaks and weakens that strong influence they have upon the minds of
men, that Circean Magic that metamorphozes the Souls of men into mere Beasts,
and changes their Understandings.

By the power of These, the Disciples themselves seem stupid, and are at a
loss, when their great Teacher utters himself in Heavenly Parables. [ I have
meat to eat you know not of.] For the unfolding of this dark Riddle, They look
no higher than a Sun-dyal, or at farthest, on the Sun, and read there [ past
Twelve;] and without any great subtilty, can easily collect that it is
Dinnertime; which now compared with their lately bought Provision in the
Cities of Samaria, and the savoury suggestions of their own Stomachs, their
thoughts are circumscribed within the margins of a Platter, they have animam in
patinis (as the Proverb goes) and are not at leisure to think of any thing
higher than Bodily Food, [ Has any man brought him to eat?]

I will observe two things from this passage, and so leave it. First, The
slowness of the Earthly Mind to apprehend Spiritual Mysteries. There be two
notable Instances of it. One in those two Disciples that went to Emaus, to whom
Christ appeared, and part of whose discourse was, ( Luke 24.) Concerning Jesus
of Nazareth, a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people.
And how the Chief Priests and their Rulers delivered him to be condemned to
death, and have crucified him. But they trusted that it had been he which
should have redeemed Israel; viz. from the Roman yoke, according to that mere
Terrene apprehension the Jews, it should seem, then had, and at this time
have, concerning the Messiah; making him a Temporal Prince, and expecting a
Temporal Happiness from him. The other Instance is; John 6. 51, 52. I am the
living bread that came down from Heaven: If any man eat of this bread, he shall
live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world. The Jews therefore strove amongst themselves,
saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? But the words our Savior
Christ here speaks are, as he himself professes; they are spirit, and they are
life; and therefore Spiritually to be discerned, and not by Carnal Eyes.

The other point that I would observe, is the Vneffectualness of our Saviors
presence, according to the Flesh. If his Spirit had been in them, as his Body
was with them, I make no question but their Minds had been so Heavenly
disposed, that our Saviors Speeches would not have proved such AEnigma's unto
them. It is true, the very touch of Christ's Garments healed the Bodies of the
Sick sometime, but nothing under his Spirit is effectual for recuring the Soul.
It is the Spirit that quickens; the flesh profits nothing. Ioh. 6. 63. I
have many things to say unto you; but you cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when
the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth. John 16. 12, 13.
Our Saviors Bodily presence could not convey those Divine Truths unto his
Disciples, that an inward principle of life, when they were partakers thereof,
would convey to them. And therefore he prefers the mission of the Holy Ghost,
before his own Bodily conversing with them, at the 7th Verse of that Chapter; I
tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not
away, the Comforter will not come unto you: But if I depart, I will send him
unto you. And this was S. Paul's pious boast, 2. Cor. 5. 16, 17. Wherefore
henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea though we have known Christ
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. Therefore if any man
be in Christ, he is a new creature; viz. if he be in Christ, not after the
Flesh; but be regenerate of the Spirit.

I HAVE on now to the last part of the Text, our Saviors own Solution of this
Parable proposed by him to his Disciples, and by them misunderstood. [
Therefore said the disciples one to another, Has any man brought him to eat?]
There Is the Misinterpretation. [ Jesus says unto them, My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.] There Is our Saviors
explication of his own mind.

The great Truth, and Mystery not inferior to any Mystery, contained in this
interpretation, is this, That the will of God is the food of the Soul.


This I conceive to be plainly exhibited to us in this Text. For the Divinity
of Christ it cannot be said to feed of any thing; it is self-sufficient and
immutable, according to those (...) that Mankind has of God: Such Spiritual
food as the will of God, cannot belong to the Body; for those Bodies grow fat
that have no relish thereof: It remains therefore the Soul of Christ was that
which was fed with the will of God. And his Soul and ours are ejusdem speciei;
Christ being utterly like us in all things, Sin only excepted: Wherefore I
conclude this Doctrine, [ The will of God is the food of man's Soul;] I mean of
Regenerate man. I know the Carnal appetite will pronounce it a very slight and
slender Sallet: But I will answer that Objection, in short, The natural man is
incapable of the things of the Spirit of God. 1. Cor. 2. 14. (...): He has no
room for them; I therefore leave him to disgorge himself: They are too great
for him, though he phansies them too little; And intus existens prohibet
extraneum: He is too full of his own Supper; So that he has no stomach nor
appetite, nor the least relish or conceiving of Christ's Supper.

But whatever it is to him, I will endeavor to raise some apprehension of it
in us; if I may by any means speak that which may prove profitable unto us.

There must be some near affinity and likeness betwixt that which is nourished
and the nutriment it receives. Man's Body cannot be fed with Stones or Metals,
but with Plants and Living Creatures; their Flesh and Substance being near
enough the Nature of our Bodies, which are of the like nature with other
Animals and Plants.

Our Souls, (I mean always of the Regenerate) or we our selves, for it is all
one, have our birth and being of the will of God. John 1. 12. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name; which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; viz. of the will of God; (...) being
to be repeated (...).

And certainly the very depth, or essential bottom and center of the new
Creature, is the Divine Will; a Will raised up in the Soul of man, perfectly
answerable to the Will of God, though not so absolutely powerful. This is the
very new Birth, and the new Creature. This is Christ in us, and we in him: And
he that is thus in Christ, he is a new Creature; He that is not thus, never
knew Christ, unless according to the Flesh.

When I say the Divine Will is the very inward Essence or Heart of the new
Creature, I mean not any desire toward God and his outward Service; or to
Knowledge of him and his works, or the beautifying and adorning a man's Soul
with Moral Virtues; but a full and absolute Resignation of a man's self unto the
Will of God, our Desires not at all circuling into our selves: (For it is a
sign then, that they sprung from our selves) But our Desire and Will being
melted as it were into one Will with God, and desiring nothing but for God, and
because God desires it and wills it.

Then shall not our Natural Will be the First mover in our desire of Knowledge,
or of Virtue, or of Power, or whatever is desirable; but the Divine Will in us
shall will all this for God, as He is in man, that is freely and without all
Hypocrisy or Self-love. This is the very Root of the new Birth; This is the
Divine Life: And whatsoever is not of this, is either but Natural or Devilish.
This is the new Creature; the (...), the Plant of Gods own planting; whose will
is in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law does he exercise himself both day
and night. This is the Lamp of God, the Eye of God fixed in the Soul of man,
that loathes all Objects represented to it, that arise from the will of the
Flesh, or the false hypocritical suggestions of man's heart; but has its whole
lust and desire after the Will of God, hungers and thirsts merely after it.

This is that, that turns away at our Prayers and Praises, at our Fasts and
Alms-deeds, at our Censuring and Conferring, at our Zeal and Devotion; viz. as
often as they are foul'd and beslutted with the filth of our own Wills, and
Self-ingagements; either of temper of body, or temporal projects. This is that
righteous man that hates lying, and before whom the wicked man is loathsome,
and comes to shame. Prove. 13.

We having therefore thus found out the Nature and Constitution of the New
Creature, the Regenerate Soul, it is no wonder to us to find out the proper
food of it. The first Adam is of the Earth Earthly; and therefore feeds of
Earthly Food. The second Adam, viz. the new Creature, is not of the Earth, but
of the free Heavenly Substance, born of the Will of God; and therefore he
breaths no other Air, sucks in no other Life or Food, than the Free Will of
God. This is that that satisfies; and this alone can satisfy.

And now we have found the Food of the Regenerate Soul, it will not be hard to
find out the Poison. If the Will of God be the Souls Sustenance, then our own
Will, be it to us as sweet as it can be, it is our Poison and Destruction: It
is a Cup of deadly Wine, of which by how much more deep every man drinks, by so
much more is he made stupid and senseless, as concerning the Godly Life; till he
be even perfectly dead drunk, and do (...) (as that Phrase of Plotinus is) lie
in the very dirt.

These things are safelier felt then spoken. However it will not be amiss a
little by way of Analogy to open the nature of that Spiritual Food mentioned in
the Text, [ My meat is to do the will of him that sent me.] The Soul set on
fire by the Will of God, and become one Divine Flame, must as our Natural
Flame, be kept alive by motion and agitation: The Will of God is the Pabulum of
this Flame; but if it continue flaming, it must act and move, within at least,
and without as often as occasion permits or requires; otherwise it will be
suffocate and extinct.

But we need not dwell so low as upon inanimates: Let Us see what is Food in
reference to that which has Life.

Health, growth, strength, sweetness of taste, and satisfying the stomach,
these belong to the Food of the Body: Let Us see if we can find these in the
Will of God, in reference to the Regenerate Soul.

1. Health.] Prove. 3. 7, 8. Be not wise in thine own eyes, fear the Lord and
depart from evil; i. e. think not that the lust, desire and determination of
thine own Carnal and unregenerate mind is the best; but abstain from that which
it longs after, and fear thou God; i. e. adhere to that which he has revealed
to thee to be his Will; fear to transgress his Law. It shall be health to thy
navel, and marrow to thy bones: -- (...)
(...).
Yet the Law of God is no charm, to cure the body; but it must do it by making
the Soul first healthful. But to dispatch this Truth in a word. What is the
disease or languishment of the Soul, but Sin? What is Sin but velle contra ac
Deus vult? Wherefore He that wills as God wills, so long as he continues so, is
safe from Sin the disease of the Soul. This Diet-drink will not only keep the
Regenerate Soul in health; but even metamorphoze Satan himself into a Saint:
When as Self-will, and the feeding on our own Desires, will so decay the
constitution and complexion of the soundest Saint, that he will be mis-shapen'd
and transformed into the figure of an abhorred Fiend.

2. Growth.] As Plants and Living Creatures spread and grow in bigness, in
virtue of their nourishment: So the Soul is enlarged by forsaking her own Will,
and by continual meditating upon, and endeavoring to do the Will of God: For
our own Will and Desire is a poor narrow contracted thing, pinching us down
next to nothing, by confining us to our selves, and our own scant bottoms. But
the Essential Will of God is free and large, even boundless as himself; and the
work of it upon us, when we receive it, is like unto it. Our drawing and
concentring all in our own Will, is like the gathering together of the free
light and warmth of the Sun into a burning glass; those rays that before lay
free, mild, and friendly in a larger room, thus forced together become surly,
ireful and scorching: Or like fire half-stifled in a bundle of green wood, it
fumes and glowes, and is sad in it self, and utterly uncomfortable to others;
but when it breaks out into a free flame, how cheerfully does it shine, and
laugh, and look pleasant, filling the whole house with lightsomeness and joy!
That is man's Straightened Will; This the Free Spirit and Will of God. Pride, and
ambition, and thirst after knowledge and the glory and applause of men, do puff
up the Soul, (when these are satisfied) make her look big and bloat: But that
this Food is not wholesome, nor the growth sound, every small prick of adverse
fortune, or frowns of men, do demonstrate; the tumor of the mind then
shriveling up like an emptyed bladder. But that bulk and breadth that the Soul
gets by feeding on Gods Will, is sound and permanent, as the Will of God is,
which nothing can wash away.

3. And as Strong, as large, does the Soul of man become by feeding on this
Celestial Food: In so much that it can bear all things and endure all things.
What makes the miseries and misfortunes of the World so tedious and irksome to
men, what makes their Souls sink and faint under this burden, but eating of
that poisonous fruit, our own Will? Which would not be, if we had no Will of
our own, but fed merely on the good pleasure of God, giving thanks for whatever
he brings upon us: For in all outward things, and to speak more fully, in all
things that befall us, our Soul, our Body, our Friends, or Estate; in all these
the Will of God is done, so far as Sin intermeddles not: So that if we relish
no Will but the Will of God, how strong shall we be to bear all these! We shall
be able (...), easily to digest either Fortune, Good or Ill, Life or Death,
Honor or Dishonor, Riches or Poverty; all will down save our own Will: This
will choke the Soul; or poison its complexion, make it lie in weakness and
languishment, that it will be weak, sickly, peevish and infirm; the whole
Creature of God will be a burden to it; nay, the least of them may prove an
importable AEtna.

4. But I go on. The Fourth thing considerable in Food is the Taste. And
hitherto may be referred those affectionate expressions in the Psalmist, who
speaking of the Laws of God, which is the interpretation of his Will, gives
abundance of sweetness and pleasantness to them. Psalm 19. The judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether; more to be desired then gold, yea, then
much fine gold; sweeter also then honey and the honeycomb. And hence it is
that the Holy and Happy man so meditates and ruminates on the Laws of God.
Psalm 1. His delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he meditate
day and night. Psalm. 63. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness,
and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips, when I remember thee upon my
bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches.

And certainly if the Will of the Flesh be sweet, and to be longed after so by
the Carnal-minded man; the Will of the Spirit, when it is once come, is much
more sweet. For there is nothing in the Sensual Life of Good, not so much as of
seeming good, but it is really and fully in the Life Spiritual: Which we must
believe; for we cannot know till such time as we have experience of it; and
that will be when we leave off our commerce and conversation with the Will of
the Flesh. The lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth is
sweeter than oil: [This is thy Carnal-mind, the Will of thy Flesh, (as
Maimonides expounds it) a subtle enticing Serpent lying ever in thy bosom; and
yet a strange Woman, thy Harlot, with whom thou feastest and sportest, and
forgettest thy Husband Christ Jesus, the Will of God, the Holy Spirit, the
Divine Life.] But her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword:
Her feet go down to death, her steps take hold on Hell. And here is the great
difference betwixt the sweetness of our own Will and the Will of God: That ends
in bitter choler, in wrath, and vengeance, and death; but this is wholesome as
well as toothsome, and is the very nexus and vinculum whereby we are held in
Eternal Life. Lust is svveet, Pride is svveet, Revenge is exceeding svveet; and
above all svveetness is the svveetness of Craft and Carnal Policy: But remember
that as sweetly as thou lickest thy Lips in secret, thou have svvallovved
down poison; and it will burn in conclusion as the Fire of Hell.

God has brought thee into the wilderness, that thou may enjoy the Promised
Land; offers thee Angels food; would feed thee with Manna: Let not thy mouth
water after the Fleshpots of Egypt: Say not with the grumbling Israelites,
Who shall give us flesh to eat? Lest the Lord in his anger, give you Flesh to
eat, not two days, nor five days, neither ten days nor twenty days, but even a
whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it become loathsome unto
you; and while the Flesh is betwixt your teeth the wrath of the Lord be kindled
against you: That you be so far engaged in your own Will and headstrong ways,
that nothing but destruction can deal with you, And thus much of the Taste of
this Food.

5. The Fifth and last thing, is the Satisfying of the Stomach. Bodinus tells
us of a Story of a Noble of Aspremont, who used to entertain those that came to
his House, with all Plenty and Magnificency that may be; the Tables furnished
with all variety of the most rare Delicates, rich Furniture, excellent
Attendance; every thing point device from the Stable to the Dining Room, above
desire or expectation: But that which is strange, so soon as they were gone out
of his House, both Horse and Man was ready to dye with hunger. The like Magic
and Imposture is there in all those things that our deceived Souls feed upon in
this life: It is but as the Prophet expresses it, a mere dream of eating and
drinking. It is even as when a hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats, but
he awaketh and his soul is empty; or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold
he drinks, but he awaketh and behold he is faint, and his soul has appetite.
Isa. 29. Such is the condition of all the adversaries of Sion, the holy people
of God, that hunger and thirst after God and his Righteousness, the fulfilling
of the Will of God; for this alone can fill the Soul of man. He that feeds of
any thing else, sucks but in a rotten mist or fog, of scarce so good as the
Prodigals husks, of no better than Mahomets Ezeck, that infernal Tree, whose
fruit be but Devils heads, and root streams with flames of fire, and tracts of
smoke; of which who tastes, feeds not but is fed upon, ever consuming in
unsatiable fiery appetite, and restless desire.

But the sound and satisfying meal of the Soul is the Will of her Maker; not
when it is done without her, but when her Life is that, and she never finds her
self to live, but in that. The very Life and Spirit of God drunk in by man's
thirsty Soul, that by continual repast from thence grows stronger and
stronger, and sucks so sweet delight from these breasts, that she never hungers
nor thirsts again; never desires the tempting Poisons, the pernicious
Pleasures, and false Contentments of this vain World: This is Christ alive in
us, quite another Principle of Life, and another Food, from all that feeds our
Eyes or Ears, or worse than these, our inordinate desires of Pleasure, Profit
or Honor: This is that true Manna, that Bread from Heaven: Of this our Savior
witnesses, viz. of himself; I am the bread of life: He that comes to me shall
never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. John 6. 35.

DISCOURSE VI. JAM. i. 22. Be ye Doers of the Word, and not Hearers only,
deceiving your own selves.
NOT to be troublesome, neither to you nor to my self, by any tedious Preface
or Introduction: The Text will afford us at least these Three Doctrines.

1. We must be Hearers of the Word. 2. We must be Doers of the Word, as well as
Hearers. 3. We are not to deceive our selves.
I. WE must be Hearers of the Word.
To exhort men to hear (since there is naturally in them such an itching Desire
of hearing and knowing) it may seem but a losing of time and labor: But
because some men's dispositions are low and grovelling, veluti pecorum quae
natura prona atque ventri obedientia finxit, (as Salust speaks) all their
desires and imagination tending downward; it will not be amiss to show what
good Causes there are, that men should give their mind to the hearing of the
Word.

(1.) And surely no mean one is the Resuscitation of that better part of Man's
Soul, that lies slumbering in a Trance; which many times being strongly called
upon by the Word, with much ado is reared up, and slowly and heavily moves its
dull sight, that darkness so strongly had possessed before: But if so be a man
here be not propitious to himself, and foster that Life which is then given
him, like one not perfectly recovered out of a swound, he sinks down again out
of the hands of him that held him; and many such neglects may enter his name
amongst the Dead, whom Death gnaweth upon, because he heard not the Monitions
of his Teachers. The eye that slighteth his fathers counsel, and despises the
instruction of his mother, the ravens of the valley will pick it out: He lying
thus like a dead carryon exposed to the fowls of the Air, the accursed Angels
of darkness shall seize upon him, and quite eradicate the principles of true
light and sight, in the valley of the shadow of death. Wherefore (...), Awake
thou that sleep, that Christ may give thee light. Surge, ne longus tibi
somnus, unde
Non times detur.
And indeed a man least of all suspects his Friend to be his deadly enemy: Yet
it fares so with foolish wicked men. Righteousness is immortal: But
unrighteousness brings death; and the ungodly call it unto them both with
hands and words; and while they think to have a friend of it, they come to
naught. Wisd. 1. Which mischief might happily be prevented by giving due heed
and attention to the Word.

(2.) For this Word, if we were grown fitly prepared for the receiving of it,
is the Seed of Eternal Life, whereby we may be born again, and regenerate into
the image of Christ: And it is our Saviors own gloss; The seed is the word of
God. Luke 8. Wherefore as in Nature, were it not for Seed, there would be no
Herbs, no Plants, no Living Creatures, so without the Word there would be no
generation of the New Creature; which S. Paul also confirms: For this is plain,
where no Salvation no Regeneration; and without the calling upon the Lord no
Salvation: For so it is written in the 10th to the Romans; Whosoever shall call
upon the name of the Lord shall be saved. But how shall they call on him on
whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe on him of whom they
have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? And at last he
concludes, Then faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

But here some (for the infringing of the necessity of this Seed) perhaps may
demand otherwise than the Apostle; for he presently annexeth, But I demand;
have they not heard? Some might be prone to say, Have they heard? But the
Answer is indifferent to both: No doubt, their sound went through all the
earth, and their words to the end of the world. And this is the (...) or (...),
the voice of the Heavens, or the voice of that vast expansum from the Earth
upward. For that no man too confidently restrict and straiten this Preaching,
and this Word that S. Paul speaks of in this place, the Quotation is a part of
the 19th Psalm, which begins, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handiwork. This (...) (as Theon calls it in his (...)
upon Aratus) this far-stretched Firmament, or all-incircling Air, -- (...)
(...) --


We never let rest, ever anvelling out its Makers praise, by Air-beating sounds
and voices. Yea that lower noise of the breathing of Men and Beasts, call aloud
unto us for obedient thankfulness, to him that is the life and breath of all
living things; that (...) the Life of the World (as R. Moses the Egyptian
calls him) who if he should draw in his rays of livelihood out of this great
Universe, the World would be as a dead fabric in silence and desolation.

But this by the way for the due extent of S. Paul's words in that place: For I
conceive not that the Spirit of God writes in Lawyers lines, a little in a
great deal; but a great deal in a little. I could travel further in this
seeming Digression upon the Apostles words; and yet bring all home at the last;
but I will rather pull in the reins, and put on strait to the place I left.

If then without Hearing, (at least in some sense or other) no Faith, without
Faith no Calling upon God, without Calling upon God no Salvation, without
Salvation from the Old Man and his deceitful Just, no Regeneration; then surely
it is very requisite, that we give heed to the Word, and hearken to it, and
dispose our selves aright, for the receiving of it, as the necessary Seed for
our New Birth and Holy Regeneration.

According to this Analogy of calling the Word Seed, the Auditors or Disciples
of them that teach the Word are called Children, as begotten of their Spiritual
Parents by the effusion of this Seed of the Word. So amongst the Hebrews, (...)
the Sons of the wise men are as much as the Disciples, or those that hear and
are instructed of the wise men; and so filii Prophetarum. And accordingly S.
Paul, Gal. 4. 19. My little children of whom I travel in birth again, till
Christ be formed in you. Ep. to Philemon, ver. 10. I beseech thee for Onesimus,
whom I have begotten in my bonds.

But we commonly take this expression to be metaphorical, and the truth of
every thing we ground in Sense, and make account there is no generation but of
Natural Bodies, which we may touch and see; making thus the visible World the
idea and paradigm of better Essences, and like Epicureans or Saducees we make
nothing of invisibles; or at least not conceiving aright of them, set them in
the scale of Truth at least a staff lower.

But if we could conceive that the spirit or life of every thing is the thing,
and that we look upon to be but the tabernacle or husk of it, or any wise, the
vehicle or receptacle of it, and not the thing it self: We might very easily
conceive that this Regeneration is as true and real generation as is in visible
Nature; and there is as it were rather a succession of a new Lord in this
outward fabric of our Bodies, than the old, new-clad with superficial
accidentary habits. Can the fig tree, my brethren, bring forth olives, either a
vine figs? So can no fountain make salt water and sweet. So new actions, in
transient evolution, must have a new center or bottom of Essence, which is the
heart of life, which is the being of every living creature.

Now the evolved life of man consists in this, in knowledge or apprehension of
things, and a lively sympathy and antipathy with them, whereby he does either
desire or abhor from them. And if all the knowledge of these things which he
now is persuaded of, together with desire and abhorrency, sympathy and
antipathy, fear or hope of future matters, the memory of things past, the sense
of things present were utterly taken from him, where would he be? Or how would
he feel out himself or find out himself? This would be but turning man to
destruction. (...). They would thus become a sleep; a sleep that they sleep,
that descend into the chambers of darkness, and whom God has covered in the
grave.

And in some sense, those words of Job are excellent: O that thou would hide
me in the grave, and keep me secret till thy wrath were past, and would give
me time and remember me! Thou shall call me, I shall answer thee, thou love
the work of thine own hands.

When this death is perfected, in which there is no life, but only a sense that
we are utterly dead to all things, then God makes a new man contrary to that of
the Devils framing, and inspires a new Life, and a new Breath, and loves this
work of his own hands, Thou turnest man to destruction; again thou say,
return ye sons of men.

So then if this be destruction and death, then must a new sense and
apprehension of things, new sympathy and antipathy, new embracing and
abhorrency, be a new life, a new generation, a new creature. Therefore if any
man be in Christ he is a new creature. Old things are passed away, behold, all
things are become new.

Here is plainly a new species, to speak in the Language of Philosophy: For to
distinguish species by outward figure and color, befits Children rather, and
Painters, than Men of Understanding, and true Philosophers. The true and real
inward difference betwixt a Stone, Plant, Brute, and Man, is, that the second
exceeds the first by the spirit of Vegetation, the third the second by
Sensation, and the fourth the third by Reason. And that a Regenerate man
differs intrinsecally from a Natural man, is, that his sympathy, sense, and
knowledge is in the life of the Spirit of God, and the others in the spirit of
the world. 1 Cor. 2.

So then the life of evolution or transient action in our Souls being utterly
other from the Natural man's, surely the original or center of life is now quite
another: And here is generation of life ab intimo, as deep as understanding can
conceive of, or apprehension penetrate to.

If then this Seed of the Word be of such efficacy that it beget a man into a
new species, even into the beautiful Image of Christ; and that hereby we be
linked into such Noble Kindred, as to have to our Fathers such as are the Sons
of God by Regeneration; being born of God first themselves, and so begetting
Children in Christ. (Otherwise they fling but Seed as Gardeners and Husbandmen
do, and that that grows is nothing like him that casts it.) Moreover we our
selves being able, after full age in the strength of Christ, to propagate the
lovely Image of the Life of God; surely it should be a sufficient incitement to
receive the Word with as much eagerness, as the dry womb of the Earth, does the
refreshing Rain after a long drought.

(3.) But as the Word is Seed to beget, so it hinders not but that it may be
nourishment for the conservation and increase of that which is brought forth. 1
Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may
grow thereby. 1 Cor. 3. I could not speak unto you brethren, as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ, I gave you milk to drink, and
not meat, for you were not yet able to bear it. There Is Milk and Meat. John 6.
And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life; he that comes to me shall
never hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst. There Is Bread and
Drink. But this was such Bread as the Pharisees ill Stomachs could not digest;
neither as yet can they. Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and
mother we know? How then says he, I came down from Heaven? See how they go
about to vilify the Meat, rather than any way suspect the foulness and
weakness of their own ill Stomachs.

But as all are not to stretch out their hand to every dish, and intemperately
and unseemlyly to seize upon that which is not meant for them: [ Seek not out
the things that are too hard for thee (says Siracides) neither search the
things rashly that are too mighty for thee. But that which God has commanded,
think upon that with reverence, etc. Ecclesiasticus 3.] I say, as we are
modestly to decline that which we are not as yet fitted for receiving: So no
man has excuse from receiving some or other of the variety of meats that He
has prepared, who feeds with his goodness, every living thing. Old men and
babes, young men and children, they all are sustained by the Word, according to
every ones necessity and capability: Or else how could the young ones increase?
Or they of full age subsist? Both which is the Will of God.

That which Theophrastus has in his First Book of his History of Plants,
belongs indifferently to all kind of Generation, (...). Nature is not content
with the bestowing of a being upon things, but works them up to the perfection
of that being. As an little Plants, that in time grow to their just bulk,
blooming and bearing Fruit plentifully. And it is said of our Savior, that he
shall grow up like a plant: And our Savior says of the Kingdom of Heaven,
that it is like the growth of the mustard seed tree.

Now as this new Life is called a Plant for its vegetation, so is it also
termed a Child for its tender sense and simplicity of meaning. That therefore
that has knowledge and sense, having also an appetite to nourishment, and that
a nourishment proper to sustain its own Nature; and the Word being the proper
nourishment of those spiritual newborn babes; then if there be no such desire
in us to this Word, it is a sign there is no such Principle of life in us, or if
there be, that it is sick, or the Stomach past by overmuch fasting. But if
this Life, by not giving it its due nutriment, either for measure or quality,
come to be extinguished; we prove our selves (it is an horrible thing to think
of it) no better than Murderers of the Innocent and Just one: For Murder is not
the cutting and slashing of the Visible Body, but the extinguishing of Life.

And thus we have seen in brief, That for the raising of our Souls from Death,
for the begetting of the Holy Life, and for the conservation and increase of
the same, we ought to be Hearers of the Word.

II. WE pass on now to that other Doctrine proposed, That we ought not only to
be Hearers, but Doers also of the Word.
That awing sense of God which is impressed (if not upon all, yet at least)
upon most men's Souls, together with a Natural desire of security and
tranquillity of mind, and every pleasing good; That experience and
acknowledgment of our own imbecility and insufficiency, walking in the fear of
darkness, and knowing not (as the Apostle speaks) whither we go; does easily
induce even our Natural and Fleshly minds, out of love to our selves, to lay
hold upon somewhat, which we conceive stronger than our selves: And this we
call God; and that outward erected form of Religion in all Churches, as
Hearing, and saying of Prayers, and giving Attention to the Word, we call Gods
Worship.

And a Worship it is surely too too easy; and so fit for the vafrous and
subdolous Spirit of the Natural man to play its wily pranks in, that it being
well instructed by the sly and subtle counsels of that Old Serpent, the Devil
and Satan, it turns those good constitutions which should have been
introductions to further Holiness, into a strong fort or castle of false
satisfaction of Conscience, and most pernicious diabolical delusion; whiles we
take our selves to be distinguished from the wicked, reprobate brood, by
outward performances of Ear-labour and Lip-labor, without the practice of that
which is taught us out of Moses or Christ; plainly according to the Pharisees
in our Saviors time, whom the Holy Baptist sharply rebukes for such kind of
imaginations. Bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life (says he). And think
not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our father: For I say unto
you, that God is able even of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.

Surely it is out of the want of that feeling Knowledge of that which is so
acceptable to God, and a fond over-estimation of our own poor naked and
contemptible Souls; or a conceit that God would want persons, (if we Christians
be excluded) to make up the number of the Inheritors of Heaven; that makes us
think that such superficial performances will make us allowable before God. But
nothing is acceptable to him but a simple, humble and unfeigned obedient
Spirit: Nothing glorious in his eyes, but his own Life, the Soul inacted and
quickened by Christ. All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof as the
flower of the field. The grass withers, the flower fades, but the word of
our God endures for ever. This is the Word and Eternal Life, on whom whosoever
does believe, and by true Faith in his strength is Regenerate into, shall
obtain Everlasting Life; otherwise he abides in the Sentence of Death, and the
Wrath of God is upon him.

It Is true there be notable Preheminences and Privileges given even to the
Natural Fleshly Adam. (...), says Hermes, The whole World subsists for Man's
sake. But this Prerogative howsoever has its condition, which follows, (...).
The World for Man, but Man for God. And how for God? To wit, that his Life may
be in us; that his Christ may be in us: Not so many verbal points of
Christianity, not so many notions of Divinity, not so many moonshine
imaginations, from the Word heard or read, in Books, in our Hearts, in the
Visible World, in Heaven, in Earth, in Men. Christ is not dead and unprofitable
fancy, but the vigorous ebullition of Life. Which Life if it be not in us,
then are we not partakers of that we were destinate to; for (...). Man was made
for a Tabernacle for God; he is Materials for his Holy Temple. But if we will
not be living stones (as the Apostle speaks) we shall have the same doom that
unprofitable trees or timber; They are fit for nothing, but to be hewn in
pieces, and cast into the fire. This is the end of that frustraneous brood of
the Sons of Belial, the offspring of unprofitableness, that fall short of the
end they were intended to by their own disobedient perverseness. The best of
them fare no better. Man being in honor has no understanding, but is like to
the beasts that perish.

I, but we learned Scholasticks, have Understanding enough; or at least, as
much as any.

As much as we have Obedience. Surely Understanding is meant there the holy
obedient Wisdom; which alone preserves from death, as we may see out of the
Prophet Baruch. They that had their pastime with the fowls of Heaven, (high and
lofty Contemplations; they that played with the soaring Eagle, and delighted
themselves in her strong, acute sight) These are come to naught, and gone down
to Hell; and other men are come up in their stead. When they were young, they
saw the light; but they understood not the way of knowledge, neither perceived
the paths thereof; neither have their children received it, but they were far
off from the way. It has not been heard of in the land Canaan, neither has it
been seen in Theman. Nor the Agarens that sought after wisdom upon earth, and
the merchants of Nerran and of Theman, nor the expounders of fables, nor the
searchers out of wisdom, have known the way of wisdom, neither do they think of
the paths thereof. See what a great deal of Understanding is purchased by
Disobedience. Though our outward and inward ears be enlarged, and plentifully
drink down many rivers of outward instructions, or inward imaginations, and
high and learned Theories; yet if we be void of that true Wisdom, that has its
root in hearty obedience to the Holy Word, we are without understanding, and
become as the beasts that perish.

Wherefore let us not hug our selves in a false conceit of unhappy Knowledge;
since not the hearers of the word, but the doers, are justified before God. Let
us not say within our selves, we have Christ for the Head of our Religion, we
have read his Words, we have heard his Ambassadors speak to us, we have fetched
out many a notable notion in the Christian Theology, we are well instructed in
all points of the Holy Faith, we have heard much within, we have received more
from without, we are the Holy Church and true Disciples of Christ. Let us not
prize our selves too high for these empty respects; and think that if we be
excluded, God will want Guests to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in
the Kingdom of Christ. No. God is able even out of stones and dust to raise up
Disciples unto Christ. But if we be the Disciples of Christ, let us give more
heed to the voice of our Master. Matthew. 7. Whosoever hears my words, and does
the same, I will liken him to a wise man, which has built his house upon a
rock: And the rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon
that house; and it fell not, for it was founded on a rock. The doing of the
Word is the sure Foundation, a Foundation no less strong than a Rock. But he
that hears and does not, is like him that founds his house upon the sand; or
builds Castles in the Air: He shall not abide the Judgment of God that comes
like a Whirlwind, nor the fierce tempest of his destroying Wrath; but he shall
be confounded in his thoughts, and all his imaginations shall vanish into smoke.

BUT to handle this present Proposition more distinctly: That we should be
Doers of the Word, there are many Reasons.

1. One Argument is taken from the End of the Word heard, which is Practice and
Purification.

It is Aristo's saying in Plutarch, (...). A bath that purges not, and speech
that reformeth not, be both alike unprofitable. But how can any admonition
purge or reform, unless the Hearer does his endeavor to practice? The Word of
God is no Magical Charm, that the mere hearing of it should be sufficient for
this or that disease of the Soul. It may indeed beget a desire or propension to
that which is good (for which cause the Old Serpent stops his ears, as close as
he may, from the receiving of this spell) but if we go no further, that motion
is lost, and we recoyl further back into evil.

So that we see what small profit we reap, if we rest in a bare Hearing of the
Word: And it is as little for our credits, if we will believe the Stoic.

If any man brag that he has the faculty of expounding Chrysippus (says
Epictetus) say thou to thy self, [Unless Chrysippus wrote obscurely, this man
has no such great cause to boast.] Well I come to Chrysippus, I understand not
his Writings, I seek an Interpreter, (...). Hitherto (says he) there is no
great matter done: But when I have got an Expositor to instruct, it remains
that I put in practice those Precepts; and this is the only magnificent thing;
the other are nothing.

Methinks the old lame man speaks perfect good sense to him that is not more
senseless and blind than he was lame.

Three necessary points there be in Philosophy (says the same Stoic). The
first consists in the use of Precepts; as, That we should be modest in our
Behavior; true in our Speech. The other is the argument or demonstration, that
we ought to be so. The third and last is a clear dilucid Logical proof, that
this argumentation proceeded right. The last is necessary for the second, the
second for the first: But the most necessary, and where we ought to rest, is
the first. But we quite contrary, bestow all our time in the latter, and
utterly neglect the first, (...), etc. Therefore (says he) we lie
nevertheless, but how to demonstrate, that we ought not to lie, (...), we have
it at our fingers ends.

The case is plain, there wants no Application.

If so be we were as faithful and industrious to perform the Christian Life, as
we are sedulous to be instructed in the Christian Truth, surely the reputed
Church of God would send a more acceptable savor into the Nostrils both of god
and Man. But whiles Religion is to whet our angry tusks in Controversy of
Points, to scandal one another, contemn one another, and hate one another,
contending more for the setting up of Opinion, than for the purchasing of the
precious Life of Christ; it is no wonder that the Holy Church, which should be
as the fragrant Paradise of God, be turned into the sink of Satan, and a
stinking sty of Swine-like Epicures.

The Gnostics, a most wicked Sect of Christians, in Plotinus time: When they
could get one to be of their Heresy, and had instructed him well in their
Principles (which was all they aimed at) then they out of self-favour, crown
him with the magnificent Title of the Child of God; though their Life as
abominable as the Devil could wish, or Man imagine. (...), etc. Thou art now
become the Son of God; but others whom thou admiredst before, they are no
Children of God, they are no body. (...), Thou art greater than Heaven, without
labor or pain.

A goodly Religion indeed, that consists in a (...), when they themselves are
but in the jaws of Hell, and in the arms of the Destroyer.

What? (says Plotinus) can a man see God, and in the mean time abstain from no
manner of pleasure, in anger impotent, in good fortune insolent, in adversity
impatient; remember the Name of God, and in the mean while be held with all
manner of Passions, overcome no kind of perturbation? Virtue arrived at its due
pitch, with true Wisdom and Prudence, shows God unto us; (...): But without
true Virtue the naming of God (...), is but a name, a word, a sound, an echo,
nothing.

See how the Heathen Philosopher triumphs over those unworthy Christians, whose
Religion was but Opinion, and their Life the depth of filth and corruption. Or
see rather how moderately and civilly he carries himself toward them, that in
their Controversies are ready to eat up and devour one another.

2. But I will endeavor to convince them with the Apostles own Argument; viz.
That they that hear and do not, deceive their own selves.

There be many testimonies of Scripture that will witness this deceit.

Gal. 6. 7, 8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man sows
that shall he also reap: He that sows to his flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting.

So S. John. Little children be not deceived, he that does righteousness, he is
righteous even as he is righteous. He that commits sin is of the Devil; for the
Devil sins from the beginning.

1 Cor. 6. Be not deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers,
nor wantons, nor defilers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor railers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

How frequent are the Apostles in inculcating this so plain a Truth, That
righteousness of life is that which leads to God and his Eternal Kingdom!
Surely those Holy Watchmen of Israel, did see the time would come, that the
delusions of the Devil would so strongly possess the heads and hearts of men,
that they would be fast glewed in hypocritical holiness to some outward form of
Religion; as the formal Hearing of the Word, and such like; that they might
with a more quiet false Conscience, omit the greater things of the Law; as
Justice, Temperance, Charity, Humility, and the whole quire of Holy Virtues.
The other they ought to do, but by no means to leave these undone.

But now I will endeavor to show how this simple sort of Souls are befooled.

Galat. 6. If any man seem to himself that he is somewhat, when he is nothing,
he deceives himself in his imagination. Now these empty Hearers of the Word,
that they think themselves to be somewhat, is plain from hence; else would they
seek something better; but being that they set up their rest in this outward
performance, it is a sign that they seem to themselves not to have got nothing.

But that they are as surely nothing, as it is sure they take themselves to be
something, is easily proved out of 1 Cor. 13. Though I speak with the tongue of
men and angels, and have not charity, I am as sounding brass and a tinkling
cymbal. And although I had the gift of prophecy, and knew all secrets, and all
knowledge; yea if I had all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and had
not love, I were nothing.

Now that they that are but idle Hearers of the Word have not Charity, and so
consequently are nothing, will be proved out of the effects of Charity. Love
suffers long: They are impatient. Love is bountiful: They are griping and
covetous. Love envieth not: They are choked with malice. Love is not puffed
up: They are swollen with deceitful imagination. Love disdaineth not: They regard
not the humble. It seeks not its own: They are not contented with their own.
It is not provoked to anger: They are implacable. It thinks no evil: They
meditate no good. It rejoices in the truth: They are contemners of the Truth.
It believes all things: They believe no more than serves their own turn. It
fulfils the Law: They only hear the Law.

The estate of this kind of people is well described by the Prophet Esaias: The
multitude of all nations that fight against the altar, shall be as a dream, or
vision of the night. Even all they that make the war against it, and
strongholds against it, and lay siege unto it. And it shall be, like as an
hungry man dreams, and behold he eats, and when he awaketh his Soul is empty:
Or like as a thirsty man dreameth and lo he is drinking, and when he awaketh
behold he is faint, and his Soul longs. So shall the multitude of nations be
that fight against mount Sion.

That we are to sacrifice our selves, that is our wickedness and fleshly life,
no man, I think, will deny. But so exceeding misery it is, and smart to Flesh
and Blood, to undergo this mortification, and to lie broiling in this consuming
fire, that there needs a steady, strong upholding instrument for this so
weighty performance; which is all-bearing Patience: This holds up the mortified
Soul in its extreme burning anguish; and therefore is not unlike an Altar that
bears the Sacrifice.

Now they that fight against this real Service of God, which is the
mortification of our sinful Lusts, the sacrificing of our evil Life; and
against Sion, which God calls the Hill of his Holiness: Let them dream never so
strongly, nor fancy never so deeply, that such a measure of Righteousness
will serve their turn; a formal Hearing of the Word, and a favorable false
Application out of the same; all this sweet repast and imaginary trust and
persuasion, will prove but a vision of the night, and a feasting upon fancy
in deceivable sleep. For these Dreamers, instead of purging the Flesh by the
sacrifice of fire, defile the Flesh with the fire of Lust: Great pretenders to
Knowledge; and therefore sedulous Hearers, but no Doers: Clouds without water;
and they, you know, make a goodly show of whitish shining light; though not so
thoroughly enlightened as the blew Sky: Stars they are; but wandering Stars; the
end of whose staggering period, is to set in everlasting blackness of darkness.

But I go on now to two other Arguments.

3. A third Argument is taken from the Dignity of the Word it self. Thou have
magnified thy name and thy Word above all things, says the Psalmist.

Hitherto belongs the Purity of the Word. Thy Word is most pure, therefore they
servant loves it. Psalm. 119. And it is Philo's observation upon the manner of
the giving of the Law, out of Fire, and Smoke, and Lightening, (...), etc. Well
and befittingly may the Word of God be said to come out of the fire; (...). For
the holy oracles of God are accurately purged, and tried, even as gold in the
fire. So the Psalmist; Psalm 12. The words of the Lord are pure words, even as
silver which from the earth is tried, and purifyed seven times in the fire.

So great Purity was conceived to be in the Law of God, even the written Word,
that no Heathen durst venture to intersert any pieces of it into their
Writings: So Holy it was accounted that they durst not contaminate it (...),
with their profane mouths; as Josephus writes, from the testimony of Hecataeus.

Demetrius in the same Historian reports, that one Theopompus grew distracted
by being too bold and busy with these Writings: And that Theodectes the
Tragaedian, lost his sight. And no wonder; for by Iosephus's relation, these
men sought rather for Flowers to adorn their Works, than for wholesome
Instructions to reform their Lives. Theodectes (it is likely) spyed somewhat
there that would grande sonare, that would sound gravely, and make a majestic
noise, fitting his Tragic buskin; but the man had little mind to set his feet
in those Laws of God, to do them.

And hence so much distraction, frenzy and blindness possesses us this very
day. Yet like bold impudent Flies, we sieze confidently upon those precious.
Oyntment-pots of the Apothecary, and in this plenty of wholesome refreshment,
have Wings and Feet clung together; and lose our Life even in the very Book of
Life. Prove. 25. If thou have found honey, eat so much as is sufficient for
thee: That is as much as thou can well digest into practice. For so it is
with the Word as it is with Meat: Not taken it does no good: Taken in and not
digested it brings but Diseases: But taken in and perfectly digested by honest
labor and exercise, preserves Life and Health.

4. But these Considerations are more proper to the Fourth and last Reason, why
we should be Doers of the Word: Which has reference to us; and is the Reward
of keeping his Commandments. By them is thy servant taught, and in keeping of
them there is great reward. Psalm. 19. (...), a Threefold great Reward; A reward
in Estate, a reward in Body, and a reward in Soul.

1. A reward in Estate.] Blessed shall thou be in thy basket and in thy dough.
Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the
fruit of thy cattle, and the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep.
Deuteronomy. 28. But if we think Moses word not sufficient, Christ himself will put in
security, for supply of all necessaries, if we take but the condition of
Obedience. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you. Matthew. 6. So the Psalmist; The lions rore
and suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord shall want no manner of thing
that is good. There are manifold Testimonies in Scripture to this purpose, and
so obvious that quotation is needless.

(2.) The second reward is in a man's Body; for Strength, Health and Beauty.
Fear the Lord and depart from evil, so health shall be to thy navel, and marrow
unto thy bones. Prove. 3. Envy, Anger, Hatred, and discontented Melancholy,
which reign in either proud or pusillanimous Souls, weaken Nature, and destroy
the Body; but Life and Vigor is in the perfect Law of Charity. A cheerful
Conscience purifies and refines the Blood, but disobeying the inward Light, is
the choking of the Vital Spirits. A sound heart is the life of the flesh,
(says Solomon) but envy is the rottenness of the bones. This for Health and
Strength. Now for Beauty. The wisdom of a man does make his face to shine.
Ecclesiastes 8. and Ecclesiasticus 25. The wickedness of a woman changes her
face, and makes her countenance black as a sack. The heart of a man changes
his countenance, (says the Wise Man) whether it be in good or evil. So if
there be a continual vigorous habit in the heart of shining Virtue and lovely
Charity, it will issue even into the face of a man in all friendly amiableness.
Moses was so filled with this Heavenly Beauty, that the Children of Israel
could not look upon him for his glorious splendor. But the works of darkness
make the spirit of a man to set in gloomy obscurity and deadness.

(3.) But now we come to the third reward; which is in the Soul. Psalm. 19. 7.
The law of the Lord is an undefiled law, converting the Soul; (...) say the
Septuagint; the word which the Platonists use.

For the clear understanding of the dignity of this Conversion, we are to take
notice of the nature thereof. Conversion therefore includes two things; a
leaving and a making toward somewhat: And here in this Christian Conversion,
that which is to be left is the Creature; and that which is to be turned unto,
is God.

The leaving of the Creature is the forsaking of whatsoever is not God, but
especially the renouncing of our own selves: For while we cleave unto the
Creature we most of all cleave unto our own selves; for we adhere unto it, for
our own sake. Self-love is the hinge or center upon which we turn from God to
the Creature; and upon which we begin to circle from the Creature to God again:
But the accomplishment of Conversion breaks this thing, abolisheth this center;
and then we have our fixation in God, and all our motion and operation of will
and affection, is upon him and from him.

That Egyptian King (as Herodotus reports in his Second Book) when he had
prohibited his Subjects sacrificing to God, and had shut up all the Temple
doors in Egypt; he presently employes all his people in his own Service, and
sets them to leed Stones to build Pyramids for his own Honor, and the lasting
Memorial of himself.

No man would be so mad as to forsake the Service of God, to be a drudge to an
inferior Master: But without question, the plot is to be his own God and his
own Master, and to employ all his strength for himself.

But how the Law of God does convert the Soul from this Idolatry; and that
which we falsely seek after, how it brings us truly more near unto, will be
seen from the manner of this Conversion of the Soul to God.

(...), says Proclus in Plato's Theology. The conversion of things to their
causes or principles, is to receive assimilating influence from them, or to
rise up and ascend nearer and nearer unto them, and to become more and more
like them. To return therefore unto God is to become like to him, by the
recovery of the lost Image of Adam, who was made according to the similitude of
God.

Now the Image of God what it is, seems not to be unknown even to the very
Heathens. The ancient Greek Poet, brings in Ulysses musing with himself,
amongst his travels, what a kind of People he had fallen among; after this
manner, (...);
(...);
(...);
What a kind of People be the Inhabitants of the Land into which I come? Are
they injurious, barbarous and unjust? Or are they of a loving disposition,
courteous unto strangers, and of a Godlike mind? (...); Are they animo Dei
formi? Where the Poet plainly makes the form or image of God consist in Love,
in Righteousness or Justice, and Courteousnes; they being contrary to Injury,
brutish Fierceness, Cruelty and Injustice.

The Divine Philosopher speaks out more expressly, though in fewer words; To be
like unto God is to be holy, just and wise.

I might multiply words here for the setting forth of the manifold Benefits and
Graces that accrue to the Soul of Man from his Conversion to God, and Obedience
to his Holy Word: But nothing more can be said than this Image of Christ does
either express, or at least imply.

Justice, Holiness and Prudence comprize all Excellence. That generous
Magnanimity of mind, that bears it self above all the contempt that can follow
the practice of that which is Good, or abstinence from that which is Evil:
(...): Pure Temperance; Manly and awful-eyed Fortitude; Gravity and Modesty
gently moving in all peaceful and steady tranquillity; and a God-like
Understanding, watering with showers of Light this flourishing Paradise of
Piety and Virtue: This, and whatsoever else we can conceive that Good is, is
contained in this Divine Image; nay more than we can conceive, before we be
transformed into that likeness.

The Wisdom of him that is regenerate into this image and conformity with God,
dives into the depth of Darkness; unties the knots of that Old Serpents train;
breaks off the bonds of Death and Hell; pierces like Lightning into the
inwardness of things; stands before the Throne of Immortal Glory. That Holiness
winds it self from all corruption of the Flesh; flies above the bewitching
attraction of the Body; looks upon God in unspotted purity. That Justice gives
every thing its own; That which is Caesar's to Caesar, and that which is Gods to
God: But nothing to it self; seeks nothing for it self; exulteth not in it
self: But gives all to God; seeks all for God; rejoices always in God. Thou
art worthy O Lord to receive honor, and glory, and power; for thou have
created all things; and for thy wills sake, they are and have been created.
Rev. 4. Thus be they nothing in their own eyes, as indeed they are nothing; but
in profound Humility and Gratitude, (which is the most exquisite act of
Justice) give all to the Eternal and Everlasting Majesty.

This is that lovely, beautiful, and most desirable Image of Christ the Son of
the Father. Who has part here is an Inheritor of Eternity: But he that by
false and lazy imagination and fancy, remains in the Devils deformed Nature,
his doom is everlasting Death, and unspeakable Misery.

AND thus much for the Reasons, Why we should be Doers of the Word. I will only
speak a word or two of the Proposition that is left, and so end this Text. The
Proposition is this;

III. That we are not to deceive our selves.
Errare, falli, decipi, etc. To err, or be deceived, says Tully, turpe est:
And that methinks should be a sufficient Argument to avoid it. But to deceive
ones self is a double fault. He that deceives himself is both Fool and Knave
(as we say) both the gull and the cheater, the deceived and the deceiver.
Though to say the truth, he that is deceived by another, was first deceived by
himself. (...), (says Aristotle) (...). The same defective Principles that
expose a man to be deceived of another, exposes him as well to be deceived of
himself. No man is discovered to be a fool by another, but he was so in himself
first: And who made him so then?

But how can this be, That man should be so wise as to circumvent himself, and
so foolish as to be circumvented by himself?

Certainly it implies more Natures than one in a Man. The Platonists reckon up
three in general; there is (...).

(1.) There is Understanding, that lamp of Heavenly Truths, or Intellectual
illumination. (2.) There is the Soul in the middle, where Will and Reasoning is
situated. (3.) In the last place, there is (...), that Life which resides in
the Body, and is but a shadow of the Soul; the darkened Cave of evil delusions,
falsehood and deceit; a den of all Serpentine Natures, false Spectrums, Magical
Allurements, thick Mists, benumming Vapors, execrable Whisperings, vain
Terror, false Delight, bewitching Apparitions, fair flitting Phantasms,
deceivable Suggestions, besotting Attractions.

Here Is that damned cell; where those three grand Impostors and Conspirators
against the Soul, plot their fraudulent mischiefs; the Flesh, the World, the
Devil: Or rather, here is a World of Devils in this Life of the Flesh, where
the Prince of Darkness rules.

Well has Zoroastre described this place. He calls it (...), a World whose
light is the blackness of darkness. (...)
(...),
(...)
A World whose bottom is the depth of unfaithfulness: It Is foundation is laid
in Hell; a Hell whose fense is pitchy clouds and thick darkness; whose treasure
is corruption; inhabitants, vanity and shadows; wisdom, senslesness; prudence,
precipitancy; simplicity of heart, inextricable labyrinths of deceit and
hypocrisy: constancy or steddiness, a vertiginous circuit of glowing frenzy
and gross madness. He that here does (...) (which those wise Oracles forbid) He
that looks down, indangers his sight, indangers being carried away with this
rapid course and hurrying flux of tumultuous motions: It Is enough to turn his
Brain, to change his Understanding, to bereave him of his right Senses.

Here Is the fountain of ignorance, and wellspring of all evil deceits. So long
as the Soul leans toward this, and its loving and liking is toward this shadow
of falsehood, it carries its deceiver about with it self; and no deceit there is
without but it is from this first, or in virtue of this.

That which the Platonists call, (...), the Scripture calls Spirit, Soul, and
Flesh.

This Flesh is that whorish Woman, that Solomon speaks of so often, and describes
her subtle carriage: But all her fair speaking is but false allurement, and her
flattering utter destruction: For a whore is a deep ditch, and a strange woman
a narrow pit, says the Wise Man: Nay the high way to the very pit of Hell. Her
house are the ways of hell, whose descent is into the chambers of death. Prove.
7.

Now the Soul of man, betwixt these two, the Spirit and the Flesh, Heaven and
Hell, God and the Devil, is so placed, that accordingly as it inclines or
cleaves to, so is its Wisdom and Life: If it continually struggle to work it
self upward toward God, God will put out his merciful arm to draw it out of
those Infernal Waters: If it cleave unto the Flesh and its deceivable Lusts,
the warmth of wickedness will attract it down lower and lower, till Satan has
ensnared it in all his nests, and has chained it in his own chains; So that
being made an absolute Vassal of that Tyrannick Prince that rules in the Sons
of Disobedience, he shall be excluded from the everlasting light of God and his
Holy Truth.

And thus briefly under one, we have seen how we are said to deceive our
selves, and the way to escape this self-deceit.

God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, shine in our hearts,
and give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus Christ, that we may walk before him in the truth of Life. To Him with the
Father and the Blessed Spirit, etc.

DISCOURSE VII. PROVE. xv. 15. All the days of the afflicted are evil, but a
good conscience is a continual feast.
THE Text is a description of the estate of the wicked man and the righteous
man: Which will be more evident if we consult with the Septuagints Translation:
(...). i. e. The eyes of the wicked continually expect evil, but the Godly (or
good men) are always at rest. Here do the LXX Interpreters express plainly,
that opposition of those persons, and of their conditions; [ Ungodly, and good
or godly; unquietness of mind, and perpetual rest]: As I pronounced concerning
this Text at first, that it is a description of the opposite conditions of
those ever opposite offsprings of God, and the Devil; the Sons of Christ, and
the Sons of Belial; the Children of Light, and the Children of Darkness.

This Sense have the LXX put upon this portion of Scripture; though the words
themselves answer not so fitly to the Hebrew Text. To devise the occasion of
their variation, would be more easy (though curious) than profitable. I intend
not to mispend time, or abuse your attention with the husks of words, or
fruitless discourse of Translations. I will follow Symmachus in the first part
of the Verse, exactly answering to the Hebrew, [(...), All the days of the
poor are evil]; in the second part the Hebrew it self, [ But a good heart is a
continual feast; or as the words will bear, He that has a good heart, feasts
continually.]

Now therefore that this Poverty is not to be understood of outward poverty, is
plain out of the Text. Continual feasting, and constant poverty or affliction,
are contrary: So that we must either exclude the poor man from having a good
Heart and Conscience, whereby all sorrow is dispelled, and continual joy and
cheerfulness obtained; or else if he has these joys, make him rich in outward
wealth. But since the poor upright honest man, through the continual comfort of
his own good Conscience, Dives like, fares deliciously every day, though poor
in estate; then surely none of his days are evil, though he poor outwardly in
them all. So that this present Text is to be understood of an inward kind of
poverty, that makes a man's life full of evil and misery.

This evil poverty and miserable want, is described in the Revelation of S.
John, Chapter 3. Thou say, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and know not, how thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou
may be made rich; and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that thy
filthy nakedness do not appear; and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou
may see. Here Is good store of penury, a wardrobe of want; want of Money; want
of Clothes to cover their shame; want of Eyesight, to be able to do that which
is but a misery, to go from door to door to beg. But hear what is said, Verse
21. To him that overcomes will I give to sit with me in my Throne; even as I
overcame, and sit with my Father in his Throne. See what a change! From a
Beggar to a King; from a Dunghill to a Throne; from a blind Wretch to a Judge
upon a Throne, that shall discern the right, that shall judge the Twelve Tribes
of Israel. He that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of
no man.

We have by this time plainly seen what this poor man is, whose days are said
all to be full of evil: That he is one that wants those white Robes, which is
the Righteousness of the Saints; wants that old precious coin, whose image and
superscription is Righteousness and true Holiness, the figure of Christ the Son
of God, the express Portraiture of his Father: He wants his Eyesight, the true
Spiritual Wisdom, holy Discretion, the sense of Spirits, and discovery of the
mysterious working of that Prince of Darkness and Deceit: He Is plainly
destitute (though not of the necessaries of this Life, yet) of that main one
and only necessary thing, as our Savior calls it; that better part that Mary
chose, and could not be taken from her. Virtus nec eripi nec surripi^ potest.
Nor force nor fraud can deprive a man of that inward good.

And now I have described this poor man, I think it is not hard to prove that
all his days are evil.

By how much better the Soul is than the Body, by so much worse are the Defects
of the Soul, than those of the Body.

1. Is an Ulcer or Wound grievous in the Body? Much more grievous is it then in
the Soul or Spirit. The Spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities, but a
wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 14.

2. Is Blindness or Darkness an horrid thing to the Body? then is Ignorance
much more to the Soul: As may appear from that excellent description of this
Egyptian darkness in the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 17. When the unrighteous people
thought to have thy holy people in subjection, they were bound with the bands
of darkness and long night, and being shut up under the roof, did lie there to
escape the eternal providence. (But now that we think not only of outward
darkness in the Air, see what follows.) And while they thought to be hid in
their dark sins, they were scattered abroad in the dark covering of
forgetfulness, fearing horribly and troubled with visions. For the den that hid
them kept them not from fear; But the sounds that were about them, troubled
them; and terrible visions, and horrible sights did appear. No power of the
fire might give light, neither might the clear flames of the stars lighten the
dreadful night. (And a few Verses after.) For it is a fearful thing when malice
is condemned by her own testimony; and a conscience that is touched does ever
forecast cruel things. Thus having their eyes closed in misty sleep, it does
not secure them from the trouble of fear: For they that endure this intolerable
night, breathed out of the dungeon of Hell; as they sleep the same sleep, so
are they in like manner tortured with the same monstrous visions, sounding for
fear and perplexity of Spirit; as is largely described in that Chapter.

But that this evil condition may appear more evil, I will set the contrary by
it. God is light, and in him there is no darkness. I am the light of the world,
says our Savior. And the Apostle rouzing us out of this sleep of Sin, says,
Awake thou that sleep, that Christ may give thee light. To walk therefore in
the Light is to walk in the Life of Christ, as in the Presence of the Father;
and he that thus walks knows both whither he and others go: But he that
walks in darkness knows not whither he goes, because that darkness
blinds his eyes. 1 Ioh. 2. And no wonder then that fear attends his footing,
that ever and anon he is afraid that the next step, he stumbles into the pit of
destruction. The wicked fear where no fear is, but God is in the generation of
the righteous, says the Psalmist. It fares so with them as with those that
travel in Arabia; who if they chance to set their foot upon Iron, Stone, or any
cold thing by night, they are even ready to dye with fear, suspecting they have
trodden upon a Serpent: So ungodly men whose stay and trust is not on God, are
subject out of the suggestions of an ill Conscience, in every harsh thing they
meet with, to think that God has forsaken them, and that they now have
stumbled upon that Old Serpent the Devil. The rising of the morning may restore
the other to peace and security, but what will chase away the terror of this
inward darkness? Nor the glorious light of the Sun, nor the beautiful aspect of
the Moon, nor the cheerful collustration of the sparkling Stars, can yield them
light, or refresh their troubled Spirit. Hunc igitur terrorem animi tenebrasque
necesse est
Non radii Solis nec lucida tela diei
Discutiant, sed naturae species ratioque.
As the Poet speaks, and may be understood in a better sense, than his earthly
mind could ever reach to. Till that (...), or idea, or Truth of all things free
us from this misery, we shall not be truly freed from it: But if not freed from
it, how evil do we think his days are, whom the clearness of the day, and
common light, cannot deliver from the tormenting fears of that continual night!
Vide qualis affectus sit timor (says Cardan) qui crepitare cogit dentes, etc.
See what a kind of passion Fear is, that makes a man's teeth chatter in his
head; which symptom (says that Physician) is proper to those that labor with
some deadly Disease. But sure the Horror of that Eternal Darkness is worse,
where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; which is the Fear of the
ungodly here, and their Portion hereafter.

3. Deformity in Body, does a little diminish ones Happiness: But the Vgliness
of Sin in a man's Soul, if it could be seen with outward eyes, it would even
fright a man out of his wits to behold it: For it is the very Impression or
Character of that evil Fiend, the ill shaped Devil himself; as Righteousness is
the Image of God.

4. Feebleness also of Body, is a miserable thing: But Weakness of Soul is
worse, when that every blast of vain Doctrine is able to blow us down; when
every Temptation makes us yield to our Enemy, and to become a wretched Vassal
of the Devils cruelty.

5. But that I run not too much upon one point, That which is most terrible is
Death: But the Death of the Body is but to be hid in the Grave; but the Death
of the Soul is to be excluded the Presence of God; and not that only, but to be
vexed and tormented with those Spirits of torture, which in their fury lay on
sure strokes.

Thus it is manifest, that every Evil of the Soul, is worse than that of the
Body that answers to it: And so that Poverty, which consists in the want of
good things, and the presence of evils that ensue from this want, is a great
deal worse in the Soul, than in outward things concerning the Body.

Now when I say Poverty, I know not what to add, either for misery of Body or
Soul; it including all in both: Hunger, Thirst, Nakedness, Filthiness,
Sickness, Heaviness, Disconsolateness; these and all manner of mischiefs
accompany Poverty. But be it what it will in the Body, it is unspeakably worse
in the Soul; and a certain cause of making that poor man's life miserable, so
long as he continues in that sense poor.

I, but will some say, how can this thing be? When as daily experience shows,
that men that are as destitute of all Spiritual and Heavenly Riches, as they
abound in Earthly, live in all Jollity and Pleasure, in all Mirth and Merriment?

But this is no good Argument if we believe the Wise Man. Prove. 14. 13. Even in
laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. So
Eccles. 7. As the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of a
fool. The flame and the noise go away together; and at last is nothing left,
but scorching coals or dead ashes.

Would a man count a man in good plight, because the poison he takes makes him
dye laughing; as it is said of that Herb in Sardo, and of the biting of the
Tarantula? We commonly count the case of a sick man more miserable, when upon
his bed he sings merry songs, and finds out fond toys from the weakness and
distemper of his troubled Brain: These men are miserable enough, though they
think not, nor perceive themselves to be so. And so it fares with all them that
be ungodly, and yet seem to flow in all joys, pleasures and contentments: It Is
but the fancy of a sick Brain: Wise men are sorry to see them in such
Distemper, to have such an ill Symptom upon them: And surely that that is
miserable in their judgments is miserable; and not in theirs whom misery has
made mad, false pleasure has infatuated.

So we see now plain enough, That the poor man (that is, he that is destitute
of Grace and Virtue) all his days are sufficiently evil; sometime in the
judgment both of himself and others; other sometime, or rather ever, in the
judgment of others, (that is) of wise and holy men: Or that this Truth may be
the stronglyer established; in the judgment of God himself, who is the measure
of all Truth; Thou say that I am rich, and increased with wealth; but thou
know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked, etc.
Rev. 3.

But of poverty, wretchedness and misery enough: It would seem more desirable,
to point out some way to be enriched.

The same Spirit that tells the Church of Laodicea, of her miserable poverty,
shows her a way, how to become rich; Vincenti dabitur. To him that overcomes,
will I grant to sit with me in my throne; even as I overcame, and sit with my
Father in his throne. Here Is no ordinary Riches: Here Is the fullness of a
Kingdom. But, take the condition I pray you, Vincenti dabitur. He that
overcomes, he shall be endued with large possessions. He that overcomes, shall
be clothed in white; shall feed of the hidden manna. Not as the Children of
Israel in the Wilderness, who lived of Manna so many years and then perished. I
am the bread of life, (says our Savior) your fathers did eat manna in the
wilderness and are dead. But this is the bread that comes down from Heaven,
that he that eats of it should not dye. John 6. 48, 49, 50. and Ver. 32, 33.
Moses gave you not bread from Heaven; but my Father gives you the true bread
from Heaven. For the bread of God is he that comes down from Heaven, and
gives life unto the world.

Now what Life is this? A virtuous honest Life, a Life devoid of filthy lusts,
of base concupiscence, of envy, hatred and bitterness, of idolatrous self-love,
(for self-love is perfect idolatry)? Or is it an hypocritical, false, ungodly
Life, not escaped the corruption of the Flesh that is by lust? Surely it is the
former, or else our Heavenly Father instead of Bread gives us a Stone; which
no Natural Father would do to his Son. He therefore that lives not an honest,
godly and upright Life, has not been at this doal of Heavenly Bread; and is
but as one that dreameth he eats and he eats not, (as the Prophet Esaias
speaks) but when he waketh he is hungry; and dreameth that he drinks, but
when he waketh his soul is faint. But he that comes to me shall never hunger,
and he that believes in me shall never thirst, says our Blessed Savior. So
here is Meat, Drink, and Clothes sufficient; if we perform the condition of
overcoming.

Now overcoming presupposes a fight, and fighting an Adversary. And God knows
we have enough, and strong ones too. The three Captains of them be these; the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil: To whom we are sworn Enemies from our very
Baptism: I am sure they are to us; from the very beginning of the World. I will
briefly tell you a way to foyl them, and so conclude the First part of my Text.

Sobriety and Temperance will overcome the Flesh. Humility and Lowliness of
mind will defeat the World. Self-denial (which is the blessed Cross of Christ)
will keep off all the pestilent plots and devices, the Devil can frame against
us. The Apostle does harness us very surely and strongly for this great
conflict. Ephesians. 6. Take unto you the whole armor of God, that you may be able
to resist in the evil day; and having finished all things stand fast. Stand
therefore, having your loins girt with verity, and having on the breast plate
of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
Peace: Above all, taking the shield of Faith, wherewith you may quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of Salvation, and the sword of
the Spirit that is the word of God.

Here Is complete furniture for a Christian Soldier; only he sets down no
Back-piece, because he intends not we should ever run away: But he commends to
us above all, the shield of Faith, which if we hold fast, and become not (...),
cowardly Soldiers, such as cast away their Shield, and take themselves to
flight, he warrants it of such proof, as no shaft or brand of Hell can enter
it. What great deeds have been done, and brave atchievments wrought by this
Armature; the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, at the 11th Chapter, does
largely discourse, and at last more roundly and summarily conclude, thus; What
shall I say more? for the time would be too short for me to tell of Gideon, of
Barak, and of Sampson, and of Iephte also, of David and Samuel, and of the
Prophets: Which through Faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
promises, stopped the mouth of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped
the edge of the sword, of weak were made strong, waxed valiant in battle,
turned to flight the armies of the aliens.

All these exploits are done by keeping fast the shield of Faith; which is a
sure Trust and Persuasion, that God is able and ready to fight on our side. The
want of this Faith is that which makes the Devils Camp so victorious against
us. We are loath to believe that God can or will enable us to resist unto Blood;
even unto the effusion of that wicked Life, and mortification of all
Fleshly-mindedness. But this is required; and if we will believe, that God
would as heartily have it done, as he does plainly command it; it would be done
in good time. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of
life. Rev. 2. If we dye with him then shall we also live with him. For if we be
grafted with him into the similitude of his death, even so shall we be into the
similitude of his resurrection. Romans 6. 5.

THUS we have seen the evil afflicted case of him that is destitute of the true
riches of the mind, Temperance, Piety, Wisdom, and all other Virtues; as also
the way to attain unto those durable riches, and affluency of all good. I will
now go on to the Second part of my Text; viz. A good Heart (or a good
Conscience) is a continual Feast.

The Heart is the seat of Conscience; i. e. of Desire, or bent of Will and
Knowledge; Knowledge of things Moral or Divine. So in Scripture, we have often
mention of a wise and understanding Heart. And surely if a man observe; in
Moral and Pious matters, a man communeth with his Heart, and discovers deceit
and hypocrisy there; as he does incongruities and falsities in his Brain,
where imagination is placed, in Natural and Mathematical Theories.

Conscience therefore is nothing but the Censure of the Soul upon the guize of
the Heart, accusing or excusing its drifts, intentions and acts: And is called
quiet or troubled: Not that that light is always so, but that it causes such
a perturbation in the Spirit of man, conscious to it self of evil committed.

Or otherwise thus: Conscience is the impression of the true light of things
Moral or Divine, upon the Heart; where Will and Intention, and Motion of Life
is: As Reason Natural is the impression of the clear light of Truth in Natural
Theories. These true lights never vary; but the impressions are more or less
perfect; sometime plainly false; as the image of the Sun in the water, when it
appears broken or of a long form, or in a mist when it appears red. Hence is
falsehood and correction of falsehood both in Heart and Brain: For the clearer
and more exact impression, confuteth the imperfect, if displaced; or confirms
it, if only dim before.

But that common and vulgar apprehension of Conscience, such as every man
conceives, when the word is named, shall be sufficient for my Discourse. And
this is nothing but a certain disposition or condition of mind, from the
knowledge or remembrance of its acts and intentions; which if they be
represented as good, simple and sincere, Joy and Rest follows; if otherwise,
Disturbance of mind and Disquietness.

And this very latter disposition is good too, but not always; that is, when
it is accompanied with a Iudas-like despair; otherwise it is good, as wholesome
Physic, not as a pleasant Banquet. But it is seldom or never known, that the
Heart was ever established, without the foregoing of this disquietness of
mind: For man's Natural Inclinations lead him astray, and Childhood and Youth
betray him unto vanity: So that man being lost thus in his Natural blindness,
when Christ begins to open his eyes by his Truth, and he is convicted of his
wicked errors, what can come of it but sorrow? Nay, but being thus in some
good measure enlightened, afterward to have rebelled against this measure of
light, or at least through weakness, or rather the love of sin and neglectful
yielding to the Devils assaults, to fall into the same filth he was warned of
before, surely this must needs breed great distraction and confusion of Spirit:
And so long will this be as that Holy Light keeps in; and we live not
conformable unto it. For God is a God of pure eyes, and cannot behold
wickedness; and so long as we see this eye upon our ways, this light over our
actions, which we see by light imparted from it, in lumine tuo videbimus lumen
(as it is said in the Psalms) In thy light we shall see light: Every work of
darkness will so ashame us and confound us, that we shall never be at quiet
till we walk uprightly before the avvful Majesty of Heaven, that is ever
present before us.

But when through the Mercy and Might of Jesus Christ, and his quickening
Spirit, we walk in unfeigned Obedience in the sight of the Father of Lights,
our Conversation being in Heaven, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of the
Power of God, having led captivity captive, as the Psalmist speaks: Then shall
our mouth be filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy; as it is said in
another Psalm, about the turning again the captivity of Sion: And Psalm. 63. My
soul shall be filled, even as with marrow and fatness, when my mouth praises
thee with joyful lips. But there is a more apt and ample description of this
joy and feasting, Esaias 25. In this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto
all people, a feast of fat things, a feast of fined wines, and fat things full
of marrow, of wines fined and purified.

This is Mount Sion: whom the Lord has chosen to be an habitation for himself;
which he has longed for; which shall be his rest for ever: Here will he dwell,
for he has a delight therein, Ps. 132. Here he keeps open house all the Year
long, or rather all Eternity long. Ho! every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters; and ye that have no silver, come, buy and eat. Come, I say, buy wine
and milk without silver and without money. Wherefore do you lay out silver and
not for bread? and your labor without being satisfied? Hearken diligently unto
me, and eat that which is good, and let your soul delight in fatness. Esaias 55.

But what is this Mountain, that God should promise such Joy upon it? Or what
is Sion, that such Feasting and Mirth should be in it? Mount Sion is called the
Hill of the Holiness of God, (...) the hill of his holiness, Psalm. 3. Such a
kind of Holiness, such a kind of Purity as a man may stand before God in, that
a man sees God in, that is approved of God and will abide the fire: For our God
is a consuming fire, and burns and pains a man's Soul so long as filth resides
there. Who amongst us shall dwell with devouring fire? Who amongst us shall
dwell with everlasting burning? He that walks in justice and speaks
righteous things, etc. He shall dwell on high, his defense shall be the
munition of rocks, bread shall be given him, and his water shall be sure, says
the Prophet Esaias. He shall dwell on Mount Sion; that high and holy Hill, where
God has prepared this great Feast. This is the Hill of the thirsty; for so may
this word Sion signify: And blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Or more properly it may signify
dry Earth: And so we may fitly use that of the Psalmist, My soul thirsts
after thee, as a thirsty land: And the same Happiness will return again as
before; they shall be satisfied, so our English; (...), they shall be fed, so
the Greek. They shall be sufficiently fed; they shall be feasted; continually
feasted: For he that eats of this bread shall never hunger, and he that
drinks of this drink shall never thirst, says our Savior. How excellent is
thy mercy, O God! therefore shall the children of men trust under the shadow of
thy wings: They shall be satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou
shall give them drink out of the river of thy pleasures. Psalm 36.

This is the excellent inward state of the upright Soul and undefiled
Conscience, streaming and overflowing with strong and full torrents of
Heavenly Delight, issuing from the Throne of God and of the Lamb.

But to handle the matter some what more distinctly, I will consider the nature
of a Feast, and of what parts it chiefly consists. The curious Varro in Gellius
makes a complete Feast to consist of these four things; Si belli homuncali
collecti sunt; si electus locus; si-tempus lectum; si apparatus non neglectus.
i. e. If good disposition'd People be gathered together; if the Provision be
not poor or sordid; if the Place be convenient; if the Time fit and seasonable.

(1.) That those that are assembled to this Feast, are [ belli homunculi] in
the best sense, I shall easily prove. Mat. 8. Many shall come from the East and
West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
Heaven. There is very good Company, you will all grant it.

But the Doubt will be, what this Kingdom of Heaven is. Let the Apostle resolve
you. Romans 14. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. All which things may be obtained (in some
good measure at least) here, without spreading a Table-cloth in the Coelum
Empyreum.

But to proceed. You saw before out of the Prophet, how that God prepares a
Feast in Mount Sion. The Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, makes known to
us the Guests. But you are come to the mount Sion, and to the city of the
living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels,
and to the congregation of the firstborn written in heaven, and to the spirits
of just and perfect men. All these are the Guests of Gods Heavenly Table: There
these are assembled. Wheresoever the carcass is there will the eagles resort,
says our Savior. This is the great Communion of Saints, who do all eat of the
same spiritual meat, and do all drink of the same spiritual drink; and are all
incorporate into one Body, all quickened by the same Spirit, all conspire into
one Will through unity of the same Life; so that all is in peace and good order.

And thus much for the Persons assembled: Which if you doubt of, or are
persuaded that you shall not continually enjoy their company; yet I will show
you an assembly, that so long as you enjoy a pure Conscience, you shall always
enjoy their company, in a true Paradise, (...)
(...)
An Holy Paradise, where are assembled, Virtue, Wisdom, and all Decency and
Discretion. And these are excellent companions; though they were known to no
body, but him that lives with them: And He lives with them that has a pure
Heart; for the Father of them abides in the sincere Spirit.

(2.) But it were time now to speak of [ the Provision;] had I not spoke
already somewhat of it, almost before due time. But no tongue can declare it: I
will rather use the Psalmists words, O taste ye and see how gracious the Lord
is! For they that fear him shall lack nothing. The lions do lack and suffer
hunger, but they that do seek the Lord shall want no manner of thing that is
good. So then here is apparatus non neglectus at least; no want, if not
redundancy.

Ay, but it is a poor Feast, you will say, where there is no overplus. If any man
suspect he shall come to such a slender Dinner, I will use the words of our
Savior, Mat. 16. O ye of little faith, why think you thus within your selves?
Do you not perceive, neither remember, the five loaves when there were five
thousand men, and how many baskets were taken up? neither the seven loaves when
there were four thousand men, and how many baskets were taken up? If Christ
could satisfy such multitudes of men with so few loaves, so that so many
fragments were left: Surely we need not fear, but when he feeds us with
himself, who is that Heavenly Bread, and the foecundity or fullness of God; but
that we shall be unspeakably satisfied and superabundantly refreshed.

So we have plainly seen, how excellent our company; how good our cheer shall
be. I will interfeit one accomplishment which Varro omits in his Feast: And
that is Music. The concent of Musicians at a Banquet, is as a Signet of
Carbunoles set in Gold. As the Signet of an Emerald well trimmed with Gold, so
is the melody of Music in a pleasant banquet. Ecclesiasticus 32. 5, 6.

Now that this Feast is not devoid of Music will thus appear.

For Righteousness is nothing else but an harmony of the lower parts of a man's
Soul with the upper, of the Affections with Reason; as the Pythagorists define
it: (...), says Polus the Pythagorean.

When as the inclinations of a man's Will or Desire answer the dictates of true
Reason, these are Heavenly responses indeed, fit for a Celestial Quire: When
Reason begins the point, and all the Affections cheerfully follow it; as Philo
comments upon that Song of Moses and Miriam: [ I will sing unto the Lord, for
he has triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider he has over-thrown in
the Sea. The Lord is my strength and praise, and he is become my salvation. Who
is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods? Who is like unto thee; so glorious
in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?] Then Miriam (the rest of the
women following her with Timbrels and with Dances) takes up her Timbrel in her
hand and answers: [ Sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously; the
horse and the rider has he over-thrown in the Sea.]

Such (...) as these, such Triumphal Songs against our Spiritual Enemies, will
become this Feast well.

The same exultation of Spirit you shall find in the blessed Psalmist. The Lord
is my strength and my shield; my heart has trusted in him and I am helped:
Therefore my heart danceth with joy, and in my song will I praise him. Psalm 28.

This is that which the Apostle exhorts to, Ephesians. 5. Be not drunk with wine
wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit, speaking unto your selves,
with psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the
Lord in your hearts.

Hitherto then is this Feasting very complete; good Companions, good Cheer,
good Music.

(3.) But what is all this, if not in a good [ convenient place]?

Jobs Children, you know, as they were making merry at their elder Brothers, a
strong Whirlwind took a corner of the house, and buried them with the ruins in
the midst of their merriment. But whosoever dwells under the defense of the
most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, (that is, under the
protection of him that is able to keep them safe) Ps. 91. And at the 90th
Psalm, Lord thou have been our habitation from generation to generation. Before
the mountains were made, and before thou had formed the earth, even from
everlasting to everlasting (...) thou art the strong God; a more sure
sustentation than the steady Earth; a more strong safeguard than the massy
Hills. So then this Holy Assembly feast under a safe roof, far from the reach
of any tumult or tempest. God is our hope and strength, a very present help in
trouble: Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the
hills be carried into the midst of the sea. Though the waters thereof rage and
swell, and though the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. (Yet there is
a river whose streams shall make glad the city of God, the holy place of the
tabernacle of the most high.) In all this danger and stir, you see, here is
secure Feasting and Joy in the Tabernacle of the most High. The voice of joy
and gladness is in the dwelling of the righteous; safe pleasure, and never
fading delight in the habitation of the upright in Heart and pure in Conscience.

But if any man be not contented with the Safeness of the place, but would
curiously inquire into the Beauty of it, that Description is done to our hands
in the 21th of S. John's Revelation. Gold and pearl and precious stones is a
slight glimpse of the Glory of that Habitation, and the Beauty of God.

(4.) I will pass now to the fourth thing considerable in a Feast, [ The
convenience of time.] And no time surely is inconvenient to these Feasters, who
have the preeminence exceedingly above them that enjoy any outward delight. For
these men be confined to Seasons and Opportunities, which be but poor small
parcels of time: But all Time and Eternity too is but one entire Opportunity
for those Spiritual Feasters to enjoy themselves in. A good Heart, or a pure
Spirit, is one continual everlasting Feast.

It was well said of Diogenes to one that was too much taken with the seldom
solemnity of an outward Feast, (...); What, says he, does not a good man count
every day a Festival? Surely if it be so, he must needs count it so: And that
it is so, my Text can witness. Solomon has asserted it; and the Devil himself
cannot deny it; nor good men conceal it; nor wicked men confute it, for they
have not experience of it.

But do I not seem to Tantalize you all this while, by describing so desirable
a Banquet, and not show you the way to be partakers of it? Verily neither God
nor good men do envy us it. But to say the truth, the way to it is as
undesirable as the Feast is to be wished for. Abstinence and emptyness is the
way to be filled with this precious Food. The full soul (says Solomon)
loatheth the honeycomb. And if we be taken up with, and filled with the
delights of this sensible World, and the pleasures of the Flesh, we shall never
relish the sweetness of this Banquet; never so much as taste of it. (...). If
false transitory pleasures get possession of the Soul, they will exclude that
true light and safe delight in God.

What Is the way then to this continual Happiness? A contemptible thing they
call Self-denial, or abstinence from our own Wills and Desires. Upon which if I
should enter a Discourse, you especially of the younger sort, might account it,
or a dull Melancholic Dream, or a pretty solemn Night-piece, but when you have
viewed it, immerse your selves again into the false light of this bewitching
World, and closely embrace that life and pleasure that I should wish you to
part with.

But be you assured, that he that is so slightly affected, with the most solemn
and solid Duties of Christianity, is so far off from the good Conscience or
good Heart named in the Text, that he is not so much as in a preparation to it;
which is Contrition and Brokenness of Spirit.

But he that even now begins, and sets himself seriously upon the curbing of
his Lusts, and denial of his own ways, and endeavors cordially from the very
depth of his Heart, to perform whatsoever he conceives is the Will of God, and
allows himself in no fault, this man shall in due time be wrought into the
Life and Spirit of Christ: And shall continually enjoy in a more eminent
manner, whatsoever or Sight, or Hearing, or Smelling, or Tasting shall judge
pleasant and delectable; such Beauty, such Harmony, such Fragrancy, such
Deliciousness as no man can conceive, but he that has it, nor he that has it
can know how to utter it. To this Happiness God grant that we may all arrive,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom etc.

DISCOURSE VIII. PSALM. xvii. 15. As for me, I will behold thy face in
righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness.
THE Excellency of this Holy resolution and High aspires of the Prophet David,
will be better set off, and more-savourly relished, if we bring into view that
lively character of men of a quite contrary dispensation, in the foregoing
Verse; which are styled men of the world, which have their portion in this
life; who are very Belly-gods and Cormorants, greedy devourers of the Temporary
good things which God has treasured up in these lower Regions of the Universe:
These they dig out, and rake up together, and lay on heaps; that they may
satisfy their own Worldly Appetite, and gratify themselves in the lusts of
the Flesh, in the lusts of the Eyes, and in the pride of Life; that they may
eat and drink plentifully, yea riotously, fill their Bellies with the choicest
delicates, and feed their Eyes with the inexhaustible store and plenty of their
riches; and their treasure being inexhaustible, (when they have lived in all
the jollity and gayity of this World, in all the affluency and felicity this
present Life will afford,) bequeath or entail upon their Posterity the like
Happiness themselves enjoyed, by leaving the rest of their Substance to their
Babes; as is described in the foregoing Verse.

This is the state of that Blessedness which the mere Natural man breaths
after, neither his foresight nor desire piercing any further.

But this Holy man of God, who was inspired from above, has a thirsty presage
of matters of far greater moment; whose mind is not fixed upon these hid
treasures of the Earth, but upon that treasure which is reserved in Heaven;
whose neither hopes nor enjoyments are in the things of this Life, but deems
this Life as Death or Sleep in comparison of that which is to come; who
evangelizes before the Gospel, and speaks the language of Christians before the
coming of the Messiah, as if he would anticipate the words of S. Paul, Col. 3.
3. Our life is hid with Christ in God: But when Christ which is our life shall
appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. Wherefore let others enjoy
themselves as much as they will; let these men of the World have all things
succeed according to their desire, and please themselves to the height in their
Wealth, Pleasure and Honors: I do not at all envy their condition, nor place
my Happiness in these things: While these men's Eyes and Minds, while their
Affection and Animadversion is wholly taken up with these Worldly Objects, the
pantings and breathings of my Soul are entirely directed toward God, and to
the blissful enjoyment of the Light of his Countenance. As for me I will behold
thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy
likeness: Or (as the Psalms in our Liturgy have it) When I awake up after thy
likeness, I shall be satisfied with it.

That Saying of Heraclitus in Clemens Alexandrinus, (...). All that we see
waking is Death, and what we see dreaming Sleep (which is the Brother of Death,
as another termed him; as if in this Body, whether sleeping or waking, it were
in the valley of the shadow of Death): I say this Speech of Heraclitus, may
seem to savor much of a very deeply Melancholized Spirit; yet if to speak
conformably to inspired men, were an Argument of Inspiration, Heraclitus his
Melancholy would approve it self Divine, by the apparent conformity it bears
with the most notable passages of those who certainly were inspired. God forbid
(says S. Paul) that I should glory, save in the cross of the Lord Jesus
Christ, whereby the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world. What was it
not sufficient that S. Paul was crucified to the World, but the World must be
also crucified unto him? That he was dead to the World, but the World must be
also dead to him? Or who ever, except S. Paul, ventured on such a Phrase, as
the Worlds being crucified or dead to us, though we be rightly said to be
crucified or dead to it? Why yes, Heraclitus said so long before, (...). All
these things which we see with these Bodily Eyes, it is but a Scene of Death.
That vivid and cheerful color of the Heavens which recreates the Eyes of
ordinary Mortals, seemed to him not a bright azure, but a funeral black; nor
Sun nor Moon real and true Lights, but two painted Scutcheons Or and Argent
hung upon the Melancholy Tapestry of this House of Mourning. Wherefore to be
buried in the Body, with him is a real Death; and this Terrestrial Region,
wherein we seem to live, but one great Caemeterium or Dormitory. No life, no
joy, no pleasure is here; no not amongst those that seem to enjoy most, that
have the greatest portion in this Life, nay their only portion therein.
Wherefore what expectation of Happiness before that blessed Resurrection? When
we shall see the Face of God, and be satisfied with his Likeness, in whose
presence there is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures
for evermore: But for the present Interval, (that is, the time of our Immersion
into the Sense of this Body) the Prophet David as well as Heraclitus, does
plainly deem it a state of Sleep or Death; which are the same in Scripture
every where, as to any Mystical meanings or purposes.

As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied,
when I awake, with thy likeness.

Munster piously, and I believe truly, paraphrases thus upon the Text. Ego vero
and omnes electi tui, Domine, non ita quaeremus has temporarias and
transitorias divitias ut in illis deliciemur; sed just and pie vivemus in hoc
seculo, ut aliquando in futuro seculo videamus faciem tuam and ea satiemur, cum
scilicet e pulvere evigilaverimus and reformati fuerimus ad similitudinem
Christi tui. And this may go for the Philosophical sense of the Text.

But there is a Moral sense thereof, which Castellio seems to reach at; and is
indeed the most easy to the words of the Text, which run thus, (...)
Of which the easy and accurate Sense is, I will behold thy face in
Righteousness, at the awaking of thy image I shall be satisfied; according as
Castellio has also rendered it; Tum satiandus cum tua experrecta fuerit imago.
And his Gloss is accordingly, Per Christi resurrectionem qui Dei imago est,
plenam consecuturus justitiam and foelicitatem. For the Image of God is Christ,
who is called also (...), the brightness of the Glory of God; answerably to the
LXX Translation of my Text, (...), I shall be satisfied when I shall see thy
Glory: Which Glory, like the beams of the Sun, reach and touch the very
eyelids of him that is asleep, but are not seen nor enjoyed till he awake; for
then the image of the Sun is also awoke in him; that is to say, excited into
actual being. According to which Analogy is that Saying of the Apostle, Awake
thou that sleep, and Christ shall give thee light. The Evigilation
therefore, or Resurrection of the Image of God in us, is our Evigilation or
Resurrection in a Mystical or Moral Sense into it; which as soon as it does
appear, we also do appear in Glory with it; but while Christ is thus hid, or
dead, or asleep in us, we are in a state of Death or Sleep, and the true Life
of our Soul is hid in him.

And this I would have the First Truth comprised in my Text, viz. That the
immersion of the Soul into the life of the Body, and love of this present
World, (which is the Image of the Earthly Adam) is as it were the Sleep or
Death of the Soul.

The Second, That there is no true Satisfaction in this Worldly or Terrestrial
Life, which is but a torpid Sleep and the very shadow of Death.

The Third, That the true Evigilation and real Life of the Soul is the
recuperation of the Image of God; the Resurrection of Christ in us, according
to the Spirit.

The Fourth, That this Mystical Resurrection of Christ is the only solid
Enjoyment and Satisfaction to the Souls of the Faithful, even in this Life.

The Fifth and Last, That the way to attain to this Satisfaction which arises
from the Evigilation of that Divine Image in us, (which is also styled the Face
of God; or if you will, the Image thereof, whereby we see his Face so far forth
as he is visible to Man) is Righteousness and Sincerity of Heart. [ I shall
behold thy face in righteousness.]

These are the precious Truths comprised in the Text, which I shall handle with
all possible brevity.

1. That the Image of the Earthly Adam is as it were the Sleep or Death of the
Soul, the very Text does apparently intimate; especially that Translation in
our Liturgy, When I shall awake into thy Image, (which is the Image of the
Heavenly Adam) I shall be satisfied therewith; which implies, that till this
awaking we are in a state of Sleep or Death. For in that we can eat and drink,
and go up and down, these are no Arguments that we are truly alive, no more
than the growing of the Hair and the Nails of them that have lain long buried
in the ground, is any Argument of Life in them; I mean of the Sensitive Life:
Nor though the Flesh be full of Worms, will the man be thought ever the more
alive for that. For neither is Sense the Life of a man, nor mere Carnal and
Worldly Reason the Life of the Child of God: The Divine Image is the Soul of
his Soul, and the Life of his Life; of which seeing every Soul is capable, it
is rightly deemed dead till it partake thereof, till it be awakened into this
Image of God. But so long as the mind is addicted to the things of this World,
to the Law of the Body, which is called (...), so long is she dead or asleep;
call it which you will. Hierocles calls it Death; (...), For the Death of every
Rational Essence (says he) is the loss or suppression of her Divine and
Intellectual excellencies: Plotinus, Sleep; (...), So far forth as the Soul is
immerged into the Body, so far she is asleep. And therefore those that are
wholly taken up with the concerns thereof, as relishing nothing but what is
Worldly and Carnal, may justly be looked upon as fallen into a deep Sleep.

And what if they can walk and talk, and go up and down, and do such things as
men that are awake also do, do not the Noctambuli do the same? Whose eyes being
shut, yet unwittingly do they several exploits, some hazardous, others
ridiculous; other some (as it some seldomer times happens) safe and congruous,
if the chain of Phantasms that leads them, attract luckily, and to convenient
Objects: But in the mean time they know not what they do, but without any free
consultation or deliberation are carried out hoodwinked to action, by the mere
suggestion of Dreams and Phansies. And is not this the very condition of those
who have arrived no higher than to the Image of the Earthly Adam? Surely every
such man walks like a vain image or shadow; or like a winking Noctambulo,
that sees not whither he goes, nor in what plight he is, nor whom he may meet,
nor what Eyes are upon his nakedness, nor what sad events may attend his
fortuitous motions. (...). Every wicked man or unregenerate, not yet awaked
into the Image of God, has the eye of his mind closed, as these Noctambuli,
those of the body; and do not walk by sight, but by fortuitous fancy, their
whole Life being but a series of dreams, and all the transactions thereof, the
execution of the dictates of their imagination impertinently busy in this
profound Sleep. For these Phantasms, under whose conduct they are in this
condition, and which is their first mover in all their actions, creep upon them
by mere chance, as dreams in the Night, suggested by the temper of the external
Air, or of their own Blood, or from some other casualty; and so one Phantasm or
commotion occasions another, and the man, like a Ship at Sea whose Pilate is
asleep, may be driven one while one way, another while another, in a right
tract, or out of it, as it happens, there being neither judge nor guide, to
stear to any end, that due examination, or mature deliberation has made choice
of.

And therefore all the passages of such a Life, whether thoughts or actions,
are (so as it fares in dreams) either fatal or fortuitous. And although there
be a great confidence, that things are true and real, and such as they appear,
and that we have concluded sure; yet in all this we do but imitate those that
dream, (...), thinking those things they see to be clear Realities, while they
are but Dreams; as Plotinus speaks, and few but do experience it. Nor can we
give judgment what is right or wrong, what false or what true, whether we have
dreamt luckily and divinatorily, or all be falsehood and delusion, till that
Mystical Resurrection, the Resuscitation of the Image of God in our Souls. And
this briefly may suffice for the First Particular, That the immersion of the
Soul into the Life of the Body, and love of this World, is as it were the
Death, or Sleep, of the Soul.

2. The Second is, That there is no true Satisfaction in this condition.

And indeed how can any true Satisfaction be there expected, where we suppose
nothing but Delusions and Dreams; nor any one in a case to profess himself
satisfied, as being utterly unable to compute right, or make a due estimate of
things? No man thinks him that is grossly cheated, truly satisfied; no not
though he give it under his own hand he is so. And is not this state of Sleep
and Dreams a mere cheat and delusion? There only is true Satisfaction, where
that which satisfies, is truly that which it would appear to be, and will be
found so by a man when he can judge aright. For that which every man means, in
all his pursuits, is Happiness; nor would he put forth his hand toward any
thing that did not bear upon it that Inscription: Which if it be false, he must
needs at last find himself in a wrong box; and what profit is there in those
things whereof he then must be ashamed? And as in the sequels of Reason, some
one latitant falsehood being admitted, it will discover it self by the inference
of some more gross and palpable absurdity, to be false it self: So some
practical mistake in adhering to some false good, though pleasing and alluring
for the present, will in the conclusion prove it self a real evil, by the
calamitous Consequence that will necessarily issue from it: For the end of such
things is Death, as the Apostle speaks.

Thus plain it is, that though we should dream pleasingly and prosperously, it
is no true Satisfaction, because at the long run we shall find our selves
disappointed and deceived. But the truth is, that those that dream most
successfully, are not happy, (no not so much as in this Dream) but have an
unquiet Night of it; there being so many interruptions and disturbances, from
the fortuitous clashings of flying Phantasms that rise by chance, and bring in
scenes of Discontent as well as Pleasure: Insomuch that those that have cast up
the compute most accurately, have concluded it best never to be born; but next
to that, quickly to dye; as the Epigrammatist inferrs upon his Synopsis of all
the ways and conditions of Humane Life. And Solomon, who was a King, whose
Reign also was Peaceable, Splendid and Prosperous, yet when he had laid all
things together, and completed his account, the whole sum was Vanity and
vexation of Spirit: Nay the scene of things in this present World, seemed to
him so sad and Tragical, that he praises the Dead, which are already dead, more
than the Living which are yet alive; and accounts him better than them both,
which has not yet been, because he has not seen the toil that is done under
the Sun. So far is this Worldly or Terrestrial Life from affording any true
Satisfaction to them that are immerse into it. But this is a Theme so trite,
that it had been enough, only to have named it; and therefore we will pass to
the Third Particular.

3. That the true Evigilation and real Life of the Soul is the recuperation of
the Divine Image.

The truth of which assertion, we shall easily understand if we but consider,
what Life is, and wherein its fullness does consist, as also what is the Image
of God. For we know that Death is a privation of Life; and Sleep a partial
Death, as being a partial privation of the Vital Functions: And therefore the
recovery of the Soul into more full and ample Functions of Life, must needs be
her expergefaction, if not resuscitation from the dead. Now I conceive the
fullness of Life to be completed in these three things, in self-motion, or
self-activity; in sense or speculative perception; and in pleasure, love or
joy: And that the heightning or enlargement of these in several degrees, is the
enlargement of Life, and a releasement from such a measure of Sleep or Death.
These Principles are so plain and manifest that scarce any one can be so dull
and sleepy, but that he will acknowledge them at the first sight.

What the Image of God consists in, we shall easily understand, if we have
recourse to the Attributes of his Nature, by which only he is cognoscible to
us: Which Nature of God consists in Omnipotency, Omnisciency and Infinite
Goodness. Whence the Image or Face of God (as it is called in the Text) so far
forth as it is visible to us, is nothing else but our perception, approbation,
or rather devotional admiration of these Divine Excellencies; and the being
effectually impressed upon by them, to the transfiguration of our Souls into
this similitude, so far forth as Humane Nature is capable to be assimilated
unto God. For we cannot be absolutely Omnipotent, nor Omniscient, nor
Infinitely good.

But we may have a kind of communicated Omnipotency, as to the affairs of our
own Sphere, in our own Microcosm, or little World; where we ought to rule with
an absolute hand, and never to be quiet, till we can profess with S. Paul, I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. Wherefore as God is
Omnipotent in the great Universe, and does curb and keep up the whole Corporeal
Creation within the limits of certain Natural Laws, which they cannot pass: So
also we are to set bounds and limits to our Bodily Passions, and keep them in
constant subjection to the Laws of right Reason, or to the Rule of the Spirit
of God.

And again, in the second place, Though we cannot be Omniscient, yet we may
become in a manner entirely Intellectual, and thoroughly understand, and as
affectionately relish the true interest of our own Souls, and perfectly discern
all the concerns thereof, and be accompanied with all those Divine Truths, and
Blissfull Speculations, which are requisite for the perfecting of Humane
Happiness; which in our Sphere, is an imitation of the Divine Omnisciency.

And lastly, Though it is impossible that any Creature should be infinitely
good, yet it is capable of being filled with a Spirit of unexpressible
Benignity; and to be a faithful well-willer to the happiness and prosperity of
every Creature of God, and therefore to be in a perpetual promptness and
readiness to help them that are in any distress, and to rejoice in the good and
welfare of every parcel of the Creation.

And this is briefly the amiable Face or Image of God, as it is visible or
communicable to us; which we see by the beams of its own brightness, as we see
the Sun by its own Light, though not in that real luster nor bigness that it is.

And I hope now it will plainly appear, That the recuperation of this Divine
Image is the true expergefaction or resuscitation of the Soul, from a state of
Sleep or Death, into the most full and ample functions of Life: Of which the
first degree was self-motion or self-activity: For mere passivity, or to be
moved or acted by another, either without a man's will or against it, this is
the condition of such as are either dead or asleep; as to go of a man's self, is
a Symptom of one alive or awake. Wherefore whatever is done in us by mere
Passion or Ignorance, seems rather to be acted upon us than acted by us; and to
be a defect of that degree of Life which we call self-motion or self-activity;
in such cases we seeming rather to be carried by surprise, than to go of our
own accords, as men that are dead drunk may be haled or disposed of where
others please. And every one that is acted by Passion is drunk; or if acted
upon through Ignorance, asleep; and so are deprived of that degree of Life
which is self-activity, a doing things from an inward or thorough assent to
them: Which no man does in a wicked action, because every one that commits
wickedness, does it to his own infinite disinterest and wrong; which no man did
ever yet, nor even can assent to. Whence it is plain that he is not, in this
regard, self-active; and that therefore he is in the state of Death, out of
which the Image of God awakes him; namely the power of Christ in him, which
shows him his way clearly, that he may make a choice never to be repented of,
and enables him to walk in that way, and to bear strongly and victoriously
against all the assaults of the Body, or suggestions of this Worldly Life: And
so by the self-activity of that spiritual or immaterial Principle in him, he
rules this little World of his by irresistible Laws, as God himself does the
great one. And this I think is one considerable degree of the evigilation of
the Soul through the Divine Image.

And the Second is no less considerable, and which we have touched upon already
in the former. For if Ignorance be Sleep, the Intellectual state of the Soul
must needs be an eminent evigilation of her. And if to grow Corporeal be to
become more inert, more unactive and drousie, then surely to become more
Spiritual must be joined with a greater measure of Life and Activity. And what
actions are more Spiritual, than those which the Soul exerts her self into in
rational disquisitions, and divine speculations, and in the search of the most
noble and momentous Truths, concerning God and Nature? When she unravels all
into certain immutable and indelible Ideas of things, which she was taught by
no touch from external matter, but are the most inward hidden Life of the Soul,
that Adytum or Oracle that speaks truth from the deepest recess of her Essence,
into which she cannot enter, but by a lusty rowzing up, and rubbing her Eyes
clean of all those mists and fumes that arise from Corporeal Phantasms, or
accustomary prejudices. These operations certainly must be very intellectual
and incorporeal, and therefore very much raised above the Body, that Sepulcher
or Dormitory of the Soul; and not to be performed but by the excitation of such
kind of Spirits, as are in some measure congenerous to that Heavenly Body, that
Luminous or Ethereal Vehicle in which the Soul shall ride as in her Triumphal
Chariot, at the general Appearance in the last day. I say the closer and more
noble intellectual Operations of the Soul are not to be performed but by the
assistance of more tenuious and fiery Spirits (whence the Oracles call the mind
(...) mentem igneam) which are contrary to that phlegmatic sluggishness and
drownedness, that the Worldly and Carnally-minded are overflown with.

But besides that the Principle from whence these Intellectual actions flow,
argues a notorious excitation or expergefaction of the mind therein; that which
is Intellectual being plainly Divine or Godlike; whom the Schools rightly
define to be Actus purissimus, pure Life, and Essential Energy: That the Soul
in her Intellectual Operations is roused as it were out of a Sleep, will
farther appear, if we compare the functions of the Terrestrial Life with those
of the Intellectual. The largest Operation of the former of which, is that of
our Eye, which takes in but this Visible Hemisphere of the World; and if it
could take in the whole, according to this contracted proportion, it were a
pitiful scant thing, such as is infinitely lesser than what our Understanding
conceives the Universe to be, nay, many thousand times less than the Earth,
which is but as a Mathematical point in comparison of the body of the World.
How contracted then is Touch, and Taste, and the other Senses! For the love of
which, when the Soul is immersed into the Body, and wholly given up to them, it
is plain that her functions of Life are infinitely contracted, and that she
lies asleep or dead to her largest Faculties; and that therefore the excitation
of them is her expergefaction into infinitely a more ample Sphere of Life.

To all which you may add, that those that are regenerate into the Image of God
or Christ, there does accrue to them by virtue of their Second Birth, an
Intellectual or Divine Sense; which you may also if you please call Moral, since
what is Moral is also Intellectual. For it is an Intellectual Sense which
discerns the pulchritude or deformity of things or actions. And as all
handsomeness and proportionableness of the forms and shapes of things in the
Universe, is from that Universal Intellect which is the maker of the World; so
all honest and decorous actions, is from an Intellectual Principle in us, which
bounds and figures into due proportion, all our Corporeal Passions or Actions,
which otherwise would flow rudely and undeterminately, like the tumbling of the
particles of matter it self, committed to no other guide than Chance or
Fortune. Wherefore he that walks, as in the day, decently and honestly, it is a
sign his Eyes are opened, and that he is not asleep: He that disrelishes every
evil motion, whether in himself or others; that feels or sees plainly what is
just or unjust; that abominates every appearance of haughtiness, or envy, or
worldly baseness, and brutish intemperance; to whom these things, and others of
the like kind, are distastful, unsavory and unsufferable; it is a sign that he
is awoke into this part of the Intellectual Life which we call Moral. But such
as have neither love of Virtue nor aversation of Vice, whether in themselves or
others, they have these Senses bound by a Lethargick Sleep, out of which the
recuperation of the Divine Image, wherever it is, loosens and awakens men
into a perpetual quickness of perception of what is truly Good or Evil.

Thus apparently is the Image of Christ the resuscitation of the Soul into
these two first parts of Life, which we called self-activity, and sense or
perception.

The last, but not the least considerable, is Pleasure, Love or Joy: Which how
little it is in the Worldly-minded, I have above declared: But how unspeakably
great it must be in him, upon whom this glorious Image of God is risen, is
discoverable at first sight. For this Image does most eminently contain in it
the sense of Love or Goodness. God is Love, and he that abides in Love,
abides in God, and God in him. Which intellectual Love or Goodness, is
certainly the highest joy or pleasure that Humane Nature is capable of, the
flower and quintessence of all sweetness. Here Is no afflicting Care, nor
consuming Envy, no disquieting Lust, nor tyrannical Superstition, no distrust
or fear of our Future State, nor any jealousies concerning the Favor of God;
this Spirit of Love being an inseparable Pledge thereof. And even the more
miserable Objects in this present scene of things, cannot divest him of his
Happiness, but rather modifie it; the sweetness of his Spirit being melted into
a kindly compassion in the behalf of others: Whom if he be able to help, it is
a greater accession to his joy; and if he cannot, the being conscious to
himself of so sincere a compassion, and so harmonious and suitable to the
present state of things, carries along with it some degree of Pleasure, like
mournful Notes of Music exquisitely well fitted to the sadness of the Ditty.
But this not unpleasant surprise of Melancholy cannot last long: And this cool
allay, this soft and moist Element of Sorrow will be soon dried up like the
Morning Dew at the rising of the Summer Sun; when but once the warm and
cheerful gleams of that Intellectual Light that represents the glorious and
comfortable comprehension of the Divine Providence that runs through all
things, shall dart into our Souls the remembrance, how infinitely scant the
region of these more Tragical Spectacles is, compared with the rest of the
Universe, and how short a time they last. For so the consideration of the
Happiness of the whole will swallow up this small pretense of discontent, and
the Soul will be wholly overflown with unexpressible joy and exultation; it
being warmed and cheared with that joy that is the joy of God, that free and
infinite Good, who knows the periods and issues of all things, and whose
pleasure is in Good as such, and not in contracted selfishness, or in petty and
sinister projects.

And certainly this is such an enlargement of Life, that He must needs seem
either dead or asleep, and fixed and congealed in some contractive and
obstupifying Dream, whom the love and admiration of himself, (and covering over
that sack of dirt, his Body; and wholly rejoicing in the ease and pleasure of
it, and the honor or respect conciliated to his own particular Person) has
made unsensible and incapable of this transcendent Satisfaction and Happiness I
have described. Which leads me to the Fourth Particular, viz.

4. That this Mystical Resurrection of Christ, or the Revelation of the Face or
Image of God in us, is the only solid Enjoyment and Satisfaction to the Souls
of the Faithful even in the Life: Which I need not at all insist upon, the
truth thereof being so exceeding manifest from the foregoing Particular. And
David accordingly has declared it in the 4th Psalm, Many say, who will show us
any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. And so in my
Text, At the awaking of thy image I shall be satisfied therewith. The LXX have
it, (...), I shall be really fed, when I shall see thy Glory. Not according to
the condition of those whom the Prophet describes, As when an hungry man
dreameth, and behold he eats, but he waketh and his soul is empty; or as when
a thirsty man dreameth, and behold he drinks, but he awaketh, and behold he
is faint: But according as our Savior Christ has promised, I am the bread of
life; he that comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that beleiveth on me,
shall never thirst. For being fed and transformed into the Image of Christ by
truly partaking of his Body and Blood, they have that which fills their vastest
Capacities, and fits them for an Eternal Enjoyment thereof. Which perpetuity of
the conditon plainly shows that the condition is most natural; and that
perfection which is most natural must needs be most satisfactory: For every
thing seeks the perfection of its own Nature; and when it is where it is most
natural for it to be, is naturally satisfied, and rests therein. And this
briefly shall serve for the Fourth Particular.

5. The Fifth and Last is, That the way to arrive to this Satisfaction, which
is the enjoyment of the Face or Image of God, is Righteousness or Sincerity of
Heart. [I will behold thy Face in Righteousness.]

I must confess that Righteousness is sometimes of so comprehensive a Sense,
that it takes in all that which we have described in the Image of God; and so
is in a manner the same with it: And if it were understood so here, the Sense
would be good; for by this Image we do see the Face of God. [ In thy light we
shall see light.] But by Righteousness I will rather understand that in us
which answers to Diaphaneity rather than to Light; and which I would render
Faithfulness, Vprightness and Sincerity of Spirit. For in such a Sense as that,
the LXX sometimes Translate (...) faithful and true. And I conceive that Purity
and Sincerity is that Righteousness that will lead us at length to the Vision
of God, according as our Savior has also promised, Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God. So the Psalmist, This is the generation of them
that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob; even of them that seek him in
Sincerity and Truth, to whom God is so faithful that he will be found of them,
nor shall their labor be in vain in the Lord.

And that a man may know whether he be in the way or no, I shall only briefly
intimate what Sincerity is; and that he may have no excuse to keep out of the
way, I must futher superadd that it is in his power to keep in it. For I say,
it is in a man's power to be sincere, though it be not in his power to be
righteous in that other usual Sense: For to be sincere is only to do what we
can, and what our Conscience witnesses we can do; which God will graciously
accept in Christ, and endue us with further strength so long as we make use of
that which we have already. Now it is Noematically true, and wants no further
demonstration, That we can do what we can do: And therefore it is but the
examination of our selves, whether we do all that which our own Consciences
tell us we both ought to do and can do, and thereby we shall easily discover
whether we be in the way toward this blissful Vision or no: And if we find our
selves out of it, we cannot excuse our selves for our wandering, since it is in
our power to keep in the way, (that is) to be sincere, as certainly as it is
in our power to do what is in our power. And therefore the falling short of
this Happiness lies at every man's door, and God and Providence must be quit of
all that evil that these Loyterers must once sadly complain of, when it is too
late.

Every man therefore must daily examine his own Conscience in this: For as the
keeping close to this way of Sincerity, or doing what is in our power will
unfailingly, through assistance of fresh supplies of Heaven, lead us directly
to the Vision of God; so he that finds himself remiss and unsincere, may be as
certain, that he is out of the way to that Happiness. He that lays his hand
to the plow and looks back, is not fit for the kingdom of God. But if we
continue in the way of Sincerity, which God has put in our power to do, as
has been already demonstrated, it is impossible but that a man shall find an
increase of Divine Assistances, and a successful progress; God imparting
strength, according to the fidelity of the user thereof, as seems to be
adumbrated in the Parable of the Talents. [ Habenti dabitur,] that is, been
utenti; and [ Fac quod in te est, and Deus adjuvabit voluntatem tuam] are, I
must confess, but short and trite Sayings, but such as fall from the mouths of
those that travel in the direct road to Heaven. For the aid and assistance of
God is never wanting to such: But they hold on their Journey in cheerfulness
and constancy, with that Song of the Psalmist in their mouths, Blessed is the
man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways: which going through
the vale of misery use it for a well; and the pools are filled with water. They
will go from strength to strength, and unto the God of Gods appears every one
of them in Sion. Or with this of my Text, As for me I will behold thy face in
righteousness; when I shall awake into thy likeness, I shall be satisfied
therewith.

DISCOURSE IX. ROMANS viii. 17. And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and
joint-heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified with him.
THIS Text is the evidence of our Eternal Inheritance.

There is none here (I suppose) so dull, so slow and so senseless of his own
good, and outward welfare, but that if he were to purchase any Worldly
Possession, he would look that his Conveyances were sure, and his Title good
and warrantable. How much more sollicitous and careful ought we to be
concerning our Everlasting Inheritance in Heaven? To inform our selves whether
there be any such Possession or no; and to whom it appertains; what manner of
persons shall be made partakers of it: So that our hopes of future Felicity may
be settled upon good grounds: That they be not all blown away with our last
breath; and the extinguishing of this Life, leave us not to eternal horror of
darkness.

This present Text of Scripture, will answer both those Queries; which contains
these two Doctrines.

1. That God has prepared an Inheritance for his Children. 2. That they that
would have this Inheritance must suffer with Christ.
I. That God has prepared an Inheritance for his Children, is plain out of
Scripture. (And verily I would not go about to prove so evident a Truth, did
not the lives of men contradict it; who live as though there were neither
Heaven nor Hell, no Reward nor Judgment to come.) Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world. And Coloss. 1. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet
to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light.

And surely it is a very reasonable thing, that God should as well provide for
our inward man as for our outward. The Light of the Sun, the seasonable Showers
of Rain, the timely Fruits of the Earth; all these has he prepared, and many
more for this Natural Life of man; Nay, his careful Providence extends it self
to the young Ravens, and the Lillies of the field: And shall his Goodness fall
short in providing for that dear and precious Life derived unto us by his own
Spirit, making us his Sons and Holy Offspring? No, surely God will not forget
that which is so near to himself; when his Fatherly Benignity circuits the
utmost verge of his Creature.

Add unto this, that we our selves are the House and Inheritance of God. Know
you not that your bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost? says the Apostle.
And the Prophet Esaias; The vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of
Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant. And Cant. 5. The voice of my
beloved that knocks, saying, Open to me, my sister: For my head is filled
with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. And elsewhere in Holy
Scripture, God is said to dwell in us, and walk in us: And Israel is called the
inheritance of God. Wherefore God in a kind of Gratitude, as I may so say, will
provide us an Inheritance, since that we (as he himself testifies) are an
Inheritance to him.

Now if any man be desirous to know what an Inheritance this is that God has
prepared: It is no less than a Kingdom. And how great an esteem is put upon an
Earthly Kingdom, is very well known to you all: Which if it be so desirable,
how much more desirable is the Kingdom of Heaven, that nor time, nor tumult can
ever demolish? This Kingdom of Heaven, of God, or Christ, is the Inheritance of
the Sons of God with Christ.

But if any one rest unsatisfied yet; and would further know what the Kingdom
of God is. Let him listen to S. Paul, Romans 14. 17. The kingdom of God is not
meat nor drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

But this will seem even nothing to him that has not the Spirit of
Righteousness, Peace and Joy: Wherefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 7. etc.
But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world unto our glory. Which none of the princes of this
world knew; for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory. But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things that God has prepared for them that
love him. But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit: For the Spirit
searches all things, even the deep things of God. For what man knows the
things of a man, save the spirit of a man that is in him? Even so, the things
of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. Now we have received, not the
spirit of the world, but the spirit that is of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given to us of God.

In a word therefore, Beloved, the Inheritance of the Children of God is the
Spirit of God, and all that it does discover; as the Sun is the lot and the
inheritance of the Natural Eye, and all visibles laid open by it in Nature. And
can any thing be wanting to them that are sharers in that Inheritance? (If I
may call them sharers, where every one is full possessour of the whole; as the
Sun is alike wholly in every eye.) Can our Souls be larger than the Life of
God? Or our Understanding not filled and satisfied by his all-knowing Spirit?
Can our Will wax restless or anxious, where the Understanding finds out and
feels the greatest good that any thing is capable of; where the pure and
undefiled Affection, baths her silver plumes in eternal love and delight? What
is the Soul more than infinite, that it should desire any Inheritance greater
than God?

But it were now more seasonable to make some Use to our selves from this
Doctrine so infinitely plain, or infinitely inexplainable.

First, Who cannot hence condemn all Avarice, Drunkenness, Fleshly Lust,
Voluptuousness; the bartering away this Glorious Inheritance of the Everlasting
Kingdom of God, for the Muck of this World; choked with the Cares of this
World; undermining our Neighbors by false and treacherous practices;
overreaching them in bargainings, and cheating indeed our selves of Eternal
LIfe by our own couzenages: Instead of being filled with the Spirit, to be full
of base liquor, drowning our Reason and Conscience, and laying our selves open
to the despite of the Devil, and the shame of the World: Chaffering away for a
light momentany fit of Pleasure, or some seducing wanton Lust, the Inheritance
of the good Spirit of God, the sweet and comfortable Fellowship of the Holy
Ghost, the Joys of Heaven, the full Contentments and unspeakable Delights of
that hidden Paradise, that Garden of all sweetness and deliciousness?

Secondly, The consideration of this future excellent state, and glorious royal
condition, may afford much comfort to men of low degree, and meaner fortune.
What though our Means be small, our Calling base and dishonorable before men:
This time will certainly over; and that quickly: Though I be poor here, a
Servant and Bond-slave, a Beggar; Yet hereafter I shall be rich, free, noble, a
Prince, a King, an Emperor: Then shall I be Lord; not of a larger spot of
Ground, consisting of Dirt and Gravel, and vvithering Grass, and perishing
Trees, the sight of which every nights sleep takes from me; but of the
boundless Heavens, the everlasting Beauty of God, where with never-vvaking
Eyes I shall alvvayes behold his excellent Glory.

This, I say, may comfort the poorer sort; they being as capable, if not more
capable of this precious Inheritance, than Lords and Princes of the Earth, than
Kings and Caesar's, than Dukes and Emperors. Gal. 3. 26, etc. For you are all
the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there
is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: For ye are all one
in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are you Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to promise.

But Thirdly and Lastly: Is it so indeed that there is prepared for men of all
conditions of Life, such a rich Inheritance? Let then all men of what condition
soever, examine themselves, and try what assurance they find in themselves, in
their own Souls, of this future Happiness.

What then is the Sign? That brings me to my Second Doctrine, viz.

II. That the heirs of the Kingdom must suffer.

So says the Text, Heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ; if so be that we
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him. Which Truth is
manifest out of sundry places of Scripture: I will name only two. Acts 14. 22.
We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. And Coloss. 1.
10, 11, 12. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God:
Strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all
patience, and long-suffering with joyfulness; Giving thanks unto the Father,
which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in
light.

What? Shall we think (Beloved) to obtain Heaven at a more easy rate, than we
purchase any Temporal Honor or Estate? Multa tulit fecitque puer: Those that
are designed for some special piece of Earthly Preferment, sweat and toil for
it even from their very Childhood, by industrious Education. But we think to
have Heaven for an old song (as they say) or for a lazily repeated Pater
Noster, for a word, for an imagination, for a fancy, a thought, an empty
faith, for nothing. Who, in the name of God, told us so? My Text contradicts
it: And Scripture will not contradict my Text; because my Text is Scripture. No
verily; It confirms it: Be not deceived, God is not mocked; as a man sowes, so
shall he reap; says the same Apostle that wrote my Text.

But I will prove by a threefold Reason, That the heirs of the Kingdom of God
shall suffer really themselves.

First, From the Antipathy betwixt the World and the Children of God. Wisd. 2.
Let us lie in wait for the righteous, because he is not for our turn, and he is
clean contrary to our doings. He upbraideth us with offending the law, and
objecteth to our infamy, the transgressings of our education. He professes
that he has the knowledge of God, and he calls himself the child of the
Lord. He was made to reprove our thoughts. He is grievous unto us even to
behold, for his life is not like other men's, his ways are of another fashion.
Hence do the Children of God oftentimes incurr much mischief, by the wicked
plots of the ungodly: And however, if they escape this outward evil, they are
grieved and vexed continually by their daily misdeeds.

But Secondly, The Will of God is, that all that he admits to that Glorious
Inheritance be tried first, and he chastises every Son that he does receive, 1
Pet. 1. 3. etc. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; unto an inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you; who are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in
the last time: Wherein you greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need
be) ye are in heaviness through many temptations: That the trial of your faith,
being much more precious than of gold that perishes, though it be tried with
fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, and Lastly, We cannot escape suffering and the exercise of our
Christian Patience, by reason of often assaults the Devil makes against us, who
like a roaring lion goes about seeking whom he may devour; as also for the close
siege that sin lays continually against us, that (...), that sin that so
easily besets us on every side. Heb. 12. 1.

But to display the Sufferings of the Heirs of the Kingdom more distinctly, I
will cast them into these four several kinds.

1. In Estate or Fortune. 2. In Name or Estimation. 3. In Body. 4. In Soul or
Spirit.
1. In Estate.] As if any man by his Pious Life, his delight in the Word of
God, in Brotherly Conference or Community in Spiritual things; by his rebuking
his Neighbor for Swearing, Profaning the Name of God; or by his Frugality and
Sobriety, that he will not run to the same excess of riot with the rest of his
Neighbors, but lives temperately, honestly and justly: If this man (as it is
not improbable but he may) bring on himself the envy of wicked men, Sons of
Belial, or at least their dislike; and so they having power, or empair his
Estate by unequal Mulcts, or deny him his due Desires: I say, he suffers as an
Heir of Heaven, as a Member of Christ, as a Child of God; and Vengeance shall
be poured out upon his enemies, but his Happiness shall be increased.

2. In Name.] As our Savior; who for his being in company with wicked men, to
convert them and heal them, (as he himself answered, The whole have not need of
the physician but they that be sick) he notwithstanding was termed a glutton, a
winebibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners. Mat. 11. For his casting out
Devils, a Conjurer: For doing good and healing on the Sabbath Day, a
Sabbath-breaker: For telling the Jews that which was true, that they were going
about to kill him, a Demoniack, or one possessed of the Devil: For teaching the
people the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, a Seducer. And so S. John the
Baptist, for his abstemiousness, his temperance, and severe manner of Life, was
counted also one possessed of the Devil: S. Paul for preaching the Gospel, a
pestilent fellow, one that turned the world upside down: That young man, one of
the Sons of the Prophets, whom Elisha sent to anoint Iehu King, the Captains of
Ioram counted him and called him a mad fellow. Wherefore came this mad fellow
to thee. 2 Kings 9.

The Frugal, they will call Nigards: The Conscientious, Timorous or
Superstitious: The Humble, base-Spirited or Silly: The Harmless and Quiet,
Fools or Innocents: The Charitable, Papists: The Zealous and fervent in Spirit,
Puritans: Godly and Pious Professors, Hypocrites. The Devil has found out a
nickname for whatsoever is good: That Blasphemous Mouth can miscall every
Attribute of God. But let us not be discouraged for all the reproaches of the
World: For if we suffer in Name for well-doing, our Shame here is nothing to
that Honor and Glory that shall be revealed in us hereafter.

I will only raise one Use from this point, and so leave it.

Did our Savior Christ, his Apostles, the Prophets of old, and the Holy men of
God, undergo such harsh Censures? Were they branded with such notorious Names,
and undeserved Calumnies? Then are not we to judge ill of any man merely from
the report of men, till we see his Life our selves. They said of John, that he
had a Devil. They made the Son of man, a man Gluttonous, a Wine-bibber, a
Friend of Publicans and Sinners: But Wisdom is justified of her children, says
our Savior, Matthew. 11. 19. That is, by its fruits. By their fruit you shall
know them. And if we find Purity of Life, far be it from us, Beloved, that we
should speak reproachfully against such as we are not able to judge.

Wherefore let us rather mortify our sinful Lusts, and purge our own Souls of
Corruption, that they may be a habitation for the Holy Ghost (rather than to
give ill Names, or give credence to ill reports of others we do not know) our
selves being still in our Carnal condition, Slaves of Sin and Satan; Servants
of Pride, of Envy, of Avarice, of Drunkenness, of Whoredom, of Lasciviousness:
Which whosoever has, let him be assured that he has not the Spirit of God;
for it will not abide in such a sink of Sin. Wherefore he cannot judge: But he
that is spiritual judges all things; and he himself is judged of no man. 1
Cor. 2.

And thus I have briefly run through the external Sufferings of the Heirs of
the Kingdom of Christ, in Fortune and Name. The internal follow, in Body and
Spirit.

3. In Body.] These kind of Sufferings you may read of, Heb. 11. Others were
tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings; yea,
moreover, of bonds and imprisonments, They were stoned, they were sawn asunder,
were tempted, were slain with the sword: They wandered in sheepskins, and
goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented.

It would be a long task to reckon up all the manners of the Sufferings of Holy
Martyrs, which they underwent, under the tyranny of bloody salvage Heathen.
Heading, and Hanging, and Crucifying, were nothing for the satisfaction of
their fury. They were broyl'd on Grid-irons; they were fried in Frying-pans;
they were boiled in Cauldrons; they were put in the Brazen Bull; they were
fired at the Stake; cast into Ovens; fired in Ships, and so thrust from the
shore into the deep; fired in their own Houses; cast upon burning Coals; made
to walk upon burning Coals; burnt under the Armpits with hot Irons: They had
their Hearts riven out of their warm Body; had their Skin flean off from their
live Flesh; had their Feet tied to boughs of two near Trees, which boughs being
at first forcibly brought together, suddenly let go rent their Body in twain:
They were trodden down by Horses; cast, bound and naked, into Vaults to be
eaten of Rats and Mice: They had their Flesh pulled off with Pinsers, torn off
with Iron-rakes; were squeezed to death in Wine-presses; were tied upon Wheels,
which turning, rubbed their naked Body against sharp pegs of Iron: They were
hung by their Hands and Feet with their Face downward over choking Smoke: They
were set out on high in the Sun, having their naked Skin besmeared with Honey,
to be stung with Bees and Waspes. The Devil spent all the skill and malice he
had in finding ways and engines of Torture for them.

God make us truly thankful unto him for his Mercy so long continued to us,
that we have without terror or torment so many years enjoyed the Christian
Religion in such Purity: And give us Grace to repent us of our unworthy
walking, and unbeseemingly of so great a Light.

But as concerning these Sufferings of the Body, Beloved, such is the love of
God to Mankind, and so reasonable is his Service, that he has made it no
necessary condition of Eternal Life, actually to suffer them. But we ought to
be so minded, that rather than to relinquish the true Christian Faith (or do
any thing which we know offends God) we would rather dye a thousand deaths. And
this was S. Paul's resolution, Acts 21. I am ready not only to be bound, but
also to dye for the name of the Lord Jesus.

But yet there is a Suffering in the Body, that we must needs suffer if we will
approve our selves the Children of God, and Heirs of that Glorious Kingdom: And
this Suffering we must inflict upon our own selves. 1 Cor. 9. 27. But I keep
under my body, and bring it into subjection. These Sufferings are most
acceptable to God, and requisite forerunners of Eternal Life. If you live
after the flesh, you shall dye; but if you through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, you shall live. Verse 13. of this 8th Chapter to the Romans.
1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts, that war against the soul. And Galat. 4. 24. They that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.

You see plainly then, That we are not Christ's, nor Gods, nor Heirs of God with
Christ; unless we suffer with Christ, in mortifying all Bodily Lusts, in
curbing our inordinate Desire of eating or drinking; unless we study to keep
under the Body, and live chastely and continently. If we will be Heirs of that
Heavenly Inheritance, we must bring under all evil and carnal concupiscence. If
we will partake of that Eternal Glory in Heaven, we must be content to suffer
reproach and evil speeches amongst men.

If any man ask, what Necessity, what Reason is there? I will briefly show him
how it comes about.

First, For suffering in Name (for I will step so much back). There is no man
loves to be disquieted in mind, or vexed: But it would disquiet us, and gall us
exceedingly, to be found fools; so that we have not the heart to find our
selves so, it would so discontent our natural proud Spirit: Hence we blame
other men rather than our selves; and say, they be in the false way. So did the
Pharisees to our Savior, and to his Apostles: And thus were the Prophets used
before them; because their ways were of another sort, their speeches and
actions of another fashion from the World.

You will better understand it in some Examples. A Carnal or Natural man, that
has no Sense of the Spirit of God, and is unacquainted with its Operations,
derides such performances as Prayers, Exhortations, or what so else may proceed
from thence, as truly and extraordinarily proceeding from the Spirit of God;
and counts those men, that acknowledge Gods power in them in the performance of
such things, weak men, crack'd-brain'd Enthusiasts, Fanatical Fools, silly
Lunaticks: But all this proceeds out of Pride, Envy, and Self-love; he himself
being not able to perform such Duties, or at least not in that manner.

So some that have got the trick of Praying ex tempore, by Custom the Mother of
Confidence and Dexterity (Ignorance and want of a true Sense of the Majesty of
Heaven upholding them in their rash performance) these men will vilify Justice
and Uprightness, Humility and Patience, and the mortification of our Sensual
Lusts; because they find in themselves no such Virtues, nor intend to trouble
themselves so much as to practice them. Then for the upholding of their own
credit, they must give them poor contemptible terms, that they are but
Heathenish Virtues, such as Socrates or Plato had, and make but a Moral man;
and that there is no such need for a Christian to have them. But, Beloved, be
not so deceived; but observe this Truth: Though Moral Virtue carries us no
higher than an Heathen; yet without the exercise of Moral Virtue, and inward
life and liking of it, we are no true Christians.

The Sum is this, That the good ways of God are spoken against and miscalled,
that wicked men may keep their credit, and yet walk indeed in the ways of the
Devil.

To the Second I answer, That it is necessary that we suffer in the Flesh;
because that if we do not keep down the Flesh and its suggestions, the Spirit
will be choked and stifled by that filth and corruption. The carnal mind is
enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can
be. Ver. 7. The carnal mind, that is, (...), the bent, will, intent, liking, or
desire of the Flesh is enmity with God; desires against the Will of God, and
will not be obedient to the Law of God; nor indeed can be. Wherefore we are to
kill it, to mortify it, to crucify it; that we may be dead to sin or the
desire of the Flesh, and alive to God, by his enquickening Spirit, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Here is the Patience of the Saints: Here their great
Suffering.

4. But I go on to their last Affliction, which is in Spirit: And that is
twofold, 1. The wrestling or conflict with spiritual wickedness in Heavenly
places. 2. The suffering with the Spirit of Christ.


For the First, Ephesians. 6. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood; but
against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of
this world; against spiritual wickedness in high places.

Beloved, The great work of Salvation is not then accomplished, when we have
through the power of God, and the strength of Jesus Christ, overcome the Lusts
of the Body; as Drunkenness, Gluttony, Whoredom, and the like: But we shall
find a new task, the taming of our proud Spirit. For after our first conquest,
I mean, the overcoming the Lusts of the Body; then pride and haughtiness, and
contempt of our Neighbor, the thinking of our selves somebody, rigor and
unmercifulness to our sinful Brother, the magnifying of our selves in some
conceited Opinions, searching out and confidently concluding concerning the
secrets of God, censuring and contemning all men that are not of the same
conceit in Divine Speculations with our selves: These and many such like evil
delusions the Devil will sow in our Hearts. The Devil himself is neither
Whoremaster, nor Drunkard, nor Glutton: But he is Proud, but he is
Contemptuous, but he is Hypocritical, but he is a Blood-sucker, a Murderer from
the beginning; full of self-love, full of self-admiration, full of cruelty
under pretense of Religion, full of deceit and injustice under pretense of
Truth and maintenance of Godliness, full of ambition and desire of rule, even
over the Souls and Consciences of men, full of self-applause and arrogance, and
strutting in his own supposed knowledge and power. But true denial of our
selves, and unfeigned deep humility, a sensible apprehension of our
nothingness, as I may so say, or real detestable vileness, will cause such
dreadful agonies in our Souls, that no tongue can express nor heart conceive
that has not had experience of those bitter Sufferings: With so great pain and
torment are we torn and riven from our spiritual wickedness, disjointed and
dislimb'd, as it were, from our head, that Prince of Pride and Father of
Disobedience, the Devil.

But I will now show you the other kind of suffering, which is the suffering in
Spirit by reason of other men's wickedness.

When we are united to God and Christ in the union of Spirit, then do those
things that are contrary to the Spirit of God, as all manner of sin, trouble
our Spirit: Envious or cruel acts, drunkenness, deceit, pride, rigor,
fierceness, folly, and whatsoever else is sinful or vain; our Spirit being
enlivened by the Spirit of God, is grieved and vexed at these wickednesses or
vanities: Then we plainly see how Christ is cut, and lashed, and hewed, and
stabbed with our wicked deeds, how he is crucified afresh, as the Apostle
speaks. Here may the true Church of God, the Holy Jerusalem, take up fitly
that Lamentation in Jeremy. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold
and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. See how the Prophet David
was affected with the wickedness of men. Psalm. 119. Mine eyes gush out with
water, because men keep not thy law. I beheld the transgressors, and was
grieved because men keep not thy word. So Lot was tormented at the wickedness
of Sodom. 2 Pet. 2. 7. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy
conversation of the wicked. For that righteous man dwelling among them, in
seeing and hearing vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with their
unlawful deeds. So God complains in the Spirit of his Prophet Amos. Behold I am
pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves. Amos 2. 13.

And surely there is good Reason it should be so, a sure Necessity. For Fire is
not more contrary to Water, nor Light to Darkness; nor any enmity in Nature or
among men so strong, as that betwixt the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of the
Devil that is in evil wicked men; according to which they live and act. So
then, when that detestable ugliness flows out in their words or actions, it
must needs offend the Children of God; God being of pure eyes, and not abiding
to behold wickedness. Hence are they driven into consuming zeal, or deep
inexpressible grief. And this is the second kind of suffering in Spirit.

But, Beloved, take this in by the way, That he that can be angry at other men's
faults, and not much more angry at his own, is a dissembler, an Hypocrite.
Herein let every man examine himself. But he that is so stupid, that he is not
moved at all with the wickedness of others or of himself, is perfectly dead in
Sin, and is in the full power of Satan, and is covered with Eternal Death and
Darkness.

THIS Second Doctrine is now sufficiently plain; That they that would be Heirs
of the Kingdom of Christ must suffer with Christ. I will again here stir you up
to an examination and trial of your Spiritual state, whether you have any
interest in the Heavenly Inheritance.

The Sign and infallible Seal is our suffering with Christ. But not any
suffering: For the fuffering in Estate if we escape it, yet may we be
inheritors of Heaven. But to be evil spoken of for Christ, is harder to efcape;
yet admit we escape that too, we may for all that be secure of our Eternal
Inheritance. Nor have all that are now with God been whipped, and tortured, and
put to death or martyrdom: But yet we ought to be so minded, that we had rather
endure all these things, than depart from Christ. But all the other sufferings;
as abstinence from voluptuousness, from the delights of the flesh, from priding
our selves in any thing that God has bestowed upon us; a suppressing our
anger, abstaining from the sweetness of revenge, denying of the ever-craving
appetite of covetousness; keeping our tongues from the delight of defamation
and evil reports, our ears from hearing evil of our Neighbor; These be
necessary. All which endeavors will surely afflict and vex the corrupt Natural
Spirit of a man: But he that will not undergo this suffering, believe it,
Beloved, he is none of Christ's; he has neither part nor portion in the Kingdom
of Christ and of God. But he that does, though with great agony of Soul and
affliction of Mind, fight against all this corruption of Flesh and Spirit; He
may bless God for his good condition, and with good reason lay hold of the hope
of Heaven. They that are troubled in Spirit for the wickedness of men, the
profanation of Gods name, and any manner of sin and iniquity; these men may
conclude that they have the Spirit of God, and consequently that they are the
Sons of God: And if sons, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with
Christ: If so be that we suffer with him: Which our own Spirit together with
Gods Spirit does testify to us, that we do; and that we shall be certainly
glorified with him.

Let every man herein examine himself, that he may find a true ground of his
hope of Eternal Salvation. For none shall be saved but they that are the
Children of God, elect to this Inheritance; none are the Children of God, but
those that have the Spirit of God; none have the Spirit of God, but those that
suffer with Christ, that mortify their own sins and are grieved for the sins
of others.

Be not deceived (Beloved) with flattering dreams and phansies: This is the
very Truth of God, and according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And this Truth
being so apparently true, I need not exhort in many words, to those Christian
Sufferings.

Stand fast in the true Faith of the Power of God, and quit your selves like
men. Cast away all softness and effeminateness; and be so stout-hearted as to
endure the pangs of Death, of the mortification of your sinful flesh and carnal
mind, for his sake that dyed for you. Resist unto Blood; even unto the effusion
of the wicked Life, and unrighteous devilish Spirit that resideth in you.

For this is the good will of your God, that you be mortified, that you be
thoroughly sanctified, that you destroy all things contrary to God in you. 1 Thessalonians. 4. And let this be the First Motive to run with patience the race that
is set before us.

Secondly, These our Sufferings, though great, are not comparable to the rich
Reward, that Glorious Inheritance in Heaven. 2 Cor. 4. For which cause we faint
not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by
day. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

Thirdly, If we compare the future state of the Wicked and the Godly, how all
their Glory and Pleasure vanishes, and how the Children of God are received
into Everlasting Happiness, crowned with Eternal Light, it will more firmly
establish us in our Christian resolutions.

It cannot be better described, then it is in the Book of Wisdom. The
iniquities of the wicked shall convince them to their own face; and they shall
approach the tribunal of God with fear and quaking. But then shall the
righteous man stand in great boldness, before the face of such as have
afflicted him, and made no account of his labors. When they see it, they shall
be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of his
salvation. And they repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say
within themselves: This is he whom we had some time in derision, and a proverb
of reproach. We fools counted his life madness, and his end to be without
honor. How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot is among the
saints. Wisd. 5. You may read the whole Chapter at your leisure.

Fourthly, and Lastly, The Inheritance of Heaven is conditional: If we suffer
with him, we shall be glorified with him; which implies, if we do not suffer
with him, we shall not be glorified with him. 2 Timothy 2. 11. This is a faithful
saying, that if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer
with him, we shall also reign with him.

Wherefore, Beloved, sooth not up your selves in vain hopes and flatteries: For
without killing of your sinful Lusts, without Mortification there is no
Salvation. He that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. Now no body
has the Spirit of Christ, unless he be dead unto sin: For if he be dead unto
Sin, then shall he be raised from Death to Life, by the Spirit of Christ that
quickens us to Righteousness: But if he be dead unto Righteousness, and alive
unto Sin; he is a son of Belial, a child of the Devil, a vessel of perdition, a
faggot for Hell; and the devouring. Wrath of God remains upon him: No Heir of
God, no Coheir with Christ; but he shall have his portion with those infernal
Fiends, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

Wherefore, Beloved, awake from your beds of ease; shake off your idle dreams,
and bewitching phansies, that either the Devil or his false Prophets have buz'd
at any time into your heads. If you will be the Sons of God, and Disciples of
Christ, take up the Cross of Christ; afflict your own carnal minds; give not
way to wrath, to envy, to anger, to revenge, to lust, to wantonness, to
backbiting, to swearing, to revelling, to drinking, to pride, to contemning,
to reproaching, to fighting, to contesting, to censuring, to defaming, or
whatsoever else Flesh and Blood is easily carried out to; but deny your selves
in abstaining from all those evil acts, and so give no encouragement to the
Devil to assault you.

Which if you shall do in the precious Christian Patience, even to the
mortification of all manner of Sin in you, God shall stir up in you the Spirit
of his Son, and enrich you with the Power and Wisdom of the Holy Ghost: And the
Peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall fill your hearts with all
joy; and you shall find in your selves an unexpressible taste of the delights
of Heaven, and receive an infallible earnest of your Eternal Inheritance. Which
God grant that we may all do, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom, etc.

DISCOURSE X. JAM. i. 27. Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the
Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to
keep himself unspotted from the world.
THE Text is a description of pure and undefiled Religion. And certainly if any
thing; Religion it is that wants the pointing out by the most evident, plain
and conspicuous descriptions that may be, to be writ in Capital Letters, in so
large and visible Characters that he that runs may read it. For indeed most men
are but at leisure to read it running, (...) by the by, tanquam aliud agentes;
still keeping on their course in that broad way, that beaten path, that leads
to the reward of impiety and irreligiousness.

But yet I know not how it comes to pass, that though men make not Religion
their (...), their main business and work, yet they prove most-what, far more
fortunate in this, than in their worldly occasions and employments; where,
though they take a great deal more pains, yet we shall more ordinarily hear
them complain of ill success. But as for Religion, how few are there that find
themselves at a loss therein; nay that are not suited to their own hearts
liking; and from these slight and transient glances cast upon it, are kindled
into so hot a passion and inflammation of love and zeal for it, that finding
their own breasts too strait and narrow for such a violent heat, would even
force open the hearts of other men, that there may be more room and freedom for
so ample a flame: Not content to keep alive this Vestal fire within the walls
of its own Temple, but to disthrone the Sun, and ordain it the sole Lamp of the
Universe; where all other Religions and Worships, must like the lesser Stars
disappear and vanish. Every rash Religion is Popery, and claims title to all,
must be Catholic: None must stand before it: A true Vr of the Chaldees, eating
up and devouring all other Deities. Whatsoever is not This, is Idolatry,
Blasphemy and Impiety. And therefore we can admit of none but our own: Or if we
should by chance or unawares, we recoyl back with more than Caunian zeal and
indignation. We are no where so lavish of our affection as in point of
Religion; and the more, because no where more safe: For who can love God too
much, and Religion immediately referrs to God. This I would say, that in the
many and manifold distractions and divisions which the sons of men exercise one
another with on this blind and dark spot, the Earth; where there is a great
deal more talk of God than true knowledge of him; all Religions every where
agree in this one, that nothing ought to be more precious and dear unto us than
our Religion: And in this also, which I must again note with greater
admiration, that ordinary Religionists are in nothing so superficially and
perfunctorily satisfied in, as in what they do so devoutly love; whence it
comes to pass that many thousands of men, Ixion-like, embrace not Juno but a
Cloud.

Wherefore we cannot sufficiently commend the sober care and prudence of the
blessed Apostle, who has so amply and fully set out to us, that, which few men
have the patience to peruse in a closer Character: And therefore out of neglect
and carelessness very subject to mistake; and if mistaken, mistake more
dangerously than in any thing else possibly they can do; spending their most
serious and dearest affections upon falsehood, their very hearts and souls upon
unprofitable lies; and not only forfeiting their own happiness, but as much as
in them lies, pulling in others also into the same whirl-pool, or dangerous pit
of destruction.

But, Beloved, that we be not led away with the same error of the wicked, nor
serve the phansies of men, let us again cast our eyes on the Text, and learn
the truth of Religion.

Pure Religion and undefiled, before God and the Father, is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep a man's self unspotted of
the world.

The Text as I intimated before, is a definition of Pure and Undefiled
Religion. I might resolve it into these two Logical terms of Definitum and
Definitio. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, that is the
Definitum or thing defined: The Definition this, To visit the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and to keep a man's self unspotted from the world.

But I shall handle the Text more roughly, and fetch out, though not force out,
these four Particulars.

1. That there is a pure and undefiled Religion. 2. That God the Father is
judge of this pure and undefiled Religion. 3. That to visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their affliction, and to keep ones self unspotted of the World, this
is pure and undefiled Religion. 4. That it is pure and undefiled Religion, even
in the judgment and sight of God.
I. That there is a pure and undefiled Religion.
(...).] It will not be amiss to make some short stay upon the unfolding of the
words.

(...) signifies properly Cultus divinus. Orpheus the Thracian and great
Mystagogue of the Graecians gave occasion to this term: For they being taught
the manners and rites of serving the Gods by him, (...), as Nonnus tells us,
They called the worshipping of the Gods (...), as being a Thracian invention.
Beza translates it very well and significantly Cultus Religiosus; and our
English not amiss, Religion, in the proper sense, as it is taken for the
Worship of God, and not extended to both Tables, as S. Austin and Lactantius
would have it: For beside the propriety of the Greek word, the quality of those
to whom the Apostle wrote is no small Argument, that that Religion which
consists in Gods immediate Worship is here meant or alluded to; they being the
dispersed Jews to whom he wrote (as is manifest in the beginning of the
Epistle) whose Native Religion consisted in multitude of Rites and Ceremonies,
and was eminent for the outward Form of Worship and Service of God. These were
all but a cloud, a veil, and mist, and was to be drawn aside and vanish at the
approach of the Sun of Righteousness that was to rise with healing in his
wings; that is our Savior, God blessed for ever.

And according to this notion, the two following terms, viz. (...) and (...),
will not only admit of but call for this Exposition; viz. pure and unpainted,
as the words are sufficiently capable thereof: The true, pure, refined,
unsophisticated Religion is this.

(...)] (...). Plato in his Sophista. And Plotinus Lib. 2. Ennead. 1. (...). So
that according to the idiom of the tongue, Pure Religion is that which is
unbared of all heterogeneal admixture, purged and separated from all
ascititious additaments, cleansed and refined from that palpable gross luggage
of unweildy Ceremonies; being pure Extraction, mere Essence or Quintessence,
perfect Life and Spirit.

Again, (...)] undyed, unpainted with the pencil of Humane Art or Device; a
naked and bare Truth: Which though it has been diversely figured and shaped by
the outward dress of Ceremonies, yet it has been from everlasting to
everlasting; Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; (...), the Gospel
of Eternal Truth, the Law of Life, the perfect Law of Liberty. (...)
(...).
It is most true of this everlasting Law of Life, whose Original is as deep as
the Divine Abyss.

But I am afraid that I have by this Exposition (though very true and genuine)
so spiritualized Religion, and unbared the Truth, that Carnal eyes accustomed
to Shadows and gross Ceremonies, will doubt whether there be any thing of
Religion left, after so much sifting and cleansing. But I hold it no hard task
to answer these men. If they mean by no Religion left, no Ceremony left; I
grant it: But if by no Religion, no truth of Religion; I say, there is nothing
but the truth of Religion left. And that the truth of Religion should not
deserve the name of Religion, as well as the Shadow or Type, I know no reason;
no more than Caesar himself should not be called Caesar, as well as his
Picture, be it drawn with never so much art and cunning.

Mistake me not, I speak not as if the kernel must of necessity be without a
shell; but led on by my Text, I speak of the kernel without the shell, and
exalt it far above the dry shell. Psalm. 50. 13. Will I eat the flesh of bulls,
or drink the blood of goats? Psalm. 51. 17. The sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. And Psalm.
4. 5. Offer the sacrifice of righteousness; and put your trust in the Lord. And
Romans 12. 1. I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your
spiritual service: So Beza. They were not to offer any dead or unclean Beast
under the Law; wherefore are we here under the Gospel to offer our selves a
living and holy Sacrifice, impolluted of the World, and alive to Righteousness
and to God.

Give me leave here a little to enlarge my self. Who can doubt but that the
Heart of a Christian, from whence sweet odours of Prayers and Praises ascend
up, is a better Altar of Incense than that in Moses's Temple; that God is more
truly fed by relieving his living Members, true and sincere Christians, than by
feeding the unsatiable fire by thousands of Holocausts; that the seven Spirits,
the Spirit of the Lord, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and the Fear of the Lord, are a
truer and clearer light than the Seven Golden Candlesticks of Moses; that the
Jewish Temple was but a strait prison in comparison of the enlarged Soul of
man; So many load of Sand or Gravel would have filled that up to the top, but
no less than God himself can fill the Heart of man: which therefore is the
meetest Temple or Mansion for him. In brief, what is this (...) but as Nonnus
speaks, (...) to honor and worship God; and what does that consist in but in
appropriating or consecrating unto him times, or places, or things, persons
also and solemnity of actions? Is not this therefore to worship God in spirit
and in truth? truly and unfeignedly to devote our selves, and dedicate all we
have to the God of Heaven, seeking his Will in all our actions, and denying our
selves and our own desires. What comparison is there betwixt the offering the
Firstlings of our Flock, or the Fruit of our Ground, whereby we acknowledge we
hold all these things of God, the great Lord of Heaven and Earth; what
comparison is there, I say, betwixt this and the not arrogating any thing to
our selves of either knowledge and power, but very sensibly and affectionately
ascribing all to God, whatsoever we can do, think or speak; which is the right
Christian Humility and Spiritual Decimation to the true Melchizedek Christ
Jesus? And let me be yet bolder, (if there be any boldness in it) What is
Baptism or the washing of Water, in respect of the real cleansing by the
Spirit, the being Baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire? What is Bread and
Wine in comparison of that true Bread from Heaven, the Flesh and Blood of
Christ?

Tell me therefore now, is nothing of Religion left, when I only consider the
inward essence or substance of it abstracting from shell or husk? Is the very
heart or kernel of it nothing? The pure and unpainted Religion is truly
Religion, if not the only true Religion. And pardon me if I seem too careful
and curious in reserving the name of Religion to it; because that word strikes
more powerfully upon the ears of men, and summons at the very first alarm all
the power we have both of Soul and Body, to assist, countenance and maintain
it. Wherefore I would under the name (as the notion it self does most eminently
deserve it) commend unto my self and all men this truth of Godliness, that we
may as heartily and zealously both aspire unto our selves, and endeavor the
same in others, as ever we did or can do the opinions and institutions of men,
or yet the opposing of them: For this will not be found pure and undefiled
Religion in his eyes who is the judge thereof; viz. God the Father. Which is
the Second Particular; and upon which I would now fall, did not another sense
step between, which must awhile hold me back.

(...).] Hitherto (...) and (...) have signified, the pure and uncolour'd truth
of Religion, without Show or Ceremony. The words are not incapable of another
sense, which our English Translation favors; Pure, impolluted or undefiled
Religion is this: Which implies that there are impure, filthy and impious
Religions in the World.

How it would make a noise to speak of the obscene Ceremonies of Baal-Peor, the
cruel Rites of Moloch, and that most ridiculous Devil-service in India! But we
need not run back so much in time, or travel to so remote places. I do not see
but the Invocation of Saints and Worshipping of Idols is impious enough; and
the relying on any one man, or a multitude, for infallible guides of his Faith
and Religion, mere Idolatry and Irreligiousness. For what is this but to cut
our selves off from the living God, and free guidance of his gracious Spirit,
and to give up our selves to men, blind guides; to the sons of men that are
found deceitful upon the weights, lighter than vanity it self? Is it not the
Lord that has made Heaven and Earth, and fills all things with his spirit
and power? Behold the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the
small dust of the balance: All nations are before him even as nothing, and
they are counted of him less than nothing and vanity. It is he alone that has
established the mountains, and has given laws to the measureless deep; that has
stretched out the Heavens as a curtain, and spreads it out as a tent to dwell
in; that sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are
as grasshoppers. Which of these will you choose for your God? Or what number of
them for the stay of your hearts? Will you worship a Fly instead of your Maker?
Will you ask counsel of the God of Ekron? Will you advise with Baal-Zebub
concerning your Salvation? Is not Christ the only Healer, the only Savior, the
only Recoverer of fallen man? Is his Holiness at Rome infallible? Or may not a
many gray heads joined together go astray together? (...) says Elihu in Job;
And I said days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom: But
there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand
judgment. Job 32. It is the Lord that is the only wise God; that Ancient of
days alone it is that can instruct us in Prudence; it is God the Father alone
that can guide us safely in his Truth. And thus am I again cast upon the Second
Particular; viz.

II. That God the Father is judge of what is true, pure and undefiled Religion.
And indeed there is very good reason for it: For what is Religion but the
worship and service of God? He therefore knows best how he would be worshipped
and served. And here it will not be unseasonable to speak of that worship which
the Apostle has found out a very fit name for, (...) Will Worship, serving God
according to our own will and liking, according to the dictates of our own vain
hearts: A fault that a Natural man is not only subject to fall into, but it is
even impossible for him to avoid it: For who knows the Will of God, saving to
whom the Word and Spirit of God is revealed from within? For if the outward
could do it without the inward, why is the whole Christian World entangled in
so much error and confusion? Why, unless for that they have served God, either
according to their own Will, or have been led captive under the Will of other
men: For that they have forsaken the Lord the fountain of living waters, and
have hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that will hold no water? Is
Israel a servant? Is he a home-born slave? Why is he become a spoil? Verily
because he is become a servant and a slave; because he has ceased now to be
Israel, a Prince and prevailer with God, and has put his trust in mortal men.
What is Paul, Apollos or Cephas? What is Bellarmine, Calvin or Arminius? Was
Arminius Crucified for you, or was you Baptized into the name of Calvin? Woe to
the rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me; and
that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin:
That walk to go down to Egypt (and have not asked at my mouth) to strengthen
themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt.
Isa. 30. Shall all the preparation of Egypt be your safety? Shall your chosen
Learned Scribes and Disputers, with all their knowledge of Tongues and Humane
Arts, assuredly talk you into the truth? Where is that infallible Judge? There
are enough that say, Lo! here is Christ; and, Lo! there he is. But it is a
shrewd Argument that he is not here nor there: Or else why did Christ say,
Believe thou not? He himself alone it is that is the Truth, and let all men be
liars before him. Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils, for whereof
is he to be accounted of?

If God then be that only infallible Judge of pure Religion and well pleasing
to himself; who is to be sought unto but He?

But that no man deceive himself, (for truth can deceive no man) my drift is
not to dehort from idolizing men that every man may make an idol of himself,
and to cleave to sudden phansies, rashly sprung up in his polluted Spirit: But
that we may truly sanctify God in our hearts, and serve him from a true,
though inward invisible Principle of Life; that we may attain to that
Righteousness of Faith, which we are not born with, nor the mouth of man can
confer upon us, but is the Breath of the Holy Ghost; a Light and Life derived
from God the Father, the Fountain of Light and Life, from whom proceeds every
good and perfect gift.

Of this it is written; You have an unction from the holy one, and you know all
things. Io. 2. But as for us that have not yet attained thereunto, it will be
our wisdom and safety to have this draught of pure Religion, set out by the
Apostle, ever before our eyes; and endeavor to frame our service to God
accordingly: To visit the Fatherless and the Widow in her affliction; and to
keep our selves unspotted from the World. And this is the Third Particular, viz.

III. That pure and undefiled Religion is this, to visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their affliction, and to keep our selves unsported from the world.
It is set out to us as once God showed himself to Moses. (...) Videbis
posteriora mea, Exodus 33. Religion is here described a posteriori, or ab
effectis: Which as it is most feasible to the Teacher, so it is most profitable
to the Learner. For the very face and essence of pure Religion is
unexpressible: No pencil can draw it, and exhibit the sight of it to other men.
Hence is there, and ever has been a veil drawn over it; but it ought not to be
environed with utter darkness. Let your light so shine before men, that they
seeing your good works, may glorify your father which is in heaven. The
Sacraments are a veil over the Christian Religion; but the Christians
unfruitful yea impious Conversation, a Cimmerian mist, a palpable Egyptian
darkness.

But to return, though I have as yet scarce given one step out of the way: The
description of pure Religion is from a twofold effect. The first respects
others; To visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction. The second
respects our selves; To keep himself unspotted from the World.

But before I fall upon these particulars, it will not be amiss, first to set
out some general Considerations, which the nature of this description affords
us. And First, That the Apostle chooses to describe Religion from the Effects
of it, rather than from the Form, Efficient or End. Secondly, Why rather from
these Effects than any other.

1. For the First. The Form of pure Religion, as I intimated before, is
unexpressible, no man can describe it. It is that name written in the white
stone, that no man knows nor can know but he that has it. (...), as Plotinus in
a case not unlike to this: If thou be it, thou see it; speaking of that
eternal form or beauty. Then to have described it from the Efficient which
should have been God, the Apostle knew very well what juggling and uncertainty
there were in that: For all Religions call God their Author, and pretend his
Glory for their End. So that this general delineation would have been subject
to much mistake, abuse and deceit. Wherefore the safest mark to point out true
Religion was the Effects of it.

2. But why these Effects rather than any other? Would not Prayer, would not
the Hearing of the Word, often Reading of the Scripture (as the very Etymon of
Religion, as some would have it a relegendo, does import) would not these a
great deal better have set out the nature of Religion? No verily: For I dare be
bold to take the Apostles part, and rely upon his judgment. For as for the
external act of Prayer, a Pharisee may perform it, both largely and often, with
many tedious tautologies, and wearisome circumlocutions, as our Savior has
marked them out in the Gospel. And as for hearing Divine Truth to talk of it in
a natural exercise of our Memory and Reason, it is pleasant even to the
unregenerate and impious man. That very natural motion that is in words and
sounds put in a tunable number, and set off with action and affection, pleases
in some sort even all kind of Auditors: And if smartness of Reason, and weight
of Argument be added to it, the merest Philosopher that is, can be content to
lend his attention thereto; and no acceptable point of Religion exerciz'd all
the time. God himself bears witness against them; Ezekiel 33. They speak every
one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that
comes from the Lord. They come unto thee, and sit before thee as my people,
and they hear thy words but they will not do them; with their mouth they show
much love, but their heart goes after covetousness. And lo! thou art unto them
as a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on
an instrument; for they hear thy words but they do them not. And Reading of the
Scripture privately is so like the public Preaching of it, that I need not
take any new pains to refute the vanity of it, if it be not accompanied with
due obedience. We may fetch that up to Divinity, which Epictetus has both
wittily and gravely, of Moral Theorems. The Sheep tell not their keeper how
much Fodder or Grass they eat, but show that they feed sufficiently by their
Milk and Wool.

Let us not therefore, Beloved, do as vain Limners they say have done, drawn
Venus and the Virgin Mary according to the feature of some Face they themselves
love best: Let us not, I say, picture out Religion to our own liking, and then
be in love with an Idol of our own making, but love and like that which the
Apostle has so plainly portrayed to us: That, whose description consists in
visiting the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and keeping our selves
unspotted of the world: Which in two words is this, Charity and Purity. Of
these two consists that true Religion acceptable to God. For I conceive
visiting the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, excludes not other good
deeds from this definition, but by a Synecdoche, is put for the whole office of
Charity.

1. The First branch is Charity.

I will not curiously and artificially set out the bounds of this Virtue. It
will be enough to intimate, that it is not confined to the relief of the Body
only; as he is not only Fatherless that wants his Natural Parent, but he much
more that has not God for his Father, through the seed of the new birth: Nor
she alone a Widow that has lost her Natural Husband; but every Soul is a Widow
that is estranged and divorced from her God; whose sins have made a separation
betwixt her and her Maker. Thy Maker is thy Husband. Esa. 11. 54. He is so
indeed to those that are not faithless and play the Harlot; for of such says
the Lord, She is not my Wife, neither am I her Husband. Hosea 2. 2. He
therefore that can reconcile a Soul unto God, does not only relieve the
Fatherless and Widow, but procures an Husband and Father for them, and wholly
rids them out of their distressful estate. These outward transient actions
tending to the spiritual or temporal good of our Neighbor, are fit testimonies
of our sincere Religion before men; but for every man's private satisfaction
concerning himself, there be diverse inward and immanent motions of the Soul
which will abundantly help on this confirmation. I will reckon them up out of
the mouth of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 13. Where I will not balk those that be at ad
extra too, they being all very well worth our taking notice of. Charity
suffers long, and is kind: Charity envieth not: Charity vaunteth not it self,
is not puffed up: Does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in
the truth: Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things.

2. I pass on now to the Second branch, Purity: (...), to keep himself
unspotted from the World.

(...),] the word signifies properly such kind of spots as are in Clothes by
spilling some liquid or oily thing on them. An hard task certainly to be
Religious at this height. Is it to be thought possible that we should wear this
Garment of Mortality every day, nay every hour and moment, for thirty, forty,
fifty, sixty years together, and soil it by no mischange or miscarriage, either
of careless Youth, violent Manhood, or palsied Old Age? To pass through the
hurry and tumult of this World, and never be crowded into the dirt, nor be
spattered by them that post by us. But verily this is not the meaning of the
Apostle, or of his description of Religion, that no man is Religious but he
that is absolutely spotless. But he sets before us an Idea or Paradigme of true
Religion; that men having their eyes upon it, may know how much, or rather how
little of Religion they have attained to: By how much nearer conformable to
this pattern, by so much more Religious; by how much further off, by so much
the less Religious. He that is not so much as within the sight of it, has not
so much as seen the least glimpse or glance of Godliness, but may be, without
any wrong to him, writ down, Atheist. Let every man herein examine himself, and
ask his own Conscience, how unspotted he has kept himself from the World.

And here as hard a difficulty represents it self, if not harder than before.
To keep himself unspotted from the World? Is it not pure Irreligiousness to
think so? Impossible to be so? Who can keep himself pure? I answer, it may be a
mistake in the Idiom of the Tongue; (...) is no more than (...), to be kept
unspotted from the World; Hithpael for Niphai; as there is elsewhere Niphal for
Hithpael, Acts 2. (...), for (...): So Beza. Or to keep himself unspotted from
the World, is to be understood so far forth as is in our power, which in truth
is very little.

Here therefore steps in the power of Christ, that strong Arm of God for our
Salvation, the stay and trust of all Nations, and the hope of the ends of the
Earth. For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free
from the law of sin and death: For what the law could not do in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his own son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, that walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. Romans 8. We
walk, though it be in the power of that Spirit of Life in Christ, as our Body
moves by virtue of our Natural Spirit. But whether this act of purification, or
keeping our selves pure, be so from God, that it is not in any wise from us, I
leave to them to dispute, that are more at leisure. That it must be in us, if
there be any Religion in us, is all that the Text affords me, and it is enough
for the trial of our Religion.

Pure Religion is to keep our selves unspotted from the World.

What? to keep our selves unspatter'd and unspall'd upon by foul Tongues? It Is
a thing as impossible as unprejudicial to the Soul her self. That which is
without a man defiles not the man, but that which is within him.

What is meant by World, S. John does fully unfold unto us. All that is in the
world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, is
not of the Father, but of the world. Of these then we must keep our selves
unspotted, if we will be holy as our Heavenly Father is holy. This is the World
that we must keep our selves unstained of: But for the Natural World, (...),
all things are sacred and good.

It Is Sensuality that soyles the Soul, and fills the Mind full of impure
thoughts, unworthy desires; that transform the Humane Nature, which is capable
of the Image of God, into a loathsome Beast. It Is Covetousness that contracts
the large Spirit of man, and makes it shrivel up and wrinkle, for want of that
which can alone fill it, those unspeakable treasures of Heaven, that no tongue
can number, nor figures express. How deformed is that mind, whose are nothing
but Bills and Bonds, moldy Money, moth-eaten Housholdstuff, and such like
trash; rusty Locks and Keys, Iron Chests, and strong hollow Vaults behung with
Cobwebs! This is the Covetous man's Soul, if we could see within him; nothing
near so beautiful as the foulest pond or dunghil-puddle, where if you cast your
eye, you may happily meet with the reflection of the Stars, or the bright
Circle of the Sun, or the white moving Clouds, or the pleasant blew-coloured
Sky. But such things as an Ingenuous man would scarce have the patience to look
on, be not only the continually desired Objects of the Worldlings sight, but
the perpetual Life and Energy of his misshapen Spirit. And here though the
Proud man may please himself in conceiting, that this inward man is garnished
with better bravery; and is a more comely Creature, his fancy glittering with
the representation of Crowns and Scepters, Silver Maces, Purple and Scarlet
Robes, rich Stuffs and Holy Mitres: Yet if we look upon the Beast that bears
this glaring luggage, his own dear Soul, what is the very life and heart of it
but Pride and Envy; the two Essentials that constitute the ugliest of all
Creatures, the deformed Fiends of Hell? And beside this innate
ill-favouredness, his whole Person is ordinarily besmeared with the Blood of
the Innocent, and his Garments drop and reek with the warm Tears of the
Afflicted and Oppressed, and are foul and greasy with the Sweat of the Poor.
This is the attire both of the Ambitious and Covetous man. And certainly there
is very little Religion in him that does not heartily abhor so abominable a
monster.

I^ but is there indeed much Religion in him that does? I confess that a man
may be temperate (for the Devil, as we ordinarily conceive, is not liable to
the sins of the Flesh,) and yet fall short of true Religion. His constitution,
or some other strong but natural or secular design making him so. Covetousness
is also often but a complexion, and Liberality may be no better in some men.

Some men are also born with a more low and quiet disposition, which is not the
Virtue of Humility, but the lowness and stillness of their Natural Spirit. But
to be unspotted of the World, is also to be free from the attraction of our own
private Nature, which is a piece of this dark deceivable World, and to have our
whole man acted and regulated by the Spirit of God. Dull Phlegm is no Christian
Patience; nor all Fire, true Zeal; especially if it be fed by the fat of the
Earth. But that is true Zeal that flows out in affliction, and glories in the
cross and tribulation. He is not chaste that never partak'd of the bed of
defilement, nor temperate that eats nor drinks to excess: But he that enjoys
the pleasure of the Creature, only in reference to the Creator, tasting the
sweetness of his God, even in his Meat and Drink, lifting up his Soul to the
Meat that perishes not, but endures to Eternal Life. He is untouched of
Covetousness, that desires nothing for himself, but is a faithful Steward of
the manifold Blessings of God. He is unstained of the Pride of life, who is so
dead to himself, and the sense or cognoscence of his own power and will, that
he arrogates no good thing to himself; but does, from the very ground of his
Soul, speak that of the Prophet, Thou, O Lord, have wrought all our works in
us. This is, as I said before, the right Idea or Paradigme, of true Religion.
By how much more near we come to this, by so much more near we are to Religion;
and the farther removed hence, the farther off from true Religion. If any man
doubt of it, I appeal to this judgment that cannot err, even to God the Father;
and that is included in my last particular, viz.

IV. That to visit the Fatherless and the Widows in their affliction, and to
keep our selves unspotted of the World; this is pure and undefiled Religion,
even in the sight of God the Father. I will dispatch this point in a word or
two.
The Sum, as you may remember, of this description of Religion, was comprised
in these two words, Charity and Purity. Both these are so near the Nature of
God, that he is engaged (as I may so say) to give Sentence for them. God is
love; and he that abides in love, abides in God, says S. John. Can any thing
then be more acceptable to God then Love? To do good and communicate, forget
not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased, says the Author to the
Hebrews. And our blessed Savior, Matthew. 5. Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully
use you and persecute you; that you may be the children of your father which is
in heaven: For he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends
rain on the just and the unjust. Be ye therefore perfect as your Father which
is in heaven is perfect. So then there is no doubt of Gods sentencing that
Religion for the best, whose Nature consists in that which himself loves and
likes, and is the image of himself, viz. Love or Charity. And we have his
Command for the other part thereof, backed with his own Example, viz. Purity.
Be ye holy says he, for I am holy.

But what is now this Holiness or Purity of God? Is it not this? That whereas
he is present in all things, he is not immerse nor polluted of any thing. So
must our Souls be. We are of necessity here in this Orb of Death and
Corruption, actors in the administration of the affairs of this lower World.
Let not our hearts sink into that, that our eye must needs attend, if we be not
idle and useless. Every man has a part or province committed to him by God: Let
us administer our part as God does the whole; not by immersion or spilling our
Souls or Affections upon the visible Creature; but collectedly into God, as God
is collected into himself. Let not our Souls cleave unto the dust, nor be spilt
upon the ground, as the Prophet David sometimes complains; but be as the Rays
of the Sun, which though they reach to the Earth, sink not in the Earth; but
being fast fixed in their fountain, or not, the Sun it self, do always move
whither he carries them. Let us also acknowledge our own Original which is from
above, and move with God and the Lamb, wheresoever they go. Let us be so pure
as not to drown our selves in the muddy stream of this transient World: Let us
be so Charitable as to wade in it, that others be not drowned. Let our Love to
men be such, that we make not our selves unprofitable members of the World. Let
our Love to God be such that we keep our selves pure and unspotted from the
love of the World. Let our whole Conversation be such, that all men may see
(that have eyes to discern) both whence and whose we are; that we serve not the
Will of man, nor are Vassals to our own vain Desires, but are the free Servants
of Christ, and true Worshippers of the Living God.

O Lord our God, thou which alone art able to speak to the Hearts and
Consciences of men, descend we beseech thee powerfully into us by thy Holy
Spirit: Guide and teach us in thy ways. Open our eyes that we may see the
wonders of thy Law. Set up thy Truth in us, and the Life of thy Son, above all
contentious opinions and conceits of men. Take away all Pride, and Prejudice,
and Wrathfulness, and Hypocrisy; and grant that the whole Christian World may
agree in Meekness, and that sweet Candor and Simplicity that is in Christ
Jesus. Show unto us, and convince us of that acceptable Service thou requirest
at our hands. Let bitterness, and heart-burning reviling, and all deceit, and
falseness, cease from amongst us; and let the Scepter of thy Son bear rule over
us in Peace, and Truth, and Righteousness. Enrich us with those precious Graces
of Love and Purity: And let the effectual power of thy Spirit be so felt
amongst us, that the least of thy Church may be as David, and the House of
David as the Angel of the Lord before thee. Hear us, O Merciful Father, etc.

DISCOURSE XI. HEB. xiii. 16. To do good and communicate forget not, for with
such sacrifices God is well pleased.
THE Philosophers define good to be that which all things desire. Now all
Desire is founded in Life: And Life is twofold; There is the Life of Nature;
and the Life of God, which in men is called the Life of Grace. Now both these
Lives desire good. But here is the difference: The Life of Nature is only
carried to good, as it is good to it self; or if it wish good to others, its
for its own sake: The Life of God, or Life of Grace, desires good too; but not
only for it self, but simply it desires good, wheresoever it can be effected,
in due order and right means. So that the Heart of the Divine Life is enlarged
toward every capable thing, and would impart its good so much as any is
capable, and so often any is disposed: For there is neither envy, want nor
niggardness in the Divine Nature.

So then he that is thus affected; whose bowels are enlarged to his
fellow creatures, to every one as they are capable: He that is merciful to the
beast, loving to men; feeds the hungry; clothes the naked; visits the sick;
directs the traveller; is courteous to the stranger; informs the ignorant;
heartens the poor-spirited; shows the proud his folly; comforts him that is
in sorrow; ballasts him that floats in vain joy; soders up enmities, and stints
strife; flies envy, and exercises an universal amity to all: This man is like
his Heavenly Father, who makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and
sends rain on the just and the unjust. This man will neither persecute his
enemy out of hatred, nor acquit his friend in his fault, out of fond love: But
deals his doals of all kinds to every one as he is fitted for receiving; slips
no opportunity of doing any manner of good; loses no occasion of hindering of
evil. His Soul is nothing but the inward Life of Charity; his Life nothing but
the passing from munificency to munificency, from one good deed to another. Out
of love to God he embraces his Neighbor; after his duty to his Neighbor
faithfully performed, he is nearer united unto God. He becomes a King for his
bountiful liberality and royal free mind. He becomes a Priest, by offering
these Sacrifices so acceptable to God. Nay he himself is but one entire
Sacrifice, whom that great High Priest, Christ Jesus, offers to his Father: The
fire of Love and Charity, is the fire that consumes and wastes continually all
corruption in his Soul; and loosened every day more and more from the body of
sin and iniquity, ascends in holy fume up nearer unto Heaven, a sweet savor
unto God and all the assistants of the Divine Majesty.

But for a more orderly handling of this present Text of Scripture: Be pleased
to observe with me these three Truths contained in the same.

1. That we are not to forget to do good and communicate. 2. That doing or
communicating good is a Sacrifice. 3. That it is a Sacrifice in which God is
well pleased.
I. That we are to do good, I think no man is so devoid of reason or goodness
as to deny it; no not so much as in his silent thoughts: Though this Truth that
he is so certainly persuaded of, lies not always so freshly in his mind, but
he may easily overslip the practice of it Yea because a man's understanding,
cogitations and affections are so mightily taken up for his own projects, and
the advancement of his own private peculiar good, it were somewhat strange, if
he did not omit too too often this Duty of communicating good to others; his
fierce and eager pursuit after his private welfare, so strongly and steddily
directing his eyes upon his own.

We being therefore so subject, out of the extreme love of our selves, to
forget the good of our Neighbor, it is no wonder that the Apostles Exhortation
is not delivered in a bare simple manner: Do good and communicate: But runs
thus, To do good and communicate forget not. As if he should say, I have
delivered in this my Epistle, many high and Divine Mysteries, concerning the
Divine Nature of Christ, the Office of the Angels, of the Levitical Priesthood,
and Ceremonies of the Old Law, the Sacrifice of Christ, and the excellency of
Faith, and many other Heavenly Theories; which for their profoundness may
easily invite the curious to muse upon them, and for their mysteriousness made
me write somewhat more largely upon them: But that which I speak to you now; it
is not a thing so difficult to understand, or so hard to explain, you know it
already, only be mindful to do it; To do good and communicate forget not.

And that we forget not, God has set over us Monitors enough; it is not the
voice of the Apostle alone, but of the whole Creature. The Clouds drop fatness
upon the Earth. The Earth sends up all manner of Herbs and Corn for service,
and Flowers for delight of men. The Trees stretch out their spreading arms and
offer their Fruit. The musical falls of the cooling crystal Brooks, sweetly
call to them the thirsty Traveller to refresh his fainting Spirit. The Sun and
Moon, with all the Host of Heaven, dance in their circuits about the Earth, as
being joyful to impart their Light and Influence, for the procreation of things
here below, and their continual conservation. The Sun comes forth as a
bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a giant to run his race: He
leaves us indeed in the West; but in the Morning he carefully revisits us with
his chearing Countenance, and rescues the World from the close cloging Vapors
of the loansome Night. See how readily and willingly the Creature practices
this Precept of the Apostle, and therefore become fit Preachers unto us to do
the same.

But if we scorn to have so poor a Pattern as the visible Creature; look
through the Creature unto God. For it is He rather that does this, than the
outward visible Creature. He laid the foundations of the earth, that it never
should move at any time. He sends his springs into the rivers, which run among
the hills. All beasts of the field drink thereof; and the wild asses quench
their thirst. Beside them have the fowls of the air their habitation; and sing
among the branches. He waters the hills from above; the earth is filled with
the fruits of his works. He brings forth grass for the castle, and green herb
for the service of men. That he may bring food out of the earth, and wine that
makes glad the heart of man. He appointed the moon for certain seasons: and
the sun knows his going down. Psalm. 104. He loves righteousness and
judgment; the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. Psalm. 33.

The continuation of the Creature, and subsistence of this mighty Universe, is
nothing else but a continual testification of the Nature and Goodness of God,
and his munificent and communicating property.

Wherefore we being encompassed with such a world of witnesses, witnesses that
so clearly testify unto us the mind of God and Christ, let us be like-minded
with him, and delight in doing good according to our power, to show our
thankfulness to him, of whom all power is received. There is the same Argument
for giving, that there is for forgiving. Mat. 18. 32. O evil servant, I forgave
thee all that debt, because thou prayedst me: Ought not thou also to have
pity on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? So surely God will reason with
us in this matter too, That which thou have, I gave it thee; why therefore do
thou not imitate me, and impart somewhat to thy Neighbor of that I gave thee?
Freely you have received (says our Savior) freely give.

NOW for the better understanding of this point, I will spend a few words by
way of explication of this act of communicating of Good; wherein three things
are supposed, and therefore to be explained so far forth as is necessary: There
is the person, to whom we must communicate; the matter, what; and the manner,
how we must communicate.

(1.) The Persons to whom we are to communicate, are such as the Prophet David
names: Psalm. 112. 9. He has dispersed abroad; he has given to the poor; and
his righteousness remains for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honor.

Quite contrary to the garb of the World, and common practice of crafty and
covetous men, who exalt themselves by gifts of unrighteousness, and trample
upon the poor and needy how just soever; and contemn the weak as of little
worth: Whose Charity is none, and Courtesy but Policy, Munificency a well
contrived bargain: Whose Gifts are but Worms and Flies; but their Expectation,
no worse than the best Fish they can pull up: Whose Hearts are always cold;
and their Hands ever benumbed, till mutual friction. Manus manum fricat. This
has always been the way of them, the usual beaten path of the World; and their
Children praise their sayings.

But the Children of God, born of the Celestial Seed, be quite of another
temper. Witness that true noble and Heroical Spirit in our Eldest Brother
Christ Jesus: With whom if the generosity and gallantry of the World be
compared, it will appear mere pageantry: Or to express the truth more homely
and rudely, they will be found partaking more of the Huxter than the Courtier.
But to leave them to their petty markets, let us endeavor not to degenerate,
but to follow the counsel of the Firstborn of our Fraternity. Luke 14. 12.
When thou make a dinner or supper (says our Savior) call not thy friends,
nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen nor thy rich neighbors; lest they also
bid thee again, and recompense be made. But when thou make a feast, call the
poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind; and thou shall be blessed because
they cannot recompense thee, for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection
of the just.

But what needs so ample a testimony in a case so plain? Even ordinary Reason
will tell us to whom Good should be imparted: Not to them that have enough
already, but those that want. Physic is proper to him that is sick already, or
is inclining to sickness. To whom should Drink be given, but to the thirsty? To
whom Meat, but to the hungry? Clothes to the naked; and warm harbor to him
that is afflicted with cold. So that whatsoever Good it is that a man is in
want of, that Good is to be administered unto him, by him that is not in that
want.

(2.) Good is to be administered, which is the matter that is to be
communicated. If any, ask Bread, we are not to offer him a Stone; or if a Fish
a Scorpion. Which though we do not in that gross manner, yet too often we do,
lapides loqui, we mall the poor indigent man in the head with some stonish or
hard-hearted answer, and deal such liberal lashes of sharp reproof, that bites
and stings him as the whips of a Scorpion.

But that we straiten not the sense of this Text more than needs: This
communicating of good is not confined to outward Bread and Meat, and such
necessary things for the natural sustentation of man; but stretches also to
that of the Soul. So that this good which we are to impart, may be divided into
these two general kinds, In rem and consilium; A supply of outward necessaries,
or seasonable and friendly advice. Both these are good, and so both to be
communicated, where we see there is a want, and find our selves able to make a
supply.

He that informs the Ignorant, does as it were lead the Blind. He that comforts
the distressed Conscience, gives a Cordial to the sick. He that appeaseth Pride
and Anger, asswageth a dangerous swelling. He that casts out the envious Devil
out of a man, cures a rotting Consumption. He that out of friendly monition and
information amendeth another man's outward Manners and Behavior, clotheth him
as it were with a seemly garment and comely ornament. He that begets in a man
the love of Virtue and true Piety, restores him to Life.

These things ought to be done, but the other in no wise left undone. For he
that is liberal in good words, and a nigard in his works, he does but verba
dare, deceive both himself and others.

Now to whom and what we are to give, I have briefly intimated.

(3.) It remains that I speak of the manner; which consists especially in these
three things: 1. In the quantity of the gift. 2. In the universality of the
persons to whom we are to give. 3. In the inward affection or qualification of
the mind of the giver.

1. For the quantity of the gift. 2 Cor. 9. I thought it necessary to exhort
the brethren to come before unto you, and to finish your benevolence appointed
before, that it might be ready as of benevolence and not of sparing:
Remembering this, that he which sows sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and
he that sows liberally shall reap also liberally.

Now that those that are of a lower fortune be not discouraged or disheartened
from giving Alms, because they may conceive that their estate is such that
their act of communicating must needs be deficient in this first requisite:
They are to understand that this quantity of their Alms, consists not in an
absolute bigness or largeness, but is in relation to their states and
abilities. See what a testimony our Savior gives of the poor Widow, who cast
in but her two Mites into the treasury, among those great largisses of the rich
men. He called to him his Disciples, and said unto them, Verily I say unto you,
that this poor widow has cast more in, than all they that have cast into the
treasury: For they all did cast in of their superfluity, but she of her poverty
did cast in all that she had, even all her living. Two Mites was not more than
all those rich men cast in, but was more to her, or in respect of her poor
fortune, than that which those rich ones gave, was to them and the abundance of
their Estates! From whence that is plain which I said before, that the quantity
of our Alms does not consist in an absolute bigness, but in a respect to our
abilities.

AElian in his First Book of his Various History, tells us how the Persians,
when the King goes his Progress, are all to offer Gifts to him, (...), every
one according to his ability. And that one Sinetas, when King Artaxerxes was
not far off from his Cottage, what with the fear of the Law, and what with the
shame, that he should not be found as forward as any in expression of his
Loyalty and good Will toward the King; having notwithstanding nothing at all at
that time to offer or present to his Majesty: The poor man was ill troubled in
his mind; and in this perplexity (the King approaching nearer) he runs to the
River Cyras, hard by, with all speed, kneels him down, gets up Water in the
hollow of his Hands, comes to the King and salutes him after this manner;
(...), O King, Artaxerxes, Reign for ever; I now (O King) what I am able, after
what manner I am able, offer this Present unto you, that so far as lies in me,
you may not pass by me without the acknowledgment of my Duty and Allegiance:
The King was very well pleased with the Gift, and commanded the Water to be
received into a Golden Phial.

Surely the Charitable man serves as reasonable a Master, and one as graciously
disposed. Our Savior Christ has promised his favorable acceptance even of
but a cup of cold Water. Whosoever shall give one of these little ones to drink
a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, Verily, I say unto you, he
shall not lose his reward. Matthew. 10. And to make the application of the story
more fit: He that offers a cup of cold Water to these little ones, offers it to
no less than a King, and no less a King, than the King of Heaven and Earth;
Matthew. 25. 34. etc. (where these doers of good, and free communicators, receive
their doom of that great Judge, and mighty Prince Christ Jesus.) Come ye
blessed of my Father, (says he) inherit you the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundations of the world: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I
thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I was naked and ye clothed me; I was sick, and
ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the righteous
answer him, saying, Lord when saw we thee an hungered, and fed thee? or a
thirst, and gave thee drink? or when saw we thee a stranger, and lodged thee?
or naked, and clothed thee? or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came
unto thee? And the King shall answer, and say unto them; Verily I say unto you,
inasmuch as you have done it unto the least of these my brethren, you have done
it unto me. He therefore that offers a cup of cold water to these, offers it to
this King, who has promised a gracious acceptance of it, and a sure reward.

Wherefore we are not to be discouraged from these works of Charity, though our
means be small: For if we give a little of a little, that little is great in
the eyes of God, who knows how to prize the works of his Saints. If there be
a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according
to that a man has not; says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. So that we see none
excluded from this First requisite, in communicating of good: For though one
man cannot give so much as another, yet one man may be as liberal as another;
which is, if he give as much for his Estate as the other does for his.

Which consideration, as it may animate the Low-estated man in his Beneficency:
So it may make them of higher fortunes, bring their Liberality to the right
measure, and consider that he has not done a super-eminent act of Charity
above others, because his Alms was bigger than others of lower degree. He that
gives one shilling out of twenty, is as truly liberal as he that gives one
hundred pound out of two thousand. This I speak, that the Poor man depretiate
not his slenderer bounty, nor the Rich overprize his larger liberality; but
that all may walk in all Meekness, Humility and Holy Charity, before God and
before men.

2. But I pass on to the Second requisite in our Beneficency, which is the
Universality thereof. Gal. 6. 10. While we have time, let us do good to all
men; especially to them of the household of faith. Here Is no evasion out of this
injunction. If so be the Apostle had said, [ Do good to all,] some cavilling
Sophister would have said, I; to all Christians, or to all true Professors;
(As every Sect will be found to style themselves so.) Thus this [ All] is to be
restricted. But the Apostles command, or rather the manner of it, prevents all
such self-seeking Sophistry: [ Do good to all men whatsoever, so far as they
are capable; though in the first place I could wish you to have a special
tender care of them of the Holy Faith, and upright Godly Life.]

I, but (will Flesh and Blood reply) to our Enemy? Yes, to our Enemy. If a man
find his enemy, will he let him go? This was that that amassed Saul so mightily:
That David (a Type of the Divine Love, a Symbol of the very Life and Spirit of
Christ,) that David whom he had sought to kill, should let him escape when he
was in his power: It wrought so upon Saul's Spirit, that it forced tears from
his eyes, and made his heart in his body like melting wax. When David had made
an end of expostulating with Saul about his unjust pursuit of him, and had
showed how dear his Masters Life was in his sight; Saul said, Is this the voice
of my son David? And Saul lift up his voice and wept: And said to David, thou
art more righteous than I: For thou have rendered me good, and I have rendered
thee evil. 1 Samuel 24.

I will only add the Apostles Exhortation, Romans 12. 26. If thine enemy hunger
feed him, if he thirst give him drink.

3. And so I go on to the Third requisite, which is the Qualification of the
mind of the giver; which consists chiefly in these two things, 1. In
cheerfulness and willingness of mind. 2. In an honest and humble simplicity of
heart, without any reference to the applause and approbation of men, but in an
unfeigned obedience unto God, and tender heartedness toward his Neighbor.

(1.) That Cheerfulness S. Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. 9. As every man wishes in
his heart; so let him give, not grudgingly or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful giver. And Romans 12. 8. He that shows mercy, let him do it with
cheerfulness.

It should seem that in time past the Holy Saints of God distributed their Alms
to men with such a loving and kind Spirit, that they out of the abundance of
their good affection, added sweet and comfortable words to their Christian
Bounty; whence in the New Testament in the original, Beneficency is called
(...) good-speaking, blessing or well-wishing to the party to whom they do
communicate: And the Hebrew word (...) has the same notion, which signifies
both benediction and a gift.

(2.) The Second qualification of mind is the Sincereness of communicating,
without respect to popular applause, but merely out of love to God and our
Neighbor. Take heed that you give not your alms before men, to be seen of
men; or else you shall have no reward of your father which is in heaven. Not
that it is unlawful to give Alms in the sight of men; but unlawful it is to
give Alms in the sight of men of a purpose to be seen of them. A man among
other Gifts and Graces of God may let this light of Mercy shine also before
men, that they seeing his good works may glorify his Father which is in
Heaven: I say, with this proviso we may do our works in public, that it be not
for our own proper ostentation, but for the Glory of God.

HITHERTO I have declared, To what persons we are to give; what we are to give
to these persons; and after what manner we are to give: I will now set down
some Motives to stir us up to give our Beneficence to due Objects of our
Beneficence.

1. The First Motive may be drawn from the things themselves that we
communicate: For such is the nature of them that no man can assure himself the
possession of them, no not an hour. Will thou cast thine eyes upon that which
is nothing? For riches takes her to her wings as an eagle, and flies into
heaven. Prove. 23.

Here Is a double Argument to unty our hearts from that which Flesh and Blood so
easily cleaves to. The most envious and nigardly man that is, will be very
well content to give nothing, or to part with that which he conceives to be
worth little or nothing: And such is Riches in themselves (unless made good use
of for further happiness) instead of being of our substance they are nothing,
if Solomon's judgment be better than ours. But grant they be something; I, and
some great thing too, and very desirable: Yet it being so uncertain how long we
shall enjoy them, being they are so suddenly stone, as an Eagle that in a
moment gets upon her wing; surely we would do wisely to follow our Saviors
counsel, Make you friends with the mammon of unrighteousness, that when you
fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Luke 16.

The Covetous man holds his Wealth so fast, as if he was persuaded whenever
his Riches take their flight as an Eagle, and mount to Heaven, they will draw
him up with them. I, but if he hold so fast, how shall they fly? Or if they get
from him, he holds not fast then, and so is disappointed of his post.

But to let this pass, and fall more seriously upon Instruction. There Is no way
of making Riches serviceable for our journey to Heaven, but willingly to let
them fly thither before us: And that is by giving them to poor honest
necessitous people; to them that are as poor in Spirit as in Purse. Thus may
your Liberality happily arrive at Heaven: For Heaven is where God is; and God
is there if any where. In so much as you did it to any of these little ones,
you did it unto me, as you heard before out of the 25th of S. Matthews Gospel.
He that gives unto these, does rather purchase than part with his Means: He
does but remove his goods to another house, whither he himself shall follow
after, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

2. And this is the Second Motive, viz. The profit which does accrue to us from
our liberal distributions. But if we be so sharp set that we cannot wait till
that great payment: That we have no excuse to hold our hands from doing good,
God has promised even a Temporal Reward too. Prove. 28. 27. He that gives to
the poor shall not lack. And elsewhere in the Proverbs, He that gives to the
poor lends unto the Lord. And the borrower you know returns the same kind to
the lender. So we lending Temporal things to God, God will return to us
Temporal things here; and Eternal Spiritual Riches he will endue us with
hereafter.

3. The Third Motive is taken from the persons to whom we are to communicate.
The rich and the poor meet together, and the Lord enlightens both their eyes.
Prove. 29. No difference between the greatest Prince and the poorest Beggar, but
the goods of Fortune; or rather of Providence: For they come not to us by
chance, but by the good will of God, who has made out of his Wisdom, some Poor
and some Rich, that we may have occasion to exercise the acts of Mercy and
tender Compassion to our Brethren; who live by the same Air, walk in the light
of the same Sun, were created by the same God, are to be saved by the same
Christ. There is one Body and one Spirit, even as you are called in one hope of
your calling: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: One God and Father of all;
which is above all, and through all, and in you all. Ephesians. 4. What? One Body,
and one Member despise and disregard another? One Spirit, and not sympathize
one with another? One Hope, and not help one another? One Lord, and not one
fellovv-servant acknovvledge another? One Father, and Brethren not relieve one
another? One God above all, over-seeing us all in all our actions, (who though
he be so high, yet beholds things here below upon earth) and we poor
earthly worms overlook one another? One God in us all, and no goodness in us
all? God who is Love it self pierce through us all, and yet not those lovely
shafts of holy Charity vvound any of our hearts? God forbid. If we abide not
in Love, God abides not in us. If our hearts be contracted and darkened by
frozen rigidness, the light of God shines not through us. If our poor
contemptible Neighbor be so far under us, that we disdain to stretch forth
our arms to help him, we forget God above us. If we love not as Brethren,
God is not our Father. If we be ashamed of our Fellovv-servants, the Lord is
not our Master. If we be cold in mutual affection, our Faith is dead, and
Hypocrisy is our Religion. If we have no sympathy or fellovv-feeling, the
Spirit we boast of is but vanity or empty air. If we favor not one another
as Members of the same Body, we are not Members of the same Body; but
disunited Dust, which the Wind blows to and fro upon the face of the Earth,
and the Angel of God scatters it.

Community is but a name where there is no communication of good: Unity but a
deceivable fancy where there is no real Mercy. He that will endanger the
Soul of his Brother by withholding the sustenance of his Body, which out of
Brotherly affection he is to administer to him, surely that (...), that
Brotherly Love which the Apostle calls for, dwells not in him. The very shame
of Poverty will force a man to do or suffer any thing: How much more will
pinching hunger, scorching thirst, benumming cold! Necessity has no Law, or at
least necessitous persons are easily drawn to think so. Give me not poverty
(says the Wise Man Prove. 30. 8, 9.) lest I be poor, and steal, and take the
name of my God in vain. A good man is merciful to his beast, and shall not we
be so good as to have compassion upon men? The miserable and penurious
condition of the Poor man would afford me great store or plenty of Arguments to
plead his cause; but I will only name them; Hunger, thirst, nakedness, rags,
filth, deformity, pensiveness, sickness, torture, contempt, sighs, tears,
groans, fear, despair, disconsolateness, assaults of the Devil,
hard-heartedness of the World, dejectedness of his spirit, weak and vain looks,
loss of limbs, blindness and deafness. I cannot name them all; Poverty is
attended with such a numerous regiment of defects and infirmities, that they
may win the most strong and stony heart to compassionate their miseries.

But because we are fallen into these ill latter times, in which the Apostle
has foretold that the love of many (or rather of most, if not almost of all)
shall wax cold; Mercy and Pity are not passions easily to be stirred up out of
the representation of our Neighbors misery and ill plight. These are poor
contemptible virtues, befitting the weak womanish sect: A strong vigorous
faith, (I would to God it were so) or if you will, a deep conceited fancy
that we are Gods Children, (though we be not merciful as our Heavenly Father is
merciful) is altogether in request and fashion amongst us Christians. So this
conceit makes us abound with Love toward God, (as we think): But when all
comes to all, it will prove but false and adulterate Love; It will not abide
that touchstone, If you love me keep my commandments: Or that of S. John's
Epistle, Chap. 3. Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have
need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him?

4. But if we do love God so much, and our Neighbor so little, yet we may not
evade or escape this duty of doing good for all that. For say that all our time
is to be spent in the duties of the First Table, all our Piety to be showed in
performances toward God: If I show that these acts of Mercy and Bounty, be acts
of the First Table too, I hope we will not show our selves so ungrateful and
impious, as to decline this manner of Worship which he requires at our hands.
Now that acts of Mercy are duties of the First Table, I need go no farther for
proof than my Text, which tells us that doing good and communicating is a
sacrifice: And Sacrificing you know is a duty of the First Table; even the
immediate service of God.

How fitly the Apostle has framed his Argument for convincing of men's corrupt
Consciences, and discovering that mysterious hidden wickedness, that lurks in
our hypocritical hearts; a strong persuasion that we are Gods, though there be
little of the inward power of Godliness in us! This holy kind of
irreligiousness, that is so immerse and lost as it were in a false counterfeit
love of God, that it quite forgets all respect and duty to our Neighbor: That
foolish impudent Spirit that would so confidently father it self upon God, and
persuade him that he is his Child, when its nothing but the deceitful breath of
the Devil: A handsome slight to travel to Heaven at least charges! The service
of God; that is, a strong persuasion that we are one of them that God has
signed to be his (though there be no other sure argument or sign, saving that
we do strongly persuade our selves so) The hearing of the Word, the saying of
Prayers, and such outward performances, or outward deceivable phansies; is a
Religion so cheap and easy, that it asks a man neither cost nor labor. But to
be crucified with Christ, to suffer with him, to undergo the deadly dolorous
pangs of mortification, to sweat drops of Blood, and endure the unspeakable
agonies of dying to sin, this is a harder way: To give Alms and relieve the
needy, to furnish those living Temples of God, the poor Christians Souls with
necessaries, this way is more chargeable. Now which of those ways be more
pleasing to Flesh and Blood, let any man judge.

Beloved, be not deceived, God is not mocked: He that sowes nothing but words,
shall reap nothing but wind: If we will serve God as we will, he will
recompense us as we would not. I will have mercy (says he) and not sacrifice;
as the Prophet speaks: Or in the Apostles Language, (If you will be
sacrificing) This is the true Christian Sacrifice and Holy Worship of God, even
to do good as we have opportunity.

As if the Apostle should thus speak; I know that such is the quality of the
natural man, and the highness of his mind, that he will easily be persuaded to
be exercised in the immediate service of the great King of Heaven and Earth:
But he is not so easily induced to regard the state of his poor necessitous
Neighbor. Such his crafty and covetous disposition is, that he will easily
bestow some sugared words upon his Maker in public or private Devotion; so
that hereby he may be excused from real good deeds to his fellow creature: He
will easily sacrifice the calves of his Lips, so it may exempt him from a
cheerful relieving or feeding the hungry and needy: He will be very earnest and
anxious in the intricate subtilties of Opinions, so he may be cold or frozen in
common Charity, the only acceptable Religion. Wherefore I knowing these slights
and subtilties of the Devil, and false and dangerous imaginations of the Flesh,
and abominable hypocrisy of the Natural man, who takes all the hints and
occasions he can to decline the true service of God, and seeks false
pacifications of Conscience for to retain his so dearly loved disobedience, and
following his own desires: That you rest not our selves in a false pretended
service to God, and so neglect those Charitable Duties to your Neighbor; I
tell you that these good offices to your Neighbor are services to God, the
highest kind of service of his Sacred Majesty, such service as is most
acceptable to the God of Charity.

5. Which is the Fifth and last Motive; and brings to the second and third
Propositions in my Text, (2.) That the doing of good and communicating is a
sacrifice: (3.) That this doing of good is a sacrifice well pleasing unto God.

THESE I will now handle in an absolute way, considering them in themselves.
And first of the former; viz.

II. That doing good is a Sacrifice.
I will first prove the truth of it out of other places of Scripture. Then
compare the doing of good with the nature of a Sacrifice and its kinds. Lastly,
I will draw some practical Inferences from it.

1. That doing of good is a Sacrifice, may easily be gathered out of that in S.
James 1. 27. Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep our selves
unspotted of the world. (...). That is, The Worship of God (which in the Old
Law consisted of Sacrifices and Purifications external) is this; even offering
or giving our Benevolence to the Poor, and comforting every one in his
distress, as his misery requires, and our ability will afford; this is our
Sacrificing: And our Washing and Purification is not that of the Body but the
Spirit; the keeping our selves from the pollution of the wicked World; the lust
of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life; as S. John glosses
upon that word. Purity from these, is undefiled Religion in the sight of the
Father: To do good is that acceptable Sacrifice or Oblation to God.
Ecclesiasticus 35. Whosoever keeps the law brings offerings enough, He that
keeps the commandments, offers an offering of salvation; and he that gives
alms, sacrifices praise. S. Paul, Phil. 4. 18. But I have all things, and
abound; I am full, having received of Epaphroditus the things that were sent
from you, an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to
God. So this point is strong enough out of Divine Testimony, that communicating
good is a Sacrifice.

I but, some will say, it is not truly a Sacrifice; but Metaphorically, and
improperly so called. But the Answer is easy, (and yet beyond their
expectation) that it is more really and truly a Sacrifice than those in the Old
Law: As the living man is more truly and really a man than the picture of a
man, or his shadow in a glass. It is well known and acknowledged of all true
Christians, that the service of the Old Law and its Ceremonies, are but Types
and Shadows of the Righteousness that is required of us Christians under the
Gospel. So then as the truth of the putting away the old leaven, is the purging
of our Souls of all malicious wickedness and hypocrisy: (1 Cor. 5. 8.) So our
sacrificing or offering unto God, is giving to our Brethren that be in need,
and not to God who has no need of any thing. I will not reprove thee (says
God) because of thy sacrifice and burnt-offerings; I will take no bullock out
of thy stall, nor he-goat out of thy fold, for all the beasts of the forest are
mine, and so are the cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all the fowls upon
the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are in my sight. If I be hungry
I will not tell thee, for the whole world is mine, and all that therein is.
Think thou that I will eat bulls flesh, or drink the blood of goats. (...)
Sacrifice unto God praise. Psalm. 50.

But what shall we think then, that he that professes his own self-sufficiency
so largely in this Psalm (that he needs not the Flesh of Bulls, or the Blood of
Goats) that he stands in need of the empty breath of man's mouth, a thing so
fading and transient, that weak puff, or perishing blast of man, whose very
substance is but a vapor, a wind that passes away, and comes not again? Is
this the change of Worship that God requires? Is our vain breath the very Life
and Soul of that Body of Moses, the Ceremonies of the Old Law? Has Aarons
melodious Bells, given place to sounding Brass or a tinkling Cymbal? If good
deeds (as giving our Goods to the Poor; and Body to the Fire, if need be)
without Charity, be such a disconsonant and harsh thing before God, how will
the praise of a wicked Worldling, that has neither inward Charity, nor outward
Munificency, grate the ears of the Almighty!

But that you may know that this Sacrifice of praise is not a mere Lip-labor,
let us compare it with that of Ecclesiasticus, in the forecited place; He that
gives alms sacrifices praise: And with that of our Savior, Let your light so
shine before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify your father
which is in heaven. Hence does shine out the Praise and Glory of God, even from
our outward real good Life. But to turn the Sacrifice of the Old Law into a
Ceremony of Words, would not be the turning of the type or shadow into the
truth or reality, but the substitution of a lighter shadow for one of more
solid subsistence. For words are but imagines rerum, the shows or shadows of
things, and the faintest flittingst shadows of all shadows, next to vanity it
self. But seni verba dare difficile est: If we offer empty words to the ancient
of days, he will not be so deceived. Wherefore it behooves us to serve him in
the truth of his Worship, which is in the acts of Charity; lest we be found as
mockers of God, and fire come from his presence; not to consume our Sacrifice,
which so easily vanishes of it self, but to blast our selves; and so we perish
irrecoverably.

The Sum is this: If sacrificing praise; that is, giving of Alms, or doing any
manner of good to our Neighbor, out of the holy spring of lively Charity in
our compassionate hearts, succeed the Sacrifices of the Old Law; then must
these Sacrifices of doing good be more really and truly a Sacrifice than those
of the Old Law; by how much more the Antitype is more really such than the
Type, and every body more really that body or being (suppose man, beast or
tree) than the shadow or image thereof is such.

2. This scruple removed, I will pass on to the second thing propounded, which
is the comparing this true and Christian Sacrifice, with that description of a
Sacrifice that commonly men give.

Learned Mr. Calvin, in the Fourth Book of his Institutions, speaks thus. Nos
perpetuo Scripturae usu Sacrificium appellari scimus quod Graeci, nunc (...),
nunc (...), nunc (...) dicunt, quod generaliter acceptum complectitur quicquid
omnino Deo offertur. We know (says he) that Sacrifice in continual use of
Scripture is called, that which the Greeks name sometime (...), sometime (...),
sometime (...), which in a general conception comprehends whatsoever is offered
to God. So he.

And according to this sense it is very plain and evident, that Alms or any
manner of doing good, especially to the members of Christ, is a Sacrifice. In
as much as you did it to one of these little ones, you did it unto me. Matthew.
25. They that are united to God and Christ, the Spirit of God being shed abroad
in their hearts, and so they becoming one with God, and God one with them;
surely our Sacrifice of Alms offered to these, does as immediately approach to
God, nay nearer and more immediately, than when a Sacrifice lies upon a
senseless stone, and the smoke vanishes into the empty air.

Or suppose a Turk or Infidel to receive these Alms; if they be given in
reference to the honor of God, and in obedience to the Almighty, they are
Oblations or Sacrifices to God as before: And what great matter, whether an
outward fire upon an Altar, or the inward heat of an hungry stomach consume
them?

But that I may satisfy all apprehensions concerning the nature of a
Sacrifice, let us now take it in a more proper and restricted sense; according
to which some define it thus, A Sacrifice is an external Oblation, made to God
alone, whereby some sensible thing being Consecrated by a Lawful Minister with
some Mystical Rite, is consumed or changed, to the acknowledgment of our humane
infirmity, and the praise and profession of the Divine Majesty.

That all these requisites are found in the true Christian Sacrifice of doing
good, I will both briefly and clearly show.

That it is an Oblation external, (...) a Gift or Offering sensible or
external, is evident to every man's apprehension; it needs no proof or
manifestation.

But that it is an Offering made to God alone, seems more difficult: Yet that
is true too. As true as in those Sacrifices of the Old Law: For neither in
those of the Old Law was God alone served; others partaked of the Sacrifice; or
the fire, or men's mouths fed upon them, or both. Indeed to say the truth, in
the matter of the Sacrifice, God was not so much as a partaker. Will I eat the
Flesh of Bulls, or drink the Blood of Goats? Can the fume of frying Flesh be so
acceptable to him, when the vapor thereof is so displeasant to men? Or can he
take any delight in the smoke of Frankincense, the breath of whose spirit,
gives life and motion to those sweet odours of Paradise? Surely no. Why then,
when others partake of the Sacrifice and he not, should a Sacrifice be an
Offering to him alone, and not to others? Surely not because he enjoyed any
emolument from them; but because the minds of the offerers passing through all
sensible objects and actions, fixed themselves in God, and witnessed before him
their obedience and thankfulness, in an humble devotion of Soul; and this was
the only thing that passed to God alone. And thus may the Christian Offering be
offered to God alone: When this action of communicating is resolved ultimately
into obedience and inward sensible Worship of the Almighty, not by watery and
cold Reason, but by a fervent vigor of Life: When out of a quick and lively
apprehension of the Will and Nature of God, which is Goodness it self and
all-embracing Love, we to our power work according to that principle, and so
exhibit to God an action most consonant to his own Nature, an action of Bounty
and Goodness; neither the applause of men, nor hope of requital, nor any other
sinister respect sharing therein; but God alone being the end and beginning,
whereby we move, and in whom alone we rest in this holy action.

And this unfolds the following words of this description of a Sacrifice, Some
sensible thing consecrated. Consecration, you know, appropriates a thing to
God. And our action of communication is appropriated to God, if we seek not any
thing for our selves in this action, but do it simply in obedience to the Will
of God.

But now that this action of doing good, whither by hand or tongue, is not
without an outward mystical Ceremony, is hence plain: For whether it be the
munificence of our hands, they are but a resemblance of his munificence, that
opens his hands, and fills with good every living thing: Or if of tongue,
whereby we do beget the holy life in others, or direct in doubt or danger, this
is an emblem of the eternal (...), the everlasting word, whereby all things
were made, and are now governed and directed.

The next term that I shall explain in this definition, is a legitimate Priest
or Minister. And surely every true Christian is truly such. Christ has made us
kings and priests unto God his father. Rev. 1. 6. And 1 Pet. 2. 5. And ye as
living stones be made a spiritual house, and holy priesthood, to offer
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Ver. 9. You are a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood. And if we consider the qualification of
the righteous man, the unfeigned Christian, we shall find him fit for this
employment. Who more gracious with God than he? Who more loving to men than he?
Who therefore more fit to make Prayers and Supplications for the People than
he? That Life which is in him, even the Spirit of Christ, does adopt him into
an higher Order, than the Order of Aaron. Or rather Christ whose Spirit of Life
is in him, is that High Priest, higher than the Order of Aaron; A Priest after
the Order of Melchizedek; A Kingly Priest, who officiates in Everlasting
Righteousness. Here Is a Priest without exception, above all commendation,
worthy all honor and admiration, worthy to be heard of God, worthy to be
obeyed by Men, worthy to be attended by Angels, worthy to whom all power should
be given in Heaven and Earth; worthy of that Glorious Throne, even the
Right Hand of God the Father in the height of Heaven, where he makes
intercession for us his poor members, wandering and toyling in the mire and mud
of this wicked earth: That we being redeemed with his most precious Blood,
may be made Kings and Priests to his Father, to offer Spiritual Sacrifices; and
first of all, our selves, in a sensible apprehension that we are wholy from
him, nothing at all of our selves; and then an open and free-hearted love to
our Neighbor, in acknovvledgment that our fullness is not of our selves but of
God. And this contains the last and best requisite, in that description of a
Sacrifice, the acknowledgment of our Humane infirmity, and the praise and
profession of the Divine Majesty.

HITHERTO we have compared this Christian Sacrifice with the general notion of
a Sacrifice. We will now see how it fits with the kinds of Sacrifice: Which
according to the Schoolmens Division are three. (1.) Sacrificing, or slaying of
living Creatures; which is most properly called (...), and is the word in my
Text. (2.) Immolation, which is a Sacrifice of inanimate things; as of Meal,
Bread, Salt, Frankincense, and such like. Or (3.) Libamentum, a Drink Offering;
as of Wine, or other liquid things.

How well some kinds of doing good will agree with that first kind of
Sacrifice, we should easily understand, if we did but rightly apprehend, how
that the sundry lives of beasts lurk in the bodies of men; as in some the Fox,
in others the Lion, in others the Bull, in some one, in some other, in others
many. Our Savior calls Herod, Fox. S. Paul his Persecutors, Lions. So Eccles.
6. Be not proud in the device of thine own mind, lest thy soul rend thee as a
bull. Where there is the living property of a Beast in a man; no wonder that
the Spirit of Truth, that pierces through the surface of things, into the
depth of Life, calls them by that which they are within, not by that which they
seem without. He therefore that can kill the Ox, the Bull, the Goat in any
man's Soul; that is a stupid laborious toil in the dirt, an high raving
unquietness of mind, or that goatish nature, that brutish sensual lust: He that
can exhibit these animalities dead before God, who is Judge of the Quick and
the Dead, he offers of the first kind of Sacrifice, which is (...), the
mortification of some Life that God was displeased with. He that does this
either in himself or others, does sacrifice in this kind. He that gives his
Bread to the hungry, sacrifices an Immolation. He that gives his Drink to the
thirsty, offers a Drink Offering. As much as you did it to one of these little
ones, you did it unto me. He that goes about doing good; (as our Savior
Christ) that is, He that lives not to himself, but according to the Command of
God, and Example of his Son; spends all his time, power and ability, in
diffusing of that good which God has bestowed on him; offers Frankincense: Or
rather, that precious composition of sweet odours, which is mentioned Exodus 30.
34, 35. And the Lord said unto Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, Stacte, and
Onicha, and Galbanum; sweet spices with pure Frankincense: of each like weight.
And thou shall make of it a perfume, etc. Philo Iudaeus will have these four
ingredients to be Emblems of the four general Principles or Elements of which
this World consists: and the evaporation of this fume, to be that acceptable
re-ascending of the Creature to God in holy thankfulness, and evacuation of it
self into that great ocean. His words are very significant. (...). It is a Life
(says he) well befitting the World, to give uncessant thanks to its Father and
Maker; even quite exhausting it self in a continual ascent and grateful fume,
and simplifying it self into its Elements; that all may see that it hoards up
nothing for it self, but consecrates it self wholly unto God that made it. Such
a Sacrifice does every Microcosm, or little World, every particular man, offer
daily unto God; when he spends all his days, and employes all the strength and
faculties of his Soul and Body: It is a thankful acknowledgment of what he has
received, resunding that goodness that he is partaker of, back again to God,
through those sure conduits or conveiances, the poor necessitous Brethren.

But there is yet another Division of Sacrifices into three kinds as before,
(...): So Philo: Which our Modern Writers call thus, Holocausta, Hostias
pacificas, Hostias pro peccato. The reason of this Division, Philo thus
unfolds; The two main and general causes of Sacrificing be these, (...): The
latter consists in two things; The participation of good, and the removing or
preventing of evil. Hence that Sacrifice that respects the profit of the
Sacrificer, is twofold, A Sin-offering, for the preventing the just punishment
thereof; and a Peace Offering, which was either pro beneficio accepto, or
accipiendo for a benefit received, or at least hoped for.

(1.) That the doing or communicating good appertains to the first sort, which
Philo calls (...), an Holocaust, which respects merely the Glory of God, and
not the Profit of the Sacrificer, will appear out of places of Scripture,
concerning this Duty of communicating. Let your light so shine before men, that
they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven.
Matthew. 5. 16. There Is the Honor of God. Now that we are not to participate our
selves in this; but that it be wholly to God, and for God, a true Holocaust;
Our Savior shows, Matthew. 6. 3. When thou do thine alms, let not thy left
hand know, what thy right hand does. That is, We must not have any sinister
respect, but do it simply in obedience to God, and for his Glory. Consult not
with thy left hand, that is, thy natural false Spirit, that will counsel for it
self: But let thy right hand act by it self, that strong Arm of God, the Spirit
of Christ; that the action may be wholly to God, the evil principle of that
wicked life of falseness, nothing at all intermingling it self with it. And
thus this communication of good will be an Holocaust, totally consecrated and
consummated in the service of God alone.

But for the other two kinds, Though the Christian Sacrifice has not finem
Sacrificantis, the end of the Jewish Sacrificant, yet has it finem Sacrificii:
For so thanks is rendered to God for his goodness, and further goodness
obtained, and future evils prevented; as is manifest out of Scripture.

(2.) The end of the Peace Offering, was to procure the Blessing and Favor of
God. See now what the Wisdom of God teaches us, Prove. 11. The liberal person
shall have plenty, and he that waters shall also have rain. And in the
Psalms; He has dispersed abroad, and has given to the poor: His righteousness
shall remain for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honor. Cornelius his
Prayers and Alms, how well were they rewarded with the service of Men and
Angels, and the descent of the Holy Ghost! For as he was Fasting and Praying in
his House, one in the shape of a man in white clothing stood before him and
said, Cornelius, Thy prayer is heard, and thine alms had in remembrance in the
sight of God. So he directs him to send for S. Peter; who came, and in requital
of his Alms, fed him with the Bread of Life; at whose Preaching the Spirit of
Life, the Holy Ghost fell upon all his Auditors, amongst whom was Cornelius.

Thus we see, how meet a Sacrifice this is, pro beneficio accipiendo, for the
procuring a benefit from God. And as fit it is pro accepto, to manifest our
thankfulness for favors received. Freely you have received, freely give, says
our Savior: This is all the requital I desire, all the thanks I expect.

(3.) The last Sacrifice is a Sin-offering. The reward of sin is death: But
mercifulness and doing good, delivers from this. Prove. 20. 2. The treasures of
wickedness profit nothing, but righteousness delivers from death. That is, The
covetous hoarding of the wicked man, or Riches wickedly and unlawfully heaped
and scraped up together, shall not profit in the conclusion: But Righteousness,
that is, bountifulness, acts of Mercy; (For so the original will signify, the
word (...), which is sometime turned (...), an act of Mercy: As also appears
out of the Inscription of the Poor man's Box in the Jews Temple, which was
(...), The chest of Justice, as we would Translate it, following the first
signification of the word; but according to the signification of the word in
that place, the chest of Alms.) This Righteousness, Goodness of Mercifulness,
will deliver from Death. That of our Savior Christ is more plain, and without
exception. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

So whether we compare this Duty of communicating good, with the general notion
of a Sacrifice, or with the kinds thereof, we see correspondency enough; it
falls short in nothing of a Sacrifice under the Old Law, but in not being a
shadow; which you might bear withal. Though to say the truth, it has that in
it too, the outward act; which I have intimated before. But the inward
principle it self, whence those good acts flow, nothing is greater than it,
nothing more divine, nothing more sublime; the Everlasting Life of Charity, the
Glory and Image of God, the Beauty of Man, the Lamp of Knowledge, the Sun of
Paradise, the Seal of Eternity, the Pledge and Crown of Everlasting Happiness.

NOW that I may not seem to have lost my time in inculcating this Truth so
long, let us see what useful Inferences will flow from the same.

First then, If doing good be a Sacrifice, let us remember that which R. Moses
the Egyptian conceives, their Wise and Holy Lawgiver to have bound them to:
Vt, quisquis utilitatem aliquam ceperit, ex re sanctificata, pro praevaricatore
habeatur, etc. Whosoever does take to himself any profit out of Consecrated
things (as Oblations, or Sacrifices, or whatsoever is Consecrated to God) he is
a Transgressour; and has need of an Atonement to be made for him, although he
commits the act out of error.

Our doing good therefore to other men; if we do it not simply in obedience to
God, and love of our Neighbor; but in hope of requital by his friends, or
himself, or out of desire of applause or vain glory, or any other sinister
respects; it is a making use of a thing Consecrated, a sharing with God in the
Holocaust, and makes our action sinful and unsavory before God. Wherefore we
are to endeavor to the utmost, that we be not guilty of this Sacrilege.

Secondly, In omni Oblatione tua offeres sal. Lev. 2. 13. All thy
meat offerings shall thou season with salt; neither shall thou suffer the salt
of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat offering: Upon all thy
oblations thou shall offer salt. See how this Precept is inculcated for
offering of Salt with every Oblation and Sacrifice. That Salt is an enblem of
Wisdom and Discretion is so well known, that I need not speak of it. I will
only name our Saviors words, You are the salt of the earth: (...), If the salt
become foolish, etc. So that by Salt is understood Wisdom, or Knowledge; as it
presently follows, You are the light of the world. So the seasoning our
Christian Sacrifice of Bounty, will prove nothing else but distributing our
good things with discretion, whether pertaining to Body or Mind.

Rebuke not a scorner, for he will hate thee; but rebuke a wise man, and he
will love thee; says Solomon. And our blessed Savior instilled his words of
Wisdom into his Disciples ears, according as they were capable. John 16. 12. I
have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now. Howbeit,
when he is come, which is the spirit of truth, he will lead you into all truth.
As the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. The natural man receives not the things of the
spirit of God. And Chap. 3. 1. I could not speak unto you, brethren, as to
spiritual men, but as unto carnal: I fed you with milk; and not with meat, for
you were not able to bear it. This is the discretion in imparting Spiritual
Alms.

Nor is every man a fit object of our Bounty, as concerning things belonging to
the Body. If Strength and Health be joined to their Poverty, the best Charity
is to set them to work.

Thirdly, Leaven was not to be offered in Sacrifice: So these Christian
Oblations, are to be offered in sincerity of heart, without pride, without
hypocrisy. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees; which is Hypocrisy. And 1
Cor. 5. the Apostle makes mention of the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth. But this is included in the first Inference. Wherefore I will let it
pass.

Fourthly, If communicating of good be a Sacrifice, then it is a Duty of the
First Table, and respects the Worship of God: From whence we may learn to set a
true estimate upon this Duty. We applaud our selves in the frequent Hearing of
the Word of God, and praying to God, and the like. We highly esteem (I say) our
performances in this kind, because they be of the First Table, and respect God
so nearly: But that we may with as great zeal and diligence, exercise the acts
of Charity, as well as of that kind of Devotion, The Apostle tells us, that
when we distribute our Goods to others, relieving them either in Body or in
Soul, we then worship God; we then sacrifice to God, which is an act of service
and worship proper and peculiar to him; which consideration is worthy our
thinking of, and more worthy our practicing of. Cursed is he that does the work
of God negligently.

The Fifth and last Inference shall be this, That which Philo the Jew speaks of
in his Tractate, (...), Of them that sacrifice; of their washing and
sprinkling; that kind of sprinkling of water mingled with the ashes of a red
heiser. Numb. 19. Which is (says he) to put us in mind whereof we be made;
that we are but dust and ashes, water and earth mingled together. This is our
composure, such our frailty, this our poor condition; capable of so many
miseries, by reason of this tempered dirt we carry about with us: And therefore
being all of one mould, we may the more heartily commiserate one another, and
help one another. This sprinkling is a fit Consecration of every Christian
Sacrificer, that in all humility and compassion he may relieve his
fellow-member.

The Sum is this, That with all sincerity, discretion, diligence, humility,
and tender sympathy, we may offer unto God, this Christian Oblation; even the
Charitable communication of such good things, as God has imparted to us.

AND thus I have dispatched the Second branch of my Text; viz. That doing of
good is a Sacrifice.

III. The Third and last is, That doing of good is a sacrifice in which God is
well pleased.
It is not improbable that the Apostle has here an eye to those many
testimonies in the Prophets of Gods displeasure against the Jewish Sacrifices.
Esa. 1, 11, 13. What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, says
the Lord? I am full of the burnt-offerings of rams, and of the fat of fed
beasts; and I desire not the blood of bullocks, nor of lambs, nor of goats.
Bring no more oblations in vain: Incense is an abomination unto me: My soul
hates your new mons, and appointed feasts. So Chap. 66. 3. He that kills a
bullock, is as if he slew a man: He that sacrifices a sheep, as if he cut off
a dogs neck.

What is it therefore that God would have? Wherein is his delight? I desired
mercy, and not sacrifice, says he, Hosea 6. 6. And in the first of Esaias, he
names the relieving of the oppressed. And Chap. 66. Ver. 2. He speaks of a
poor and contrite Spirit; and such a Spirit is also merciful. For it is pride
and high-mindedness that makes us forget the evil plight of our Neighbor.

I will add a Reason or two to confirm this Truth, and so conclude. God is
Truth and Essence it self; therefore his delight is in the truth of every
thing, and not in their empty shadows. He loves the truth in the inward parts,
as the Psalmist says. Therefore doing good out of pure Charity, cannot but
please him; it being the substance of the Jewish Ceremony of Sacrificing.
(...); says the Pious Jew: True Sacrificing, what can it be, but the Piety of
the Soul that loves God? And he that loves him, must needs love his Neighbor
also: And he that loves his Neighbor, will do good to him so far as he is
able. Therefore the same Author says very truly in another place. (...).
Humanity (or forwardness to do all good offices to our Neighbor) and Piety are
twins. He thinks not the term of Cousin or Sister fit enough; but calls them
Twins, to show that they be born both at a time. So soon as true Piety is born
in us, Humanity strait springs up with it.

Now this (...), or love of our Neighbor, being so like the Nature of God,
whom the Apostle calls Love; This principle and the effects of it ( doing good
to our Neighbor) must needs be acceptable to God. The Heathens had so much
Reason in them, to offer that to their Deities, which was most consonant to
their Nature. So the Persians Sacrificed on Horse to the Sun, Ne detur celeri
victima tarda Deo.


But I will not insist upon the proof of a thing so plain: I doubt not but that
you are thoroughly persuaded of the truth of these two latter parts of my
Text, That doing good is a Sacrifice; and that it is a Sacrifice wherein God is
well pleased.

The Inference and Conclusion of all is that which I begun with; viz. To do
good and communicate forget not. And that we forget not, He that has set his
eyes upon the hearts of men, and minds all their ways; He strengthen us and
stir us up, by the powerful working of his all-quickening Spirit; that we
constantly endeavor to fulfill the dictates thereof through Jesus Christ our
Lord; to whom with the Father, and the Blessed Spirit, be all Honor, Glory,
Power, Praise, henceforth and for ever.

Amen.
DISCOURSE XII. GAL. vi. 14, 15, 16. But God forbid that I should glory, save
in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom the world is crucified unto me,
and I unto the world. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any
thing, nor uncircumcision; but a new creature. And as many as walk according to
this rule, peace be on them, and mercy; and upon the Israel of God.
THE drift of this Epistle to the Galatians is to reduce them again to the
Truth of Christianity, that were almost apostatizing to Judaism and the
Ceremonial Law of Moses. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years: I
am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed labor on you in vain. Chap. 4. Ver. 10,
11. But the main scope of the Apostle is against Circumcision, as is plain upon
the very first perusal of the Epistle: Which he beating down, together with
all the Law of Moses, and extolling the Faith in Christ, seems sometime to
excuse a man from walking in the Law, under the pretense of Faith in Christ.

But as S. Peter has well observed; there be many things in S. Paul's Epistles
hard to be understood, which foolish men pervert to their own destruction. And
that we be not led into the same error and mischief, I hold it not from my
purpose to trace the footsteps of S. Paul in this present Epistle, if so we may
happily wind our selves out of this dangerous maze or labyrinth.

Whereas then he seems to nullify, or vilify at least, the Law, in the
advancing of that Righteousness that is by Faith; Let us see what this
Righteousness that is of Faith, and what that of the Law is.

Chap. 2. 19. For I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto
God. Ver. 20. I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ lives in me.

I through the law am dead to the law,] What a riddle is this? that the Law
should deprive it self of its Disciples. And yet it does so. For it is a
Schoolmaster to Christ, or rather an Usher: Which when it has well tutour'd us
and castigated us, removes us up higher, to be made in Christ perfect, who is
the perfection of the Law: But the Law it self makes nothing perfect. And this
is the reason that Righteousness is not of the Law. And to this purpose speaks
the Apostle in this very Epistle, Chap. 3. Ver. 21. Is the law then against the
promises of God? God forbid: For if there had been a law given which could have
given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law.

(...), A Law that could enliven and enquicken us]. But that is beyond the
power of the Law. That Is the Title and Prerogative of Christ; who is the way,
the truth, and the life. (...), I am the resurrection and the life: He that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. John 11. 25. This
therefore is the Righteousness of Faith or Belief; far above the Righteousness
of the Law or killing Letter.

Now when this Faith is come, we are no longer under that Poedagog of
Punie-boys, the Low-master: But are all the Children of God by Faith in Jesus
Christ. And none are the Children of God, but those that are led by the Spirit
of God, as the Apostle witnesses in his Epistle to the Romans. And those that
have the Spirit of God, what fruits they bring forth, is amply set out by the
Apostle in this to the Galatians, Chap. 5. ver. 22, 23. But the fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance: (...), Against such there is no Law: For indeed there is
no need of it, they being a Law unto themselves.

So we see how those that are in Christ, are not under the Law, because their
Obedience or that living Law in their Hearts are above it: They do really and
truly fulfill it, through the Spirit that is by Faith: For that Spirit is the
begetter of Love, and Love is the fulfilling of the Law. For all the law is
fulfilled in one word, even in this; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of
another. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust
of the flesh. For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do
the things that ye would. But if ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the
law. Ver. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

Observe that [ If you be led by the Spirit] For against such there is no Law,
as was said before. Which implies if thou art not led by the Spirit, thou art
liable to the Curse of the Law, to Death, Hell and Damnation: For so also
speaks the Apostle, when he has reckoned up the works of the flesh, ver. 21.

But here methinks I see some filching away an excuse for their own hypocrisy,
out of some of the foregoing words at the 6th Verse of that 5th Chapter, The
flesh and the spirit are contrary, so that you cannot do that you would.

I, but withal this is true too, That if we will that which we do amiss, we are
then under the Curse of the Law: For we are not then led by the Spirit of God,
but are servants of Sin and Satan: We are not then in Christ, no more than our
bodies at Athens or Carthage, but our phansies roving thither; For they that
are Christ, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Ver. 24.

So we see plainly, Beloved, that the Righteousness that is of Faith is not a
mere Chimaera or fancy, but a more excellent Righteousness than that of the
Law. For the Law is no quickening Spirit, but a dead Letter: But Christ is the
resurrection and the life. And he is God our Righteousness, mighty to save; and
can with ease destroy the powers of Death, Darkness, and the Devil, out of the
Soul of man: But we must have the patience to endure the work wrought in us by
him. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

And if we will still cloak and cover our foul corrupt Hearts with forged
conceits of Hypocrisies own making, and excuse our selves from being good to
one another or to our selves, because God in Christ is so good to us; Hear what
the Apostle speaks in the last Chapter of this Epistle, (for it is now time to
draw nearer to my Text) Ver. 7, 8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: But he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

The aim therefore of the Apostle is not to extenuate or discountenance real
Virtue and Righteousness, but to point us to it, and tell us where it may be
had. Not in Days and Years, not in New Moons or Festivals, not in Circumcision,
nor in the dead Letter of the Law; But in Christ and the Spirit of God, in the
renewed Image of God, in the New Birth, in the New life, in the second Adam
from Heaven, in the New Creature, in that stumbling block to all Flesh and
Blood, in the Cross of Christ.

But God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross, etc.
THE Text contains briefly the Sum of the whole Discourse; we may cast it into
these Three parts.

1. The Apostles Resolution; He will not glory in any thing save in the cross
of Christ, whereby the man of Sin in his very Soul is crucified and made dead,
that the Life of Christ may abide in him. 2. The Reason of his Resolution;
Because when a man has given his name to Christ, neither circumcision, nor
uncircumcision (nor any of the Ceremonial Laws) is any thing, but a new
creature. 3. His Benediction or well-wishing to all that walk after the rule (
i. e. according to the new man, that is framed in Righteousness and true
Holiness) the true Israel of God; Peace be on them.
But I will rather fall upon the words themselves: And in my passage point out
such Observations, as shall arise most naturally from the Text, and be most
profitable for you to hear.

But God forbid] That has reference to the precedent Verse, [ But they desire
to have you circumcised, that they might glory in your flesh.]

Yet the Holy Apostle, devoid of all ambition and emulation, and of making an
outward shovv among them, contents himself with that which is but the scorn
of Worldly men, nay glories in it, and in it alone, the Inward Cross, the
Mortification of the Old man, the Circumcision of the Heart.

God forbid that I should glory in any thing, etc.] See the exceeding deep
humility of the Apostle, a man endued with such excellent gifts from God, so
learned and well versed in the Law, one acquainted with so Divine
Revelations, rapt up into the Third Heavens, an Hebrew also, an Israelite, a
Son of Abraham; such an excellent Orator as he approved himself before Felix,
before Festus, before Agrippa, and also at Lysta, where they took him to be
the God of Eloquence, Mercury himself, and would have Sacrificed unto him; so
well versed in the Poets, as his quotations out of Aratus and others, testify
him to be. But these are but trifles, I mean Poetry and Oratory. You may see
him in the Acts, casting out Devils, healing the Sick, making the Lame walk,
recovering the Dead to Life; nay giving the Spirit of Life, even the Holy
Ghost, and with it the power of Prophecy, and speaking with Tongues: Yet all
these, and many more (the least whereof were able to puff up the vain mind of
our ordinary Christians, and swell them to an unusual extent) stir not S. Paul
above his wonted measure: But he still continues himself a Paul, i. e. little
in his own eyes, though the endowments God had bestowed on him were very great.

A true Disciple of Christ who taught his to be thus minded; Learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly. And methinks I hear the Apostle call to us out of this Text,
saying, Be you followers of me, as I am of Christ.

But if a man propound the Example of the Apostles and Saints of God to some,
they look on them rather as Prodigies to gaze at, than Examples to imitate; and
do usually with the rude Cyclops in Erasmus, return this answer, Paulus est
Paulus, Ego sum ego. Paul had a privilege to be good, my privilege is to be as
bad as he was good.

But let Reason move thee, if Example will not. Why should thou glory, and in
what? Art thou Noble? No more than the blood that runs out of thy Fathers Nose,
or that which is blown out of it, unless thou be Virtuous. Art thou well
Apparel'd? Yet a Lilly is better. Art thou Fair? It is but in thy superficies,
or surface of thy Body; within is stinking dung and dirt. Art thou Strong? Yet
weaker far than an ordinary Cart-horse. Art thou Proper? Yet not so tall as a
Pine. A goodly great-bodied man? The whole Earth is but a Point, why struttest
thou then so proudly, as if thou would outface Heaven? Thou art a wise and
subtle piece: So is the Devil, and a Serpent. Thou art extolled and admired of
men: So is Vanity. Beloved of women: But their own Lust and Lasciviousness a
great deal more. (...)
All, whatsoever thou boastest thy self in, is but ludicrous and ridiculous,
contemptible dust, and less than dust, even nothing. Why then do thou glory
in any thing?

God forbid that I should glory in any thing, save in the cross] What a Paradox
is this? More strange than not to boast at all. For not to boast, there being
nothing worthy boasting of, is but reasonable: But to boast of that which is a
shame and reproach among all men, is uncouth and strangely admirable. Crux
crux, inquam, infaelici and miseris. The Cross was but the fate and doom of
Thieves and Malefactors, and as little glorious as the deserts that bring to it.

But it may be it was some fine Silver or Golden Crucifix: A pretty toy for
Children to glory in. What was it?

The Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ]. Yet it is but a stumbling block to the
Jews, and to the Greeks foolishness. I, but it is the Cross of Christ,

Whereby the World is crucified to him, and he unto the World]. This is worse
and worse, a scandal also to the Christians themselves. Sufficient for them it
is that Christ bore his own Cross, and the Cross bore him: It was fitter one
man should dye for the people. What? that we may securely live in sin? God
forbid. He that will be my disciple, let him take up his cross and follow me,
says our blessed Savior. The death therefore of the Cross belongs to us, as
well as to him, though we would fain avoid it?

This is true then (truer than we would have it) that a right Christian whose
Pattern S. Paul is, must be crucified to the World, and the World to him; be
dead unto the World, and the World dead to him.

But what is the World, and what to be dead to it? S. John in his 1 Ep. Chap.
2. describes it from its parts; Ver. 15, 16. Love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the world.

These then ought we to be dead to, viz. The lust of the flesh, i. e. all
carnal concupiscence and unlawful desires of the Body, all gluttony,
drunkenness and leachery: To the lust of the eyes, i. e. all covetousness and
filthy avariciousness, desiring to encroach and compass all that we see, and
pleasing our selves with looking upon what we have got already, but making no
good use of it, to the glory of God or good of our Neighbor: To the pride of
life, i.e. ambition, stately and lordly living, the praise and applause of men,
superiority and authority over others. All these things we are to be dead to by
the inward Cross, by an holy and serious mortification of our corrupt Life.

But how shall a man be able to mortify this corruption, to kill these
inordinate desires?

I will tell you an infallible way, upon condition you will remember it: By a
constant denial of their Cravings. Give a Beggar nothing at thy door, and he
will never visit thee. Desire is starved by being unfulfill'd. A man, you know,
often loses his appetite by staying very long for his Dinner. Inordinate
desire will hurt a man like an Ague, if we pamper or satisfy it. The Devil and
the Sop will both down into our guts at once. But thou may pine out both
Desire and the Devil that lurks in it, by a pertinacious Temperance, or
stopping thy self in thy outward actions. Affect not vain glory in thy actions
or words, but modestly decline it, and Pride will fall in thy Soul in good
time; thou shall find Humility rise in thy Heart, and sweetly shine in thee
with her mild light. Give not thine Anger vent, it will be extinct like
smothered fire. Answer not thy Lust or Lasciviousness, and it will cease to
call unto thee, but dye as a Weed kept under in the ground. Dare to do good,
though thy base heart gainsay it: God will look upon thee in pity, and repay
thee with a more noble Spirit; and Covetousness being often crossed, will even out
of discontent quite leave thee.

But if thou be false to God and thine own Soul in these things which he has
put in thy power (and he has put the outward man plainly in thy power) and
neglectest the performance of them, and yet do complain of want of strength,
thou art in plain English an Hypocrite; and the Devil and thy own false heart
have deceived thee. A man, I confess, cannot generate himself, but he may kill
himself: So though we cannot regenerate our selves, yet we may mortify our own
corruption, if we be not wanting to our selves.

And this is the Cross that we with S. Paul are to bear, and to dye upon; that
when we have suffered and been buried with Christ in this Baptism, God may
raise us up with him to Life, and endue us with his Holy Spirit.

And this is the New Creature which is spoken of in the next Verse, For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision; but a
new creature.

In Christ Iesus] i. e. When we have taken upon us the Profession of Christ,
have been made Members of the Christian Church by Baptism.

Circumcision avails nothing]. And verily there is no reason why it should,
for it is a badge of Judaism, not of Christianism; and cannot, no not in
Judaism, do much without the inward Circumcision of the heart, and observation
of the Commandments of God. Romans 2. 25. to the end. For circumcision verily
profits, if thou keep the law: But if thou be a breaker of the law, thy
circumcision is made uncircumcision. Therefore, if the uncircumcision keep the
righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for
circumcision? And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfill the
law, judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision do transgress the law?
For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision,
which is outward in the flesh: But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and
circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose
praise is not of men but of God.

And this also was known and propounded to the Jews under the Law. Deuteronomy. 10.
16. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be not refractory. And
in Chap. 3. ver. 6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the
heart of thy seed, to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, that thou may live.

And what else indeed does God require of thee, O man, but that thou would
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and all thy strength, and thy
neighbor as thy self! This if thou perform in thy Circumcision, thy
Circumcision is effectual to thee: If thou do not, it is but Concision; and
cutting off a piece of Flesh, which God and Nature was not so overseen in
making, but it might well be left uncut off. And if Circumcision without
Obedience and an Holy Life, avails them nothing that are under the Law, how
could it possibly be any thing to us that live under the Gospel?

But to what purpose is this to us that do not bear the outward Circumcision,
nor are likely to prove so giddy as to revolt to Judaism? Wherefore let us here
turn aside awhile from the Circumcision of the Jews, to that which is its
(...), that answers to it among us Christians: And that is Baptism. Will that
avail any thing without the New Creature?

What it may do to Children before they be actually sinful by their own
misdeeds, I leave to the censure of the Schools to dispute: That concerns not
us who are past Children, were we got as far out of Foolishness as
Childishness. The Question is, how much Baptism avails us of grown. Age,
without the New Creature.

Just as much as Circumcision without the keeping of the Law, avails a Jew.
Can Water wash without the Spirits operation? Does the Spirit operate and
effect nothing? Are we suppressors and choakers of the Christian Life that
should revive in us, and yet stand justified before God? Can we kill Christ
within us, and persist in that obstinate cruelty, and yet be clean from the
guilt or punishment of so heinous transgression, by the sprinkling of that
outward Water upon us in Baptism? Ah nimium faciles! qui tristia crimina caedis
Fluminea tolli posse putatis aqua.
Foolish and too too credulous men they are indeed, that think their being dipped
in the Font, shall vvash out the deep stain of this so horrible murder.

Yet there is a Baptism that will do it, and without it nothing is done: It
is Mortification. If the Murderer dye, that is, that man of Sin, the Old Adam,
or the blood-red Edom, and Christ revive, all is well. Romans 6, 3, 4. Know ye
not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into
his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: That like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life. Ver. 6, 7. Knowing this, that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin. For he that is dead, is freed from sin. Believe it,
though we are called to Liberty, we are not invited to Libertinism. But our
true Liberty or Freedom is to become free from sin.

So you see that Outvvard Baptism without the Inward, is as little available
as Circumcision in the Flesh, without that in the Spirit. If any here, as it
is not plainly immaterial, ask of the efficacy of the Lords Supper: So far it
is from doing good without an inward qualification, that it is Poison to the
unvvorthy Receiver, or worse; even Damnation it self, as the Apostle
witnesses.

It is the New Creature then only, or at least chiefly, that a Christian must
rest upon; since nothing is available without it.

The New Creature] It is worth the enquiring into, what this New Creature is,
that is of such efficacy, and power, and worth, and price.

It is no more certainly than the New man. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. That ye put
off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt according
to the deceitful lusts: And be renewed in the spirit of your mind: And that ye
put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness; that is, not in external Ceremonial holiness, or outward
Sanctimonious show; but in the Regeneration of the inward Spirit to a new life
from the very heart.

And again, Col. 3. 9, 10, 11. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put
off the old man with his deeds: And have put on the new man, which is renewed
in knowledge, after the image of him that created him: Where there is neither
Greek, nor Jew, circumcision, nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor
free; but Christ is all, and in all.

This New Creature then is nothing but the Image of God in the Soul of man. So
witness both these Texts: -- The new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness: After God] that is, according to God; or like
him, (...), after the image of him that created him. This New Creature is the
likeness of God: And the likeness of God (as both these places evidently show)
does consist in Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness. The very same that
Plato speaks at once in his Theatetus, (...) (...). To be like God, is to
become holy, just, and wise.

But because most men (even the Old Adam in us) take themselves to be holy,
just and wise: It will be seasonable here to see what Justice, Wisdom and
Holiness this is that is in the New Creature. And who can tell it so well as he
that is it? Matthew. 5. 21, 22. Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old
time, Thou shall not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the
judgment. But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without
a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment: And whosoever shall say to his
brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the council: But whosoever shall say,
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Ver. 27, 28. Ye have heard that it
was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit adultery. But I say unto
you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed
adultery with her already in his heart. Ver. 33, 34, 37. Again, ye have heard
that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self,
but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths. But I say unto you, swear not at
all. But let your communication be, yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more
than these, comes of evil. Ver. 38, 39. Ye have heard that it has been said,
An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. But I say unto you, that ye resist
not evil. Ver. 43, 44. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love
thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you and persecute you.

Behold the exact and unblameable Righteousness that is in the Regenerate Soul,
far above the doctrine or thoughts of the Pharisees. External Righteousness in
the Outward man, or to be internally just as far as corrupt reason suggests, is
but filthy rags, in respect of this Righteousness that Christ requires of us,
and the New Creature does bring with it, once grown up to its due stature in
us. Let every man examine himself by this rule.

And as this Justice is far above, I, sometime contrary to the Justice of the
Natural man (for with him to hate his enemy, to recompense evil with evil is
just) so the Holiness is far transcending the Holiness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and Zelotical Ceremonialists. For all Outward Ceremonies of Time, or
Place, or Gestures, or Vestments, Rites or Orders, they are all but Signs and
Shows; but the Body is Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

Lastly, that the Natural man fancy not himself wise (as who is not, of all
precious things, the most forward to appropriate that to himself?) that he
fancy not himself wise, before he be holy and just, let him examine his
Wisdom in the third Chap. of S. James's Ep. Ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Who is a
wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? let him show out of a good
conversation his works with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter envying
and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth. This
wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. For where
envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. But the wisdom
that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy.

The Righteousness then of the New Creature is a Righteousness far above the
Letter of Moses's Law, though exactly performed. Its Holiness more resplendent
than the Robe of Aaron and all his Priest-like Attire, or whatsoever Ceremonies
else God has instituted or Man invented. Its Wisdom far above all the
thin-beaten subtleties of the disputacious Schools, without contention or
bitter contradiction.

And they that walk according to this rule] This upright rule of everlasting
Righteousness,

Peace be on them, and mercy; and upon the Israel of God.] (...). Peace be on
them, or Peace is on them. For the Verb is not expressed in the Greek.

Peace certainly is on them, they having obtained the true Righteousness, whose
very Essence is Peace, (...), The Peace of the Soul, as the Pythagoreans have
well defined it.

And how can there not but be Peace, when they that cause tumult and rebellion
in the Soul are dead? Pride is dead, Covetousness is dead, Anger is dead,
Malice, Hatred, and Envy, and Lust, all dead and buried in the true Christian
Baptism: None left now but Reasons Liege Subjects. The whole man now is but an
Habitation of the Deity, the Temple of God, an Instrument for the Holy Ghost to
work his Will by.

This is the Kingdom of God in us, the Kingdom of Peace and Righteousness, the
Kingdom of Joy and Triumph in the Holy Ghost. This is the Rule of Christ in us,
who is the Prince of Peace. And they that are thus guided and ruled, (...),

Peace on them]. The inward Peace is on them; they are at Peace with God, and
their own Conscience: And God give them also Peace with men.

(...), Let no man molest me (let no man trouble me) for I bear in my Body the
marks of the Lord Jesus, says S. Paul in the following Verse. The Apostles
desire is but equal: For why should any man afflict this peaceable generation
of men? Certainly it is either out of Ignorance or Malice, whosoever do it.

Pray rather even for the outward Peace of this true Jerusalem: They shall
prosper that love thee: For these indeed are the true Inhabitants of Salem,
whose Head or King is Melchizedek, King of Righteousness, and therefore King of
Salem, that is, King of Peace. This is, as the Text does plainly speak,

The Israel of God]; The righteous Nation in whom there is no guile. As our
Savior says of Nathanael, Behold a true Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
guile. And thus the Psalmist, Surely God is good unto Israel, even to such as
are of an upright heart.

God continue his Goodness to them, and increase it sevenfold: And increase
them in number above the Sands of the Sea, and the Stars of Heaven; that none
may be able to count the dust of Jacob, or to number the fourth part of Israel:
That the Heathen may be swallowed up of them; and that the very memorial of
wickedness may perish from off the Earth, To the King of Saints, the Holy one
of Israel, who inhabits Immortality, and the Light inaccessible, to the only
Wise and All-powerful God, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, etc.

DISCOURSE XIII. 1 PET. i. 22, 23. Seeing ye have purified your souls in
obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren; see
that ye love one another, with a pure heart, fervently: Being born again, not
of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and
abides for ever.
THE Text is an Exhortation to Christian Love, The Duty is enforced from a
double Argument.

1. From the end of our Sanctification, in those words, Seeing ye have purified
your Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit, (...), unto (or for)
unfeigned brotherly love. And this ushers in the Precept or Duty, Love one
another with a pure heart, fervently.

2. The other Argument follows, of no less force than the former, which is
drawn from the condition of our new Birth; Being born again, not of corruptible
seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and abides for
ever.

THE several Truths or Doctrines contained in the First Argument are these, viz.

Doctrine I. That the Christian man's Soul is Purified.
Purified] (...) is the word, synonymous to (...); both imply a purging or
cleansing from filth. They are both used together, James 4. 8. in one
signification: But yet there is a more special sense belonging to them both;
they both signify a Sacred and Ceremonial kind of cleansing and purification,
and after, appropriation to God; as Titus 2. 14. where the word is (...), with
allusion to the Consecration of the Levites, Numb. 8. and their washing of
their Cloths, and sprinkling the Water of Purification, is called (...).

So that the purifying of the Soul (in the Text) implies cleansing and
appropriation. But the Objects are not here expressed, yet very safely
supposed; we cannot miss of them if we would. For from what should the Soul be
purified, but from its filth? What is the filth of the Soul but Sin? To whom
should the Soul thus purged be appropriated or consecrated? To it self? It is
not purged, if not purged from it self. To the Creature? It is the height of
Impiety, palpable Idolatry. To Sin? It is not Sense. To what then but to God
its Creator and Redeemer, who gave himself, (...), that he might purify unto
himself a peculiar people. Tit. 2. 14.

Thus is purified the Christians Soul; which is true not only in that narrower
sense of taking the Soul, but also as it includes the Body, or the Beast as the
Platonists call it; even the very Passions, and more fiery motions which those
Philosophers resemble to Horses drawing the Chariot of the Soul; these also
shall be Sanctified: So that upon the reins of the Horses (if I may speak with
Zechary) there is inscribed, Holiness to the Lord. But certainly more properly
and chiefly this Purification belongs to the Soul her self, and from thence
will sink through all the powers and faculties of the Body, taking hold of
them, wielding them and ruling them at its own pleasure, or at least not
suffering it self to be overruled by them.

Now this purifying of a Christian implies, that he was unholy and foul before.
And not only the whole man, but also whole mankind is in this sinful state till
washed and purified. Romans 3. 12. 1 Ioh. 1. 8, 9, 10. where we have both these
points confirmed. 1. That we all have sinned, and stand obnoxious before God.
2. That by the worth and merit of Christ, and the effectual working of the
Divine Spirit we have forgiveness, and that God does cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. And this is the true Christian Mystery: If we be Christians,
we must be as certainly purified, as its certain we were once impure.

Doct. II. That the Christians Soul is purified in obeying the Truth.
Here meets us the unwelcome visage of Obedience; but with its face turned upon
a safe object the Truth. Where we may note, that it is not any Obedience that
purifies, but the Obedience to the Truth. A man may toil like a Mill-horse in a
circuir of Ceremonies and outward performances, and yet but take his walk with
the wicked, unless the Truth be obeyed.

Again it is such a Truth as Obedience belongs to, not an high aerie speculative
Truth; not a Truth only to be believed, but to be put in practice; for we
cannot be said properly to obey speculative Truth, because the Soul there has
no power to resist or disobey: For the Devil himself would glady embrace and
assent to all pure and inoffensive speculation, that does not touch his own
interest and present condition; and so would all his and Natures children, the
most wicked men that are: And that the Devil is cast into a fit of trembling at
this grand speculative Maxim, [ There is a God]; is because his quick memory
does presently recollect that he is Just, and that himself stands obnoxious to
his Justice; here is his interest touched.

The Truth therefore here meant is not so much those general speculations of
the Infinite Power and Wisdom of God, the Incomprehensible Trinity, etc. which
both good and bad men do easily spend their time in, and promiscuously believe,
and yet sit securely upon their lees, their hearts being untoucht, unbroken,
unstir'd: But the Truths which we are said most properly to obey are the
Practical Truths, such as Matthew. 5. Chap. 16. 24. Chap. 11. ult. Chap. 7. 13.
etc. The Purification of a Christian is in obedience to such Truths; and Christ
admits none for his that be disobedient, workers of iniquity. Matthew. 7. 23.

Doct. III. That the purified and obedient Soul is thus purged and obedient
through the Spirit.
This is he of whom Malachi 3. 2, 3. But who may abide the day of his coming?
and who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like
fullers soap. And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he
shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver; that they
may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

We having then so powerful a Purifier, what hinders but the Christian Soul may
be purified? No doubt of this Refiners Art or Skill. Is his Will doubted of? It
is one with the Will of God; and Gods Will is, that we be purified, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
3. And Christ is no teacher of looseness, but of the height of Righteousness.
It Is not the privilege of the Gospel that we may sin securely, because Christus
solvit; but that we may live more exactly, because Christ requires it, and does
inwardly enable us to perform it.

See also Romans 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. There is therefore now no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
For the law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the
law of sin and death. For what the law could not do, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: That the righteousness of the law might
be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Here we will acknowledge that God is able, his Spirit is willing, but we are
incapable of so great a good, by reason of the infirmity of the Flesh: But
answer me, O vain man, what is this infirmity of the Flesh, is it not the
strength of Sin? And is there any strength that can withstand the powerful
operation of the Spirit of God? The weakness, or strength if you will, of the
Body bears it toward the Earth; but the fire and activity of the Natural
Spirits bears it above, and enables it to walk upright on the Earth, contrary
to be bend of its own Essence and Nature. Shall not the Spirit of God then be
as able to actuate and lead the Soul contrary to its accidental and ascititious
Principles, as the Natural Spirits to actuate the Body contrary to its innate
and essential Principles? Certainly if it be not effectual in us, we our selves
are in fault, who abuse our shuffling Fancy and Reason to fend off the stroke
and power of Truth that at once would cleave our hearts, that is a tender place,
the seat of Life it self; and any Religion but that which kills us and
mortifies us. The Devil knew well enough what he said, and his Children make it
good; Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. This is
the shuffling hypocrisy of the Natural Spirit of man, and the root of
infidelity.

But let us make better use of this precious Scripture, [ Seeing ye obeyed the
Truth through the Spirit]. 1 st. For the increase of Faith, and Confidence, and
Courage in the ways of Obedience, since we have so strong assistance as the
Spirit of our God, with true Christian Fortitude to conflict with all our
Spiritual Enemies, wearing that Motto in our Minds, (...). 2 dly, For hearty
Thankfulness to God when ever we find our selves successful in our Spiritual
Warfare, as to the only giver of Victory. 3 dly, and lastly, For Humility,
AEquanimity, and Christian Patience and expectancy toward our Neighbors that
are not yet reclaimed from their evil ways, being compassionate over them; not
to insult in other men's weaknesses and miscarriages, since we our selves stand
not by our own power, but by the gracious assistance of our Savior Jesus
Christ: And certainly Purification arrived at its full end, will easily afford
us this; for the end of Purification is Brotherly Love, which is the Fourth
Doctrine.

Doct. IV. That this Purification of the Soul, and Obedience to the Truth
through the Spirit, is for this end, viz. the eliciting of Brotherly Love and
Sincerity in the Soul.
(...)]. I know, sometimes (...) and (...) are distinguished, as 2 Pet. 1. 7.
But that (...) here may be as large as (...), I know nothing considerable to
the contrary. The word is capable of that Sense, (...) and (...) being used in
as great a latitude as Proximus and Alter, including all that descended from
our Father Adam.

So that (...) is the love of our Neighbor; and this Love is the end and
height of our Purification and Obedience, the aim and scope of it, as much as
concerns the Second Table, Romans 13. 9, 10. and 1 Timothy 1. 5. Who is able to
express so Divine an excellency? For certainly the unfeigned Love of men is the
very Divine Love it self, whereby God loves himself and all things, and we also
love God and all things in reference to him. This is that Love of whom the
whole Universe was begotten, and that rocked the cradle of the Infant World;
the very Spirit of God, whose Splendor none can behold and live; for he must
first be dead to himself, and extinguish the love of himself, before he can be
touched and quickened by this Spirit of Life and Love.

THUS much for the Doctrines included in the First main Argument. In the Second
are these; viz.

Doctrine I. That there is a Regeneration of the Soul.
By understanding what Generation is, we may better know what is Regeneration.

1. The notion in general of Generation (according to Aristotle) implies no
more than a right and fit union of a form substantial with some capable
subject, whether that form be elicited of the subject or matter, or be brought
in from elsewhere, (...), as Aristotle speaks of the Rational Soul.

2. There may be more Forms substantial than one in one subject; so they be but
subordinate one to the other; and that a new Species does not arise so much
from the destruction of the pre-existent Form, as by addition of a new one,
which might actuate the whole that does pre-exist: As the numerus ternarius is
not made by taking from the numerus binarius, but by adding an Unite thereto.
Thus Aristotle seems to speak, Metaph. 7. Cap. 3.

3. Observe, That one Soul actuating a Body, if any part of that Body be cut
off and lose the benefit of information, suppose an Hand or Foot, that is then
said to be but equivocally what it was before; which implies it is then of
another Nature or Species, as much of it as there is, though it be not an
entire substance if compared with the whole; and consequently that the Soul
actuating it, did then specificate it another way.

We have now a tolerable insight into Generation, and Regeneration is but this
twice told. That which is this specifical substance now, by adding a new
substantial Form thereto becomes something else: This is Regeneration. And to
apply it to our selves. We are already once born according to Nature; our
Bodies and Souls being fitly united together by him that is the Father of all
Life, and the Lord of Nature: But though we be thus specificated, yet we are
not thence perfected; but this Binary of Body and Soul the Pythagoreans would
be bold to call but a miserable, (...), till that Third completing Unite be
added, the (...), that Divine Nature, or Spirit of God.

This Doctrine of Regeneration is inculcated often enough in Scripture, though
not under this express name; but it is strongly enough employed in as many
places as there is mention of being born of God: For what is that but
Regeneration, or a Second Birth, and how often is that repeated in S. John's
Writings? John 1. 12, 13. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: Which were born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
Chap. 3. 5. Jesus answered, Verily verily I say unto thee. Except a man be born
of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Regeneration is not a slight tipping or coloring over with superficial
qualities and habits, but is from a substantial principle of Life, that
actuates the Soul as powerfully as the Soul does the Body; is the Souls true
form or (...), as the Soul is the Bodies (...) and form. For what does (...)
imply, but penetration and most intimate possession of the subject actuated or
informed, and power, rule and command over the same to move it at pleasure? And
does not the Divine (...), the Eternal Word, thus penetrate and possess the
Souls of Godly men; even as the subtle Light does the Air, of it self but a
dark and forlorn body?

There is so perfect a correspondency between Generation and Regeneration, that
unless prejudice and Sophistical curiosity keep it off, man's Reason would
forwardly assent that the Christian Regeneration is no dry Metaphor, but full
Truth: And that the Regenerate man is even as specifically distinct from the
mere Natural man, as the Natural man from brute Beasts. We made it good even
out of Aristotle, that the Species or Essences of things are as Numbers, etc.
The Ternarius is not made by taking from the Binarius, but by adding another
Unite thereunto: Therefore a man though he have one Form already, viz. the
Natural Soul, it hinders not but he may have also another, the quickening
Spirit of God. I will add a little more force to the Conclusion by taking
notice of the grounds of our specificating things, and essentially
distinguishing the one from the other; that we may discover the like grounds
for our conclusion. What small and slight intimations from accidentary
differences in Natural Bodies, have cast the Earth, Water and Air into so many
distinct Species; and that they cannot put on one another outward qualities,
without the generation of some inward substantial form! A little difference in
weight and color must imply a several Specification in Silver and Gold; and
upon a little more occasion than color and taste, must a Pigeon and a
Partridge be distinct Species. Not that these things are false, but that there
is as true grounds to find a real Specifical difference betwixt a Natural man
and a man Regenerate. For if several color, figure and weight, though they be
something near akin to one another, be a sufficient cause of surmisal that some
inward essential form is within; surely then when we see the Soul of man
figured and covered over with new Thoughts of Mind, new Knowledge, new Desires;
it is as good an Argument that it is actuated by a new Principle of Life.

But here it will be replied; Then any Chaste man will Specifically differ from
an Unchaste man, Just men from Unjust, Philosophers from Idiots.

But it is not such an opposition as it seems at first sight. The improvement
of Nature is no sign of a new Specification. A Horse that can go, may also
trot, gallop, pace, swim, and dance too, and yet not cease to be an Horse: But
if I should see him flying in the Air, I should take him to be no Horse but a
Devil. A Nightingal may vary with her voice into a multitude of interchangeable
Notes, and various Musical falls and risings, and yet be but a Nightingal, no
Chorister: But should she but sing one Hymn or Hallelujah, I should deem her no
Bird but an Angel. So the highest improvement of Natural Knowledge, or mere
Morality, will argue us no more than the Sons of Men: But to be of one will
completely with God, will make us, or does argue us to be the Sons of God.
Stones, Dirt, Metals, Minerals, distinct enough one from another, agree in
tending downwards to the Earth; and Fire is as much determinate to moving
upward to the Natural Seat of that Element: But if that either of them, or
Fiery or Earthy nature, move of its pleasure upward, downward, to the right, to
the left, this way and the other way, even as it will; no man any longer will
suppose it either Fire or Earth, but something else Specificated by a new
internal principle. To be always bent down to the desire of the body and
worldly delights, that motion is Bestial: To be always reaching at high things,
that is Diabolical: To be disengaged from a man's self, and stand indifferent to
what ere the Will of God is, that is Angelical or Divine.

But it is again objected, If Regeneration imply a real new Generation, that
then it must also imply a real Corruption; so that the Natural Soul shall be
destroyed, or at least Natural Knowledge, Natural Principles of Reason.

Not a jot of this follows. Neither the Soul it self, nor its Natural
Principles of Knowledge or Reason are destroyed or abated, but made up and
perfected. Does one Unite added to two pre-existent Unites destroy those
Unites? Or rather, do they not all put together beget a new Number of another
Species and Name? Or, to bring it more home, does the Soul of man coming into
the organized Body, destroy the Body? Or does it not rather perfect and
complete it? So does also the Spirit of God coming into the Soul. But as for
the pre-existent qualities, no more of those are destroyed than are
incompatible with the residence of that new Form, the Divine Spirit.
Disobedience and wickedness be the only (...) with this new Birth. Reason is no
more incompatible with this state, than fancy, memory, hearing, seeing,
smelling, etc. Nor the improvement of Reason, or Arts and Sciences, then
looking upon the Stars through a Galilaeos Glass, or reading the Bible with an
ordinary pair of Spectacles.

Doct. II. That the Soul is Regenerated of no corruptible Seed, but
incorruptible.
There needs no Descant upon this, no Interpretation, the Words are so clear;
no Proof, the Truth is so unquestionable.

Doct. III. That this incorruptible Seed is the Word of God.
The Word of God has two or three Senses: It signifies The written Word, The
Word spoken, and Verbum mentis, That which God conceives within himself. This
last is chiefly the Word: The other but dead signs or shadows of it, differing
as much from this, as a picture of a man from a living man; nay much more; as
much at least as the shadow of the Garland hanging on a Sign-post, and
projected on the ground, differs from the best Wine in the Inn. The Word
spoken perishes with the speaking, Vox audita perit. The written Word is
indeed longer-liv'd, but Paper and Ink is not incorruptible and immortal: For
the heavens shall melt away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt
up. 2 Pet. 3. 10. The Word of God then is safe no where but in his own bosom,
cypher'd within himself in his own mind. This is his eternal Wisdom and
incorruptible Word; the only incorruptible Seed.

Preaching and hearing, and reading and discoursing, they may be a kind of
plowing or harrowing, or some such piece of Husbandry: But it is an hand out of
the Clouds that sets this Seed of everlasting Life in our hearts. Those are but
some hungry talk of the best dishes, or spreading the table: This is the real
food. Those but a note under the Physicians hand: This is the very Physic that
restores to health.

Doct. IV. That this Word of God, which is the Seed of the Soul, is a living
and everlasting Word.
This Word is no other than the inward Word of God, which is his firstborn
Son, the everlasting Wisdom of the Father, which sat in Counsel with him when
he made the World. Prove. 8. John 1. This Second Hypostasis is so acknowledged
by the Heathen to be everlasting; they make it to be (...), the first Life.
That it is a living Word, we have an ample testimony, Heb. 4. 12, 13. For the
word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Neither is
there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked,
and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. Can these Attributes
be given to any dead letter, or any transient hand? Can Words or Writings be so
penetrating as to divied asunder the Soul and Spirit? etc.

It Is true, Authors both Divine and Profane give very quick operations to the
Words of the Tongue. Prove. 25. 15. By long forbearing is a prince persuaded,
and a soft tongue breaks the bone. Psalm. 57. 4. My soul is among lions, and I
lie even among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are
spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. Psalm. 64. 3. Who whet their
tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter
words. And in Homer, (...) is to speak words that cut to the heart. But for
this, consider that it is not the words that do then so wound the mind; as the
mind launceth it self, and plagues it self by those unruly phantasms she then
occasionally creates in her self upon such speeches. One man being jear'd at a
Comedy, bears himself so carelessly and jollily, that he walks cross the stage
that all the people may take notice that he was the man that was so abused.
Another so used, goes home and hangs himself; which is a sure experiment to
prove that it is not words, but the Souls own thoughts that so wound and scorch
her self. Words of themselves are but empty shells and husks, and can give no
greater blow than the shadow of Hercule's Club lifted up in the Sun; nor can no
more administer comfort than an Ivy-bush can quench our thirst. Wherefore it is
plain, that it is the Soul her self that creates these joys or disturbances in
things Natural or Moral. But in real Conversion to God, in unfeigned
Repentance, in the New Birth (as the Letter or outward Word is excluded, as has
been cleared, so) the Soul her self is excluded, as being unable to regenerate
her self; therefore what is left but God himself by his living Word? That Is the
immediate cause of Conversion and Regeneration, the other but occasions. If
not, there is no supernatural act at all in Conversion and Regeneration.

Again, this Word of God is said to be a discerner of the thoughts, etc. all
which are manifest Properties of Life. Compareing therefore this place of the
Hebrews with the Text, it is plain that there is a living and everlasting Word,
and that that Word is meant in both these places: And if so, then its the same
with S. John's words, In him was life, and the life was the light of men.

THUS much for the Doctrines or Truths, which are as so many enforcements to
the great Duty, (...). The substance of the Duty is mutual Love; which is
charged with a double modification, viz. of quality, (...), and of quantity,
(...); which implies extension, and is as much as (...), or intension, and is
as much as (...). Again, this (...) or extension, is either in reference to the
object or else duration, and implies an universal Love, and continued. But no
English word will fully answer to (...): Therefore our Interpreters have been
forced to make use but of one of these senses, fervently: And they have with
more judgment, pitched upon the sense of intension than extension, because that
intension in some measure implies extension; but not e contra; for that which
is ( ex. gr.) very hot, has also a further extended sphere of calefaction, and
does last longer hot, than that which is at first but more remisly heated, as
is manifested in heated Irons.

To make any subtle disquisition of the nature of Love, is not much to the
purpose. Every one knows what it is to love himself, how he is affected toward
himself: Let him but transfer that affection, which he is so sensible of in
himself, to his Neighbor, and the Duty is done more substantially and
completely, than all Scholastical definitions and curious circumscriptions can
be able to set it out. Be so affected to other men, as you would they should be
to you, or as you are affected to your self: This is the Law, and the Prophets.

THE Incitements to this Duty are many: But I will confine my self to the Text,
and cull out some three: As, 1. From the Seed of the New Birth.

For what is this Seed but the Son of God, by union with whom we also become
the Sons of God, petty Deities? But since that the Deity it self is nothing else
but a sufficient and overflowing Goodness, creating all things, and sustaining
them from no other principle than the Spirit of Goodness; though we cannot act
as this absolute Deity, yet we may will according to that uncreated Will, which
is nothing else but pure overspreading Love.

Again, this Seed, (as has been showed) which is the Word, is a living Seed.
But where Life is, and Understanding or Sense, there must needs be Love, for it
is the flower and sweet of all desire. What then can be the desire of the
living Word but Love; and how can he want desire, since he is Life; and what can
he so much desire as the good and welfare of Mankind? What therefore should
that part of Mankind that partake of this Divine Nature, desire more than the
good of one another, and of those also, that as yet have not partaked of that
Divine Nature: For God also loves those, or else how could ever any partake of
it?

2. From the Regeneration of the Soul.

It is the Holy Ghosts own arguing, 1 Ioh. 4. 7. Beloved, let us love one
another: for love is of God; and every one that loves, is born of God, and
loves God. Ver. 16. And we have known and believed the love that God has to
us. God is love; and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
By Righteousness and Unrighteousness, by Love and Hatred, are the Children of
God and the Children of the Devil manifested. 1 John 3. 10. In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: Whosoever does
not righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother. Ver.
14. We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren: he that loves not his brother, abides in death. If Water or Earth
be turned into Fire, we expect it should burn and be hot. How shall then a Son
of Satan, or the Earthly man, be turned by Regeneration into the Son of God,
and not love?

3. From the end of our Sanctification.

Love is the very End of it. Shall Envy, shall Hatred, shall Lust, Ambition,
Luxury, etc. shall all these enormous Desires and Affections be cast out of the
Soul by Sanctity and Purity, that she may be but a transparent piece of Ice, or
a spotless fleece of Show? Shall she become so pure, so pellucid, so
christalline, so devoid of all stains, that nothing but still shadows and night
may possess that inward diaphanous Purity? Thus would she be no better than the
nocturnal Air, no happier than a statue of Alabaster; it would be but a more
cleanly sepulcher of a dead starved Soul. Nay, certainly at this cleansing and
preparing is for something well worth that labor. The Stoics themselves, that
were such severe Sentencers of Passion, would retain (...). Stoicism it self
brings in, upon that deadness and privation of other Passions, that divine
motion of the Soul, which is Love or Goodwill to all Mankind. And shall
Christianity be but a cold grave to the mortified Soul of man? No surely, there
is a Resurrection to Life, Love and the Divinity, as well as a Death of the
enormous Affections of this Mortal Body. Bitter Zeal, harsh Censure, busy
Revenge, (...) are so far from being able to supply the place of Charity, that
it is a manifest sign that we are as yet carnal and unsanctified.




DISCOURSE XIV. PSALM. cvi 28. They joined themselves also unto Baal-Peor, and
are the sacrifices of the dead.
THIS Psalm is a compendious commemoration of those many slips and falls the
Children of Israel had in their Journey to the Land of Canaan.

As foul and as dangerous as any, is this in my Text; this business of the
Baal-Peor. In the handling whereof I will observe this method.

First, I will explain what may seem difficult to understand, or ambiguous.

Secondly, I will further confirm out of Scripture the narration in this
Particle of Scripture.

Thirdly and Lastly; I will make some Observations or Deductions from the truth
of this Text; such as will come from it with as much ease as profit.

I. For the First.

(...)
(...), i. e. They joined themselves.] For although the word be in Niphal, and
may seem to signify either Passively or Neutrally; yet (as Elias the
Grammarian has observed) the Conjugation Niphal sometimes signifies as
Hithpael, which denotes a reflex act: Tota actio ejus est retransitiva, quum
recipiatur ab ipso agente. So he expounds that in 2 Kings 20! (...) Amasa non
est custoditus; that is (says he) (...) Non custodivit se. So Lev. 25. (...)
Et venditus tibi. Vt dicunt sapientes bonae memoriae (says Elias upon this
place) loquitur hic versus de vendente seipsum, necessitate cogente. Other
Examples this Grammarian brings, for the further confirmation of the matter,
but I will omit them; these being sufficient for proof. According therefore to
this Analogy (...) is to be interpreted (as our Translators have expounded it)
They joined themselves also to Baal-Peor.

To Baal-Peor] But what is that? Such an Abomination that I am loath to name it.
I am almost forced back at the evil sight of it, and ill sent: And well may be,
if we believe the Hebrew Writers. Peor (says Vatablus) testantibus Hebraeis
spurcissimum Idolum Madianitarum fuit, a denudando nempe nomen habens: (...)
enim aperire and denudare significat. I will not venture any further in this
description. The impure Dog has more modesty than the Worshippers of that
Deity: For that which they hide by scraping over earth from the sight of men,
they lay open to the view of their God. Yet as filthy Abomination as it is, the
Jews (as Moses the Egytian for example, and R. Solomon) stick not to assert it
as true. Origin durst conclude, that at least, it is idolum turpitudinis,
though not define what kind of turpitude, in his twentieth Homily upon Numbers.
Cum multae sint turpitudinum species, una quaedam ex pluribus turpitudinis
species Beelphegor appellatur. S. Ierom ventures to parallel it with the
Latins Priapus, and makes it to be chiefly workshipped of Women. Others I
could bring in to confirm this of the turpitudo of this Idol. But I lift not to
dwell so long upon an history so foul. It is enough and too much, that it be
true that all assent to, that it was an Idol that Israel joined himself to.
Those things concerning it that be questionable and uncertain, I will let go,
and will build nothing but upon a sure foundation.

Let the condition therefore of their transgression be set as low as Venerable Bede has pitched it, in his Exposition upon this Text, Initiati junt (says
he) or consecraverunt se, vel initiati sunt and sacricaverunt Beel, qui
colebatur in Phegor: Belus enim fuit Pater Nini, in cujus honorem Filius Idolum
fecit, quod vocabatur Beel, and colebatur in regione Phegor, cui isti in
deserto sacricaverunt. And hence we may have some little light, to find out the
meaning of the latter words of my Text,

They ate the Offerings of the dead] that is, Offerings offered to dead men,
departed this life.

Est honor and tumulis animas placare paternas.
Ovid. Fast.
This piece of Superstition exhibited by Ninus to his Father Belus descended to
his Posterity, and overspread that Country; he being not a private Person, but
Lord of a Kingdom.

This worshipping of the Dead by Prayers and Sacrifices, is as commonly known
as ordinary School-books. There Is a large description of these Rites in Homers
Odyssees: Where after three Libations or Drink Offerings of Wine and Honey, of
Wine, of Water and Meal, which were poured into a ditch of a cubit wide, with
promise of a further Sacrifice, a barren Cow and a black Wether, with a present
immolation of Beast then prepared for Sacrifice, upon the running down of the
black Blood, -- (...)
(...),
straight there were gathered together by whole flocks from out of Erebus, the
Souls of dead deceased.

Cardan also writes of Adrian, that he erected a Temple and Oracle, instituted
Priests and Rites for his execrable Catamite Antinous, when he was dead. This
is the Superstition of Necromancy. Which though the Israelites aimed not at, in
their Sacrificing to the Ghost of Belus; yet is their Idolatry as little, if
not less excusable: For the end of the Necromancer is knowledge of future
things, or things past that lie hid: The drift of the Israelites was the
accomplishment of their wicked Lust, their committing of Whoredom with the
Daughters of Moab.

But more light than from any profane Writer, may we gather out of the Book of
Wisdom, Chap. 14. A father afflicted with untimely mourning, when he has made
an image of his child soon taken away, now honors him as a God, which was
then a dead man; and delivered to those that were under him ceremonies and
sacrifices. Thus in process of time an ungodly custom grown strong was kept as
a law, and graven images were worshipped by commandment of Kings. Here we see a
Father making an Image for his Child, and Deifying him with Ceremonies and
Sacrifices: Which makes Venerable Bedes opinion of the Child's Deifying the
Father [ Ninus his erecting an Image in honor of his Father Belus]
sufficiently probable.

So an ungodly Custom got the strength of a Religious Law among the Children of
Moab: As also that among the Latins from the first Example of AEneas, Ille
Patris genio solennia dona ferebat:
Hinc populi ritus edidicere pios.
Ovid. Fast. Lib. 2.
Where patris Genius may be very well for Anima patris, the Soul of his Father,
or his Fathers Ghost; as Hesiod also terms the Souls of them that dyed in the
Golden Age, (...), which is Genii in Latin. (...) -- These be Genii. Plutarch
restricts it not to the Golden Age, but speaks at large: (...). Souls freed
from their Bodies become Genii according to Hesiod. So Plutarch, and he venters
to show how they be affected with things here below: They love to be abettors
though not actors; as old men who have left off the more youthful sports, love
to set the younger sort to their games and exercises, and to look on and
encourage them; as he expresses it in his de Genio Socratis. Maximus Tyrius
does endeavor at large to prove that the (...) or Genii be naught but the
Souls of men, who are occupied much what in such employments as they were in
the flesh. And Xenocrates in Aristotle's Topics, makes (...) and (...) all one,
even when it is in the Body. (...): As Xenocrates says, He Is happy that has a
good Soul; for the Soul is the Genius of every one.

But I have not bestowed all this pains for a Distich in Ovid. If we be
persuaded of the Identity of the Souls of the departed and Genii or Spirits,
way is made to that in S. Basil, where he describes the nature of Sacrificing
to these Genii, Daemones or Souls of the deceased; they being all one, or
little difference being betwixt them. Which will be further confirmed, if we
consider that even all the Deities of the Heathen (as Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Luna,
and the rest) have been Men upon earth, as the Egyptians witness in Diodorus
Sicalus; from whence the Graecians had their Numina, as the Egyptians contend,
and is not improbable. Insomuch that we shall scarce find any Daemones or
Daemonia among the Heathen, but the Souls of them that have departed this life,
to whom Sacrifice has been offered. Statues, Temples and Stars have been
bestowed upon them, as in that Story of Adrian and Antinous, whom he placed
also among the Stars; the Constellation next the Eagle bears his name, as all
the Planets the names of men once here upon earth, as I intimated out of
Diodorus.

But to come at length to S. Basil, out of whom we shall understand more fully
this eating of the Sacrifices of the dead, or of the Daemones or Daemonia, The
Statue consecrated to any Daemonium or Genius, has the assistence (says he)
of the Genii or Daemonia. (...), etc. For as hungry dogs haunt the shambles
where blood and gore use to be, (...). So the lickersome Daemonia seeking the
enjoyment of the blood and nidour of the Sacrifices, frequent the Altars and
Statues consecrated to them. (...). Hence it is that the Apostle says, That
they that eat things consecrated to Idols, partake of the table of the
Daemonia, or Genii: Or (as was probably inferred before) the Souls of the dead,
according to their apprehension. For it is more incident to Natural Reason to
think that the Souls of the departed (men being rather forced out of their
Bodies by fatal necessity, than willingly following the call of Nature) that
they should delight rather in such provision as men can make them, than those
that we conceive never to have stooped so low as the descent into the flesh:
And so, whatsoever S. Basil speaks of the Daemonia, Natural Reason to be more
prone to conceive of the Souls of the departed; and accordingly to have
provided for them in that worship they did to them. So that they that have been
[ joined to Baal-Peor;] that is, that have been initiated into that Religion,
have worshipped the Soul of Belus, and have been partakers of his Table, eaten
of the same Flesh with him; accordingly as S. Basil explains the Daemonia. And
nor Reason, nor Scripture, nor the Mysteries of Nature do any thing clash
against this.

II. BUT now that Israel was initiated into those Rites of Peor, is manifest
out of Numb. 25. 3. (...), etc. Initiatusque est Israel Beelphegor: Or, as the
Hebrew has it, Et adjunxit se Israel Baal-Peor. But that we may see the
abomination of this act more fully, we will take in a more full narration of
it. And Israel abode in Shittim, and the people began to commit whoredom with
the daughters of Moab, and they called the people unto the sacrifice of their
Gods, and Israel joined himself unto Baal-Peor. Ver. 1, 2, 3. of that Chapter.
That which is here (...) Sacrificia Deorum, is in my Text (...) Sacrificia
mortuorum: Which makes further for that I drove at before, viz. That the Gods
of the Heathen are mostwhat the Souls of dead men.

THUS I have dispatched the two former Parts of my task, viz. the Explication
and Confirmation of the truth of this Text, so far as was needful.

III. The Inferences following are these.

First, From those words [ They joined themselves to Baal-Peor] we may observe,
That it is long of a man's self when he sins. Thus Ecclesiasticus 15. 11, 12.
Say not thou, that it is through the Lord that I fell away: For thou ought
not to do the thing that he hates. Say not thou, that he has caused me to
err: For he has no need of the sinful man. So Iam. 1. 13, 14. Let no man say
when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: For God cannot be tempted with evil,
neither tempts he any man. But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of
his own lust, and enticed.

To say therefore, that it is the all-swaying Providence of God that bore men
to this or that evil action, is to blaspheme the Sacred Name of God, and
contradict Reason and Scripture. Or (which seems more plausible) to say the
Devil ought us a spite, is but to be gulled by the Devil, and to add a new
error to our former misdeed. The Devil may suggest, but not compel. But to
exalt the strength of the evil Spirit above the dominion and power of him that
is the Prince of Spirits, as though they were stronger than he, is to cast God
out of his Throne, and to place Satan in his stead. Surely God who hates Sin
with a perfect hatred, will not let the Devil prevail against that Will in us
that is conformable to his. If we be against Sin, God will aid us. If we fall
into Wickedness, it is long of our selves: Yea, though the greatest of
Wickednesses; For they joined themselves to Baal-Peor, etc. Not forced or
necessitated by the Devil, against a good Will, and sincere aversation of Sin;
for this is the Will of God, and he will help his own Will: Nor led on by God;
for God will not beget to life that which he hates to see. But the truth is,
God who is the God of Love and Freedom, would have us to serve him out of a
free Principle; and so neither constrains us to good, nor over-sways us to evil.

Secondly, They joined themselves [ also] to Baal-Peor. The Calf in Horeb,
their envying and murmuring against Moses and Aaron, their lusting after the
fleshpots of Egypt, all these did not satisfy; but as if these were a light
matter, they add Whoredom and Idolatry in this business of Baal-Peor. Hence we
may observe, That the wickedness of a man's heart knows no bounds, but his evil
desires are enlarged like Hell.

Thirdly, If we compare the greatness of this transgression with the great
experience they had of the Power and Love of God to them; who had done great
things for them in Egypt, wondrous works in the Land of Ham, and fearful things
by the Red Sea; who had given them from Mount Sinai an express Law against
Idolatry, in Thunder and Lightning, Clouds and Vapors of Smoke, to the utter
dismaying of them from Sin; who had given them Manna in the Wilderness, and fed
them with Angels food; who had guided them by two mighty Pillars, a Cloudy
Pillar by day, and a Pillar of Fire to give light by night; who had made them
eyewitnesses of so many Miracles of his Almighty Arm: That these People should
so foully Apostatize, argues plainly an excessive weakness in the Children of
Adam. And the best Use we can make of it is this, To be vigilant over our own
ways, and merciful to our Brother when he slides.

Fourthly and Lastly, We may gather also a kind of disability in all outward
stays and props of our Souls in goodness, all visible helps for Piety; if
something stronger within do not sustain us and keep us.

What more forcible outward means could have been used, than Israel had
experience of? But all the terror upon Mount Sinai, and all that tempest and
dread in giving of the Law, all the Miracles that were wrought by the hand of
Moses, and the visible presence of God or his Angel, all those passed out of
their minds like a dream, and vanished as a vision of the night; all those
failed them, when the present object possessed their Eyes, when the beauty of
the Daughters of Moab had ensnared their Hearts, and captivated their Souls to
the commiting of folly.

The Young man in Macarius, who in an high Rapture beheld glorious sights,
(...), Faces of Light, and the shining Luster of Heaven, after fell into the
filth of the Flesh, and deplorable deformity of Life.

The best use we can make of this is, Not to satisfy our selves with any
outward or momentany Worships or Ceremonies, as to rest in them; but to seek an
inward Principle of never failing Life.

Else so soon as we are departed the Church, and that honor we do there to
God, we may be easily carried into the service of the Devil, the committing any
wickedness. Whereas if we had the living Spring of Truth and Righteousness in
us, we should also have a perpetual sense of what is good or evil: And as our
Natural Life is tender of it self, and perceives the least touch of harm that
approaches it; so would that Spirit of Life and Truth be exceeding sensible of
whatsoever is contrary to it or the Will of God, which would always be very
fresh and vivid in our Minds and Will.

But to attain to this Spirit of Life and Righteousness, there is no way but
Mortification, a death to Sin and our own selves, that the Life of God may
alone rule in us. Then shall not the Daughters of Moab inveigle us; that is, as
Philo the Jew interprets it, the false allurements of the bewitching Senses.
Nor shall we then worship Baal-Peor; or partake of his Sacrifices, that is,
according to the same Author, (...), etc. We shall not dilate all the openings
of our Bodies for receiving the influx or strong impressions, the unwholesome
vapors of this intoxicating World, and the pleasures thereof; and so drown our
Souls in the bottom of Corruption. For so he interprets the name of this
Idol, as if it were (...), intimating his power to lie in all the openings of
the Body, or rather outward Skin; through which the influences of this sensible
World, if they be not kept out by due vigilance, stream in and drown the Soul,
and choke all Life of Virtue and Goodness. This is that great Deity of the
Heaten: This is the Idol of the Daughters of Moab, whose stay and confidence is
in this visible World, whose joy and pleasure is in the Life of the Flesh.

I will conclude with the Conclusion of the Psalmist.

Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the Heathen; to give thanks
unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting; and let all
the people say Amen. Praise ye the Lord.

DISCOURSE XV. COL. iii. 1. If you then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.
THIS Text contains in it that precious mystery of the internal or inward
Resurrection of Christ in our Hearts or Souls; which is the chief, if not only
saving Knowledge of that part of our Christian Religion. For (alas!) Beloved,
what will that outward Resurrection of our Savior according to the flesh
profit us, though we have the History of it never so accurately; nay, though we
had seen it with our own eyes? We may lie in the grave of sin our selves for
all that: We may sink like a dead stone into the bottomless pit, and have our
portion with the damned Devils, who have an Historical Faith of all the
passages of Christ's doings or sufferings here on Earth (it may be) better than
our selves. And those wicked Soldiers that watched his Sepulcher, were
perfectly convinced, that he had escaped the jaws of Death: But what was this
to them, who were yet dead in their trespasses and sins? Surely nothing at all.
And as little is it to us, Beloved, if we be dead in sin, and have not risen
from the strong holding bands of iniquity and vanity.

Wherefore it is not enough to say Christ dyed for our sins, and rose again for
our justification; and so to imagine his Resurrection to be our raising from
wickedness and corruption: But we our selves also really and in truth are to
rise from the grave of sin, by the power of the enlivening Spirit of Jesus
Christ. And whether we be thus risen indeed or no, this present Text of
Scripture will teach us.

If you be risen with Christ, seek those things [or you do seek those things]
which are above: For the Greek Text will bear both senses.

I will first briefly run through the Sense of the words; and then raise such
Doctrines and Uses as shall most naturally flow from the Text, and shall be
most profitable, for the promotion of that main work of our Salvation.

(...), If then you be risen with Christ,] That is, If you be risen in your
Souls, as Christ in Body rose from the grave: If your Souls have escaped the
bands of the Spiritual Death, which is the nature and life of Sin, (for that
makes us truly dead unto Righteousness and unto God) as Christ's Body broke
from the Prison of the Sepulcher: Then you seek those things that are above. It
must needs be understood of the Resurrection of the Soul from Sin, because the
Apostle did not Preach to dead men departed this Life once, and again clothed
with this Fleshly Tabernacle; but to men, who were always alive from their
first being born into this visible World. In vain then had he taught them a
sign of that which he knew would never come to pass, till the Colossians were
past his Preaching to; to wit at the last day, the time of the Resurrection of
our Bodies.

And according to this manner, does the Apostle speak also of the Crucifixion
of Christ; making the outward Passion and Death of Christ, a sign or
resemblance of something in our Souls, viz. our dying to Sin, as here he has
made his Resurrection an emblem of our rising to Righteousness. Romans 6. 2,
etc.. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Know you not
that all we that have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into
his death? We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also
should walk in newness of life. For if we be grafted with him into the
similitude of his death, even so shall we be into the similitude of his
resurrection. Knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. The
Apostle there plainly compares our dying to Sin, to the Crucifixion of our
Savior; and that as he dyed on the Cross Corporally, so we ought to crucify
the body of Sin in us, by the power of God in our Spirits.

Thus have we good warrant from the example of the Apostle, to look upon the
Mystery of Christianity with Spiritual eyes. The Birth, the Death, the
Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior Bodily, have their similitude
Spiritually in our Souls. The Birth of Christ, a resemblance of Christ's being
born in us. Gal. 4. 19. My little children of whom I travail in the birth
again, till Christ be formed in you. His Death, of our dying to Sin, as I have
already declared: Or of Christ's being dead in us. For we are also said to
crucify Christ by our ungodliness, and by extinguishing his Spirit of power
and illumination in us. Heb. 6. 4. For it is impossible, that they which were
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers
of the world to come: If they fall away, that they should be renewed by
repentance; seeing they have crucified again to themselves the Son of God, and
put him to an open shame.

Crucified again: For verily, Beloved, from our very youth up we have laid dead
the Son of God, the suggestions of the Holy Life in our Consciences. But yet it
pleases God to raise his Son in us, and recover him to Life, by the Preaching
of the powerful Messengers of God, and the secret working of his Holy Spirit
upon the Heart: And here is Christ risen as it were from the grave. But if we
by loose and negligent courses, destroy this Life of Christ in us, and
extinguish the Spirit of God in our Souls, then do we crucify the Son of God
afresh, and shame the profession of Regeneration and the Spirit of God, and the
true and living Christianism, by our open revolting from the living God, and
taking part with the wicked of this World, and their ungodly and sensual
courses.

But now as Christ is thus in a Spiritual manner killed and crucified, so when
he is in us restored to Life, it must needs be fittingly termed his
Resurrection from Death: And according to this sense may those words of my Text
be understood also, If you be risen with Christ: That is, If your Souls have
become living by that Spirit of Christ being alive in you, then you seek those
things that be above. For it is as impossible that the Spirit of Christ should
be alive in us, and not we alive by it to him, as it is, that light should be
let into a room, and the air in the room not enlightened

Wherefore if Christ be risen in us, we are also risen with him. But the Sign
that we are thus risen with Christ, is, that we seek those things that be
above. But how above? What? Is the contemplation of the Stars, or the knowledge
of Meteors, viz. of Comets, of Rainbows, of falling Stars, of Thunder, of
Lightning, of Hail, of Snow or such like, commended to us? Nor Astronomy, nor
Astrology, nor Meteorology, seem considerable things in the eyes of God.

Those things that be above] That is, in Heaven. But how in Heaven? Or what is
Heaven? We are therefore to understand, that this word [ Heaven] has a
threefold signification in Holy Writ.

First, It signifies the Air. Psalm. 79. 2. The dead bodies of thy servants have
they given to be meat to the fowls of Heaven. That is, of the Air.

Secondly, It signifies that space where the Stars, the Sun, and the Moon, and
the rest of the Host of Heaven do move. Isa. 13. 10. For the stars of heaven,
and the planets thereof, shall not give their light; the sun shall be darkened
in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.

Thirdly, It signifies that abode of the holy spirits of men where the eternal
light and luster of God is present; where Christ sits at the right hand of
God.

At the right hand of God.] That is, the Power, Majesty or Glory of God. For
God has neither a Right hand nor a Left, because he has not a Body, or any
palpable distinct Members. Wherefore when any sensible parts of a Body are
ascribed to him, they are to be understood, by way of Analogy or resemblance.
So when, his eyes are said to be upon the hearts of men, and his eyelids to try
their ways, when his ear is said to be open to the prayers of the faithful;
these signify nothing else but that God does perfectly both know and discern,
and approve or disallow, as certainly and as clearly, nay infinitely more
clearly, than we see or hear any thing with our eyes or ears. Now as by the
organs of sense attributed to God, the Knowledge of God is set forth, so by the
organs or instruments of action or operation, is his Power decyphered: And most
eminently by this (...), the instrument of instruments, or best of all
instruments, the Hand. The hand of God is the Power of God ordinarily in
Scripture. So is he said to deliver the Israelites with a mighty hand and
stretched-out arm; that is, by exceeding great Power. Now the Right hand being
more active than the Left, the more usual instrument in outward works or
manufactures, it may intimate the exceeding abundance of the Power of God. Or
the Right Hand of his Power, may intimate the Power of God to good; the more
large effusion or pouring out of Benignity; the enlargement and exaltation of
the Soul of Christ and his Fellow Members, as many as have been conformable to
him in the death, or mortification of the Old Man. For these also God will
raise up with him to Eternal Riches and Glory, and irresistible. Power, which
the Devil, Death and Sin shall never be able to overcome. But the Power of his
Left Hand, is the Power of destruction, the fury, and wrath, and strong tempest
of God, which does sieze the Children of Disobedience; which abides in Hell
for them, for an endless woe, and toil, and torment for ever. And this is the
distinction of the Sheep and the Goats, on the Right hand and the Left; these
shall be plagued with the vengeance and anger of God in the power and dominion
of Hell; but those shall be strengthened, and comforted with those pleasures
that flow at the Right Hand of God for evermore. Thou will not leave my soul in
the grave, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Thou will
show me the path of life: In thy presence is the fullness of joy; and at thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

What therefore the Right Hand of God is, we plainly see; viz. the full and
strong stream of his Goodness and Divine Benignity. To sit here, what can it be
but to remain in this Happiness, unshaken, unmoved, steadily and securely? But
he that stands is next going or departing.

AND thus much by way of Explication of the words, which will afford us these
Doctrines.

1. That there is a Spiritual Resurrection of the Soul, belonging to every true
Christian. 2. That those that do partake of this Spiritual Resurrection, seek
those things that be above; that is, Divine and Heavenly things. 3. That they
seek them where Christ sits, at the Right Hand of God.
First of the first, viz. That there is a Spiritual Resurrection of the Soul in
this Life.

I will not go far for my first Proof. I will only step back into the Chapter
foregoing my Text, viz. the Second Chapter of this Epistle to the Colossians,
at the 11th and 12th Verses; In whom ( i. e. in Christ) also ye are circumcised
with circumcision made without hands, by putting off the sinful body of the
flesh, through the circumcision of Christ; in that you are buried with him
through baptism: In whom ye are also raised up together through the faith of
the operation of God, which raised him from the dead. And ye which were dead in
sins, and in the uncircumcision of the flesh, has he quickened together with
him, forgiving you all your trespasses. And then follows my Text (for all the
residue of that Chapter may be very well Parenthetical) If ye then be risen
with Christ, etc. which he does assert or affirm in the forenamed Verses, when
as he says they [ are buried with him in Baptism.] There Is the Death we are to
imitate in our Soul; that is, to have the body of Sin dead and buried. [ In
whom you are also raised up by the operation of God.] There Is the Spiritual
Resurrection of the Soul. And in the next Verse, [ Ye which were dead in sins]
There Is the Death of the Soul; [ has he quickened together with him]. There Is
the Resurrection of the Soul from its Death, which is Sin. For Sin is the Death
of the Soul; as Obedience, Righteousness, or the Holy Spirit of God, is the
Life thereof.

But for further and more manifest proof of this point, it will not be amiss to
rehearse again to you, that place at the 6th of Romans, (for it suits exceeding
well with the place I expounded to you just now.) Ver. 3, etc. Know you not,
that all we that have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into
his death? We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also
should walk in newness of life. For if we be grafted with him into the
similitude of his death, even so shall we be into the similitude of his
resurrection. Knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, etc. The
words do plainly describe the Spiritual Death of the Soul, as also the inward
Resurrection thereof from Sin to a newness of life; as the Apostle speaks.

And so Romans 8. 10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin,
(...), is mortified for sin: As we would say, such an one is killed for
Robbing, or is let blood for an Ague. So [ dead for sin] is either the
mortifying our Bodily and Carnal Affection, in a just vengeance on our selves
for the sin they suggest, and made us commit: Or [ dead, or mortified for sin,]
is, that Sin may be quite dislodged of our Bodies; as a man is said to be let
blood for an Ague, to rid himself quite of that disease, or to prevent its
unwelcome returns. But the Spirit is life or righteousness; that is, the Spirit
is our life, vivification, or the cause of our inward or Spiritual
Resurrection, (...), for righteousness; that is, that we may be righteous, or
live righteously. For, Beloved, if we take the sense of this place of
Scripture, in a natural meaning: It will not prove true. For those Romans,
bodies to whom the Apostle writes, were not dead; for if so, they had not been
able to read the Epistle, or to have heard others read it: And beside this, the
words would imply, that Christ's being in us, destroyed this Body or the health
of it; when as Piety unfeigned preserves both Body and Soul in good temper;
much less does Christ's being in us, make the Body dead unto Righteousness
Therefore it is plain that this is the sense of this place; viz. That if Christ
be in us, the Body or Flesh of a man is dead or mortified to sin; and that our
Life then is the Spirit of God, to live in Righteousness.

Now mark the following Verse. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit that dwells in you.

O behold the mighty power and dominion of the Spirit of God in a man! Not only
our Will and Understanding, is swayed, ruled, and enlivened by it, but it
descends even to the enquickening of our Bodies too, when they be once
mortified; that is, the Passions and Lusts thereof destroyed, so that we
exercise not our Affections in the things of this World. Then will God enliven
it with better and more Divine Passions and Affections: For Anger against our
Brother unadvisedly, it shall be moved with holy and discreet Zeal against all
wickedness in every body: For Sorrow and inordinate Grief, for its own private
crosses, with a sweet and tender Compassion and Pity toward all that be in any
Affliction: For Lust, and Sensual or Carnal Love, with Divine Charity, and a
large embracement of all the Creatures of God; they having some resemblance of
his lovely Wisdom and Beauty. Thus shall a man exult and rejoice in the ways of
God, both Body and Soul, serving willingly and cheerfully with the whole man.
For our mortal Bodies, even those earthly tabernacles, liable to death and
dissolution, shall the Spirit of Christ enliven by his powerful working; if so
be, that our Bodies be first made dead unto Sin, and the Spirit of God be in us
indeed: As the Apostle does plainly witness.

A further proof for this purpose may we gather out of Phil. 3. 10, 11. That I
may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable to his death: If by any means I might attain
unto the resurrection of the dead. Not as though I had already attained, either
were already perfect.

That this is meant of a Spiritual Resurrection, seems reasonable from these
grounds: First, because it is ranked with Spiritual sufferings, and Spiritual
conformableness unto the Death of Christ: And then, because the Apostle uses
this way of apologizing, [ Not as though I had already attained, either were
already perfect;] which caution he need not have put in about the Bodily
Resurrection. For could the Apostle think the Philippians to be so mad, as to
conceive that the Apostle had now risen out of the grave already, clothed with
his glorious Body, which should be incorruptible? Wherefore the Apostle speaks
there of a Spiritual Resurrection.

And that this Doctrine want no Authority to confirm it, I will add those words
of our blessed Savior, John 5. 25. Verily; verily I say unto you, The hour is
coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and
they that hear shall live.

That Life and Resurrection from the dead, can it be understood of the
Resurrection of the Body out of the grave? That was not then when our Savior
Christ spoke; nor has been yet fulfilled, saving in one single example of
Lazarus, whom Christ called out of the grave: But that was not the Life that is
meant here, for it is called everlasting life, in the foregoing Verse; which
Lazarus was not raised up to, else Lazarus would be alive at this very day,
which no man will acknowledge to be true.

But remember what our Savior Christ says, John 11. 25, 26. I am the
resurrection and the life, he that believes in me (or trusts in me, or my
power) though he dye (or be mortified; or though he be dead) yet he shall live.
And whosoever lives and believes in me (that is, is alive in me, or to me,
The everlasting Righteousness of God; and trusts this living power) shall
never dye; but be ever alive to Righteousness, and to God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. This must be understood of a Spiritual Life or Resurrection; or else
it will follow, that all true Believers in Christ shall not dye at all, that
their Bodies shall never descend into the grave.

And now, Beloved, if this Discourse of the Spiritual Resurrection of the Soul,
seem to us subtle, nice or obscure, it is our fault, not the fault of Truth.
The Sun is clear enough, and easy to be seen, but he that is blind, dead or
asleep, beholds it not: Nor can the unbelieving and unregenerate, while he lies
dead or asleep in Sin, discern the truth of the Spirit of God in the Holy
Scripture. But all things are discovered, and made manifest by the light: For
whatsoever does make manifest is light. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Ephesians. 5.
13, 14.

Wherefore this point is plain to him whose eyes are open to behold it; viz.
That there is a Spiritual Resurrection, or Vivification of the Soul.

But now if you be desirous to know what this Resurrection of the Soul is: I
will also endeavor to satisfy you in that too; but very briefly.

It is the inward Life of Righteousness, it is the renewing of the Soul, the
shaping of it again into the image and similitude of God; in a word, it is the
Life or Spirit of Christ, whereby a man's Soul is alive to all Spiritual and
Heavenly things. I will explain it by a comparison.

When a man's Natural Life is gone, all his imaginations and machinations
perish: He desires not any thing belonging to this Natural Life, nor Food, nor
Clothing; he feels not though his Body be rent, or cut, or rot away; goes not
about to preserve or recover the Health or Life of his dead Body; thinks not of
Wife, nor Children, nor any Natural thing else: But when a man is alive
according to Nature, he desires Food, Meat and Drink for the preservation of
his Natural Life; Cloths, both for shelter and ornament; is sensible of what
hurts his living Body; provides for his Health and Strength; is active in the
deeds of Nature, and (if he be a mere Natural man) all his joy, pleasure and
content is in the same. Just thus it is, Beloved, in the Death and Life of the
Soul. While the Soul is dead Spiritually, it has no true desire to the Word of
God, which is the Food of the Soul, but does come to the Church only for
fashion sake; gives no ear to the Voice of God, rebuking her in her Conscience;
has no unfeigned thirst after Righteousness; nor is she sensible of the
violent heat of Passion, how wicked it is; nor feels her self frozen and stark
cold to all Charity and due Devotion; she goes not about to obtain that saving
Health, even Jesus Christ, that precious Balsam of the Soul, nor is she a whit
moved whatever mischief betides him. But when the Soul has risen from this
Death, and has got the new Life of Christ, being enquickened by his Spirit:
Then has she a right healthful appeal to that Heavenly Bread, and those
Spiritual Waters, those Refreshments from above, the sweet Comforts of the Holy
Ghost: Then does she heartily abhor all filth of Sin; and keeps her Affections
unspotted before her Lord and Husband Jesus Christ, clothed in fine Linen pure
and white, which is the Righteousness of the Saints: Then is the living Law of
God to her sweeter than the Honey and the Honeycomb, so delightful and
pleasant that she meditates thereon day and night: She is very sensible of
whatsoever is disgraceful to Christ, or wounds or hurts his precious Body in
any thing; very tenderly loves the Communion of Saints, and has a very forward
desire to propagate and enlarge the true and living Church of God: She never
falls by any infirmity or surprisal, but is grieved and hurt; as the Natural
man is vexed, when his Body chances to fall upon stones and is bruised.
Beloved, where there is Life there is also Sense, and where there in Sense,
there is also Grief and Joy; Grief at such things as are contrary or
destructive of the Life; and Joy at such things as are agreeable and healthful
for the same.

BY this time I hope you are sufficiently instructed concerning the Spiritual
Resurrection; both that it is, and what it is. Let us now make some Uses of
this Doctrine, That there is a Spiritual Resurrection belonging to every true
Christian.

1. Then it is plain from hence, That every Christian be he what he will, that
has been made partaker of this Resurrection, was once dead himself: For as
rising presupposes a being down first, so does also a rising from death, or
being quickened, presuppose a being dead. Hence therefore it is plain, That
every Christian man, or if you will even every man, or was once, or is at this
present Spiritually dead. Now the Nature of Death you know is such, that
nothing that is held therewith, nothing that is Dead can recover it self to
Life: As it is also said in the Book of Psalms, No man has quickened his own
Soul.

Wherefore, Beloved, this is the proper Use we can make of this Consideration,
That if we find the fruits of the Resurrection of Christ Spiritually in our
Souls, we give God alone the Glory. For it is he alone that kills and makes
alive, that leads down to Hell and brings up again: He it is that is the
death of deaths, and a mighty destruction to the destroyer: He it is that is
the Resurrection and the Life; as he himself witnesses of himself: He it is (I
mean the Spirit of Christ in us) that fights against all the powers of Death
and Darkness in our Souls, and triumphs gloriously over his and our enemies:
He is the strong arm of Salvation from God: He has wrought all our works in
us. Therefore not to us, but unto God be the praise, for his mercy and truths
sake.

Nor only are we to praise God, but also to live humbly and meekly before our
Neighbor. For thou whoever thou art, that presumest thou have attained to the
Resurrection, or enquickening, or enlivening of the Spirit of Christ; If hereby
thou contemnest thy sinful Brother, and set him at naught, and art not
mercifully and kindly affected toward all men, acknowledging very sensibly and
inwardly, that wherewith thou conceivest thy self to excel others, or to be
distinguished from them, to be the Grace of God and his free work; Thou art a
liar, and a deceiver, and jugglest with God and thine own Soul, and art vainly
puffed up in thy Carnal Mind: For where Pride is, there is not the saving
Spirit of Christ; where harshness of Mind is, and contempt of our Neighbor,
there abides not the Love of God.

2. If men be dead till they partake of the Resurrection of Christ, then such
neither can, nor ought to take upon them any office of the living. Who will
make a Blind man judge of Colors, or a Sick man of Tastes, or a Deaf man of
Music? But he that is Dead is worse than Sick, or Blind, or Deaf. Wherefore no
man that is devoid of the Resurrectiod of Christ in the Spirit, is fit to judge
in Spiritual things, or in the secret Mysteries of God. It is the Spiritual man
that judges all; the Heavenly man, the Lord from Heaven, and yet with man upon
Earth; the true Emanuel, God with us, and in us by his Spirit; the true Judge
of the Quick and the Dead. As it is written, The first man is of the earth
earthly, the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthly, such are
they that are earthly; and as is the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly.
Wherefore, Beloved, judge nothing before the time; that is, till the coming of
our Lord and Savior Jesus; till his glorious appearing from Heaven, when he
shall make every work of man manifest, and shall judge with right judgment.

3. I will only add an Use of Examination, and so conclude. Is there such a
State of the Soul belonging to every Christian, such a State, I say, as the
Resurrection from Death? Then it is worth our pains, to try our selves, whether
we be in that state or no. We have seen many Easter-Mornings, God be praised,
but if the Sun of Righteousness has not yet risen upon us with healing in his
Wings, all those solemnizations of the Resurrection of Christ's Body from the
grave, is but Death and Darkness unto us; is no Health, no Light, nor Life. It
was the manner of Primitive Christians to salute one another with this
Salutation, (...), The Lord is risen: If we could this Easter-Sunday, and every
Lord's Day, make such Salutations as this in the very Spiritual Truth, [ The
Lord is risen,] That is, is risen from Death in our Souls; and we by him become
enlivened to all Righteousness; O what Mutual Rejoicing, and true Spiritual
Triumph, would there be in the Church of God!

Verily, Beloved, if you partake not of the Mysteries of Christianity in the
Spirit and Truth of them, as well as in the History and Ceremony, your
Profession is but vain, you are still in your Sins, and dismal Sentence of
Damnation remains still upon you.

DISCOURSE XVI. Appendix to DISCOURSE XIII. 1 PET. 1. 22, 23. Seeing ye have
purified your Souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned
love of the brethren: See that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently.
Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of
God, which lives and abides for ever.
I Have already insisted upon the Doctrines or Truths which are as so many
enforcements to the great Duty in the Text, (...). That which may be observed
out of this Precept is a fourfold Doctrine.

1. That we are to love one another. 2. That we are to love one another out of
a pure Heart. 3. That we are to love one another fervently. 4. That we are to
love one another universally and continually.
The First of these I have done with. I come now to

Doct. II. That we are to love one another out of a pure Heart.
This Purity may be set out in these three Constitutives, or at least,
Consecutives of Love, viz. Complacentia, Benevolentia, Beneficentia.

1. The Purity of Complacency consists in this, that we love and like that of a
man that is the adequate object of honest Love; and that is Divine Beauty,
which is not in the Body, but in the Soul, adorned with all Moral and Divine
Virtues. He that loves not according to this in a man, he loves after the same
manner he may love an horse, a dog, or any beast that is fitted for the
satisfying of his natural or extravagant humors. For if there be no ground of
right Friendship but Virtue, then is there no Love in vain and lewd men, but
after the manner of Brutes; that is, eating together as Sheep and Kine in one
pasture, or sporting together like young. Greyhounds at their going out into
the fields, or better natured Spaniels, or such like fond Animals.

I, but the gaudes of Fancy and queint toys of Wit; or at least the subtilty
thereof, Art and accomplishment of the Intellectual parts; these, all of them
put together at least, may make up an object of Complacency and friendly
delight.

Verily as much as a well proportioned Body, clear Complexion, a vigorous Eye,
gentle Deportment, etc. which are so far from that living object of Pure Love,
that by the same Law we may join Friendship with a well wrought Statue, or some
more curious Picture. Complacency in any person, saving for Virtues sake, is as
far removed from pure and Divine Love, as the affections of Xerxes, Glauca, the
Youth of Athens, and that others of Sparta, who loved trees, statues, rams,
geese, etc. were distant from Natural. ( Vid. AElian. lib. 1. cap. 39. (...).)
And as ridiculous and absurd will their Love prove in respect of that more pure
and holy affection, that can take Complacency in the person of men that have
but the outward accomplishment of parts and abilities, or outward artifice, or
natural well-favouredness, their Souls being dead to Virtue and Righteousness.
For beside that these are as helpless to the best things as a dumb statue or a
dead picture, they are also very dangerous for either hindering the first
shooting out of divine worth in the Soul of man, or for corrupting and
destroying what already is grown up of Virtue and Goodness. For so it is with
man, that so soon as he is capable of Virtue, he must either have it or the
contrary. Man's Nature is no barren Soil, it brings forth or good grain or
stinking weeds: And where once corruption has taken hold, it is even worse than
a Gangrene; it catches hold on the companion, and is the very pest of the Souls
of men.

But if the Love and Complacency of those be not pure that can love
notwithstanding the foulness of their friends, what pollution is there in
theirs that can love for foulness it self? viz. whose society pleases one
another for some bad quality, as for being a vain Gamester, Swearer, for their
Lasciviousness; or that delicious condiment of Friendship, good Fellowship,
which some loving Souls are so taken with: When as its nothing but the
similitude of their evil manners, or equality of their enlarged bellies, do
thus join their affections; Fellow-wine-bottles of the same size, or
Ale-tap-urinals, etc.

And as this Impurity in Love is Bestial, so there is also that is Devilish; as
when men like one another the better for being alike imbittered against this or
the other party: Such compliance as this is but like the twining together of
Snakes and venomous Serpents in one bed. A Paradox, That that which is the most
ugly of all the affections, viz. embittering Malice and Hatred, should make men
so amiable one to another. Thus Hags and Imps love one another.

And there is a knot of Friendship, that is as Fond at least, as this is
Devilish; viz. endearment from Identity of opinion, Fellow-Thomist,
Fellow-Scotist, etc. And when it rises no higher than Scholastic siding, or
Philosophical altercations, it is not much worse than fondness or childishness.
But when this unskillful affection interweaves it self with matters of
Religion, and touches upon the Attributes, actions or designs of the highest
God (where men are very loath to be deceived though no where more subject to
err) Fondness is then too mild a term for that which is boiled up to Fury and
Fanaticalness. For here men of the same Sect are not content with the pleasure
and goodwill they exhibit one to another; but they grow to that heat, as to
scorch all gainsayers, as well as warm themselves at these misguided flames.

God forbid that I should go about to slack any man's affection in the pursuit
and profession of Divine Truth, such as is plainly contained in the Scripture,
or evidenced by palpable experience in his heart. But that which is but the
collection of Humane Reason (which at the best, and containing it self within
its own more proper Bounds, the representations of Nature, is slippery enough
and uncertain) if it be promoted with urgency of Affection over-proportionated
to the weight of Reason and Argument, by how much it transgresses this way, by
so much largely does it partake of superstitious Phrenzy and Fanaticalness. And
that this heat is but mistaken zeal, not divine Love of the Truth, this one
thing may be a shroud sign, That they hate a man commonly more for not being of
their Sect, than they love him for being a Christian.

2. The Second Branch of Love is Benevolence: Which as it is nothing so
precious as the former [ viz. Complacency] so we may and should be the more
prodigal thereof. We may wish well to all men, but can delight in none but such
as be good.

The Purity therefore and perfection of Benevolence, is that it shoots out
before and lasts longer, if need be, than Complacency may do. For God also
loved us when there was nothing lovely in us. And we are to be like-minded with
God, who is kindly affected to those who deserve it not. And though there be a
good rude Honesty in such a disposition that makes a man not able to be at all
kindly affected to them that are debauched; yet certainly we are obliged to a
more high and Divine temper, if that which is most perfect and most Divine does
oblige us, as certainly it does.

Object. But then, Anger and Hatred, and such churlish Passions are useless,
nay sinful.

Sol. That follows not. For we may wish well to the man, though we be angry, or
hate, or grieve at his Vices. Nay, its impossible to bear a sincere Good Will
to any man that goes out of the way, but that he should be angry, or grieved at
such a man's wicked courses, and reprove him. Benevolence is so far from
excluding Anger and Rebuke, that the want of this upon due occasions is an
argument of the impureness or counterfeitness of the Affection; at least in
those men who hold it lawful, or are upon any occasions brought into this
Passion. When a man sees God dishonored, and his Brother endangered by his
vain ways, Quis est tam ferreus ut teneat se? He that can be still and smooth
in such matters, has some unwarrantable Complacence in his Friend; they are not
united in the bond of Virtue.

The Impurity of this part of Love, is the well-wishing to others for our own
sakes. This is called Amor Concupiscentiae, in contradiction to Amor Amicitiae;
as being indeed nothing akin, but rather opposite thereunto. He that loves a
man thus, is no more a Friend to him, than a Country Farmer is a Friend to his
Team of Horses, his Cart, or Plough. I wish that most Politicians were not of
this stamp, to look upon all the World as the Rustic does upon his Horse,
Plough, Sheep, Dog, etc. as profitable and instrumental. The World is so
Epidemically corrupt herein, that the whole Conversation or dealing of men,
(even of them that would seem something more than ordinarily serious) is not
much better and more generous, than the trade and commerce of Fairs and
Markets: They make choice of their Friends after the same rate they would seek
out a purchase. Profit and Pleasure share all the Societies of men betwixt them
two. He that is not instrumental to either of these ends, is overlookt as a
thing of no worth; so that there is no room but for the skilful flatterer, or
the able purse. And indeed none can love at a better rate, that is not born of
God, who is Love it self; and made the World, and the whole Creature, out of no
such self-respects at all, but for their Happiness; or if for any thing in
reference to himself, for the delight that should arise to him from their being
Happy. Nor do I know that they are obliged to any thing but what is conducible
to this end, whatever unlearned Melancholy, or rude Mistake may surmize to the
contrary.

3. The Third and last considerable in Love is Beneficence. And 1. This should
spread out as large as our Benevolence. Humanity is to be extended so far as
Mankind reaches, at least, 2. Those who partake most of Virtue, and the Divine
Image, should share the greatest part of our Favor. 3. It must be devoid of
all self-respects. What a shameful thing is it, That where that noble and
generous title of a Friend is pretended, there should be no other Love found at
the bottom (if the business be unravelled) than such as he bears to the meanest
utensil he has in his house!

WE pass on now to the Intension of our Love, viz.

Doct. III. That we are to love one another fervently.
And if we did make good the foregoing Precept of loving sincerely, we might
easily arrive to the doing of it fervently, -- Quis enim celaverit ignem?
Indeed the most accurately well painted Flame that is, gives no heat: But true
Fire without a miracle will betray it self in burning, or warming at least.

Quest. But you will say, We are uncertain of the due measure and degree of
this fervency of our Affection.

Answ. The least degree that we can allow our Brotherly Affection is, that it
must be fervent. Coldness here is Death, and Luke-warmness an Abomination, a
thing to be spued out, as being nauseating and distastful to all good men. But
when we are got to that due warmth and heat that we are really constituted in
the Divine Life and Heavenly Love, we are in a very good and safe and
commendable condition, though we have not reached all the degrees thereof; for
a little fire is as truly fire as a great deal.

And these degrees of Divine Love are, it may be, best proposed unto us in
several Examples of Saints and Prophets, which have gone before us carrying the
Glorious Lamps of Divine Love in their hands to light us the way, that we might
follow them by a godly imitation. Such were Abraham, Joseph, Moses, S. Paul,
etc.

This kindly Flame did so inact Abraham, that in the very heat of the day, at
the door of his Tent, he waited with as much earnestness for an opportunity to
exercise that excellent Virtue of Hospitality, as our greedy Innkeepers at
their Sign-posts expect a Traveller. Nor does this generous Fire only melt him
into all sweet behavior and kindness unto Strangers; but elsewhere we shall
find it bravely to raise him to feats of Arms and hardy. Enterprises in behalf
of his Captived Friends, Genesis 14. And certainly no truer root of Valor and
Bravery can be found, than Hearty and Compassionate Love to those that be in
affliction and oppressed: Nor any cause that God is more engaged to prosper.

Nor does this Principle of holy fervency only express it self in bounty and
indignation, and just revenge; but in Grief also, whether mixed with joy or
downright sadness. Thus Joseph fell upon his brother Benjamins neck, and wept;
and Benjamin wept upon his neck. Moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept
upon them. Genesis 45. 14. 15. And thus in Acts 20. 37, 38. They all wept sore,
and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him: Sorrowing most of all for the words
which he spoke, that they should see his face no more. But no Story in all the
New Testament at least is of that sadness and solemnity, as the preparation to
the raising up of dead Lazarus. Women, Men, nay God himself (as in the flesh)
all melted together into one Sorrow. Jesus wept.

Nor is this so much a torture as a pleasure to the Mind sweetly melting in
kindly motion and gentle ruth for any mishap that befalls her tender care and
charge, the several parts of the Creation of God. This is so far from being a
blemish to the condition of Holy and Divine men, that it is even a member and
branch of that condition that makes them Holy and Divine, which is their
abiding in Love, i. e. in God; whence we become Dei-formes.

Now the due and safe measure of those degrees of fervency in our Mutual Love,
is, The love of our own selves. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; and
none is coldly affected to himself. And that which is to limit our Love to our
selves, is to bound our Affection to our Neighbor; and that is Discretion and
Justice. For if we may not do any thing unjustly in our own behalf, nor Reason,
nor Scripture, can warrant us to adventure on any unjust enterprise in the
behalf of our Neighbor.

Now let us see what this plain and familiar measure will amount to; which
indeed is little less than what was intimated before. For though we love our
Neighbor no better than we love our selves, and that within the bounds of
Justice and sound Reason; yet we loving our selves so much, and so
affectionately as we do, it must follow that all that Joy, Grief, Pleasure,
Displeasure, Hope, Fear, Care, Labor, Valor, and whatever else we can bestow
upon our selves in our own behalfes, that when occasion requires, we confer it
all upon our Neighbor. This will enable us to profess with S. Paul, 2 Cor. 11.
29. Who is weak and I am not weak? What is offended, and I burn not? And to
make good his Precept, Romans 12. 15. Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep
with them that weep. To bear others burdens, to wax pale with other men's fears,
to grow lean with their cares. It will harness us with Courage, as it did
Abraham for Lot. It will make a man, though not desire, yet not care to dye for
his Brother: For its plain his Affection being equal to both, he must be
indifferent whether shall taste of that bitter Cup.

Object. If we love every one equally with our selves, then must we love all
men equally: Which is thus demonstrated; for the Love whereby one loves every
man, being each of them equal to that one Love whereby one loves himself, they
must be all equal to one another from the first (...) in Euclid.

Sol. I Answer, That our Love of Complacency is not equally to be distributed
to all. What then, shall our Love of Benevolence? Shall I bear as much
good will, and therefore do as much good, and owe as much service to Thersites
as Achilles, Shimei as David, Nabal as Abigail? Verily no. But as God loves
himself best, not because it is himself, but because there is nothing better
than himself; so we certainly are to love all things according to the several
degrees of participation of the Excellencies of the Divine Nature. As they that
contribute to one common stock, though by unequal contributions, suppose some
one contributing a third part, another a seventh part, a third a tenth; though
they partake of the gains but according to this proportion, the distribution is
said to be just and equal; there being indeed a similitude or equality of
proportion, though the shares of gains that every Adventurer has, are not equal
(for it were unequal that they should be so): So though the shares and portions
of our Love to others be not equal, nor ought so to be, yet the proportions of
our Love may and ought to be equal; and that is, if our Love flow out according
to the several degrees of Divine Excellency in every Person: And thus its true,
(...), viz. of Geometrical Equality.

Object. But you will still urge, my Love to my self, being one single term of
Quantity, to which my Love to every one is to be equal, proves plainly that all
these Loves are Arithmetically equal one with another; as 2 and 2 are equal to
one another.

Sol. To dispatch all in a Word. When we are pointed to the love of our selves,
as a right measure of our love to our Neighbor, it must be understood thus;
That we are to love our Neighbor of this or that Rank and Qualification, in
such sort as we would love our selves, if we were in that Rank and
Qualification; and do the same to our Neighbor of this condition, that we
should expect from others if we were of that condition; as suppose a Prince, a
Noble, a Wise man, an Honest sincere man, a man of unparalleled
Accomplishments. In these cases what Love and Respect we would look for, if we
were such (though we be not such yet) are we bound to give it to those that are
such. And thus it will come about, that we are obliged to love some better than
our selves, viz. such as have more Divine Accomplishments in them. Thus in 2 Samuel 18. 3. The People said to David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us. And
this obligement to love some better than our selves, arises from that general
Rule of all, That we are bound to love every one according to the proportion of
Divine worth in them. Whence it must also follow, That we are to love othersome
less than our selves, if we do palpably and infallibly discover in our selves
more Divine Accomplishments, and more excellent Endowments than in others.

AND thus we come to the last Doctrine, viz.

Doct. IV. That we are to love one another universally and continually.
Universally.] So also 2. Pet. 1. 7. where (...) is universal Love. And so 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12. The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward
another, and toward all men. And Chap. 5. 15. See that none render evil for
evil unto any man: but ever follow that which is good, both among your selves,
and to all men.

We might add Testimonies out of Heathen Philosophers, whose Examples may shame
us, who without any niceness place them many Stories below our selves. Socrates
had so little gall against the Judges, his mortal Enemies, who were no better
to him than to tell him, He should dye for it, if they caught him
Philosophizing; and had so great Affection to the good of all, that he says,
(...).

The Meditations of M. Antoninus are full to this purpose. Vid. lib. 5. and
lib. 6.

And this Philosopher attempts by many ways and Arguments to keep us in this
so pleasant temper of Spirit to all men, good and bad, friends and foes, viz.

1. A settled persuasion that all those things which the Stoics call (...) or
(...), are so indeed, not truly good or bad in themselves; there being nothing
truly good but what is in our own power; such are the voluntary motions of our
Mind or Soul.

Thus he. And indeed a very little observation will make this good to us, That
an eager and sharp desire of outward things, Riches, Honor, and Corporeal
Pleasure, whose maintenance is from the outward Creature; that this is the
main, if not only Cause of all Dissension amongst the Sons of men: So that I
think Envy it self is not moved at the Virtuous Accomplishments of any; but
merely at the effects thereof, viz. the Admiration and Glory they get amongst
the People. Therefore the best way to be friends with all the World, is not to
desire the things of this World, but to reckon them as nothing to the purpose;
and so shall we assuredly provoke very few against us, and be provoked by none.

2. Consider Socrates's Maxim, (...).

So Christ said, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. This is true
in injuries done to our selves, but the Stoic would drive it to an
universality.

3. That thou thy self transgressest in many things, etc.

4. Man's Life is but for a moment of time.

5. Consider how many things may and do often follow upon such fits of Anger
and Grief, far more grievous in themselves than those things we are grieved
for, and angry.

6. The Meekness is a thing unconquerable, if it be true and natural.

7. It is a mad man's part to look there should be no wicked men in the World,
because it is impossible, etc.

Thus he. But observe, that in all these attempts for a continued Meekness and
Benignity toward all men whatsoever, the ease and quiet of the Philosophers
Mind is rather aimed at than any thing else: And that it is not so much an
Universal Love to all men, as an universal fencing of himself against the
provocations of all whatsoever may at any time chance to assault and shake that
firmness and stillness of Temper he proposes to himself; being loath to be so
obnoxious to any man, that it should be in his power to plough up in uneven
furrows the settled Planities of his smoothed mind.

Object. But here it will be Objected, That unless we endeavor after, and at
some time reach that Stoical state of the Mind, it will be impossible to hold
out perpetually in that mild and even tenor of Love to all men. For some men
are so habitually evil, that nothing is tolerable, much less lovely in them: So
that when we light on such, some other Affection will be drawn out. And for
those of the better sort, They are sometimes so unlike themselves, that it
cannot be that the same Affection should be continued to them. How then is it,
That we are to love continually?

Sol. To this I answer, three ways.

First, We are to love all men, i. e. all manner of men, of what Religion,
Sect, or Nation soever; so be that God has manifested his Graces in them any
way: And then that this Love should continue as long as the deserts of them
that are loved. And this takes away all partiality in Love.

Or Secondly, We are to love all men, and always, amore Benevolentiae, though
not Complacentiae: And thus all particularity or peculiarity will be taken
away, or swallowed up: All men whatsoever being objects capable of this Love.

We may wish those to be good that are notoriously evil, and endeavor too to
make them so; which are real fruits of Love: Or we may pity them, that they
are not so already, it being so great a Misery for them to be otherwise; which
is a Symptom of Love, if not a genuine Notion thereof; nay the very Act of
Love, only under another modification. Which minds me of a

Third way of Answer, which I cannot so well make out without giving first some
settled Notion or Definition of the Nature of Love.

The general Description whereof let be this. Love is an Affection, or Passion
of the Mind, conversant about Divine Beauty and Perfection, introducible into
the Souls or Persons of the Sons of men. And I say Conversant about Divine
Perfection and Beauty communicable to the Sons of men, to distinguish it from
what Love soever else. For that Love that arises from Interest, is but such as
a man would bear to his Saddle-horse that carries him safely and easily: And
that Pity we bear to calamitous men in Sickness, Death or great distress,
without reference to what we have mentioned in our definition, is but the same
we may be happily moved with toward a dying beast, or a bemoaning and whining
dog. That Love therefore that like the Vestal Fire is never to go out, but
always to burn and shine in our hearts, is the motion of our Mind one way or
other taken up about the Divine Beauty communicable to man.

And thus I have at large, as if I should define Color in general, described
the Nature of Love. But as Color is not at all, but in its several kinds and
distinctions, viz. either White, or Red, or Yellow, or Green, etc. or some
other particular kind: So this Love is not any Passion at all, indeed nothing
at all but in its several kinds, such as are Hope, Fear, Joy, Anger, Sorrow,
etc. For the very root or matter of all these is Love, yea of Hatred it self,
if we look to the bottom of this Mystery. As the Wax takes all shapes, and yet
is Wax still at the bottom; The (...) still is Wax: So the Soul transported in
so many several Passions of Joy, Fear, Hope, Sorrow, Anger, and the like, has
for its general groundwork of all this, Love; which if it were taken away,
those various superstructures would suddenly fall. For he that loves nothing,
how can he fear any thing, or hope or joy, or hate any thing? For how can he
hate, when there is nothing to injure, or cross him in what he loves, he loving
nothing?

Or yet to make a more fit representation, Love is that to the Soul that the
Light is to the Sun: For Light being simple in it self, and uniform, is yet the
Basis or ground of much variety in the (...) of Nature. Light being in it self
one, according as it lights on various surfaces of things, returns modifyed
into this or that color. If it fall upon Grass, it becomes green: if upon the
Piony-flower, red: on the Marigold, yellow: from the Swans back it is reflected
white; and so according to the variety of the surfaces of Bodies which occur,
there is a change of light into some particular modification, which to us are
so many distinct Colors. But take away the Light, and all these Colors cease
to be: As if there were a way to intercept the Suns light from coming to the
Cloud where the Rainbow is figured, all the Colors of the Rainbow would soon
vanish and disappear. So if Love be not, no other Passion can be; but that
first supposed, the other occasionally will arise from it: As from the hitting
of the Sunbeams against several Objects several Colors arise, which are
nothing else but the Beams or Light it self variously modified, according to
the variety of surfaces against which it does impinge, and is reverberated
from. So in like manner the Passion of Love in a man's Soul being one, is
variously transformed into several shapes and modes, according as the
occurrences and occasions it meets with.

And this we may sensibly perceive in the love of our selves, which Domestic
fire is kept alive in us with more superstition and care than that more Sacred
flame of Divine Love; but in a multifarious transfiguration, as we may easily
observe. For Example; When a man has committed any thing against his own Profit
or Interest, through some carelessness or mistake, and so grows vexed at it, what
is this but Self-love appearing in the disguise of Anger? Sadness and
discontent at the death or displeasure of some potent friend, what is this but
Self-love mufled up in the sad attirements of Sorrow? Those pleasing motions
and prefigurations of the mind upon the promise of future Honors and
Preferments, what is that but Self-love putting on the smiling countenance of
hope? And so of the rest.

But now to transfer all this to the present purpose: That Love which I have
defined to you, is one simple and uniform thing, like the visible Light. And
this is a perpetual well-liking of, or benign affection to the Divine Beauty
communicable to man; which is as one still Sunshine day; or (if you will) as
the Sun shining in silence and solitude, there being no Earth, or any opake
part of the World to reflect and variegate his Rays. Such is the mind of him
that is possessed with this Divine Love, as it is freely and uncurb'dly working
in it self: But lighting upon several objects is after several manners modified
and transfigured into several shapes. This Love at the Conversion of a Sinner
shines forth in that cheerful aspect of Heavenly Joy and Exultation of Spirit;
at the unworthy usage of good and holy men it burns with Anger and Indignation,
looking as red and purpled as the Horizontal Sun; at the doubtful carriages of
men is broken into distractful thoughts, careful Fear and Anxiety; at the sight
of Solomon's Fool, devoid of understanding, is struck with Forlornness and
Sadness of Spirit; such a one being as a lonesome desolate Cottage where no man
inhabits. For as he that is in the Wilderness, though he have the company of
Beasts, yet being destitute of the society of men, finds himself really in
sadness and solitude; so certainly he that is regenerate into the Image of the
true man, the Heavenly Adam, i. e. Christ, even in a crowd of acquaintance
devoid of that Image, perceives himself but in solitude: And whenever he
converses or meets with any in whom that Heavenly inhabitant is wanting, it is
to him as forlorn a spectacle, as a lonesome and empty Lodge in the midst of a
Desert; whither when the weary Traveller diverts, he finds no man to refresh
him with a morsel of Bread, or a dish of Water. For certainly they that once
have a right sense and esteem of the lovely Image of Christ, out of a kind of a
Divine dotage (as I may so speak) can not endure to find it missing any where,
would have it hung up in every room, would have it inhabit every house, that
they may meet with it at every turn. And therefore where they miss of it, it is
as sad a chance, as Divorce or Exile from our dear Friend; as discomfortable,
as close Imprisonment, and seclusion from all Conversation with men.

Thus we see Divine Love ceases not by other Passions, but remains still the
same, though in several postures: And that it is the several operations of one
simple Nature about one and the same Object, that is the Image of God or Divine
Accomplishments communicable to man: Which when they begin to spring and
flourish in men, this Love is figured into Joy; when they decay or are lost,
into Sorrow; when despightfully used, into Anger; and the like. So that if we
know what we chiefly love, and for whose cause man is to be loved, we shall
find it not impossible to have our Souls work according to this Principle of
Love, upon what Object soever: So that we may without contradiction fulfill
these Duties in the Text, of Universal and Perpetual Love.

And now that the Thing is understood feasible, it will not be hard to fetch
out Arguments for the enforcement of the same: The present Text will afford
them.

And the First is, From the State of Purification, which every Christian is
bound to be in, and is in, if he be truly a Christian. For the Soul of man
being a kind of Flame or Fiery Essence, (Igneus est olli vigor and Coelestis
origo.)
whereas that foulness and rubbish, which it lies in, to wit, sensual and
corruptible Pleasure, the instrument whereof is this faeculent and misgoverned
Body, makes the Soul wrathful, lustful, self-willed, impetuously given to petty
interests, and particular poor contentations and delights: Surely the purging
of it from this foul dross and dregs, must needs wing it, free it, universalize
it, and make it as generally benign to all men, as the Sun is universally
courteous to all the World, in lending Light and Heat to all. For by how much
the Soul does purge her self, by so much nearer she approaches to that
Primogeneal, or Original Fire, which is God himself, that lets his sun rise on
the evil and good; and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust, Matthew. 5.
45.

This is the Chaldaean (...), out of which proceeds all things: (...), as those
Oracles speak. And the Soul of man, the Image of God, is in the same said also
to be Fire, which Psellus more expressly defines in his Notes upon those
Oracles, (...), that the Soul is an immaterial and incorporeal Fire, which
withdrawing it self from the thickness and foulness of this low Corruption,
incorporates with that Original Fire, even God himself, (...), as the same
Author upon those Oracles has it. Wherefore mingling Essences, as it were,
with the Divinity, it must be of the same sense and mind with God; and
therefore never ceases from loving all men, as God himself refuses none.

The Publishers POSTSCRIPT.
THree things I shall here advertise the Reader of.

1. The First is, That the Appendix to Discourse XIIIth should not have been
Printed apart, but that most of it was wanting till that other part was Printed
off. 2. The Second is, That what is still wanting to complete that Discourse,
as also the Continuation of Discourse XVth, never came into my hands. 3. The
Third is, That if those Papers (or any other of the Authors) be sent to me, all
due care shall be taken for the making of them Public.
FINIS.
A Catalogue. Books Published by His Grace, JOHN Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
THirty Sermons and Discourses upon several Occasions, in three Volumes, in
Octavo.

The Rule of Faith; or, an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. I. Sergeant. Octavo.

Since which is Published Nine several Sermons on several Occasions, in Quarto.

Books writ by the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge. And Published by His Grace JOHN Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, in
Four Volumes in Folio.

The First Volume, containing Thirty Two Sermons Preached upon several
Occasions. An Exposition of the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments; also
the Doctrine of the Sacraments. A Learned Treatise of the Popes Supremacy. With
some Account of the Authors Life.

The Second Volume containing Sermons and Expositions upon the Apostles Creed.

The Third Volume containing Forty Five Sermons upon several Occasions:
Completing his English Works.

The Fourth Volume, being his Opuscula; Viz. Determinationes, Conc. ad Clerum,
Orationes, Poemata, etc.

Any of the said Volumes may be had alone.

All Sold by Brabazon Ayliner, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.


