BREACH upon BREACH: OR AN ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF Judicial Breaches MADE UPON US,
PROCURED BY SINFUL BREACHES FOUND AMONGST US; With Instruction, Admonition,
and encouragement yet to turn to him that smites us, and the sum of it was
delivered at the Funeral of Mr. Jeremiah Colman, (late Preacher of the Gospel
at Hetherset in Norfolk) February 18. 1658 / 9.

By Tho. Moore Junior.

If they shall confess their iniquity, -- And that they have walked contrary
to me, and I also have walked contrary to them -- Then will I remember my
covenant -- and I will remember the Land, Levit. 26. 40, 41, 42. If any say I
have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profitted me not, he
will deliver his soul from going down to the pit, and his life shall see the
light; for he has found a Ransom, Job. 33. 24. 27. 28. For this cause (
vide.) not so discerning the Lords Body that was broken for us: as to examine,
and judge our selves in the light thereof, many are weak, and sickly among
you, and many sleep, for if we would judge our selves we should not be judged,
etc. 1 Cor. 11. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. LONDON; Printed by J. B. for the Author,
1659.

The Epistle to the Reader.
THis our beloved Brother deceased, had his conversation in times past among a
people, zealous about some lighter matters of the Law, as to outward order, and
discipline in the worship of God; while yet neglecting the weighty matters, as
judgment, and the love of God: ernest in building Churches, but slighting, if
not (as there is too much cause of jealou^y of many of their builders) refusing
that stone for the foundation, and head of the corner, which God has laid in
Sion for that purpose; too much like (though it may be hoped, not so much out
of order, as) Israel of old, who when forgetting his maker. And counting the
great things of his Law (even Christ the end of the Law, and the knowledge of
God in Christ and his righteousness, the things witnessed in the Law and
Prophets) as a strange thing; were yet zealous in building Temples and
multiplying Altars, and sacrifices, Hos. 8. 11, 12 - 14. with chapter 6. 6, 7.
Psalm. 118. 22. Math. 21. 42. and 23. 23. Luke 11. 42. Act. 4. 11. with Isa. 28.
12. 16. and 29. 11.

But God who is rich in mercy, for the great love wherewith he loved us, even
when we were dead in sins, and ^respasses, and that he might thereby show the
exceeding riches of his grace to others, inclined his heart more dilligently to
enquire into the great things of his Law, (or doctrine) summed up in the
testimony God has given of Christ, and gave him to perceive the faithfulness
of that saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. By the
light of which he karned to relinquish the former apprehensions he had of
Christ, and so of other persons, and things after the flesh, or as that
teaches: and to account loss, and dung for Christ; and for the excellency of
the knowledge of him, such things, as before were gain to him; that he might
farther win him, and be found in him. And so in receiving his word, as the word
of God, and not of men, Christ (as testified in the scriptures, the son of God,
the Savior of the world) became precious to him. And having tested, that the
Lord is gracious (to whom coming as to a living stone, disalowed indeed of
men, but chosen of God and precious he also, as a lively stone was therein
built up in him, and so made of the spiritual house, and holy Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ, the love of
Christ constrained him, with much earnestness, to persuade and beseech others
to be reconciled to God, and to seek help in the name of God in Christ, to
warn the unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, to be patient
toward all men, in meekness instructing them that oppose themselves: and to
encourage, and stir up such, as had believed through grace, to abide in him as
they had received him, and to provoke them to love, and good works and so to
help forward, and strengthen the hearts, and hands of the fellow-helpers to the
truth. As one that had his heart seasoned with those principles of certainty,
and truth, that one died for all, so effectually with the father that all have
died in that death of one, as all have sinned, and death passed on them, in and
by the sin of one. And that he therefore died for all, that they which live in
their several ages, by the grace of God, bringing salvation to them, (as it
does to all men in due time) should not henceforth live to themselves, but to
him that dyed for them, and rose again; knowing also in this knowledge of the
greatness, and truth of Gods grace in Christ to manward, the unspeakable
terror of the Lord against those that will not know him, but are contentious,
and do not obey the truth, or by an evil heart of unbelief depart from him, and
go on in their trespasses, and backslidings, till the day of grace pass, and
the master of the house be rissen up, and have shut to the door.

And in this his earnest seeking the good of all, and the edifying of the Body
of Christ: he was much stirred up, esp^cially in his latter days to press for
more fellowship in the Gospel, with them that did know, and acknowledge the
grace of God in truth, and so callon the Lord out of a pure heart. And that
such should join together, as the heart of one man, for the promoting that
design. To which purpose, he moved it, as of great advantage, and very
necessary; that brethren in the Gospel should often gather together, as they
might have opportunity frro^ diverse parts to consult one with another, and
together with the Scriptures and the testimony of God concerning Christ, as
contained in them; how they might walk, and strive together in more joint order
for for the faith of the Gospel. This though much upon his spirit, to his
latter end. Yet was too little considered by us. Our general dullness and loss
of our first love, by wandering out of the way of understanding, made us
insencible, both of the advantage to be s^^^net within such endeavoring to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond if peace, and so seeking the Lord, and
his things, and therein the things, and good of others after the due order, and
also of the necessiry of it, especially in these evil times. It seemed to me,
that Gods removing this instrument, in the midst of his days, and while his
spirit was so earnestly set, for the promoting, and carrying on so good a
work, and yet it was so little apprehended, or considered by us; had in it a
great reproof of our dullness, and a loud voice (signifying necessity of
timely listening to it) to awaken us to righteousness in this particular; that
standing up from the dead, Christ might give us light, to straighten our steps,
and strengthen the things that remain, and are ready to dye.

It was therefore much set upon my spirit, on this occasion, to apply my self
to some consideration of the voice of the rod in these instructions. In which
though I met with many discouragement in my self, from the sense of my own
weakness, as also from some other considerations yet I could not with any
satisfaction in my own spirit, wave the propounding something of my weak
apprehensions, (if thereby I might by any means stir up others, more able, and
fit, to set their hearts and hands to the work.) which having done at the
funeral of our deceased Brother. I was earnestly requested once and again by
our Sister the Widow of the deceased (who also signified it to be the earnest
desire of others.) This way to make more public, what I had then delivered;
unto which, though with some unwillingnesse at the first, being sensible of the
weakness, and confusion of my own apprehensions of these things; yet I was
persuaded, thus further to show my weakness: Beseeching my Brethren to help
me, as they may see my need. And add their more profitable endeavors, to the
instructing, and stirring up Beleivers, to seek the Lord after the due order,
to strive together for the faith of the Gospel, as becomes it, and in nothing
terrifyed by our adversaries, etc. Unto which, that the Lord in his mercy may
farther direct us, and make profitable his judgments, and these mean
endeavors of putting to mind the voice of them to that purpose, is the desire
of the most unworty of all that have received mercy.

Tho. Moore Junior.
Lynn, July 27, 1659.
A TABLE of the principal Heads of the following Discourse.
AFter some general consideration of the sum, and scope of the Text and
instruction from it, to hear the Rod. page 1. and 2. And a brief veiw of the
parts of the Text, ( viz.) an evil of punishment bewailed, and an evil of sin
acknowledged as the cause; with some hints of the difference between the manner
of that correction, and of this; and yet how this Text suites our occasion.
page 3. These instructions are opened. 1 Such Providence, are great Breaches
upon a People. 2 The Lord is the maker of such Breaches. 3 The reason, or
procuring cause, is our own iniquities, yea usually there is found in it great
neglects, and disorder in Gods people. Iniquities in their holy things. 4 Yet
the Lord is our God, when so provoked, and while so punishing us. 1 Such
providence are Breaches. And there, "1 What providence. "2 How they are
Breaches, and on whom. "1 The providence are such, as in which righteous Men
are taken away untimely. page 4. And there is proposed. I. What manner of
Persons they are whose untimely removal is such a Judgment. page 4, 5, and 6.
II. What manner of removal of such, is so to be apprehended. page 6, 7, 8, and
9. "2 What manner of Breaches such providence make, and on whom. pages 9, 10,
11, 12. 2 The Lord is the maker of such Breaches. And there, How he is the
Author of the evil of punishments, or corrections for sin. And how that
evidences him to have no hand, or heart in the sin. see pages 13, 14.
Corrections of sin, of two sorts, some by evil instruments, of which God is
more remotely the Author. The Author of the punishment on the party punished,
but not of the sinful action in the instrument. pages 14, 15. There are others
more directly from his own hand, of which sort this. Some use of this. pages
16, 17, 18. 3 The reason, or procuring cause is our own iniquities, etc. Some
general demonstration of this by other Scriptures. As, Ezekiel. 33. with other
Scriptures. pages 18, 19. 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30, 31. pages 19, 20, 21, 22. The
particular consideration of the evil of sin mentioned in the Text, as the
reason of the Judgment. That is first considered, as a general expression of
any way of iniquity that may be fignified in the sense of the words; And then
veiwed, as particularly applied in the Text. In the first, There are some
considerations propounded of the due order after which the Lord is to be sought
by us. 1 There is an order of precedence in the nature worth, and goodness of
things after which, some are to be sought, rather than, yea with a neglect of
others. And so to seek the Lord after the due order, as with reference to other
things that are not the Lord, is to seek him first, and so as with a neglect of
all other things for him. pages 22, 23. 2 There is an order in the time, and
causes of the things that are to be preferred and in a sense equally to be
sought; After which some things are to be sought first that other things may be
sound, and attained, in, and through them. And so what it is to seek the Lord
after the due order, as with reference to the things of the Lord, and to be
sought in him. see pages 24, 25, 26, 27. 3 There is an order of regularnesse to
be observed in the manner of our seeking. To walk according to the rule already
delivered, as that is grounded upon, and opened by the word of the beginning of
Christ. page 28. "1 To seek, and acknowledge him in his ways. pages 28, 29. "2
Always first, and chiefly to mind the greater, or more weighty matters. And
who sought him not after the due order according to these considerations. see
pages 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. "3 To seek him in the preparation, and sanctification
of his Sanctuary I. In the instruction of his name. pages 33, 34, 35. II. In
the encouragement, and strength of it. pages 35, 36. III. In a cordial
confession, and acknowledgment of it. p. 37, 38. IV. In hearty union together
in it. And there, First, The Persons with whom, we are to dwell, and walk in
the unity of the spirit. pages 39, 40. Then the unity of the spirit in which
such are to dwell, and walk together. 1 Union of love. 2 Union of mind, or
design. 3 Of way* 4 Of accord. 5 Union of fellowship. pages 41, 42, 43, 44,
45. Who they are that seek him not after the due order according to these
considerations. See it under four Heads. page 46, 47, 48. Particular
application under three Heads. page 49, 50, 51, 52. The particular veiw of the
evils unto which the acknowledgment in the Text is applied. page 53. For
applying that to our selves, These considerations propounded. 1 Who are the
holy Preisthood under the Gospel. 2 What Is their charge. 3 How they should be
sanctified to it. 4 What order is to be observed in the mannagement of it. 1
Who are the Preisthood. page 54, 55, 56. 2 Their Service. "1 In respect of the
Persons to whom it is to extend. page 56, 57. "2 As to the manner of their
service, not in Tipes, and patterns, but in the truth, in the spirit, in the
Heavenly things themselves. page 57, 58, 59. I. To keep, and bear the truth of
the former Tipes, and patterns, as come forth, in, and by Christ; where what it
is, and how they are to keep, and bear it. see pages 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64,
65. II. To them is committed the keeping, and charge of holy, and devoted
things, and persons. pages 66, 67. 3 How they ought to be sanctified to this
service. "1 There is a previous sanctification needful to sit for it; And how
that answers to theirs under the Law. page 68. What it is as to the means by
which effected. page 69. As to the nature of the work. page 70. As to the
seal, and confirmation of it. pages 71, 72. "2 There is a daily sanctification
also needful to render them acceptable, and profitable, and how answering to
the legal, and tipicall. see page 72. I. To lay aside, and put off those
filthinesses of flesh, and spirit moving and riseing up in our selves from the
old man. page 73. II. To come out from amongst, and be separate from unclean
persons, and fellowships. And how that is to be understood with a caution
against keeping, or shutting out ignorant, or unclean persons from us;
according to Jer. 15. 19. see pages 74, 75. "3 There is an accidental
sanctification, or a renewing of sanctification on occasion of pollutions
happening. pages 76, 77, 78. 4 What order is to be observed in the mannagement
of their affairs; and to that, some consideration of the leviticall order,
proposed under three heads. pages 78, 79, 80. And then a view of the order
under the Gospel in some answerablenesse. And there, "1 How the holy
Preisthood, are to minister each in their place, and according to their gifts,
with some caution about Women. pages 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85. "2 Who are
appointed to go before others in this ministration; and how. pages 85, 86, 87.
"3 How all are given to Christ, (the great Master of all, the Apostle and high
Priest of our profession) to depend on him, and receive together their
instructions, and directions from him, as delivered already, in the Apostles
Doctrine, and Commandments. page 88, 89. Who they are, that seek him not after
the due order, according to these considerations, under 6 Heads. page 89, 90,
91, 92. Some general application of this to our selves. pages 92, 93.
Particular application of it To the Younger. page 93, 94. Particular
application of it To the Elders. page 94, 95. 4 That yet the Lord is our God
while so punishing us. page 96. Briefly opened and applied under several Heads
in the following pages.
There are some material faults have escaped the Corrector, especially in the
first three Sheets, which the Reader is desired to mend with his pen, or get
mended, (as he is directed in the latter end of the Book) to facilitate the
understanding of what he reads.

Breach upon Breach. OR, An acknowledgment of Judicial Breaches, made upon us,
procured by sinful Breaches found amongst us, with Instruction, Admonition, and
Encouragement, yet to turn to him that smites us, as the sum of it was
delivered at the Funeral of Mr. Jeremie Colman, February 18. 1658. in some
explanation of that acknowledgment of David, 1 Chronicles. 15. 3.
The Lord our God made a Breach upon us; for that we sought him not after the
due Order.
THe text contains the sum of the instruction, which David received from Gods
chastise men, in taking away Vzzah by a sudden stroke upon his touching the
Ark, and that which he gives as the reason of his calling the Priests and
Levites, to sanctify themselves, that they might bring up the Ark, etc.

Wise men will hear the Rod, and who has appointed it, and in such hearing,
shall see his name, and have the instructions of it sealed home and opened to
them in such corrections, being so exercised by them, Mich. 6. 9. Zeph. 3. 2,
7. Jer. 2. 30. Heb. 12. 11.

Its not patience under afflictions, to be insensible of Gods hand and
regardless of what it means, but on the other hand, a sign of great wickedness
and hardness, not to cry when he binds us with the cords of his affliction,
not to be grieved and ashamed when he strikes us, not to see and lay it to
heart, when his hand is lifted up, especially in such judgments, yea this,
that iniqui y, that heaps up more wrath, and procures farther strokes, and
greater judgments, job. 36. 13. Jer. 5. 3, 6. Isa. 26. 11. and 57. 1 Zeph. 3.
2. 5.

I know its too generally in high account with men, even with many professing
godliness, it goes under the name of a great virtue, and strength of faith and
patience, and a note of having much rejoicing in the Lord: To pass under such
liftings up of Gods hand without sense, or rather instead of being humbled
under them, to pass over them lightly, as if they felt nothing, not wisely
considering the Work of the Lord, nor minding, or attending to know the meaning
of such voices.

But though with men this may go for a virtue, and a note of great strength,
yet with God its reputed as a note of great wickedness and hardness as we have
seen. Yea doubtless, That rejoicing which is truly in the Lord, and in which he
is glori^^ed in, and glorify by us, it has in it always a true sense, and
acknowledgement of our own vileness and sins, with a ^ea^iness to judge, and
take shame to our selves, that so he may be therein justified in his sayings,
and rendered clear equal, and righteous in his judgments, as Psalm. 51. 3, 4.
Hence Joshuah instructs Achan to give glory to God, in confessing his sin, like
to which is Jeremies instruction and council, Jer. 13. 15. 18. Whence also
confessing Gods name, and confessing our sins, knowing every one the Plague of
his own heart, are put one for another, 1 Kings 8. 33. 35. with verses 38. 46.
48. The latter being in the former, as also is signified, 1 John 1. 7. 9.

And so the patience and comfort of the Scriptures is such, as in which the
heart is exercised under, and by the trials and afflictions, to a silent and
digilent looking unto the Lord, a quick apprehension of displeasure when
testified, falling down under it, and awaking to search and try our ways, that
we may understand the meaning of the voice, even where yet we see it not, That
so we may not fail of the grace of God.

In the Text we have, 1. An evil of punishment, a heavy affliction, and
correction bewailed, yet taken out of Gods hand. The Lord our God has made a
Breach upon us.

2. An evil of sin, a wilful iniquity, neglect, and disorder seen, and
acknowledged, as found with them the Survivers, and as being as on their parts
the procuring cause of the judgment, for that we sought him not after the due
order.

In both parts it affords us much instruction suitable to our present occasion,
though there is some difference between the manner of the correction or
judgment, occasioning the lamentation and acknowledgement in the Text, and
that now to be bewailed by us.

That was the cutting off an useful member by a sudden stroke, the taking away
from us one probably more useful by pining sickness, like that threatened, Isa.
38. 2.

That was in signal testimony of displeasure, not only to the Survivers, but
also to him that was cut off, which is more then can be said of this. Yea this
was by sickness, as may be supposed, occasioned by, and for the work of Christ,
if not also to supply some neglect and lack of service on others part, for
which he ought to be held in greater reputation, as Phil. 2. 29, 30.

Yet has it not in it the less but the more signal testimony of displeasure to
us. And however this Text suits our occasion; it being not a declaration or
mention of the correction in that stroke to Vzzah, but of the correction in it
to themselves, and an acknowledgement not of his, but their own iniquities,
neglects, and disorders, as the reason and procuring cause of it to them. Now
David could see that as the main reason, and chiefly to be considered and
acknowledged by them, wherefore God was angry with Vzzah; as sometimes also God
was angry with Moses for the Peoples sake, by whom also he was provoked to
speak unadvisedly, Numb. 20. 10, 12. Deuteronomy. 1. 37. and 3. 26. Psalm 106. 32, 33.
So here, though at the first, when David was angry he did not so see it, ((...)
of spirit^ exalts folly, Prove. 14. 29.) It appears not that he observed any
more then, but a Breach upon Vzzah, 1 Chronicles. 13. 11. Yet now he acknowledges,
Their not being sanctified after the Sanctification of the sanctuary, nor
seeking the Lord after the due order, as not only the principal occasion of
Vzza's error of rashness, but also as that which provoked the Lord to make
this breach upon Vzzah, which now he bewails as a Breach chiefly upon them, and
procured by their owner iniquities, which instructions of wisdom being seen and
heard in quiet (as Eccles. 9. 17.) as writ upon, and spoken by the Rod,
provoke, and stir him up, to seek healing in a right way: Better is the end of
any thing, then the beginning; Better the patient in Spirit, then the hasty; Be
not hasty in thy Spirit to be angry, Eccles. 7. 8, 9. The instructions set
before us in this text, and seasonable to be considered of us. Are,

1. Such Providence, are Breaches made, or do make Breaches great and grievous
Breaches upon a people.

2 The Lord is the maker of such Breaches.

3 The reason or procuring cause of such judgments from the Lord is our own
iniquities, yea usually there is found besides the more general evils, some
great iniquity of neglects and disorders, in Gods people, the holy Priesthood,
yea iniquities and polutions in their holy things, as the inlet to, and
procuring cause of such judgments on themselves and others.

4 Yet the Lord is our God, when so provoked by such iniquities, and while so
punishing us; there is yet forgiveness with him and help in him, that he may be
feared, and hoped in by us while it is to day; That we may turn to him from
whom we have deeply revolted.

1 Such Providence are great and grievous Breaches made upon a People here. 1
Consider what Providence. 2 How they are Breaches, or what manner of Breaches
they are, and on whom.

1 The Providence, or judgments under consideration, are such, as in which
Righteous, Good, and Upright men, are cut off, or taken away from us in the
midst of their days, or before they have filled up their years; or in the
midst of some good work, in the promoting and carrying on the design of Christ
in the World, and especially when such are so taken away as therein, that
generation, or kind of persons are made thin, or made to fail, as when such of
them as were more eminently useful, in gathering and keeping others together
in companies or clusters, and in stirring up believers with full purpose of
heart to cleave to the Lord, and strive together for the faith of the Gospel
are taken away, and no others of like usefulness, and faithfulness, left or
raised up in their stead.

For more full understanding and usefulness of this, we shall consider
distinctly. 1 What manner of persons they are, whose being so removed make such
Breaches. 2 What manner of removal or taking away of such persons, is
especially so to be looked upon by us.

1 The persons whose being taken away and perishing from the earth is such a
woe and affliction, or judgment upon others, the Survivers are in other
Scriptures thus expressed. Righteous, and merciful men, Godly men, men of
kindness, born of the kindness, and pity of God our Savior toward man, and
thence framed to some like mindedness, Good men, men full of the Holy Ghost, in
his discovery and shedding abroad the love, and goodness of God in the
testimony of Jesus, and so full of faith of his operation, in which that
goodness of God in Christ is believed, and their souls resting satisfied, and
rejoicing in it, and thence filled with all goodness, like their Heavenly
Father, able also, and therein qualified, to admonish one another, and to seek
the good of all according to their capacity, Psalm 12. 1. Isaiah 57. 1. Mich.
7. 2. with Acts 11. 23, 24. Romans 15. 13, 14. Such as are reconciled to God by
Jesus Christ, and have received into their hearts that word of reconciliation,
that God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, and in retaining it in their hearts, have it in some
measure fitted in their lips, that with it they may persuade others to be
reconciled to God. (See farther for this the description of righteous and
merciful men, in the lamentation over the dead, published on the death of Henry
Rix, and of the Doers of good, Doers of the truth, in the instruction to the
living, published on the death of Elizabeth Harrison; in both which having
spoken more largely to this point, I forbear it here, only this we add.)

The removing or perishing of wicked and ungodly men, whether such as are
incensed against the acknowledgement of the man Christ Jesus, and of the
excellent glory, the Father has given him for us in the same body in which he
bore our sins on the tree, that by him our faith and hope might be in God,
privily designing to cast him down from his excellency: For such as are
contrary to the good of all men, being enemies in their minds to the riches and
truth of Gods grace in and through Christ to man-ward, and therefore seeking to
eclipse, hinder, and cast mire and dirt upon the sincere Preaching of it, as
also upon the faithful confessors of it, that hold it fast, and hold it forth,
without hidden things of dishonesty.

Or such as otherwise in their principles and works deny him, or do not love,
esteem, and worship him, or come to God by him, nor seek the lifting him up,
but turn the grace of God in that unspeakable gift into wantonness; turn his
glory into shame, loving vanity, and seeking after lies. I say the removing or
cutting off such from the earth cannot come under this consideration, as a woe,
affliction, or judgment to the Survivers, their being so cut off, is a heavy
judgment to themselves, because they are therein cut off for ever, and driven
away in their wickedness into utter darkness. From the time of their death
their is a great Gulf fixed, that they can never return to any mercy, or door
of hope, but perish for ever without any regarding it; which should teach us
not to desire such a woeful day, because so woeful to them, nor to hasten from
following him in seeking their good, Jer. 17. 16.

But the perishing of such is so far from being a judgment of this nature to
others, That on the other hand, as when they rise, increase, or bear rule a man
is hidden, Prove. 28. 12. Even the man Christ is hidden, his visage more marred
then any man's, and the man that is godly, and so such as are valiant for the
truth, and have quit themselves thereto, like men from those diverse
entanglements, and lusts that weaken; They are sought for to be suppressed,
kept under and hidden, yea men, not only such, but even all that in any sense
quit themselves like men, and will not subject themselves to their principles
and traditions are feign to hide themselves: And therefore thereby the people
generally have cause of mourning, so when they perish the righteous increase,
and it goes well with them, and thereby the people rejoice, and there is
shouting. See Prove. 28. 12, 28. and 29. 2. and 11. 10.

But they are the righteous, even such as have righteousness, and strength in
the Lord, seeking it there by faith in him, that ceasing from their own works
in the light and power of his testimony, believe on him that justifies the
ungodly, having raised up Jesus our Lord from the Dead, who was delivered for
our offenses, and raised again for our justification. They are such, as having
tasted that the Lord is gracious do cleave to him with full purpose of heart,
and are by his goodness retained in the midst of their hearts, fitted, and
apted with earnestness to stir up others so to do. Such they are whose being
taken away out of this life in the flesh, is to themselves great gain, whose
removal from us is to the Survivers generally great loss; a heavy woe and
affliction, whether they be sensible of it, or no.

Because such men are through the grace in Christ received and retained by them
in its own light, and power qualified to mind, and seek the promoting of the
things of Christ in the World, and so the good of others therein, and are
therefore set and preserved in the World to that purpose. To them to live is
Christ, it tends to the setting forth and magnifying him, and so to the
carrying on his design and business in the World; To die is to themselves gain
and advantage, but that reaches but to themselves; and so the affliction and
judgment in the removal of such is greater, as they were more one with him in
his design, not seeking their own things, but the things which be Jesus Christ's.

2 The manner of removing, or taking away of such persons, that is especially
to be looked upon by us, as such a woe and affliction in which evil Breaches
are made upon us; It is not simply, or only their being taken away by death,
for its appointed to men, the whole kind, once to die, and that first death is
so abolished, the sting and wrath so taken out of it, that no man shall perish
or be holden for, ever in that, nor is it in himself simply a judgment in
wrath or anger to themselves, or others for any man once to die. But when death
seizes them, or they are snacht away by it unseasonably, or before the time, or
when it is in some signal testimony of displeasure, then it is a correction or
judgment either to themselves or to others, or to both.

Now that men may die before their time, that they may shorten their days
though they cannot lengthen them, or that the shortning or cutting them off in
the midst, or before the appointed time, may by some means be procured to them,
is evident in the Scripture: There is (says Job) an appointed time to man upon
earth the number of his Months or Days are with God, beyond which he cannot
pass. Also his days are like the days of an hireling (Of which a forfeiture
may be made to the shortning them.) Therefore he says, All the Days of of his
appointed time he would wait till his change came: (not hasting his end as he
was councelled by his wife, Chap. 2. 9.) And begs of God to turn from him
(namely his wrath, or not to set his iniquities before him, his secret sins in
the light of his countenance, as Psalm 90. 7, 8, 9.) That he might rest, (or be
spared a little to recover strength, and not consumed, or cut off by the blow
of his hand, as Psalm 39. 10, 13.) till he should accomplish as an hireling his
day, Job. 7. 1. and 14. 5, 6. 14. See also that caution Eccles. 7. 17. Why
should thou die before thy time. Of like import to this purpose is that
saying of Hezekiah. That in the cutting off his Days threatened, he was
deprived of the residue of his years, his age was departed from him, he had cut
off like a Weaver his life, Isaiah 38. 10. 12.

Yea we find that both good and righteous men, and also wicked and ungodly men
may be cut off, and die before their appointed time.

But this difference is always to be observed.

The cutting off wicked and ungodly men is always mentioned as a judgment
upon themselves, such as in which they are utterly ^ut off from all hope, and
driven away in their wickedness; but not as a judgment or evil breach, or woe to
the survivers. Yea rather such providence are mentioned, as having favor and
mercy in them toward others from amongst whom such are cut off: As Saul's being
cuting off, was in wrath to himself, but in mercy to Israel. So Ahitophel, and
Judas cut off in judgment to themselves; but there being cut off, was no evil
breach upon others, but on the other hand a signal manifestation of Gods taking
part with the righteous, and pleading their cause for the good of others; so
that doom generally threatened on such men, as put forth their hands against
those that be at peace with them, break the covenant, are bloody, and deceitful
men, as Judas, Ahitophel, and others, that they shall not live out half their
days, Psalm 55. 20, 23. ^^^ mentioned as Gods faithfulness and mercy to the
righteous for their sustaining, and that they may not be moved by their
afflictions afflictions they suffer from such, and by the general prosperity of
such, as sometimes David almost was, Psalm 7. 3.

Whereas when ever the cutting off righteous and good men in the midst of their
days, or depriving of the residue of their years, is spoken of, its always
mentioned as an evil breach, a heavy woe and judgment to the survivers procured
by their iniquities, yea though sometimes such providence have in them some
present correction to themselves so cut off, for some error or miscarriage in
which they have not sanctified him before others, as in the case of Moses,
Josiah, and here Vzzah; and that threatened on Hezekiah yet. First, That
correction is not in wrath, or such as in which they are cut off from God, or
from their hope, only from their further opportunity of praising him to the
living, and so of bringing forth more fruit that might appear on their account
at the day of Christ, which is a present correction and affliction to a
gracious soul, though the end of corrections to them, and redounds to their own
private gain and advantage.

Again secondly, God would never so correct them for such errors, by cutting
them off in the midst of their days, and depriving them of the residue of
their years, if he had not a controversy with others, the people from whom
such are moved and taken: It was for the Peoples sakes that God was angry with
Moses, and took him away (as before we snewed) so it was in judgment, and
wrath upon Jerusalem, and for their grievous sins and rebellions, that God
corrected Josiah for his rashness by cutting him off. See the whole book of the
Lamentations.

Likewise for the iniquities found with the Corinths, even these that yet
survived, for their not so discerning the Lords body, as to examine and judge
themselves in the instructions and reproots of it, many from among them slept,
or were taken away by death, in displeasure to the rest, 1 Corin. 11. 30. And
such are the providence in which God is making evil breaches upon a people,
and they are such breaches and judgments to the survivers, whether there were
any correction or displeasure testified unto them taken away, or no; when such
as before good and righteous men are cut off in the midst of their daye^, or
deprived of the residue of their years, as in that threatened on Hezekiah,
Isaiah, 38. and as it may seem on David, Psalm 39. 10, 13.

Or when by some sudden stroke, or in signal testimony of displeasure, they are
cut off in the midst of some good work; they had been eminently instrumental in
beginning, and promoting, as Moses, Josiah, and here Vzzah, especially when
others of like usefulness and faithfulness are not found surviving, or timely
raised up in their stead, yea however they are taken away though in a good old
age; yet when that kind or generation of men perish, and decay from among men,
that they are so many the fewer, as there is taken away by death. And
especially when such as were chiefly instrumental for stirring up others to
seek the Lord, and with full purpose of heart to cleave to him, and so for
gathering and keeping others in clusters, fail from among men; that its hard to
find one in such a sense good and upright, but all are seeking their own
things, and not the things which be Jesus Christ's. These are the providence
and breaches under consideration, in which God is making evil breaches,
executing sad judgments on the survivers.

2 We come next to consider what manner of breaches, such providence do make,
and on whom.

1 They are breaches made in the Wall, or Hedge, or do make such breaches.

1 Upon all generally in the Nations, Places, and Families, amongst whom they
had their conversation, and from amongst whom they are taken.

To the making away for Gods anger to be poured out in desolating judgments to
the destruction or cutting off a people, or in sending strong delusions to
them, and leaving them to their own hearts lusts, that they might be damned,
Psalm 78. 50. Isaiah 59. 4, 18. and 64. 7. Jer. 5. 1. For while they are
preserved amongst men. They are set to seek the Peace, and good of all men, to
make supplcations, prayers, and intercessions for all men, that they may be
saved, to stand in the gap to keep off judgen en^s; and the effectual servent
prayer of the righteous avails much, yea, by the exercise of their wisdom in
the knowledge of God in Christ, they though poor and despised, are made
instruments of delivering the place and City where they live: Therefore their
perishing from the earth, is a sign and forerunner of greater evils and
j^dgments to come, if not timely prevented by turning to him that smites.

2 To the leaving evil and ungodly men at liberty, without sense or control to
run on, and prevail also with their ungodly principles and works, as Psalm 12.
When the godly man cease, and faithful ones fail from among the children of
men, then they, the children of men speak vanity every one with his neighbor,
with a flattering lip and double heart do they speak, encouraging themselves to
prevail with their Lip, Word, or Doctrine: For say they; Who is Lord over us?
Who shall control, or hinder us, or stop our mouths? The godly and faithful
being failed from among them, who it seems had power in their right words and
works (which are forcible) to stop the mouths of Gainsayers, and hinder the
prevalency and spreading of their Lip, even by sound Doctrine, witnessed also
in a good conversation in Christ, for they would not seek to do it by a worldly
power if they had opportunity, nor by the wrath of man.

Yea it follows in the close of the Psalm, still as the issue of this
judgment: The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted. So
Isaiah 57. 3, 4. with Mich. 7. we read, That on the perishing of the righteous
and good men from the earth, the seed of the sorceress, of the Adulterer, and
Whore, sport themselves, and draw out a wide mouth; they rejoice to do evil
with both hands, earnestly laying in wait for blood, hunting every man his
brother with a net; encouraging themselves now easily to prevail over those
needy and feeble ones, that are sighing under Gods judgments, and to blot out
their name from under heaven, that it be no more a hindrance reproof, and check
to them: For if the foundations be destroyed, say they, what can the righteous
do? But our Rock is not like theirs, our foundation and sanctuary is one, and
cannot be destroyed, our God is in his holy Temple; The Lords Throne is in
Heaven: A glorious high Throne is the place of our sanctuary, Psalm 11. Jer.
17. 12, 13.

Therefore rejoice not against me, Oh mine enemies, says Michah, chap. 7. 9.
When I fall, I shall arise, because the Lord lives, who is the Rock of my
salvation, and will be a light to me, even when good men are perished from the
earth, and in that respect I am made to sit in darkness, 1 Samuel 22. 47. and
Psalm. 18. 1, 2, 3, 46. with Mich. 7 7, 8, 9. even so the true believer of Gods
testimony, exercising faith in Christ according to it, has yet encouragement
in the Lord his God.

But evil and ungodly men take liberty, and rejoice to do evil (as before)
boasting themselves of their hearts desire, and encouraging themselves in hope
of prevailing, upon the ceasing of faithful men from amongst them, for while
they were preserved among them; They were by the word of life put in their
heart, held forth in word and conversation unto them, and amongst them, as a
fenced Brazen Wall; against which, though fighting, they could never prevail.
But they the faithful or upright ones, were mighty through God by the power of
their word, to turn their waters or doctrines into blood, that men could not
drink them, or not find rest and content in them, for the Lord was with them,
as a mighty, and terrible One, making their witness held forth in word and
conversation together, so powerful as was affirmed of Jeremie of old, Jer. 1.
7. 10, 17, 18, 19. and 15, 19, 20, 21. with chap. 6. 27, 28, 29, 30. And might
not be altogether unduely applied here.

2 Such providence are also as breaches, in the hedge, wall, or sense to such
as are left of Gods peculiar people, even to the flock of God, the Church, or
Congregation, that he has gathered or redeemed from among men, through that
excellent price the precious blood of Christ, set before them and opened to
them, by the spirit in the Gospel.

1 To the laying them open to be wasted, spoiled, and trodden down by Bores and
wild Beasts, in the likeness of men, who now will enter in amongst them without
let or hindrance to corrupt and destroy. I know, sais Paul, that after my
departure shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock, also
of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things to draw away
Disciples after them, Acts 20. 29, 30.

While such powerful and faithful instruments are continued with and amongst
the flock, they are mighty through God, to the keeping out and driving away
such hurtful Wolves, and false brethren that come to bring into bondage, to
whom they will not give place by subjection to them; no not for an hour, that
the truth of the Gospel may continue with the flock of God, over whom the Holy
Ghost has made them overseers, and that it may therefore and so remain with
them, that it may be held forth by them for the good of others.

They being furnished with that faithful word, the word of reconciliation, the
preaching peace by Jesus Christ, he is Lord of all, with which they are able
through God to stop the mouths of gainsayers, and of such vain and unruly
talkers, and so to hinder them in their enterprise of subverting whole houses,
being thereby fully instructed and strengthened to every good word and work.

Their removal therefore is an evil breach to the letting in such to waste and
destroy this Vine, Psalm 80. 13. Isaiah. 5.

2 Also to the letting out or administering occasion of disheartning to the weak
and wavering, leaving them as without watch or guard, to their aptness to take
offense and stumble at they know not what; and so to turn away their ears from
the truth, and be tumbled aside to fables, such as did watch over them and seek
to heal, help, and strengthen them at all occasions, being removed and failing
from them. Many will be easily enticed to follow the pernicious ways of the
spirit of Antichrist; by reason of whom the way of truth will be evil spoken
of, and the enemy will more rejoice, 2 Timothy 4. 2, 3, 4, 6. 2 Pet. 1. 13, 14.
with chap. 2. 1. 2. Acts 20. 30. Psalm. 12. Mich. 7.

2 Such providence are like a breach in the natural body, as the cutting off
an useful member, until the making up; or healing of which there can be no
profitable or cheerful progress in the work, for if all the members suffer in
the suffering of one, their suffering and affliction must needs be greater in
the loss of one, by its being broken or cut off from being any more useful, or
serviceable to, or in the body in this time of temptation. Whence Paul speaking
of Epaphroditus, as his brother and companion in labors, and fellow-souldier,
and their messenger signifies, that his being taken away by death as was
threatened, would have been not only to the Philippians, but to himself also a
very great affliction, adding sorrow upon sorrow. Yea,

3 Being breaches of such a nature, they must needs occasion a present breach
in, and st^^ppage to the good work, the work of the Lord to be carried on by
the Church in the world, until it be made up or healed; as Vzzah's being thus
cut off by a sudden stroke, chiefly procures by their iniquities, occasioned a
breach in, and put a stop to their work of bringing home the Ark of God for the
present, and till they had searched and sound the iniquity reproved, and their
hearts were prepared to seek the Lord after the due order, as we see by
comparing the 13. chap. With this we may fitly apply what has been said, to
our present occasion of lamentation. The taking away of this our Jeremy in the
midst of his days, depriving him, or rather us of the residue of his years,
and at such a time in the midst; or rather in the beginning of his zealous
endeavors to the promoting of so glorious a work, as the Publishing and
Proclaiming the glorious name and grace of God in Christ to man-ward, and
earnest pressing and stirring up the people of God, to join as one man with
full purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord, striving together in his name
after the due order for the faith of the Gospel, and in nothing terrified by
their adversaries, his being taken from us being also in such an evil time,
when so few like minded, not seeking their own things, but the things which be
Jesus Christ's. This is surely a very great and grievous breach made upon us in
all the forementioned considerations, something near to that, Lamentations 2.
13.

Use. It presents us with abundant cause and matter of lamentation and bitter
weeping for our selves, and the miseries that are like to follow upon us, if
not timely prevented by turning to him that smites us, with whom only is
healing. It Is a day of trouble, of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord
God of hosts in the valley of Vision, breaking down the wall, etc. He has made
us to see the breaches of the City of David, Isaiah 22. 5, 9. It Is a day in
which the Lord calls to mourning and weeping, to astonishment, and humbling
under his mighty hand: Take heed least there be in any of us a spirit lifted
up, or carried away from the sense of the affliction as those people were by a
conceit of their ability and strength, yet to make up the breaches in the wall
by pulling down the houses. But with fear and trembling let us look unto the
maker thereof, and with reverence have respect to him that fashioned it long
ago. For,

2 It is he, even the Lord, that is the maker of such breaches in it.

The Lord our God has made this breach upon us.

He is the author of all evil of punishments or corrections of sin: They are
his work, though his strange work ( Isaiah 28. 21.) to which he is unwillingly
provoked. It is not the work of his delight, in this day of his grace and
patience to prepare, and frame such evil things against men: He delights in
mercy, that pleases him, he is the Father of lights, and therefore every good
and perfect gift comes down naturally and freely from him; but there is no
darkness in him; Evil or wrath toward men, has not its original in his
gracious heart or councels, whence he is said to frame and create it against
men, as a thing without him, or that had not its original in him, but his
strange act, not framed against any till he be highly provoked to it.

I the Lord form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and create evil;
I the Lord do all these things, Isaiah 45. 7.

Note, That darkness which he is said to create, is darkness as opposed to
light, Favor, Grace, and good things vouchsaled to men, and so evil, as
opposed to peace, and not as opposed to good things done by men. Its not the
evil of sin that he frames or creates, that is their ways, their doings, none
of his, but the evil of punishment, as Amos 3 3. 6. You have I known above all
the families of the earth, therefore you will I punish for all your iniquities.
And of these punishments for their iniquities, he says, verse 6. shall there
be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it.

Yea that he tempts no man with evil, nor can he be tempted, or moved to have
any hand in, or fellowship with any thing that is sinful; no, not inmoving,
^rompting, approving, or allowing it, is evident in this that he is the Author
or maker of all punishments of it present, and eternal: and righteous, in
executing such judgments, as indeed, all his ways are equal, and he is holy and
righteous in all his works; Now he could not be righteously or lawfully the
Author of the punishment, if he had any hand or heart in the sin, or iniquity
punished. It is great cruelty, injustice, and wickedness for any Magistrate to
punish that fact in another, of which he knows himself to be the first, and
principal author and mover, or if but a promoter and approver of it. And shall
not the Judge of all the earth do right; far be it from us to attribute any
manner of cruelty, injustice, or wickedness to the Almighty: Yea, therefore to
him of Right it belongs to execute vengeance upon all ungodly sinners that
despise him, and run to other Rocks, because he is the Rock, his work is
perfect. A God of truth, and without iniquity, just, and (...). They have
corrupted themselves, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 4, 5, 15, 31, 35. Therefore he would have
us commit vengeance to him, as indeed altogether unmeet our selves to assume
it. Its his work, and he will do it seasonably, and righteously, to punish the
world for their iniquity, and the wicked for their sin, Isa. 13. 11.

Of the evil of punishment for men's evils and iniquities, or corrections, and
trials for purging them: There are some of which God is more remotely the
author ( viz.) Such as are executed by evil instruments, and in the execution
of which the instruments do evil, or sinfully: As those many and great
afflictions on Job. Shimeies cursing David, and the like, which yet they did
well to take out of Gods hand, as his doing and ordering to them. But in such
judgments as these; this cautionary distinction is well to be observed, God is
the author of the punishment to the party punished, not of the sinful action,
of the instrument by whom he punishes. He has no hand in or fellowship with
the sinful action of the instrument, in moving or promoting to it, or allowing,
and approving of it, but yet is the Author and orderer of the punishment, or
correction, that is in the influence of such evils on the subjects they fall
upon by permitting and ordering such influence of others evils to light upon
them. And whatsoever he does is holy, just, and good, and for the good of those
to whom he does it, while it is to day, though in that which they (...) the
instruments do, the influence of which he permits to fall on others, they do
evil, and sinfully, and intend it for evil, as Joseph well said to his
brethren, Genesis 50. 20. Yea thought it for evil, but God meant it for good. They
envied and hated him, and thought to destroy him, God had no hand in that; but
suffered their evil to have influence upon him, so far as might tend to the
sending him to Egypt, to preserve them, and much people alive, They meant no
such thing in it, it was not they but God, that by that means sent him thither,
Genesis 45. 7, 8. So the Assyrian, The rod of Gods anger was by him ordered, and
used to punish, and purge an Hypocritical nation. Howbeit, he meant not so, nor
did his heart think so, but to destroy and cut off, Isaiah 10. 5, 7. So also in
raising up the Caldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, that came to eat up and
to destroy; God in giving permissive commission to them, was yet of pu^e^ eyes
then to behold iniquity, or have fellowship with them, in their sinful thought
and action. But he did ordain the influence of their wrath, and evils for
righteous judgment, and for correction, that utter destruction to his people
might be prevented, and so was holy and righteous in all his ways, though they
were wicked and sinful in theirs, Hab. 1. 6. 12, 13

And so generally, he has made the wicked for the day of evil, and wrath, he
makes no man wicked, but such as make themselves so, he has made and ordered
them to be in his hands to be used, and ordered by him, in the influence of
their wickedness, as rods to execute wrath on others for his own glory. They
shall be kept in store for judgments to execute such judgments, as he
delights not to employ good Angels, and as they desire not to be employed in,
Proverbs 16. 4.

God did not move Shemei to curse, but Shemei hardening his heart against that
grace that brings salvation to all men, which would have prevented him; and
conceiving the evil and malicious thought, and lust, which God approved not,
nor came it into his mind (as Jer. 19. 5. and 32. 35.) And being at this time
himself a fit person to be left or given up to his own hearts lust (as Psalm 18
12. Isaiah 66. 3, 4.) God now left him to it in just judgment to him, which
though he did, he could yet have restrained the influence of it from falling on
David, or turned it on his own Head, as after he did, or some other way; yet
now he suffered it to light on David for good and holy ends. What God did in it
was Holy and Good, and meant for good to David, though what Shimei did was
sinful, and meant for evil; to which agrees that general affirmation.

The wrath of man shall praise him. Note still, its the wrath of man which
directly*, or of it self works not the righteousness of God: But its of God
to make it turn to his praise, and to restrain that remainder thereof, which
might not do so, Psalm 76. 10. with James 1. 20.

But there are other judgments for punishment, correction, and purging of sin,
that God is more immediately, and directly the author of, which he does as it
were by himself, without such evident and visible use or employment of
instruments, as in the forementioned, and so is more properly and directly
affirmed to be the maker of them, as, the withholding rain, giving want of
bread, smiting with blasting and mil-dews, sending the pestilence after the
manner of Egypt, taking away their Horses, and making the stink of their Camps
to come up into their Nostrils (a judgment now uponus) overthrowing some of
them, as he overthrew Sodom, etc. See Jer. 14. 22. with Amos 4. 2, 6, 12. 2 Samuel 24. 14, 15. Likewise many of those extraordinary or unusual sicknesses,
weaknesses, and deaths, wherewith God punishes a people for stubborness in
iniquity, in not timely judging themselves, as 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32. Are more
immediately, and directly his own hand, done by himself, without such use of
instruments, as before. So of that sickness unto death and threatened with it on
Hezekiah, Isaiah 38. 1. He says verse 15. He, namely, the Lord, has both
spoken unto me, and himself has done it.

And of this latter sort of judgments, is the breach spoken of in the Text, the
Lord made it even by himself, without evident and discernable use of
instruments, by an immediate and sudden stroke: And such is also that which we
have this day to lament, as to the immediate and direct hand of the maker in
it, though he did it not by a sudden stroke as there, but by pining sickness,
yet he has done it himself, from day even to night, he has made an end of
him, as to us, and our present enjoyment and personal usefulness of him in this
world.

The Lord our God has made this breach upon us. Let the consideration hereof
be of use.

1 To astonish us, and make us silent before him, from murmuring or disputing,
according to the frowardness and unsubmittedness of our own hearts and from our
^a^n thoughts and imaginations, in which we are ready to be proposing to our
selves some way or other of our own, to put off the evil or grievance from us,
that we may not bear the indignation of the Lord, as those that have sinned
against him. Its the Lord; let us ^ow before him, and be humbled under his
mighty hand, he is against whom we have sinned, and who only can heal us, and
bring us forth to the light to behold his righteousness.

The immediateness of his hand in it, leaves us the more without room or color
to wander with our eyes into corners, or to reason or dispute, indeed such a
behavior under his hand when lifted up, is very evil, and unseemly when yet
its evident, evil instruments are i^ployed in the judgments executed. Its good
for us then not to look to consider or to have to do with them, but ^o acquaint
our selves with him, to draw near to God; to receive the correction out of his
hand, and be at peace quietly enduring it as his hand, and waiting for him as
J^b, David, and others. But now his hand lifted up as it is, is more eminent to
humble and meaken our spirits, and make us silent before him: And it shows
greater iniquity and hardness in it, if it have not that effect. If now we will
be froward, or murmer, we have none to wrangle with or look upon but the Lord:
If we would vindicate our selves, or seek to excuse or plead our innocence, we
have none whose judgment we might therein seek to disanul. But the Lord. If any
way we would lift up our selves, as if we felt nothing, or could set it light
or make it light, we have none so to lift up or harden our selves against.

But the Lord, against whom none ever hardened himself, and prospered; we may
well say with Hezekiah: What shall we say? Himself has d^ne it. And with Job;
B^hold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon mine mouth,
once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea twice, but I will proceed no
farther. Let us then put our mouths in the dust, if so be, there may be hope,
and be silent before him, and with reverence wait upon him, who does all these
things. To which,

2 This consideration affords us encouragement, That it is the Lord, even that
great and ^aithful Crea^or, who when we had marred and destroyed our selves,
and were dead in sins and trespasses, yet so loved u^, as to send his own Son
to be the propitiation for our sins, that his Kingdom might come to us, and we
might live under i^ through him, yea all this that through him we might be
saved: And it (...) him, that by the Grace of God tasted death for every man,
and (...) all these things in the same wisdom, mercy, and faithfulness, that
he might bring us to God. Having obtained power in the name of the father so to
execute judgment, because he is the Son of man. It is the Lord, let him do what
he will: Yea the Graciousness, Faithfulness, and Goodness of his Government,
and his worthiness to be submitted to, appears in this; That it is his Kingdom
that rules over us, even in all things: That he has not left us under the
hand, will, or power, of our enemies, but still we are in his hand, with whom
is mercy and power, to save and heal. Come therefore let us return to the Lord,
let us prepare to meet him in the way of his judgments. He has smitten, he
will heal. After two days he will re^^ive us, and the third day, we shall live
in his sight. Yet likewise,

3 This consideration serves to warn and admonish us to be sensible of some
displeasure provoked, and some great reproof in it to us; That it may be
diligently listened to and received by us: For though its much better to fall
into the hands of the Lord, then into the hands of men, whose tender mercies
are cruelties. Yet when taking us unto his own hands, he is provoked to make
such breaches, to correct so sharply himself, it bears witness against us of
some great iniquities with us, and of much stubborness in hiding and retaining
them, provoking such displeasure in such a gracious God and Savior.

If he had given us over, or left us in the hands of men, and they had not
spared nor pitied, but been cruel to the utmost they could; There might yet
have been some room to have waved the reproof of instruction in it, or to have
strengthened our selves in a thought, that there had been no such reproof in it
to us, or displeasure from God signified against us. He might have ordered some
light affliction to us, and they might (being also left to try them) have added
to our affliction, as Zach. 1. 15. But what shall we say? Himself has done it,
and by himself: The Lord that sees many things to provoke before he observe
them against us, yea though he prevents always with opening the ^ar by
gracious instructions in milder means, yet is not quick to hear our murmurings,
disputings, and hardening our hearts against the reproofs of instruction so
graciously brought us, nor is there with him any changeableness; He is the
same, yet he, the Lord. The Lord, Gracious, Merciful, slow to Anger, ready to
forgive; and that does not willingly afflict or grieve the children of men,
even he has made this breach upon us: Who gave Jacob to the spoil and Israel
to the robbers? Did not the Lord? Surely the Lord, our Holy and Gracious One,
the glorious Lord would not have done it, if we had not exc^edingly sinned
against him, and with much and long stubborness refused to walk in his ways,
and to be obedient to his laws. Let us then search and try our ways, and turn
unto the Lord. This leads us into the n^xt instruction propounded to be
considered in the Text.

3 That the reason or procuring cause of such judgments from the Lord, is our
own iniquities; Yea that usually there is found, besides the more general
evils, some great iniquity of neglects, and disorder in Gods peculiar people,
yea even iniquity and pollution in their holy things as the inlet to, and
procuring cause of such judgments on themselves and others.

We shall first give some general proof and demonstration of this point by
other Scriptures. And then speak particularly to the evil of sin or iniquity
mentioned in the text, as the reason or procuring cause of the breach made upon
them. First, For the general proof and demonstration of this point by other
Scriptures. See Ezekiel. 33. After the Proph^t has mentioned many great and
crying sins, as general, and national evils, such as, The feeding on, and
rejoicing in forbidden and unclean things, lifting up their eyes to their
idols; Gods, that men make to themselves, which indeed are no Gods, as their
wisdom, strength, ^iches, honour^, confederates, and the like. Their shedding
blood: Their standing, leaning, or depending on their sword for defense and
safety: Working Ambition and Vncl^anness; For which he threatens to dispossess
them of the land, and to lay the land most desolate, etc. verse 25. 28. He then
adds verse, 30. etc. Also (moreover, or besides these great general and
national evils) The children of thy people still are talking against thee by
the Walls, and in the doors of the houses, privately murmuring, and speaking
evil; imagining deceit, and seeking how to avoid the force and prevalency of
his doctrine yet speaking one to another, mean while; Come I pray you, and hear
what is the word, that comes forth from the Lord, yea such they were as did
sit before him, as Gods people, and did hear his words, and with their mouth
show much love, and he was to them as a very lovely song of one that has a
pleasant voice, etc. Yet they were not doers of his words, but was still
secretly murmuring and disputing against them, and the reproofs of instruction
in them, for their heart went after their covetousness. And for these with the
former: God farther threatens, That when this, namely the forementioned
judgment comes to pass, They should also know that a Prophet had been among
them (as may seem by the want of them.) He would take away such, in such an
evil time, when they should have stood in the gap, to turn away Gods wrath, and
been instruments of comforting, strength, and teaching, to them in their
affliction. Their condition should then be such as they should not see their
signs, nor should there be among them a Prophet, or any that knows, How
long, as Psalm 74. 9.

I might here mention the evils complained of, Isaiah 56. which is principally
their general envy at God people, by whom his house is rendered a house of
prayer for all people, the blindness, greediness, profaness, and enmity of
their watchmen, who were Ringleaders in those crooked paths, which are
declared as forerunners and procurers of such judgments, as well as their
multiplied idolatries, and covetousness, compare chap. 57. with chap. 56.

Likewise the oppression, fraudilence, violence, deceit, and the like spoken
of, Mich. 6. as forerunners of such judgments, as the taking away righteous
and good men from the earth, and from among men, chap. 7. But to these
Scriptures having spoke more fully in the foresaid lamentation, I shall here
add no more.

Yet something more we shall briefly add, to what is there also hinted of that
plain declaration of the cause, why many among believers were weak and sickly,
and many slept, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30, 31.

It was as appears by comparing the verses 28. 31. For their not so discerning,
considering, and looking into the Lords body, that was broken for them, and is
now through sufferings entered into his glory: As to examine themselves in that
glass, and judge themselves thereby, as discovered and reproved in the light
and powet of it; and so for their pride and disorders, that followed on that
inlet to all disorder. For so much is evident from his council; let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat, as that is pressed with this motive or
reason; For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation
(present reproof and correction) to himself, not discerning the Lords body, so
much I say is evident.

1 That the true way for a man rightly to examine himself is in the discerning
the Lords body, as declared in the glorious Gospel; looking to and into that as
the true glass, that makes himself and all things else manifest in their right
colors.

2 That the want of, or the wilful neglect, or shunning the so examining a
man's selt in that glass, the unwillingness to see and judge himself, his own
vileness and wretchedness, the evil, and shortness of his own ways, as therein
discovered and reproved, is that iniquity, that renders him unworthy, or
un^eer, and disorderly in his seeking and worshipping the Lord, and makes him
obnoxious to reproof from the Lords body, the object acknowledged by him in
those acts of worship, and procures such corrections as follows. For this
cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.

And this understanding is farther confirmed in what follows: For if we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged. This shows us that the examining of
a man's self, to which we are here instracted is not to search our own glory,
which indeed is not glory, Proverbs 25 27. Nor to search for, know, or take
notice of the goodness of our own frames or qualifications, as things rendering
us worthy, or by which we may come, nor in this case, or to such an and, are we
so ^o examine or look upon the operations of grace in us, or by us (as in other
cases or to other purposes may be good and useful, as 2 Cor. 13. 3, 4, 5. Hebr.
10. 32. Gal. 3. 2, and 4. 15.) But if we had done all those things, to which by
grace made known through blood we are instructed and obliged, the same grace
instructs us therein always to acknowledge our selves unprofitable servants
that have done but our duty, nothing in which we may be profitable to God, or
procure the reward o^ himself, or his things to us.

But the examining our selves here, and in this case instructed to, ver. 28. is
such an examining our selves in that true glass, the Lords body, verse 29. As
in which we shall always at best find cause to judge our selves, to receive,
and fall down under the humbling instructions of the Lords body broken for us,
as declared in the Gospel; and so under the r^proofs of those instructions:
It Is indeed a searching for, and so looking into the true glass, as to see our
own shame; or what cause we have always to be ashamed and humbled before him,
such as has in it a willingness to see, acknowledge, and be ashamed of our own
vil^ness and sinfulness, to know every one the plague of his own heart, and
confess our sins as discovered by the true light as we are instructed to come
before him, and approach his presence in prayer, and other ordinances, so in
this. Let a man examine himself, discerning the Lords body -- For if we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged.

1 Let him examine himself what he is in and of himself, and as from Adam, as
discovered in that glass of the Lo^ds body, where he may always see himself a
sinner, wholly polluted, an heir of wrath, as in himself and from Adam; yea
altogether without strength, helpless and dead in sins and trespasses, and so
lost. Thus he is presented in Christ's coming to seek and save him, and in the
great things he suffered; That through sufferings he might obtain such glory
unto himself for us, that he might bring us back to God, and that through him
we might be saved: For we thus judge (says the Apostle.) If one dyed for all,
then were all dead, etc. which being always rightly minded and remembered,
would exclude all boasting and rejoicing in the Flesh, and keep us from being
lifted up in or by any thing that we have received; making us to differ from
any, seeing its not of our selves, not of works, but of free grace through
blood, and for that love wherewith he loved us when dead in sins and
trespasses, and for a pattern of the exceeding riches of it toward others of
mankind, toward whom also it is in Christ that they might partake of it
together with us, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15, 16. Romans 3. 9, 27. 1 Cor. 4. 1, 7. Ephesians.
2. 1, 12.

2 Let him examine himself, his own ways and doings in the sight of the Lord,
what they are or have been, in answerableness to his grace in Christ, or the
appearances and streamings forth of it unto him.

Not measuring himself by himself, what he is now, with what he was before, or
with others, what he is more, or better then they; that he may have any thing
of that nature to look upon or commend himself by. This was the evil way of the
Corinths, that led them to despise such as had not what they had. Therefore in
measuring, or examining our selves according to such rules we are not wise, 1
Cor. 11, 22, 31. with 2 Cor. 10. tot. But let a man examine himself in an
earnest and hearty discerning the Lords body, in that glass, let every man
search and try his ways, how short his understanding and knowledge is of the
object to be known, and also of the grace discovered, and means of knowledge
afforded: How short his love to God, or to men of his infinite grace discovered
in that glass, obliging; and of the discoveries of it to him, instructing and
leading; how short all his ways and doings of any answerableness to the grace
in Christ or to the streams of loving kindness bestowed.

There the best will always find, and be most sensible of cause of shame of
their vast shortness, and the greatness of their sins aggravated by the grace
bestowed: And find good reason to equalize themselves with them of the lower
sort, and rejoice that they may yet come in at the same door with them.

This law of faith (cen^ured and exercised in the Lords body broken for us)
excludes boasting every where. The wilful neglect and unwillingingness thus to
examine and judge themselves in an earnest discerning (looking into and
continuing in, as James 1. 23. 25.) The Lords body (in which is also the
encouragement for such sinners approach) was that which procured such judgments
to them, 1 Cor. 11. 30. For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and
many sl^ep. And this leads us again to the text.

Secondly, To consider particularly the evil of sin, or iniquity mentioned
there as the reason, or procuring cause of the breach made upon them.

The Lord our God made this breach upon us, for that we sought him not after
the due order.

We shall first consider this declaration of the procuring cause of the breach
made upon them, as it is a general expression of any way of in^quity that may
be meant and signified in the sense of the words; and then take a view of the
particular evils to which it is here applied.

1 As it is a general expression of any way of iniquity, that may be meant and
signified in the sense of the words; and for our understanding of that, w^
shall propound some considerations of the due order after which the Lord is to
be sought by us.

1 There is an order of Precedence in the nature, worth and goodness of things,
after which some things are to be esteemed, prized, and sought for, rather then
other things, yea with a neglect of other things for them.

And so to seek the Lord after the d^e order; as with reference to all other
things that are not the Lord, nor of his appointment, for our rest, is, to
esteem and prefer him above all things, and to seek him before all things, and
with a neglect of all things for him, and for the things of him.

S^ we are instructed to esteem and prefer wisdom in the knowledge of him as
the principal thing, the merchandise of it better then of silver, and the gain
thereof then of fine gold, she is more precious then R^bi^s, and all the things
thou can desire, are not to be compared to her.

And therefore we are exhorted so to seek after it, and get it with all our
getting, to buy the truth what ever it cost us, or we must part with for i^,
and not to sell or part with it, whatever advantage we might have in lieu of it,
Proverbs 3. 14, 15. and 4, 5, 7, etc. and 23. 23.

To seek first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, so as with a neglect
of all other things, even things needful as to the natural life for it,
leaving it to ^h^m without carefulness to dispose of them, and add them to us
(as he sees good) Matthew 6. 19, 32, 33. etc. Yea even those things that are of
all the things in this World most to be esteemed, loved, and respected in their
place, and in subordination to him, yet are to be hated by us for him, and in
comparison of him. If any man come to me, (says our Savior) and in coming
hate not Father and Mother, Wife, and Children, Brethren and Sisters; Yea, and
his own Life also, he is not worthy of me, he cannot be my Disciple, Matthew
10. 37, 39. Luke 14. 26, 33.

They sought not the Lord after the due order, that with their mouth showed
much love, but their heart went after their covetousness, Ezekiel 33. 31. Nor
they that loved the praise of men more then that which comes of God alone, John
5. 44. and 12, 43. That rather then part with, or hazard the loss of the one,
would let go the other, or put, or keep themselves out of the certain way or
meeting with it, and so for lying vanities forsake their own mercies: As also
he that would first go bury his Father, that so he might keep the good will of
such relations while they lived, and so make sure the Inheritance, Portion, or
Advantage, he might have from them at their death, then promising to himself to
follow him with a more full Spirit: And likewise he that would first go bid
them farewell that were at home at his house, that in a design to keep the
friendship of the World, and worldly rela^ions and friends, would seek their
consent, or a fair and possible come off: That he might not incur hatred and
reproach from them, and be as the filth and offscouring of the World to them;
not willing, for the excellency of the knowledge of him to go out of the Camp,
bea^ing his reproach, Luke 9. 58. 61.

Yea, whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, even to his
own natural Life, if he lay not that at the stake for him, or be not willing to
let it go and part with it, o^ any thing pertaining to it when it stands in
the way for his sake and the Gospels, or in his seeking to know him, and win
him, that he may be found in him, do not neglect, and hate it in comparison of
him, he is not worthy of him, he seeks him not after the due order, he cannot
be his Disciple, for no man can serve two masters, the mind and affections
cannot be fixed on ^^ings below, and on the things that are above together;
Therefore l^^t seek we the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, so as with a
neglect of all other things for it, and in comparision of it.

There is an order in the time and causes of the things, that are to be
preferred, and earnestly, and in a sense equally to be sought for by us. After
which somethings are to be sought first; that other things which are also to be
preferred, and sought may be found in them, and attained through them with
other things, are not otherwise to be sought but in the first things: And so to
seek the Lord after the due order, as with reference to the things of the Lord,
and to be sought in in him, as wisdom, righteousness, and strength; Yea, all
things pertaining to life, and godliness are in him, and to be sought in him. I
say, To seek him after the due order, as with reference to those things. Is

First, And as the first thing unto all to seek after wisdom in the knowledge
of him, in what he has done, and is become for us in Christ and the hope set
before us in him, that through the knowledge of his Grace toward us and rich
provision for us in Christ, even while we were yet dead in sins and trespasses,
we may be strengthened to believe in him, love and trust in him before the sons
of men, for his name in Christ known by us, instructs and strengthens us to
trust in him, Psalm 9, 10. to desire after him, John 4. 10. to delight in, and
rest satisfied with him, verse 14. Whence the Apostle prays for the Ephesians
that God would grant them the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
of him; the eyes of their understandings being enlightened, that they may know
what is the hope of his calling, etc. Ephesians 1. 17, 18, 19.

And the great conflict he had for the Collosians, was that their hearts might
be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full
ass^rance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of Christ; and in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom,
and knowledge: Ye^, this he signifies to be that order of their faith, in which
it became stedf^st, which he joyed to behold, and according to which he exhorts
them to go on, walking in him as they had received him, even according to this
rule or order; being rooted and built up in him, and so stablished in the faith
as they had been taught.

In their receiving him, they were baptized into the knowledge and
acknowledgment of his death, and so taking root down-ward, believing, minding,
and considering, what he had done, and was now become for them through the
blood of his Cross: They were thence built up in him, and upon him, and after
the same order might profitably go on to farther growth, and stability in him,
Col. 2. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7.

And so the way to grow in grace is signified to be, in growing in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 8, 18. Also that the
mind or soul be without knowledge, it is not good, nor safe, for without it, it
cannot be made good. There is no other arm or power to reconcile the heart to
God, but the knowledge of his reconciliation in Christ, or of that goodness of
God, that is in and through Christ, its the goodness of God that leads to
repentance.

Therefore the first thing to be sought always, and in all o^^^ seekings of the
Lord, and of righteousness, and strength in him, is that we may win him, in the
understanding and knowledge of him that is true, that so we may be found in
him, for the knowledge of him in what he has done, and is become for us, while
we were yet out of him, being heartily embraced, leads the heart and mind into
him, and to be stayed in him: See Phil. 3. 8, 10. 1 John 5 20.

And to that purpose, the first thing in all the commandments, as brought to
us by the glorious Gospel, is, to hear that word, or doctrine of faith, that
presents the Lord our God to be one Lord, as evidenced in that one Mediator
between God and men; the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all,
a testimony in due time, which shows him to be light, and in him no darkness at
all. See, and compare Mark 12. 29. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5, 6. 1 John 1. 5.

Whence also we are exhorted to be swift to hear that word of truth, in what
condition so ever we be, come as we are to it, listen to, and receive it with
all acception, as a faithful saying, full of truth and goodness for us at all
times, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.

To hear always before we speak, or do, that thence we may be rightly taught,
strengthened, and qualified, so to speak and do, as those that shall be judged
by that royal law of liberty. Be more ready to hear then to offer the
Sacrifices of Fools, James 1. 19. Eccles. 5. 1. Prove. 22. 17, 21.

And so the way to seek righteousness profitably that we may attain it, is to
seek it by faith in Christ, Romans 9. 30, 32. To believe in him, that we may be
justified by the faith of him. Gal. 2. 15, 16. For (as by his knowledge, or
skill, so also) through the knowledge of himself, through his name he gives the
forgiveness of sins, and justifies the believer, Isaiah 53. 11. with Acts 10.
43. and 13, 38, 39.

And so likewise if we would get victory over sin, and Satan, cleanse our hands
from sins, our hearts from guile, be made partakers of his holiness; without
which no man shall see him. The way to seek it is also in the knowledge and
faith of him, and to that purpose to be exercised in beholding the glory of the
Lord, as shined in that glass, even in the face of Christ through the glorious
Gospel, 2 Cor. 3. 18. with chap. 4. 6.

Whence the Psalraist tells us, That they that have clean hands, and a pure
heart, are only the Generation of them that seek his face, and so seek
righteousness, and strength there, Psalm 24. 4, 6. with Isaiah 45. 24, 25. And
therefore also calling upon us to seek the Lord, and his strength, leads us to
this as the way to it, in his fundamental instruction seek his face evermore:
Remember his mavelous works that he has done, his wonders, and the judgments
of his mouth, Psam 105. 4, 5.

They then seek him not after the due Order; that first seek to frame or work
up their own hearts to a belief or hope in God, or confident expectation of
good from him, before they hear, or dare receive and consider the word of
faith, as true for them, but seek to find the act or grace of faith first in
their own hearts, that from thence they may conclude the truth of the word of
faith to themselves, that first seek to work up their own hearts to love God,
before they will know, or believe his love to them in Christ as, and while
sinners, and enemies, which only is fit, and able to get true love and good
affection to him, that so from the imagination of their love and good affection
to him, they may conclude his love and good affection in Christ ^o them.

Now herein is not love (says the Apostle) that we have loved God, herein Gods
love is not rightly perceived; But in this, that he first loved us, even while
enemies, and sent his Son the propitiation for our sins. And therefore, and
from thence we indeed love him, because he first loved us, and from thence also
(that being first known and believed) springs true love one to another, 1 John
4. 9, 10, 19, and 3, 16. They therefore do greatly err; as likewise, in seeking
to get victory over sin, and strength against their corruptions, before they
dare receive the report of his coming into the world to save sinners, and the
victory and conquest obtained (in his resurrection) over sin, and Satan as
faithful and true for them. And then from what they imagine they find in
themselves, they conclude the truth of that done in him for them.

In this preposterous and disorderly way of seeking the Lord, men make i^ their
first and great inquiry, whether they be elected, or in a good condition before
God, which they strive to guess, and to conclude to themselves, from some
imagined gracious frames, good affection, victory over sin, or the like; or
from some particular assurance, that has no better ground for the bottom of
it, then some testimony of their own, or some private spirit; before they will
believe Gods testimony, of his sending his only begotten Son by his grace to
taste death for them, and giving him glory, that their faith and hope might be
in God: And then gather up conclusions of the truth of that for them from their
imagination of the truth of the former. Namely that Christ by the grace of God
tasted death for them, because they find themselves such as before. Hence it
is, that the way men too generally walk in, to comfort themselves and others in
distress, is to labor to persuade them, that they are in a better condition
then they think they are. Their sins less, their Hearts, Desire, Frames, and
Works better, or else from some signs or testimony of their own spirit, or of
others, that they are of the Elect, and that therefore Christ and all his
things belong to them.

Behold a more excellent way, then any of these crooked paths, in which who so
walks, shall know no true, or lasting peace.

First inquire in the light of Gods testimony, and consider diligently what
Jesus Christ by the grace of God has done, and what an infinite rich provision
of all things pertaining to life and godliness is in him for such vile sinners
and wretched ones, as at the worst thou may suppose thy self to be, even for
such as ye^ are not of the Elect, or chosen Generation, that through him they
might be saved, and in finding him find Life, Election, Sonship, and
privileges of Sons in him, and so be made of that Generation that were chosen
in Christ from the beginning of the World to be his peculiar treasure, even of
the chosen generation, the Holy Nation; Beloved with peculiar manner of love,
who before were not so, as Romans 9. 24, 25. 1 Peter 2. 9, 10.

Instead then of striving to conclude thy self in a good or safe condition, see
and consider in the testimony of Christ, what there is for such as are in a bad
and lost condition (like the woman to whom our Savior said, Its not meet to
cast the Childrens Bread to Dogs: Truth Lord, says she, yet the Dogs eat the
crumbs, etc.) That being heartily considered, will bring the into a better
condition: For God made him that knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him. And he came to seek and to save that
which was lost.

Oh! That men were willing to know that unspeakable gift of God, and the
infinite grace of God in it to every man, that would deliver them from this
disorder and confusion; in which instead of building on Christ, that only true
foundation which God has laid, they seek to lay a foundation of their own, and
would build Christ and his things upon it.

3 There is an order of regularness to be observed in the manner of our
seeking. And so to seek the Lord after the Due Order, is to walk according to
that rule (in all our seeking) which is already delivered, as that is grounded
upon and opened by the word of the beginning of Christ, which is the vision of
all, the foundation of all ordinances of divine worship, and the key of
knowledge for opening them, and the particular precepts concerning them, and
not to have our fear toward God taught by the precepts of men, which is an
evil found with all those worshippers, or seekers, to whom the vision of all is
a sealed book, who perceive not their ground in that, nor receive their
instructions from thence unto all their fear, and worship; but make the word of
the Lord to them precept upon precept, line upon line, etc. Isa. 29. 11, 13,
with chap. 28. 12, 13.

To seek him after the Due Order, as under this consideration, is

1 To seek him, fear, or worship him, remember, and acknowledge him, in his
ways, Isaiah 64. 5. not to choose our own ways, Isaiah 66. 3. or to receive
our conversation in that respect from the customs or traditions of men, or to
be determined by their precepts: That will render our worship vain,
unacceptable, and fruitless, Matthew 15. 9. 1 Peter 1. 18. But in the
instruction and direction of the Apostles main Doctrine (the preaching of the
Cross) to observe all things, whatsoever our Lord and Savior commanded them,
and has delivered to us by them, to remember them in all things, in their word
and doctrine, and so to keep the ordinances, as they have delivered them to us,
to stand fast in the grace of the Gospel, by and into which we are called, and
so to hold the traditions which they have in his name delivered to us, Matthew
18. 20. 1 Corinthians 11. 2. 2 Thessalonians 2. 14, 15. Always acknowledging
as the commandments of the Lord, the things so delivered by them, 1
Corinthians 14. 36, 37 By whom the preaching was fully made known, that all the
Gentiles might hear (2 Timothy 4. 17.) and in the instruction and encouragement
of the word heard, come into his house and rejoice with his people, that call
on him in truth, and so to acknowledge him, to pray unto him, to remember him,
and wait on him and wait on him in his house with his people, where his name is
truly acknowledged, as opportunity is vouchsafed in his ordinances, as by the
Apostles in his name delivered, Romans 15. 9, 10, 11. 1 Timothy 2, 4, 8.
Proverbs 9. 1, 5. Matthew 22. 4, 10. Luke 14. 17, 23.

For they have delivered to us the commandments of the Lord: Both what to
hear, Mark 2. 24. (viz.) That which we have already heard, even from the
beginning in the word of the truth of the Gospel, as by them delivered, Hebrews
2. 1. with chapter 1. 1, 3. etc. 1 John 2. 24, 27. 1 Cor. 15. 1, 3. 2 Pet. 2. 12.
to the end, with chapter 3. 1, 2. etc.) And also how to hear ( Luke 8. 18.) For the
trying of all things, in those prophecyings which are not to be despised, but
respected and attended by us, as well, as also for the trial of every doctrine,
or spirit, that may come to us ( viz.) so as retaining and holding fast that
which is good. Even the good word or doctrine of Christ, as already come in the
flesh; and so as having finished the works the father gave him to do on the
earth, and being received up into glory in that body prepared for him in our
nature, in which he bore our sins on the tree, as they have delivered the same
unto us, cleaving to, and holding fast that, as the Touchstone and Rule of
Trial; compare that, Luke 8. 18. with 1 Thessalonians 5. 20, 21. 2 Timothy 1.
13, 14, etc. 1 John 4. 1, 6.

Likewise in the same name, and so by the Lord Jesus, they have given us full
instructions and commandments, how we ought to walk in all our remembrances
and acknowledgment of him, and approaches to him in his ordinances: (1 Thessalonians.
2. 11, 12. and 4. 1, 2. etc.) And in any thing where they have not limited, or
circumscribed us, to this or that thing, or form, we are not to fall under the
judgment, or become subject to the ordinances of men, such as touch not, taste
not, handle not, Coll. 2. 16, 20, 21.

Yea they have instructed us how, and in what cases, we are to behold Israel
after the flesh, for our helpfullness in the understanding and use of
ordinances, as well as for example and admonition to us, 1 Corinthians 10. 1,
18.

2 In the manner of our seeking, remembering, and acknowledging him in his
ways; It is after the Due Order: Always first, and chiefly, to mind the
greater, or more weighty matters of the law, of the things declared in the
Apostles doctrine, or instructed to thereby, and so required in precepts, and
not to neglect the lighter matters (as they are called in comparison of the
greater, though there is nothing in Gods law, doctrine, or requirings, that is
in it self light) but to observe them according to the instruction of, and in
subserviency to the greater and more weighty, Matthew 23. 23. Luke 11. 42.
Hosea 6. 6. As

1 The end of all ordinances is the greater thing in them, and more weighty
then the circumstances in the manner of observance, and so to be minded and
preferred, as the Apostle signifies, both of the law, as given by Moses, and
also of the commandment of the everlasting God in the Gospel of Christ, and
things instructed to therein, from the end of which commandment, he says:
Some having swerved, or not aiming at that, have turned aside to vain jangling,
desiring to be teachers of the Law, and so urging precept upon precept, though
without any certain ground, foundation, or rule of harmony, not knowing what
they say, nor whereof they affirm. The great things of his law being strange
things to them, Hosea 8. 12. with 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6, 7.

Now the great end of all ordinances, is to Preach, or witness not our selves
to our selves, or to him, or to others; But Jesus the Lord to testify of him
unto us, and so to hold forth and witness repentance and remission of sins in
his name, and for us to remember, acknowledge, wait upon, and seek unto him,
(and not our selves) in them.

Thus we read of John's baptizing them with water, as well as his verbal
preaching; That it was to manifest Christ to Israel, not to manifest Israel to
Christ, or to themselves, or one another, but to manifest Christ to them as the
Son of God, the Savior of the World, John 1. 29, 31. And so all the people
that heard, and the Publicans justified (not themselves but) God, owned, and
acknowledged the truth of his testimony, and grace in Christ in being baptized
with the baptism of John, Luke 7. 29.

Likewise the Apostles baptizing the Nations of the Gentiles, with their word,
or doctrine, and also with water in his name, it was in order to the discipling
them unto Christ, and to that purpose to witness repentance and remission of
sins in his name to them; not to witness themselves repentance and remission of
sins in them, or in their name, or any other for them: But in the name of tha^
Jesus of Nazareth, that was dead, but is alive for evermore; comp^re Mat. 28.
18, 19. with Luke 24. 46, 47, 48.

And so the Supper of the Lord, is a commemoration and showing forth (not of
our graces and excellencies, but) of the Lords death till he come, 1
Corinthians 11. 23, 26. That we might therein acknowledge, remember, and be
instructed, and led into such a discerning of the Lords body, as therein to
examine and judge our selves (as we have hinted upon that place before.) So
likewise all our prayers to him, and confessions of him are to this great end:
That we and others might be led into and filled with the knowledge of him, that
therein we may be strengthened with all might in the inner-man; that Christ may
dwell in our hearts by faith, that so we may be rooted and grounded in love,
and filled with all goodness, and with all the fullness of God, through the
knowledge and faith of him. All his ordinances, as ordained, and delivered by
him, testify of him, and lead to him, and are given us that we might remember
him in them, as in all his ways.

Now this being the end of all, we are therefore directed to Gods testimony
concerning Christ, as to the vision of all visions, and foundation and key of
knowledge unto all ordinances, for helping our understandings in, and directing
to the right observance and usefulness of the things required in them.

And therefore also for our understanding, who they are, that walk as they have
the Apostles for an example, we are instructed to consider (not so much or
firstly, as a rule to know them by, the outward appearance in the zealous
observance of this, or that circumstance; but) the end of their conversation,
which is Jesus Christ. The same (even the mighty God and our Savior)
Yesterday, and to day, and for ever. In what he has done, and is become
himself, in his own body for us, in which he is the Son of God, the Savior of
the World of mankind without difference or respect of persons, as all are in
themselves, and as from Adam in a like consideration, wholly sinful and
miserable by nature.

And in what he is now doing, as the great and powerful Mediator, between God
and men: In which he is the living God, the Savior of all men, that through
him they might believe and be saved. And especially the Savior of them, that
through that grace to man-ward bringing salvation wherewith he prevents every
man in due time, do believe.

And in what he will do in his eternal judgment, at his second and glorious
appearing, and kingdom: In which he shall gloriously appear; The mighty God
and our Savior; the Savio^r to the utmost of all the Israel of God, that
through his love, love him, and wait for his appearing, they shall be saved in
the Lord with an everlasting salvation, and shall not be confounded World
without end, when all that now are incensed against him shall be ashamed.

Thus is Jesus Christ in these three great things testified of him in the
preaching of the Cross, the ground and end of all ordinances, and so the end of
the conversation that is ordered aright. The things principally minded and
aimed at in all things, Phillipians 3. 17, 20, 21. Hebrews 13. 7, 8.

2 There are also some ordinances that are more weighty then others, even of
those that are of his appointment, for us to remember, and wait upon him in;
yet some are to be chiefly preferred for our exercise, and earnestly to be
attended to and striven for, to be kept without spot (viz) such as more
directly tend to the end of all, and are more plainly discovering it, and
leading to it, and are appointed as the more choice instruments, and means
thereto; yea they are such as include others, and in which the discovery of the
ground and use of others is brought unto us, as the ordinance of baptizing with
water, is included in the work or business of Preaching the Cross of Christ,
being an outward way or seal to be used for witnessing repentance and remission
of sins in his name, for, and to them as verbally preached in the gospel. And
therefore also the ground, end, and use of that ordinance is discovered in the
Doctrinal Preaching of the Cross; whence also the Apostle prefers the Preaching
of the Cross, before that ordinance of baptizing with water, and was glad, he
baptized no more himself, least any should say he baptized in his own name; and
gives this as the reason, why he was so indifferent how few he baptized with
his own hands. For, says he, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel, that is not only, nor so much to baptize; the main business that he
was sent especially to look too, was the preaching of the Gospel. Or thus; He
was not otherwise sent to baptize, then as that is a thing included in the
work, or business of preaching the Gospel as a lighter thing in the work or
service required of them to that purpose, and therefore always so to be used
as may be subservient to the greater -- For (says he) The preaching of the
Cross (That as distinguished from and in some sense opposed to the other
ordinance, as by it self considered, as 1 Peter 3. 21. The baptism that saves
answerably to the figure there alluded to, is not the putting away the filth of
the flesh ( viz.) the outward baptism. But the answer of a good conscience
toward God, which stands in this, that Christ has dyed; yea rather is risen
again, and is on the Right Hand of God, making intercession for us, and through
him God justifies the ungodly, compare with that of Peter, Romans 8. 32, 33,
34. with chap. 4. 5, 2^, 25. and 5, 1, Hebrews 9. 14, and 10. 19, 22. So here,
not baptizing with water, but the preaching of the Cross) is to them that
perish foolishness, but to us that are saved its the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.
14, 18.

So also, there are other appointments for decency and order in assemblings and
observance of ordinances, as to say, men in praying or prophesying to have
their head uncovered, and women to have a covering on the head, as likewise we
find in the Scriptures plentiful directions to the use of reverend gestures, as
kneeling or standing in prayer to God.

Yet about these, or such like things, the Apostle says; We have no such
custom, nor in any of the Churches, as from them, to be contentious, 1
Corinthians 11. 1, 16. That in all things to be contended and earnestly striven
for, is only the faith of the Gospel, Jude 3. Phil. 1. 27. Gal. 2. 5. with
Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. and 9, in. and 10. 23, 23.

So then to seek the Lord regularly, or after the due order, is in all our
seeking chiefly to mind, and be exercised in the great things of Gods law, the
things in which the Kingdom stands; yea even for our understanding and
direction to the usefulness of the lighter matters, as may be subservient to
the greater.

They then sought him not after the due order, that spent their ^eal and laid
the stress of their Religion, in multiplying Altars, Sacrifices, and Washings,
yea in lighter matters, as Tything mint, Annis, Cummin, and regarded not, but
neglected the great things of Gods law, as judgment, mercy, and says* Matthew.
23. 23. judgment, and the love of God, Luke 2. 42. For he desired mercy, and
not Sacrifice, and the knowledge of God rather then Burnt offerings; but they
like men trasgressed the covenant, Israel has forgotten his maker, and
builds Temples, Hosea 6. 5, 6, 7. chap. 8. 11, 12, 14.

In lik manner were they irregular, in all their seeking and worship of God,
who refusing Gods council to run into his name in Christ, as witnessed in the
Law and Prophets as their rest, and as the foundation and key of knowledge unto
all precepts, did esteem, and look upon the great things of his law, contained
in that name witnessed, as strange things to the precepts for their worship, or
as having no relation to them, or influence upon them: And so made the word of
the Lord to themselves, Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line, here a little and
there a little, etc. Isa. 28. 12, 13, 16. Hos. 8. 12. with 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6, 7.

3 To seek the Lord regularly, or in a right way, and so after the due order,
is. To seek him in the preparation, and sanctification of his Sanctuary, with
the whole heart, prepared, engaged, and devoted to him; in the instruction,
encouragement, and acknowledgement of his name, as by his preventing and
following grace therein, bringing salvation, they are taught, moved, and
strengthened.

1 In the light, teaching, and instruction of his name; to look unto and seek
him in Christ, according to his will therein declared ( viz.) for such things,
and in such manner, as we are instructed by the Spirit (in that testimony of
Christ and Gods name in him) for so he helps our infirmities; thereby
teaching, and instructing us.

To seek with earnestness, fervency, and violence, the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness; Those things which God has certainly treasured up for us in
Christ and promised to give unto us with him, as wisdom in the knowledge of
him, strength to receive, and abide in him. And so all things pertaining to
life, and godliness through the knowledge of him; these things to be sought in
him, with such earnestness, fervency, and holy boldness, and confidence,
without wavering, wrath, or doubting, as certainly knowing that God has
treasured them up in Christ for us, and that he will freely give them with him
to us, and that it is his good and acceptable will, that we should be made
partakers of them in and through him; for he made him that knew no sin, to be
sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, and has
made the witnesses of his goodness through him; especially his glorious Gospel,
his arm, or power to save us; to open our eyes, and turn us from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God, that also in turning we might
through it receive the forgiveness of our sins and inheritance among them, that
are sanctified by faith that is in Jesus, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Acts 5. 31. and 20. 32.
and 26. 17, 18. Therefore these things so to be sought, in all our seekings, 1 Timothy 2. 8. Jam. 1. 5, 6. Prove. 2. 1, 6. and 4, 5, 7. Matthew. 7. 7, 8. Ephesians. 1.
17, 18, etc. and 3. 13, 17, etc Psalm. 32. 6.

And so with some degree of that earnestness, and fervency of spirit to seek
and beg of God such blessings of this life; as by the light of his testimony we
may know, do most conduce unto life and godliness for our selves and others, as
the peace, good, and prosperity of Jerusalem, Psalm 122. The preservation and
increase of a seed of faithful laborers to serve him in the world, that such
may not fail from among men, but more of them be raised up, and thrust forth
into his harvest, Matthew. 9. 37, 38.

In like manner the pardoning the iniquities, and healing the diseases, that
procures such judgments as the cutting off such in the midst of their days, or
in the midst of their work, and the healing and restoring such, when there
being so cut off is threatened; these things may be sought and prayed for with
more fervency and earnestness, then other blessings pertaining to this life,
for as much as we know by the light of his testimony, they tend more especially
and directly to the promoting the things of Christ, and so the good of others
in the world: And that therefore its Gods good and acceptable will ^o lade us
wi^h such benefits, and one of the special fruits of the mediation of Christ to
preserve such, and procure the continuance of them; and a great judgment to
have such so cut off, and failing from us, and such as to which he is not
willingly provoked, nor till by great iniquities and much stubborness in them,
and when so, is yet ready to repent of the evils framed against us on our
turning to him that smites, yea ready to prepare our heart, and to cause his
ear to hear. And the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much
unto it: See James 5. 13, 16, etc. with Isa. 45. 11. Romans 15. 30, 31. Phil. 1.
19, 24, 27, and 2, 25, 28.

So likewise for the saving or granting life of sparing unto such, especially
of our brethren in any peculiar sense as we see have sinned, even to the
procuring a speedy cutting off in their iniquities, while yet we see it not
finished unto death, we are to seek and pray for sparing mercies for such, with
a degree of that earnestness and fervency forementioned, that yet they may
have space and opportunity to repent, and seek him while he may be found; and
God shall give us life of sparing, to a farther gracious end, for them that sin
not unto death, compare 1 John 5. 14, 16. with James 5. 15. 16. See also Luke
23. 34. Acts 7. 40. Romans 9. 1, 2, and 10, 1. with Psalm 35. 13, 14.

And for other things pertaining to this life, concerning which we know not by
the light of his testimony, whether this or that may be best for us, or for
others, or most conducing unto life and godliness: Even so without carefulness,
earnestness, or fervency for this or that, to present our needs, wants,
affliction, case and matters to him, and leave it with him, waiting and seeking
for his good will to be done, and that however he deal with us, he will not
correct us in anger; that we may earnestly beg of him, as Psalm 38. 1. and 6.
1. Jeremiah 10. 24. And so committing our matters wholly to him, without a will
or fervent spirit, for this or that, of all such things as before, that he may
add and dispose to us what is good before him, Phillippians 4. 5, 6. Matthew 6.
32, 33. with James 4. 13, 15.

2 In the encouragement and strength of his name, always retaining in the midst
of the heart the believing remembrance and consideration of that which he has
already done for us, in not sparing his own Son, but delivering him up for us
all, when we were yet sinners, enemies, and without strength, and of the
plenteous redemption in him through his blood, not forgetting all his benefits
through that precious sacrifice of the body of Christ once for all, and the
powerful mediation of the sacrifice^ (who is the Great Apostle and High Priest
of our profession) bestowed upon us. But calling them to mind, and considering
how they lead into that good name, and commend to us that unspeakable gift, and
the infinite grace in and through it; there seeking our strength and
encouragement, and thereby engaging our hearts to approach to him and seek his
f^ce for such things, and in such wise as is according to his will therein
declared (as aforesaid.) And so waiting and staying on his name because it is
good, yea even when by any trials or difficulties that befall us, we are in
darkness, and see no light, yet staying upon that and trusting in him according
to it, till he make that in every such case a light to us, and give us to
behold his righteousness according to it, with hearty submission to his
Government, though sometimes he makes us to wait for that: Always
relinquishing all other lights, rejoycings, and encouragements, that may offer
themselves from sparks of our own kindling, or from any private grounds to come
in that only, and as that ingageth and incourageth; So, in and unto all our
seekings, and striving for the faith of the Gospel; standing fast in that one
spirit, that is in the testimony of Jesus, seeking our strength in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, even in the grace that is in Christ Jesus, as
revealed in the glorious Gospel, and going in that strength of the Lord God,
making mention of his righteousness, (as our support, encouragement, and stay.)
And of his only, Psalm 71. 16, and 4, 1, and 50, 14, 15, and 52, 9, and 95, 1,
7, and 100, and 103. 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 8. Isa. 50. 10, 11. with
Mich. 7. 7, 8, 9. Isaiah 26. 3. with Philippians 4. 6. and 3. 3, Romans 5. 1,
11.

And so in the strength and encouragement of that grace and name of God in
Christ, to persuade others to be reconciled to God, in the publishing his name;
because God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them, and has given us that word of reconciliation, instructing,
moving, and strengthening to such in deavouring the good of others in hope:
There seeking our strength and encouragement (and not in any of our gifts,
parts, or excellencies) to the Discipling the Nations, baptizing them in his
name, and going in that might according to our capacity, because all power is
given to him, as Lord and Savior, and by him the word of his Grace made able
(especially in the faithful ministration of it) to give them repentance and
the forgiveness of sins.

Likewise to suffer the little children to come to him, and receive them in his
name; because of such is the Kingdom, Mark 10. 14. with chap. 9. 37.

And on that ground, and in that encouragement, instructing others according to
their capacity, to rejoice with his people, pray to him, and seek him while he
may be found, and call on him while he is near, observing what Christ commanded
his Apostles, Proverbs 9. 1, 6. Isaiah 55. 1, 6. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 21. Matthew 28.
18, 20. Romans 15. 6, 12.

And whatever we do in word or in deed; do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God and the Father by him, Col. 3. 17.

3 In, and with a hearty confession, and acknowledgement of his name, and of
the goodness and truth of it, in all that it says, so as therein acknowledging
our own vileness and sins, and knowing every one the Plague of our own heart,
as by the light and instructions of his name discovered, and reproved, or by
his corrections (according to the instructions of his name), witnessed against.
Confessing our faults to him, and one to another, as discovered and reproved,
that so he may be justified in his sayings and proceedings, and glory given to
his name by us, as 1 Kings 8. 33, 35, 38, 46, 48. James 5. 16. Psalm. 32. 5, and
51, 5. Jer. 13. 15, 18.

And in such wise seeking pardon and healing in his name, willingly giving up
to him, and laying apart in the light and strength of his gracious reproofs,
what ever secret purpose, idol, or way of iniquity, he discovers and reproves;
not secretly hiding it under our Tongue or in our Heart, that we may still hold
it, and find pleasure in it, even while yet we are praying to him for help, and
healing of the breaches, or evils procured to us by it, nor shunning the light,
least some secret deeds and ways of our own heart, which we love should be
detected by it, but coming to the light, giving earnest heed to the
instructions of his name, and searching and trying our ways thereby, that we
may yet be taught to see, what we see not, as Job 34. 31, 32. Psalm 19. 11, 12,
etc. and 139. 23, 24. Lam. 3. 39, 40, etc. Jam. 1. 21, 25.

Our unwillingness to see, and confess our fins, our secret designs and
purposes for vain things that cannot profit us, our loathness to acknowledge or
be made sensible of our idolatry, and let go our idols hinder us from knowing
and proving what is the good and acceptable will of the Lord, Romans 12. 1, 2,
3. from reaping the peaceable fruit of his righteousness, by his chastisements,
Hebrews 12. 11, 15, 16. from gracious returns of prayers, and from beholding
the light of his countenance, and so from victory over our iniquities, and the
evil of our temptations, Isaiah 1 10, 18. Psalm 32. 3, 4. Yea the secret and
wilful retaining diverse lusts, disables from so coming to the knowledge of the
truth, that we might be saved by it, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.

Therefore says James, we have not, because we ask not, or we ask and receive
not, because we ask amiss, to consume it upon our lust, or still secretly
retain the purpose, desire, or idol of iniquity in the heart, whence he thus
admonishes: Submit, resign, or yield up your selves to God; Resist the Devil,
and he will flee from you; draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you;
Cleanse your hands ye sinners, purify your hearts ye double minded, etc. James
4. Oh! That yet we were willing so to discern, diligently to look into and
consider the Lords body, as to examine our selves, search and try our ways in
that glass, and to see what we see not, and judge our selves as there
discovered and reproved, as we are instructed, 1 Cor 11. 28, 31. Yea so to
remember him in all his ways, as to acknowledge him in all our ways, not
leaning to our own thoughts or understanding. But as those that call on the
father, who without respect of persons judges according to every man's work, to
pass the time of our sojourning here in fear. The good Lord would yet be
merciful, and pardon, and heal us, though yet we be not sanctified after the
sanctification of his sanctuary, were we but willing in the light and strength
of his grace and name in Christ, so to prepare our hearts, or suffer him to
prepare and fix them to him, that the iniquities and idols might be discovered,
and the purpose or desire to hide, and hold them fast, broken, and we made
willing to see, and part with them for the excellency of the knowledge of him;
for he does not only always prevent with his abundant grace in Christ to
humble, but will also prepare the heart of the hamble, and cause his ear to
hear, Psalm 10. 17. Isaiah 1. 16, 19. 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19. James 4. 6, 10.

Thus have his servants the Prophets that have spoken to us in the Name of the
Lord, in all their earnest and diligent inquiries after God, and for
understanding the visions of the times, and the things that in both parts of
them, as to the actual accomplishment and bringing forth of them, were then yet
to come, namely the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow.
Humbled themselves to the searching ou^, and being sensible of, and
acknowledging their iniquities, and the iniquities of their people, as
discovered in the instructions of his name, and written upon the rod; See Ezra
9. 6. to the end, 10, 1. Neh. 1. 6, 7, and 9. tot. Psalm 32. 5, and 38, and 39.
Isa. 64. 5, 9. Dan. 9. 3. 20.

And thus they have instructed us in the way, not to be as the Horse, or Male,
etc* Psalm 32. 8. But to search and try our ways, and turn to the Lord, to
examine and judge our selves in the true light, to humble our selves in the
sight of the Lord, and under his mighty hand.

And surely such walking humbly, and mournfully before him in the sense of our
own vileness, and searching out, and giving up our iniquities and Idols, in
the light and power of Gods name in Christ, is found in the right worshipping,
in which the father is worshipped in spirit, and truth in the light of the
Spirits testimony given of Christ, and so in Christ the truth.

Yea, the way, the truth, and the life; that rejoicing in and giving glory unto
Christ Jesus, in which the father is truly honored and worshipped in the
spirit, has always in it, and is it self found in a ta^king shame to our
selves, and relinquishing all rejoicing in the flesh, that no flesh may glory
in his presence, Philipians 3. 3.

4. I might here add, in this seeking him after the due Order, as to the manner
of our seeking; that there is in it a joining and cleaving together in his
name, and so seeking and striving together for the faith of the Gospel, even in
the Unity of the spirit, with them that call on his Name in truth, that worship
him in Christ according to the Gospel.

The persons with whom we may, and are to join, dwell, and walk in the Unity of
the spirit, and so together with whom we are to be followers of the Apostles,
they are such as walk as they have the Apostles for an example, Philippians 3.
17, 20, 21. And we are diligently to mark, know, and distinguish them, by
considering the end of their conversation. (Compare this to the Philippians,
with Hebrews 13. 7, 8, 9.)

For there are many other walkers, zealous pretenders to godliness,
mortification, holiness, that have also much of the form, or outward appearance
of it in many things, who yet are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, the very
end of their conversation (though privily carried on under a fair show of
mortification and holiness, with good words and fair speeches to deceive the
simple) is to deny the Lord that bought them.

To destroy or cast down him from his excellency, to render him undesireable,
and to corrupt believers from the simplicity of him: And the thing thereto
worshipped, adhered to, and magnified by them, is their own Belly, their own,
or some private Spirit, experiments, works, mortifications, sufferings, and the
like, instead of the person of Christ, and the works finished in his body, and
the grace treasured up and hope set before us in him, for this life, and that
to come, as evidenced by the spirit of truth, in his testimony given of Christ:
They glory in their shame, mind earthly things, things suited to sense; and in
which they have their portion in this life.

But as for me (says David) I will behold thy face in righteousness (even in
Christ the true light and manifestation of the righteousness and glory of God,
and so in the great and precious promises confi^med in him.) For here we walk
by faith, that is the evidence of things not seen, the confidence of things
hoped for; and not by sight.) When I awake (says he) namely in the morning of
the resurrection of the just by Christ at his coming, then I shall be
satisfied with thine image ( Psalm 17. 15. with 2 Cor. 4. 17. 18. and 5, 1, 7,
9. Hebrews 11. 1. Romans 8. 23, 24. So here the Apostles conversation, and so
theirs that walk as they have them for an example, is in Heaven, exercised in
and about the treasure they have there in the person of Christ, with God and
the expectation they have in him, as now appearing in the glorious presence of
God in the Heaven it self for them, from whence also they look for the same
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ to come in the glory of his Father, which he now
possesses in heaven with the father for us, and to restore all things, and
then to fashion their vile bodies unto the likeness of his glorious body.

And so the end of their conversation is Jesus Christ: The same, Yesterday, and
to Day, and for ever, as also before is showed, the thing they aim at and
strive for in all their seekings, and in which they seek righteousness and
strength, is the faith of the Gospel: yea these are the true circumcision,
persons truly redeemed, separated, and devoted from men, and from their vain
conversation unto God, the Israel of God, that are so redeemed and congregated
to him, by the precious blood of Christ discovered in the Gospel, and the grace
of God therein commended, who also have their rejoicing in Christ Jesus,
relinquishing for the excellency of the knowledge of him all confidence or
rejoicing in the flesh, Phil. 33. etc. with Acts 20. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 18. etc.
Romans 5. 1, 11.

The other sorts of walkers such as before mentioned, for they are many, and
under many forms, are so to be marked by us, as to be distinguished from the
true brethren, and to be avoided and turned from as strangers, Proverbs 5. 1.
8. and 14. 7. and 19. 27. John 1^. 5. Romans 16. 17, 18. 2 Timothy 2. 17, 21.
and 3. 1, 5. But with these, all or any of these worshippers in the spirit,
that have their rejoicing in Christ Jesus, so as for the excellency of the
knowledge of him, relinquishing fleshly confidences that call on him out of a
pure heart, as 2 Timothy 2. 22.

A spirit fixed and purified from double mindedness, (as to the spirit of the
mind at least) to seek righteousness and strength in Jesus, having their hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience with the blood of Christ, and therein set to
seek all things pertaining to life and godliness there. With these, I say,
whatever differences in lighter matters, or shortness in seize, or
infirmities may be found with any of them and discerned by us, yet we are to
dwell and walk together with such, as we have opportunity, as brethren and
fellow laborers, or helpers in our combat, Strift or warfare.

The Unity of the Spirit to be endeavored to be kept with such, and so in
which such are to dwell and walk together in their seeking the Lord, and
striving for the faith of the Gospel. Has in it

1. Union of love, such as in which they love one another, with such peculiar
manner of love, as with which they are beloved of God, which is such, as in
which they are called Sons, accepted in Christ as found in him, delighted in,
and chosen to peculiar favor and fellowship, so the love wherewith they are to
love one another, is such as wherewith they are not to love others; That are
yet of the world, or are gone out again from them into the world, as is
signified, 1 John 4. 1, 7. Yea such as in which they are to love as brethren
beloved of God, 1 Peter 4. 8. with 1 Thessalonians 1. 4. Colosians 1. 4. To
esteem, receive, and own another, as brethren in a peculiar sense, even of one
and the same body, and heirs together of the grace of life, as they have been
all baptized, or washed from the errors and pollutions of the world, into the
faith and acknowledgement of that one body of Christ; (that was broken for us
and through sufferings perfected, and offered once for all, and now glorified
with the father for us) and so united by faith unto it, and to one another in
it, even as they are called in one hope of their calling, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13.
Ephesians. 4. 4. with chap. 5. 30. even so they are to love as brethren, and heirs
together of the same inheritance, and on the same account, and terms as members
of the same body to be so respected, cared for, and delighted in for fellowship
in the Gospel. And so also to be more abundantly pitied and tendered in their
infirmities, and afflictions, and the covering of infirmities, bearing
burdens, and healing diseases, to be sought with more abundant diligence, and
as our own in a peculiar sense more then others, to whom yet that love of pity
and compassion is to be extended, even as God, that is so abundantly gracious
to all in his great love of pity and compassion, wherewith he loves them in
and through Christ, when they are yet dead in sins and trespasses, and so not
peculiarly beloved by him with that manner of love, in which he receives,
delights in, and takes pleasure in persons; is yet more abundantly rich in that
his tender mercy, pity, and compassion, unto them that call on him in truth,
that come to him by Christ, whom also he accepts, receives, and takes
pleasure in them, as they are found in Christ, Psa^^^ 103. 11, 13. and 145, 8,
18, 19. Romans 10. 12. with 1 Peter 3. 8* Col. 3. 9, 13.

This love is to be the same and indifferent to them, as they are Christ's in
that peculiar sense, without partiality or respect of persons, as they are rich
or poor, bond or free. And without dissimulation, or hypocrisy, to be in them
one to another not so much in word or tongue, as in deed and truth.

It Is indeed too general an evil, to lay so much of the stress of Religion in
that loving which is in word and in tongue, as in familiar calling Brother and
Sister, and the like, that the loving indeed, and in truth as brethren, is
neglected and forgotten, as if all stood in word and tongue.

2 Union of mind, and design, as of one heart and soul, being made to drink
into that one Spirit that testifies of Christ, instructing, and framing to like
mindedness with him, each minding and seeking the things which be Jesus
Christ's, and so the things and good of one another, without guile, hypocrisy,
or partiallity, yea with a neglect of themselves, their own ends, interests,
and things as distinct from these, not regarding their own life, that they may
earnestly follow, mind, and promote the one thing needful. As we read of
multitudes of men expert in War, and that could keep Rank that were not of
double heart, but all perfect hatred, yea of one heart, to make David King, 1
Chronicles 12. 33. 38. So also we read of the multitude of them that believed,
Acts 4. 32. Being of one heart and of one soul, as likewise Acts 2. 46. This
that prayed for John 17. 20, 23. and instructed too, Philippians 2. 1, 5, 20,
29. and 4, 2.

And indeed there cannot be that one-ness, or sameness of mind, any other way
but in the Lord meeting together there; each to mind and seek the things which
be Jesus Christ's with a neglect, each of their own: For if each be seeking
their own interests or things, there can be no perfect joining of them
together, because their particular interests, or things will clash one with
another, in something or other.

3 Union of way for promoting this design, working, and walking together in the
same work and way of the Lord, speaking, or doing nothing through strife or
vain glory, but truthing it in love so as seeking and striving to walk
together, in setting forth, commending, cleaving to, and leading others unto,
the same one Lord, and so the one faith and the one baptism, that is of and by
him, and the glory of God as shined forth in his face, unto, and for all
things, and in teaching all things therewith. Seeking I say to walk, together
in this way of understanding, in their several gifts, administrations,
operations, etc. studying and striving each of them, and together in the light
and strength of the Lord to speak the same thing, and to be perfectly joined
together in one mind and one judgment, that there be no divisions, etc. (1 Cor.
1. 10. and chap. 12. 6, 12. with Ephesians. 4. 1. 15.) And so

4 Union of accord and agreement, such as in which all things by each one are
sought to be done in charity, and with the advice, consent, prayers, and
helpfulness of their brethren in the faith and patience of Jesus, that they may
be blessed out of the house of the Lord, and grow by that which every joint
supplyeth; and to that purpose the younger submitting to the elder, and all of
them one to another in the fear of God. And so there is in it.

5 An union of fellowship one wi^h another, and that in personal society and
companionship, for fellowship in the Gospel, and ordinances thereof, for
acquainting our selves with the joys and griefs of one another, for stirring up
and exhorting to love and good works, not forsaking the assembling of themselves
together, as the manner of some is, who are sensual not retaining the spirit.
This of personal society with them, that call on him out of a pure heart, is to
be prized and embraced, as one of the choicest outward mercies, and blessings
of this life, and of greatest advantage to the one thing needful and to be
striven for in all our seekings; namely, the faith of the Gospel, and therefore
the opportunities God gives for it, with diligence to be apprehended and
improved: See Psalm 84. and 122. Acts 2. 42. 46. Hebrews 10. 23, 24, 25. with
chapter 3. 12, 13.

And in communicating on with another by and diligent improving the helpfulness
that we may enjoy from such persons (as aforesaid) by that means, when
personal converse or society with them cannot be enjoyed: Till I come (says
the Apostle) to Timothy, give attention to reading, etc. Signisying, That when
the Apostle should be personally present with him, it might be of more use and
advantage to Timothy to apply himself to personal converse with him, and to
attend to what he might personally hear and receive from him; But when
opportunity for that is denied, the reading, searching, and studdy of the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, and so the reading and considering the
writings of such as have that lap of knowledge forementioned, the Word of God,
and testimony of Jesus, and searching the Scriptures of truth, whether those
things be so, and in such wise attending to those helps to our understanding
and usefulness of the Scriptures, and great things of Gods love con^ained in
them, that we may enjoy from such persons, is in the next place of great
advantage and usefulness to the promoting these our main affairs: Only here be
we admonished by the words of the wise, given forth from one Shepherd; That as
no man can gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figgs of Thistles; so neither can we
expect to reap any good fruit or advantage, but loss and pollution, to the
corruping our minds and manners from evil communication, or the communication
about the things of God from evil persons, or such as love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, nor have that lip of knowledge, that word of reconciliation in their
hearts, or mouths, or in some measure having it, yet are not so subdued by it
to let fall their imaginations and high thoughts of comprehending and making
out those things of the testimony of God by the wisdom of man, or of this
World, and by the words which man's wisdom teache^h, not willing to become
Fools in themselves, that they may have all their wisdom and strength in that
evidence and demonstration of the Spirit that is in the testimony of Jesus.

The discourses or writings of such, even of such as the last, though they the
best and most to be respected of the several sorts mentioned, because they have
in some measure the testimony of God, though not subdued by it, they seek to
comprehend and declare it by man's wisdom or words, (as 1 Corinthians 1. 17.
and 2. 1. 4. and 3. 18, 19, 20. 1 Timothy 6. 21.) which makes that even such
helps of either sort, are little helpful to those that through Grace have
believed, or to the convincing the ignorant and gainsayers, because they make
it not their business, nor does their excellency lie there, plainly to show and
demonstrate by the Scriptures Jesus the Christ, and so other things in that
demonstration of him by the Scriptures, and so leave it on men's Consciences as
his word and in his name: But rather to show and demonstrate those things by
strength of reason or excellency of wisdom and of words which man's wisdom
teaches. (Compare the forementioned Scriptures with Acts 18. 27, 28.) Those
seeming helps may occasion to us much bodily exercise, and such kind of study
as is a wearisomness to the flesh; but the profit gained by them is but little,
and for a little while.

And if time were spared from such discourses and readings as in which chiefly
the excellency of wisdom and of words is showed in declaring and for
demonstrating and making out the testimony of God, we might have more to spend
better, and in more free and diligent attention to those helps, that might be
indeed helps and profitable to us.

But how much more, are we to go from the presence of such soolish men as have
not the lip of knowledge, so soon as we perceive it, to cease to hear the
instruction that causes to err from the words of knowledge; because not only
they are in themselves polluting, but also that with more diligence and
earnestness we may continue together in the Apostles Doctrine, and sellowship
striving together for the faith of the Gospel, that in nothing we may be
terrified by our adversaries.

When the wicked did gather together in bands, and were therein more powerful
to do mischief, to rob, and rend from David; he then resolves to be a companion
of all those that fear the Lord, and of those that in their fear, or worship
keep his way, his precepts; as of great advantage to strengthen him against the
bands of the wicked, Psalm. 119. 61, 63.

So in the latter days when there are of those many sorts of walkers, who are
enemies to the Cross of Christ, the power of godliness, that creep into houses,
or gather into companies and societies, like the Churches of Christ. Then such
as Timothy are advised with more diligence to follow their work and design
together with them that call on him out of a pure heart, 2 Timothy 2. 22. with
chap. 3. 1. 6. And all of us to be followers together of the Apostles, and mark
them which walk so as they have them for an example, considering the end of
their conversation. (as aforesaid) and so knowing and owning them for our
companions to strive together with ( Phil. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. with chap. 1.
27, 28. and 2. 1. 6. etc.) And that in all our acts of seeking, and striving
for the faith of the Gospel, in all our hearing, speaking, doing, suffering;
yea in our prayers to God, as Romans 15. 30. with Ephesians 6. 18. Acts 1. 14.
and 12. 12.

See the many instructions and earnest entreaties and exhortations to this
seeking and striving together, in the Scriptures already mentioned and in
diverse others.

Surely a good and pleasant thing is this unity of the Spirit, and the
generation of seekers dwelling together in it: For there the Lord has
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore: Where ever two or three are
gathered together in his name, there is he in the midst of them, rendering them
comely as Jerusalem, that is compact together, and terrible as an Army with
Banners, Psam 103 Cant. 6. 4. Mat. 18. 20.

This last branch of order in the manner of our seeking is fitly added to the
latter part of the former branch: For only by Pride comes Contention,
Envying, and Strife; And then follows confusion and every evil work, Proverbs
13. 10. James 3. 13. 16. and 4. 1, 6, 10.

Therefore our Savior thus joins them in his instruction and exhortation, Mark
9. 50. Have Salt in your selves, have peace one with another: Meaning by Salt
the humbling instructions of the Gospel and the reproofs of instruction, and
signifying that the retaining them, and suffering their effecacy each of us on
our Spirits, is the way to have peace one with another; hence also the Apostle
instructs with all lowliness of mind, to endeavor to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, for there can be no union, or perfect joining
together without suffering the desires of vain glory to be subdued, and our
selves to be broken off from our own purpose and desire, in which we are each
minding and seeking his own things, nor will there be any right submission of
the younger to the elder, nor of all of us one to another, in the fear of the
Lord, without being clothed with humility, in the hearty acknowledgement of
his glorious name, Ephesians 4. 2, 3, etc. Philipians 2. 2, 3, 4, 7, 20, 21. 1
Peter 5. 5, 6.

According to these last considerations of the due order in the manner of our
seeking, after which the Lord is to be sought by us. They seek him not after
the due order, that are not gathered together to him in his name, and so
seeking him in the instruction, encouragement, and acknowledgement of it, and
in the unity of the Spirit in it; or thus:

They that worship not in the spirit, in the light, teaching, and instruction
of that one spirit, that is in and with the testimony of Jesus, taking of his
things and showing them, and so teaching all things and leading into all truth.
For as this is the spirit of prophecy, so also of faith, and of grace, and
supplication, in which all the true worshippers worship God, Rev. 19. 10.

They therefore worship not aright, that worship not in the spirit, and so that
have not their rejoicing in Christ Jesus, who is the truth with a relinquishing
and free giving up all Idols and rejoycings in the flesh, for the excellency of
the knowledge of him, John 4. 23, 24. Phil. 3. 3. Particularly thus.

1. They that run not into that name of Christ, in which is the evidence and
demonstration of the spirit with power for their light and instruction what to
seek for in him, and from him, and how to seek, but adhere to their own or some
private spirit for that which will instruct and lead, to seek and wait for in
him, or from him, such things as God has not put in him for us, and therefore
not promised to give with him to us, as some such private assurances or
speakings of peace, and liftings up, as are more suited to the sensual mind,
and may a little gratify the flesh that desires ease or liberty, or like
things, which instructions cause to err from the words of Knowledge; and
therefore neither can they stay upon or rest satisfied with the encouragement
and strength which that spirit in the name of the Lord Jesus gives, to seek
him, to hope in, and wait upon him, and so not with that rejoicing which is
only in Christ Jesus because that gives no encouragement or strength to seek
hope, or wait for such things in him, or from him, or to seek in such a way as
by their own or some private spirit, light, word, or spark of their own
kindling they are led to. They therefore run to such sparks for light, and
heat, and for a time may walk in the light of them; stolen waters are sweet,
and bread eaten in secret places is pleasant. But from all those sparks and
rejoycings in them, they must lie down in sorrow: Nor can these persons while
wilfully walking in this way, heartily acknowledge his name, or give glory to
it, in submitting, and falling down under the discoveries and reproofs of its
instruction, because their deeds are evil. Their principal works and ways are
so contrary to it and reproved by it, nor can they be heartily united with
those that fear his name, and worship him in truth. And truly, any branches or
rellicks of that way of iniquity abovementioned will have answerable like
effects of confusion and disorder upon those that retain and walk in them.

2. Nor are they seeking after the due order, that though in some good measure
right as to the first branch: That is, as to the things they seek and look for
in him, and from him seeking according to his will; yet are not content with
that ground of encouragement and way of approach, that is only in and through
his blood and powerful mediation with it, and therefore instead of attending
principally to seek farther assurance of understanding in that, that their
hearts might be comforted and strengthened therein, are even seeking, peeping
into corners, and waiting for some other private encouragement or ground of
assurance, in which to seek, expect, and wait for his righteousness in
perfecting what concerns them, and so unsatisfifyed, if they cannot gather up
or kindle something of that nature, as if they were without hope in the World,
as if all that ever God has done for them in his Son and for and to them
through him, were nothing to assure them of the truth of his love and
faithfulness, for the carrying on his work in what remains, in giving with his
Son whatever is needful to the finishing his work unto the Day of Christ: And
therefore seeking at least to perfect that hope, confidence, rejoicing, and
strength to wait, which was begun by the Spirit in and through the Testimony of
Jesus, seeking to perfect it by the flesh, or according to its wisdom or
desire, and not waiting through the spirit for the hope of righteousness of
faith.

3 Nor yet are they seeking the Lord after the due Order, who though in some
measure coming in this encouragement and name, having their boldness by the
blood of Jesus, to approach by that new, and living way consecrated through his
flesh, yet are not found so drawing near with a true heart, as in that full
assurance of faith, they are instructed and strengthened, Hebrews 10. 19. 22.
James 4. 8. But still secretly hideing, retaining, or regarding some way of
iniquity or Idol discovered and reproved.

If any man of the house of Israel do so, God will answer them according to
their Idols, Ezekiel 14. 4, 5. If David do so God will not hear him, Psalm 66.
18. Yea whosoever hides his sin shall not prosper; but he that confesses and
forsakes, finds mercy, Proverbs 28. 13. Psalm 32. 3, 4, 5.

Yea this hiding of our sin, and secret holding fast any deceit, unwillingness
to be made sencible of it, and have it discovered and purged, it hinders of
profitable and orderly fellowship one with another, and so of the advantage and
benefit of that, and to be met with in that way for cleansing us from all
unrighteousness.

See 1 John 1. 7. 9. Comparing the Verses we shall find,

That walking in the Light as he is in the Light, has in it a confession of
our sins in the belief and acknowledgement of his Name in Christ, the true
light, as he is in the Revelation and opening of it, discovering and reproving
them.

And that this is the way to have hearty and profitable fellowship one with
another, and so to enjoy together those special influences of the virtues of
his Blood, cleansing us from all unrighteousness. Yea,

4. The want or wilful neglect of this last, viz. fellowship together in the
Gospel, is disorder enough to fill us with confusion, and make all our seekings
unprofitable.

If we should think to seek the Lord with a full Spirit, in the instruction,
encouragement, and acknowledgement of his name in truth, and yet forsake the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of too many is, or neglect the
advantages we might have, in the fellowship and help of our brethren out of an
imagination, that we stand no need of such help, or can receive no increase by,
or through them, or are able to stand alone and manage our affairs in the
Gospel that concern our selves, and other as well of our selves, and without
such advice and help of brethren, as we might enjoy, and can, or may as well
understand the wondrous things of Gods law contained in the Scriptures by our
selves, as together with the the helpfulness of our brethren, that are one with
us in the faith and patience of Jesus.

If (I say) we should any of us entertain and listen to any such vain thoughts,
we deceive our selves: For two is better then one, because they have a good
reward for their labor; if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: Bnt woe
to him that is alone, etc.

Again, If two lie together, there is heat; But how can one be warm alone? And
if one prevail against him, two shall with-stand him; and a three fold Cord is
not easily broken, Eccles. 4. 9. 12. For where two or three are gathered
together in his Name, there is he in the midst of them, Matthew 18. 20.

And God has so set the members in the Body, that the chief, strongest, or
most eminent, cannot say to the more feeble or inferior oves, I have no need
of you, that there should be no Scisme in the Body, but that the members should
have the same care one for another, and that the whole body being fitly joined
and compact together from him, who is the head even Christ might by that which
every joint supplyeth according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, make increase unto the edifying of it self in love, 1 Cor. 12. 12.
25. Ephesians. 4. 7. 15, 16.

We shall here add a word or two by way of particular application to our
selves, of what has been hitherto spoken to this point.

That the Lord has made a sad and very grievous breach upon us we have seen
before, and now have taken a view of some of those ways of iniquity, that are
the procuring causes of such judgments as they are expressed in this
acknowledgement; For that we sought him not after the due order.

Let us then search and try our ways, desiring God to teach us what we see
not, and make us willing to be sensible wherein we our selves have been, and
are polluted with any of these ways of iniquity, which indeed are such crooked
paths, as in which who so walks, shall know no peace.

What I shall say in this application, I shall rank under these three heads.

I Has not such folly and iniquity been found too generally with us? As when a
price has been put in our hands to get wisdom, we have had no heart to prefer
and prize it according to the nature and worth of it, to accept and improve it
with earnestness and diligence to the end for which it was put in our hands,
even to the provoking the Lord to take away what we had, because in having we
had it not. And who can say, his heart is clean? How have we foolishly
preferred things of least concernment? Yea, even for lying vanities, the
appearing beauty of which we have observed, and let our eyes fly upon, have we
not even for them by such observing them, neglected, despised, and forsaken our
own mercies? Yea even such as to whom, the speaking of God by his Son, through
the ministration of this, and other his servants, has been as a pleasant Song.

Yet have not they, even while with their mouth they have showed much love; let
their heart run after their covetousness, pleasures, and other lusts: And even
loved, and preferred the praise of men, before the praise of God. Yea though
Gospel convictions have been many times on our spirits, yet how have we shunned
the light? Because our deeds were reproved by it, smothering the truth of God
in unrighteousness, choking the saving effecacy of it in our hearts, with the
deceitfulness of riches, the cares of this life, and the lusts of other things,
till we have (it is to be feared) many of us hardened our hearts to a hating
instruction, despising, reproof, not obeying the voice of our teachers, nor
inclining our ear to them that instructed us.

Yea even to a secret murmuring and indignation against them, because they
testified concerning us, that our works were evil, though they did it in
bearing witness to his infinite grace in Christ, for, and toward us.

It was one of the greatest griefs, and burchens on the Spirit of this Servant
of the Lord, much complained of by him, toward his end, That he had preached
the Gospel of Jesus Christ in this place, till it was made a reproach and
derision to him, till it was even snuffed at, and become contemptible, a
burden; yea a Savor of Death to them that sometime had heard it with
gladness, and rejoiced in it.

2 If we look farther, even upon the generality of those that have a great zeal
of God, and pretend to be earnest seekers and worshippers of him in these parts
where this light shined, yea even among those that were willing for a season to
rejoice in his light, as John 5. 33. 35.

Yet how few seeking the Lord after the due order? But first seeking to frame
their hearts unto, and do something for God, that thence they may conclude, God
has a gracious affection toward, and has done great things for them in
Christ. First seeking to know their love to him, that from thence they may
conclude his love to them: First seeking to know, or rather guess, or imagine
their election, before they will know or believe Christ's death for them, yea
that they may gather the knowledge of that from the other. And being so
fundamentally out of order, The Vision of all, is become to them as a sealed
book.

The great things of his Law a strange thing, having no understanding or
persuasion of the truth of it, they can have no usefulness of it, as to any of
their worship, but their fear toward him is taught by the precepts of men,
according to which they prefer, and lay the stress of their Religion, in the
lighter matters, yea in the ordinances of men, such as Tonch not, Taste not,
Handle not; neglecting the weighty matters of the Law, as Judgment, Mercy, and
Faith. Yea, how is the foundation and head of the corner laid aside by the
chief builders, and teachers that they heap up to themselves?

May not this complaint be taken up, of the generallity of those that profess
them selves the Churches of Christ, and are called by his name, and gathered
into societies, and pretended order: (Though it may be feared of the greatest
part of them, not by him, not entering by the door, but climbing up, or creeping
in some other way into such houses or societies, as the Apostle fore-tells us,
such shall do in the latter days, as under a form of godliness privily deny
the power of it, the Gross of Christ, the Lord that bought them. I say, may not
this complaint be taken up of the generality of them.) That take away but their
disorder and irregularness, and what will be left them of all their Religions,
or of all their fear, or worship toward God.

Its to be feared of the greatest part of them, very little, if any thing,
their fear, or worship it self, is little else, but a bundle of confusion and
disorder, their very stock, is a Doctrine of vanity and lies, their root,
rottenness, and confusion (at least in a great part of it) and what then can be
expected in any of the blossoms or branches, as springing from such a root,
but disorder and confusion, like as in the Land of Darkness, where there is no
order, and where their light is as darkness, as has been often bewailed by this
servant of the Lord, concerning many of them among whom he formerly had his
conversation. And with whom, and for whose good he still labored exceedingly,
as he had opportunity, notwithstanding the many discouragements he met with
from them, but God has taken him from the evil.

3 If we go yet farther to take a view of the true worshipers, or such as in
some measure call on him in truth, or at least are more fundamentally in order
then the former. Yet what disorder and confusion has been found with them? Yea
what pollution in their holy things, had they as they have been redeemed from
among men, and gathered together unto him, by the powerful effecacy of his
precious blood discovered: Had they even so, in the light, and power of that
grace cleaved together in his name, and sought the Lord after the due order,
they might have prevented this breach; yea had we yet after the judgment was
devised and framed against us, as a punishment and correction of our disorder.

Had we (I say) yet sought him after the due order in this thing, and so for
the healing and restoring to us this our now deceased Brother. While yet there
was hope, as the taking him away, was along time evidently enough threatened
before finished, to give us opportunity to seek him in due manner while he
might have been found, and entreated by us in that matter. If we would have
judged our selves, surely we should not thus have been judged; had we
diligently in the opportunity (which is now past for that) prepared our selves
to the search and consideration, what is the meaning of the voice in such
judgments threatened, and searched and tried our ways in the true glass, and
with a true heart, that what is halting might be healed.

And so run into his name together, to see what we might have sought for with
servency in such a case as this, and on what ground, and in that instruction
and encouragement sought it of him, or rather sought him in it, (with a hearty
acknowledgement of the evil of our ways and doings, humbling our selves under
his mighty hand lifted up) That he would graciously teach us what we see not,
and make us willing to see and be ashamed of, and give up what is discovered
and reproved, that he would prepare our hearts and cause his ear to hear, that
we might turn from our iniquities and understand his truth, and he might turn
from the evil threatened, and not bring it upon us: Surely this judgment might
have been prevented; God would have repented him of the evil, even when he had
devised and prepared it against us, as Jer. 11. 8. 11. with 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31.

For this shall every one that is godly, every true worshipper of God, that
worship in spirit and truth; yea such true worshippers jointly, and together
standing fast in one Spirit, with one mind or soul, and so in personal
fellowship one with another, as they have opportunity, they shall strive
together in their prayers in a time of finding, even for this, To prepare our
hearts to him, that we may not still hide our iniquity under our tongue, or set
up the Idol of it in our hearts, but heartily acknowledge and confess it unto
him together, and resign it up to him that is ready to pardon and heal: And to
cause his ear to hear, That he may do for us for his Namessake, forgiving the
iniquity of our sin.

Surely in the Floods of great Waters they shall not come nigh him, The Lord
our God would graciously have hidden us from the reproach and shame of our
iniquities, and compassed us about with songs of deliverance, Psalm 32. 5, 6, 7.

For he meets them that rejoice, and work righteousness, and remember him in
his ways, in those is continuance, and we shall be saved. But we are all as an
unclean thing, and our righteousness in so giving glory to him as therein
taking shame to our selves, and hearty confession of our sins in the confession
of his name, and ascribing righteousness to him, is as filthy rags; We all do
fade as a leaf.

If at any time there be any little sense off and humbling under his mighty
hand when lifted up, our goodness as the morning dew early passes away, yea
our iniquities like the Wind has taken us away.

And there is none that calls upon his Name, or stirs up himself to take
hold of him, as we are instructed, Isaiah 27. 5, 6. See chap. 64. 5 7.

Is not this complaint verified among us (I speak it with shame and grief, as
my self with my brethren falling under the reproof of it.) That in all our
cryings and prayings to God, when this evil was already come upon us, in the
sentence of it, and when as yet the finishing of the execution of it might have
been prevented, yet we have not hitherto made our prayer unto God, that we
might turn from our iniquities and understand his truth. Therefore has the
Lord watched for the evil and brought it upon us, for the Lord our God is
righteous in all his works which he does, for we obeyed not his voice, Daniel
9. 13, 14. And because we did it not at the first, Therefore the Lord our God
has made this breach upon us.

And this leads us unto the particular view of those evils bewailed in the
Text, unto which this acknowledgement is here applied; We sought him not after
the due order: That is, they did not this at the first, unto which he had now
instructed and counseled them. It Is here to be noted,

That he directs his council to the chief of the Fathers of the Priests, the
sons of A^^on, and of the Levites, which whole Tribe were separated from the
re^t of the Congregation, and given unto Aaron, and to his sons the Priests, to
Mini^ter unto them, and to keep their charge and the charge of the whole
Congregation, to do the service of the Tabernacle, to keep, and bear the
Vessels of the Lord, and to Minister to, and with the Priests about holy
things, and so with the Priests were devoted unto God, instead of all the first
born of the children of Israel, Numbers 3. 1. 13. 45. etc. and chap. 18. 1. 7.
I say to the chief of the Fathers of them, he directs his council; signifying
that they were especially to keep, and look to the keeping of this charge,
sanctify your selves ye and your brethren, etc. ^o which also agrees 2 Chronicles.
29. tot.

The council he gives, is, To sanctify themselves, they, and their brethren,
that they might bring up the Ark of the Lord God of Israel to the place he had
prepared for it: For because ye did not this at the first, The Lord our God
made a breach upon us.

The evils then for which God made this breach upon them were.

1. That the Priests and Levites did not Sanctify themselves unto, nor keep
their charge, as to bearing the Vessels of the Lord.

2. That the chief of the Fathers of them, were negligent^, or not diligent in
their care over the rest, and looking to the whole charge of their Ministry
about holy things.

Now that we may apply this to our selves, and see how far we are guilty of the
like evils, as answering to these, we are to consider.

1. Who are the holy Priesthood, and chosen Generation, that are appointed to
bear the Vessels of the Lord, and Minister for, and to others, about holy
things, now under the Gospel.

2. What is their charge.

3. How they should be sanctified to it.

4. What order is to be observed in the managing their affairs; and how it
answers to their order in the management of their tipical affairs under the law.

1. The Priesthood is changed, since the rising of the great High Priest after
the order of Melchizedeck, even the man Christ Jesus through sufferings
glorified, in the same body in which he bore our sins on the tree. For no man
takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron, so
also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, But he that said
unto him, Thou art my Son, To day have I begotten thee, he that prepared him a
body, he that raised him from the Dead, now no more to return to corruption,
even the same said unto him, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck. Not after the law of a Carnal Commandment, but after the power
of an endless life; For because this man continues ever, therefore he has an
unchangeable Priesthood, therefore the Father has made him in his own person,
the Great, and everlasting Apostle, and High Priest of our profession: And
therefore also has given unto him, all those who through the power of the
Heavenly call, (with which he calls all in due time) even through the
discoveries and influences of that life in him, flowing from him, and through
him, by which the Father draws to him, are therein drawn and chosen out of
the World, unto obedience (the obedience of says) and to the sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ.

These the Father has given to him to be his house, an holy Priesthood to
him, and so in a sense, or after some sort they are partakers with him of his
Heavenly calling, to minister to, and with him about the holy things of the
true sanctuary which the Lord pitched and not man, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God by him, Heb. 3. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10.
Joh. 17. 18. 20. etc. Romans 8. 28. 30.

The Ministration about holy things for and unto others, is not limited to men
of any one outward degree, order, or dignity in the world not to men wise and
learned in the wisdom of this world, which is science falsely so called as to
these things, and comes to naught, nor to men honorable approved of, and of
high account with men, no not so ^uch as are most eminently gifted among
believers, much less to such of them, as have the worldly furniture,
approbation, and authority.

But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one, that by that one
Spirit, are baptized into that one body of Christ (whether they be Jews, or
Gentiles, bond, or free) to profit others with all, 1 Corinthians 12. 7. 11.
Ephesians 4. 4. 7. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 14. 31. 1 Peter 4. 10, 11.

They all coming to him as to a living stone, That is, coming in the drawing
and quickening force of the influences of that life in him, and so through the
taste of his graciousness, are as lively stones built up in him, a spiritual
house for him to dwell and walk in, and so manifest himself in, and through
them, Hebrews 3. 6. 2 Corinthians 6. 16. 1 Corinthians 3. 16, 17. John 14. 21.
23. An holy Priesthood, to offer up by him Spiritual sacrifices of praise to
God continually, even the fruit of their lips confessing to his name, as well
as in doing good, and communicating, for with such sacrifices also God is well
pleased, Heb. 13. 15, 16.

A Chosen Generation, a Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, that they should show
forth the praises of him that called them out of darkness into his mavelous
light, 1 Peter 2. 4, 5. 9, 10. They are the Salt of the earth, the light of the
World, let, and preserved in it, to shine as lights by holding forth the word
of life in it in word* and conversation, so working out to others their own
salvation, Mat. 5. 13. 16. Phil. 2. 12. 16.

Whence Timothy is instructed to be an example of believers in word and
conversation, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 12. That they might all, each in their place,
and according to their capacity be followers of him, as he was of Christ, and
so together with him of Christ and his Apostles.

Hence also our Sa^iour in John 17. Praying for such peculiar blessings as in
which the persons prayed for, might be sanctified through the truth, to the
ministration of it and holding it forth to the world, which blessings he prays
not for, for the world, that they should be conferred on any man that is yet
abiding in the state, condition, and way of the World, such being not appointed
of him to this service.

Yet he says, he prays for those peculiar blessings, not only for those
first messengers, whom he sent immediately to that work of the Ministry, as the
Father sent him; and to whom he gave the grace of Apostleship for obedience to
the faith among all Nations, nor only to the more eminently gifted believers.
But in those prayers, he also prayed for all those, that in after Ages should
believe through their word, That they also might be one in this service in a
secondary sense, so as receiving it, and their fitness to it, in believing
through the Apostles doctrine, That they all might be one, in will and design
with the Father and Son and with his Apostle, for carrying on this business,
that through him, by means of them instrumentally, the World might know and
believe that the Father had sent Christ, the Savior of the World, and loves
those that through his grace believe, as he has loved him (or with such manner
of love in a subordinate sense) John 17. 9. 24.

2 The Priesthood being changed, there is therein made of necessity a change
also of the law for service, There is verily a disanulling of the commandment
going before, for the weakness and unp^ofi^ableness of it. For the law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope, by the which we draw
nigh to God: If perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood, under which the
people received the law, what farther need was there that another Priest should
arise after the order of Melchizedeck, etc.

There is therefore a change of the law for service.

1. In respect of the persons unto whom their ministration of, and about holy
things is to be extended, and amongst whom to be exercised.

2. In respect ^^ the manner of their work, or service in the charge committed
to them, yet in both it is such as answers to those patterns, and tipical
re^^mb^ances that was in theirs.

1. As to the persons unto whom their ministry is to be extended, and among
whom to be exercised. As their charge was to bear, and keep the vessels of the
Lord, and to minister about holy things, for, and in the behalf of the whole
Congregation of Israel after the flesh, To whom was committed the Oracles of
God, the knowledge of which as given by the Prophets, was by the Priests lips,
to be preserved amongst and unto them, To whom also pertained the Adoption, the
Glory, the Covenants, the giving of the law, the service of God, and the
promises, Romans 3. 2. and 9. 4.

Even so now, The charge of the holy Priesthood whom the Father has given unto
Christ, to minister unto him, and keep his charge, who is the great Apostle,
and High Priest of our profession, is to bear the vessels of the Lord, and to
minister about holy things, for, and in the behalf of, unto, and amongst all
Nations.

Unto the Apostles eminently, this charge was committed, to go into all the
World, to disciple the Nations to Christ baptizing them in his name, preaching
the Gospel to every creature of all the Nations, small and great, Jew and
Gentile, bond and free, witnessing repentance and remission of sins to them,
and amongst them as in his name for them, and that in baptizing them (with
their word, or doctrine, and also as an outward seal to that with water) in his
name; and therein teaching them to observe as instructed, moved, and
capacitated, by his preventing Grace through their word, all things that Christ
had commanded them. To them was committed the grace of Apostleship for
obedience to the faith among all Nations for his name.

And unto all them that believe through their word, in a secondary sense is
this charge committed, That they should shine as lights in the World as they
have capacity, and opportunity in their several places where they are set, to
keep that commandment without spot, until the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ; They ought not to account any man common, or unclean, or as left under
that outward state of uncleanness, which sometime remained on the Gentiles, who
are now made nigh by the blood of Christ Act. 1^. 28. Ephesians. 2. 13. 17. and 3.
1. 10.

The Servants therefore, as Servants (not as Lords or Worldly Princes by a
worldly power, nor by the wrath of man) are to endeavor the gathering them
together, as many as they find, both good and bad, and the bringing them into
his house, to rejoice with his People, to eat of his Bread, and drink of the
Wine that he has mingled, Proverbs 9. 3, 4, 5. Matthew 22. 9, 10. Romans 15.
6. 9. etc.

2. As to the manner of their service in the charge committed to them whereas
the service of the Levitical Priesthood, was exercised in the tipes and patters
of Heavenly things; and so in offering such gifts and sacrifices, as could
never make themselves, and therefore not the comers perfect as pertaining to
the Conscience, but stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and
tipical rights and ceremonies imposed on them, till the time of reformation,
they had a Worldly or Earthly Sanctuary, and Vessels of the Ministry committed
to their charge: They had an earthly and tipical Ark, and mercy seat all
patterns, and figures of the true, and in the Ark, the first Testament which
made nothing perfect, but pointed to a better hope in Christ, and so were
Ministers of the letter, and had a ministration of death, to nurture and lead
to life, and peace in him that was to come.

Now the service of the holy Priesthood is to be exercised in the Heavenly
things themselves. That which is committed to their charge, is, the revelation
of Grace and Truth, as now come forth in, and by Jesus Christ delivered for our
offenses, and raised again for our justification. The dispensation of the
fullness of times, in which al things are gathered together in one, and so in
which is the revelation of the truth, and body of all those figures, tipes, and
shadows in the law, even in Christ, that excellent ministry, in which God has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings, whereas that committed to them, was
but Gods speaking in diverse parts. In this speaking by his Son last of all, is
given unto us, the full and clear revelation of the name of the Father, in the
manif^station of the truth of all his former Oracles and promises to the
Fathers, and so of his infinite grace and glory therein, and that in the face
of Christ, in the discovery of which his name, The name of the Son is also
revealed, in which he is manifested, as before witnessed, in Oracles, Tipes,
and Prophesies, and as the fulfilling, and body of them all, in what he has
already done, and by means thereof does, and will do. The Son of God, the
Savior of the World. The Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the World,
the perfect sacrifice and offering for sin, That is, the only and complete
ransom and price of redemption for all. The Mediator between God and men, the
High Priest over the house of God, yea the only He, in whom it has pleased
the Father, that all fullness should dwell, even the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, and in whose blood the whole New Testament of precious promises, both
for this life, and that to come is sealed, that also the performance of them
may be given forth in due time with him.

And this revelation of the Son, and so of the Father in him, is given us in
the full evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, with plainness and power, in
which also the name of the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Truth, is revealed in his
full and glorious testimony of Christ, and so of the Father in him immediately
given, and in his powerful presence, and working with it unto all things
pertaining to life and godliness to the end of the World, as was before
prophesied of that pouring forth of him from on high.

And so they are Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the
Spirit; being in this dispensation blessed with all Spiritual Blessings, and
that not in earthly or tipical, but in Heavenly things, even in Christ, in whom
all Spiritual blessings, the truth and body of all figures and tipes are
treasured up for us, and in the rveelation of him brought to us, and in this
Ministry committed to the Holy Priesthood, That they should offer up spiritual
Sacrifices of prayer and praise to God continually, and confession of his name
by Jesus Christ, as comed in the flesh, and so that they should Minister in the
Heavenly things themselves, and not in Tipes, Figures, or Patterns, as the
Levitical Priesthood, but in, and about the true Sanctuary, Mercy-Seat, Altar,
Sacrifice, etc. as the truth and body of all, is met and found in him.

So then, the bearing, and keeping the charge of the Vessels of the Lord, that
is now, the work, or service of the Holy Priesthood under the Gospel, and was
resembled by the Priests, and Levites bearing, and keeping the charge of the
Ark, of the Sanctuary, and of all the Vessels of the Ministry; may be thus
expressed.

1. Their great business, and the sum of all, is to keep and to bear, even to
bear upon them, and hold forth. The truth of God, as it is now come forth and
manifested in the personal body of Jesus Christ, which the Father prepared for
him in our nature, that he might do his will for us, and in which he bore our
sins on the Tree, and in which being raised from the dead, he is entered into
his glory for us, which is such, as in which it has pleased the Father that
all fullness should dwell in him, even the fullness of the Godhead bodily, That
by him our faith and hope might be in God. They are to hold fast* and hold
forth to others, this acknowledgement or profession of their faith, in which
those things, which the Prophets said should come to pass, That Christ should
suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and
should show light to the People, and to the Gentiles, is declared to be even so
fulfilled, and come forth in that one offering of his personal body once for
all. And so in him the truth, and body of all the tipes and shadows of the law.

Whence the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, as now it is
since the appearing of Christ, the Church of the man Christ raised from the
dead, who was dead, but is alive for evermore, and stands in the name and
majesty of God his Father to feed, and rule.

I say his spiritual house, his holy Priesthood, is (according to the general
acception of that, 1 Timothy 3. 15.) said to be, The Pillar and ground of
truth, even of the manifestation of the truth, and righteousness of God in all
his former Oracles, and promises given to the Fathers, and in all the grace and
good things tipified, and witnessed in the law and Prophets, as now come forth
in Christ raised from the Dead, and treasured up in his personal body for us.

And though that Scripture may have another acception* such as in which that
clause, the pillar and ground of truth, is attributed to the living God that
stands before it, and indeed He, even God in Christ, and so the man Christ
Jesus in the name and majesty of God, he is not only the truth but in the most
full and absolute sense, the pillar and ground of it, yet that understanding,
though taken in here, destroys not the sense forementioned, in which also His
Church from him, and as in conjunction with him, the Head is signified to be in
a subordinate sense the pillar and ground of truth: And happily the words may
be so left, that we may take in the sense of both acceptions together.

We shall briefly speak to it in the sense we have mentioned, according to the
usual acceptance, as that also may stand and agree with the other.

The truth of which in any sense, The Church of the living God, is the Pillar
and Ground, is (as before hinted) Jesus Christ himself as raised from the Dead
in that Body in which he was delivered for our offenses. And so the infinite
fountain, and treasury of grace, and truth in him as so considered answering to
all the former Oracles, prophesies, and tipes; as that is manifested or brought
to light by the Gospel, as now spoken forth by Jesus Christ in those last
days, which Gospel of our Salvation, as so come forth, is therefore eminently
(and as distinguished from former dispensations, even from Gods speaking in the
Law, and by the Prophets) called the truth, The word of Truth, Ephesians 1. 13.
James 1. 18. 2 Corinthians 4. 1. 4. with chap. 3. Not because this speaking of
God by Jesuus Christ is more true then any of his former speakings in the Law,
or by the Prophets, that cannot be, for, as his righteousness is everlasting,
so his whole Law, or Doctrine is the truth, The righteousness of his
testimonies is everlasting; his word true from the beginning, and every one of
his righteous judgments for ever: They are all infinite in truth and
faithfulness like himself, so that no one of them can be more true, Psalm 119.
140. 142. 144. 160. with Psalm 12. 6, 7. and Proverbs 22. 20, 21. Eccles. 12.
10. Psalm 19. 7, 8, 9. But because in this speaking of God by his Son in these
last days, The truth of all those former speakings is manife^ted, the infinite
truth, faithfulness, and rigteousness of God, in every one of those Oracl^s,
Prophesies, and Typical witnesses of things to come, is in this dispensation
manifested, revealed, and brought to light, God did give us his purpose and
grace in Christ, for saving and calling with an holy calling, even from the
beginning of the World in those oracles and witnesses of Christ in the Law and
Prophets, but he has now manifested his righteousness in it, by the appearing
of Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and brought life, and immortalty to
light through the Gospel: See 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. 11. with Tit. 1. 1. 3. Romans 1.
16, 17. and 3. 21. 2 Cor. 4. 1. 3.

In Jesus Christ as thus manifested, and so in this speaking of God by him is
revealed, the truth and righteousness of God, in that first Oracle: The Seed of
the Woman, shall bruise the Head of the Serpent. For, for this purpose was that
Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil.

And therefore forasmuch as the children (of men) are partakers of flesh and
blood, weakness, and mortallity as the fruit of sin that brought death; he
likewise took part of the same, in that one body, which the Father prepared for
him, made of a Woman, made under the Law, in which he was made subject to all
our infirmities that came on us by sin, and so in the fimilitude of sinful
flesh, yet without sin, and had all our iniquities that the Law charged upon
u^, ^^ we fell under it through the first departure of our nature from God,
even the guilt of that offense of one, and of all our natural filthiness, as
thence naturally and necessarily derived to us; imputed to him and caused to
meet together upon him, that through death, he might in the virtue of his
suffering the judgment of this World, and in the power of his resurrection,
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver them
who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage, etc. And
he has made Peace, and Atonement for our sins by his blood, and so by himself
purged them away from before the Father, and is set down on his Right Hand,
with his stripes we were healed, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, under which we must have been utterly banished, and cast out from God, and
so necessarily left under the power of Satan, he has obtained a release and
discharge of those transgressions, and so of that judgment of this World unto
himself, by his bearing that judgment, in being made a curse for us; And so,
that all judgment is committed unto him over mankind, that through him they
might be saved; and therein the Prince of this World is judged, and cast out of
his principallity over man, the power of death taken from him, and all men
delivered over into the Kingdom power, and government of God by Christ, that
in and through him the grace of God might bring salvation to them, 1 John 3. 8.
Hebr. 2. 14, 15. Gall. 4. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 19. with Isa. 53. 6. Gal. 3. 13. John
12. 31, 32. and 5. 22. 27. Acts 5. 31. John 3. 17.

In him as thus manifested, God has performed and brought forth his truth and
rigteousness in that great promise made to the Fathers, That in Abraham's seed
(speaking not of his seeds, as of many, but of his seed as of one, which seed
is, Christ, Genesis 22. 18. Gal. 3. 16.) All the nations of the earth should be
blessed.

In him the great blessing of life from the Dead, eternal life, the restoring
of our nature into the image and glory of God, and therein into glorious
capacity and liberty to the immediate knowledge of and fellowship with God, far
exceeding the glory in and unto which we were at first created in the first
public person and which we lost by sin, This being that glory, which the only
Begotten Son of God had with the Father, before the World was, which he has
now through sufferings obtained, to be glorified with, and to possess for ever
in that body prepared for him in our Nature, in which he was crucified for us,
That he might now appear in the presence of God in Heaven it self for us,
while we cannot appear for our selves, or in our own persons, that through him
the grace of God may bring salvation to us, and that we coming in his drawings
by him, may be made accepted, and made the righteousness of God in him, and in
due time actually made partakers of that glory he now posseth for us, together
with him. And herein all blessings pertaining to life and godliness, as the
forgiveness of all our sins, the healing of all our diseases while it is to
day; virtue, force, or effecacy with the Father, and so power in the name of
the Father for the daily taking away those sins of the world, that are now
imputed to the people, which make liable to condemnation on a new account, and
deserve the wrath to come, and this by means of that death, which was for the
redemption of the transgressions under the first Testament, and so all gifts
for men, even for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among
them, as the fruit of the travel of his soul are prepared, and treasured up in
Christ for them all, in that God has raised him from the dead, and given him
glory, that our faith and hope might be in God.

And so all these things given with him, brought to light, in the testimony of
Christ raised from the dead, in whose name repentance and remission of sins is
preached unto, and among all Nations that it might be received in and through
him, and in the receiving of him, even in the believing on his name, unto which
also his Gospel is his arm, or power sent forth, 1 John 5. 11, 12. Col 1. 14,
15, 19. and 2. 2, 9. with John 17. 4, 5. 1 Peter 1. ^1. Hebrews 1. 3. and 9.
24. 1 John 1. 1, 2. Hebr. 7. 23. 25. etc. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Joh. 14. 3. Romans 8. 17,
18. Phil 3. 3. 9, 10. 21.

In him is manifested the righteousness of God in that promise, and Oath unto
David, That of the fruit of his Loins according to the Flesh, God would raise
up Christ to sit on his Thrrne. In that God has made that Jesus of the seed of
David after the Flesh, both Lord and Christ, and set him on his Holy Hill, on
his Right Hand, in that Glory of his Father, in which also he shall gloriously
appear in due time, to take to him his great power and reign, till all enemies
be subdued, and then deliver up the Kingdom to God his Father. He is already
raised and entered into his glooy, and shall no more return to corruption.

And as so raised and exalted with the Right Hand of Power, is called the sure
mercies of David in whom God has manifested his truth to David, and that he
will not lie unto David, or fail him of a man to sit on his Throne for ever,
Acts 2. 25, 36. and 13. 32. 37. compared with 2 Samuel 7. 12. 16. 1 Kings 2. 4.
and 8. 25. with 2 Samuel 23. 5. Psalm. 89. 19. 37. and 132. 11. Isa. 55. 3, 4. 6.

In him likewise is the body and truth of those manifold figures, tipes, and
shadows under the law, as to instance in some few: He in that body raised from
the Dead, is the true Temple and Sanctuary, which the Lord has pitched, and
not Man, John 2. 19. 22. Hebrews 9. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 1. In whom the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily, that so of his fullness we may receive, Col. 2. 9. John
1. 16. As also the Great Apostle, and High Priest of our Profession, and so the
Minister of the holy things, of that true Tabernacle of his own body, Heb. 1. 2.

And in coming into him, others are made of the Spiritual House and holy
Priesthood (as before is showed.) He is the body, and truth of all signified in
those tipical offerings of the Lord, made by fire, yea of all those Sacrifices,
Atonements, and Offerings for sin, in that offering of his own body once for
all in which the Father has smelt a savor of rest for ever, and which he ever
lives to present, and now to appear in, in the presence of God for us.

He is the true Ark, and treasury of all Grace and Truth, for the Law came by
Moses, discovering sin, witnessing and leading to the better hope in Christ,
and this whole Testament was kept in the Ark, with diverse other things.

But g^^c^ and truth in the forgiveness of sins, charged by the Law, and the
fulfilling all the Tipes and shadows of it, came by Jesus Christ, and is now
manifested, as kept and treasured up in him, in whom are hid all the Treasures
of Wisdom and Knowledge, that with him they may be given and opened to us; and
so he is the true mercy seat, answering to the tipical one which covered the
Ark of the Testament that charged with sin and concluded under curse, and
whence also the oracle came forth; He is the propitiation or covering, the
atonement, and reconciliation for our sins, and not for our sins only; but
also for the sins of the whole World: He is our peace, and being so is also the
way by and through which God is gracious, and speaks graciously to men, yea the
Oracle by whom he has spoken, and through which he speaks to us in these
last days. Yea in him the Oil for anointing to service, and light for
directing in all our worship, even in the man Christ Jesus, and so brought to
us in the revelation of him, in the Doctrine of God our Savior, in which
dispensation of the fullness of times, God has gathered together all things in
one, even in Christ, and so given us the manifestation of the truth of all
those former Oracles, Prophesies, Tipes, and Shadows, in the testimony of
Jesus of the seed of David after the flesh, delivered for our offenses, and
raised again for our justification.

Of this truth of all former witnesses and shadows, and so of the
righteousness of God in them, as now come forth in Christ, the Church may be
said to be the Pillar and ground; not so as to uphold, or support the truth in
a proper sense. To be put to that charge, and hard service is proper to the
makers, and worshippers Idols, the imagined Deities, and Rocks of men's choosing,
which indeed are no Gods, but vanity and lies, and therefore cannot bear up,
support, or save them that look to the, nor can they stand by themselves; but
must be born up, and maintained by them that make and worship them. And prove
so heavy a burden to the weary beast, that they are not able to support,
maintain, defend, and save them, Isa. 46. 1, 2. 5. 7. Jer. 10. 5. etc.

But the portion of Israel is not like them, for he is the former of all
things. The truth of God in Christ, as now raised from the dead, i^ the
begetter, maintainer, and upholder of his Chruch, Isa. 46. 3, 4. Jeremiah 10.
10. etc. with James 1. 18. 1 Timothy 4. 10. In the Lord they have righteousness
and strength, Isaiah 45. 20. 25.

But their work, to which also they are begotten, and strengthened of him is so
to keep, retain, and bear upon them, the writing of this manifestation of the
truth of God, in the tidings and patterns of it, so fair and without spot, that
others may see and read it in their word and conversation, and so
instrumentally also through him that works in them mightily, to maintain and
defend it in the World. To watch in all things, to keep the commandment
delivered to them without spot unrebukable, etc. That the truth of the Gospel
may continue with others. So Paul was a chosen Vessel to Christ, to bear his
name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel, to keep the
Faith, and that the truth of the Gospel might continue with others. Acts 9. 15.
2 Timothy 4 7. Gal. 2. 5. And so he instructs Timothy to watch in all things,
to the keeping this charge, 1 Timothy 6. 12, 13, 14. and 2 Timothy 4. 5. And all
believers so to shine as lights in the World, as a City set on a Hill, as a
Candle on a Candle-stick, holding forth the word of life in word and
conversation, That it may be seen and read of all men, Matthew 5. 14, 15, 16.
Philippians 2. 15, 16.

And as in old time a pillar was used for a witness and remembrance of Gods
gracious appearances, Genesis 28. 11. 18. 22. and 35. 11. 14, 15. As also for a
witness of peace and reconciliation, Genesis 31. 45. 51, 52. And for a
manifestation of Gods presence with a people, and for a guide to them, Exodus
13. 21, 22. And as the law was appointed to be written on several pillars, as
on the Posts of their house, and on their Gates, Deuteronomy. 6. 9. and 11. 20.

So this House of God, which is the Church of the living God, is the pillar
appointed of God, to bear up and keep in remembrance, even to the view of
others, the glorious grace of the first appearance of Christ, even till his
coming again, and to keep and bear upon them the witness or manifestation of
that peace, or reconciliation with God for men, which he has made, and is
become through his blood, and while so continued and preserved among a people,
they are a witness of his merciful presence with them, his nighness and waiting
that he may be gracious to them, 2 Cor. 5. 18. 20. with chap. 6. 1, 2. Isaiah
55. 5, 6. and 50. 1, 2. and 30. 18. 20, 21. And set and preserved for a light,
and guide to be observed and followed, Matthew 5. 13, 14. Hebrews 1. 3. 7, 8.
Phil. 2. 15, 16.

And to that purpose to bear upon them, and lift up to the sight and view of
others, and so to hold forth to them that all men may see, The manifestation of
the truth of God, in all his former Oracles, and witnesses in the tipes, and
shadows of the law; as now come forth in the personal body of Christ raised
from the dead; whose name they are so to bear, as they may therein show the end
of the law in him, and so the body of all the former shadows; and truth
signified in them, and so him the fountain of all grace and truth, the treasury
of all Wisdom and Knowledge, etc. (as before is showed.) And this House of
God, the Holy Nation, are also in many societies, as they are in several
places, and so many pillars. And so may be included in the sense of those seven
pillars, Wisdom has hewn out, Proverbs 9. 1. Those Gates and Posts of his
Doors. (Answering to Deuteronomy. 6. 9. and 11. 20.) At which whosoever watches daily,
and waits, hearing him there, is blessed, Proverbs 8. 34. (See what is said
of the manifold use of pillars, and the allusion to them in this business in
the explicit declaration of the testimony of Christ, by Thomas Moor senior,
Pages 287. 290.)

And so they are the ground or Tables on which its written, (in some sense
answering to that, Habbacuk 2. 2.) That others may read it, as the Corinths
were the Apostles Epistle, for as much as they were manifestly declared to be
the Epistle of Christ, the ground on which the mind and things of Christ are
so written by the spirit of the living God, evidencing, and writing them in and
through the Apostles Doctrine, on the Tables of their hearts and fellowships,
that receive and abide in it, that it may be seen, and read of all men in their
word and conversation, in both which they are set to shine as lights in the
World, by retaining in them and bearing upon them that others may see, and so
holding forth the word of life, even of Christ raised from the dead, in a fair
writing and faithful discovery of the tidings, and patterns of it, That others
may behold all goodness and truth in it, and so also in a subordinate sense
instrumentally keeping, maintaining, and defending it, and the goodness and
truth of it amongst themselves, and to the World against all adversaries,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel, Philipians 1. 27.

And so their work is, with that word of righteousness, The great things of his
law, as now come forth by Christ, which are the main things to be kept, looked
to, striven for, and held forth by them in their whole Ministry for, and unto
all things. I say, with that to instruct, reprove, exhort, comfort, etc. 2 Timothy
4. 2. Tit. 3. 11. 15.

And as in all this, they are instruments, or vessels, through whom he carries
the seed of his word, and so conveyes his heavenly treasure to the hearts of
others, so their work instrumentally and through him is said to be, to speak to
the heart, to be Ministers of Spirit, to open the blind eyes, and turn men
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may
receive the forgiveness of sins and inheritance with them that are sanctified
by faith that is in Christ; yea they are a sweet savor unto God in them that
are saved, and in them that perish, to the one, they are the savor of death
unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life, Isa. 35. 3, 4. and
40. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 2. 14. 17. and 3. tot. and 4. 1, 2. Acts 26. 18. And to this
purpose.

2. To them is committed the keeping and charge of holy and devoted things.

1. Of Gods Ordinances of Divine Worship, that are appointed for bearing and
showing forth the Lords Body that was broken for us, and through sufferings is
entered into his glory, and so for witnessing repentance and r^mission of sins
in his name, unto, and among the Nations; as the Preaching of the Cross, and
therein, the showing the things of Christ out of the Scriptures in the exercise
of those gifts of prophecy, or teaching, as every man has received the gift,
this work is committed to them, even to the whole body of the Saints, each to
serve in it according to his several ability, and therefore the gifts t^ fit
for it, only given unto them, and ditributed among them, according to his
pleasure, Ephesians 4. 7. 11, 12.

And so the other Ordinances, in which the same things are to be showed, and
holden forth in the Church and to the World. The management of those affairs,
the teaching the Nations to observe, and how to observe with them what was
given to the Apostles in commandment, that so they, the Gentiles may rejoice
with his people, these things are committed and given in charge unto them. But
to the wicked, or unreconciled persons that are not reconciled to God by Jesus
Christ, and so have not that word of reconciliation, (viz.) That God was in
Christ reconciling the World to himself, etc. And the love of Christ thence
constraining to persuade men with it; To them God says, What have thou to do
to take my covenant in thy mouth, that hate to be reformed by my law? His
Saints are to be gathered together to him, to keep, and look to this charge,
even those that have made, or entered into covenant with him by the Sacrifice
of his Son, Psalm 50. 1, 2. 5, 6. 14, 15. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 20.

2. Of persons that are given unto the Church in his name, or also called to be
holy and devoted first to the Lord, and then to them according to the will of
God. It is contained in their charge, not only to call others to Christ, and
into his house, and to receive those that come, as Christ received them to the
glory of God: Yea even to receive children in his name, such as are brought by
others, under whose tuition they are, as given from above not only to their
parents, but also to the Church of Christ in his name, as the price of his
blood, and part of his Kingdom and charge, and so committed to them, as part
of their charge, for no man can receive any thing in his name, except it be so
given them from above, therefore the instruction to the servants to receive
them in his name, in their ministration, implies their being so given unto
them: But therefore also, it is contained in their charge, or service, to take
the care and oversight of such, as so come, or are brought to them in his
name, or by Gods providence, left, and committed to their care and charge, That
they may be trained up, and educated in the nurture and School of Christ, as
means and capacity thereto is afforded, whence children given by Gods gracious
providence, to any of the Church, are said to be holy, Mark 9. 36, 37. and 10.
13, 14. with John 3. 27. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Yea they are in especial manner to watch for the souls of such, as adhere or
listen to the Apostles Doctrine with them, as being se^ as Watchmen, and
guides) according to their fitness and ability given them of God) over such in
the Word of the Lord, and as those that must give an account, that they may do
it with joy and not with grief, Ez^kiel 33. 7. Hebrews 13. 7. 17. For all such
are in a sense devoted vessels committed to their charge, to be so cared for,
born, and watched over by them.

And so likewise more especially, and as to the promoting of the forementioned
ends also, to take heed to themselves and to the Doctrine, that they continue
therein, that in so doing, they may save themselves and others. To keep
themselves, and so one another in the love of Christ, unspotted from the world,
as Temples of the Holy Ghost, vessels devoted to holy use, building up
themselves in their most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, looking for the
mercy of God unto eternal life, Jude 20. 21. 1 Timothy 4. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
and 6. 13. 20.

And this brings us into the next consideration.

3. How they ought to sanctify themselves, or be sanctified un^o, and in this
service.

1. There is a previous Sanctification, necessary to fit them to this service
answering to that separation and consecration of themselves to the Lord, which
was in that whole Tribe of Levy, gathering themselves unto Moses, to obey the
word of the Lord and keep his covenant, in which he said unto his Father and
Mother, I have not seen them, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew
his own children, of which we read, Exodus 32. 26. 29. Deuteronomy 33. 9. Upon
which they were blessed with that blessing! They shall teach Jacob thy
judgments, and Israel thy law; They shall put insence before thee, and whole
burnt Sacrifice upon thine Altar, Deuteronomy 33. 10.

As likewise answering to that separating, or setting them apart unto the Lord,
and for his peculiar use and service, in which the Lord separated that whole
Tribe from the rest of their hrethren, and took them to himself, as a devoted
thing, instead of all the firstborn of the children of Israel to be his, and
to draw near to him, to bear the Ark of the covenant of the Lord, and to do the
service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and to minister unto him, and to
bless in his name, of which we read, Numbers 1. 49, 50. and 3. 6. etc. with
chap. 4. and 18. 2. 6. with chap. 19. 9, 10. Deuteronomy 10. 8.

It is such as also answers to that tipical Sanctification, and in the flesh by
tipical washings, sacrifices, and anointings, wherewith Aaron and his Sons were
sanctified, and consecrated from the rest of their brethren unto the Priests
office. Of which we read Exodus 28. and 29. with Leviticus 8. tot. And that
also with which the whole Tribe of Levy were sanctified, and consecrated from
the rest of the children of Israel: Of which we read Numbers 8. 5, 6. 22.

The sanctification of and in the truth answerably necessary to go before, to
consecrate and fit persons to this ministry in the manifestation of the truth
is the same by or through which they are made of his Spiritual House, and Holy
Piiest-hood, 1 Peter 2. 4, 5. And may be thus expressed.

1. As to the means by which it is effected. Its the Sanctification of the
Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 1 Peter 1. 2. Even of that eternal Spirit of God, by
which Jesus Christ in our nature of the seed of David after the flesh, was
raised from the dead, and through which he offered himself without spot to God,
Romans 1. 3. Hebr. 9. 14.

As the same being now infinitely, and immeasurably given to, put, and caused
to rest upon him in that spotless body in which he bore our sins on the Tree,
is now by him poured forth from on high, in and with the Testimony of himfelf,
the man Christ Jesus, as through sufferings entered into his glory, the office
of which Spirit as so sent forth is to bear witness of the truth in Christ
Jesus, even of the true water, or washing of regeneration, cleansing and
separation, and of the true blood of sprinkling, with which through faith in
it, the heart may be sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and the whole man in
all his powers, motions, and actings washed; and so persons purified a peculiar
people to him zealous of good works: See Heb. 9. 12. 14. and 10. 19. 22. Tit.
3. 3. 4, 5, 6. It is such a sanctificaion and consecration, as is effected
through the righteousness of God our Savior, as now come forth and manifested
in Christ crucified as already evidenced by the spirit with which he is
anointed in the same body, in which he bore our sins on the Tree, and so
brought to light through the Gospel, his arm to save and sanctify. In and
through which glorious Gospel the holy Spirit takes of the things of Christ,
the things that he has done and finished in his own body on the earth, and the
things by virtue thereof treasured up in the same body for us in the name of
the Father, and in showing them glorifies him, renders him precious, comely and
excellent, for the complete sanctifying us, and making us perfect to every good
word and work; therein showing him to be that perfect and complete
righteousness, in which we being found through faith in it, shall be made
acceptable to God, and meet to stand before him, to offer up Spiritual
Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Christ, and so shall be profitable to men,
being filled and clothed with the fruits of that righteousness to the praise
of his grace. And so the fountain of that Water of Gods grace and Spirit, and
so the testimony of him that anointing, by the pouring out and shedding abroad
of which we in receiving and attending to it, shall be washed, enlightened,
healed, strengthened, and made meet for service. Yea that one offering by which
all our Sacrifices, brought and offered by him, shall be made acceptable and to
his praise.

Its not any other Sanctification, Separation, or consecration, that makes meet
for this inheritance of the Holy Priesthood, or of the Saints in light not the
outward and tipical sanctification, that was but to a tipical service in the
flesh, and in the letter. Nor any such, as may be by the works of the law. Nor
any such redeeming from any part of the vain conversation as may be effected by
corruptable things, as silver and gold, or by any other Wisdom, Strength, or
Motions, only in the Lord, in whom they have righteousness and strength. In
the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.

2. As to the nature of the work, or effecacy of this one Spirit through the
Gospel on the subject, needful to go before to make meet for this service and
inheritance of the Saints. It is such, as in which through the righteousness of
God our Savior, they are made partakers of like precious faith, with the
Apostles, through this sanctification of the Spirit forementioned, they are
chosen out of the way and condition of the World, (that lies in ignorance of
God, in Christ, and enmity to him, and so under the power of the Wicked one)
unto obedience the obedience of faith, so to understand and know him that is
true, that therein the soul is brought into him, and united with him by faith,
1 Peter. 1. 2. 2 Peter 1. 1. with 1 John 5. 19, 20. They are begotten by the
word of truth, to such an unfeined belief of the truth, as now come forth in
Christ, as in which its believed and received, not in vain but to purpose, even
to the same purpose, to which it is discovered and given to them ( viz) to the
saving of the soul, bringing it out of the World, and worldly ways of seeking
rest, righteousness, wisdom, strength, etc. into Christ for all; such as in
which they are redeemed from among men, and from their vain conversation
received by tradition from them, and so washed in the Spirit of their mind
from the errors and pollutions of the World, in which men are vainly seeking
rest, peace, wisdom, righteousness, etc. where it is not; unto God in Christ
to seek all in him by an exercise of faith in him in what he has done, and is
become for them in his own body, and in the hope set before them in him. Such
it is, as in which their minds or souls are purified to unseigned love, of God,
of Men, and brethren, in obeying the truth. They are principled with those
principles of truth, that naturally lead so to trust in him, and seek all in
him, and so to love, that they may thenceforth walk in that newness of life.
They are so baptized into Christ, even into his death, that as to the Spirit of
their mind, they are subdued and made willing to put on Christ for all, and be
devoted to him; and to that purpose for the excellency of the knowledge of him,
to let go all other excellencies as loss, and dung, that they may win him, and
be found in him, yea herein to hate Father, Mother, Brethren, Sisters, Wife,
and Children; yea and their own life also for his sake, and in comparison of
him, for they have obeyed his word and kept his covenant. (Answerable to that
Exodus 32. 6. 29. Deuteronomy 32. 9.) 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2. with 2 Cor. 6. 1. Hebr. 10. 39.
1 Peter 1. 18 22. and 2 Peter 1. 4. and 2. 18. 20. Romans 6. 3. 4. Gal. 3. 26,
27. James 1. 18. Luke 14. 26, 27. 33. Phil. 3. 3. 10. 2 Timothy 1. 5, 6. with 1 Timothy 1. 5.

There may be among them many feigh^ned, or halting believers, That have yet
believed but in vain, still halting between two opinions, or have not yet so
crucified the flesh with its affections and lusts as to be renewed and purified
in the Spirit of their mind from double-mindedness, to have the heart fixed,
to seek rest, wisdom, righteousness, and strength only in him, by an exercise
of faith in him; yea there may be many daughters and attenders, who though in
some good degree of simplicity waiting, yet are not so of them, of his
Spiritual house and holy Priesthood, Yet let all that hear say come,
Revelations 22. 17.

3. A^ to the seal and confirmation of the truth of this washing effecacy of
the Spirit through the Gospel, making meet for this inheritance it is such, as
in which they are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, even the same which
is the earnest of the Apostles inheritance until the redemption of the
purchased possession, by which fealing they are marked out, and approved by
God, as unto the day of redemption, so also as a peculiar people unto this
service, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. and 4. 30.

By this manifesting himself unto them, pouring out abundantly of the Spirit
of his Son into their hearts, making known his words and so teaching and
leading into the Spiritual enjoyment and usefulness of the truth, making Christ
unto them all that, which by the power of his word, they are instructed and led
to seek for in him, even wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, and so filling them with peace and joy through the power of the
Holy Ghost, in the belief of the truth, quickening them to a lively hope by the
resurrection of Christ.

Giving them access with boldness and confidence in him, strengthening them to
cry Abba Father, by that Spirit of his Son, opening the testimony of his Son,
believed and so spiritually sprinkling the blood of Christ, and shedding abroad
his love therethrough in their hearts, making it useful and powerful to all
those ends and purposes.

Also enriching them with some useful understanding, and gifts for the profit
of others, even as the testimony of Christ is confirmed in them so anointing
and fitting them for ministering to him, and in his name, that through them
others may be saved, turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
to God, that in turning they also may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance with them that are sanctified by fiath that is in Christ, John 14.
21. 23. and 17. 20. 23. 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. Romans 5. 1. 11. and 15. 13, 14. 1
Peter 1. 3. Ephesians. 3. 12. Romans 8. 15. Galatians 4. 6. 1 Corinthians 1. 5. and
12. 4, 5, 6, 7. Acts 26. 17, 18.

A man may say he has faith in Christ, and so fellowship with the light, and
in so saying lie, and deceive himself, but if indeed he have, it will be
manifested by these works and fruits of it. If any man love God, the same is
known of him, 1 Cor. 8. 2. with John 14. 21. 23.

And as in any measure so sealed, so far forth are they approved, and as it
were set apart by God to peculiar service in the Gospel: And to be called forth
and approved by their brethren.

Such therefore Jude instructs and incourageth to contend earnestly for the
faith of the common salvation in Christ, as once delivered to the Saints, to be
kept, held fast, and held forth by them. Such I say as were sanctified by God
the Father. (Namely with this sanctification of the Spirit, which is the way
fore-known and approved by him from the beginning, for sanctifying persons unto
himself by Christ, in these last Ages so sanctified, unto obedience, and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus) preserved sometime, and so found steadfast in
Christ, and called, approved, fitted, and so appointed to such pecnliar service
in the Gospel, as also to such suffering for his sake, as might be occasioned
by such service, Jude 1. 3. with 1 Peter 1. 2, 3.

2. There is a daily sanctification of themselves (in the light and strength of
the Lord that sanctifies them) in, and unto this service, necessary to render
them acceptable and profitable therein, answering to that daily, and continual
tipical sanctification, from tipical uncleanness, wherewith the Levitical order
and Priesthood, were to sanctify themselves and be sanctified to their
service; in which they were to sanctify themselves and be sanctified,
cleansed, and separated, from those things in themselves in their own bodies
their marriages and works, which according to the law did but tipcally defile
and render unclean. And also to be separate from, so as not to have to do with
or touch any thing or person, declared unclean by the law. As we read Leviticus
21. and 22. with other Scriptures.

So here in the sanctification of the Spirit having these great and precious
promises, That the Lord will dwell in them, by his word, and Spirit in it, even
to sanctify them. (According to those many Scriptures, I the Lord do Sanctify
you, Exodus 31. 13. Leviticus 20. 7, 8. and 21. 8. 15. 23. and 22. 9. 16.
Ezekiel 20. 12. etc.) And will also walk in them, to manifest the savor of
his knowledge by them. They are in the light, and strength of the Lord, in whom
they are what they are, as such a House, and Priesthood, to cleanse themselves
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness, so as in the
fear of the Lord.

1. To lay aside, put off, and flee from, those filthinesses, and superfluities
of naughtiness, that are moved, and rising up daily from the old man, the Law
of sin, still remaining, and warring in the members, the flesh lusting against
the spirit, as they have already in some measure been renewed in the spirit of
their mind, so to be always putting off as concerning the former conversation,
the old man with his deeds, and putting on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness, and holiness of truth, as the anointing, even the
word of truth which they have heard from the beginning, and received of him, and
which abides in them, as that teaches, even so by minding the things of that
spirit, and walking in the light, and strength of it, as by the mercies of God
therein put to remembrance, displayed, and commended, they are moved, and
strengthened, so to present, and yield up their bodies their whole man, in all
their Actings, a living sacrifice to him; that so, that spirit in the testimony
of Jesus which has begun to renew the mind, may daily fashion, and transform
the whole man in all his actings into likeness to him, according to that
renewing of the mind, Jam. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 1-3. Romans 6. and 12. 1-3. According
to those many instructions, and exhortations. Purge out the old leaven, even as
yea are unleavened for Christ our passover is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth, (as in the previous
sanctification forementioned) see that ye love one another with a pure heart
fervently, 1 Peter. 1. 22. If we live in the spirit, let us walk in the
spirit, seeing we have already crucified the flesh, with its affections, and
lusts as to the spirit of our mind, we have gotten victory, and escaped the
errors and polutions of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord, and
Savior, so as not withstanding all those hindrances by the flesh with its
affections and lusts, we have known, believed, and owned him, or rather been
owned by him, as his peculiar people, let us not therefore suffer i^ to reign,
or yield up our minds, or members to it, but let us resign our selves to God,
according to the renewing of the mind, as those that are alive from the dead,
and our members as instruments of righteousness unto him. Be not desirous of
vain glory, etc. Gal. 5. 16-24, 25, 26. with Romans 6.

So cleansing our selves daily, and in all our actings from all filthynesse of
flesh grosser filthynesse, as the lusts of the flesh, and of the eye, as
Ephesians. 5. 1-18. 1 Timothy 6. 9-11. and 2. 22. And of the spirit; the pride of
life, all those desires of wisdom, strength, and righteousness in our
selves, or of vain glory to our selves, etc. Which do all war against the
soul, and make us, and our works unclean, they even defile our holy things.

2. They are also to come out from amongst, and be separate from unclean
persons, and fellowships, so as not to touch the unclean thing, that God may
receive and own them, as vessels in whom he takes pleasure to manifest himself
in, and through, 2 Cor. 6. 14-17, 18. with Isa. 52. 11. Jer. 15. 19.

To have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkensse, but rather
reprove them, to forsake the foolish, to stand up from the dead, etc. Ephesians. 5.
11. 14. with Prove. 9. 6. And in this also, they are to cleanse themselves from
all filthyness of flesh, and spirit, from fellowship with men in their evil
and unclean principles, and practices, whether more gross, or more refined,
whether more openly, or privily denying the Lord that bought them, and being
enemies to the Cross of Christ the power of Godliness, so as not to touch the
unclean thing, 2 Timothy 3. 1-5. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Phil. 3. 17, 18, 19. Romans 16. 17,
18.

Here this caution is warily to be observed, ( vide.) that they are not to shut
out such unclean persons from them, from listening to their word or doctrine,
or to forbid, or hinder them from turning, and coming in to them, in their
acknowledgement, and worship, but they the chosen generation, are to separate,
and come out from them, in their doctrines, and fellowships, principles, and
practices that are unclean, so as not to have any fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness. They are to cease to hear the instruction that
causes to err from the words of knowledge, Prove. 19. 27. To go from the
presence of such, yea to withdraw our selves from them, in their preachings,
acknowledgements, fellowships, as in whom we perceive (by the light of Gods
Testimony) that lip of knowledge is not but some other lip, or word, privily
undermining or slighting the preaching of the Cross, and lifting up some other
thing in its name and place, Prove. 14. 7. 2 Timothy 3. 1-5. 1 Timothy 6. 1. 3. Romans
16, 17, 18. Gal. 1. 8, 9. with 2 John 10. From such they are to withdraw
themselves, but not to bid such stand aloof from them, or withdraw from them,
in their acknowledgments, and worship, see that instruction to Jeremiah.
Directing him how to take forth the precious from the vile, not by separating
or putting out the vile from the precious, in their precious Doctrine, Society,
and Worship. But thus, let them return unto thee, but return thou not to them.
The believer can have no true or profitable fellowship with an infidel or
unbeliever in his principles or practices, nor in spiritual things partake of
his Table or worship, as by them, and according to their principles, presented,
commended, and invited too; But the unbeliever may come in to, and join
himself with, and have profitable fellowship with the believer, in his right
acknowledgments, and worship, and so in the Table of the Lord, with them; and
that is not, nor can be accounted the believers having fellowship with them, or
being yoaked to, or with them, but rather, the strangers joining himself to
the Lord, to rejoice and praise him with his people, see Jer. 15. 19. with 2
Cor. 6. 14-17-18. Romans 15. 9-11.

They the chosen generation, and holy Priesthood, are not to forbid, or keep
out any of the world. But to instruct them as they have opportunity, by their
listening to their word, or maine doctrine, I say so to instruct, and teach
them, how, on what ground, and in what manner, they even now may, and ought to
join with his people, in their worship and observance of ordinances, rejoice
ye Gentiles with his people. Yet if any after joining to them, and with them
professedly, in their acknowledgement, and worship of the Lord, if any that is
called a Brother. Walk disorderly, and will not be admonished, they are to
withhold, or withdraw from such, by putting away from among them in their
fellowships in breaking of bread, (if not also in some other ordinances) such
stubbornely wicked persons, in such wise as themselves may bear shame, and
others may see they are disowned in such evil ways, and this till they be
ashamed, or judge, and take shame to themselves.

But till any come in to the house, or Church of believers, so to join with
them, in professed acknowledgement and worship of the Lord; they have not to
do with them, so to judge them, see 1 Cor. 5. tot. with 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14, 15.

They the holy preisthood, are not to be yoaked together with unbelievers, in
fellowship with them, in their unfruitful works of darkness, or in marriages
with them, or in society and fellowship with them in their acknowlegments and
worships, as by them propounded and called too, and taught by their precepts,
and according to their principles, yea in these things, they are to separate
from them, not to mind or to let their eyes fly upon their pretended
excellencyes, or dive into their depths, but to depart and come out from among
them. But not to keep them, or any of them out from the house, or Church of
God, where they may be redeemed, as they have been from their vain
conversation, through the precious blood of Christ and the love of God
commended through it, there showed forth, yea they are as they have opportunity
(as aforesaid) in their holding forth the word of life to, and among them, to
instruct, and invite them to come into his house, and rejoice with his people.
To examine themselves in the glass of the Gospel as there held forth, and so
to eat of his Bread, and drink of the Wine of his mingling yea so to to
remember him in his ways, and ordinances with his people.

3. There is an accidental sanctification, or a renewing of sanctification on
occasion of polutions, happening, and prevailing to defile, through
forgetfulness, and neglect of the first love, also necessary to fit for this
service, and render persons acceptable, and profitable therein. Answerable to
such renewed tipicall sanctifications, wherewith they were exhorted to
sanctify themselves after long forgetfulness, neglect and confusion had been
found with them, such as we read off in this text, 1 Chronicles. 15. 12, 14, 15.
and in 2 Chronicles. 29. and 30. In which they were to search in the Law, and see
wherein they had transgressed, to confess their sins, and repent, and do
again the first works, to cleanse themselves from all their uncleanesses, as
in Ezrah, Nehemiah, and other places.

So the renewed sanctifications in the spirit and truth, necessary to the Holy
Preist-hood now, on occasion of defilements, or polutions in principles* or
practices, contracted to themselves, by such neglects and forgetfulness of the
great salvation in the Cross of Christ, and wandering out of the way of
understanding is such, as in which, they call to mind the day in which they
were illuminated, remember how they have heard in that preaching of the Cross,
and how precious Jesus Christ was then to them, and what blessedness they met
with in him. And so here and in this case, the remembering and considering the
sweetness tasted in the graciousnesse of the Lord, and the operations that it
has had upon our spirits, as commended, and displayed in and through the
preaching of the Cross is very good and useful, though as we have showed
before, the efficacyes of the grace of God on our own spirits, or the
operations of it in us, or by us, are not to be looked to as things that
commend us to God, or as the ground of our rejoicing and hope in him, or that
give us title to the things of Christ, or are the way or ground of our
encouragement to approach to, or stand before him, yet they are to be remembered
and called to mind, as things that discover the preciousnesse of the Cross of
Christ, and his gracious and spiritual presence with that Gospel, his
speaking in and through it, and so in and through his servants faithfully
ministering it, 2 Cor. 13. 3, 4, 5. and present us with cause of shame of our
coming (...) a^ best of answerablenesse and conformity to him according to
those efficacies, and more abundantly for our departings from such a fountain,
having never found any want in it, as by such calling to mind we shall be
convinced, and so no iniquity with him, and yet that we should depart and go
away from him by an evil heart of unbelief, and dig to our selves broken
Cesterns that can hold no water, yea those things remembered or called to mind,
do so present his preciousnesse, comeliness, and excellency for our help and
escape, as that they lead to him, yea allure back again from all our
wanderings, and give instruction and encouragement yet again to turn to him,
though we have deeply revolted to confess our sins, and do again the first
works, or seek the same things, even rest to our souls, righteousness and
strength in the Lord, and that in the same way. And therefore also admonish and
engage to what follows, namely in this calling to mind the day in which we were
illuminated, and remembering how we have heard from the beginning, (as Hebr.
10. 32. 1 John 2. 24. 27. Revel. 3. 2, 3.)

Therein to search and try our ways in that true Glass or Light of the Lord,
with willingness and desire to see what we see not, and hearts fixed to take
shame to our selves, and not to hide, excuse, or seek to hold what we may see
reprooved, but acknowledge and give it up to him, with whom is pardon and
healing, and so to repent, change, our minds and way, cleanse our hands from
our sins, and our hearts from our diverse lusts, guile, or doublemindednesse, in
and according to the reproves of instruction in the true anointing, unto which
we turn for light and healing, and so do again the first works; for there is no
other way to renew our sanctification, but the first good and old way in
drawing nigh to God in Christ, to cleanse our hands and hearts, that so he may
draw nigh to us again in a peculiar sense to dwell in us and walk in us, James
4. 8. Isa, 1. 15. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 16. 17. etc. chapter 7. 1.

We find it many times very hard and difficult to recover our selves out of the
snares of Satan, when we have willingly suffered our selves to be entangled in
them after knowledge of the truth received, and so to recover out of relapses,
when we have back-sliden from him that called us into the grace of Christ, to
seek to perfect our peace, hope, joy, confidence, or sanctification, according
to the wisdom or desire of the flesh, and so procured a loss of our first
love, and decay of his work, or the powerful efficacy and usefullnesse of his
grace in us. And surely its more hard than to keep our selves in it when we are
in it, yet the preaching of the Cross is the power of God to save in both
senses, to preserve and to deliver, even to seek and to save them that are
lost, and have wandered and gone astray l^ke lost sheep. And that which makes
it so hard to recover our selves out of such relapses, and to at ^in his
righteousness in the reviving his work, it our unwillingnesse to take shame,
and judge our selves, as discovered and reproved in the true light, for so
infinitely gracious is our God, and such the plentious redemption, even the
forgiveof sins of that nature with him, that he is not wanting to follow us in
our wanderings all the day long, while yet it is called to day, and especially
to meet us in our looking back to him (and calling to mind the day in which we
were illumin^^ed, remembering how we have heard and received) with such
discoveries of the Cross of Christ, and bringing to remmbrance his
Graciousnesse tasted therein, as might make ^is ashamed, and then were we but
willing to take shame to our selves, to be sensible of, and acknowledge our own
ways and doings that have not been good, and so to lay apart and cast from us
our iniquities and Idols that we have loved, and after which we have wandered,
he would then farther and more abundantly pour out of his spirit upon us
making known his words and leading us into the understanding, and usefulness
of his truth and grace in Christ as in the former days, and much more
abundantly. According to that instruction tipically held forth, Ezekiel. 43. 10,
11. to which also agrees Prove. 1. 23. Psalm. 32. 3, 4, 5, 6-9. Prove. 28* 13. 1 John 1. 9. with Jer. 3. 12, 13. 21-25.

Such is the sanctification of the sanctuary in the spirit, and truth needful,
to fit persons for, and render them acceptable and profitable in this service
and charge committed to the holy Preisthood, and chosen generation.

4 We are in the last place, to consider. What farther order is to be observed
in the mannagement of the affairs of the Gospel by the holy Preisthood, and
chosen generation now, answerable to the order appointed to the Priests, and
Levites under the Law. And to this we shall first briefly propound some
considerations of their order.

1. The whole Tribe of Levy, were separated to bear the Arc of the Convenant
of the Lord, and the vessels of the Ministry, and to keep the whole charge of
the Tabernacle of the congregation, to Minister unto the Lord, to sing praise
on outward instruments, and to bless in his name, as was showed before, Number.
1. and 3. and 8. 9-22. Deuteronomy. 10* 8. But these both Priests, and Levites were to
wait on their office in their courses, according to their several charge, and
set office, according to to the commandment of the Lord, by the hand of Moses.

So while the Ark of the Lord, Alter, and vessels of the Ministry were under
curtains in a Tabernacle, moving from place to place, as the children of Israel
also moved. The Priests, and Levites had their several charges and set
offices, as to the keeping, and bearing the vessels of the Lord, and Ministering
about holy things, as to give some instances. The Levites, the Sons of Kohath,
were to take the charge of, and bear the Ark, the Table of show bread, the
Candle-stick, and Golden Altar, with the vessels pertaining to them, as taken
down, put together and covered by the Priests, and committed to them, Number. 4.
4-15.

But to the office of Eleazar the Priest partained the oil for the light the
sweet incense, the daily meat offering, and the anointing oil, and oversight
of all the Tabernacle, etc.

The Sons of Gershim were appointed to bear the several hangings and
coverings of Badgers skins, etc. As the Priests should appoint them their
charge in all their burdens. To the Sons of Merary in like manner pertained,
the Boards, Bars, Pillars, Sockets, Pins, etc. And in stead of these services,
when Israel, and the Arc, and Tabernacle of the Lord had rest. They had also
their diverse several set offices, ordained by Samuel, David, and Solomon,
according to the word of the Lord by Moses.

Several chosen to be Porters in the Gates who were reckoned by their
genealogy, and had the oversight of the Gates of the House of the Lord by
wards, and certain of them had the charge of the Ministering Vessels, that they
should bring them in and out by tale, some of them also to oversee the Vessels
and the fine Flower, the Wine, the Oil, the Spices, etc. but to the Sons of
the Priests still it pertained to make the ointment of the Spices.

Again, some had their set office over the things made in the pans, others of
the Kohathites were over the Shewbread, to prepare it every Sabbath. And they
had also their several set offices and courses of singing, praising, and
blessing, in his name, the Priests with Trumpets, the Levites with other
Instruments, etc. 2 Chronicles. 29. 25, 26. each to wait on their office according
to their order, see, 1 Chronicles. 6. 31, 32. chapter 9. 10. to the end. 2 Chronicles. 29.
and 30. and 31. with 1 Chronicles. 23. 24. to the end. with chapters. 24. and 25.
and 26. total.

2 There were some appointed chief heads, who were of the chief of the house of
their Fathers that had the oversight of these several offices and employments,
who had themselves also some special service in them, and were to look to the
management of the rest, as appears in the verses before the text.

There were some chief of the house of their Fathers to oversee the whole
charge and service of bearing the Ark and Vessels of the Lord, etc. So also we
read of four chief Porters that had their set office, and the oversight of the
whole charge upon them, who were therefore lodged round about the house, as
more devoted to the looking to, and management of those affairs. Likewise we
read of chief heads of their Fathers appointed to be singers, and of several
orders and courses of first and second degrees appointed by them, 1 Chronicles. 6.
33 etc. and 9. 33, 34. etc. and 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. etc. see also, Chapters 24.
and 25. and 26.

3 The Priests, the sons of Aaron, and especially the High-Preist had the whole
charge and over-fight of the whole Tribe of Levy, and of their several
offices and service about the House of God, and holy things, when the
Tabernacle with the Ark and Vessels of the Ministry were to be carried from
place to place. They were to appoint the several services and burdens to the
Levites, and to cover the holy things committed to the Kohathites charge, nor
might the Kohathites look into, touch, or alter them least they dye, and so to
appoint and order all the other service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation.

And when they had rest, still they were to appoint, order, and oversee the
management of the whole business, according to the Word of the Lord by Moses.
And to offer up and consecrate the Levites to their service, and to offer the
Burnt Offerings and the Bread of their God, to make and keep the charge of the
Oil for the Lights, and the Ointments of Spices for anointing, etc. As in the
several Scriptures forementioned may be seen, and none of the Levites, no not
the heads or the chief of the heads of them, to presume to do any thing
otherwise, then according to, and so as under their order. For they the whole
Tribe, as they were devoted to the Lord, so were given as a gift to Aaron, and
his Sons, to minister unto them as in the forecited Scriptures may be seen.

Answerable to this their tipicall order. There is an order to be observed by
the holy Priesthood now in the service of the true Tabernacle, and Sanctuary,
which the Lord has pitched, and not man, And in their bearing the vessels of
the Lord, and Ministration about holy things in it* As.

1 The whle company of them that call on him in truth, being so sanctified by
God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ are therein prepared, and made
meet for this inheritance, and called to this service, to strive together for
the faith of the Gospel, to stand before him, as an holy Priesthood, to offer
up spiritual sacrifices, and to shine as lights in the world, holding forth
the word of life (as has been showed before) but each according to their
several Abillities, and Capacities by the grace given, and gracious gifts
bestowed, and distributed to every man, yet with this cautionary provisoe the
women are not permitted to speak in every place, not in the public or general
assemblies of the Church, where there are, or may be not only many daughters
and attenders, who are in some degree of simplicity waighting, though yet they
have received little, But also many faighned as well as many halting believers,
and likewise many ignorant and some wilful opposers coming in among them.

Nor is it seemly for them in any assemblys of believers, so to speak or act,
as to usurp authority over the man, and so not otherwise then so as they may be
therein under obedience, as that (1 Corinthians 14. 34.) without the
Translators addition is, thus read. It is not (or has not been) permitted unto
them to speak, but to be under obedience, etc. in which saying, as so read, are
two parts in such conjunction, and the former so depending on the latter, that
it cannot stand without it, and so this appears in the sum and scope of the
saying; That it is not permitted to them otherwise to speak then so as they be
therein under obedience, for so we find the like phrase or manner of speech in
other Scriptures and in other cases carrying a like sense, as John 5. 22. The
Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son. Now that
the Father does now judge men, and that without respect of persons, is plainly
expressed in other Scriptures, 1 Peter 1. 17. John 12. 48. with 1 Cor. 11. 32.
Therefore the first part of that saying cannot stand alone or without the
second, yea our Savior says, in that same Chapter, John 5. 19. that The Son
can do nothing of himself but what he sees the Father do. So that the sense
of the saying forementioned appears to be this, That the Father judges no man
immediately, or otherwise then so as by committing all judgment to the Son, and
so judging and executing judgment by him, like to which is that, 1 John 2. 27.
Ye need not that any man teach you but as the same anointing teaches, etc. Now
that they all needed the helpfulnesse and teaching of their fellowmembers and
brethren, and that all believers do so while they are here in this present
world, is evident enough in the same Chapter, verses 1. 12. 15-24. 28. and in
other Scriptures, 1 Cor. 12. 21. etc. Ephesians. 7. 12, 13. etc. But the sense is
clear, they need not that any man teach them but as that teaches, or otherwise
then as that teaches, they need not any man's teaching that teaches otherwise,
as 1 Timothy 6. 3. 5.

So here, it is not permitted into the Women to speak, but to be under
obedience, that the first part of this cannot stand alone, or without the
second, is evident in the Scripture, for they, especially the elder women, are
exhorted, and instructed so to speak, as to be teachers of good things, Tit. 2.
3, 4. yea women are commended for laboring with Paul in the Gospel, Phil. 4.
3. and that a woman expounded unto Apollo. The way of the Lord more perfectly
we read, Acts 18. 26. yea that they were of the first witnesses and preachers
of the resurrection of Christ, the Evangelists tell us; and that they may, as
any of them is through grace sitted thereto, both pray and prophecy, and that
in the presence of others, in some assemblys of believers is clearly fignified,
1 Cor. 11. 5. and in other Scriptures; but the sense of the saying in both
parts together is this; They ought not, nor is it seemly for them otherwise to
speak either in praying or prophesying, as the mouth of others, or in
propounding questions, nor otherwise to act, no not in the Church, or any the
assemblys thereof, then so as therein they be under obedience, and in quiet
silence and subjection to the man so as in the Lord, and therein to the wise
and holy order and disposition of God. They then are not capable of any office
of rule or oversight in the Church as Elders and Deacons, but to be in
subjection.

Yea farther I suppose: That in any assemblys of believers where there are men
in presence, fitted for speaking in prayer, or prophecy, or in propounding and
answering questions for the edification of others, it may be convenient for the
women there to be silent, yea a shame for them to speak, unless in some
extraordinary cases, or on some particular occasion, and so as desired or
appointed, as to the order and time of such their speaking by such brethren in
presence with them, or that are also over them in the word of the Lord, as they
may judge it needful and convenient; for the man was first formed then the
woman, likewise the woman was first in the transgression, nevertheless,
neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman without the man in the
Lord. But I forbear to urge my apprehensions of these things, and leave what is
said to correction by better judgment.

The women then for decency and ordersake observing such cautions, as 1 Cor.
14. 33, 34, 35. 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12. etc. with 1 Cor. 11. 5 -- 10. and so every
one, man or woman, keeping their place, and attending that place and service to
which they are sitted and called: The whole Church of unfeigned believers may
all prophecy one by one, as God has dealt to them such a gift, or exercise any
other gift they have, according to their several abillity in this shift for
the faith of the Gospel, that all may learn, and all may be comforted
according as God has dealt to every man.

For as there are many members in one body, and all members have not the same
office, so we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of
another, to every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift
of Christ; he who has set the members in the body as it has pleased him,
divides to every man severally as he will, for there are diversities of gifts,
but the same spirit and differences of administrations, but the same Lord and
diverfities of operations, but it is the same God which works all in all, but
the manifestation of the spirit is given to every one to profit withal
according to his measure, for to one is given by the Spirit the word of
wisdom, to another knowledge by the same Spirit, to another faith, etc.

And so these several gifts were set in the Church, Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, rancked under five heads, Ephesians. 4. 11. there were also other gifts
added with these to the Church, to accompany the first proclamation of the
Gospel to the Gentiles by the first witnesses, which gifts were not so set for
continuance as the former unto which they were added, and therefore not
mentioned among those which were given to continue in the Church, till it come
to its perfect state, compare 1 Cor. 12. 28. with Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.

Now the Apostles themselves as they were appointed and chosen to peculiar
service, that by them the preaching might be fully known, and that all the
Gentiles might hear, so they were not only immediately from the Lord, but also
peculiarly gifted with all spiritual gifts to fit them to that service, they
had all the scriptures of the Prophets so opened to them, and their
understandings so opened and strengthened to understand them, and the
revelation of the mystery even of the truth of all, as fulfilled, come forth
and manifested in Christ, raised from the dead, so immediately and fully given
them from the Lord himself, and were so gifted with all wisdom, knowledge,
and utterance, that they was therein perfectly accomplished, and therefore sent
in his name to make known the mystery as now revealed, and to make it known out
of the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the commandment of the
everlasting God for the obedience of the faith among all Nations for his name,
and so as wise Master Builders, to lay the foundation for others to the end of
the world to build on, and so their gift as it was peculiar to them, is yet
left us in the fruit of it, in their word and doctrine confirmed and set in the
Church.

And so also their gift, even the gift of Apostles in a secondary and inferior
sense is still found in the prime degree of the gift of Prophecy as set in the
Church, which therefore is mentioned as the head or chief of the best gifts,
now to be coveted by believers, by other believers since, or besides the
Apostles, such as believe through their word, 1 Cor. 12. 31. with c^. 14 1. of
which gift there are degrees, or diversity of measure, and so of
administrations, and operations accordingly. Whence it is expressed in that to
the Ephesians under these two heads. Prophets, Evangelists. The prime degree
has in it, such an understanding of the Scriptures of the Prophets, even as
the Testimony of Christ witnessed by them as now manifested by the Apostles, is
confirmed in the heart. As also such acquaintance with the Scriptures, and such
skill in the word of righteousness. ( vide.) The vision of all, the great
things of the Law, or doctrine delivered by the Prophets, and Apostles, and as
the foundation of, and key of knowledge for opening all other things (namely
the testimony of Jesus) as in which they are furnished, and apted to a plain,
and clear opening the foundation, as laid by the Apostles, and that out of the
Scriptures of the Prophets, by the revelation of the mystery given by the
Apostles. And so to show the things of Christ by the Scrriptures even the
things already done in his own body which the Prophets said should come to
pass, and the powerful efficacy of them with the Father for men, and in the
name of the Father unto then. Through his powerful mediation between God and
men; as also therein to show the things yet to come in his glorious appearing,
and Kingdom, and with this word of righteousness, so distinctly, and
convincingly, to instruct, teach, exhort, reprove, etc. By the Scriptures of
the Prophets, as opened by the Apostles, that they are therein mighty through
God, to the opening the eyes of the blind, convincing the ignorant, and
gainsayers of the vanity and falsenesse of other foundations, in the plain
demonstration of this, in the evidence, and demonstration of the spirit with
power, and to the helping them much, who through grace believe, Acts 18. 24,
25, 27, 28. 1 Cor. 14. 1, 3, 4, 20, 24, 25.

There is also an inferior degree of this gift of prophecy (called in Ephesians. 4.
11. Evangelizing, included in Prephets, 1 Cor. 12. 28.) In which (though there
may be wanting, some of that abillity, and skill forementioned) yet there is so
much of that nature, as may render their feet beautiful, to the alluting, and
drawing to Christ especially on the barren Mountains, where men are not so
settled on other objects, or where they are in any measure taken off from
finding content, rest, and feeding in them.

Yea they that have not this gift, that are much wanting, and short, in such
understanding, and acquaintance with the Scriptures, and such skill in the word
of righteousness, the great things of his Law contained in them, as might apt
them so to open the foundation, and show the great things of Christ by the
Scriptures, and therewith open the Scriptures of the Prophets by the Apostles,
show things to come; and thence, and therewith to instruct, etc. as before. Yet
they may have some word of knowledge, or of faith; some feeding or teaching
gift, in which they may be fellow helpers to the truth by confessing his name,
as they have proved the goodness, and truth of it and may be helped to
express it by the Scriptures, though not so to open, interpret, and give the
sense of the Scriptures, and show the scope of them, and instructions contained
in them, as others, that have a more excellent gift that way.

Each might be profitable to themselves, and others; to their brethren, and the
world, and comely, and useful in their generation were they content to keep
their place, and so to minister, as they have received the gift, and as God
has distributed to every one. Every one might have joy, and praise from God,
in a right exercise of his own gift that God has given him, if he were not
seeking, to have the rejoicing use, and praise of another gift, which yet is
not his own, which indeed springs from a desire of vain glory, whence those
admonitions, Romans 12. 3. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. with such vehemence urged.

2. There are some appointed of God to go before others, as guides, rulers,
elders, or leaders in the Word of the Lord; to whom is especially committed the
peculiar service, of Preaching the Cross of Christ of witnessing repentance,
and remission of sins in his name, and so of showing Jesus Christ, and the
things of him, out of the Scriptures of the Prophets, and Apostles compared.
And therewith interpreting, and opening the Scriptures, giving the sense of the
manifold, instructions, judgments, encouragements, reproves, exhortations,
etc. Contained therein, and contending with opposers; to them also is more
peculiarly committed, the whole charge of ordering, and managing the affairs
of the Gospel in the Church, and to the world-ward according to their
capacity, and opportunity in the several places where they are set. And these
according to the instructions of the Apostles given by the one Shephard, with
the advice, prayers, and help of their brethren in the faith, as they may enjoy
it, are to commit to others their several charges, according to their fitness
in first, and second degrees.

They are to commit the chief work of preaching, and giving the sense of the
Scriptures, and showing the things of Christ out of them, and contending with
adversaryes for the faith, unto faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also. Seeing to them, as they have opportunity that they teach no other
doctrine, instructing, helping, and going before them in their Ministry, and
seeking in a Gospel way, to stop the mouths of unruly, and vain talkers.

And to others that are faithful, though not so able, nor gifted for the
forementioned services, as there is occasion, and need, they may commit, the
administration of the outward ordinance of Baptizeing in his Name, which is
mentioned by the Apostle, as a lighter matter of the Law, and not so peculiarly
appropriated to choice instruments, (as also we have showed before, in 1 Cor.
1. 14-17.) which likewise is signified in our Saviors committing that to his
disciples before so sit to be sent forth to preach, John 4. 2. And in Peter's
appointing that to be done by others, when yet none of them but himself that
we read of had preached the Gospel to that people, Act. 10. 48. And so the
testimonial receiving in that ordinance, the little children, brought, and
presented to the Church. As also some care, and charge of them, and of their
parents, that they may be kept, and brought up in the School of Christ, and so
in the nurture, and admonition of the Lord.

Likewise according to their capacity, some care, and charge of other persons
adheering to the Gospel with them, and so also of one another.

Care of their souls, in faithful admonishing, warning the unruly, comforting,
and strengthening the weak, exhorting one another bearing one another
burtherns, etc. as 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14, 15. etc. Heb. 3. Gall. 6. 1-5. 6.

And so care of their bodies also, in visiting the sick, having inspection into
the wants of the needy, and some more particularly, as they have capacity, and
opportunity, to see to what is needful to the mannagement of the affairs of
the Gospel, as to the entertainment of strangers, and otherwise helping
forward the fellow-helpers to the truth, and to these purposes to be ready
themselves, and to provoke, and stir up others to love, and good works. And
some to receive, and distribute, as necessity, and opportunity calls for it the
liberallity of others to the relief of the needy, as to other the
forementioned purposes. And those that are appointed or in any wise set apart
as by way of office to such service, (for all that have believed in God ought
to be careful to maintain good works each acording to their capacity, and
are so to be charged by those over them in any sense in the Word of the Lord,
yea to stir up, and provoke one another thereto; Tit. 3. 8, 14, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14,
15. Heb. 10. 24, and 13. 1, 2. 3 John 4. 5, 6. But those that are in any wise
set apart by way of office to such service) as the taking any oversight of
their brethren in these things, and mannaging these affairs in the Church, and
for the good of the world. They especially, are to be such as are known to be
men sound in the faith, honest, and of good report, and in some measure full of
the holy Ghost, and of wisdom, that the name of God be not evil spoken of,
but gloryfied among the Gentiles, and the design of the Gospel not hindered
but farthered, and promoted by each in their place, Act. 6. 1-6. 1 Timothy 3.
7-13. And therefore also the rich, to be more vehemently charged, not to be
high-minded nor trust in uncertain riches -- to do good, yea to be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18.

Now those appointed of God in especial manner to go before others in the
word of the Lord, and in the ordering, and mannagement of these affairs, and
more especially to commit to others their several charges, and burdens. Who
are also so to be known, approved, allowed, and submitted to in the Lord by
their brethren, and to be prayed for, and blessed out of the house of the Lord,
they are such, as are furnished to such peculiar service, and oversight of
others, and so also approved and appointed thereto by Jesus Christ the great
Apostle, and high Priest of our profession, and so in, and by the Apostles
doctrine, instructions, and commandments given us by the Lord Jesus. And they
are such, as are faithful men, upright, fixed, to seek righteousness, and
strength in Christ, holding fast the faithful word, wherein they have been
taught, and not novices therein, but elders in the faith; in Christ the elders
that are among them, such as are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in
Jesus Christ, yea such as are, and have been some time preserved blameless,
as 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. For though some men's sins rendering, them unfit for such
service, are open, going beforehand so as manifesting themselves to the
judgment of others, yet all do not so but some follow after, likewise also
the good works or quallifications, rendering meet for such service, in some are
manifest beforehand and may seem more then they are, and they that are
otherwise, that is in any measure truly fitted, and quallified to it, and yet
not so much, or forward in appearance, they cannot be hid but will in due time
for their thrusting forth, be manifested, at least to the judgment of such as
Timothy, that should have a more special hand, in knowing, and thrusting forth
such; therefore Timothy was to lay hands suddenly on no man, that so he might
commit these things to faithful men, who should be able and fitly quallified
to teach others also, 1 Timothy 5. 21, 22, 24, 25. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Such are the
called to such peculiar service, to such is the special charge of watching for
others souls, or keeping this whole commandment without spot, unrebukeable
until the appearing of Jesus* Christ. Such others are admonished to know, and
esteem very highly for their works sake, especially such as labor most
abundantly in the word, and doctrine, yea to obey them in the Lord, and to be
followers together of them as they are of Christ, and so with them followers of
him, considering the end of their conversation which is Jesus Christ the same,
yesterday, and to day, and for ever, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Phil. 3.
17 20, 21. Heb. 13. 7, 8, 17.

3. They all, the whole body of unfeigned believer^, with their chief ones
Pillars or guides of one degree, or another, are given as a gift to Christ to
be to him a company of spiritual Priests, an holy Nation, and peculiar people,
Heb. 3. 1-6. 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 9. (All his Saints in thy hand, they sat down at
thy fcete, every one shall receive of thy words, Deuteronomy. 33. 3.) And so therein
in some sense given to the Apostles, the wise Master builders, that they may
stand before him, and Minister unto him, according to the commandments, and
instructions delivered from that one Shephard by them.

It is his peculiar work, and reserved in his own hand, as the great Apostle
and high Priest of our profession, not as Aaron, and his Sons, in their veiled
ministry, to cover the things committed to the charge of others, (as the
vessels committed to the K^hathites) and so commit them covered. But to open
the things committed in charge to his peculiar people, and to commit them unto
them, as so opened, yea the veil, or covering is already taken away in Christ,
and so in his Ministration. Therefore also the Apostles have used all playnness
of speech, 2 Cor. 3. And given us to see within the vail into the truth of
things as found in Christ, and brought forth by him. For the Law came by Moses,
but grace, and truth by Jesus Christ (as is showed before.)

Yea to him pertains the offerings of the Lord made by fire, etc. He has
fulfilled, and brought forth the truth of all, in that one offering of his own
body, once for all, and appears now, presenting himself, that one perfect
sacrifice, in the presence of God for us, yea the great Mediator, Apostle and
high Priest of our profession; and therefore to him pertains the oil for the
lights and the anointing oil; he has prepared, and made it in himself for
us, and be gives it forth, to him it pertaines to give us wisdom, strength,
and fitness to all service, and suffering, and to make manifest the savor of
his knowledge by us, to give the increase, and he does so do and give, by, and
through the knowledge of himself. Yea his office it is, not only to Baptize
with the holy Ghost, but also with fire, nor has he, or will he depute any in
his place for this, or either of these, but he will do it himself,
faithfully, and seasonably unto his holy Priesthood, and to others also that
they may be brought in to them, and with them to himself, he will faithfully
pour out his spiritual Baptizing, the washing of regeneration, and renewing
of the holy Ghost and so give his increase, even by and through them in their
observance of his charge, lo I am with you always unto the end of the world,
Math. 28. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 3. 5 9. 2 Cor. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8.

Yea this promise is to us in, and through the Apostles doctrine, to whom
pertained the revelation of the Mystery (formerly hid, or not so manifested)
and that for obedience to the faith among all Nations for his ^ame; among whom,
we are also, the called of Jesus Christ by their Gospel, as Romans 1. 5, 6, 7. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14. He is the great Master, of them, and us, who has already
given the word by them. All we are brethen, and to receive the Law from his
mouth, yet the Apostles, as wise Master Builders, in his name, have laid the
foundation, we are to build on that good foundation as laid by them, and as
also they have instructed us to build on it, 1 Cor. 3. 10* etc. And so to be
followers together of Christ, and thereto, and therein shall enjoy those great,
and precious promises sorementioned, as 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. etc. with Job. 14. 21,
23. He will dwell in them and walk in them, as 2 Cor. 6. 16 -- 18, etc. Yea he
will seasonblic follow with his fiery Baptism, more immediately by himself.

Noe man, not any of the Fathers, are to cover, or put vailes upon any thing,
which they have opened, or to open any thing otherwise, then as they have
opened, and delivered the same unto us, nor to add any mixtures, which man's
wisdom teaches in the building such mixtures, or additions, will occasion
the loss of our work, by the fire that comes from that foundation, the fire of
the Altar, or by the fiery trial. Yea we our selves cannot be saved otherwise
then so as by fire, suffering that to burn up our mixtures, and so we may be
saved by it, 1 Corinthians. 3. 10 -- 13 -- 15 -- 18. Whereas Nedeb, and Abibu,
Leviticus 10. 1, 2. And those Numbers 16. 35. were consumed by the tipicall
fire, so exceeding in glorious grace is this dispensation of the fulness of
times, and the administration of Gods Government by Jesus Christ under it. But
take heed, when saved, and converted from such polutions, of turning again to
folly. In^quities of this nature, are like that of Kor^b. And very much to the
defiling Gods Temple and so to the procuring speedy d^struction: For if any man
defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. see the sorementioned, 1 Cor.
3. 16, 17, 18. According to these considerations, they seek not the Lord after
the due order.

1. That are ready to be offering Sacrifices, before they hear the word of
truth, the Gospel of our salvation, or have so heard, as in some measure to be
reconciled by it, and so brought into, or made of his house, or while they are
entering (...) not still more ready to hear, then to offer the Sacrifices of
fools: nor are they yet capable of considering the evil they do in such
hastiness of spirit.

Whence James exhorts even such as are beloved brethren, yet to be swift to
hear, flow to speak, slow to wrath; for the wrath of of man, the hastiness of
the spirit of a man, to be speaking and offering sacrifices so as for, or on
the behalf of others, works not the righteousness of God; wherefore laying
apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, receive with meekness
the ingrafted word which is able to save your souls, James 1. 19, 20, 21.

2 Nor they that having tasted that the Lord is gracious, and proved the
powerful efficacy and force of that living stone, drawing to him, building on
him, delivering from the errors and polutions of the world, consecrating and
devoting them to him and his, yet do not diligently mind or regard their
charge, and the end of their calling. But either are slothful, cleaving to,
and embracing the things of this present world, preferring profane and common
affairs before these great affairs of the Gospel, and so taken off, and
hindered from earnest striving together with them that call on him in truth for
the faith of it; loving and preferring Fathers, Mothers, Lands, Livings, or
their own life before him, or not ha^ing them in comparison of him, and for his
sake and the Gospells. They are not worthy of him, nor demean themselves
worthy of, or suitable to such a vocation, as wherewith they are called, yea
this their dullness, neglect, and slothfulness, may occasion errors of
rashness in others, as the like did in Vzzah, 1 Chronicles. 13. 9. with chap. 15.
12, 13.

Or else retain some other Idol, or way of iniquity in their hearts, though often
discovered and reproved, and seek to excuse and hide it from the light, as some
desire of vain glory, or any other fiilthinesse of flesh or spirit, and yet
appear and stand before him in their uncleanness, yea hiding it under their
tongue, or setting it up in their hearts, as if by him they had a dispensation,
or were delivered to it, or might be conived at, or allowed in it more then
others, because of their peculiar service, or usefulness in the Church more
then others, something like that, Jer. 7. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Be we admonished of these ways of iniquity and confusion, for he the Lord
that sanctifies us is holy, be ye therefore clean ye that bear the vessels of
the Lord.

3 Nor yet are they seeking after the due order, that are not content with
their place and service in the body, in which they might be useful, but either
they must do as others do, or undertake the exercise of such a gift as they
have not almost like them, that intrude into things they have not seen, vainly
puffed up with their fleshly mind, or else sit down in a peevish coffeehouse
as if they were none of the body, because not such a principal member or might
be no way useful, yea refuse to be useful and seek their own good, and the
good of others as they might, of they may not or cannot be useful in such a
gift or manner of administration as another.

4 Nor they that are headily running on in the exercise of any gift, or setting
themselves apart, or being set apart by some others, to any peculiar service in
the Gospel, or undertaking any special charge in this Ministry, to which they
may think themselves meet, and some others like them, or weaker and younger
ones in the faith, (that are therein out of their place) may put them forward
before they be called and thrust forth by the Lord, and by such of his
servants, especially the Elders among them to whom they are given as a gift
from the Lord, to be lo^ked too, watched over, and ordered by them in the Lord:
Or go an end in such exercises, and in the management of such affairs, (as to
which they may have had some previous fitness and due encouragements, yet) so
as alone and in the hastiness of their own spirit, before and without the
advice, helps, prayers, and blessings, out of the house of the Lord. Oh how
needful is that admonition of the Apostle to every one amongst us, not to
think of our selves more highly then we ought to think, but to think soberly
according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith -- with all
lowlynesse and me^knesse to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, not to be desirous of vain glory, nor to let any thing be done
through it, but in lowlynesse of mind each to esteem other better then
themselves, the younger submitting to the elder, and all of us one to another
in the fear of the Lord, Romans 12. 3. Ephesians 4. 1 3. etc. Phillippians 2.
1-5. with 1 Peter 5. 5, 6.

5 Yea faulty and out of order are they that are over such in the word of the
Lord, unto whom they have been, or are given as a gift from the Lord to
minister to, and with them according to their capacity, if they take not
special notice of such disorders, to warn the unruly, as well as encourage and
support the weak and timorous. And although if the instructions and admonitions
of sound doctrine will not prevail to rectify or stop the mouths of such
unruly and vain talkers, they cannot so well stop their mouths or prohibit them
any other way, which may be meet for them to walk in, as happily they might in
the Apostles times, or first times of the Church succeeding them, while the
outward Court was in the hands of true and unfeignbelievers which since is left
out, as given into the hands of the Gentiles, who tread the Holy City
under-foot, Revelations 11. 1, 2. yet it behooves them therefore to be the more
diligent and watchful in holding fast the faithful word, as they have been
taught, and making full proof of their ministry, doing whatever lies before
them to be done in it, and with it, faithfully as unto the Lord, That they may
be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers, and
that the truth and power of the Gospel may continue with others, as Acts 20.
28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Timothy 5. 20. 21, 22, 2 Timothy 4. 1-5. Titus 1. 9. 10.
Galatians 2. 4, 5. Therefore says Peter, The Elders that are among you I
exhort. Feed the flock of God that are among you, taking the oversight, etc.
And yet not as being Lords. For,

6 Most of all out of order are they that seek to exercise a Master-ship or
Lord-ship over their brethren, that are not content to be brought so nigh, as
to minister to him as a holy Preisthood, and to receive the Law, and that their
brethren with them also, should receive it from his mouth, but seek the
Preisthood also, even the high Preisthood that is peculiar to him, (like that
sin of Korab, Numbers 1 6. 9, 10, 11.) and so would set themselves in his place
and Temple, as if they were the Great Apostles and high Priests of our
profession, to give laws to his Church, teaching for doctrines the precepts of
men, and setting up their Posts by his, or as if they were the Lords of their
brethren, and had been crucified and given themselves a ransom for them, would
rule over the conscience, determine their faith, and assume to themselves an
absolute seat of judgment over them, not committing that to him to whom only
it belongs, or would espouse them to themselves, as if they could give increase
or spirit to them, cont^ary to John 3. 28, 29, 30. Matthew 23. 8, 9, 10. and 7.
1. 2 Cor. 11. 2. like him, 2 These. 2. 3, 4, etc.

Now let us here also search and try our ways, and be willing to see and
acknowledge our confusion and disorder, as in these instructions it may be
discovered, and turn unto the Lord that has s^itten us, with whom yet there is
mercy and healing for us. And for a little farther particular application of
these last instructions, to such as are in any measure made of his spiritual
house and holy Preisthood, I shall briefly add a word or two unto such; and oh
that we were willing every one of us seriously to examine and judge our selves,
and to know every man the plague of his own heart.

Have we considered the nature and weight of the charge committed to us? and
been willing or had our hearts prepared to seek it? to be sanctified to that
service after the sanctification of his sanctuary. Have we not defiled our
selves with Idols, and with many polutions of flesh and spirit.

Yea even then, when under pretense of having no fellowship with the
unfruitful works, or workers of darkness, we in our rash zeal have been
seeking to hinder and keep out others for their weakness, ignorance, or
sinfulness out of the house of God, and from rejoicing and seeking the Lord
with his people in his ordinances, and bidding them stand aloof from us, we
are holier then you, yet have we not? Instead of awakening, rising, and
standing up from them in their ignorant and unclean principles and practices,
which we should have done and not the other; I say while instead of that, we
have bidden them stand aloof from us, I am holyer, etc. Have we not walked in
their ways? and so had fellowship with them in their uncleanness, in their
covetousness, pride, following after the vanity of the mind, in the fashions
and customs of this world, and according to our former lusts in our ignorance,
and after the Iusts of men. Have we not sought after, and doted on the wisdom
of this world, the praise of men and like things? nay do we not even outstrip
many of the world in these things, and teach the ignorant and wicked ones these
our ways? (while under pretense of holiness we will not let them learn
better of us) and so strengthen the hands of evil doers by our example, that
none of them returns by means of us from the evil of his way.

Yea, how little dwelling together with all lowliness of mind in the unity of
the spirit? or submitting of the younger to the elder, and all of us one to
another in the fear of the Lord, as being clothed with humility is there not
rather a spirit of pride, and thence of division, yea of madness and
giddynesse possessing us, that is ever rushing us into extremes. As to say.

1. The younger, and such as are taught in the word, as Gall. 6. 6. And also
fellow-helpers to the truth, or such as might be so more then they are, were
they willing to walk circumspectly, and with a right foot in the Gospel. But
such of us. Are we not either headily slighting, or dispising all helps of our
brethren, or at least such as we might enjoy, and have much mercy in, and
advantage by, as if we could understand the mind of God in the Scriptures, as
well without such helps, and enjoy fellowship, and communion with him, though
neglecting them boasting that we are of Christ as well as they, and are not all
the Lords people holy? as Numbers. 16. 3. with 1 Cor. 1. 12. As immagining that
we have no need of them, of their instructions, advice, prayers, blessings, and
hands with us, for our understanding, and mannaging the affairs of the Gospel
pertaining to us but can as well stand alone, or go one of our selves, even
without such of our brethren, as to whom we ought more especially to submit our
selves in the fear of the Lord, at least, if they will not fulfill our humor,
and say as we say. Or else, are we not on the other hand? Idolizing, and
preferring them, or some one or other of them, before, or in opposition to
another. As if they had been crucified for us, or had the spirit, to give to
us, calling them, or some of them, our masters, or fathers, in such respects,
as Christ ought only so to be esteemed by us, having our eye, and dependence on
them, as those that would have our fear regulated and taught by their precepts,
yea as the eyes of a Servant, are to his Master, and of a Handmaid to her
Mistress, and as our eyes should be only unto the Lord. Yea.

2. The Elders among us, Though its not meet, (especially for such a younger
one as my self) to rebuke such, yet let me entreat them as Fathers, to
consider. Is there not also too much of such a spirit as is rushing even such
into extremes.

1. Either sometimes to neglect that great care, and oversight of their
brethren, as a thing not partaining to them, or as if the unworthiness,
stubbornness, and* giddiness found with us, or any over whom the holy Ghost
has made them overseers, might excuse the neglect of their care and oversight
of them, or give them just cause to be so angry, as to cast it off. Like Jeremy
of old, that sometimes said, he would speak no more in his name, because it
was made a reproach, and dirision to him daily, But the Lord was stronger than
he, and prevailed, to beget in him, and carry him forth in a better resolution.
May not likewise such follyes, or giddiness in us, as forementioned, either on
the one hand, slighting, or on the other hand idolizing such as are over us in
the word of the Lord, or being partially pustup for one against another. And
not rightly obeying, or submiting to any of them in the Lord, but wilfully
walking every one in the ways of his own heart, and in the fight of his eyes
and happily after our own lusts, heaping up to our selves teachers too, having
itching ears, I say may not such follyes, and giddiness found with us,
sometimes move, and provoke the spirits even of such as Moses, to be ready to
take up such rash resolutions, to neglect, or cast off their care, and
watchfullnesse over their brethren, as if disengaged; to let them go on, and
walk in their own way, without plain and faithful reproving and warning of
the evil of it, as they see it, or might see it, and have opportunity so to
warn them and seek their healing. Yet to such let me say be ye entreated, to
consider the nature of your engagement. The grace bestowed rendering you
Deptors, and obliging, and from whom you expect your reward, yea consider him,
that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, and such
unteachablenesse, and untowardnesse, in his chosen Disciples, least ye be
weary, and faint in your minds, and withal bethink your selves what advantage
Satan may get over others even of some more simple, and upright ones, though
weak, to rush them, into errors of rashness, like Vzzab's, by occasion of your
negligence, or listening to such a peevish spirit, provoked by others evils,
and happily partly also by too much looking or too single poorin^s on your own
weakness and unfitness to deal with or for such a people, as by such
occasions you are made sensible of it, as Isaiah. 6. 5. with Exodus. 3. 11. and
4. 10.

2. Or on the other hand, will not the same spirit that moves and provokes from
such considerations as before, to sit down in a peevish discontent, or to
neglect, or cast of their care, or charge committed to them, happily working
thereto also, upon their own natural desire of case, or the like, I say will
not, or may not the same spirit from the like considerations, rush them
otherwhile into another extreme, (happily working to this also, upon some
natural inclination that may yet be found with such, to honor, or praise, or
to be some bodies or the like) that is to say, when they are stirred up even by
Gods spirit, to take some care of their brethren, and seek some way to be
helpful, or profitable to them, in those things, in which they are out of
order, even then, and in those endeavors, to be Lording it over Gods heritage,
rashly judging, and upbraiding them for their follyes, as if they had opened
their cares, nay more then he that did so yea seeking to bring them under
them, or to submit to their order, or if it be Gods, yet as from them; rather
then as servants, and with the meekness, and gentleness of Christ seeking
their being first devoted, and given up to God, that so they may be to him and
for his use, and by him be given to them according to his will. To such
therefore let me here farther add.

Oh see I beseech you, what the following such a spirit a little cost Moses, or
rather the people in his loss, Numbers 20. 10, 12. Deuteronomy. 3. 26, 27. with Psalm.
106. 32, 33. And consider how much unlike it is to the mind, and way of Christ
found in himself, Isaiah 42. 18, 19, 20. And in his servants guided by his
spirit, Psalm. 38. 13, 14, 15.

And give earnest heed to that vehement charge of the Apostle Paul to Timothy,
2 Timothy 4. 1 -- 5. with Chapter 2. 24, 25, 26. and of Peter to the Elders. 1
Peter 5. 1 -- 5.

And let us all be admonished, so to think on our ways, as to turn our feet
unto his testimonies, and in the light and strength of them, to make have, and
not to delay to keep his Commandments, Psa 119, 59, 60. Even to do what we
should have done of this nature at the first, and have prevented this harm and
loss to our selves, least yet a worse thing come unto us. And to encourage us
to listen to, and receive this admonition. Consider in the last place.

4. That yet the Lord is our God, though he has made this Breach upon us:
while he is so highly provoked, to punish us in such manner for our iniquityes,
yet there is forgiveness wi^h him, and help in him, even for rebellious
sinners, that yet he may be feared, and hoped in by them while yet it is called
to day. Y^a such punishments, and corrections on his peculiar people, may yet
stand with his gracious owning them in Christ receiving and taking pleasure in
them, as found in Christ however punishing them for their iniquityes for he
chasteneth every Son whom he receives; Though indeed such judgments as these,
do signify him to be as one rising up out of his wonted place of mercy, and
are something near to a withdrawing from a people, and to a resisting, and
giving up. And may also have some Act of resisting in them, and yet stand with
his readiness to receive, return, and be gracious to us. For he that is so
unwillingly, and hardly provoked to deny, disowne, and put away any, from that
relation, or neerenesse, in which he has made them nigh to himself, as his
spouse, or children by faith in Christ and will not do it, till it come to
that, he must either deny himself, o^ them, but still graciously receives, and
accepts as beleivers on Christ and so as children, and heirs, to be favored,
with the peculiar favor of his people, when as yet many unkind, and
unchildlike requitalls of his grace have been found with them yea when not
only many iniquityes, and polutions in their holy things are found with them,
but also many backslidings, and departings from him, by an evil heart of
unbelief, such as do bring much loss, and deadness upon them, and procure
fore corrections to them, and might justly procure his utter denying, and
disowning them, he is also so infinite in graciousnesse, that, when any man's
drawings back, are come to that height, that his soul ^^^ ^ake no pleasure in
them, but that he is provoked to put them away for such iniquityes as by which
they have sold themselves from him, ye he does not presently give them a bill
of divorce, ( Isa ^ ^o.) But is yet following them in their wanderings, while
yet it is to day, with such discoveryes of his Son, and the riches of provision
in his house even for prodigalls that have wasted all they had, and forfeited
all, and with such reproofs of instruction, as might make them ashamed, to see
if yet they will repent and remember from whence they are fallen, and look back
toward him who is yet waiting to be gracious to them, and if any by all this
goodness yet be ashamed and say I have sinned and perverted that which is
right, and it profited me not, then he is gracious and says, deliver him from
going down to the pit, for I have found a ransom, and he will farther open to
him the treasures and fat things of his House, and lead him into the
understanding and usefulness of his truth in Christ, and he shall return to
the days of his youth, as Ez. k. 43. 10, 11. Jer. 2. and 3. tet. Job. 33.
23-28.

For therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious, blessed are all
they that yet in the way of his judgments wait for him. For the Lord is a God
of judgment. He is the Lord our God, his Judgments are in all the earth, who
has made this Breach upon us.

I shall briefly propound for our farther usefulness of this; these several
positions of instruction, contained in this acknowledgement, that it is the
Lord, and avouchment of him to be their God, as Deuteronomy. 26. 17.

1. That he whose hand had made this Breach upon them, and whose Kingdom in
it, did rule over them is, the Lord our God, that has for ever the only right
to dispose off and judge us.

2. That he is yet able to save, to preserve, yea to deliver even when we are
ready to perish.

3. That he is then ready, and willing to save, nigh at hand, especially to
such as seek him.

4. He it is, and he only, to whom from these considerations, we may be, (and
in looking to him are) encouraged to fly for help and refuge. He is the Lord
our God.

1 He that has done it, is the only Lord, that has for ever the only right
to dispose of, and judge us. He even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has committed all judgment to the Son, and executes all his judgments
present and eternal by him: even as now in man's nature exalted (as we have
showed before) and so Jesus Christ as now actually made flesh in a body
prepared for him in our nature, and through sufferings in the same body
glorified with the Father, with whom all this was vertually present, and of
force from the beginning of the world: He even the Man Christ Jesus in the Name
of the Father (for all the Scriptures bear witness of him) as it is he that
has done it, as we showed in the second instruction propounded to be
considered in the text, so he had the only right to do it, for he is Lord of
all, and has for ever in the name and majesty of God his Father, the only
right to dispose of and judge us, not only by right of creation, as Psalm. 95.
7. and 100. 3. for so all are his from the beginning, for he was in the
beginning with God, and that word was God, by him and for him were all things
made that were made, John 1. 1, 2, 3. Collossians 1. 16. and so he is the
proper Lord and Heir of all things by right of creation, and according to his
divine and eternal generation, but not only so, nor is that all meant in those
places in the Psalms forementioned, but also by right of redemption (in which
there is a new creation for our nature, made and perfect in him for us) he is
Lord of all to the glory and praise of God the Father, Pbill. 2. 6. 11.

For when we by reason of sin were justly banished from his Kingdom, in the
righteous sentance of his Law, and equity of his Justice, shut out as accursed
from him, and by reason thereof must needs have been le^t under the power of
Satan and dominion of death, for all our strength was as water spile on the
ground that cannot be gathered up again, even then when we were sinners and
without strength, in due time Christ dyed for the ungodly, and according to the
prupose and grace given us in him from the beginning of the world, in which he
in due time tasted death for every man. He has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law being made a curse for us. As it is written cursed i^ every one that
hangs on a Tree. For therein he suffered and sati^fied the judgment of this
world. That judgment of banishment that came on us by the offense one, so that
his resurrection was for our justification, and by the power of it in the
virtue of his sufferings all men are given him, and all judgment committed to
him, and power to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of Man, 2
Samuel 14 14. with Hebrews 2. 9. 14. Galatians 3. 13. John 12. 27. 31, 32. and
5. 22. 27. Romans 5. 18. By him the Kingdom of God is brought unto us; for to
this end Christ both dyed rose and revived, that he might be Lord of all: so
that he is the Lord our God by right of purchase and redemption, for he gave
himself a ransom (or price of redemption) for all to be testified in due
time, and has obtained an eternal redemption and release of all mankind from
under the curse of the Law, and so from under that necessary slavery to Sin,
Death, and Satan, into which we were fallen, so that the Father holds no man
under that condemnation, or sentence of banishment, as they were fallen under
it, but has committed all judgment to the Son, that through him they might be
saved, and that by him they may be righteously judged according to the Gospel,
according to which this is the only condemnation, that when light is come, men
love and choose darkness rather.

Therefore to day, while it is called to day, if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts, but let us kneel before the Lord our Maker that has bought us
with the ransom of his own body, which the Father prepared him to that
purpose, for by the virtue of that ransom and so by means of his death.

2 He has yet power to save us, even when by our iniquities and sinnings
against the grace of God by him bringing salva ion to us we have deserved to be
cut off in his righteous judgment according to the Gospel, yea when we have
procured to our selves such judgments as in which we are ready to perish and
nigh to cutting off and burning. For by means of his death, he has obtained
power to forgive those sins that deserve a second death while it is yet to day,
that is before they be so finished in any, as to procure the utter bloting out
of their names out of the book of the living, and so to save us from the wrath
to come, and has received gifts for the rebellious, that the Lord God might
dwell among them, Hebr. 7. 27. and 9. 15. 1 John 2. 1, 2. 1 Thessalonians* 1 10. Psalm.
68 18, 19. 20.

And is therein able to save to the utmost, them that come to God by him, as
well as to hold open the door for rebellious sinners approach, and that he
might bring them back from all their wanderings to God. And all this, because
this man continues for ever in the name and majesty of God his Father, to
improve for us, that one offering of his own body, by which he has obtained
plenteous redemption even the forgiveness of sins, and in which he liveeth to
appear in the presence of God for us. Though good men are perished from us,
and being taken away by death, can be of no more personal usefulness to us,
for the dead know not any thing -- nor have any more a portion in any thing
that is done under the Sun, and so no simpathy with us, in our present joys,
or griefs nor is there any more that they can do for us, by speaking to us,
or praying for us, for there is no work, or devise, nor knowledge or wisdom
in the grave, nor have the dead any capacity, or opportunity to perfect any
thing left undone under the Sun. They cannot praise him or celebrate his truth
to the living, nor hope, or seek for it for them, Eccles. 9. 5, 10. Psalm. 6.
5. Isa. 38. 18, 19.

Yet the Lord lives, and blessed be the God of the Rock of our Salvation, 2 Samuel 22. 47. Psalm. 18. 46. For because he lives for ever in that body in which
he once dyed for us therefore also, they that sleep in Jesus, and we that
wait for him, shall live together with him, in a like consideration, even in
these bodies that are now vile, which then shall be fashioned into the
likeness of his glorious body, yea therefore all shall be raised, and stand
before his judgement-seate, to receive in their bodies according to the things
done in them whether good* or bad. And therefore also, they that wait on him
shall not be ashamed, but though they here pass through the valley of the
shadow of death, and may sit in darkness as the fruit of their own ways,
yet looking to him* he will be a light to them and his rod, and staff, shall
comfort, and uphold them. For he is able to uphold, support, preserve and
deliver them, when all other helpers, and Saviors fail from them, even yet to
preserve his Church in the world, as a people to his praise, when their power
is gone, though those pillars be removed which were a strength to them, and
their enemies thought were their only foundations, whence they encourage
themselves saying, if the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do.
But our God, our Rock of salvation, foundation, and high Tower, is in heaven,
he dyed once and ^an dye no more, but is alive for evermore, and has the keys
of Hell, and Death, yea the Lord is in his holy Temple, God has set his King
upon his holy Hill of Sion. Therefore says Micha. I will look unto the Lord,
I will wait for the God of thy salvation. For

3 My God says he will hear me. He is ready to save, to forgive and heal, he
delights in mercy, that pleases him, he has no pleasure in the death of any,
or that any should perish, but that they should come to repentance, and be
saved. And therefore will not be wanting in seasonable admonitions to
rebellious ones while it is to day, yea will make his rods and reproves
powerful to the awaking unto his righteousness, to the giving wisdom, and
opening the ear to discipline; and turning at his reproof will farther power
out his spirit and make known his words, as is showed before, yea he the Lord
of the harvest, will yet raise up, and thrust forth many more faithful
laborers into his vinyard, if yet we be willing to be humbled under his mighty
hand, and seek it of him after the due order, for because of his infinite
compassions, kindness and pity to man-ward that they may hear of the things
that concern their peace, and learn to know and sear his name, therefore he
will not make his peculiar people, an utter desolation in the carth, b^t will
preserve a Seed to serve him in their generation for the good of others, Psalm
22 30, 31. and 103. 1 -- 7. 8. etc. and 145. John 17. 15 -- 20. Yea therefore
the Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake, because it has
pleased the Lord to make them his people, only fear the Lord, and serve him
in truth, with a perfect heart, for consider how great things the Lord has
done for you, 1 Samuel 12. 22. 24* For

4. These things considered, will instruct, encourage, strengthen, and
admonish, not to forsake him, though all this evil be come upon, us nor fly to
any other mountain, or refuge for help, but to fly to him, trust in him, and
resign our selves to his government, for truly in vain is salvation hoped for
from the hills, and from the multitude of Mountains, truly in the Lord our God
is the salvation of Israel, yea he that is our God is the God of salvation,
and to God the Lord belong the issues from death, Jeremiah 3. 23. Psalm 68. 20.
And they that know thy name will trust in thee, for thou Lord never forsakest
them that seek thee, Psalm. 9. 10. But as for such as will still go on in their
trespasses, not regarding the work of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands,
but still persist in their falling away, and turning aside unto their crooked
paths; the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity, he shall
destroy and not build them up. But peace upon Israel, Psalm. 28. 5. and 125. 5.
and 68. 20. 1 Samuel 12. 25. Heb. 10. 38*

Seek we therefore the Lord, and his strength, seek his face evermore, remember
his marvelous works that he has done, his wonders, and the judgments of his
mouth -- he is the Lord our God, his judgments are in all the earth, Psalm.
105. 4, 5, 7.

FINIS.
Postscript.
WHereas in page 20. speaking of the examining a man's self, and so eating the
Supper of the Lord, to which we are instructed, 1 Cor. 11. 28. I have written,
That it is not to search for, know, or take notice of the goodness of our own
frames or qualifications: as things rend^ring us worthy or by which we may
come, n^r in this case, or to such an end, are we so to examine or look upon
the opperations of grace in us, or by us (as in other cases, and to other
purposes may be good, and useful, as 2 Cor. 13. 3, 4, 5. Heb. 10. 32. Galat.
3. 2. and 4. 15.) I would not be so understood, as to exclude from that
selfe-examination, the remembrance and consideration of such efficacies, or
operations of the Grace of God, (through the preaching of the Cross,) in us, or
by us, or in, or by others upon us. But as in such cases, or to such an end, as
2 Cor. 13. and Gal. 3 and 4. (viz) for the pro^ving, and confirming to us, the
truth of Christ speaking in, and through that preaching of the Cross of
Christ, and so in, or by his servants, faithfully ministering it to us, and so
for the making us ashamed of our dullness, and unprofitablenesse under it, or
wanderings from it, and to stir us up to give more earne^t heed to the things
that we have heard, as in that to the Galatians, and H^brews, we are so
in^tructed to ca^ to remembrance, and consider them. So in this case and to
such an end, as to render the Cross of Christ more precious to us, and worthy
to be remembered by us, and the more to present us, with what cause there is for
us to judge and take shame to our selves, and yet to hope in his mercy and
look to him for help, and healing, remembering him in his ways; The
consideration, and calling to remembrance such efficacies, and opperations of
the Grace of God, as forementioned, is good, and useful, and may be uderstood
as included in that examining a man's self, ^s also is signified under that
second branch of explication, page 21.

I desire that what is spoken to this point, of remembering and considering how
we have heard, and received, in pages 76, 77, 78. may be compared with what is
said of a man's examining himself, pages 20, 21. and taken in for farther
explanation of my sense of what may be contained in it. According to what I
have here add^d, consider and search the Scriptures, and the Lord give us
understanding in all things.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 22. for glorified in, read gloryed in, l. 24. for heaviness
(...) readiness, p. 3. l. 8. ad to stroke. This, l. 28. r. hastiness of
spirit, l. 35. (...) own, l. 38. for any r. a, l. last, r. are Breaches, p. 5.
l. 6. for yours r. them, (...) 20. for for r. or, p. 6. l. 6. for faint r*
feign, l. 31. for teaches r. reaches, l. 41. (...) for himself r. it self, p.
8. l. 5. r* depriveing them, l. 22. for moved r. remove^ l. 32. for Chron. r.
Corinths. p. 9. l. 20. for away r. a way, p. 10. l. 16. r. fou^dations, l. 33.
for which r. while, p. 11. l. 17. for depriveing r. driveing. l. 35^ for
tumbled r. turned, p. 12. l. 19. make the period at this, p. 13. l. 10. for ^^^
r. or* p. 14. l. 6. r. right is he, l. 29. put out and, page 16. line 5. r. and
death threatened, l. 26. r. he it is, l, 40. r. murmur, p. 17. l. 3. r. the next
line with it, as part of the sentence, l. 25. r. in all these things, l. 30. r.
revive* l. 32. f^^ the r. this, p. 20. l. 31. for to himself r. of himself,
p. 21. l. 11. and 12. (...) unto r. into, l. 40. for them r. him, p. 22. l. 5.
for censured r. centured, p. 23. ^. 5. r. him, l. 21. r. of, l. 30 r.
plausible, p. 24. l. 4. and 5. r. comparison, l. 6. prefix* 2. l. 10. for with
r. which, l. 14. for goodness r. godliness, l. 33. (...) out the last and, p.
25. l. 12. for other r. our, p. 26. l. 24. r. beget, l. 42. for i^ r. it, p.
27. l. 4. put a colon at private spirit, p. 28. l. 39. blot out wait on him.
p. 35. l. 36. for sacrifice r. sacrificer, p. 36. l. 5. r. make us, l. 7. put
out they, p. 38. l. 29. r. and 10. 1. l. 41. add the first clause in the next
line, and there make the period, p. 39. l. 2. r. taking, to l. 24. add the
reading of what immediately follows without a period, and do the like in p. 40.
l. 31. and p. 50. l. 35. p. 51. l. 38. Page 43. l. 6. for 1. r. 5. l. 13. r.
embraced, l. 20. r. writing, p. 44. l. 10. r. discourses, p. 46. l. 27. r. the,
p. 47. l. 35. r. by faith, p. 5^* l. 10. for what r. that, p. 53. l. 7. r.
complaint. p. 55. l. 6. for not so much r* nor to such, p. 56. l. 27. for in
the r. of the, l. 29. r. resemblances, p. 59. l. 36. and l. last* r.
acceptance, p. 60. l. 10. r. acceptations, p. 62. l. 15. r. possesses* p. 64.
l. 12. for of worshipers r. worshipers of, l. 14. for the r. them, p. 65. l.
25* at shadows put a comma, p. 66. l. 31. r. things, l. 34. and 35. r.
remission, (...) 40. r. to, p. 68. l. 12. for precious r. previous, p. 70. l.
7. r. motives l. 9. for own r. one, l. 30. at not put a stop, p. 71 l. 7. r.
feighned. l. 15. put out th^^ whole clause, and he that hears speaks
constantly Proverbs 21. 28. and ad (...) to l. 17. Line 26. for this r. his, p.
80. l. ^. for 34. r. 24. l. 6. r. priests (...) 85. l. 9. at others put a
comma. p. 89. l. 9. at name do the like, l* 19. r. (...) q. 92. l. 29. r.
spirit to them, p. 94. l. 29. r puffed.


