Clavis Aurea; OR, A Golden Key: By which Hidden and Mystical Scriptures are
Opened and Explained.

WHEREIN Is clearly discovered and asserted, the Doctrine of the Salvation of
all Men.

ALSO The Mystery of Iniquity laid open, and the Doctrine of Freewill fully
refuted; by proving, That Sin is an Infirmity.

By THOMAS MOOR.

I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have these
things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them to Babes, Matthew. 11.
25. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1695.

The Preface to the Reader.
Christian and Friendly Reader,
WHoever thou art that happens to meet with this little Treatise, my earnest
Desire to thee is, that thou would suspend thy rash Censure of the Subject,
till thou have thoroughly perused it over and over, and begged the Assistance of
God's Enlightening Spirit to understand aright; and also consider the
Concurrence of Scriptures, and always be sure to magnify (and not lessen) the
Infinite Love and Mercy of God, who in all Ages, even from the Creation of the
World, has kept this Mystery concealed only to some of his faithful Servants
the Prophets, and such as were endued with a large Portion of the Holy Spirit;
therefore St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 14. says, The natural Man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God; for they are Foolishness to him; neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. So that for want of this
Spiritual Guide, these Mysteries have laid hid; but God, by the Prophet
Malachi, in the 4th Chapter, says, that Elijah shall come before the great and
dreadful Day, and shall turn the Heart of the Fathers to the Children, and the
Heart of the Children to the Fathers, least the Earth should by him be smitten
with a Curse. But many will have this dreadful Day to be the Destruction of
Jerusalem; but that cannot be, since a heavy Curse was there inflicted, and
therefore not turned away: But when Elijah, here spoken of, comes, he shall
unite all in Love, and join all Hearts into one, all shall be in Harmony; then
shall the Prophecy be fulfilled, that the Knowledge of the Lord shall cover the
Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea: And they shall sing that angelical Song,
Rev. 15. 4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou
only art holy: for all Nations shall come and worship before thee. Then shall
that part, Rev. 14. 6. be fulfilled, That the Angel shall preach the
everlasting Gospel to every Nation and Kindred, and Tongue, and People. These
things I write not for to get my self a Name, or to broach a new Opinion; but
after many Years of Discontent in Spirit, and weary Travels to several
Universities, and conversing in my Travels in several Nations without
Satisfaction, at last it pleased the Divine Will, by the Assistance of his Holy
Spirit, to assist me: As to the Manner, I shall pass by. It may be some will
say this will be an Encouragement to Sin. I answer, that Faith which works by
Love is the most true* And besides, what Person soever there be that once comes
to the Truth, and to be persuaded in the Truth of this Doctrine, but will
always be offering up himself to his Creator so far as he is capable. This
Doctrine will most certainly be the best for uniting all into a firm Love, and
fit all to meet Christ at his Second Coming: Which is the earnest Desire of thy
hearty Friend,

Thomas Moor.

CLAVIS AUREA; or a Golden Key, By which Hidden and Mystical Scriptures are
opened and explained, etc.
THE Holy Apostle St. Paul being converted and sent to preach to the Gentiles,
and many of the Gentiles receiving his Doctrine, and they seeing the Jews would
not receive it, he being doubtful whether the Gentiles should not exalt
themselves above measure, and triumph over the Jews, by thinking that now the
Jews had rejected and they had received the Gospel; that the Jews should be
eternally damned, and they to be the only Heirs of Salvation: But Paul to
remove this great Mistake comes and discovers the greatest of Mysteries to the
Gentiles, by telling them that although the Jews were for a time excluded, and
they only to be of the Visible Church of Christ, yet the Jews were not excluded
Salvation; and Paul says, he has declared all the Counsel of God, Acts 20. 27.

So that from Paul's Words I have deduced my Doctrine, which I call a GOLDKN
KEY, and by which I prove the Salvation of all Men.

And first I consider Romans 11. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, and 33 verses.
The Words are these.

25. For I would not, Brethren, that you should be ignorant of this Mystery
(lest you should be wise in your own conceit) that Blindness in part is
happened unto Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in.

26. And so all Israel should be saved: as it is written, there shall come out
of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away Ungodliness from Jacob.

27. For this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their Sins.

28. As concerning the Gospel, they are Enemies for your sakes: but as touching
the Election, they are beloved for the Father's sake.

29. For the Gifts and Callings of God are without Repentance.

30. For as ye in Times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained Mercy
through their Unbelief:

31. Even so have these also now not believed, that through yo^^ Mercy they
also may obtain Mercy.

32. For God has concluded them all in Unbelief, that ^^ might have Mercy upon
all.

33. O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

EXPOSITION.
The Words Blindness in part, can signify no other than part of Israel are
Unbelievers: Since in the 28th verse *^^^ apparent that their Unbelief is so
great, that it makes them Enemies to the Gospel.

Here we are to observe also, that since the Jews unbelief is to continue till
the fullness of the Gentiles be come in: Let us see how St. Paul came to know
that the Jews unbelief should continue so long; which will explain the word
happen; Blindness in part has happened unto Israel.

Certainly we must grant this, that seeing St. Paul foretold so long before,
that this Blindness which was happened to Israel, and should continue till the
fullness of the Gentiles, that is, till the Jews are called: this Unbelief was
determined by God, and revealed to Paul by the Holy Ghost.

And this is confirmed in the 32d Verse, that God has concluded them all in
Unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all.

But some may say, When is the fullness of the Gentiles?

I answer, When the Jews are called, the fullness of the Gentiles are come in,
and not before, as Paul notes in the 25th verse, Blindness in part has
happened unto Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Again,
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles until the Times of the Gentiles
be fulfilled, Luke 21. 24. But to proceed, There shall come out of Sion the
Deliverer, and shall turn away Ungodliness from Jacob, ver. 26. Now so long as
Unbelief remains, Ungodliness is not perfectly turned away from Jacob; so that
this Deliverer is to give them Faith: And we cannot know who this Deliverer is,
until they be called. This being plain, let us look on the 28th verse, As
concerning the Gospel, they are Enemies for your sakes: but as touching the
Election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake. That is, the Jews are cut off
from the Faith, that the Gentiles might be grafted in: And although Blindness in
part has happened unto them, as being concluded in Unbelief, so long yet are
they Elected and Beloved, that is Saved; otherwise, How are they Elected and
Beloved? But the following Text clears the Mystery, if added to this, in that
it says, All Israel shall be saved, ver. 26. These Words, Blindness in part
has happened unto Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, being
the 25th verse, is the Antecedent, or Sense foregoing to the following Verses;
which one of these Texts likewise considered in it self shows. For who are
those that God has concluded in Unbelief, as in the 32d verse? Why, they are
those to whom Blindness in part has happened, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in, in the 25th verse. And who are those though they are
Enemies to the Gospel, yet are they Elected and Beloved? ver. 28. Why, they are
those to whom Blindness in part has happened, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in, ver. 25. as I said, one of these Texts in it self shows,
as he says in the 26th Verse, out of Sion shall come the Deliverer, and turn
away Iniquity from Jacob; so that their Iniquity is not perfectly turned away
by Faith, till this Deliverer comes out of Sion. You may observe that this
whole Chapter is a Discourse of the Branch broken off.

But how comes this to be, that seeing for Men to die in Unbelief, as Israel
before, and Damnation is the Punishment thereof, as in Mark 16. yet such
Enemies to the Gospel are saved? What, can a Man be saved and damned both? But
some will say presently, tho not to the purpose, That all are not Israel which
are of Israel; but what signifies this, since they are Israel to whom Blindness
in part has happened, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so
must die in Unbelief, yet are they Elected and Beloved and so Saved? I have
discoursed this Point, and when others have been driven to a Nonplus, have said
that these things ought not to be meddled with; but St. Paul's advice is to be
preferred, who says, Brethren I would not have you ignorant of this Mystery,
least you should be wise in your own Conceits; as if he had said, You Gentiles
boast not because you have received the Gospel, and the Jews are excluded at
present; think not that they shall be damned, and you only saved; nay but I
tell you they also shall be saved, as he in these Verses has given a clear
Demonstration. And indeed the Explanation of this Mystery renders us a great
Satisfaction of Salvation, and prepares us to meet Christ at his second
Appearance in the Clouds; and so long as this Mystery lies hid, we are but
conceited, and Men preach they know not what. well, but some may say, If part
of Israel are concluded in Unbelief, it may be they may be saved because they
were God's own People: But what is this to the saving of all the Gentiles in
general? I answer, as the Holy Apostle has defined the other, let us see what
he says to this; if we consider Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. he says thus.

6. ver. Not as though the Word of God has taken none effect, for they are not
all Israel which are of Israel.

7. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham are they all Children, but in
Isaac shall thy Seed be called.

8. That is, those which are the Children of the Flesh, these are not the
Children of God: but the Children of the Promise are accounted for the Seed.

St. Paul here says in ver. 6. All are not Israel which are of Israel. Now let
us see the Reason, Why all are not Israel which are of Israel? We find in Romans
11. 28, etc. that although Israel in part are concluded in Unbelief till the
fullness of the Gentiles, and are Enemies to the Gospel, yet are they Elected
and Beloved; therefore that part of Israel which are thus concluded in
Unbelief, so long that they die in Unbelief, and so great that they are Enemies
to the Gospel, whereby they must die in Unbelief; yet still they are termed
Israel, Elected, Beloved and Saved, as before proved. Neither in the 7^h verse
is it, that all are not Israel which are of Israel, any other way but as they
are blessed in Christ, although they are of the Line of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in
whom truly all are Israel which are of Israel, as it is said, In Isaac shall thy
Seed be called: Now Isaac typified Christ, but was not crucified for us. So
that all are not Israel which are of Israel, as being not all but only some of
them; for in Isaac figuratively and in Christ really the Gentiles are added to
them, as in Romans 9. 8. The Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children of
God: but the Children of the Promise are accounted for the Seed. That is, Flesh
and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, only the Children of the
Promise, as it is writ, in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, Romans 9. 7. Now since
the Enemies of the Gospel that die in Unbelief, as being concluded in it, till
the fullness of the Gentiles become in, yet are Saved, Elected, and Beloved; and
without Faith it is impossible to be Saved.

Therefore Faith is given after this Life; for it cannot be proved that without
Faith in this Life a Man cannot be saved.

Now seeing Israel in part must die in Unbelief, and in Mark 16. Damnation is
the Punishment for Unbelief, What must Hellfire be, but the Troubles of this
Life, or some Finite Misery? As figuratively we say in that Distemper called a
Fever, as hot as Fire; and David calls the Troubles of this Life Hell: He says
in the 116th Psalm, That the Sorrows of Hell encompassed him, and had taken
hold of him. So likewise in the 18th Psalm. And Jonah in the Whales Belly he
called it Hell, because it afforded Sorrow: And so may all the Troubles of this
Life be compared to a Hell, as the Scripture says. So we find Unbelief so
unavoidable to Israel in part, that they die in Unbelief, as being till the
Fullness of the Gentiles be come in: Where is then FREE WILL in this Case of
Faith, which is the Fountain of Good Works? If one Man may be saved and damned
(as Israel in part that die in Unbelief) then there must be two Eternals or
Everlastings in Scripture, the one as long as this Life endures, the other
after this Life to all Eternity.

But now to proceed with Romans 9. 9. This is the Word of Promise, At this time
will I come, and Sarah shall have a Son. Sarah had none but Isaac typifying
Christ; this then is the figurative Promise, the real Promise is Gal. 3. 16.
Now to Abraham and to his Seed were the Promises made, He says not, unto
Seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy Seed, which is Christ. And indeed
by no other Name can we be saved. The Law of Moses is called the Law of Sin and
Death, Romans 8. 2. it discovers Sin, and brings us under Sin, in that we cannot
keep it, and inflicts Death if we break it but in one Point: Now what is this
but that we might be Heirs to the Promise or Gospel. This Seed, Promise, Gospel
or Christ, was preached to Abraham four hundred and thirty years before the Law
of Moses was given at Mount Sinai, Gal. 3. 17. So that the Inheritance by this
Seed, Gospel, Promise or Blood of Christ, is by Glorification, and not here in
the Flesh; as St. Paul says, If we have hopes of Christ only in this Life,
then we are of all Men most miserable. For Paul was a great Sufferer in the
Flesh, as being whipped, stoned, in Death (...), etc. Add to this that
unbelieving Israel are saved tho they die in Unbelief; then is it clear, that
the Children of the Flesh, which are not the Children of God, are Men in the
Flesh, let them be either Good or Evil; and that the Children of the Promise,
which are truly the Children of God, are the Souls of all Men that ever were,
are, or will be, not one excepted, of what Nation soever, or of what Belief (in
their glorified State.) All Authors have missed of this Distinction, between
the Children of the Flesh and the Children of the Promise, which is the cause
of so many Volumes in Divinity, yet the Scriptures could not be made plain and
easy; and indeed it is Error that fills Volumes, when Truth will lie in a
little Compass. A farther Illustration of what has been said, both by Reason,
and by uniting the Scriptures in Sense one with another, bringing them to the
9th and 11th of the Romans, which is a Key to unlock the rest: And I shall also
answer some Objections.

Object. 1. If all Men are saved, it is an Encouragement to commit Sin.

I answer, He that fears, is not made perfect in Love, 1 John 4. 18. That is,
he does not believe God to be an Infinite Goodness. St. Paul takes notice of
our Salvation concluded and agreed upon before the World began; not for any
Works that we could do, but according to his own Purpose and Grace which was
given us in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1. 9. And these great Mercies of God moved him
to please him the more, Romans 12. 1. as being a reasonable Service. Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 14. 8, 9. Therefore it is the Sum of all that is
expected from us, and what can we endeavor more and farther to do? The Fear of
Hell cannot persuade us to the highest Duties of Christianity, which is Love to
God with all our Hearts, from whence flows our Love to our Neighbor as our
selves, and to do Good to those that despightfully use us: Therefore the Fear
of Hell is a hindrance to perform the highest Duties of Christianity,
persuading us there must be FREE WILL: Love thinks no Ill to the Object it
loves; and as Love is the Price of Love, by that Object it is accepted.

Grace and Mercy must draw us to this Love of God; if we believe he is so Good
and Merciful to save all Men, we have the greater reason to love him; but on
the contrary, if (...) believe that he is so severe to punish Finite Sins with
(...) and Eternal Punishments, and that he will never be (...)* we cannot have
so great Affections toward him, (...) in Persons under Despair, who are always
crying out against him for his Severity: And it is evident from Robbers,
Drunkards, Swearers, Murderers, etc. that it is not the preaching Hell to them,
but the want of Grace, that they do not reform: Hence the preaching of Hell
makes not Men the better, and Grace will do the work much better by Love, if it
please God to give it, otherwise no Good can be wrought upon us. If I deny
FREE WILL, whereby I must account it reasonable and just for all Men to be
saved, then the Abuses and Affronts of my Neighbors I can with ease pass by,
as knowing they have not the rule of themselves: So that the Effects of denying
FREE*WILL, and allowing all Men to be saved, draws our Affections perfectly to
God, and our Love and Charity to our Neighbors, which are the highest Duties
in Christianity, and a better Hypothesis than the Doctrine of FREE WILL, which
is the Fountain of Enmity and Persecution. Well, let us farther consider how
reasonable it is for all unbelieving Israel to be saved. When our Savior was
on the Cross, he said, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do; and
Christ that prayed for them, was as able to save them as he was willing, in
that he prayed for them. Israel had a Zeal to God, Romans 10. Now they that have
a Zeal to God would do any thing for the best that they were sensible of: And
Nature in all things is for its Interest, Who willingly would act against it?
The Jews zealously crucified Christ as a Blasphemer; and did not the Jews think
it for their Interest to believe in Christ? Can we be so foolish as to imagine
they would not rather believe if they could? Thus Unbelief in Israel, tho
unavoidable to them, till the Fullness of the Gentiles be come in, yet this Sin
of Unbelief is term*d their own, (as all Sins are, tho they are unavoidable) in
that Damnation also is the Punishment for it. And so, Israel thou have
destroyed thy self, Hosea 13. 9. Our Savior wept over Jerusalem, and said, How
would I have gathered you as a Hen gathers her Chickens, but you would not,
Mat. 23. 37. And how should they be gathered, when the things which belonged to
their Peace (which was Faith) was hid from their Eyes, Luke 19. 42. Now with
what Argument Men can place FREE WILL in an Effect, passes my Understanding;
for I am sure no Example can be brought for it. Many are apt to say that the
Scriptures are not rightly interpreted from the Original Tongues. I answer,
Many Hebrew and Greek Words may signify diverse things; but their Interpretation
must be according to the Sense of the Text, and that Text must agree to other
Texts, and then the Interpretation is true: And none but a Man taught the
Mysteries of the Scriptures by the same Spirit that Indiced them, can discern
when they are truly interpreted from the Original Tongues, because by
understanding the Mysteries of them he is able to unite them in Sense one with
another: And when they will not unite, their Interpretation is false. All
Scripture is true if rightly interpreted; therefore in Disputations one
Scripture cannot be brought to contradict another: Therefore they must be
united in Sense, or no Satisfaction can be drawn from them. Our Savior spoke
to the Jews in Parables, that seeing they might not see, Mat. 13. 13, 14. And
without a Parable he spoke nothing unto them, Mat. 13. 34. Now Parables are not
Realities, but Blinds to darken the Truth, so that if plain places of Scripture
be understood we have no occasion to mind Parables, for they must agree to
those plainer Texts: I call those plain Scriptures that are not Parables. So
that all terrible Places of Scripture concerning Hell Fire, must be brought to
Romans 9. and Romans 11. or they will never be united in Sense one with another,
which is the reason of so many Religious in the World.

Now for Example I will unite some of them. Let us observe the distinction
between the Children of the Flesh, (which are all Men in the Flesh) and the
Children of the Promise (which are the Souls of all Men or glorified Persons)
and then it is easy to unite the Scriptures: And this is that which St. Paul
calls comparing Natural Things with Natural Things, and Spiritual Things with
Spiritual Things. The Children of the Flesh, these are not the Children of God:
but the Children of the Promise are accounted for the Seed, Romans 9. 8. And
seeing it is proved that notwithstanding Israel in part die in Unbelief, yet
they are saved, then there must be two Everlastings, the one as long as this
Life endures, the other Everlasting to all Eternity: which is plain, for the
Troubles of the Body are everlasting or for ever to the Body, that is so long
as the Body remains under its present state of Flesh and Blood: But the
Everlasting of the Soul in Glory shall eternally abide without end. And
therefore Hellfire or Damnation, which in Scripture is termed the Punishment
for Unbelief, can be nothing but the Sufferings of this Life, and not an
eternal tormenting in Hellfire after this Life. So that the Goats are the
Children of the Flesh, and the Sheep the Children of the Promise; and so are
the five foolish Virgins the Children of the Flesh, the five wise the Children
of the Promise, Mat, 25. [wherein observe there were just so many Foolish as
Wise.] Understand the same, as aforesaid, of the Loaves and Wheat, Mat. 13. 26,
etc. As for the Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, it sets forth God's Power
and Terror; and shows the Inability of Abraham to bring the Rich Man to him:
Now Abraham was he whom the Jews depended on, and Christ here insinuates
himself, as in other places, to be of greater Power than Abraham to save them:
And so John the Baptist does the like, saying, Think not within your selves to
say ye have Abraham for your Father, for God out of these Stones can raise
Children to Abraham. As in Adam all die [in the Flesh,] so in Christ are all
made alive, [by the Promise in the Spirit] 1 Cor. 15. And so no Adulterer,
Fornicator, or Unbeliever, as they are in the Flesh, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: Thus Christ is the Savior of all Men, especially of those
that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. By a Figure, we say in a Fever, or by any thing
else that is warm, as hot as Fire: And so in Rev. 14. 9, 10. They that receive
the Mark of the Beast shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone; and yet in
the Chapter before, no Man must buy or sell but what has the Mark of the
Beast: And he shall cause all, the Rich and Poor, Small and Great, Bond and
Free, to receive his Mark: So then who shall escape, Rev. 13. 16. But some will
say, this is meant all that buy and sell, etc. that do not believe, shall be
cast into the Lake: So that Believers are not cast in, such as had or have such
Faith as the Apostles had. We grant then that Unbelievers are cast in: So are
Israel in part, they die in Unbelief, yet are they saved, as has been proved.
So that by Fire, Brimstone and Fire, Everlasting Fire, and such terrible
Expressions, figurates the Sorrows of this Life, or some Finite Suffering; and
also that there are two Everlastings, In the 20th Chapter of the Revelations is
mention made of a first Resurrection, and a second Death.

As for the first Resurrection, it is the first and last, and but one and the
same: Since in the 4th verse, the Souls of the Martyrs that had not worshipped
and received the Mark of the Beast, lived and reigned with Christ a thousand
Years. And the 6th verse, they that have part in the first Resurrection, the
second Death has no power on them; for as Christ our Head arose from Death to
Life, and became the First Fruits of them that slept: So shall all Mankind have
but one Resurrection. And our Blessed Savior, Mat. 22. 30. says, that in the
Resurrection they shall be like the Angels of God in Heaven. Neither does he
make any distinction between Believers and Unbelievers. And in the 32d verse of
the same Chapter says, God is not the God of the Dead, (that is, of the Flesh)
but the God of the Living; (that is, of all Souls): These Souls shall live and
reign with Christ not only a thousand Years, but for ever. Hence there can be
but one Resurrection. Again, it is said in ver. 7. the rest of the Dead lived
not till the thousand Years were finished. Hence those that live and reign with
Christ till the thousand Years are finished, and for ever, are part of those
that are dead; in that the Text says, the rest of the Dead lived not till the
thousand Years were finished: So that those which are in Heaven, as touching
the Body, are dead; and the rest of the dead are Men living in the World, in
the Flesh, and shall never live as Children of the Promise. Now let us examine
what this second Death is which so affrightens Men: This is described in the
14th and 15th Verses, And Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of Fire: This
is the second Death. And whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life,
was cast into the Lake of Fire. The first Death then is the Death of Man in the
Body; the second Death is the casting of Death and Hell into a Lake of Fire.
But who are those that are cast into this Lake? Why, all Men whose Names are
not written in the Book of Life: And who are those but Unbelievers, etc.? and
such are the Children of the Flesh, as Israel that die in Unbelief, yet as they
are the Children of the Promise are they written in the Book of Life. Thus the
Exposition of this 20th of the Revelations is the same as Romans 11. and 9. Now
that Unbelievers are saved, or such as have not Faith; in this Life, observe
what our Savior says, John 12. 47, etc. If any Man hear my words, and believe
not, I judge him not: for I come not to judge the World, but to save the World.
Which Words he says were his Father's Words, and his Father's Words are Life
everlasting; and says, Mat. 12. 31. that all Sins shall be forgiven, nay all
Blasphemies; only the Sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven: No
more it shall; as touching the Body or state of Flesh and Blood, it shall never
be forgiven; but as touching the Promise, this and all others shall certainly
be forgiven.

Some shall rise to everlasting Life, and some shall rise to everlasting
Damnation, John 5. 29. and so do Israel that die in Unbelief. We are all quick,
and all dead that are in the Graves: So Christ said, Those that are in the
Grave shall hear his Voice; The Time is coming, and now is (observe now is)
when the dead shall hear his Voice; and they that hear shall live, John 5. 25.
We are all, as touching the Flesh, shut everlastingly from the presence of God
and his Holy Angels; so we all live and all die.

There are many other Scriptures that seem to threaten Eternal Punishment for
Sin after this Life; but all must be brought to the 9th and 11th of the Romans,
otherwise they contradict one another: And whenever we read any such terrible
place of Scripture that seems to threaten Hellfire, for Unbelief and Evil
Works, then presently say, such is the Condition of Israel that die in
Unbelief, and yet they are saved: Which clears the Truth, and makes dark and
terrible places of Scripture pleasant, and discovers God to be a God of Love,
and not a God of Wrath. We are saved by Faith, and that not of our selves: it
is the Gift of God: Not of Works, lest any Man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Now
compare this with the Salvation of Israel that die in Unbelief, and we may
easily see that the Salvation of Man is a Free Gift: So that when we have good
Thoughts, it is a Free Gift* good Works it is a Free Gift; and if God does reward
Faith and good Works, he does but crown his own Gifts by Rewards. And when God
shall open our Graves, (observe Grr^^s) and bring us to our own Land, the Land
of Israel, there shall we know the Lord, Ezekiel. 37. 13, 14, etc, It would be
redious for me to bring all seeming dissenting places of Scripture to the 9th
and 11th of the Romans, for their union in Sense one with another; but I have
here laid a Foundation for others to do it, who, if they are not with Israel
under Blindness of Heart, must readily agree to what I have said; That all the
Punishment for Sin is to happen in this Life; and the Valley of Jehosophat, in
Joel 3. figurates the Graze, which is the Punishment of all Men for Sin. And
this may* be plain, that by a Valley is meant the Grave, when we consider that
the Valley of Achor, is called the Door of Hope, Hos. 2. 15. that is, by the
Grave we enter into Glory. We are sown a Natural Body, we shall rise again a
Spiritual Body. So that if we consider, that only Death was threatened before
Adam's Fall, for his disobeying God's Commands, and that in the Sweat of his
Face he should eat his Bread; which signifies the continued Series of
Punishment, for continuing in unavoidable Sin so long as he is in the Flesh.
Hence put altogether, and you can find no other Punishment than in this Life
for Sin, and that no more than we are able to bear. For Christ bad all our
Iniquities laid on him, and by his Stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.

Object. But some enjoy much Pleasure here, yet are great Sinners, shall they
all receive alike?

I answer, It has been proved that all Israel shall be saved: And there is no
question but amongst such Multitudes the grossest Sins have been committed.
From the Scepter to the Spade all receive some Distress or other, as Sickness,
Trouble of Mind, Crosses, and all Disappointments whatsoever, tho some more
than others; and those that know most Troubles here, will the more esteem
Happiness hereafter to all Eternity.

I have no more to say than this, that this Doctrine enables us above all other
Doctrines, to perform the highest Duties of Christianity: and what can we
expect to do more than to love our God with all our Hearts, and our Neighbor,
nay our Enemies as our selves? This Doctrine leads us to the Angelical Frame of
the Apostles, who being despitefully used, yet prayed for, and blessed those
that persecuted and hated them. It likewise gives us a serene Frame of Spirit,
continual Joys and Comfort in Afflictions, a fervent Love to God, and a desire
or rather a panting after a Dissolution; that we may be embraced in the
everlasting Arms of our Savior, where are Joys and Pleasures for evermore.

FINIS.
THE Mystery of Iniquity laid Open; AND THE Doctrine of FREEWILL fully Refuted:
By proving, That Sin is an Infirmity.

By THOMAS MOOR.

For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do of his good
Pleasure, Philip. 2. 13. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1695.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
IN the first Part I have plainly proved the Salvation of all Men, and in this
I shall as fully prove that Sin is an Infirmity, and God designed it to enter
into the World, and Death by Sin, that he might make known his manifold Wisdom
in a Crucified Christ; he being a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World:
For we may observe, that when God created Adam^ be created him Male and Female,
Genesis 1. 27. and so long as Adam was in that State, he did not fall, neither was
he in a Possibility to fall: But God seeing it was sit Adam should have a
Companion, cast him into a deep Sleep, and separated the Female Nature from
him, of which he formed Woman. Now God could as well have made Woman of the
same Matter that he made Man with: But God made her out of Man, that there
might be a Magnetic Love between them: Now seeing the Devil could not tempt
Adam, therefore he a^^ost* Eve, and persuades her; so she being tempted, then
she tempts Adam, and so God suffered his Command to be broken. But some may say
it is against the Justice of God to command, and yet design it to be broken. I
answer, that in Genesis 22. we read, God tempted Abraham, and commanded him to
offer up his Son Isaac for a Burnt-offering; and when Abraham was just going to
execute the Command, God would not suffer him to do it. So that God commanded
Adam not to do a thing, yet suffered him to do it; and he commanded Abraham to
do a thing, yet suffered him not to do it. So likewise God sent Moses several
times to Pharaoh, commanding him to (...) the People go; yet at the same time,
he told Moses that he had hardened Pharaoh's Heart, that he should not let the
People go: Many places of Scripture may be brought of the like nature. But the
Oppossers will not believe these things, because they cannot comprehend them
with their narrow and clouded Capacities: But says the Lord, As the Heavens
are higher than the Earth, so are my Ways higher than your Ways, and my
Thoughts than your Thoughts, Isa. 55. 9. I would have thee to lay by all
Rashness, and seriously consider these things, and the Lord enlighten thy
Understanding; which is the Desire of thy Soul's Friend,

Thomas Moor.

The Mystery of Iniquity laid open, and the Doctrine of FREE WILL fully
refuted, etc.
WHEN Almighty God made Man, he gave him a Law, which he had no sooner
received, but he broke; and if Adam had had an equal power of Scanding or
Falling, he would have stood longer than he did; but it pleased the Divine
Wisdom to suffer him to fall, that it might be made known by the Church the
manifold Wisdom of God, according to the eternal Purpose, which he purposed in
Christ Jesus our Lord, Ephesians. 3. 11 And it has pleased God to hide this mystery
from Man, that is from the generality of Men, now almost six thousand years,
for Ignorance will not have Sin an Infirmity, but must of necessity be wilful,
and that it must lie in the power of the Creature to avoid sin, or it cannot be
a sin; and if there be a power of avoiding sin, then there is a power in the
Creature of doing good: but St. Paul tells us positively, Romans 7. 21. I find
then a Law in my members that when I would do good evil is present with me: to
will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not, Romans
7. 18. And St. Paul in Ephesians. 1. 11. We have obtained an Inheritance, being
predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things after the
Council of his own will: So that if God works all things in us as is evident,
Philip. 2. 13. then is Man wholly Passive, and not able of himself to do good
or evil, and then consequently sin is an Infirmity. (Objection) In Genesis 6. 56.
It is said that when God saw the wickedness of Man, It repented him that he
made Man, and it grieved him at the very heart. Answer, The Scripture tells us
of false Teachers, that should deny the Lord that bought them. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
What Murders, and other horrid sins have been, and now are daily committed,
none can be ignorant of. And what was foretold by Christ and his Apostles, we
may by Reading observe; as the Murder of the Apostles: a falling away from the
Faith, and the latter days to be perilous times, and Men to be lovers of
themselves more than lovers of God, Blasphemers, etc. 2 Timothy 3. And yet for all
this God continues Man upon the Earth; therefore it is not for want of
foresight in God, but his seeing sin committed and punished, that grieves him.
This was said to them in the Old World, when they lived many hundreds of years,
and the longer they lived the more sin they committed, and the more punishment
they endured; which when God beheld, it grieved him; and our Savior in Mark
13. 20. says, That for the Elects sake whom he has chosen (which are the
Children of the Promise) he has shortened the days. Now God having chosen a
method (undoubtedly the best) to set forth his Attributes, that Man thereby
might the better know Godand himself; and that Man through misery here, might
be the more perfectly happy hereafter, ordained sin and punishment to be
inseparable. And Man being made Flesh and Blood, is a sign that he was intended
to be subjected to sin, and so consequently to punishment, so long as he is on
this side the Grave: now seeing such great sins are daily committed, and yet
God continues Man upon the Earth, it argues that these things were
predestined at first. Unbelief is so great a sin, that Damnation, in
Scripture, is made the punishment for it; yet unbelief is an Infirmity, which
our Savior testified while he was upon the Cross, in saying, Father forgive
them, they know not what they do; and sure'y he that prayed for them, was both
able and willing to Pardon them: and as St. Paul said, had they known it, They
would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. For Israel had a Zeal
to God, Romans 10. 1. and therefore would have done any thing for the best.
Nature is for its Interest in all, it is Interest that makes the Turks so
Zealous for their Mahomet, and from asking our selves the question, we may
judge of them; did they think it more beneficial to believe in Christ than in
Mahomet, they would certainly do it; and the same may be said of the Jews, So
that this unbelief that is compelted on the Posterity of Israel, cannot be said
to be a punishment for their Forefathers unavoidable unbelief: but there is a
Mystery in it hid from the World, which Mystery I have already laid open before
in the first Book of the Salvation of all Men. True Faith we know is the
Fountain of good Works, since it works by Love, especially if such a Faith as
the Apostles had could be obtained, being accompanied with assurance of
Salvation. So Unbelief is the Fountain of evil Works, it makes us depart from
the Living God: Take heed least there be in you a heart of Unbelief in
departing from the Living God, Heb. 3. 12. Unbelief makes us set our Affections
on Things Below, as on Pride, Covetousness, Revenge, Lust, etc. All Discourses
concerning Freewill in matter of Works, are not so material then, since Works,
good and bad, are but the Rivers that run from those Fountains of Unbelief and
Faith; and good Works are no farther meritorious than they are signs of true
Faith, except it can be proved that we can be saved by Works without Faith;
What does it profit, my brethren, tho a Man say he has Faith and has not
Works? can Faith save him? James 2. 14. Faith without Works is dead, verse 20.
I will show thee my Faith by my Works, verse 18. Therefore Freewill, as
touching true Faith, which works by Love, is chiefly to be discourst, and that
Faith being obtained, good Works will follow. And though we cannot perform in
good Works the intent of our mind that we desire to do, yet God accepts the
Will for the Deed, as Paul says, Romans 7. 16. If then I do that which I would
not, I consent into the Law that it is good: now then it is no more I that do
it, but sin that dweleth in me, etc. That Unbelief is compelled on Man, we have
already proved; now of Adam's fall, it is plain from Ephesians. 3. That God created
all things to manifest his manifold Wisdom in a Crucified Christ (who was Lamb
slain from the Foundation of the World) whereby Adam was to fall, that sin
might enter into the World, that Christ might suffer for sin, that so Gods
manifold Wisdom might be made known in Christ: the words of the Texts are
these, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10, etc. And to make all Men see what is the fellowship of
the mystery, which from the beginning of the World has been hid in God, who
created all things by Jesus Christ: to the intent that now unto the Powers and
Principalities in heavenly places, might be made known by the Church the
manifold Wisdom of God, according to his eternal purpose which he purposed in
Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom we have confidence and access by the faith of
him. Now take these Texts which way you please, it is apparent that God created
all things to manifest his Wisdom in a Crucified Christ: whereby there lay a
necessity that Adam must fall, that sin might enter into the World, that God's
manifold Wisdom might be made known in a Crucified Christ. And it must be in a
Crucified Christ, if we consider the words: That now unto the Powers, etc.
Which was after Christ was Crucified, and also verse 12. which says, In whom
we have access by Faith in him, and what signifies Faith in Christ without his
Crucifixion? Objection, But say the Opposers that God Created all things to
manifest his Wisdom in Christ, as foreseeing that Adam would wilfully fall.
Answer, Omnipotency is the cause of Omniseiency, for we cannot foresee whether
a Ship shall certainly arive to her Port, by reason we have not the command of
the VVind and Seas; but God foresaw all things, as having power to bring all
things to pass. If an equal power was given to Adam to stand or fall, which way
could his fall of a certain be foreseen, especially before he was Created? Let
any Man consider this, for it is not enough to say that all things are possible
with God, as to make a Camel pass through the Eye of a Needle; which is true,
all things are possible with God, in things of that Nature, for he could
diminish the Body of the Camel: but to foresee Adam's fall of a certainty, when
an equal power is to be, nay is given to stand or fall, I can plant no such
Idea, nor imagine or believe. The cause of foresight in this case of Adam's
fall, must lie in Omnipotency, or an ability of bringing the fall to pass: so
that if God of a certainty foresaw his fall, he must have brought it to pass;
to which the Ship is an equal example.

Another Objection of the Opposers is this, That God Created all things to
manifest his Wisdom in Christ, upon condition Adam wilfully fell. Answer, This
Objection seems to deny God's foreseeing Adam's fall; but upon condition he
fell wilfully, God would manifest his Wisdom in Christ; if not, he would not,
or could not do it. If Adam had wilfully fallen, and might have stood, then his
sin had been perfectly wilful; and so Christ could not have rendered
Satisfaction for sin, but Adam's own death must have been both the punishment
and satisfaction. For Justice described in Moses's Law, (which Law Christ came
to fulfill) makes the Cause render the Satisfaction; hence Adam's death was only
a punishment, but not a satisfaction for sin: and Justice cannot be satisfied
with the death of one Man for the Offense of another. Objection, If Adam's fa^^
was inevitable, it seems injustice to punish him at all for it, especially by
death. I answer, it would be so indeed, were it not that Christ rendered the
satisfaction to Adam by his Crucifixion, and so in requital gives him Eternal
Glory with himself: thus God shows his astonishing power over Death, for as
Light destroys Darkness, so Life entering into a dead Man destroys Death: the
same may be said of all sins which we have not power to avoid. Objection, You
say there is no Freewill, yet it is said, if a Man should wilfully sin after
knowledge given him: and give an example of this from Scripture of the Man that
picked up Sticks on the Sabbath day, and was stoned to death without Mercy. I
answer, To attribute Freewil to an Effect, is more than the first Cause
attributes to himself, in that he cannot lie, or be unjust: and shall an Effect
of that Cause do it? Pharaoh would not let the Children of Israel go; that is
no Argument, he could let them go; this is not spoken that this Man who picked
up Sticks had Freewil to avoid this contempt of the Law, but that his Will
being hardened by the Devil, without any scruple of Conscience did freely break
the Law; yet this Man died without Mercy, and no Sacrifice was allowed under
the Law for his Pardon, to save him in the Flesh from being destroyed: much
more if a Man had Freewill either to do the thing, or avoid it at his own
pleasure, then there could be no Sacrifice at all, not under the Gospel.

Babel's Tower seems to be a true Similitude of the Doctrine of Freewill; for
although God had promised he would never drown the World again, yet they fall to
work to defend themselves against God, if he should drown the World again: But
says the Text, God came down and confounded their Purposes. So although God has
declared that he will not the death of a Sinner, and that his Son came to die
for the Sins of the whole World, and that he is the Propitiation for the Sins
of the whole World, and that there is no other Name given under Heaven whereby
Men should be saved; yet they place the hopes of their Salvation upon what they
believe and do, when they are able to do nothing, Therefore God has given them
up to strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. The
Almighty says, Let us reason together, Isa. 1. 18. So that where the Scripture
is silent, if we act or believe according to reason, we are excusable in
Christ, and have a Plea for what we do or believe, and better cannot be
expected from us: And therefore according to Reason again I thus argue. It
passes my Understanding, neither can I six such an Idea in my Imagination, how
an equal Power or Ability could be given to Adam to stand or fall, since from a
deep Consideration of the Property of a Cause and an Effect here below, we find
that an Effect has such a close, nay cemented depen^^^ce on its Cause, that
without it, it ceases its Motion: So that if Adam, an Effect, could have Power
given him to move in himself to will and to do, whereby there must be a
Separation between the Cause and the Effect, as a Weight separated from a
Clock: then we may as easily conclude, that this whole Fabric of the World may
remain in all Circumstances that it is now in, if the first Cause were ceased
to be. So that'tis as easy to conceive an Effect, or Man can create himself, as
govern himself, or have a Power given him so to do: But God works in us both
to will and to do, Phil. 2. 3. It is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father which speaks in you, Mat. 10. 20. In all Human Things it is so, which
are Examples of Things Divine; we can reach no farther, and therein we are
safe, teaching us to trust perfectly in God; and throughout the Scriptures,
those that trusted in him, God never failed them, but relieved their
Necessities, and moved in them to walk in his Ways: for an Effect moves
directly as the Cause moves it, as the Spring does the Wheels of a VVatch, as
the Artist does set the Spring; and why it must not be so between God and Man,
the Reason is yet to be given by the Opposers: That which is free, is not
bound; if I had Freewill, what occasion have I to require a farther assisting
Grace? I observe likewise, that Hellfire was not threatened to Adam, nor to his
Posterity after him in case he fell: Which argues firmly that his Fall was
ordained before, or else no such Punishment intended; for that was the only
time to have it threatened if ever intended. But I know no such reason for Man
to be so sollicitous about Adam's fall, since I am satisfied it is the same
thing for me to be ordained or compelled to commit Sin, as to be subjected to
it through Adam's Ofsence, for through all my Endeavor I cannot avoid; my
Nature falling in Adam, or my Subjection to Sin by his Fall, heither was I the
cause of his Fall. The Scripture is a Mystery, and little Satisfaction as to
Freewill can be drawn from it: For though St. Paul said (as before) that he was
carnal, sold under Sin, and the things he would, he could not perform; yet it
is said, James 1. 13. That God tempts no Man to evil, but every Man is drawn
away by his own Lust. Here we may be very well satisfied that Lust is termed
our own, though it cannot be avoided. And this is plain, since the Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; and these are
contrary one to the other, that we cannot do the things we would, Gal. 5. 17.
And Christ commands us in the Lord's Prayer, to pray to our Father in Heaven
that he would not lead us into Temptation. If God does not lead us into
Temptation, or suffer it by his own Consent, why does he teach us to pray him,
not to lead us into Temptation? Objection; If Sin be an Infirmity, why is it
punished? I answer; To make Man more sensible of his Sins or Infirmities, and
in that we take the more notice of the Perfections of the Almighty; as his
Holiness, and his Power in punishing Sin; for we endeavoring to escape the
Punishments of Sin, we endeavor the more to avoid Sin, whereby we take the
greater notice of Sin or our Infirmities: But I deny eternal Punishment for Sin
after this Life; its Punishment being here on Earth, that we might become as
God in Knowledge of Good and Evil, and so learn to prize our future Happiness
the more.

Sin and its temporal Punishment is then very necessary, and both determined by
God: And there is no Justification in the Blood of Christ, without a Commission
of Sin ( for Christ came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance;)
and so consequently no Glorification. Objection; We have Freewill to do Evil of
our selves, but not to do Good. I answer; The Evil or Sin is an Infirmity: We
must then do Evil, because we have not Freewill to do Good* seeing we must be
doing either Good or Evil. Objection; If Sin be an Infirmity, and so
unavoidable, it is in it self pardonable: what then did Christ die for? and if
no Hellfire, what did he save us from? I answer; It has been proved that the
Jews Unbelief is an unavoidable Sin, therefore an Infirmity: But that which
Christ saved us from, was an eternal reducing us into the same Nothing that we
were before the Creation, which Death (if Adam had fallen wilfully) must have
been his Punishment, and Satisfaction for Sin: For Hellfire was not threatened
under the Name of Death; for Death is without Sense or Feeling, but an eternal
Torment in Fire is a tormented Life; in which is both Sense and Fee^^ng. And
this is easy to believe, if we consider that there is a vast difference between
Hellfire, and Death to be threatened to Adam: Sin is the Breach of God's
Commands, though through Infirmity in the Creature, yet determined by God, and
unpardonable in i^ self; but through the Blood of Christ, and good Reason for
it; for God created all things to manifest his Wisdom in Christ, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10.
He gave us the Law by Moses, whereby we may discern the difference between Good
and Evil, Jus^^^^ and Injustice; and this Law being broken unavoidably by Man,
as God determined, it was necessary to set forth his own Holiness, to satisfy
this Law so determined to be unavoidably broken by Man: Hence he himself comes
down from Heaven, and fulfills this Law by his Death, rendering Satisfaction for
Sin: From whence flows a Reconciliation between God and Man in Christ's Blood,
God not intending to be reconciled but by Justice satisfied, deseribed in the
Law of Moses.

And this stands to reason, that the chief Cause of the Breach of Justice, must
render the Satisfaction to Justice, he being made perfect by suffering: which
is an undoubted Proof, that Adam's Fall was foreordained, and he fell
unavoidably. Otherwise also for Sin, the Death of Adam must as well render the
Satisfaction as be a Punishment.

Objection; Sins may be wilful, and in that Sense they may be avoided; yet the
Death of Christ may satisfy for them, he paid our Debt^.

I answer; The Law of Moses in setting forth the Property of Justice or Equity,
commands Life for Life, Eye for Eye, of the Cause offending; Goods nor Money in
this Case will serve.

And he that determined this to set forth Equity or Justice, must force one to
be destroyed by another, (as the innocent Children in Matthew. 2. 16.) or
otherwise he could not have rendered the Satisfaction, since none but the Cause
can do it: So then, I say, if Freewill were in Man, nothing but the eternal
Death of Man could render Satisfaction to Justice, or this Law of Moses, which
requires the Cause only to render Satisfaction. And what hurt is this to us,
when the present Troubles are but the increasing us in the Knowledge of God, and
his Terrors whereby we learn to prize our Happiness hereafter? Now if Christ's
Blood will satisfy for for all sorts of Sins, all sorts of Sins must be
Infirmities, and not wilful; by wilful, I mean that it lies in the Power of the
Creature either to commit Sin, or avoid it at his pleasure.

But I have sufficiently proved Sin an Infirmity; but however, I will take
notice of St. Peter: Our Savior told him, that he should deny him thrice
before the Cock crew; which he did, and then the Cock crew, John 18. 27. The
Scripture was fulfilled by the Murder of the Infants, Matthew. 2. Which therefore
was foreordained by God, in that this Murder was foreseen so long before, even
in the days of Jeremiah, about the beginning of the 70 years Captivity.

Now according to Reason (which ought to be our Rule for what we believe, and
so renders us excusable in Christ), if Christ had not the Power of bringing
this thing to pass of Peter's denying him exactly thrice, and that a Cock
should crow immediately upon it, how came Christ to foresee this? By this we
may observe also, that the Devil, which compelled Peter so exactly, was only an
Instrument commanded and limited by God to do it. But many will say, this was
to set forth Peter's Weakness, and Self-Confidence, and that he ought to have
relied on Christ for his Protection. I answer; To such kind of Ends as this,
was all Sin entailed or compelled on Man, therefore Freewill is a dangerous
Doctrine: For by our discerning of Sin in our selves, we see God's Holiness,
and not to depend on our Strength; but by seeing the dreadful, though temporal,
Punishment for Sin, we see God's Terrors and Wonders; whereby we learn to know
him the more.

Death is made the Wages of Sin, that God's Power over Death (that astonishing
Power) might be experimentally and better discerned; for as Light entering into
a dark place, destroys the Darkness of it, so when we are dead and raised to
Life again, Death is destroyed. So that Death is not destroyed by Death, for
then it is still Death; but when Life enters into Death, as Life into a dead
Man, then Death is destroyed, as Light destroys Darkness: So that by this we
shall experimentally know God to be the God of Light and Life, by his Power
over Death and Darkness. By the Knowledge of Evil as well as by the Knowledge of
Good, we became as God in Knowledge (in that Point:) behold the Man is become as
one of us to know Good and Evil.

There are many Scriptures that give light to this Doctrine; I have hardened
Pharaoh's Heart, he shall not let them go, Exodus 4. 21. and St. Paul draws a
general Rule, Romans 9. from this particular Example; Therefore he has Mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth: And God says of Ahab, Who will
persuade Ahab to go, and fall at Ramoth Gilead? the lying Spirit said, I will;
the Lord said, Go, thou shall prosper, 1 Kings 22. 22. Judas inevitably
betrayed Christ, and destroyed himself: The Lord said unto Shimei, Curse David,
2 Samuel 16. 10. If the Prophet be deceived, I the Lord have deceived that
Prophet; and I will destroy him, Ezekiel. 14. 9. But I have proved, that Men are
predestined, and compelled to die in Unbelief before they were born; which
proves one of the chiefest Foundations of Sin (it being also one of the
greatest Sins, in that Damnation is its Punishment) to be an Infirmity. Yet all
Men in general, not one left out, whether good or evil, Believer or Unbeliever,
but what shall be perfect in Faith and good Works after this Life, and shall
be saved: which is proved in the first Book, this second Book being chiefly to
prove ^^^ ^n Infirmity, and determined by God to set forth his Attributes: I
shall put an end to this, with the words of the Prophet.

Comfort ye, comfort ye my People, says your God; speak comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her Warfare is accomplished, that her Inquity
is pardoned: for she has received of the Lord's hand double for all her Sins,
Isa. 40. 1, 2.

FINIS.

