THE REVELATION OF Jesus Christ.

UNTO JOHN MOON.

In the fourth Month, in the year 1658.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1658.

THE EPISTLE.
OH all you who are begotten by the Eternal Word of life, all wait and abide in
that which the Lord has begotten of himself in you, And all to walk in
obedience unto him who has begotten you, that you may daily by him alone be
strengthened and refreshed with his living mercies, that so you may go on in
his work which is perfect, in obedience unto whatever Christ Jesus the light
makes known unto you, and so will the secrets of the Lord be with you, and
revealed unto you; For truly the Lord God is greatly making his large love and
mercies known unto them who are begotten by him, and revealing himself to his
own Children, who bears the reproach of the World for his Name sake, the Lord
is now arising in his power and majesty to Crown his own Children with strength
and dominion over the World; So all you who are obedient unto the Truth, you
are Gods friends, and with you is my life hid in Christ Jesus the light, and in
this fare you all well.

John Moon.

He who is the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, the Creator of all things, and the
governor of his Children, (who are begotten by his Eternal Word) it is He
alone who is Lord of Lords, and King of Saints, which shows unto them things
past, present, and that which will shortly come to pass, that they may bear
Testimony unto the Truth, as it is made manifest by Christ Jesus the Light, and
that they thereby may be justified in the sight of God.
I Being a servant of the Lord who bear testimony unto the Truth as it is made
manifest and required of me, The Lord God showed me in the time of weakness, a
River of water as clear as Crystal; and in it there was a pure precious pearl,
which was the life of men; and the Lord made known unto me, that I was to bring
many to be washed in that River, that they might be made clean, that the Lord
might receive them, and by this River there was a Hill like unto a great
mountain; and by this Hill there was a great Wood like unto a wilderness, and
in that wood there was a mighty house, and I saw many came to that House which
was weak and feeble, and the Rulers of that house destroyed many of them; and
some was dying and not dead, and this was the house where many souls was and is
destroyed; and the Lord God showed unto me that I might cry with a loud voice,
that a day of deliverance was coming unto them who were dying and in bondage in
that house, and with that immediately after dread and terror fell upon the
Ruler of that house, and a fire was kindled therein, which could not be
quenched, and by this fire many was to be delivered which suffered, and was
kept in bondage for the truth of God, which is Jesus Christ; but when that fire
was kindled, all of that house were of an uproar, and gathered their forces and
their strength together, to keep those that were in bondage, and was dying,
that they should not be delivered, nor relieved, but they could not prevail
against him that came to deliver them, but many was delivered, even so as it
were by fire and sword, and many were they that were slain thereby.

And moreover, I saw a people that had no habitation in the earth, and was
naked, and so they were to remain until the appearance and coming of our Lord
Jesus, but many of them not being content to abide in that estate, they were
going about to build houses in the earth again, and making to themselves
coverings which were rough and ill-favored, and as it were of rough hair, and
I was to reprove them.

Moreover I saw the place where the Lord God would come and appear to judge his
people, and there I was commanded of the Lord, to counsel the faithful people
of God, to make their habitation and abode in that place, that they might all
live together in that habitation, for it was, and is sure from generation to
generation; for the day is coming that them that was not found there, in that
habitation was to perish, for the Lord God would make a speedy riddance of them
by the fire of his jealousy.

The Lord God of power gave unto me the Book of life, and I was glad and did
receive it, and did look thereon, and all my enemies was brought down under my
feet, and I was in a quiet habitation, and the glory of the Lord did shine
round about me.

And the Lord God of heaven and earth took me up in the spirit unto a holy
mountain and showed me all the whole world, and spoke to me, and said, That he
had warned all men to repent, and to come to Judgment, and some obeyed, and
came to judgment at the Lords command, and were saved, and they were brought
into that holy Mountain; and others refused to come to judgment, and they
stayed in the ungodly world, and were to be destroyed with the World, and
others were afraid of destruction which was to come upon the wicked, and they
were running and striving to save themselves, and with rashness and hastiness
they killed and destroyed one another, and never came to life, and they which
was not saved was either killed or burned with fire.

And I saw a people that lived, and not of any earthly thing; or else they
could not inherit the Kingdom of God; but they were few that lived so, though
some was come much out of the earth, and was turning into the earth again, and
so destruction came upon them.

The Lord God by his mighty hand and power lifted me upon high and set me on
that which stood sure and was indurable, and gave unto me a weapon in my hand
like unto aspear, and when it was lifted up, a glorious light did shine about
it, that many could not behold and endure, And so they would strive to make war
and rise up against it, but the Lord God spoke to me and said, Go on and make
war with the nations which riseup against thee, with that weapon which I have
given thee in thy hand, and hold it fast, and thy enemies shall not overcome
thee, though they be many against thee, neither them nor their weapons shall
never prevail against thee.

And the Lord God showed me a narrow and a straight way, and he led me therein,
and some others with me, And I saw a City before me, and the Lord brought me
through great tribulations to that City, and in that City there was a Child
which had a throne above the earth and walked in it; and there was a Lion with
that Child, but he was made subject, and the Child had power and dominion over
the Lion, and some few was brought to that City, and saw it, but it was through
great tribulations; but there was none could come to that child which was in
the Throne but through death, he that reads let him understand.

Dear Brethren, and Sisters in the invisible life of our Lord Jesus Christ do I
salute you all in that which has been hid from ages and generations, but now
is made manifest in the light by the Revelation and appearance of the Son of
God, and in this life and light am I one with you, and as you abide in the
light you will grow in the life of Righteousness, and also in the knowledge of
the pure God of life and wisdom, and so the Lord will Establish you in his own
House on top of all mountains, and you shall be the glory of all the whole
Earth, and you shall be called Zion the holy City of the living God, and the
Lord will be unto you an open fountain of life to refresh your hearts and
souls, as the former and latter rain in its due season, and you shall sit under
your own Vine which is Christ in you the hope of your life and glory, so wait
and abide in the light, and be obedient to it, that you may he made witnesses
of this through the death upon the cross, And so will your lives be hid with
Christ in God.

Amen. JOHN MOON.

This Epistle and Revelation is to be read amongst the Church of the firstborn
and begotten unto God.
THE END.

