THE CHARACTERS OR POURTRAICTS OF The Pr^^^^^ COURT OF FR^NCE:

Wherein is described The Ki^^, the Princes, the Generals, and the principal
Ministers of State, etc.

Written Originally in French. ^

LONDON: Printed by J ^ for Thomas Palmer, at the Crown in Westminster Hall.
1668.

TO THE Reader.
THe French Nation being at present the most considerable Actors upon the great
Theater of the World, their Vast Designs and Notable Progress having made them
become the chief Subjects of most men's daily Discourse; I thought it not amiss,
until a more perfect Relation comes to our hands, to give in short the Names
and Characters of the principal Persons, drawn by (...) Countryman of their
own, and ^aithfully copied in this Rough-draught, where you will find a brief
account of that King, those Princes, Generals and Statesmen who are now so
acti^^ and eager in the pursuit of Conquests. If this be received with any
kindness, I may perhaps draw aside the curtain, show the Scenes, and accurately
describe the precedent and following Champagnes, with all the Contrivances,
Turns, Counterturns, and Windings up of every Act as they shall succeed; which
how it will conclude, is the enquiry, concern, and expectation of all Europe,
amongst whom our Interest is not so little, but we ought to inform our selves
of all the Particulars: to which if this contribute in the least, I have my
Ends.

Farewell.

A Catalogue of books lately Printed, and are to be sold by Thomas Palmer, at
the sign of the Crown in Westminster Hall. 1668.
1. THe Characters and Pourtraicts of the present Court of France: describing
the King, Princes, Ministers of State, and others, in 8.

2. Rome exactly described: or, a Relation of the state of the Court of Rome,
made at the late Council of Pregadi, in two curious Discourses: by the most
Excellent, the Lord Angelo Corrare, Ambassador from the most Serene Republique
of Venice to Pope Alexander 7. Translated out of scalian by John Bulteel Gent.
in large 8.

3. Spare minutes: or, Resolved Meditations, and Premedicated Resolutions, by
Arthur Warwick, in 24.

4. The Essays and Counsels, Civil and Moral: whereunto is newly added A Fable
of the Colors of Good and Evil: by the Right Honorable Sir Fr. Bacon, Lord
Verulam, Viscount S. Alban, in large 12.

5. Flagelum, or the Life and death of O. Cromwell, from his Birth to his
Burial. With an exact Account of his Policies and Successes: with a Discovery
of his private and public actions, not till now made public. Impartially
written by James Heath Gent. in large 8.

6. The English Rogue described, in the Life of Meriton Latroon a Witty
Extravagant: being a Complete Discovery of the most eminent Cheats of both
Sexes: in large 8.

7. Cupids Courtship: or, the Celebration of a Marriage between the Godd of
Love and Psyche, in a Poem, by the same ingenious Author, in 8.

8. Venus Cabinet unlocked, and Natures chief Miracles and Rarities laid open:
being a Curious Collection out of the two eminent Physicians, Levinus Lemnius,
and Sinibaldus, and others: made English by Rob. Miller M. D. in 12.

9. The complete Solicitor: performing his duty, and teaching his Clyent to
run through his own Business, as well in his Majesty's superior Courts at
Westminster, as in the Mayors Court, Court of Hustings, Court of Marshalsey,
and other inferior Courts both in the City of London and elsewhere: the like
not formerly extant: written by R. T. Gent. in 80.

10. The first and second Part of Counsel and Advice to Builders, for the
choice of their Surveyors, Clerks of their Works, Bricklayers, Masons,
Carpenters, etc. With several Letters to his sacred Majesty, his Royal
Highness, Prince Rupert, Duke of Albemarle, and other Lords, Knights and
Gentlemen of the Realm, concerning the three chief Principles of Magnificent
Building, viz. Solidity, Convenience, and Ornament. Written by Sir Balthazar
Gerbier Donnilly, Knight, in 8. A Work very necessary for all those that are
concerned in rebuilding the city of London.

11. Don Juan Lamberto: or, a Comical History of our late Times: wherein the
Contrivances of the late Rebels under their Names are Jovially discovered, and
to the life displayed: in two parts. By John Philips Gent. in 4.

12. The Royal Game of the Ombre, written at the request of diverse Honorable
persons, by R. F. Esquire in 8.

At the same Shop also, any persons may have Histories, Romances, Plays, or
other Books, lent them to read; or any that have Books to sell, may there have
Money for them.

THE Characters and Pourtraicts OF THE COURT OF FRANCE.
FOr the better understanding of the Affairs and Interests of France, it is fit
to know those persons that Govern, and such as are any thing considerable,
either for their Offices or Quality; And therefore we shall begin with the
Characters of those that are most Eminent and Illustrious. To which shall be
added their several Offices and Functions. We will distinguish the Order of the
Kings Council, and the several Employments in the War. And lastly, treat
cursorily of the Revenues whereby all these subsist.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE KING, And all His Preeminences.
THe Most Christian King is the Eldest Son of the Christian Church, by the
consent of the States of Christendom, and the acknowledgement of the very
Infidels themselves, who in their Treaties between Henry the IV, and the Grand
Signior, gave him the Title of the greatest Monarch of the Christian Faith;
really Sovereign, Absolute, and Immortal in his own Kingdom of France. The
succession is by a Natural Right, and by virtue of the Salique Law, which
conveys it from Male to Male, as they are nearest in Blood, to the exclusion of
the Females, who have ever contented themselves with the Honor of being Dames
of France, and submitted to the Kings will therein; from whom they receive such
advantages as he is willing to bestow, according to the greatness of his
Dignity, and the interest of his Power. Childebert the First of the first Race,
was preferred before the Daughters of Lewis the II, without any opposition
against that Election. Philip the IV. of Valois was preferred before Isabella
Daughter of France, and Queen of England. Lewis the XII. after Charles the
VIII. Francis the First next to him, and Henry the IV. after Henry the III.

The present King is the Son and Successor to Lewis the XIII, Grandson of Henry
the IV, descended from Anthony of Burbon King of Navarre, and from Robert of
Clermont, fourth Son of Lewis the IX. All his Genealogy derives from Hugh
Capet, the first King of the third Race. He is of so handsome a shape and mine,
that Don Juan of Austria seeing him pass by without any attendance, and the
Queen having said to him, Do you know that this is the King of France? Replied,
Although I am yet unacquainted with him, yet Madam I was persuaded in mind that
he deserved that quality, looking upon him as the best accomplished Frenchman,
and most worthy to Reign over them.

He will be sole Master, and cannot endure to be governed by any other; he is
bold, haughty, and fearless; speaks but little, and well to purpose; constant
in his resolutions, very secret and judicious. The Portugal Ambassador told
him once, Sir, I shall dispatch this business with your Ministers. I have no
Ministers, Sir, replied the King, you mean our inferior Officers. At their
return from Lions, the Cardinals having set some persons aside, for whom the
King had a particular esteem, he said in the presence of several of his
Gentlemen, who have often affirmed it to me, The Cardinal does all what he
pleases, and I suffer it, because of the good services he has rendered me; but
my turn will come to be Master one day.

He covets to imitate his Grandfather, nay, even to surpass him, as himself
once testified to Monsieur de Paris, who was discoursing of it: The King my
Grandfather did many great things, and has left many great things to do; if it
please God to let me live twenty years longer, I may, perhaps, do as great, if
not greater things then he. There was never any Prince that knew better how to
make himself be respected then this, nor to keep every one within his duty and
distance; all which he effects without any noise, or the least appearance of
clamor. I have also been a witness of his patience, upon a trial which would
have lost it self in any other person. One afternoon at Fountainbleau he had
given order to his Coachman to have his Calesche there about four a clock, to
go a hunting; the whole Court was in a readiness for the sport, and it had
struck four a long while before by the Clock, yet the Kin^^ Coach came not. The
King himself came often to the Balcone to look for him: but it was on the
stroke of five before the Coach appeared. The King going into the Calesche,
said, Coachman, I told you I would have the Coach at four a Clock. Sir, replied
the man, who had, it may be, tipled the time away, It is but four now. The
King, who knew the contrary, said no more, but, Drive along, that is your best
way, and never commit the like again. It is averred, that he pardons the first
offense; severely reproves the second; but at third he turns them away without
remission. He requires an inviolable execution of all his Orders: when he had
given command to seize on Monsieur Fouquet, at his coming forth from the
Council, Monsieur at Artagnan by accident missed him, for he had not taken his
own Sedan, but retired in another into a little Alley, to give Audience to some
certain people. Monsieur d'Artagnan very much surprised, and fearing Monsieur
Fouquet might have some intelligence of the design, and make a secret escape,
immediately sent a Musquettier to give the King notice he was not to be found.
The King was then writing a Letter about the detection of the said Treasurer to
the Queen Mother at that time at Fountainbleau; and the Soldier having told
him the news, without naming any body, Go, said the King, and tell Artagnan
that he must be found! and I shall find him well enough! And then turning
himself toward the Prince, It Is Fouquet, Cosen, that I intend to seize upon,
because be withholds all my Revenues, and puts me to a thousand troubles to get
a little money of him, of which he never gives me any account. The Prince, and
all the other Lords were much astonished at this, they knowing nothing of it;
but every one commended the conduct and resolution of his Majesty.

He is very temperate, and was never known to give himself over to the least
excess, amidst the abundance of his delights and pleasures, no more then he
does to his anger, for all his Power and Authority; which plainly shows he is a
perfect Master over himself, not tainted with any passion that might eclipse
his other excellent Qualities: Or if there be any Objection against him, it is
his Frugality; but that is inherent to the Family of the Burbons, who have ever
been noted for great heapers up of Riches. But this reproach he has wiped off
very judiciously, by saying publicly, My Subjects will, I hope, consider me as
a young married man, who is about settling his Family, and ought to take care of
furnishing himself plentifully; but within a while they shall find the effects
of it; for I have a regard to them as well as to my self.

He understands all his Exercises to the best advantage, especially the
Mathematics, and the Art of Fortification. There is no Officer can command his
Troops so distinctly, and with so much sweetness. He rides the Great Horse very
gracefully and skilfully; and can use any Weapon with as much dexterity as any
Master of those Sciences. He Dances admirably; and though he wear sometimes a
disguize, yet his Majestic Garb and Air does soon discover him. He laughs but
seldom, and with much moderation; and the Jest must be very witty and well
placed to gain his approbation, however others esteem it.

In fine, it must needs be acknowledged, that this Great King has all the
Virtues and Qualifications necessary to command so vast a Kingdom as his is:
nay, so eminently is he endued with them, that he is worthy of the whole Worlds
Empire, there being nothing wanting toward it, but his being fully known to
all Nations, who without doubt would be charmed by his incomparable Virtues,
and willingly submit themselves to the mildest and best-regulated Empire that
was ever yet known to this Great Universe.

Of the Kings Family.
THe wise Solomon upon his first advancement to his Fathers Crown, built him a
House, such as the Scripture represents to us of so mavelous a Structure,
that it invited the Queen of Sheba to come and admire both its greatness and
glory: and of this puissant King of Lillies, under the Conduct of an
Illustrious Woman, one who is worthy of the Title of Mother of the greatest
Monarch in the World, I think we may say the same, if not more, who Reigns at
present with so much splendor, through the Care and Noble Impressions of that
Regent who guided him during his minority, and has seated him on the Throne
with so much Pomp and Majesty, after she had bestowed an universal Peace. The
stately building of the Louvre continued with so much heat, besides the
admirable Structure of a thousand other Royal and Public Buildings; the Iustre
of the Throne sustained with so much Judgment; the admirable Conduct in the
establishment and reglement of the Royal Family; the present reunion of the
Princes; the general Peace, which spreads a joy over all the Earth: In fine,
the august and glorious presence of Lewis the Gift of God, has not only
attracted a Highborn and Wise Queen to come and admire his Greatness; but
likewise tempts the greatest and noblest part of all Europe besides to behold
him, whom Fame has noised all abroad. All these, I say, are Subjects
sufficient to be compared to all the Wonders of Antiquity, and to make us
repeat that passage in Scripture, Verily I say unto you, That Solomon in all
his glory was never equal to this Triumphant Monarch. The Design or Model of
the Louvre is to make four spacious Courts, where six thousand men may be drawn
up in Battalia: and besides the regularity of the Buildings, and their
ingenious Architecture, which is supposed shall surpass all that the height of
Art or Greatness has yet produced in the rest of the World; They are
contriving Apartments convenient and sufficient to lodge the whole Royal
Family, besides all the Principal Officers of the Crown. Thus the Grandeur and
Magnificence of the Court will be more conspicuous in such an Assemblage, then
now as it is divided. In the mean while, till that Work be completed, I shall
trace out a slight draught of it, for the benefit of such as desire the
knowledge of it.

This numerous and pompous Train belonging to his Majesty, may be comprehended
under these three Heads: The multiplicity of the Princes, or such as the
necessary Offices require, or those whom for his Majesty's pleasure and for the
Ornament of the Court are constantly attending. Those that are most fixed, like
some brighter Stars still following the Sun, are the Queen, the Princes of the
Blood, and some other foreign Princes, who prefer the Honor of being under
this Empire, above the Command of other Dominions, or the subjection of other
Monarchs: and so highly do our Princes value their condition, though but
Subjects in this Court, that those of the Blood Royal never did, nor ever will
give precedence to any other Subject Prince on Earth, nor to any of his
Ambassadors, only to a Sovereign when present.

We have a Cloud of Examples, and one very fresh, between Monsieur and the Duke
of Savoy, to whom his Royal Highness would not give the right hand, even when
he came to his own Lodgings; which absolutely hindered the interview betwixt
those two Princes. It is true, that Monsieur yielded to an Equality with the
Prince of Denmark; but it was in respect of the infallible pretenses he has to
be king of his Native Country, which is reckoned a Sovereignty. But this must
be noted, that he would not however yield to any more then an Equality; and for
this cause they never came together. This preeminence of the Princes of the
Blood shines brighter now, after the long contest betwixt the Princes of the
House of Lorraine and ours, which but a few days since was settled after this
manner. During the former Reigns of Henry the II, Charles the IX, and Henry the
III, the House of Guise had acquired so much credit in the Court of France,
that besides that they were become the absolute Masters of all Affairs under
the Regency of Catharine of Medices, they had flattered themselves with some
pretensions to the Crown; a certain Canon of Verdun published in a Printed Book
of his, that they were descended from Charles of Lorrain, who was deprived by
the Estates of the right of Succession to the Crown of France, and Hugh Capett
was substituted in his stead. And though this Genealogy was false, as diverse
Authors have demonstrated, in clearing out their descent from the Counts of
Alsatia; Nevertheless the Guises, who were very potent in the Kingdom, made use
of this advantage: for the necessity of affairs, and the fear of their
Authority, having obliged Henry the III. to condescend that the Princes of the
Blood should yield the right hand to the Chief of the house of Lorrain, and
that the younger Sons of the House of Lorrain should in the same manner give
the upper hand to the Princes of the Blood of France; Our Princes have never
observed this order, but opposed it very vigorously, till such time as the King
by full Power and Authority, and knowing the Justice of their Cause, has
ordained, That ever hereafter, all the Lorrain Princes, and even the Head of
that Family, should give place to the Princes of the Blood; and to this purpose
he sent an Order by Monsieur Tellier to Monsieur de Guise, who is here the
Chief or Head of that Family, to go and give a visit to the Prince, and to give
place to him upon all occasions, yea, even in his own House; and to observe the
very same toward all the rest of the Princes of the Blood: Which order was
immediately executed by Monsieur de Guise, and afterward by all the rest of
that Family. There was another contest of Precedence between Strangers, or
Foreign Princes, and the Dukes and Pairs. These pretended a Right as well as
the Princes of the Blood, to go before foreign Princes, especially at great
Solemnities, where they pretend to represent Sovereign Persons by virtue of
their Dignities, which are undoubtedly the first and highest in the Kingdom.
It Is true, they have heretofore been Sovereigns, and yet always Subjects or
Vassals to the King, being obliged to render homage for what they held of the
Crown. Their rise is attributed to Hugh Capett; for that Prince, to make
himself King, agreed to bestow his Dutchies and Pairies to those great Lords
who were most able to oppose him in his advancement to the Throne. This made
them so potent, that having once declared to the Duke of Aquitaine, that he
could not approve of his intents of making War upon the Duke of Anjou, and the
Duke little regarding his resentment, the King bidding some body ask him, Who
it was had made him Duke of Aquitain? He replied with much haughtiness, Those
that made him King. And although they are now perfectly submitted to Regal
Authority, yet they are careful of preserving the remainders of their Grandeur
toward foreign Princes; whereupon many of them would not appear at the
entrance of the King and Queen into Paris after their Marriage, because the
Count de Soissons, of the House of Savoy, would not yield them the precedence
and rank they claim in all Royal Ceremonies, by virtue of their Dignities. But
what greatness soever these Nobles of France do attribute to themselves, yet
there are others that do contend with them for precedence, and go already in
equal rank, having no less Authority in the Kingdom then they. Our Kings, to
maintain an equal poise and temperament in the State, have always equally
considered Valor and Justice, and for this respect have made Gentlemen of the
Robe, as well as of the Sword, having allowed them the same privileges,
advantages and immunities, without any distinction; it being indubitable, that
a State consists equally of Power and Justice: the Swordmen however have still
attributed something of preeminence to themselves; but those of the long Robe,
have wisely taken the Superiority on their parts, of which they do not vaunt,
though in effect they dispose absolutely of the Estates, Lives and Honor of
the other, by an Authority of the Crown, wherewith they shelter themselves,
sitting upon the Royal Lillies, as Judges of the greatest Peers and Princes of
the Blood, who are bound to stand to their Sentence, and come in at their
Summons, to answer for themselves. I remember an Example during the last
troubles, in the person of Monsieur the Prince; they had given him some cause
to apprehend he might be again confined, though but newly out of Prison; which
occasioned his retreat to S. Maur. The Parliament deputed two Counselors to go
to this Prince, and invite him to come and show the Reasons for his retiremens,
to the Parliament. He comes accompanied with his Royal Highness, the Prince of
Conty, the Princes of Nemours, Guise, and other Lords that assembled
themselves. There the first President addressing his Speech to the Prince,
boldly reproved him for withdrawing himself tumultuously from Paris, and told
him, That he would make him responsable for all the disorders that should
happen, those actions of his being but like the Alarms to a Civil War, during
the Kings Minority; it being well known at Court, that he kept Secret
Intelligence with the Kings Enemies, and caused several places to be fortified,
amongst which Bellegarde was one. To which the Prince replied, with as much
heat, That if any disorders did happen in the Kingdom, themselves would be the
only causers of it; to which they had already given birth. That for his part,
he detested the design of any such disturbance in his Soul; and for the
correspondence they mentioned he held with the Enemy, it was false; nor could
they produce the least Witness against him; there being as little verity also
in what they alleged touching Bellegarde, which they particularly objected;
concerning which, he vowed and protested both to his Royal Highness and the
Court, that there had not been one shovel full of Earth removed to any such
intent. Upon which the first President with as much confidence as he began,
resumed his Speech, and told him, That indeed his words were good and
plausible, but yet many times men's words and intentions look contrary ways, as
his were suspected to do; and then proceeded to reprove him in these terms: It
is very laudable to see the Prince of Conde keep within his Palace in the
Fauxburgh Saint Germans, and not vouchsafe to go over the new Bridge to wait
upon the King his Lord and Master. This looks like an intrenching and
barricading ones self on the other side of the River against the Louvre; and
what will strangers say, Sir, when they hear of such proceedings of the Prince
of Conde toward the King? The Prince replied again as smartly as at the
beginning: That his Royal Highness had given him caution not to do it, and
would not undertake for the security of his person, the Cardinal Mazarine
ruling still in the hearts of the Court, where his Enemies were yet the
strongest party, and threatened him with a second imprisonment. But that he
still must attribute all the disorders and disturbances that might happen, to
their negligence, unless they would acquaint the King and Queen with his just
Reasons, and most humble Remonstrances. This contest betwixt the Presidents and
the Dukes and Pairs of France for Precedence, has been of late started up more
then ever, upon some accidents happening in a general Procession. One of these
last Holydays, the President de Mesmes Footmen, being the more numerous, took
place of the Duke of Brisac's, upon which there ensued a great quarrel and
debate; but the Duke's were in fine constrained to yield to the number and
strength of the others; upon which the Duke's preferred their complaints, with
a great deal of heat, having demanded for Justice against them; each of them
made their own defense, and the Duke's have newly produced their Manifesto, and
presented it to the King to have a decision of it. It is said that his Majesty
goes in person the next week to the Parliament for this end, and to give order
to the Chancellor to collect first the Votes of the Dukes and Pairs before
those of the Presidents. But others that are very clear-sighted, do believe
that the business will be thus accommodated; That the Presidents shall have
precedence in the Parliament, but shall any where else give it to all Dukes and
Pairs, especially at Extraordinary Ceremonies, and Triumphant Shows, where the
Sword seems to claim a Right above the long Robe. Of this we expect the Issue.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of the QUEEN MOTHER.
ANna Maria Mauritia of Austria, Daughter of Philip the III. King of Spain, was
married to Lewis the XIII. King of France and Navarre. The Marshall d' Ancre
made up this match, and carried the King to Bourdeaux to that end, whilst an
Army lay amusing the Princes of the League in Champagne. She was married many
years before she had any children, but at length she brought forth this King,
and Monsieur only, having never had any Daughters, or other Children then these
two. After the death of Lewis the XIII, she was declared Queen Regent, and made
use of the counsel and administration of Cardinal Mazarine, during the time of
her Regency and the Kings minority. The beginning of his Ministry was both
peaceable, and happy enough: for, to gain the amity and good will of the great
ones, he showed the Kings favors upon them with an open hand indifferently,
being contented to engage them to be of his party, that they should share with
him in his Masters Grace and Authority. He endeavored likewise at first to
strengthen himself with some considerable Alliance; and to this purpose he sent
for some of his Nephews and Nieces, and other Relations, whom he caused to be
bred up at Court after the French Mode and Air, upon the hopes of future
Grandeur. But we shall mention this Minister in a Chapter apart, which shall
describe both his Person and Conduct.

The Queen Mother is a good and virtuous Princess, of a pacifique spirit, and
an exemplary Piety. She wants neither for resolution nor conduct in great
affairs, nor for good will toward the public Interest. Her great courage was
apparent during the troubles of her Regency: when she resolved to make use of
her power against Paris, and asked the Prince upon his return from the battle,
Will you suffer them to affront the Regal Authority? (meaning the business of
the Barricadoes, when they would absolutely have Monsieur Broussel released
leased upon their popular insurrection) This violence concerns you, continued
she. To whom the Prince replied, Madam, behold, this Sword of mine is ever at
his Majesty's service, which you may absolutely command. She showed also a
great deal of resolution in her enterprise upon the Princes, whom she caused to
be seized on by her Captain of the Guards; but her undaunted spirit appeared
most eminently after the Cardinals absence, when she took the Helm of the
State into her own hands, and steering all affairs during that hideous tempest,
causing the King to be declared in his Majority, after she had driven the
Prince into Guyenne, and confined the Cardinal de Retz, who had been flattered
with the hopes of being chief Minister. In a word, she appeared to be, what she
really was, that is to say, good natured, and pacifick in her heart, when she
forgave her enemies, without the smallest resentment of any injury; and stood
for Peace in despite of the Cardinals intentions, even so far as to command him
to make it up for the general good of all Christendom. She is Magnificent
without excess, and glories in her Birth and Alliance. Her Devotion is more
then common, and often repeated, yet without affectation or severity. Her
Virtue appears without any disguize, she taking pleasure to do good in the best
manner, thereby to attract the World to follow her virtuous Examples. She
caused the Val de Grace to be built for her retreat, as a holy Solitude,
whither she goes to seek her God out of the noise of the Court, and the
confusion of State-Employments. She is very Charitable to the poor Convents, to
whom she allows a comfortable subsistence; that so they may follow their
Devotions and Studies, with their harmless Recreations. She has always
endeavored to nourish a happy Union and Correspondence in the Royal Family;
and by her virtue maintained her self as Mother to the King of France with so
much discretion, that she yet retains a great Authority with a potent King, and
a Noble Prince, who do each of them honor her most entirely. She made the
match betwixt the King and the Daughter of Spain, whose Father is her Brother;
having settled them in perfect Amity, to the great content of their Subjects,
and the joy of all Christendom. She showed a great deal of moderation amidst
that power and plenty she was Mistress of; in an Age so corrupt and greedy of
gain, that nothing is sufficient to glut the desires of most people. She alone
never heaped up any Treasure, but rested content with what Nature, Justice, and
her Quality brought freely to her Store.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of MONSIEUR.
HE is the Kings only Brother; a Prince well shaped, good natured, and very
Gallant: he is not, however, so Majestic as the King; has not that full stock
of generous bounty, solidity, and haughty bravery. He is mild, agreeable, civil
and obliging; very complaisant to the Ladies, always gay and active, curious of
rarities, and nice in his Habits and Modes, in his Furnitures and Cabinets, and
very perfect in the Ornaments belonging to Architecture, the Art: of Music,
Perspective and Agriculture. Though this Prince has ever showed an exact
submission to all the Kings commands, and preserved an extreme respect for the
Queen Mother, yet he could never be brought to favor Cardinal Mazarine.

For it is reported, that the Cardinal one day at St. Germains passed by him,
and pulled off his Hat by way of salutation; he only cast an eye upon him, but
moved not at all, not so much as to take notice of his civility, or return the
ceremony. The Cardinal going immediately to the Queens apartment, complained
openly to her, saying, I do not know what I have done to Monsieur, that he
should treat me with so much scorn; I thought he had a better esteem of me,
having never given him any occasion to treat me so. The Queen Mother having
sent for Monsieur, made him a thousand reproaches for it, and threatened him
with some kind of indignation, for not rising up to the Cardinal: To which
Monsieur at the instant replied, Though he had been the Pope, I should not have
risen to him. He was threatened to be chastised for saying so; but he explained
it very handsomely, telling them, One does not use to rise up to the Pope, but
fall down upon ones knees before him, which I should then have been obliged to
do. He ever showed himself averse to that Ministers proceedings, chiefly
because he did not give him enough to maintain his Family, and his other
divertisements in that splendour and magnificence as he desired, and as indeed
was requisite to his quality of the Kings Brother. He was bred up with a great
deal of fear and respect toward the King, without much application to
learning, or knowledge in the Art of War; yet he did sometimes ride the great
Horse, but not with so much assiduity as the King. He has a marvelous ready
wit to make reparties: a among others, let this show his ability, it being
somewhat remarkable.

The King took him one day to visit the Buildings at the Lonvre, before
Monsieur Fouquet's disgrace; and complaining, That he wanted money to continue
that vast Structure; Monsieur replied very aptly, Sir, your Majesty must only
take upon you to be Super intendent of your revenues for one year, and you will
have enough to carry on your Building. He loves peace and quietness, seldom
disturbing sturbing himself with the tumult and trade of War; yet he has kept
his Majesty company, and endured all the fatigues of a long voyage, without
trouble or complaint. Before his Marriage he had a great deal of friendship for
Madam de Hourdon; and the Queen, to make some discovery of his mind, told him
once, That it seemed to her he was in love with that Lady, having sent her a
pair of Pendants worth four thousand Crowns for a New Years gift. To which he
answered, That for friendship and compassion, he had indeed some toward her,
as being a poor stranger far from her own Country, and destitute of means;
which were indeed the treasons why he sent her that Regalio.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of the PRINCE.
PRince Lewis Son of Henry of Bourbon, descended from Lewis Prince of Conde,
younger Brother of Henry the IV. is one of the most courageous and stoutest
Captains either of this or former Ages, not excepting either Alexander or
Gustavus Adolphus; being so fearless of any peril or danger, that it has been
sometimes judged he was rather desperate then valiant. The Marshal Gassion, who
was one of the bravest men of his time, was deceived in him: the Prince, to
convince him of his error, thought it sufficient to let him know by experience,
that no danger could in any attaque shake his great Soul. At the Battle of
Rocroy, where this Prince made his first Essay, he never showed the least
apprehension, although the beginning of it were very disadvantagious to his
party, and himself threatened with a general defeat; but he bestirred himself
with so much cagerness, and rallied up his broken and flying Regiments with so
much courage and heat, and good example, that he made all the French at last
resolve either to vanquish, or die with him. The Baron de Syrop, one of the
best resolved men in his Army, did second him extraordinarily well in this
sight, and justly merited a Marshals Staff for that eminent service; but he
missed that due recompense, and all other advantages since, rather by
misfortune then any want of desert: that days actions having proclaimed his
worth to all the world. Besides the battle of Rocroy, which was both his
maiden-attempt and Masterpiece; He has gained three other Victories, two in
Germany, at Fribourgh and Nordlingen: He also took Philips bourgh in eighteen
days, which had withstood a Royal Seige for eighteen months, and saved it self
from the prosperous valor of the Great Gustavus. The last battle he won was
that of Lens; the joy and triumph for which Victory was silenced by the
disorder of the Barricado's, where the whole Kingdom was in confusion, most
people in Arms, and the Kings Palace almost besieged; all which uproar happened
about Monsieur Bronstet, a Counselor in Parliament, who had been that day
arrested upon his vigorous proceedings on some points in the behalf of the
people. The Parisians in this action plainly violated all Authority through
their obstinacy, obliging the Ministers to surrender up the Prisoner, with two
others who were taken with him; and in this great heat of theirs, they remained
three whole days and nights in Arms; nor would they be appeased till he was
restored, whom they called the Protector of the People, and had brought him
back with triumph and general acclamations in the Kings own Coach.

The Prince employed all his courage to revenge this seditious act; and his
resolve being fixed to besiege the City, he went out thence in the night with
the whole Court, leaving those that remained in a horrible consternation; but
after much ado, things being brought to an accommodation, the Court returned to
Paris; and the fruits of all the Princes labors came to this, that he drew the
general odium and hatred of the Citizens upon himself, by his being so forward
and busy to endeavor their chastisement. However, the Prince having served
the Court so faithfully on all occasions, thought he had reason to expect some
considerable recompense; and being obliging, active, and restless, he after
pressed the Cardinal, in favor of some of his relations, for some Command or
Office.

The Cardinal thinking to remove him from any vicinity to the Court, presents
him with the Government of Guienne in lieu of that of Burgundy; which the
Prince readily gave way to, as well because it is more honorable, as because
he hoped to keep the better correspondence and intelligence with the Sieur de
Marsin, Lieutenant General in Catalonia, who was his Creature.

But this not being enough to secure him from the private attempts of Enemies,
they assaulted his Coachon the Pont-Neuf in disguise, shot into it, and wounded
a Page, who then sat in the Princes Seat. The Prince made a narrow and diligent
search after these Assasines; and some jealousies there were of Monsieur de
Beaufort, and the Cardinal de Retz: but whilst he was laying an Ambuscade to
entrap some of the Accomplies, he never imagined they had pitched their Toils
to take him, and conduct him to the Bois de Vincennes, whither he was led
Prisoner by his Majesty's Order. Never did so great a heart so patiently submit
to confinement: himself directed the best way to that place, which he had found
out upon an occasion of carrying some Guns thither, during the troubles at
Paris, which could not be, drawn the other way, by reason of the deepness of it.

About thirteen months afterward he was released, upon occasion of the
Intrigue between the Cardinal de Retz and the Parliament: a Letter which he
writ with a Back-lead-pen, and which was signed by the Prince of Conti and the
Duke of Longueville his Brothers, and companions in his restraint, being
presented to the Parliament, to whom it was directed, did very much contribute
to his release. He has ever since been very jealous of the Cardinal, and
rather adventured to withdraw himself into Flanders, then to fall again into
his hands. But although he ever was his Enemy, yet he never spoke any ill of
him; only he would sometimes let his friends know he did not approve of his
Conduct. He was saying once, That there were three persons in France that made
much noise; one was the Marshal of Turenne, who was the best and most prudent
Captain of those times, but yet very unfortunate. Another, the Cardinal
Mazarine, who was the ablest in the World for Counsel, but the greatest coward
alive. The last was himself, who had neither of those two perfections, but yet
was much happier then either of them He is now returned to his duty, and yields
his obedience with so much submission and adherence, that it is easily judged,
he had no quarrel with his Master, but all his discontent arose from Cardinal
Mazarine, with whom he was again presently reconciled. He is Brave, Generous,
Learned, and Active as any man alive, nor does he want discretion when
occasions call for it. At present he is very intent about the Economy of his
Family, enquiring into all the minutest concerns thereof; and having made so
great an Alliance betwixt his only Son, and a Princess of the Palatine House,
his chief care is to heap up Treasure sufficient for the maintenance of so
Illustrious Persons.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of the DUKE.
HE is a young Prince not at all wanting of that Courage and Spirit of his
Ancestors; he is Prompt and Active, and keeps an absolute Authority over all
those that are submitted to him: yet has he Allay enough to temper his heat,
and do all things with prudence and circumspection. He delights much in
hunting, even to the discomposing himself sometimes, as he did at
Fountainbleau. He has been a hard Student, and speaks diverse Languages. He
hates great Ceremonies, and tedious Discourses; and gives quick dispatch to
those that address themselves to him about business. He promises very much for
the future, and has both Heart and Capacity enough to imitate his Fathers
exploits of War.

It is said that he has some hopes and pretenses to the Crown of Poland.
Certain it is, that he is the adopted Son of the King and Queen of that
Country, as having espoused that Queens Niece. He does every thing very
gracefully, and without any affectation. He takes the upper hand of his Father,
for what reason I know not, though some attribute it to a paternal Humility and
Goodness, which I most incline to; as others say that it arises from the
consideration of his Nobility, which augments the more, by how much it is the
older and more distant from its Origin: others imagine it is only for his
Fathers convenience, who thinks that place in the Coach less easy, holding
this Maxim, That it is the Person gives the Dignity to the Place, not the
Place to the Person; as may be observed in the Queen Mother, who ever rides in
the forepart of the Coach. His knowledge is great in Poetry, he taking a
delight to read and remember things that are exquisite in that kind. Every
ordinary divertisement does not relish with him, but there must be something
more then common in them to gain his approbation. He answers any Philosophical
Question with a great deal of Wit and Judgment; and would please himself very
much with a Magnificent Train, stately Balls and Masks, and all other
splendid appearances, if his Father did not moderate his inclinations a little,
and reform his expenses to the just measure of Decency, and the quality of his
Illustrious Birth.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE Prince of CONTY.
HE is mild, good natured, and accomplished in all excellent Qualities. He is
very Learned in all the Sciences, and has been admired in the most celebrated
Academy for his great Wit, and capacity in the knowledge of the highest points
of Theology: but besides his Titles and excellent Qualities, he is Master of a
very great stock of Bounty and Virtue. His life is a fit Exemplar for the best
Courts, and makes good the possibility of being a very great Lord, and a very
honest man.

His Lady is a most virtuous Princess, who agrees admirably well with him in
his Zeal and Piety; and had the Cardinal brought no other benefit to France,
but the bestowing of so rare a person on us, who is so Noble and Charitable to
the World, he would deserve our eternal thanks and praises, since by her means,
Millions of our lives have been preserved during the Famine; besides the many
Souls she has saved by her frequent Prayers and eminent Examples; insomuch, as
this Prince and Princess are the true patterns of Piety, amidst the Pomp and
Bravery of this Age. I shall not mention the Beauty of this Woman; for though
she be of an excelling Shape, yet that is the least of her perfections, she
being infinitely good and wise, charitable and discreet, and in a word, a
complete Model of Christian Perfection. There is a worthy Branch of the Noble
Stock, who is called Monsieur le Comte, who is as yet too young to show the
World the advantages he is like to derive from such a worthy Birth. All that is
yet observed, i^ his ravishing prettiness, and such a Physiognomy as promises
he will hereafter keep up the Fame and Reputation of his Illustrious Parents.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of Mademoiselle de Montpensier.
MAdemoiselle de Montpensier the elder is of the house Bourbon, both by Father
and Mother. Gaston the Son of France, younger brother to Lewis the XIII, was her
Father; and Mary de Montpensier, his first wife, derived her Birth from Henry
Duke of Montpensier; and that Henry from a third Son of the house of Bourbon,
whose direct line failed at the death of the Constable, and revived again in
Charles the Second Son of that Family: the third Son having begotten the Prince
de la Roche, Suryon, and the Duke of Montpensier, from whom Mary the Mother of
Mademoiselle was descended. The Princess being of the blood of Kings and
Princes, is haughty, daring, and of a more then feminine courage. It may be
truly said, she is an Amazon, and fitter to manage the Sword then a Distaff,
which she made apparent at the business of St. Anthonies, where the Princes
fortunes being desperate, and her Father not daring to appear, to save the
Prince of Conde's party, who were at the brink of destruction; She went to the
Town Hall, and took the Provost of the Merchants and the Governor of Paris by
the Beards, using great threats, to oblige them to arm and raise the Citizens
for the defense of the Prince; from whence she went to her Father, his Royal
Highness, in his Palace, whom she in a manner constrained to go with her to the
Bastille, that so his presence might support the staggering forces: and all
that rising of the Citizens, (an enterprise too rugged and daring for that
foster Sex, especially against a Royal Army, and in presence of their
Majesty's) was an action hardly to be excused, but upon the consideration of
the rashness of a woman, the Kings minority, and the general aversion at that
time against Cardinal Mazarine. For she commanded them to fire their Cannon
upon the Kings Army, and facilitated the Princes retreat, opening the
City-Gates to him; which saved both him and his whole party from evident ruin.
She is passionate, resolute and active, free in discourse, and endures not to
be contradicted in her opinions. She never cared for the Kings, nor her Fathers
Minsters, because that obliged her to some condescension toward them. She had
formerly some thoughts of marrying the Archduke Leopold of Austria without the
Kings consent, which obliged his Majesty to have a Guard attending her, and to
secure all the passages into Flanders, lest she should throw her self into his
Arms, who then made War against France. It is said she otherwhile refused the
King of Englands courtship, during his misfortunes; which is a fault of youth,
not to be repaired. I hold it somewhat difficult to believe that her great
heart could submit it self to any man's commands, how potent and noble soever he
might be. She is the richest Princess in Europe: for she enjoys above eight
hundred thousand Livres revenue in Lands yearly. She is of a very tall and
handsome proportion, of a Masculine aspect, a confident and free garb and pace,
a majestic presence, and yet a pleasing and graceful conversation. Her humor
is somewhat impatient, sprightly, and forward to undertake whatever she
designs; and being a stranger to any kind of dissimulation, speaking her mind
freely without disguise, not caring who listens. It is thought they apprehended
at Court, that she would express some discontent, by reason of the Marriage of
her younger Sisters before her, who were by another Mother; or else upon some
resentment written or spoken, she was commanded to withdraw her self from the
Court to her own Estate, where she remains in a great deal of freedom and
liberty, and not without much hopes of being suddenly recalled to Court, where
some advantageous propositions are on foot for a fit match for her, but with
what Monarch is not so well known.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of the House of Vendosme.
THe Duke of Vendosme, named Caesar of Bourbon, is the natural Son of Henry the
IV, and the Marchioness of Estree, called the beauteous Gabriele. The excessive
tenderness which the King his Father had for this Lady, and for this Son, had
almost caused his legitimation by a Marriage, which the King had given his
promise for, in favor of that Mistress; which promise in writing Monsieur de
Rosny tore in pieces in her presence, as Monsieur de Sully mentions in his
Memoires. He does very much resemble that great Prince his Father; is well
shaped, and of a good mien. He is something jovial, and has wit enough; but
above these, he is really good natured, mild, and extraordinary affable. He was
a long while absent from Court with his Family, in the late Kings days; but
since this Man's Reign, he returned again with all the honor due to his birth
and quality; nay, his Majesty conferred the office of high Admiral upon him,
which is one of the highest in the Kingdom, and has bestowed the reversion
upon Monsieur de Beaufort the youngest of his Sons, insomuch that he is now
higher at Court then ever; his age and experience making him capable of that
great employment, which he executes with all the conduct and advantage
required, especially by the assistance and activity of his Son. The Duke of
Mercoeur is his eldest Son, who married one of Cardinal Mazarines Neeces: which
match was kept secret; but in fine, she being great with Child, they were
compelled to a discovery: there had been some propositions for this alliance
before, which the Prince seemed to dissent from, for the interest of the
Family; but the riddle being resolved, there was no more withstanding it: the
Cardinal having played the surer Game, fearing some opposition might arise. This
Prince is very free and openhearted, facile, and one that loves his
divertisements; he minds not much the Court-intrigues, but being Governor of
Provence, he passes his time very contentedly, without that noise or
magnificence natural to his Family. The Duke of Beaufort is a mild humble
Prince, and civil even beneath his quality. He was in raillery called Roy des
Halles during the troubles, because he was beloved and followed by all the
populace, to whom he never refused to pull off his Hat. He is accomplished and
well proportioned, very fair, and rides a Horse excellently; they say he is the
best Marks-man with a Pistol in France. He had a sad occasion to try his skill,
after the sight at St. Anthonies, upon the Person of Mr. de Nemours his
Brother-in-law, whom he killed upon the place, though against his will and
inclination, which tends another way: some youthful rashness precipitated
Monsieur de Nemours to that duel, where Beaufort was engaged of necessity to
defend himself: after the unhappy shot, he betook himself to the Convent of the
Chartreux with an inexpressible grief. The survivance of the Admiralty is
bestowed upon him, in which quality he commands his Majesty's Fleet at Sea,
against the Barbary Pirates of Tunis and Algier.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of the Duke of GVISE.
THere are none I suppose that are ignorant of the grandeur of this family
under the last reigns, their elevation under Henry the II, their increase under
Charles the IX; to whom they became jealous, as well for the good mien, as
their Magnificence; and in fine, their prodigious authority under Henry the
III, who was obliged, for the security of his Crown, to secure the head of this
Family at Blois, together with his Brother the Cardinal. The Duke of Guise his
Son was propounded to be King of France by the Spaniards, during the League
against Henry the IV, after his escape out of the Castle of Tours where the
King held him prisoner.

But the Duke of Mayenne looking upon him as a younger Brother of his Family,
would not endure the proposition, ins;omuch as their division served to the
advancement of the Kings affairs, who pardoned him for that rebellion,
according to his usual clemency, and advanced, him to the Govenament of
Provence.

Monsieur de Guise is at present the only remaining branch of that Family; he
retains very many of his Ancestors worthy qualities, and especially their
Magnificence, which is as it were natural to him. He is one of the greatest
Gallants in the Court, and in his youthful days was very amorous; he loved the
Princess of Nevers, the Queen of Polands Sister, with a most violent passion.
He married the Countess of Bossum, one of the beautifullest Ladies of Flanders;
and being afterward passionately enamoured with Madame du Pont, he went to
Rome to annul his first Marriage, that he might tie a new knot with this last.
She kept an absolute correspondence with him, so that her love to him was as
great as his to her. But being unable to obtain his desires of the Pope, he
took occasion to go to Naples, where all was in confusion, by reason of Thomas
Anielo's revolt: At his arrival he became very considerable amongst the people
of that great City; and flattering himself with the hopes of making a Conquest
of it for the King, provided they would succor him from France, he added in
his Letter, written to that purpose, That he desired no other recompense for
that glorious Expedition, but only to have Madam du Pont. Whereupon the
Cardinal judging this passion and expression a sign of weakness in him; and
being unwilling to hazard so many men upon so vain an attempt, left him to
himself; so that being taken Prisoner by the Spaniards, and carried into their
Country, he was freed again during the troubles in Guienne, at the Request of
the Prince, thinking thereby to gain him to his own party; but the King having
dispatched Monsieur de Verderonne to release him, he came directly to Court,
without so much as once waiting on the Prince, to whom he was obliged for
moving the business first; which occasioned the Court to take some notice of
it, and afterward obtain his liberty. Since that time he has sold and wasted
most of his estate upon a new design on Naples, and the Idea's of conquering a
Kingom. Without doubt he has a great soul; but being unlimited, he has wasted
the Estate of the whole Family: whereupon Madam de Guise (speaking once to the
Queen Mother) said, That the Dukes of Guise had formerly amassed so much
Riches, that they were become jealous and terrible, but there was now an Heir
able to destroy and squander all away again, so that there would be no cause of
fear and apprehension of their great ness hereafter. He is well shaped,
obliging, mild, civil, amorous; he speaks exactly, and writes good verse,
having some knowledge of whatever is exquisite. He has as it were, a natural
faculty in riding and managing a great Horse, and behaves himself more
gracefully then any man at the running at the Ring, or any kind of Turnament.
He is infinitely delighted with those noble exercises, which he undertakes with
more happiness then any Querry in France.

There are likewise in France some younger Brothers of the House of Lorraine;
amongst others, the Count of Harcourt, frank, haughty, valiant, as he has
showed himself in several occasions, especially before Turin against the
Marquis D'Eguux, who had invited the Ladies of that City to see him make a
breakfast of the French, where himself was soundly beaten by this Count of
Harcourt, who had not above seven thousand men against fifteen thousand. He
also performed some things that seem to be above all belief at the taking the
Isses of St. Marguerit, and St. Honorat, with a very small force, contrary to
the Worlds expectation.

He made War likewise in Catalonia, but not so succesfully, being forced in his
Trenches before Lerida. He undertook, and effected above hopes, the conducting
of the Princes of the blood, Conde, Conty and Longueville, Prisoners to Havre
de Grace. He has the Office of Grand Escuyer of France, and the Count of
Armagnac his Son has the reversion version; and it is said, old and tired as
he is, he yet desires the King would employ him in his service, that he may dye
no otherwhere but in the Field, the Bed of Honor.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of the House of Longueville.
THe Count De St. Paul ought to have been ranged before the Duke of Guise; but
because of the Kings Declaration in favor of the House of Lorrain, that they
shall go next to the Princes of the Blood of France, I observe that Method,
though it be yet but in Idea, and against which, this Prince has made his
Protestation; which for my part I shall not interest my self in, but leave it
wholly to his Majesty's decision. And truly his Family, although descended from
John Count de Dunois, a natural Son of the Duke of Orleans, has been declared
capable of succeeding to the Crown, having assisted the Pucelle of Orleans more
then any one in regaining the Kingdom from the English, who had usurped it in
the time of Charles the VII. He is the Son of Henry of Orleans lately deceased,
who has left him Heir of much Wealth, and more Virtues; he being a Prince of
the greatest hopes in the World. He is a very graceful Person, of much Wit,
Courage and Learning; a great lover of Arts and Sciences, Virtuous, and in
sine, one that promises to be nothing less then his great Ancestor, who rendered
this Kingdom such eminent and extraordinary services. But he is yet only
learning his Exercises, which he begins to perform with that dexterity, that
the world admires him. His eldest Brother is become a Jesuit, and has left
him sole Heir of the richest Family amongst the Princes.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE New House of Soissons.
HE who at present bears the Title of the Count of Soissons, is the youngest
Son of the decased Prince Thomas of Savoy, and the Princess of Carignan,
Daughter of the true House of Soissons. He is well shaped, mild, and civil; and
is, as it were, the eldest of the Family, his eldest Brother being both deaf
and dumb. He married one of Cardinal Mazarines Nieces, by which means he got
very much in favor. He enjoys the Command of Colonel of the Swissers, which is
one of the handsomest employments about the Court. Besides this, he is
Governor of Champagne and Brie, and in a word, is one of the best settled
Princes in the whole Kingdom. He was in disgrace some years since for
attempting to draw his Sword upon the Duke of Novailles, in behalf of his Wife,
who contended with the Dukes Lady about the Privilege of giving the Queen her
Napkin; but he is now restored again, and more then ever respected by his
Majesty.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of the House of Courtenay.
THis Family, though very illustrious, and indeed descended from the Kings of
France, is very low at present; and unless the King out of his meet bounty be
pleased to raise them again, they must be contented to remain as they are, the
Relics of a Princely House, with only the bare title of Nobility.

There are yet extant of this Family a Father and Son, called Princes of
Courtenay; and a Knight of Malta, a younger Sprigg of them. Nothing is more
true, then that they were of the Royal stock, having lost their right of
Succession by their own default and negligence, having mis-allied themselves,
and changed their Coat of the Arms of France, which they should ever have
preserved, as an infallible mark of their Original. Thus have they deprived
themselves voluntarily of a great advantage; and according to Law, Volenti non
sit Injuria.

They remain still in obscurity, though they have many times endeavored to
raise themselves again, and restore their Family to its wonted quality and
splendor.

There are other Lords who take upon them the title of Princes, as the Princes
of Bouillon, or Sedan, De la Rochefaucalt, De Marsillac, De Tarante; amongst
whom, the most considerable for his great exploits, is the Marshal Turenne,
younger Son of the Family of Bouillon. He is a person of great conduct, and
admirable judgment; prudent in the midst of Battles, and fearless in dangers
and perils: and though he has not always had the success he deserved; yet in
the opinion of brave Warriors, he is esteemed one of the greatest Captains
this Age affords. He was ever most fortunate when he commanded for the King, as
may be observed by the taking of Stenay, his relieving of Arras, and the
gaining of the most important places in Flanders, before the conclusion of the
last peace: On the contrary, at the Battle of Rhetel, he lost a great number of
men, and had like to have been taken Prisoner himself. He married the Daughter
of the deceased Marshal de la Force, by whom he has no Issue. He has no
defect, but that of his Religion, founded upon a false Maxim, That a man ought
to dye in that Religion he was born in; which ought not to be maintained, but
in the true Church. He is a man of Faith, and of his word, in respect of the
world; and glories in this, that he never failed of his promise to any one;
which begets a great deal of credit and assurance toward him.

There is likewise the Marshal Gramond, Sovereign of Bidache, who is one of the
ablest Counselors about the Court, and one that wants not for any courage at
a time of need. He obeys Authority and Command as it were blindfold, and is
accused for giving Battle at Honincourt against all appearance of success: but
when this rashness was objected against him, he answered, That he had a written
Order from the Cardinal Richelieu, who then had the sole command; and this was
when the King was at Perpignan, and the Cardinal, as it were, in disgrace; who
to re-establish himself in his former power, and get an opportunity to revenge
himself of those Enemies that had brought him to that condition, by the means
of his Royal Highness, and monsieur de St. Mare, he designed to give the King
this considerable Chocque, being then at a great distance from Paris and the
Frontiers of Flanders; which succeeded just as he designed it: for the King
being surprised at this sudden blow, and imagining all was lost, said aloud,
Alas! then shall I not return to Paris! for they had apprehensions for that
great City, destitute of any Forces, and too far from any relief against a
victorious Army. But Monsieur de Noyers taking his time, replied, Sir, there is
none but the Cardinal that can ward this fatal blow. Whereupon the King
immediately sent for him, and restored all power and commands to him, enjoining
him to provide for the safety of the Nation, and take a just revenge of his
opposers, who were immediately seized, and Monsieur de St. Mare and Monsieur de
Thou executed at Lions a while after, as guilty of Treason against his Majesty,
in the person of his chief Minister of State.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE Cardinal de Retz.
THis Cardinal is the Son of the General of the Galleys, by name Father Gondy,
Priest of the Oratory. And the reason which moved him to take a Religious Habit
was this; having informed the King of somewhat, he quoted Monsieur de Liancourt
for his Author: the King having sent for Monsieur de Liancourt to know the
truth, he flatly denied that he had mentioned any such thing to Monsieur de
Gondy. This affront of giving him the lie, should have succeeded to a Duel; but
resigning his resentment and satisfaction to God in favor of his friend, he
resolved to quit the Court, and indeed the World, and retire himself to those
Fathers of the Oratory. His Son at that time Abbot of St. Berigre was elected
Coadjutor to the Archbishop of Paris his Uncle. During the Troubles, he made
himself famous under that quality, having raised a Regiment for the Parisians,
which at Court was in a scoffing way called the Corinthian Band, from his being
entitled to that Archbishopric of Corinth, In partibus insidelium. He
obliged the Court to make him a Cardinal, even against their Wills; for the
Cardinal Mazarine being otherwise unable to break that Party called Les
Frondeurs, whereof he was Chief, resolved to frustrate him of the Cardinals
Cap, and deluded him; and therefore upon their dissolving that League framed
against him, he had the grant of the Kings nomination of him for a
Cardinalship; but another Express was immediately dispatched after his
Messenger, to oppose his Promotion at Rome, which he somewhat doubted of; and
having given his Kinsman, the Bailly Gondy, Secretary of State to the Great
Duke of Florence, notice of it, he set all his Friends, and all the Engines
imaginable on work to advance his Family by this means; and having at the same
time caused Mazarines Messenger to be waylaid in his passage, he was stopped
while they carried on their design at Rome, where they obliged the Pope to call
an extraordinary Assembly, to expedite the business: So that having eluded the
Cardinals crafty design by this handsome subtilty, he grew very much fuspected
at Court, where they believed him capable of great undertakings. Cardinal
Mazarine became both jealous and afraid of him, and therefore to ensnare him,
he was flattered with the hopes of being made a Minister of State, to which the
Queen Mother seemed to incline. This extraordinary favor having swelled his
thoughts, he imagined he might attain it, and went to Court, accompanied with
his Guards, attending the Queen with great exactness. In the end, staying there
one day at Dinnertime, the Queen bid him go to dinner himself; but he waiting
till the Queens Fruit was served in, and then taking his leave with great
respect, and having had some good words from her Majesty, he was seized on upon
the Stair by a Captain of the Guards, who commanded him in the Kings name, to
go into a Room, where they had a Dinner provided for him; after which he was
carried to Vincennes, and there transported to Nants Castle, being committed to
the Custody of the Marshal de Milleray.

He made his escape from that Prison, and riding post to save himself, fell,
and put his Arm out of joint. There were some sent after him; but having caused
some of his Gentlemen to continue riding in the ordinary Road, he deceived
those that pursued him, and kept himself concealed in a Barn, which he
afterward forsook, and traveled in By-ways. He went out of the Kingdom the
nearest way, and retired himself in St. Sebastians Port, which is under the
Spaniards Dominion.

The Governor having heard of his arrival, sent notice to the King his Master;
and according to Order, came and visited the Cardinal de Retz, and offered him
7000 Pistols. The Cardinal refused them, telling him, he would receive money
from none but the King his own Master; and all he craved of the King of Spain
was a free passage, and security against his Enemies, which he hoped for. The
Governor replied, That the King of Spain was able enough to make such
presents, and did not pretend thereby to gain a person of his quality to side
with him, but he entreated him not to refuse that liberality. The Cardinal
being fully resolved not to accept of any thing, though he were in the
extremest necessity: The Governor returned next day with 2000 only, and told
him, That the King of Spain knew he was in want of some money, and therefore he
would take it very kindly if he accepted but of that small sum: Whereupon the
Cardinal being unwilling to show too much obstinacy, took 500 to serve him only
for defraying his charges into: Toscany, whither he designed to go; and
returning his thanks to the King by the Governor, he prosecuted his journey
the very next day. He arrived at Florence, where he was very cordially
received, and treated with all imaginable magnificence: amongst other rarities
which were showed him at the Great Dukes Palace, he stood a while to gaze on
the Picture of John de Medicis, a Cardinal, and General of an Army, in a
negligent habit, as it was said, he was wont to go; whereupon he said, Those
Gentlemen our Ancestors were not so Ceremonious as we are now adays; and yet I
believe they were no less honest and considerable then we are now.

But though he had boasted then, that in despite of Cardinal Mazarine, he
should die Archbishop of Paris; yet he has showed a great deal of moderation
in his surrender of it into the hands of his Majesty, who made it known that
such was his Royal pleasure.

He is, without doubt, very generous, magnificent, and full of honor and
virtue; learned, wise, and very capable of being a Minister of State, were he
called to it.

THE Character or Pourtraict of Cardinal Baberino, Called the Cardinal Antonio.
HE is Nephew of Urban the VIII, and the youngest Son of his Family. He is
great Chamberlain of the holy Church (Chair) and in his Name are all affairs
dispatched after the death of the Pope, and during the Election, in whose
lifetime he keeps his Holinesses Ring. He is great Almoner of France,
Archbishop of Rheims, first Duke and Pair of France, Abbot of S. Denis. He was
born Commander of the Kings Orders, and has the right of Information touching
the lives and behaviors of the Knights of the Order, and receives the
profession of their faith. This Office is Solstitium Honorum in France, the
Zenith of all Honors; which was created by Francis the first, in favor of
Cardinal Antonio Menden. He administers the Oath of Fidelity to the King, and
takes it of all the other Ecclesiastics, according to the Court of Bishops and
Archbishops of France, Grand Priors of Aquitaine, Auvergne, Champagne, and
other considerable Abbeys. He delivers the prisoners from their bondage upon
solemn Festivals, or days of Coronation, and the like extraordinary occasions.
He disposes of the whole stock of the Kings Alms, and exercises all these
Functions, without any dependence upon others as superior; which power he can
communicate to whomsoever he pleases. He is mild, peaceable and humble; loves
the French way of living, and has otherwhile governed the affairs of the
Church during the life of his Uncle. It is reported of him, that when the War
happened to be made upon the Duke of Parma, having no great skill in the Military
Art, he studied a whole night to frame an equivocal Letter when he was to send
his Orders to the Generals; that so, in case things succeeded well, he might
reap the glory of the Enterprise; and if Fortune were averse, there might be
room enough left to excuse himself, by pretending they had not comprehended his
meaning in their attempts.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF The Chancellor.
MOnsieur Seguier, issued from a family of the Robe, has had some of his
ancestors officiating in the greatest State-employments. Such men are usually
made to pass through those lower employments of the Long Robe first, and are
afterward according to their abilities called up to the Sovereign degree of
Chancellor of France, which is the chief of all Judicature. He is prudent and
judicious, and is accounted the most learned person in the Kingdom. He declares
his Majesty's mind when he lists in Parliament; who having in few words
expressed himself, to take off the trouble of a long Harangue, tells them, My
Chancellor shall inform of what I have more to say. He sits at the Kings feet
on a black Velvet Cushion; presiding in the Great Council in his Majesty's
absence; which Office he holds for his whole life. The Seals may be sometimes
indeed taken from him, and committed to such a Keeper as the King shall make
choice of, to seal Orders that are passed. Though he perfectly submitted
himself to the Kings will in all things, yet was the Seal given from him to the
first President Monsieur Molet, during the troubles of Paris, he being pursued
by the rascally people to the Hostel de Luynes, whither he was forced to
retreat, and in much danger even there of being forced out, had not the Marshal
de la Milleray come and rescued him by force of arms. The fear and jealousy he
had of Monsieur Fouquet at Fountainbleau, made him follow the King every where:
and he showed himself as able and active as any young man in the Journey to
Britany, because he had heard, as it is reported, that the King should say to
Monsieur Fouquet, who importuned him to take the Seals from him, seeing his
very great age disabled him in the execution of that Office; Do not trouble
your self; as soon as I return from Britany, I assure you the Seals shall be in
your house: which was true indeed, all things being sealed there. Monsieur
Fouquet making a favorable, though not a right construction of that promise,
was satisfied therewith; and the Chancellor had a great apprehension,
endeavoring by his close attendance to make it appear to his Majestic, that he
had yet vigor enough left him to acquit himself of that trust. This is one of
the causes of the enmity betwixt him and Monsieur Fouquet.

He cherishes his wealth above all the things in the world, and is sparing for
nothing that may contribute to prolong his days, making frequent use of
Cordials, and excellent nourishment; which have been so effectual, that he is
in a perfect condition of health at the age of Fourscore years. He has always
a Guard with him when he goes abroad; which is rather for a mark of his
dignity, then for fear of any hurt or danger. He presides in the Court of
Justice; but Monsieur Fouquet has put in many Heads of Recusation against him,
by no means accepting or owning him for his Judge. He is prodigiously rich, and
very oeconomical; and having no male-issue, his Succession is devolved to his
daughters husbands, the chief whereof is the Marquis de Coaslin.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of Monsieur Colbert.
HE is the son of an eminent Citizen of Rheims: but those who are very well
versed in Genealogies, affirm that he is descended from one of the most
Illustrious Families of Scotland. He was first under Monsieur Tellier the
Secretary of State; and when the Cardinal was exiled from the Court, and
retired into Germany, having enquired of Monsieur Tellier for some person whom
he might conside in, to entrust with some Jewels of a very great value, and
certain sums of money; Monsieur Tellier named Monsieur Colbert to him, as a
very honest confiding man, whose fidelity he was well acquainted with; who
having a house at Rheims just upon the Road betwixt Paris and Cologne, the
Cardinal left in his keeping the most considerable treasure he had, which he
laid up for his last reserve, and found this the most convenient place that
could be to dispose of it as occasion might require. His Eminence lodged two
nights at his house, and appointed him to receive and convey all his Letters of
Correspondence which he either d^spatched to, or received from the Court; which
Commerce he was the fitter to drive, being then not generally known; of which
he acquitted himself with so much exactness, integrity, and success, that he
deserved to be entrusted with matters of more importance: and indeed, from that
time he grew much in favor with the Cardinal, who being recalled into France,
and happily resetled at Court, desired to have him from Monsieur Tellier, and
made him Intendant of his house, which he governed till his death to the great
liking of that grand Minister; insomuch as the Cardinal upon his deathbed, and
in his Will and Testament, whereof he was Executor, recommended him
particularly to the King, entreating his Majesty to make use of him as a
person of a tried Ability and Faith.

The King has found him such a one indeed, according to his own desire, and
the fittest man in the whole Nation to manage his Treasury; and therefore
having set aside Monsieur Fouquet, he gave the whole Administration and
Management of it to this person, whom he has likewise honored with the Office
of Chief Surveyor of his Buildings and Royal Houses; and, which is more, does
not seldom communicate the weightiest affairs of State unto him.

He is indeclinably devoted to the will and service of his Master. A person he
is without any thing of vainglory or boasting, moderate in expenses, who
willingly sacrifices all his pleasures and divertisements to the interest of
his Country and affairs of importance. He is active and vigilant, constant and
inviolable in any thing of his duty; avoiding all making of Parties and Cabals,
not treating with any body without the Kings knowledge, or an express Order
from his Majestic. He seems not to thirst after much riches for himself, but is
hugely diligent and active in heaping up Treasure for his Master, and
preserving the Revenues of the Crown; and being well versed in ordering those
things, he gives the King his best advice to redeem that part of his Demesnes
which has been long engaged, thereby filling his Coffers, and increasing his
daily Income. By these prudent means he has already received many Millions,
which were concealed, detained, and unjustly converted to other uses, by such
as formerly had the management of the Treasury; not fearing the ill will of
any, to do his Master service; relying wholly upon the justice and power of a
Monarch able to protect him against all his adversaries.

It is reported, that he has assured his Majesty that in three years time he
will redeem and clear all his Demesnes; which when accomplished, will make him
the richest Potentate of Christendom, which he is indeed already, in the
reputation of all stranger-Nations.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF Monsieur Tellier.
HE is descended of a Family of the Long Robe; and raised himself to the height
he is now at, as much by his own diligence and conduct, as by the favor of the
Cardinal Richelieu, who made him chief Master of Requests. He is of a friendly,
discreet, and prudent temper, and one that understands Military affairs better
then any man in the Kingdom; I mean, as to the manner how to keep up and
maintain an Army, what the charge will amount to according to the numbers
raised, and the like: which knowledge he has acquired by a very long
experience. He has maintained himself unblameable in his Office, and was but
feignedly disgraced or set aside during the Intestine Troubles. For the Prince
complaining that the Cardinal, though banished, still ruled at Court by means
of his Creatures, amongst whom Monsieur Tellier and Monsieur de Lionne were
counted the principal; the Queen, to take away all cause of jealousy, caused
them to be sent out of Paris, and promised to admit no more of them to her
Council: which Order within a month was again reversed, and the policy of this
Court-turn apparent. He is a person nothing tainted with the vanities of the
times, having no ambitious thoughts, but performing his duty merely out of a
principle of honor and honesty, not minding either concurrences nor enmities,
not aiming at higher preferments or greater profits, being already in a
condition, indeed, so good in these respects, that there is little left him to
wish for.

He has a son, the Marquis de Louvais, very much in favor with the King, to
whom his Majesty has granted the reversion of his Fathers Office of Secretary
of State for Military affairs.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of Monsieur de Lionne.
HE is of a Noble Family, and was formerly chief Secretary to the Queen Mother;
and when she was Regent, he was employed in State Affairs; and the Cardinal, a
while before his death, recommended him to his Majesty in particular, as a man
fit for the employments he holds. He is one of the most prudent men in Europe;
one that has the most phlegm, and reservedness of temper, as the Italians
themselves confessed when he was amongst them; they endeavored by all the ways
imaginable to make him discover himself, but with all their subtilty they could
not make themselves Masters of the least of his secrets.

The Great Duke, and the whole House of Medices treated him to that very end,
and laid all the plots and snares they could; but all their diligence and
cunning could not entice him to utter one syllable but what was merely
indifferent. He went since joint Ambassador with the Marshal de Gramont into
Germany, at the Election of the Emperor: and we may truly say, that the two
subtillest and wisest Politicians of France did then share together in that
Illustrious Negotiation. He is a person of much honesty and conscience, and one
that will not make use of any one that is not good and virtuous; though it were
his misfortune a while since to have a person in his Family who was a Traitor
both to him, the King, and the State: but this was a fellow taken in by his
other servants, not of his choosing: and having found that his Secrets were
divulged to Foreign Ambassadors by his infidelity, he caused him to be
chastised according to his deserts, having made him confess that he had never
spoken so much as one word to him. He is a lover of Virtue and Arts; is mild,
affable, of a good presence, and exactly faithful in the Kings concerns: and
though he be Secretary of State for all Foreign affairs, which he understands
incomparably well, yet in the Cardinals Will he is preferred before all others
to inform the King of all the concerns of Lorraine, and whatever is to be
transacted with the Duke Charles, who is one of the subtillest and wary Princes
of this Age; of whom the Duke said, that he was a fit man to be treated with,
but it must be only for three days. Which words he taking hold of, did indeed
finish his Negotiation within that space of time, as is apparent by the Treaty
mutually Signed to by each of them.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF Monsieur Foucquet.
HE is the son of a Citizen, and pretends the original of his Family is Noble.
He rose to his Fortune by his Brother the Abbot Foucquet's means, who was much
in favor with Cardinal Mazarine. He borrowed a sum of money to buy the Office
of Attorney General, and in that quality did the Cardinal many good Offices in
the Parliament, and the Government of Paris. He was very exact in prosecuting
any that wrote against that Minister. Yet all these Services could not exempt
him from being suspected; which obliged him to draw up that Project, found
amongst his rifled Papers, to defend himself in case he were attaqu'd. The
Cardinals favor procured him the employment of Superintendant, which he
managed alone after the decease of Monsieur Servien, who during a time shared
it with him. He has a vast and lofty spirit, and was the profusest and most
magnificent man in the Kingdom. His ambitious mind made him choose this Motto
for his Devise: Quo non ascendam?

Whither shall I not climb?



And it is believed his thoughts aspired at being Chief Minister: but the King
by no means enduring to have any Subject raise himself to that Authority in his
Reign, reserving that power most justly for himself, caused him to be arrested
some years since in his journey to Brittany, and sent him to Vincennes, and
from thence to the Bastille. He was liberal with profusion, being accused of
having squandred away infinite sums of money upon his Pleasures and Mistresses.
He is likewise accused of allowing several large Pensions to the Grandees at
Court, to be his creatures; it being his Opinion and Maxim, that no man's Faith
could be of proof against Fifty thousand Crowns. His Buildings do also show his
excessive Prodigality, together with the Furniture, Conches, Attendance,
Rarities, and unparalled Banquets; as for example, the Collation he gave his
Majesty at Veau de Vicomte, where he expended Forty thousand Crowns, by all
computation. He bestowed great Largesses likewise upon the Jesuits, viz. a
Library, a Thousand livres of annual Rent to maintain it, and Fourscore
thousand livres for a Building within their College.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of The First President of PARLIAMENT.
MOnsieur de la Mignon (issued from a Family of the Long Robe) enjoys this
considerable Office, which is only attained unto by Merit and Ability; i^
being never sold, no more then the Chancellors place, as being not to be valued
at its worth. He represents the Kings person in Parliament, and acknowledges no
Superior to him in the whole Kingdom for Judicial matters, being Head of a
Sovereign Court. He was a Fellow-President long before he arrived to this chief
dignity. He is eloquent without affectation, learned without ambition, and one
of the wisest heads of the Nation. He is an enemy to the Jansenists, and all
other Novelties; being so much wedded to ancient Customs, that he will not
admit of any alteration either in Church, or Maxims of State or Law. He adheres
most strictly to the Royal Authority, and receives all Orders from his Majesty
with a great deal of veneration, and zeal to put them in execution. They say he
is very much Jesuited, because he is of their opinion concerning the Doctrine
of the Times: nevertheless he shows a very even temper in all his actions, not
refusing to hear any of the contrary party; judging with equity and conscience,
and doing justice where it is requisite. He is a person of an excellent good
nature, very charitable, loving peace and quietness as well in State as Church.
So that it may be truly said of him, that he is the common Father to his
Country, on whom he bestows all his Cares and Labors, in rendering every one
what is his due; being just and merciful to the good, and a punisher of the
wicked; which are the chief and only Pillars of a State. So that the King has
reason to rely upon him for that part of his Government, which he administers
with an unbyassed integrity.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF THE The Duke of S. Agnan.
HE has signalized himself in diverse encounters for his Majesty's service, and
verified it in his own person, That true Gallantry does not debase a Courageous
heart. The height of his Valor and Skill was manifested in an odd Adventure,
which might have proved his utter ruin, and the loss of many a brave Courtier.
Three men mounted to the best advantage, and having Vizards on, lay in
Ambuscado near one of his Country-houses, to surprise him unawares and alone,
intending to murder him, as they had done infallibly, if his great courage and
resolution had not carried him off that evident peril. The Story of it is so
well known, that I thought it needless to insert it here at length.

He is the most obliging Gentleman in the world, from whom, I never heard any
one say that he came dissatisfied. No man loves Learning, or persons of
ingenuity, more then himself: and so well versed he is, that several very
handsome Things have been composed by him; amongst the which is a Comedy of his
fashion, made to divert the Court; and the Kings voyage to Bretagne; written in
French in one nights time, at his Majesty's command. He is highly cherished by
the King for his gallant wit, and generous inclinations. It is very fit, that
so brave a man should be in favor with so great a Monarch, whom he cannot but
inspire with noble and good Sentiments: for all he either says or does is
honest and worthy. Formerly the Titles of Minions and Favorites were given to
such persons: at present, that of Consident is more in vogue. But this Duke has
no other quality, then what Ephestion had from Alexander; and it may be truly
said, that he entirely loves the person of the King, to whom he is a faithful
Guardian, and a most zealous servant. He speaks very well and gracefully; has
a wonderful presence, and an unparalled sweetness in conversation; so that he
may very properly be esteemed as a Model of a complete Courtier, and a very
honest Gentleman.

THE Character or Pourtraict Of The Duke of Crequi.
THis Lord was son of a Marshal of France, and is the chief Gentleman of the
Kings Bedchamber; one of the handsomest, haughtiest, and bravest men of the
whole Court. He is frank and liberal, and keeps up the Character of his ancient
Nobility. He neither is acquainted with dissimulation, intrigues, or designs,
but goes roundly to work, and maintains the Kings interest with heat, not
fearing any thing can be opposed. He is fitter for the Camp then the Cabinet or
Council, being as it were born to that Noble Exercise. Nevertheless he was sent
upon an extraordinary Embassy to Rome, to congratulate the Popes new Election,
and complement him in his Masters behalf; which was only an act of Civility,
the King not being at all obliged, like some other Princes, to pay this respect
to the Holy Chair, but only of his free will: so that the Romans and their
Governors did hugely mistake themselves, in forfeiting that respect due to the
dignity of Monsieur de Crequi, and violating the right of Princes in his
person, and the person of Madam the Ambassadrice. It must be noted here, that
all Ambassadors wives in Italy take the same Title and Quality as their
Husbands, and as such, take place accordingly in all Assemblies. But the
Contest being fully composed, and satissfaction given by the Legate from his
Holiness, that troublesome Quarrel is now brought to a period.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF The Duke of Novailles.
HIs Extraction is Illustrious, and of the ancient Nobility: the whole Family
have ever been remarkable for their Fidelity, and constant Adherence to their
Kings Interest. He is one of the four Captains of his Majesty's Lifeguards, and
most commonly has the sole Command in the Louvre, still attending his Masters
person wherever he is pleased to go; always riding in the Boot of the Kings
Coach with the Baton in his hand. He commands the Scotch Company under the
White Colors. And although he is one of the most daring Soldiers in the
Nation, and as valiant as any of these times; yet no man is endued with more
Meekness or Modesty then he is. He executes his employment with so much
satisfaction and content to all the world, that he is beloved and esteemed by
the whole Court: his very denials having so little of harshness in them, that
people seldom go away discontented, though they lose their Errand they came
for. And so fair and obliging his nature is, that wherever he can do a good
office, it is performed so freely and nobly, either to friends, or even
strangers themselves, that he lays a double tie of gratitude upon them, arising
as much from the manner, as the thing it self.

There is not a Nobleman in the Court that does not cover his friendship, nor
any man so indifferent as not to pay him a high respect. Nor is any man, though
nere so great a stranger, denied access to his presence, if they address
themselves but with civility to him. And yet is he severe enough upon any
occasion of contest, and will not suffer the least disorder either in the Kings
family, or any place where his Command extends. He speaks little, but very well
to the purpose, and with a very great deal of solid Reason and Judgment.

THE Character or Pourtraict OF The Duke of Mazarine, AND de la Milleraye.
HE is the son of the Marshal de la Milleraye, Great Master of the Ordnance;
wherein he succeeds him, as well as in the Government of Bretagne, in quality
of Lieutenant General to the Queen Mother. He is a very virtuous Gentleman, a
pious man: and it is said, that in his younger days he had a desire of becoming
a Religious. Friar. Cardinal Mazarine looked upon him as the man to whom he
intended to leave his great Wealth, his Name, and his Arms; upon which
condition he married his Niece. So that he is very rich on all sides, and very
potent; having besides this, the Principality of Elsas, and the favor of the
King, which is an advantage above all those before mentioned. He is very stayed,
speaks little, and does every thing with a great deal of moderation: and though
he is at this instant one of the greatest and powerfullest Subjects in the
world, yet is no whit the prouder, nor of a more difficult access. He receives
every body with a great deal of frankness and civility, and dispatches the
Kings affairs with all the conduct and exactness imaginable.

He treated with the Princes of the Rhyne about many things of high importance,
and has gained a great deal of Credit and Reputation by his Moderation, having
refused the Title of His Highness, which they would needs have given him, in
consideration of the Principality of Elsas. His late Business was, to cause the
French Troops to pass over a River on a Bridge of Boats, in the March toward
the Emperors Relief against the Grand Seignor.

FINIS.

