A MORAL ESSAY Concerning the Nature and Unreasonableness OF PRIDE: IN WHICH
The most plausible Pretenses of this VICE are examined, IN A CONFERENCE BETWEEN
Philotimus and Philalethes.

Licensed August 17. 1689.

London: Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball in Cornhil. 1689.

TO THE READER.
I Easily foresee some People will be disobliged with the Freedom of these
Papers, and think themselves treated with too little Ceremony; But unless they
can disarm their pretended Adversary, and confute his Arguments, I would desire
them by all means to smother their Resentments: For as bad as the World is, to
appear in defense of Pride, and turn Advocate for the Devil, looks like an
untoward sort of an Employment. However to sweeten their Humor as much as may
be, they may please to consider that there was no good to be done in this Case
without plain dealing; This Malady of all others must be well examined,
otherwise it is in vain to expect a Cure. It Is to no purpose to declaim in
general against a Proud man, and to give him a great many hard Names; for
unless you point directly upon his Vice, distinguish it is Nature, and discover
the weakness of that which he builds upon. Every one will be sure to avoid the
Charge and parry against the Application. Farther, to abate their Censure I
think it not improper to acquaint them that here are no particular Characters
attempted, nor is there the least intention to provoke or expose any Person
Living. Besides when a Piece like this is drawn from so many different Faces;
the mixing of Features and Complexions, will keep the Originals from being
discovered. In short the Design of this small Discourse is only to make Men
more useful and acceptable to Society, and more easy to themselves than they
generally are: And that those who overtop their Neighbors upon any
considerable account; may manage their Advantage with that Modesty and good
Humor, that none may have any just occasion to wish them less.

A Moral Essay UPON PRIDE, IN A CONFERENCE Between PHILOTIMUS and PHILALETHES.
Philot. PHilalethes, I am glad to see you, though you are so wrapped up in
Speculation that I scarce knew you at first sight; pray why so thoughtful? you
don't use to have so much Philosophy in your Face.


Philal. I have a particular reason to look a little pretendingly at present;
therefore I hope you will excuse it.


Philot. With all my heart, for I suppose you will not make a practice of it:
But whatever Emergency you may be under, I would advise you to appear in your
old shape again; for in my Judgment that contemplative Figure does not become
you.


Philal. I am sorry to hear Thinking agrees so ill with my Constitution; but I
hope this Alteration does not arise from any natural Antipathy I have to Sense,
but from the unacceptableness of the subject I am upon.


Philot. Pray if it be not too free a Question, what were you musing upon?


Philal. Why last night I happened to light upon an overgrown Fop, who plagued
the Company with such an impertinent History of his Quality and Performances,
and was so vain and insolent in all his behavior, that as soon as I was
delivered from him, I had a plentiful occasion to consider the unreasonableness
of Pride; which is the present Employment of my Thoughts, and upon a full view,
I find so much folly, and ill humor, and Monster, in the Composition of this
Vice, that I am ashamed, and almost afraid, of the Idea I have raised.


Philot. It Is somewhat hard you cannot stand the charge of your own Imagination;
But though I shall not dispute your Courage, yet I much question your
Mortification.


Philal. The Reason of your censure?


Philot. Because I have observed it is but a bad Sign of Humility to declaim
against Pride; for he that is really humble will be unconcerned about Respect
and Applause; such a Person values himself upon nothing but his Conscience and
Integrity, and therefore the haughtiness of another cannot make him uneasy; so
that if he finds himself wince upon the account of neglect, he may be pretty
well assured he has a fore place.


Philal. I think you are somewhat out in your notion of Humility; for that
virtue does not make us either servile or insensible, it does not oblige us to
be ridden at the pleasure of every Coxcomb. We may show our dislike of an
imperious humor, as well as of any other foolish Action, both for the Benefit
of others, and in vindication of our own right.


Philot. I am glad to hear this concession from you, because from hence it
follows that a man may have a just esteem of himself without being proud: Now
if this observation was remembered and rightly applied, men would not be so
censorious in this point, nor mistake their own Pride for their neighbors so
often as they do. For instance, a man whom the Law has made my Superior, may
take notice of his Quality if he pleases; but this cannot well be done, except
he makes me an abatement of the regard he receives from me, therefore I ought
not to interpret the Reserve or Familiarity of his Carriage as a Neglect, for
provided he keeps within his proportion, he challenges nothing but his own; so
that if I am displeased, the Pride lies on my side, for affecting to have an
equal Regard paid to persons who are unequal.


Philal. I have nothing to object against the main of your discourse, and
conceive that the best way to know whether we are guilty or not, and to prevent
charging this odious Imputation unjustly upon others, is to state the Nature of
Pride, and to enquire into the Grounds of it.


Philot. I confess that is the way to pinch the Question, therefore let what
will come of it, I will stand the Test of your Method, though I am afraid you
will say some unacceptable things.


Philal. Suppose I do; if the subject leads me to it, the fault is not mine:
But to come to the point: Pride has a very strong Foundation in the mind; it is
bottomed upon Self-love.


Philot. Then I find there is somewhat to work upon. --


Philal. Pray give me leave, I say Pride is originally founded in Self-love,
which is the most intimate and inseparable Passion of humane Nature. The
kindness men have for themselves, is apt to put them upon overvaluing their own
things: which humor unless checked in time, will make them take most delight
in those Circumstances and Actions which distinguish them from their
Neighbors; and place their supposed Advantages in the best light. Now this
design is best pursued by being Master of uncommon Excellencies, which though
desired by all, are possessed but by a few; for the Rareness of things raises
their Esteem, and draws a general Admiration. And their desire of being
distinguished, is one reason why they love to keep the odds in their own hand,
and to make the distance between themselves and their Neighbors as wide as may
be, which often runs them upon a vain, and tyrannical Ostentation of their
Power, Capacity, etc. For this magnificent discovery makes the difference
between them and their Neighbors the more apparent, and consequently occasions
their own Greatness to be the more remarkable.


Philot. I think you have said something very remarkable, and I don't know but
you may grow considerable by it, if you can prove your Assertion.


Philal. Pray what rising Doctrine have I laid down?


Philot. You say that Pride is founded in Self-love, which is an unseparable
Passion of humane nature; from whence I gather, that it is impossible for a man
not to be proud, because it is impossible for a man not to love himself. We are
like to have an admirable Preservative from you at this rate.


Philal. Not so fast, If you had attended to the whole, you might have observed
that by self-love I meant the Excesses of it.


Philot. I thought a Man could not have loved himself too well.


Philal. If by loving you mean wishing himself happy, I agree with you; for we
may, or rather we must desire to be as happy as is possible, provided it be
without prejudice to another. But then if Esteem is understood by Love, it is
easy (without care) to exceed in our own behalf; and in this sense we
certainly do love our selves too well, as often as we set an overproportioned
and unusual value upon any thing because it is our own; as if our fondness and
partiality was the true Standard of worth, and we had the faculty of turning
every thing we touched into gold.


Philot. I will not contest this point any farther with you; but as I remember
you started another Paradox, by intimating that it was a sign of Ambition to
esteem any Excellency the higher for being uncommon: Now since the value of an
Advantage is enhansed by its scarceness, and made more reputable to the owner;
I think it somewhat hard not to give a man leave to love that most which is
most serviceable to him,


Philal. So it would if he had no body to love but himself; but since he is
both obliged and naturally inclinable to universal Benevolence, this alters the
Case: for he who values any thing the more for being uncommon, will desire it
should continue so, which is no kind Wish to his Neighbors, and is an Argument
that a man does not delight in an Advantage so much for it self, as for the
Comparison; not so much for its own irrespective goodness, as because others
want it. Now it affords a more generous, and I believe, a more transporting
pleasure, to converse with universal Happiness, though we make no greater
figure in it, than the rest of our Neighbors; than to be gazed at, and admired
by a Crowd of indigent and inferior People.


Philot. The World does not seem to be of your opinion; however I will let your
Argument pass for the good nature of it. But after all let me tell you, though
I have no mind to be counted proud, yet I have a strong fancy for myself, and
therefore if you will not allow me to be civil to my Person, we might even as
good dispute no farther, for --


Philal. Don't trouble your self, if your Terms are moderate, we'll never break
off upon the score, therefore I will offer at a short negative description of
Pride, in which if it is possible, I will give you Satisfaction.


Philot. Pray let us see how liberal you will be.


Philal. First it is no part of Pride to be conscious of any perfections we
have, whether intellectual or moral; for this is in many Cases necessary, and
impossible to be avoided. He that is wise or learned must know it, otherwise he
cannot understand when he judges true or false, nor distinguish difficult and
noble Speculations, from trifling and vulgar Remarks, nor tell when he acts
rationally or not. Now a Man that is ignorant of these things can neither be
wise nor knowing: Therefore as he that has a just and vigorous sense of the
Magnitude, Distance and Colors of Objects, must conclude that he has eyes
whether he will or not; so these perfections of the mind discover themselves by
their own Light. The Possessour can no more be ignorant of them, than he can
doubt of his Existence when he is awake. To give one instance more; How can any
Person have true Fortitude, who does not know how far he ought to hazard
himself, and wherein the baseness of Cowardice consists? So that to affirm a
Man may be ignorant of his own considerableness, is to make him wise and great,
and good by Chance, which is a contradictition to the Excellencies supposed in
him.


Philot. Right. And since I like the Frankness, and tendency of your Argument,
I Will try if I can reinforce it: I say then, supposing it was possible for a man
to be ignorant of his good Qualities; it was by no means convenient: For if he
carried such a Treasure about him, without knowing how well furnished he was;
its somewhat hard to conceive, how he could either improve or use it. If it lay
thus close, it would be little better, than a Mine undiscovered, for which
neither the owner of the Ground, or any Body else are ever the richer,


Philal. You say well, and therefore I shall venture in the second place to
affirm, That as we may be acquainted with our own Accomplishments, without
being guilty of Pride, so neither is it any branch of this sin to discover that
they are greater than some of our Neighbors enjoy. If we have a real Advantage
over another, it is no sin to be sensible of it; to apprehend otherwise, is to
judge contrary to the Reason of things, when the Case is plain, we may believe
we have more Honesty, Sense, etc. than some others. This is as allowable as it
is for us to think, that we have better Complexions than Moors, and are taller
than Pygmies.


Philot. Can you go on?


Philal. Yes, I Am not afraid to add, Thirdly, that we don't fall into the sin
of Pride, by being delighted with those Advantages of Mind, Body or Fortune,
which Providence has given us; these things in the very notion of them are
supposed to be beneficial. Now it is natural and necessary for us to be pleased
with the Enjoyment of that which is good; of that which is agreeable to our
Faculties, and an Advancement of our Nature: To speak strictly, when the
Faculty and the Object are rightly proportioned, Satisfaction follows of
course, and its as impossible for us not to be pleased, as it is for fire not
to ascend: Farther, if we are not allowed to take any Satisfaction in our
condition, we are not bound to give God thanks for it,; for we are not obliged
to be thankful for that which does us no good: But nothing can do us any good,
except it be by giving us a pleasure either in hand or in prospect. Fourthly,
it is no part of Pride, to be more pleased with having an Advantage our selves,
than by seeing one of the same value possessed by another.


Philot. Make this out and you will oblige me.


Philal. Very well: I prove my Proposition thus. First, Because that which is
in our Possession, or incorporated into our Essence, is always in our Power,
and ready to be made use of when we think fit. But that which belongs to
another is often at a distance, and out of our reach, and cannot be communicated
to us, though the owner was never so willing. Secondly, it must be more
agreeable to be Master of any perfection our selves, than to contemplate one of
the same nature in another; because every one is more certain of the kind
Inclination he has to himself, than he can be of the Affection of any other
Person whatever: That I will be always kind to my self, I am as well assured
of, as that I have a being; but that another will be so, is impossible for me
to know: And therefore let a man be never so good natured, it must be somewhat
more satisfactory to him, to see himself well furnished in any kind, than his
Neighbor. Thirdly, that which is our own and in our Nature, we have the most
intimate and vigorous sense of; for the presence of any desirable Object, we
know is more acceptable and entertaining than either the notion or Prospect of
it: Possession gives us the Life of the thing, But hopes and Fancy can furnish
out no more at the best than a Picture finely drawn. So that, for Example, let
a man be of never so generous and disinterested a Spirit, yet it is natural for
him to be better pleased, with being rich himself (if he has any value for
riches) than in having the bare Idea of an Estate: Besides as I observed, that
which is our own, is always at our disposal, and does not depend upon the
uncertain Inclination and humor of another.


Philot. Very comfortably argued. I find then by your discourse that a Man may
without vanity be pleased with his Circumstances, and have good Thoughts of
himself too, if he deserves it. Now some People are so unreasonable, that they
will neither give Men leave to love, nor understand themselves; if they are
conscious of any commendable Quality, they must be sure to lay it out of the
way that they may not see it; nay if a Man has taken never so much care to make
himself insignificant, in order to the promoting of Humility, they will scarce
let him know he is good for nothing, for fear he should grow conceited of his
Virtue. But I perceive you are not so strait laced, and pedantick in your
Notions. Therefore if you can recover us no more Ground, let us know directly
what Pride is, and be as fair as you can.


Philal. Why Pride in the plainest words which I can think of, is too high an
Opinion of our own Excellency.


Philot. How shall we know when we over-rate our selves?


Philal. That is a very seasonable question, and absolutely necessary to the
state of the Case: Therefore I shall lay down some indisputable Marks of this
Vice, that whenever we see the Tokens we may conclude the Plague is in the
House.


Philot. Let us hear your Diagnosticks.


Philal. First, Then we may be assured we have this Disease, when we value any
Person chiefly because his advantages are of the same nature with those we
enjoy, neglecting others who have an equal right to Regard, only because their
Privileges are of a different kind from our own. For instance, when Men who
derive their considerableness from the Sword, the Gown, or their Ancestors,
think none worthy their Esteem but such as claim under their own Pretenses; In
this case it is evident it can be nothing but Partiality and Conceitedness which
makes them give the Pre-eminence.


Secondly, We may certainly conclude our selves infected with this Vice, when
we invade the Rights of our Neighbor, not upon the account of Covetousness,
but of Dominion; only that we may have it in our power to create Dependencies,
and to give another that which is already his own.

Thirdly, When Men don't measure their civil Advantages by the Laws of their
Country, but by their own fancies, and the submissions of Flatterers; this is
another infallible sign they are Proud.

Fourthly, to mention no more, When Men love to make themselves the subject of
discourse: To conn over their Pedigrees, and obtrude the Blazon of their
exploits upon the company; this is an argument they are overgrown with conceit,
and very much smitten with themselves.

Philot. Though I think you have hit the symptoms pretty well, yet except they
are marked somewhat more distinctly, it is possible for a Man to have most of
them without being ever the wiser. For unless we are able to draw up a just
State of the Degrees of merit, we can never take the true height of our
Pretensions, and being in this uncertainty it is odds if self Love does not make
us determine to the prejudice of our Neighbors. Now I would gladly know how we
must go to work to be sufficiently informed in this Point.


Philal. We must endeavor to get right apprehensions of the several
Excellencies of humane Nature, and what proportion they hold to each other: In
order to the assisting our Judgment in this case I shall lay down these general
rules.


First, Those advantages which spring from our selves, which are the effects of
our power and courage, of our Industry or Understanding, are more valuable than
those which are derived, and borrowed, because they are a sign of a Richer and
more active nature.

Secondly, Those Qualities which are most useful ought to have the Preference:
for since acknowledgments ought to be suitable to the nature of benefits
received, those who have the largest Capacity of obliging, may fairly challenge
the Perheminence in our Esteem; and therefore in the third place the duration
of an advantage ought to be considered; And that which has the firmest
Constitution and is most likely to continue, ought to be preferred to others
which are brittle and short lived. These rules carefully applied will snew us
how far our pretensions to Regard are short of, or exceed other Men's, and so
prevent an overweening opinion of our selves. However, we are to observe that
outward Respect ought to be given according to the Distinctions of; Law, and
though a Man may happen to be very defective in point of merit, yet we ought to
take notice of the value Authority has set upon him.

Philot. Give me leave to put in a word, which is to tell you, that though I am
not satisfied with your Instances, yet I am glad to find you will allow us
different degrees of worth. I was almost afraid you would have set all Mankind
upon a Level.


Philal. To deliver you from such apprehensions, I freely grant you that the
Distinctions of Quality ought to be kept up for the Encouragement of Industry,
and the support of Government. I hope now you have the reason of my Concession,
you will not be so suspicious for the future.


Philot. No, not till you give me a farther occasion; especially since the
inference of your discourse is not unacceptable: from whence it follows, that
when a Man sees plainly that he has the Advantage of his Neighbor, he may let
him understand so much without any offense to humility.


Philal. No doubt of it, especially when his station is public; but then the
discovery of his superiority ought to be managed with a great deal of Art and
good nature, to which we are obliged not only in point of Complaisance but
Justice. For though there is often a real difference between one Man and
another, yet the party who has the advantgae usually magnifies the inequality
beyond all Sense, and Proportion. Men don't consider that the great privileges
of humane Nature are common to the whole Kind; such as being equally related to
God and Adam, Reason and Immortality, the same number of Senses, and much of
the same perfection and continuance. And as for those things which are the
peculiar Advantages of a few; they are either acquired and enjoyed by the
strength of those general ones I have mentioned, or else they are foreign and in
a great measure Chimerical, and therefore can be no real enrichments of our
nature. They are often no more than the Blessings of Chance, of Flattery, and
Imagination. And though they may set us upon higher Ground, yet they can add
nothing to the true Stature of our Being. But to combat this Vice more
successfully, we'll examine its most plausible Pretenses, and see if we can
discover the weakness of them.


Philot. What pretenses are those?


Philal. I mean Learning, Nobility, and Power; for these you know are accounted
the brightest and most distinguishing Advantages. But though they ought all to
be considered, yet I believe there is much more Weight laid upon them, than in
strict reason they will bear.


Philot. You talk as if you were retained by the Mobile, and had a Mind to
bring us back to our original State of Ignorance and Peasantry.


Philal. I tell you once again you are much mistaken. I have no design to
lessen the value of any man's Honor, or Understanding: Let People have as much
Sense and Quality as they please, provided they don't grow troublesome and
ridiculous about it.


Philot. I somewhat suspect you have a mind to engross this Vice of Pride to
your self. This sort of discourse looks like declaiming against Arbitrary
Power, where the sharpest Invectives are commonly made by the most
Enterprizing, and unmortifyed Men, who are only angry that they are not
possessed of that absoluteness themselves, which they endeavor to render
odious in others.


Philal. Hah! you are somewhat smart. However let me tell you, if I have any
such project as you imagine, you have me upon a fair Dilemma. For, if my
reasons against Pride hold good, they will stand upon record against my self,
which I suppose will be no unacceptable revenge for you: if they are
insignificant, you will have the diversion of laughing at the folly of the
attempt: and which is more considerable, you may keep your good opinion of
yourself into the bargain.


Philot. Pray begin your attack as you think fit, and for disputes sake I Will
try how far I can maintain the ground against you.


Philal. First then, Learning (to begin there) and High Conceit agree very well
together: for a Man of Letters may have a clearer notion of the stupidness and
deformity of this Vice, and being better acquainted with the frame and passions
of humane Nature, he cannot choose but discover how unacceptable it must make
him to all Mankind. Besides he is supposed to know that nothing in strict
reason deserves a true Commendation, but a right use of the Liberty of our
Will, which is in every ones power to manage to advantage.

Secondly, Learning gives us a fuller conviction of the imperfection of our
nature, which one would think might dispose us to Modesty. The more a Man knows
the more he discovers his ignorance. He can scarce look upon any part of the
Creation, but he finds himself encompassed with doubts and difficulties. There
is scarce any thing so trifling or seemingly common, but perplexes his
Understanding, if he has but sense enough to look into all the objections which
may be raised about it. He knows he has a being it is true, and so does a
Peasant, but what this thing is which he calls himself, is hard to say. He has
reason to believe, that he is compounded of two very different Ingredients,
Spirit, and Matter; but how such unallyed and disproportioned substances should
hold any Correspondence and act upon each other, no man's Learning yet could
ever tell him. Nay how the parts of Matter cohere, is a Question which it is
likely will never be well answered in this life. For though we make use of the
fairest Hypotheses, yet if we pursue the Argument home, we shall go nigh to
dispute away our Bodies, and reason our selves all in pieces. Insomuch that if
we had nothing but Principles to encourage us, we might justly be afraid of
going abroad, lest we should be blown away like a heap of dust: For it is no
solution to say the greater parts of Matter are connected with hooked
particles; for still the difficulty returns how these Hooks were made? Quis
custodiet ipsos Custodes? What is it that fastens this Soder, and links these
first Principles of Bodies into a Chain? And as the more refined Understandings
know little or nothing of themselves, and of the material World; so upon
Enquiry we shall find them as defective in their Skill about Moral Truths:
(excepting those who are taught by Revelation, which supernatural Discoveries
the unlearned are capable of understanding, as far as their happiness is
concerned.) Those who made Laws in their respective Countries, we have reason
to believe had their minds polished above the vulgar rate: And yet we see how
unaccountably the public Constitutions of Nations vary. The Persians and
Athenians allowed Incest, the Lacedaemonians Stealing, and some Indians
Herodotus mentions, used to bury their best Friends in their Stomachs. In
short, the Rules of Decency, of Government, of Justice it self, are so
different in one place from what they are in another, so party-colored and
contradictious, that one would almost think the Species of men altered,
according to their Climates; and that they had not the same Nature in common.
One would almost think that Right and Wrong lay rather in the Fancies of men,
than in the reason of things, and was bounded more by Seas and Rivers, than by
any unalterable limits of Nature; that Virtue and Vice were minted by the Civil
Magistrate, and like Coins would pass for Current only in his own Dominions.
The Heathen Philosophers may fairly be granted to have as good pretenses to
Learning, as any other sort of men among them: And yet we may observe from
Tully and Laertius what a small Proportion of solid Knowledge they were Masters
of; how strangely did they differ in Matters of the highest Import? How eagerly
did they dispute, and not without probability on both sides: Whether there was
any thing certain? Whether the Criterions of Truth and Falsehood were clear and
indubitable or not? Whether the Government of the World was casual, fatal, or
providential? How many Summum Bonums have they presented us with, some of them
only fit to entertain a Brute, others noble enough for a Spirit of the highest
Order? It were tedious to recount the differences one Sect had with another,
their Inconsistences with themselves, and the ridiculous and ill supported
Tenets some of the most famous of them have held. Insomuch that Tully takes
notice that there was no opinion so absurd, but was held by some Philosopher or
other. It Is true they could wrangle and Harangue better than the common People;
they could talk more plausibly about that they did not understand; but their
Learning lay chiefly in Flourish, and Terms, and Cant; for as for any real
Improvements in Science they were not much wiser than the less pretending
Multitude. Indeed the more modest of them would confess that the chief use of
Learning was to give us a fuller discovery of our Ignorance, and to keep us
from being peremptory and dogmatical in our determinations. Now one would
imagine the more intimate Acquaintance we had with the Imperfections of our
Nature, the greater reason we should have to be humble. Is Weakness a proper
Foundation to erect our lofty conceits upon? Indeed he that has not the leisure
or capacity to examine how it is with him, may be fondly persuaded to fancy
himself somebody, and grow vain upon the kind presumption; but for a man to be
proud who can demonstrate his own poverty, is little less than Madness.


Philot. If the case stands thus, to make all sure, we had best get an order to
burn the Twenty four Letters, and hang up Cadmus in Effigy; for --


Philal. Pray don't interrupt me, and I will try if I can give you a little
Ease. Granting therefore, as we may, that Learning does give some advantage,
and that our Understandings are really enriched by it; yet in regard we have
but a few Principles to build upon, the greatest part of our Knowledge must
consist in Inferences, which cannot be wrought out without great Labor and
Attention of mind: And when we are at any distance from self-evident Truths,
the mind is not only perplexed with the Consideration of a great many
Circumstances, but which is worse, Forgetfulness or Mistake in the least of
them, frustrates our whole Design, and rewards us with nothing but Error for
our trouble.

Now he that is so liable to be imposed upon, who rises but by Inches, and
enriches himself, by such slow and insensible Degrees; it is a Sign that his
Stock was either very small, or that he is unskilful in the management of his
Business, and therefore he has no reason to be proud of what he has gotten:
Besides it is an humbling consideration to reflect what pains we are obliged to
take to muster up our Forces, and to make that little reason we have
serviceable. How fast does Obscurity, Flatness and Impertinency flow in upon
our Meditations? It Is a difficult Task to talk to the purpose, and to put life
and perspicuity into our Discourses; those who are most ready and inventive
have not their best Thoughts uppermost: No, they must think upon the Stretch,
ransack, and turn over their mind, and put their Imagination into a kind of
Ferment, if they intend to produce any thing extraordinary: So that considering
the Trouble and almost Violence we are put upon, one would think that Sense and
Reason was not made for Mankind, and that we strive against our Natures, when
we pretend to it.


Philot. Well; What though our Minds were poor, and unfurnished at first, is it
any disparagement to us to have more Wit than we were born with? What though we
cannot strike out a Science at a Heat, but are forced to polish our selves by
degrees, and to work hard for what we have? The less we were assisted by
Nature, the greater commendation it is to our Industry, and our seize are
so much the more our own. And since we have thus fairly distinguished our
selves by Merit, why should we seem unapprehensive of our Performances? since
we have paid so dear for the Improvements of our understanding, and our
advantages are gained with so much Difficulty, what harm is it to make our best
of them? Why should we not oblige the negligent to Distance and Regard, and
make those who are younger or less knowing than our selves sensible of their
Inferiority?


Philal. I agree with you as I have already hinted, that a Man may lawfully
maintain his Character and just pretenses against Rudeness and Ignorance,
especially when the public Good is concerned in his Reputation. But when he
acts a private part, and converses with People of Sense and Modesty, he should
give them but very gentle remembrances of his Prerogative: his Opinion of his
own worth should but just dawn upon them, and at the most give them but an
obscure and remote notice, that he expected any singular Acknowledgment: He
should take the respect that is paid him rather as a Present than a Debt, and
seem thankful for that which is his own: But to be stiff and formally reserved
as if the Company did not deserve our Familiarity; to be haughty and
contemptuous, and to make scanty and underproportioned returns of Civility:
this is a downright Challenge of Homage, and plainly tells people, they must be
very mannerly: It Is in effect to say, Gentlemen, I have more Learning, and have
done the public greater Service than you, and therefore I expect to be
considered for it: you may possibly say that I have more preferment too, and am
paid for my merit in money, but that shall not serve your turn; for except you
show your selves very dutiful, I shall give you broad Signs of my
dissatisfaction, and never let you have the Honor of my converse again. Now
such a Man if he went much abroad, would plague mankind more with his Company,
than he could oblige them with his Writings, though they were never so
considerable. Such People seem to owe their parts to their ill Temper: Their
Industry is malicious, and they have taken pains not so much to oblige the
World, as to get an Opportunity of trampling upon their Inferiors. Had they
been good-natured, they would have been as dull and insignificant as their
Neighbors. But their imperious Carriage is just as reasonable as it would have
been for the old Athletae to have drudged hard in Eating and Exercise, that
they might employ their Bulk and Activity in beating every one who was weaker,
and less skilful than themselves.


Philot. By your discourse you seem to mistake the matter, and not to weigh
things rightly. It Is not Superiority that these Gentlemen of Learning are so
solicitous about; it is not personal Advantage which they chiefly intend by
their Reservedness: They have no doubt a more public and generous Design; for
you may observe they usually bear hardest upon those of their own Order and
Profession, which is nothing but a forced and politic stateliness for the
promoting of Knowledge in others. The young Fry, whether you know it or not,
must be held at a Distance, and kept under the Discipline of Contempt. If you
give them any tolerable Quarter, you indulge them in their Idleness, and ruin
them to all intents and purposes. For who would be at the trouble of Learning,
when he finds his Ignorance is caressed, and that he is easy and acceptable
enough in the Company of the best Authors of the Town? But when you brow-beat
them and maul them, you make them Men for ever; for Vexatio dat intellectum;
though they have no natural Metal, yet if they are spurred and kicked they will
mend their pace, if they have any feeling. Such rigorous usage will make them
study night and day to get out of this ignominious Condition, in hopes that it
may come to their own turn to be proud one day. Take my word for it, there is
no such way to make a Scholar, as to keep him under while he is young, or
unpreferred.


Philal. Notwithstanding your Flourish I cannot persuade my self that this
Dispensation of Pride is so mighty useful as you pretend. I should think such
an untoward management of any Accomplishment should rather discourage others
from attempting such dangerous circumstances. If Sense and Learning are such
unsociable imperious things, a good-natured Man ought to take especial care not
to improve too fast. He ought to keep down the growth of his Reason, and curb
his Intellectuals when he finds them ready to outstrip his Neighbors. I assure
you, if I was of your opinion, and thought my self near the temptation to so
much ill humor, I would never look on a Book again.


Philot. Come when you have said all, there is no keeping up the Credit of
Learning without that which you call a reserved behavior. For if those who are
eminent this way should condescend to those Familiarities which you seem to
desire, the honor of their Profession would suffer much by it; if they should
converse upon the Level, the veneration which their Inferiors have for them
would quickly wear off: And if the vulgar observed there was no distinction
kept up amongst the Men of Letters; they would suspect there was nothing
extraordinary in any of them. Pray who are supposed to be the best Judges of
Learning, those who have it or others?


Philal. No doubt those who have it.


Philot. Then if they seem to undervalue it themselves, is not this the way to
bring it into a general disrepute? I tell you once again, if the privileges of
Merit are not insisted upon all, must go to wrack. If a Man who has digested
all the Fathers, and is ready to add himself to the Number, shows any tolerable
countenance to one who has scarce rubbed through Ignatius, and lets a pure
English Divine to go cheek by jole with him, the Commonwealth of Learning will
grow almost as contemptible as that of the Pigmies, and be only fit to write
Romances upon.


Philal. I shall not enquire how far this lofty method may advance the
Reputation of Learning, but I am pretty sure it is no great addition to theirs
who use it; for it only makes others more inquisitive into their defects, and
more inclinable to expose them. If they take them tardy they endeavor to
humble them by way of Reprizal. Those slips and mismanagements are usually
ridiculed and aggravated, when such Persons are guilty of them, which would be
overlooked or excused in others of a more modest and affable Conversation. If
they happen to be found inconsistent with themselves: If their vanity of
appearing singular puts them upon advancing Paradoxes, and proving them as
Paradoxically. If a presumption upon their own strength, and a desire of
greater triumph makes them venture too far into the enemies Quarters, and take
up a Post which they cannot maintain; they are usually laughed at for their folly
and left to shift for themselves; for Pride never has any friends, and all Men
are glad of a just occasion to lessen his Reputation who makes such an
ill-natured use of it.


Philot. I conceive you harp a little too much upon one string: do you think
the inferior Clergy for whom you are now pleading, are discouraged by none but
those of their own Profession?


Philal. No, I grant there is another sort of People who use them with neglect
enough: But then they are somewhat more to be excused. They have not such fair
opportunities to understand the just pretenses of a liberal Education, and a
Religious employment. They are apt to fall under unfortunate hands in their
minority: The vanity of their Parents, and the Knavery of Flatterers often
gives them a wrong notion of themselves, and makes them admire nothing but
Wealt hand Greatness, and think no condition deserves regard but that which
resembles their own. Besides their neglect looks less unaccountably by reason
of their Quality, and their Breeding makes their Pride sit more decently upon
them. They usually contemn with a better Grace than others: for there is a
great deal of Art and Mystery in Pride to manage it handsomely: A man might
almost as soon learn a Trade: and if we observe we shall find that those who
were not brought up to it, seldom prove their Crafts-master or practice with
any sort of address. To which I may add, that such Persons are usually willing
to pay for their imperiousness, so that a Man is not made a Fool for nothing.
But when this lofty humor is clumsily and inartificially managed, when it is
affected by those of a self-denying and mortified Profession, and who get their
Living by declaiming against it. When it is taken up by Men of Sense, who may
well be expected to see through the folly of this Vice, and who generally have
not those pretenses of a biased Education to misguide them: especially when
they play it upon Persons of their own Order who were born and bred to as fair
Expectations of Regard as themselves, and are sometimes their Inferiors in
nothing so much as in Success; this is such a singular Practice that I had
rather leave it undescribed than be forced to give it its proper Character.


Philot. I believe you will be willing to abate, if not to retract your censure
when you consider that these Gentlemen of the Gown, whom you think too much
depressed, are many of them Curates; and is it not very reasonable there should
be a distance observed between Masters and Servants? If you confound these two
Relations by lavish and indiscreet Familiarities, you destroy the respect, and
by degrees the very notion of Superiority. If there is not a due Homage paid in
Conversation, those who are in a state of subjection will neither know their
Condition nor their Duty: They will be apt to forget they hold by a servile
Tenure, and think themselves enfranchised from all manner of Suit and Service.
Besides, if the Parson should use his Curate with that freedom which you
insinuate, as if there was neither dependence nor obligation between them; this
might be of very ill example to the Parish, and make all other servants
challenge the same liberty, and grow pert upon their Masters: And when this
Sawciness became universal, as it is likely it might do in a short time, what
less Mischief could be expected from it, than an old Scythian Rebellion?


Philal. I confess, I was not aware the being of Government depended so much
upon the distinction between Rector and Curate, and that if the modern way of
Distance and Subordination was not kept up, we must presently return to Hob's
state of Nature. If a Curate be such a dangerous thing, that a little civil
Usage to him is ready to make the World fall about our Ears, I wonder why so
many of them are suffered. Now without raising the posse Comitatus, if the
Pluralists would but do their best to suppress them, their Number might quickly
be so retrenched, that they would not be in the least formidable. But you seem
to argue all this while upon a wrong Principle, you take it for granted, that
Curates are Servants; now if this proves a mistake, you will own they may be
treated with a little more freedom, without any danger to Authority.


Philot. Who doubts of their being Servants?


Philal. I do, and for very good reasons.


Philot. See how a Man may be mistaken! I thought the English of Curate had
been an Ecclesiastical Hireling.


Philal. No such matter, the proper import of the Word signifies one who has
the Cure of Souls; therefore in France all Parochial Priests are called
Curates, as they are likewise in our Rubric and Common Prayer.


Philot. I find then there lies no Servitude in the Name, so that it must be
either the Deputation, or Salary which they receive from the Instituted Priest,
which sinks them into this condition.


Philal. That there is no Servitude in either of these, I am ready to make
good. 1. Not in the Office; and here I must crave leave to ask you a few
Questions.


Philot. Take your own method.


Philal. What in your apprehension is a Curate's Employment?


Philot. To serve God in the public Offices of Religion, and to take care of
the Parish.


Philal. Then he is not entertained to serve the Rector.


Philot. Go on.


Philal. In the next place I desire to know whether Authority is not essential
to a Master?


Philot. Who questions it?


Philal. Has the Curate his Authority to Preach, and Administer the Sacraments
from the Rector?


Philot. No, from the Bishop.


Philal. May not a Master turn away his Servants when he pleases?


Philot. I think so.


Philal. But the Rector has no power to remove the Curate after he is Licensed
and Fixed by the Bishop. To sum up the Evidence therefore; if the Curate was
not entertained to wait upon the Rector, nor has his Authority from him, nor
can be removed from his Employment, I think it is pretty plain he is none of
his Servant.


Philot. Well, but does not the Parson make choice of him, and pay him?


Philal. Don't a Corporation choose a Mayor?


Philot. What then?


Philal. Pray whose Servant is he after his Election?


Philot. None but the Kings that I know of: but you have not answered the
latter part of my objection about his being paid by the Rector.


Philal. If you had not called for my answer, I had waved it for your sake,
because I think your objection borders somewhat upon Treason.


Philot. How so?


Philal. Why, is it not of kin to Treason to say the Subjects are Masters over
the Supreme Authority?


Philot. If Nonsense will not excuse a Man, I think it is.


Philal. But your Argument proves the King a Servant to the People.


Philot. How?


Philal. Because they pay him Taxes, and that among other reasons, by way of
acknowledgment of the benefits of his Government, and that they may show
themselves willing, if it was in their power, to requite him for his care of
the State.


Philot. Pray why so much concerned to prove Curates no Servants?


Philal. Because I am willing to rescue them from that contempt, which they
will certainly fall into, as long as they pass under this notion: which
considering the number of persons Officiating, this way, must be very
prejudicial to Religion. Besides it makes some persons, who are fit to do the
Church service, suspend themselves, and show their Priesthood only by their
Habit, rather than serve God under such uncreditable circumstances: and for the
same reason others are tempted to grow too fond of a Presentation, and choose
rather to court it by Flattery, or other indirect practices, than be condemned
to the servile condition of a Curate. For let me tell you, it is no ordinary
piece of Self-Denial, for a Man of a generous Education, who has been trained
up all along to Freedom and good Usage, to be degraded in his Manhood, when the
mind is most in love with Liberty, and to enter upon Business with marks of
disadvantage, when he stands most in need of Reputation. To my thinking this is
a very discouraging and preposterous way of Educating the Clergy. If a Man must
go to service, he had better begin with it as they do in Trades, and not be
Master at first, and then be forced to turn Apprentice, or Journyman
afterward. Of such ill consequence it is to miscal things, and as Plato
observes, that an alteration of the Notes in Music is apt to produce an
Innovation in the Laws and Customs of a Country: so by changing the names of
Offices for others of less Repute, we change the Uses and Designs of them, and
make them less satisfactory to those engaged, and less serviceable to the
Public than they would have been, if the Character of their Institution had
been kept up.


Philot. Granting at present what you say to be true, yet a Curate seems to lie
under another disadvantage, which makes him considered with Abatement.


Philal. What is that?


Philot. Why, People are apt to fancy that it is the want either of Parts or
Conduct, which keeps him without a Patron.


Philal. If People think so, I am sorry their Sense and Charity is no greater;
for if they examined things fairly, they would find that the being a Curate is
no Argument of a Man's insignificancy, nor any just blemish to his Reputation.
For it is often the integrity and generous temper of his mind which hinders him
from a better Provision; it is because he will not flatter the Pride of some,
nor keep pace with the Bigottry of others: because he will neither court
Greatness nor Faction, nor make himself popular to the disadvantage of his
Audience. Because he cannot digest a Simoniacal Contract, nor charge through
Perjury with the courage of an Evidence. In short, it is his plain and
impartial dealing with the People, his resolution to preserve the Decency of
his Character, and the Innocence of his Conscience which bars his promotion: so
that if he was mean enough to complain, he might have the satisfaction to apply
this Sentence of Tully to himself, Non nos vitia sed virtutes afflixerunt.


Philot. What a broad Innuendo is here upon the beneficed Clergy?


Philal. I am glad you have given me an opportunity of explaining my self. My
meaning is not that those who are possessed of Livings have gained them, by
such indirect Courses: God forbid! I only say, that all Men are not so lucky as
to have the offer of fair Conditions, and those who have not, must be Curates
if they will be honest; or else lay by the use of their Priesthood, which I am
afraid is not very accountable.


Philot. I confess you have brought your self off well enough: But now I think
on it you must try to maintain the liberty of your Curate a little more
convincingly. For some say there lies Prescription and immemorial Custom
against it, and then you know he is a Servant by Common Law.


Philal. Not at all: For as we are lately told by a great Lawyer, Prescription
is good for nothing where there are any Records to the contrary.


Philot. What Records can you produce?


Philal. Why, to mention no more, the 18th of the Apostles Canons, and the 80th
of the Council of Eliberis, are, I think, considerable Evidence; the first of
which forbids the ordaining of those who had married a Servant, and the other
excludes manumized Persons, while their Patrons were living, from the
Priesthood.


Philot. Say you so? Then I fancy those who drew up Queen Elizabeth's
Injunctions knew nothing of this piece of Antiquity you mention.


Philal. Your Reason?


Philot. Because by those Injunctions a Clergyman could not lawfully marry
till he had gone and made his complaint against Celibacy, before two Justices
of the Peace, and gained their consent, and the good will of the Master, or
Mistress where the Damsel served.


Philal. And then I suppose if he could not prevail by his Rhetoric they gave
him a Warrant to distrein.


Philot. Or possibly if he courted in forma pauperis they assigned him a Wife
gratis out of an Hospital.


Philal. Upon my word this Order, take it which way you will, has a singular
aspect, and looks as if it intended to put the Clergy in mind, that they ought
not to aspire above an Abigail. Certainly Discretion and Merit ran very low in
the Church at that time, or else, some People were willing to make the Nation
believe so. But to return to the Canons, the design of which was to secure the
Reputation of the Clergy; but according to the modern opinion, this provision
signifies nothing; for if a man must go to Service after he is in Orders, had
he not as good do it before? In your sense he often only changes his Lay for an
Ecclesiastical Master, which sometimes might be so far from an advantage that
it would make the Servitude the more uneasy, by being subjected to one no more
than equal to himself.


Philot. I grant you in the Primitive Times the advantage of Priesthood was
equally shared among all the Order, and none of that Character had any
Superiority over another. For then the Revenues of the Church consisted only in
the voluntary Offerings of the People, which were all deposited with the
Bishop, who assigned every one his respective portion; so that no Priest had
any dependence upon another for his maintenance; but now the case is otherwise,
and a man ought to be subject to him that supports him.


Philal. It Is somewhat hard, that the bare alteration of the Church Revenues
should make so wide a difference between those who were equal before; that a
man must lose his freedom only for want of a Presentation, and he made a
Servant because he does not take Tithes, though he has as much spiritual
Authority as if he did. But I perceive you think there is no consideration
equivalent to a little money, and that he who receives it must be no longer at
his own disposal, though he makes never so valuable a return. Since therefore
you insist so much upon maintenance, what if it appears that the Curate
maintains the Parson?


Philot. That would be strange indeed.


Philal. To what end were the Church Revenues intended?


Philot. To keep up the worship of God.


Philal. Which way?


Philot. By settling a competent maintenance upon the Ministers of Religion,
that they may be in the better capacity to discharge their Office, and not be
obliged to lose their time, and lessen their Character, by engaging in
Labourious or Mechanical Employments.


Philal. By your arguing there should be something for them to do.


Philot. Yes, they are to take care of that Precinct to which their Endowment
is annexed.


Philal. I hope you don't mean not to come at it.


Philot. I mean they are to take care of the performance of the duties of their
Office.


Philal. Then ought not he to have the Revenues who performs these Duties?


Philot. I am not willing to grant that.


Philal. Have a care of denying the conclusion; you grant the Revenues of the
Church were designed for the support of the Clergy.


Philot. Yes.


Philal. Of what Clergy? Those who live many miles distant from the Premises?


Philot. No, I Am afraid they were intended for those who live upon the place,
otherwise methinks Endowments are a very slender Provision for the benefit of
the Parish.


Philal. Then if the Curate does all the work, ought he not to have the reward
for his pains? In short, either he is qualified to undertake the Parish or not;
if not, with what sincerity can he be employed? If he is qualified, why is he
barred the profit when he only performs the Conditions upon which they were
settled, when none but himself answers the design they were intended for? To
speak properly, the Rector seems to live out of the labors of another, he is
maintained by the perquisites of the Curates Office; and therefore is in effect
but a kind of Pensioner to him.


Philot. I see you are an everlasting Leveller, you will not allow any
encouragement to extraordinary Industry and Merit.


Philal. You mistake me. I would have the best men have the best Livings, but
then before we go to doubling of Preferments, possibly it were not amiss to
examine whether the number of Benefices exceeds the Persons who are capable of
them. Let us first examine whether they will hold out one apiece, and when
every man has one, then the supernumerary Livings may be divided amongst those
who are most deserving.


Philot. In good time, when it is likely there there will be none left! Now do
you imagine the Church can be defended against her Adversaries by the strength
of a single Parsonage? But it may be you will say all our Plurality-men are not
Writers.


Philal. No, nor Readers neither. Besides, we may observe that Heresy and
Schism were very successfully combated before Unions, Dispensations, and
Consolidations were heard of. If you consult Father Paul's History of the
Council of Trent, (p. 216.) he will inform you that Non-residence and
Pluralities are things of no very primitive establishment. I confess some of
the Lay-managers of our Reformation have not been over-kind to the Church, so
that Affairs are not in so good a posture as they might have been: But God be
thanked there is still some provision left for the Ornament and Defense of
Religion.


Philot. What Provision do you mean?


Philal. Why, to speak to your Case, there are Dignities, to which those
Gentlemen who are prepared to engage in the Controversy have a good right: And
with submission to better Judgments, I think it would not be amiss if all
dignified Persons held their Preferments by a new Tenure.


Philot. What Tenure?


Philal. By Knights Service; pursuant to which they should be obliged to draw
their Pens in the Cause, when ever their Superiors required them: to appear in
the Field upon an Invasion with their Quota, and in short, to maintain any Post
that shall be assigned.


Philot. What if a man has not a mind to quarrel, must he be turned out of his
Dignity for being of a peaceable Disposition?


Philal. Those peaceable men you speak of, are none of the most useful in a
time of War, and therefore a smaller Gratification should content them.


Philot. What if they are disabled by age?


Philal. Then they should be continued for their past Services.


Philot. Truly this is a good probable Expedient to keep the Church Militia in
Discipline, and might for ought I know, very much improve the noble Science of
Controversy. But to return to the old Argument, if you intend to bring me over
to your opinion of the Curate, you must clear the business of his Salary a
little better, for I am afraid where he has his money he ought to own he has
his Master too.


Philal. I confess there would be a great deal in what you say, if the Rector
had the right of Coinage. If the Money had his Image, and Superscription upon
it, the Curate's taking it for current, would conclude him under his
Jurisdiction: but that the bare receiving a sum should sink a Man into a
servile state, is past my comprehension. For considering that Money is a thing
of such quality, and sovereign sway in the World, one would imagine it should
bring Power and Reputation along with it, and rather enlarge than abridge a
Man's Liberty by receiving it. And to mention nothing farther, the nature of
the Contract between the Rector and Curate, is sufficient to give you
satisfaction; for there, as has been observed, the Curate undertakes no other
Employment but the Instruction and Government of the Parish. There is no
attendance upon the Parson, no running upon his Errands, nor subjection to his
Humor indented for.


Philot. Methinks it is a little hard a Curate must not be called a Servant, as
well as a Cook, or a Footman, since he has Wages as much as the other.


Philal. Possibly not always so much neither; but waving that, if you had
remembered what I urged to you before, this Objection would have been no
difficulty.


Philot. What was that?


Philal. Why, that the Curate is to wait upon none but God Almighty, that the
manage of his Employment is not prescribed by the Rector, but by the Rubric
and Constitutions of the Church, and that he is not removeable at pleasure. I
suppose by this time you apprehend there is a difference between him and a
Footman, or a Steward either.


Philot. Well! Notwithstanding your subtlety, this notion of Wages sticks in my
Stomach still.


Philal. I wonder the glitter of a little Money should dazzle your Eyes at that
rate, that you cannot see so plain a distinction. You don't seem to understand
Commerce, if you think that something of Authority and Dominion is always given
in exchange for Money. Now I am of Diogenes his mind, and believe it possible
for one to buy a Master, as well as a Servant.


Philot. As how?


Philal. Why, for the purpose, if a person of twenty one puts himself
Apprentice to another, you know this is seldom done without charge: now what
does a Man do in this case but purchase his subjection, and hire himself a
drubbing upon occasion? To give one instance more. When a Woman of Fortune
marries a Man with nothing, does she not give him Meat, Drink, and Wages to
govern her? And to end this dispute, you know Physicians, and Lawyers, and
Judges, have Fees or Wages, either given, or assigned them by Law, without
being thought Servants to those they are concerned with. Now, what reason is
there a Curate should have worse luck with his Money than other People?


Philot. To deal plainly, I suppose it is because he does not get enough of it.
If his Fees were as considerable as any of those Gentlemen you speak of, I
question not but his Office would be much more reputable.


Philal. Well guessed, and therefore what Character do they deserve who confine
him to this scandalous Pittance. I believe you can scarcely name any sort of
Injustice which has a more malignant influence upon Religion than this
oppresion of Curates.


Philot. Why so Tragical?


Philal. Because their Poverty exposes them to Contempt, which renders their
Instructions insignificant, and which is worse, makes them less considerable in
themselves, as well as in the opinion of others.


Philot. I hope Poverty is no crime.


Philal. No, but it is a scurvy temptation, especially to those who have lived
freely, and been bred to better Expectations. For when a man finds his hopes
disappointed, himself unsupported, and topp'd upon by Persons of meaner
Pretenses and Employments; this is apt to pall his Spirits, and check the
courage of his thoughts, so that his Compositions and Fortune will seem to be
much of a piece.


Philot. I thought strait circumstances had been none of the worst promoters of
Learning, according to the old saying, Ingenii largitor Venture.


Philal. I grant there is some truth in your observation, and that it is Want
which often reconciles men to Labor and Letters; but this is at their first
setting out, when though they have not gained their point, yet they are full of
hopes, which pricks them on, and puts them upon their utmost. but after they
are once qualified for success, and find their industry discouraged, this makes
them sink in the socket, and fret away their strength and Spirits; so that
either out of impotence, or disgust, or despair, they give over the fruitless
pursuit, and seldom make any generous attempt ever after. It Is true, there are
some hardy souls that will not be beaten off by ill usage, but these are very
rarely to be met with.


Philot. Then you think there would be a strange improvement in the unbeneficed
Clergy, if they had a better Salary.


Philal. Yes; I think they would have more Books, and more Learning, and more
Credit. They would not be so easily obliged to improper Compliances, nor so
liable to several other miscarriages in their Conduct.


Philot. By your discourse the slender provision which is made for them, should
be very Criminal.


Philal. Doubtless so it is. For pray consider.


Philot. Pray be as brief as you can.


Philal. I say then, for a Clergyman to enrich himself by the labor and
necessities of one of his own Order, and make his Figure out of the Church
without performing the Services required, is a direct translating the holy
Revenues to a Foreign and secular use, and consequently besides other
aggravations is no better than sacrilege, which is a very uncanonical Sin, and
unless we are very much in the dark will be accounted for afterward. In short
this Practice has been the main ground of the Contempt of the Clergy, making
one part of them grow cheap by their Poverty, and the other by their
Covetousness.


Philot. Pray what allowance would you oblige the Rector to, if you had the
Regulation of that Affair?


Philal. To speak within Compass, in my Opinion the Curate ought to have half
the profits, let the value of them be never so considerable; for if the Parson
has the other moiety for doing nothing, I think he has no reason to complain.
But if the Living be small, then he that supplies it should have two thirds
assigned him, because he cannot be decently supported under that proportion.


Philot. Well, I am not disposed to examine that matter any farther. But I
beseech you what is all this to the business of Pride? I think your Zeal for
the Curates has transported you a little out of your Subject.


Philal. No such matter; for it is generally nothing but Ambition which makes
Men Covetous and Mean: besides, if it is a Digression it is a very seasonable
one. However I am willing to take my leave of this part of the Argument,
therefore if you please we will call a new Cause.


Philot. I think it is best to adjourn at present, and when we meet again I
will venture the other Brush with you.


Philal. Till then Farewell.


A SECOND CONFERENCE BETWEEN Philotimus and Philalethes.
Philal. WELL met! I am glad the opportunity you mentioned is so quickly
returned.


Philot. So am I, and therefore if you please without any further Ceremony, let
us pursue the Argument we were last upon.


Philal. With all my Heart, and since (as has been showed) Learning and
Conceit, make so odd a Figure; let us proceed to examine the pretenses of
Nobility, for I am afraid the Vulgar Notion of it is screwed somewhat too high,
and that it has not, Ballast enough to carry all the Sail which is commonly
made out.


Philot. I must tell you, you are upon a touchy Point, and therefore I hope you
will treat so nice a subject as this is with proportionable caution.


Philal. I am sensible of what you say, and shall manage my enquiry with all
the fairness, and decency, the free discussion of the Question will allow. To
begin, you know all Men were equally Noble, or if you will, equally Plebeian at
first: now I would gladly understand how they came to be so much distinguished
afterward, for there are different reasons assigned.


Philot. I suppose the distinctions you mention, were founded upon
extraordinary performances, and won at the expense of Industry and Merit. For
how can you imagine any persons should emerge out of the common Mass of
Mankind, unless by the advantages of Capacity, Labor, and Resolution? Their
mounting, argues that Fire was the ruling Element in their Composition; and
that they were of a more vigorous and enterprizing Spirit than their Neighbors.


Philal. I am willing to suppose with you, that they made a generous use of
these advantages, and employed them for the benefit of Mankind: being as
remarkable for their Justice, Fidelity, and good Humor, as for their Conduct
and Courage; and therefore I am not willing to believe the account which some
pretend to give concerning the Original of Nobility.


Philot. What is that?


Philal. They will tell you that it has been often founded upon Rapine and
Injustice. It seems they have observed out of Thucidides, that in ancient times
it was counted an Heroic Atcheivement to Plunder lustily, and he was a Man of
the best Quality, who was able to steal most Cattle. These Nimrods (say they)
grew great by the strength of their Limbs and their Vices, engraved their
Murders upon their Shields, and Hectored all the little and peaceable People
into Peasantry.


Philot. This looks so like a Chimerical and ill natured Opinion, that I shall
not do it the honor of a Confutation.


Philal. I have no exceptions to your Resentment, but to go on, for the more
distinct consideration of the Argument, we will divide Nobility into two kinds,
Hereditary, or Acquired. The first is transmitted to us from our Ancestors, the
other is immediately conferred by the favor of the Prince.


Philot. Proceed upon the several parts of your Division.


Philal. 1. Then, Hereditary Nobility seems no just ground for a high Opinion,
because it is borrowed. Those great Actions which we had no share in, cannot
properly be any part of our Commendation, especially if we want abilities to
imitate them. It Is true, they ought to be taken notice of by others for the
encouragement of Virtue, and the ornament of Society. But then he that depends
wholly upon the worth of others, ought to consider that he has but the honor of
an Image, and is worshipped not for his own sake, but upon the account of what
he represents. To be plain, it is a sign a Man is very poor when he has nothing
of his own to appear in; but is forced to patch up his Figure with the Relics
of the Dead, and rifle Tomb-Stones and Monuments for Reputation.


Philot. Notwithstanding your rallying, I cannot conceive what crime it is to
possess the Inheritance of our Forefathers. Now Honor is part of their Estate,
which was raised on purpose that we might be the better for it. And since their
Children were the occasion of their merit, and pushed them on to generous
undertakings, ought they not to share in the glory of the Success?


Philal. Yes. But it should be managed with great modesty, because though an
honorable Title may be conveyed to Posterity, yet the ennobling Qualities
which are the Soul of Greatness, are a sort of incommunicable perfections, and
cannot be transferred. Indeed if a Man could bequeath his Virtues by Will, and
settle his Sense, and Learning, and Resolution, upon his Children, as certainly
as he can his Lands, a brave Ancestor would be a mighty privilege.


Philot. I hope those fine Qualities are not so incommunicable as you suppose,
for methinks there is a Ie ne scay quoi, in persons well born: there is a
peculiar Nobleness of Temper in them, their Conversation is inimitably
graceful, and a Man may distinguish their Quality by the Air of their Faces.


Philal. I wish that Spirit of Honor and Bravery you mention, was inseparable
to their Quality; but it is too plain that great Minds, and great Fortunes
don't always go together; however I grant there is some Truth in your
observation, but am afraid the distinction does not always spring from the
cause you assign. For by the gracefulness of Conversation, I suppose you mean a
decent Assurance, and an Address in the Modes, and Gestures of Salutation. Now
these are pretty accomplishments I confess, and recommend a Man to Company with
some advantage; but then they are easily gained by Custom and Education, and
therefore we need not fetch them ex Traduce. And moreover, these little
Formalities are often magnified beyond all Sense and Reason, and some People
are so Fantastically fond of them, as if they were the topper perfections of
Human Nature; and that it were in reality a more valuable and gentile quality
to Dress well, and come handsomely into a Room, than to take a Town, or to be
fit to discharge the Office of a Privy Counselor. Now with submission to these
Ceremonious Gentlemen, I am not of their mind in this matter, but think it much
better for a Man's Parts to lie in his Head, than in his Heels.


Philot. I think so too, but you have not answered the whole.


Philal. True! Your Air was omitted: now if this was a constant privilege of
Birth, which you know it is not, yet in this deceitful Age of ours, there is no
Arguing from an Outside. Besides, I doubt this Advantage is sometimes the
effect of a slothful and Effeminate Life. When Men will attempt nothing either
in the Field, or in their Closets: when they will neither trouble themselves
with Thinking, nor endure to be exposed to the Weather: This Niceness, though
it renders them insignificant to the great purposes of Life, yet it Polishes
their Complexion, and makes their Spirits seem more moving and transparent.
Sometime this Sprightliness and Grandeur of Face, is Painted by Flattery: for
when Men are once made to believe they are very Considerable, they are
presently for trying to write the Inscriptions of their Quality upon their
Forehead. Now Conceit when it is Corrected with a mixture of Gravity, is an
admirable Wash, and will make one look as Wise, and as Great as you would wish.


Philot. This Grandeur of Face, as you call it, may possibly be explained upon
kinder Principles; for I am apt to believe that a quick Sense of Honor, a
Consciousness of Worth, an Elevation of Thought, will sometimes break out into
a Luster, and make the great Soul sparkle in a Man's Eyes.


Philal. I cannot deny what you say, and therefore the best Construction ought
to be made, where the known Character of the person does not disallow it.


Philot, I see you can be fair when you list, therefore I shall venture to go
on with you to another Advantage of Nobility, viz. Antiquity. Now to begin in
your own way, Don't you think it is a great addition to ones Birth to stand at
the bottom of long Parchment Pedigree, and be some yards removed from the first
Escocheon? Is not that Family substantially Built which can stand the shock of
Time, and hold out against all varieties of Accidents? How generous must that
Blood be, which has been so long Refining, and run through the Channels of
Honor for so many Ages, where it is sometimes as hard to come to the Plebeian
Fountain: as to find out the Head of Nilus?


Philal. Not so hard neither, For if you go but one Inch farther than the
Gentleman at the Top you spoke of, it is ten to one but you take old Goodman,
etc. by the Leathern Breeches. And as for the Antiquity of a Family, though it
looks prettily at first sight, yet I fear it will abate upon examination.


Philot. Pray try your skill upon it, for I am not of your mind.


Philal. Then to deal plainly with you, I conceive the Antiquity you talk of,
is commonly nothing but ancient Wealth, and therefore the chief commendation of
this Privilege consists in the long continued Frugality of the Family, who
after they were once possessed of an Estate, had the Discretion to keep it.


Philot. Is it nothing then for a Man's Ancestors to have lived in Reputation,
and to have had Interest and Command in their Country for so many Generations?


Philal. I suppose the English of all this is no more than that they have lived
in good Houses, Eat and Drank better, and born higher Offices than those who
have wanted a Fortune. Now Money, and a moderate share of Sense, will furnish
any Man with all these Advantages. And as to the holding out against so many
Accidents, and Alterations of State, I am afraid it sometimes proceeds from
shifting and indifferent Principles, and from a servile compliance with
whatever is Uppermost. So that what my Lord Bacon mentions in reference to
Notions and Inventions, may be sometimes applicable to Families; where he tells
us, that Time is like a River, in which Metals and solid Substances are sunk,
while Chaff and Straws swim upon the Surface.

Secondly, You are to consider that an ancient Gentility does not necessarily
convey to us any advantage either of Body or Mind: and to speak like
Philosophers, these are the only two things in which we are capable of any real
improvement. I confess, if every Generation grew Wiser, Stronger, Handsomer, or
longer Lived than the other: if the Breed of a Man's Family was thus improved,
the farther it was continued; then indeed the quality of an Escocheon would be
exactly contrary to that of Clothes, and the one would always grow better, as
the other does worse, by wearing. From whence it would follow, that if the
seven Sleepers had been made Gentlemen immediately before they entered their
Cave, and had held on their Nap from seventy, to seven hundred years, they had
most undeniably slept themselves into a considerable degree of Quality.


Philot. You may talk as subtly as you please, but you must not think to
baffle established and uncontested Opinions, with a few Logical quirks.


Philal. Pray don't grow warm, and I will endeavor to satisfy you, and in
order to it, I observe in the third place, That an ancient Gentility, makes a
Man Superior only to those of the same Quality, ( viz. an Esquire, to an
Esquire, and so in the rest) and that in nothing but in point of Precedence.
The reason, I suppose, why those which are placed in any degree of Honor,
precede others who are afterward raised to the same Height, is for the
encouragement of Industry. To make Men forward to exert their earliest
Endeavors to deserve well of the State; for this reason there is a distinction
made between Merit, otherwise equal, only upon the account of the Priority of
Time.


Philot. Is this all you can afford?

Philal. Look you! We that pretend to be subject to a Constitution, must not
Carve out our own Quality, for at this rate a Cobbler may make himself a Lord.


Philot. And what then?

Philal. Why, then I say, it is Vanity for any Man to have a better Opinion of
his Family than the Law allows: my Reason is, because the Law is the measure of
Honor, as well as of all other Civil Rights. Besides, I must tell you that it
is both reasonable, and the Interest of the State that Merit should be
considered, of what date soever it is. A worthy Action ought to be as much
rewarded now, as one of the same kind was a thousand years since. The prospect
of Honor, to a generous Mind, is the chief incitement to all great
Undertakings. This consideration Polishes Arts and Sciences, makes Men
Industrious in improving their Understandings, and Resolute in exposing their
Persons, for the Public Service. If therefore we dote upon Antiquity so far,
as to undervalue the Merit of the present Age, the Government must necessarily
suffer by it: for such a Partiality will slacken the Nerves of Industry, and
occasion a negligence both in those who have an ancient Title to Honor, and in
those who have not. The first will grow sluggish, because they have a
sufficient share of Reputation already; and therefore need not run any hazards
about getting more. The latter will abate in their forwardness to oblige their
Country, because they know their Service, though never so great, will be
contemned, and for that very Reason which ought to make them the more valued,
that is, because their Considerableness came from themselves. Moreover, If the
Inheritors of ancient Honor, have not by Personal Additions improved that Stock
which was granted to their Ancestors; there is no reason it should be rated
above the same Degree (Precedence excepted) which is given now. For to affirm
that a Family raised to Nobility by this King, is not as good as one raised by
the Conqueror, is a reflection upon his present Majesty: it supposes his
Judgment, or his Authority, less considerable than that of his Predecessors;
and that the Fountain of Honor is almost dried up, and runs more muddy than in
former Ages.


Philot, How plausibly soever you may make your opinion look, I Am sure it has
the disadvantage of being Singular. For you know a plain Gentleman of an
ancient Family is accounted a Person of better Quality than a new made Knight,
though the reason of his dubbing was never so Meritorious. Honor like China
Dishes must lie some Ages under Ground before it comes to any Perfection. And
to carry on your own Figure, the greater distance from the spring always makes
the Stream the more considerable.


Philal. This it is to be wiser than the Laws! And since you are for
Illustrations I reply, that to suppose an ancient Title (though lesser in
degree) is preferable to a greater of late Creation, is as if one should affirm
that an old shilling is better than a new half-Crown, though the Alloy and
Impression are the same in both. Nay from your Argument a man may conclude that
a coarser metal only by being dug and refined in the Days of our Great
Grandfathers, (though perhaps it has contracted some rust by lying) is more
valuable than the same weight in Gold but lately separated from the Oar. And
that an ancient Estate is really better than one newly purchased, though the
Lands of the latter are richer, and the Survey larger than the other. Now if a
man should prove so fanciful as to demand a greater Rent for his Farm because
it has been in the Possession of his Family for some hundred of years, I
believe the want of Tenants would soon convince him of his Error. From whence
it is evident that in taking an Estimate of Nobility we are not so much to
consider its Antiquity, as the Merit of the first Grantee, and the distinction
the Prince has put upon it; which like Figures or other marks upon Money, stamp
the value, and tell the Subject for how much it is to pass.


Philot. Pray by your favor are not Meddals, and Coyns valued more for their
Antiquity than their Metal?


Philal. That Question is to the point; and therefore I answer,

First, That Coyns, etc. though they are valuable as rarities, yet they
signify little in Exchange and common use; And if a man has any debt to pay,
or Commodities to buy, K. Charles his Image, and superscription will do him
much more service than Ce'sar's.

Secondly, The Reason why these things are sometimes so much valued, is not
because they are old but useful: They often rectify Chronology, and explain
History, and retrieve us several material parts of Learning, which might
otherwise have been irrecoverably lost.

Thirdly, There is a disparity in the case of ancient Coyns and Families; For
in the first you have the same numerical piece, in the latter nothing but the
Name or Relation, so that the change and succession of Persons seems to destroy
the notion of Antiquity. To make the Instance parallel we must suppose a
Gentleman as old as Methusalem, and then I confess he would be a great
Curiosity, and ought to be valued accordingly.


Philot. As I remember you were saying, the merit of the first Gentleman of the
House ought to be considered.


Philal. Yes, I conceive that circumstance very material, and that if upon
enquiry it proves unintelligible, or unlucky, it is no small abatement to the
Family. For if he Advanced himself by a voluntary engaging in unjust Quarrels,
he has no better pretense to Honor than what a resolute and successful Padder
may Challenge. If he owes his Heraldry to a servile Flattery, and a dextrous
Application to the vices of Princes, the marks of their Favor are rather
infamous than Honorable to his Posterity, because he is ennobled for those
qualities, for which he ought to have been punished.


Philot. What if the Gentility was purchased, I hope we may make the best of
what we have paid for?


Philal. By all means! But then this is a sign that Worth and distinguishing
Qualities were wanting, otherwise the Honor had been conferred Gratis. The
same may be said when Arms or Titles are given at the Instance or
recommendation of a Favorite, for this is downright begging for Quality, and
looks more like an Alms than an Honor. Farther it is a lessening to a man's
Nobility, when the Reason and Grounds of it are unknown, for if his Rise had
been derived from worthy and creditable Causes, he would in all likelihood have
been as certainly acquainted with them, as with his Arms; It being both easy
and for the Reputation of the Family, that Records of this nature should have
been preserved, and therefore the loss of them seems rather to proceed from
Design than Neglect. In short, if the first Principles of Honor happen to be
thus coarse, or counterfeit, it is not in the power of time to mend them: A
Pebble or Bristol stone will not change their natures, and improve into
Diamonds, though they are laid up a thousand years together.


Philot. Hark you Mr. I doubt your Effects (if you have any) have lain but a
little while in the Heralds Office.


Philal. Probably as long as your Worships: But I take it to be much more a
Gentlemanly quality to discover such unsociable mistakes than to abett them. If
we are capable of understanding any thing, it must undoubtedly be more
creditable to promote good humor and modesty in Conversation, and give men
right Apprehensions of themselves; than to flatter them into groundless
Conceits, and make them believe they may be truly Great, and yet good for
nothing. To maintain such indefensible and dangerous Principles of Honor,
which not only impose upon our Understandings, but emasculate our Spirits, and
spoil our Temper, and tend only to the nourishing of Idleness and Pride; is in
my opinion no very Heroical undertaking.


Philot. Then I find we must come to the Merits of the Cause as you call them,
and examine upon what foundation the Family stands.


Philal. I think that is the only way to know what we have to trust to, and how
far we may insist upon the advantages of Birth.


Philot. What are the usual steps to Honor?


Philal. I suppose one of these three, Learning, Commerce or Arms. The
pretenses of Learning have been examined already; To which I shall only add,
that if a Person whose mind is enlarged, and beautified with all sorts of
useful Knowledge, is notwithstanding obliged to Modesty, and Sobriety of
thought, then certainly those who claim under him, and are wise only by Proxy,
ought not to grow too big upon their Relation to the Muses. To Proceed,
Commerce is another Expedient which often distinguishes a man from the vulgar.
For Trading raises an Estate, and that procures Honor, so that in this Case
Wealth is the main of the merit, and that which is chiefly insisted on by those
who inherit it. But here we ought to be very cautious and meek-spirited, till
we are assured of the honesty of our Ancestors, for Covetousness and
Circumvention make no good Motto for a Coat. And yet your men of Trade are too
often assisted in their Fortunes by these Qualities.


Philot. I think you are too hard upon them, and believe they may come into
their Estates by more accountable methods, viz. by their Industry, by
Understanding how to make use of all fair advantages, and by the luck of a good
Acquaintance.


Philal. I grant there is a great deal of Good Faith, Frankness and Generosity
to be found among Tradesmen, and that such Professions are necessary to the
convenience and splendour of Life, and being thus useful ought to be esteemed
Honorable. But their being used to value small gains is apt (without care) to
make them contract a narrowness of Spirit, and to stand too much to the point
of Interest.


Philot. What is that which they call the Mystery of Trade?


Philal. A great part of it consists in the skill of overreaching their
Customers, which Science, I fear is not learned merely for Speculation.


Philot. Possibly it may be for Caution, that they may not be imposed on by
others.


Philal. I am willing to think so, however these Arcana Officinae, are counted
such Essentials, that except an Apprentice is fully instructed how to
Adulterate, and Varnish, and give you the Go-by upon occasion, his Master may
be charged with Neglect, and sued for not teaching him his Art, and his Trade.


Philot. It seems then he cannot be an Honest Man, except he teaches his
Servant to play the Knave.


Philal. Granting your Inference, yet you know a Man may understand his Weapon
better than his Neighbor, and notwithstanding be of a very peaceable
inoffensive Temper. However, when the Rise of the Family is owing to such an
Original, a Man has a particular Reason not to flourish too much upon the
glitter of his Fortune, for fear there should be too much Alloy in it. For some
People are forced to climb in a very mean and servile posture. They must
Flatter, Deceive, and Pinch; use their Neighbors, and themselves too, very
unkindly, before they can gain their Point. So that if the Ancestour had not
been remarkably Little, his Posterity had never been reputed Great.


Philot. But what needs all this Scruple? Why should I enquire so anxiously how
my Ancestors came by their Estate? Let their Merit be as small as you please,
the Revenue will not sink upon this Score. Now, if you considered the
Sovereignty of Money, how it commands Honor, and Beauty, and Power, how much of
Ornament, and Defense, and Pleasure there is in it; you would allow us to be a
little Uppish upon the Matter: for when a Man has such a Universal Instrument
of Delight, and is Master of that, which is Master of every thing else, he
ought visibly to Congratulate his Happiness, and pay himself a particular
Respect.


Philal. If I could purchase a parcel of new Senses, and some pretty
undiscovered Curiosities to please them with, I confess I should be more
desirous of growing Rich than I am.


Philot. What though you cannot buy any new, you may please the old ones
better, and make one Sense go as far as two, with Poverty.


Philal. I am not altogether of your mind; besides if my Understanding does not
improve proportionably, I am only in the fairer way to be more a Brute.


Philot. Understanding! Money will buy good Books, and though the Owner should
should not know how to use them, yet if has an Estate, he will never want
People to make him believe he has Sense, which will be in a manner as well, for
Pleasure consists mostly in Fancy.


Philal. I don't envy such a one the entertainment of his Imagination, though I
believe it is much short of the transports of Lunacy: but withal I think that
folly and madness are no proper Judges to pronounce upon the Advancements of
human Nature. But to return to the Argument, no person can be Great by being
Owner of those things which wise Men have always counted it a piece of
greatness to despise. To which I must add, that it is not the possessing, but
the right management of any valuable Advantage which makes us Considerable. He
that does not employ his Fortune generously, is not to be respected merely
because he has it. Indeed if a Man gives me part of his Estate, I am bound to
make him an acknowledgment; but I am not obliged to honor him because he is
pleased to keep it to himself.


Philot. Well! Since Merchandise is sometimes liable to exceptions, and ancient
Wealth has no right to challenge Worship, and Homage. Pray what do you think of
Nobility raised by Arms? I hope here you will grant the Materials are all
shining, and solid. And when an Ancestour works out his Fortune by great and
hazardous Undertakings, by contempt of Danger and Death, and all the instances
of an Heroic Gallantry; is it not highly reasonable his Descendants should
share his Honor, as well as his Inheritance? Nay, they seem obliged, in justice
to his Memory, to have some strokes of Greatness and Reserve in their Carriage.
They might better be Profuse in their Expenses, than their Familiarities. The
wasting his Estate, and razing him out of the Heralds Books, is scarce more
injurious to his Name, than the heedless Condescensions of his Family. For by
such ill managed Humility, they do as it were Prostitute his Quality, mingle
his Ashes with ignoble Dust, and deface the Monuments and Distinctions of his
Merit.


Philal. I confess a Man ought to be civil to his Generation, but not to that
degree as to plague the Living, only in Ceremony to the Dead. And I may say
farther, that a Noble Ancestor, does not desire his Posterity should pretend to
honor him this way, except his Qualities, as well as his Name descend upon
them. A person truly Great, is never fond and unreasonable; he hates to see
Folly Idolized, though it be in his own Children; and had rather have his
Memory buried in Oblivion, than his Honor should be Usurped by a Degenerate
insignificant Offspring. Besides, the reasons you assign why Martial Men ought
to be valued by after-Ages, seem to be common to other pretenses to Nobility.


Philot. I am sorry if they appear so, since I designed them chiefly for the
advantage of Arms. For in my judgment, the Profession of a Soldier has a
particular, and paramount Title to Honor. For can there be a more extraordinary
instance of Greatness, than for a Man to be undismayed amidst so many horrible
Instruments and Images of Death? To expose his person as freely as if he knew
himself immortal, and to fear nothing but Obscurity and Disgrace? And therefore
though there are many other creditable Employments and Accomplishments, yet
there is a transcendent, and almost an astonishing Greatness and Gracefulness
in Valor. It has something more illustrious and sparkling, more Noble and
Majestic than the rest.


Philal. Hold! You are going to describe Alexander or Caesar; do you think that
every Field, or Charge in Gules, can pretend to all these fine things? This
must be examined farther by and by: at present I shall only observe to you,
that though I have a great esteem for a Gentleman of the Sword, and don't in
the least intend to lessen the just Character of Military Glory; yet I conceive
there is another Profession, which possibly does not glitter altogether so much
upon the Sense, but for all that, if you touch it 'twill prove right Sterling.


Philot. What Profession do you mean?

Philal. That of Learning; therefore if you please, I will just glance upon the
Advantages of Learning without interposing my judgment by way of comparison.


Philot. Do so, for I think you had need say some kind things upon this
Argument, to make amends for the freedom you took with it in our former
Conference.


Philal. Don't mistake me, I am conscious of no Injury, and therefore design
nothing by way of Reparation.


Philot. Take your Course.

Philal. 1. Then not to mention that Learning is an improvement of our Minds,
which is the noblest part of us. I say not to mention this, you may please to
take notice, that without some share in this accomplishment, War it self cannot
be successfully managed. Without the assistance of Letters, a Man can never be
qualified for any considerable Post in the Camp. For Courage and Corporal
Force, unless joined with Conduct, and reach of Thought (which are the usual
effects of Contemplation) is no more fit to command than a Tempest; doing for
the most part more harm than good, and destroying it self by its blind and ill
directed motion. It is Learning which teaches a General the successes and
events of Action in former Ages, which makes him better able to judge of his
present preparation. It instructs him how to take advantage of his Enemies, and
avoid those miscarriages which have been fatal to others before him. It teaches
him how to Fortify and Assault, how to manage the difference of Ground and
Weather. It lets him into the knowledge of Human Nature, and shows him how to
understand the Tempers of other men, and to govern his own. It discovers by
what secret Springs the Passions are moved, what are the most probable Causes
of Hope and Fear, of Resolution and Cowardice; and how strangely they are
mixed, and varied according to the difference of Climates, Governments,
Conditions, and Occupations, especially according to the different Age, Temper,
Interest, and Experience of those who are in Power.


Philot. Yes, no doubt it teaches a Man to take a Soul in pieces, as easily as
a Watch! If ever I heard such Conjuring!


Philal. Pray be not so sharp, the Discourse is not so Romantic as you suppose.


Philot. Go on.

Philal. Secondly, I observe that the Advantages of Learning are more lasting
and extensive than those of Arms. The Courage of a Soldier, does his Country
not much service after his death, the benefit of it being usually confined to
one Age: whereas by the knowledge of Men and Things, Public Provisions for
Society are framed, and the Constitution adjusted to the Temper, and
Convenience of the People; of the happy effects of which, remote Posterity is
often sensible. And as the Consequences of Valor, seldom reach beyond the
death of him who showed it, so there are few the better for it, except those a
Man engages for; which are commonly none but his Countrymen. But Learning, by
inventing and improving Arts and Sciences, scatters its Favors in a much
larger compass; becomes a universal Benefactor, and obliges mankind in its most
comprehensive Latitude of Place and Time.


Philot. I hope you will grant that Learning must fly to the Protection of the
Sword to secure its quiet, and all the profits accrewing from thence. For in
earnest, Notions, and Syllogisms, are very defenseless things against Violence.
If we had nothing but Philosophy, Statutes and Reports, to secure the Peace;
our Meum and Tuum were but in an ill condition.


Philal. I agree with you, and shall just add in the third place, That the
successes of Learning are naturally of a very innocent Tendency, and under good
management prejudicial to none. The Conquests of Arts are not like those of
Arms, gained by slaughter, and attended with ruin and desolation. No, Here is
nothing routed but Ignorance and Error, nothing destroyed but obstinate Humor,
and savage Disposition: Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros. But a Martial Man,
except he has been sweetened, and polished by a Lettered Education, is apt to
have a tincture of sowerness, and incomplyance in his Behavior. And therefore
if you observe your old Heroes in Homer, (for want of being Book-Learned) were
none of the Gentilest Men. What a rugged tempestuous, unconversable Mortal was
Achilles; I could never fancy that same (...).


Philot. Well! I perceive it is requisite for a Man to get some Sense to his
Courage if he can: but have we not lost all our Pride, and gone somewhat off
from the Point?


Philal. No, We have only fetched a Compass, and thrown our reasoning more into
a Circle to invest the Place; and now we will come on directly, and make a
little Assault, only to try the strength of the Garrison.


Philot. Very Soldier-like! In plain English I doubt you are attempting to show
that it is not so much the Profession of Arms, as the unexceptionable
management of that Profession which makes a Family honorable.


Philal. Yes. Therefore before we fall too much in love with the Buff in the
Wardrobe; we should examine whether the War was just, whether our Ancestor
fought in defense of his Prince and Country, or let himself out to any person
who would hire him to murder. We should consider whether the Enterprise was
Great and Dangerous; whether the Advantages were gained by open Bravery and
Resolution, or were no more than the effects of Chance, of Treachery, or
Surprise. And though a Man can give a creditable Answer to all these Questions,
he should then remember there are a great many persons who have ventured as far
as himself, and yet continue in their first Obscurity: so that had it not been
his good Fortune to have fallen under the Notice of his General, his Merit had
been unrewarded. There are many persons who perform signal service in a Breach,
or Scalado, and yet their Courage is often unregarded, and lost in the Crowd,
and Tumult of the Action, so that they get nothing but Blows for their Pains.
To wind up this part of the Discourse: let the Rise of the Family be never so
considerable (I mean none but Subjects) it ought not to supersede the Industry,
or stop the Progress of those who are thence Descended. For if we rely wholly
upon the Merit of others, and are Great only by imputation, we shall be
esteemed by none but the injudicious part of the World. To speak out, if
neither the advantages of Fortune and Education (which often concur in these
Cases) the expectation of others, nor the Memory of worthy Ancestors, if none
of these Motives can prevail with a Man to furnish himself with Supravulgar and
Noble Qualities, this is an argument that he is either under a natural
incapacity, or else has abandoned himself to Sloth, and Luxury. And without
dispute he is most emphatically mean, who is so under the greatest advantages
and arguments to the contrary. So that the Luster of his Family serves only to
set off his own Degeneracy, it does Facem proeferre pudendis and makes him the
more remarkably Contemptible.


Philot. You are smart upon the empty Sparks! And I perceive by your discourse
that if we intend to set up strong, we must do something for our selves.


Philal. Yes: And therefore I presume that Women have more reason to insist
upon their Birth than Men: because they have not so fair a trial to discover
their worth. They are by custom made incapable of those employments by which
Honor is usually gained. They are shut out from the Pulpit and Bar, from
Embassies, and State Negotiations, so that notwithstanding (as I believe it
often happens) their Inclinations are generous, and their Abilities great, to
serve the public; yet they have not an opportunity of showing it.


Philot. Truly I think you need not have been so liberal to the Beau-Sex; you
know they have enough to be proud of besides Heraldry.


Philal. What do you mean?

Philot. Their Beauty Man.

Philal. Right, I believe that may disturb them sometimes; but they have no
great reason for it. For Beauty though it is a pretty varnish, yet it is of a
frail Constitution, liable to abundance of Accidents, and but a short lived
Blessing at the best. And waving this Consideration, it seems to be made
chiefly for the entertainment of the lookers on. Those who are so much admired
by others, cannot share the pleasure of the Company without the help of a Glass;
for the Eyes which show us other Objects cannot see themselves. Nature seems to
have laid the most graceful parts of our Fabric out of our way; to prevent our
vanity. For could some People always command a sight of their Faces, they would
Narcissus like be perpetually poring upon their Handsomeness, and so be neither
fit for Business, nor Company.


Philot. To my thinking you have not cleared the Point; For why may we not
insist upon the privileges of Nature? Why should a fine Woman be so prodigal of
her Beauty, make strip and waste of her Complexion, and squander away her Face
for nothing? There is no reason persons of a less agreeable aspect (except they
have some other advantage) should converse with beauty upon a Level. For those
who cannot furnish out an equal proportion toward the pleasure of
Conversation, ought to pay for their insufficiency in Acknowledgments. Beauty
without doubt was designed for some advantage, and if so, certainly the Owners
have the best right to it.


Philal. I grant it; and therefore it is allowable for them to set a value upon
their Persons, for the better disposal of them. And farther if they have a mind
to it, they may please themselves, because they are acceptable to others, which
is a generous satisfaction: But when they grow humoursom they spoil all; For
Pride not only raises a prejudice against their Beauty, but really lessens it.
For if you observe, it paints an ill-natured Air upon their Face; and fills
them with spleen and peevishness and passion, which exhausts their Spirits, and
makes their blood less florid, so that their Beauty is neither so agreeable nor
lasting as otherwise it would be. And if the present inconvenience will not
cure them, they will do well to remember that they must of necessity grow
humble when they are old; unless they are so fanciful as to dote upon Rubbish
and Ruins.


Philot. Pray let us take leave of the Ladies, and proceed to the other branch
of your Division, viz. to acquired Nobility. And here methinks every thing
looks unexceptionable and fine upon your own Principles. For here we are
beholden to none but our selves; we are not thrown up the Hill by another
Arms, and made considerable by Diversion, or Chancemedly; but climb the ascent
by plain Strength, and indesatigable Activity. Is it not a singular
commendation to have our circumstances not only large and Honorable, but
Independent; and almost to create the privileges we enjoy? Here is no gilding
of a coarse substance, no borrowed Glory, no faint Reflection from an
Ancestour, but the Man is all bright and luminous to the Center, and shines and
sparkles in his own worth. He is not Great by Genealogy and ancient Title, by
the Favor of Fortune and the Labors of those he never helped, but by Nature
and Performances, by having Greatness incorporated in himself. Now may not a
Person who has thus distinguished himself by his Merit, make use of the Honor
which has been so justly conferred upon him, and put the Lazy and less
significant in mind of their Defects?


Philal. If you recollect your self you will find that this point concerning
Acquired Nobility has been occasionally discoursed already: Therefore I shall
only add that upon supposition a Man has obliged the Public, and is remarkable
for great Abilities and a generous Use of them; he would do well to remember
that there are others who have ventured as far, and performed as considerably
as himself, whose Services all miscarried as to any private Advantage, because
they were not so lucky as to act under the Notice of those who were able to
reward: And that many Persons well furnished for Employment and Honor, go out
of the World as obscurely as they came in; only for want of a proper
opportunity to bring them into Light, and public View.


Philot. What tho some People are unlucky, ought their misfortunes to be
pleaded to the prejudice of Desert in others?


Philal. No. But when a man has received so valuable a consideration for his
Service as Honor and Estate, he ought to acquiesce, and not press too
arbitrarily for Submission. He should not set a tax upon his Conversation, and
put the Company under Contribution for Respect. Besides a Gentleman of the
first Head has a particular reason to manage his Advancement obligingly: For by
treating the little People roughly, he does in effect but expose his Ancestors
and reproach his own former Condition.


Philot. You have so many fetches with you! But what do you think of
Magistrates? In my opinion those who represent their Prince, and are the
Ministers of Justice, cannot practice that Humility and Condescension you seem
to admire, with any manner of Decency, or Security to the public. For if they
don't oblige their Inferiors to Distance, their Reputation will sink, and the
Majesty of the Government will be lessened, and then it is easy to guess what
the consequence must be.


Philal. I agree with you: Magistrates ought to assert their Office, and not
make themselves cheap by improper Familiarities. But their Character may be
over-strained. To prevent which inconvenience they may please to remember that
their power was given them upon a public account, more for the benefit of
others than themselves. They are deputed by their Prince, for the countenancing
of Virtue, for the ease and Protection of the People, and therefore they should
discourage none who are regular and fair, they should show their Authority upon
nothing but Insolence and Injustice, Thieves and Malefactors; upon those who
affront the Government, or break the Peace. There is no necessity they should
bring the Air of the Bench into common Conversation, and wear their Commissions
always upon their Faces. To manage their Power thus singularly looks like a
little private Design of setting up for themselves; as if they procured their
Authority to fright the Kings Liege Subjects, and to overawe the Neighborhood
into a greater Reverence.


Philot. But if they should happen to take too much upon them, are the People
to slight them upon this account?


Philal. By no means: the Authority ought to be considered let the Men be what
they will. However in general I observe that the best way to secure Observance,
is not to insist too violently upon it. For Pride is a most unfortunate Vice,
other Immoralities usually gain their Point, though they lose more another way;
but a Proud man is so far from making himself Great by his haughty and
contemptuous Port, that he is usually punished with Neglect for it: and that
Disdain with which he treats others, is returned more justly upon himself:
which may be done without much difficulty, in regard Honor is not become a
property so far as to have all it is Appurtenances bounded and fixed by Law. The
Circumstantials and oftentimes the most pompous part of Ceremony, are arbitrary
and undetermined. For we are not told either by Statute, or Common Law how many
Bows a Superior of such a degree may expect from us, nor how low we are to
make them, nor how often the terms of Respect are to be used in our Application.


Philot. What do you mean?


Philal. I mean that it is not settled by Act of Parliament, how many Sirs and
Madams, a Discourse of such a length is to be sprinkled with; and therefore a
cross-grained Fellow, will tell you he has his Betters upon their Good
Behavior: if he likes their humor, he will be as liberal to them in
acknowledgments as they please; if not, he shall take the freedom to hold his
hand, and let them help themselves how they can.


Philot. Well! I cannot reconcile this self-denying Humor you are contending
for to the Character of a Gentleman. Such an untoward management of Fortune and
Honor as this is, argues either that a Man wants Sense to understand his
Condition, or Spirit to maintain it. To throw away the Prerogatives of our
Birth, or the rewards of our Industry, at such a careless Cynical rate, is a
sign of a Rustic inapprehensive meanness, and that we have not the least
inclination to Greatness in us. For those who desire to be Great, will
endeavor to excel, and those who excel will be sure to show it; for the
Essence of Greatness lies in Comparison. A tall Man loses the advantage of his
Stature, unless he stands straight, and overlooks his Neighbor.


Philal. Methinks you are somewhat out in your notion of Greatness.


Philot. Let us hear if you can hit it better.


Philal. To speak freely, I conceive it a much more substantial and better
natured thing than you have made it. Greatness certainly does not consist in
Pageantry and Show, in Pomp and Retinue; and though a person of Quality will
make use of these things to avoid Singularity, and to put the Vulgar in mind of
their obedience to Authority, yet he does not think himself really the bigger
for them: for he knows that those who have neither Honesty nor Understanding,
have oftentimes all this fine Furniture about them. Farther, To be Great, is
not to be starched, and formal, and supercilious, to swagger at our Footmen,
and browbeat our Inferiors. Such a Behavior looks as if a Man was conscious
of his own insignificancy, and that he had nothing but Outside, and Noise, and
ill Humor, to make himself Considerable with. But he that is truly Noble, has
far different Sentiments, and turns his Figure quite another way. He hates to
abridge the Liberties, to depress the Spirits, or any ways to impair the
satisfaction of his Neighbor. His Greatness is easy, obliging, and agreeable,
so that none have any just cause to wish it less. And though he has a general
kindness for all Men, though he despises not the meanest Mortal, but desires to
stand fair in the Opinion of the World, yet he never courts any Man's Favor at
the Expense of Justice, nor strikes in with a Popular Mistake. No, He is
sensible it is the part of true Magnanimity to adhere unalterably to a wise
Choice: not to be overrun by Noise and Numbers, but to appear in defense of
injured Right, of neglected Truth, notwithstanding all the Censure and
Disadvantage they may sometimes lie under. To conclude his Character, A Great
Man is affable in his Converse, generous in his Temper, and immovable in what
he has maturely resolved upon. And as Prosperity does not make him haughty and
imperious, so neither does Adversity sink him into meanness and dejection: for
if ever he shows more spirit than ordinary, it is when he is ill used, and the
World frowns upon him. In short, he is equally removed from the extremes of
Servility and Pride; and scorns either to trample upon a Worm, or sneak to an
Emperor.


Philot. In earnest, you have described a Person of Honor: And I am so far
pleased with the Character, that I would give all I am Master of to make it my
own. But can we receive no other Advantages from Nobility, but what have been
hinted already?


Philal. All that I can think of at present, are these following.

First, It gives a fair occasion to excite the generosity of our Minds, and
disposes us to the imitation of great Examples, that so we may not seem
unworthy our Predecessors. Indeed, a Man is bound in justice not to impair the
Reputation, not spoil the Breed of the Family: but to hand down the Line to his
Posterity, at least with the same good Conditions he received it.

Secondly, These Privileges of Birth may serve to check an insolent Humor in
others, who behave themselves contemptuously toward us upon lesser, or but
equal pretenses.

Thirdly, A Man may make some Advantage this way, when he falls undeservedly
under Public Disgrace, or is unrighteously Oppressed. For in such a Case, the
mention of his Ancestors seems free from all suspicion of Vanity, and may
fairly be interpreted to proceed either from self-Defence, or greatness of
Spirit.

Fourthly, The same may be done when any Office or Promotion, may Legally be
claimed by virtue of an honorable Condition. For example, If a Man should put
in to be one of the Knights of Malta, he might modestly enough publish his
Pedigree, and prove his six Descents, against a less qualified Competitor.


Philot. If you are at a stop, I think I can carry your concessions somewhat
farther. For, as I remember, it has been granted already, that the common
People may pay a Respect to Quality, though you mortify the Pleasure a little
severely in those who receive it.


Philal. May pay a Respect, call you it? I say they must. For not to mention
that Gentlemen have generally a greater share of Fortune and Sense too, than
those of vulgar Condition; not to mention this I say, if they had nothing to
plead but their Quality, they ought to be regarded upon that Score, because the
State sets a value upon it, and that for public and considerable Reasons.


Philot. I perceive if a Man will but stay and hear you out, you are civil
enough at the last. Pray what are we to do next?


Philal. Why, now I could run a Discourse with you upon the inconveniences of
Pride: and snew you in particular, what an unconquerable Aversion it gives all
Mankind against us, when we are overgrown with it. How it multiplies, and
conceals our Defects from us, and makes us do a thousand silly things, without
taking notice of them. How it makes us a Prey to Flatterers, and puts us to
great Expenses only to be laughed at. I might debate with you, how it spoils
Conversation, and takes away the pleasure of Society. How often Families,
Kingdoms, and Churches are embroiled, and the World turned topsiturvy by this
Vice. These and many other ill consequences of Pride might be enlarged upon;
but this part of the Argument is, I conceive, more proper for Divines, and
therefore I shall pursue it no farther.


Philot. Well moved! For now I think it is almost time to give over.


Philal. I will not tire you.


Your humble Servant.

THE CONTENTS.
SOme mistakes concerning Conversation removed Page 3 The Grounds of Pride
enquired into, and shown to be founded in Self-Love, and why p. 5 The due
bounds of Self-Love briefly examined p. 6, 7 Pride described, 1. By way of
Negation p. 8 2. The Positive marks of it are laid down p. 13 The principal
pretenses to this Vice, viz. Learning, Nobility, Wealth, Power, and Beauty p.
17 The pretenses of Learning considered p. 18 The Office of Curates generally
misunderstood; the mistakes about it rectified p. 31 The depressing their
Character, and streitning them in point of Maintenance, of ill Consequence to
Religion p. 35 The case of Nobility considered p. 51 Nobility divided into
Hereditary or Acquired p. 53 The Privileges of Antiquity examined p. 57
Families generally raised either by Commerce, Arms, or Learning p. 66 The
pretenses of Commerce inquired into, where likewise those of Wealth, are
occasionally handled p. 66, 69 The Merit of Arms debated p. 70 The Advantages
of Learning, and Arms compared p. 73 The Plea of Beauty argued, and that of
Acquired Nobility p. 79 The difference between Pride and Magnanimity p. 86 The
just Advantages of Nobility p. 88 Some of the unhappy Consequences of Pride
hinted. p. 89
THE END.

