The Magistrates Monitor: OR, Several Considerations and Observations Upon the
ACT against SEDITIOUS CONVENTICLES.
Humbly offered to the serious Consideration of all Judges, Justices of the
Peace, and other inferior Officers, concerned in the Prosecution of Protestant
Dissenters.
And submitted to the Judgment of all Conforming and Nonconforming PROTESTANTS
FOrasmuch as the aforesaid Act, has been, and still is, vigorously Prosecuted
against the Protestant Dissenters, to the very great damage of many good
Families, who are His Majesty's peaceable Subjects, of whom it may be truly
said, There is no matters against them, except it be concerning the Law of
their God, as it was said heretofore concerning Daniel.

Therefore in order to a better understanding of the aforesaid Act, let the
several particulars thereof be warily and soberly considered, with some
Observations upon it.

First, Consider the Title of the said Act, which is called. An Act to prevent
and suppress Seditious Conventicles. Now it is well known that Titles of Acts
are as keys to open the said Acts, and by the Title of the aforesaid Act it
do^^ plainly appear, that any Assembly or every gathering together of People,
is not intended by the King and Parliament, but such Assembly as in express
words is mentioned, viz. Seditious Conventicles, and therefore whosoever
stretches the Law beyond the express words thereof agreeable to sound Reason
will not only abuse His Majesty's Subjects, but the Law also, and instead of
looking on the Law as a rule to walk by, make it an Engine of Ruin; therefore
let these words, Seditious Conventicles, be well inquired into, least they be
applied unto such Meetings of His Majesty's Subjects as are not guilty thereof,
especially considering that in Ages past, such have been charged with Sedition,
when they were innocent of such a Crime, as may be seen in the Holy Scriptures;
when the Jews went about to build the Walls of Jerusalem, and the House of
their God, Rehum the Chancellor and Shimshai the Scribe (or Secretary) wrote to
the great King Artaxerxes, charging them with Rebellion and Sedition, and they
called Jerusalem the Rebellious and bad City, see Ezra 4. 9, 12, 15. And the
blessed Apostle Paul, when he stood before most noble Faelix, a certain Orator
named Tertullus vehemently accused Paul that he was a pestilent Fellow and a
mover of Sedition, pray see Acts 24. 1, 5. Whereas Paul did but Preach the way
of Salvation to any number of People that would Assemble together and hear the
Blessed Doctrine of the Gospel; and this is the practice that the Dissenting
Protestants desire to follow, and therefore let it be soberly inquired into,

1 Whether any number of people quietly and solemnly Assembled together to
Preach and hear Salvation by the blessed Merits of Christ, and a holy
Conversation according to the Holy Scriptures, can be indeed and in truth a
Seditious Conventicle.

2 Whether the aforesaid matters ( viz. Preaching and hearing of Salvation by
the blessed Merits of Christ, and a holy Conversation according to the Holy
Scriptures) be not the constant practice of the Protestant Dissenters in all
their Meetings? if any should say they cannot tell whether this be their
practice, because they do not go to any of their Meetings, let such take heed
they do not lay other things to their charge, they being ignorant of their
Meetings: and let such as daily attend their Meetings be witness of the truth
of these things either for them, or against them as they will answer it before
the God of Heaven and Earth.

And therefore from the Title of this Act, these things being considered, these
Observations are humbly proposed:

Observe. 1. That such Meetings of People as have no seditious speeches nor
seditious practices, are not Seditious Conventicles.

Observe. 2. That Protestant Dissenters, Promoting the Protestant Religion in
their Meetings, ( viz. Faith in a Crucified Christ, Repentance for Sin against
God, and a godly Life in this World) ought not to be charged with Seditious
Conventicles.

Observe. 3. That such as cannot be proved guilty of Seditious Meetings, ought
not to be Prosecuted by the aforesaid Act.

Secondly, Consider the good design of the aforesaid Act, and that is, To
provide Remedy against the growing and dangerous practices of SEDITIOUS
Sectaries, and other DISLOYAL Persons, who under pretense of Tender Consciences
have or may at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, page 1.

From this part of the Act, these things are to be observed:

Observe. 1. That Seditious Sectaries and other Disloyal Persons, are the only
Offenders intended by this Act, and the Protestant Dissenters do abhor to be
such, and can comfortably appeal to God and the King, they are not such; and
have given sufficient Demonstration of this matter, by a peaceable subjection
to his Government in all parts of England, in paying all Taxes levied by Law,
and in a patient suffering for Conscience Sake, being many times in Prison, and
have suffered the loss of their Goods.

Observe. 2. Furthermore it is declared by this Act, That the Persons intended
as Offenders, are such who at their Meetings CONTRIVE INSURRECTIONS; Now all
the Protestant Dissenters will with one voice say, Him or them that are thus
guilty, let them suffer according to this or any other Law; but it is denied
that they are at all guilty of this horrid Crime.

Observe. 3. That as their Meetings are and have for a long time been public
(and they desire they may be so still) they are not in a Capacity to Contrive
Insurrections, for as much as all sorts of people, Women as well as Men, Young
People as well as Old, may come among them, and see and hear all that they do;
and such as do attend the Dissenters Meetings day after day for a long time,
who are not joined with them in their particular fellowship, can witness for
them that in all their Meetings they concern themselves only with matters of
godly instructions, and not at all with Disloyal Consultations. Now if any
should be so disingenious as to remember and repeat that desperate Insurrection
by Venner's Party in the year -- 60. and so reflect upon and Reproach the
Protestant Dissenters in general, it is humbly desired they would Consider
these few following things: 1. That Action was done but by a few Men, about
thirty was the whole number. 2. That Action and practice was and is detested by
the Protestant Dissenters in all parts of England. 3. They that were guilty of
that bloody Crime, have suffered the punishments of the Law. 4. Consider that
it is not fair dealing to charge a people in general, for the folly and madness
of a few; it is well known that many of the Members of the Church of England
are frequently guilty of horrid Crimes against the Peace of their Sovereign
Lord the King, as also against the God of Heaven and Earth, viz. Robbing upon
the Highways, breaking open Houses in Towns and Cities, and many horrid
Murders, for which they are Hanged; but it would be very abominable to charge
these abominable practices upon the Church of England; or suppose any
Courtiers, Lawyers, Clergymen, or Magistrates, should by the instigations of
the Devil be led into high Crimes against the King and Government, it would be
high injustice to charge or reflect upon all persons of such Ranks and Degrees,
as being concerned with such horrid Crimes: Therefore let men learn that
blessed* Doctrine of Christ, viz. Do unto others as you would they should do
unto you.

The third particular in the aforesaid Act to be considered, viz. The Persons
who are to be punished, and they are all persons of the Age of Sixteen years,
or upwards, being Subjects of this Realm, who shall be present at any Assembly,
Conventicle, or Meeting, under Color or Pretense of any exercise of Religion,
in other manner than according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of
England, they being in number five or more, besides the Family or Household; and
if it be in a place where there is no Family inhabiting, then the number of
five or more are deemed Offenders. From hence observe these things:

Observe. 1. That such whom this Act accounts Offenders, are they which meet
and assemble together under Col^ur and PRETENSE of exercise of Religion; which
words supposes that the exercise of Religion, is but pretended, and some bad
design is Resolved, v^z. Contriving Insurrect^ons as aforesaid, and so to
color that design, make a show of Religion, but this is not the practice of
the Dissenting Protestants, they do not design any other things then the Real
Performance of Religion in sincerity of heart, to promote godliness among
themselves and others, that God may be served, and they may be saved, according
to the Precepts and Promises in the blessed Gospel of Christ.

Observe. 2. The Persons accounted Offenders are such as thus under pretense,
exercise Religion in OTHER MANNER than according to the Liturgy and Practice of
the Church of England; now these words, in other manner, may be fairly
understood such exercise of Religion as is directly contrary and opposite to
the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, in the main and substantial
parts thereof; but that exercise of Religion which is agreeable to, and
corresponds with the practice of the Church of England, in the main and
substantial parts thereof, may be truly said to be according to it; every small
variation must not be counted a Contradiction: For the Church of England does
vary in some things from each other in their exercise of Religion; in some
places they have Organs, and in some they have none, in some they have Singing
Men and Singing Boys, and in otherplaces they have none.

Observe. 3. That this Act does not declare it to be a Crime if any Assembly of
people have not the Book called the Liturgy among them, or because they do not
Read it in their Assembly, but it does require that the exercise of Religion
among them should be according to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of
England; and therefore let the exercise of Religion in the Church of England,
and among the Protestant Dissenters, be well considered and compared together,
and then we shall see whether it be contradictious or* Harmnious in the main
and substantial parts. 1. The exercise of Religion in the Liturgy, and as it is
practiced in the Church of England, does consist of Prayers to Almighty God, in
the name of Jesus Christ his only Son, for Spiritual and Temporal Blessings;
and this is the practice of the Protestant Dissenters in their Meetings; and
the Church of England does use Extempory Prayers as well as the Dissenters. 2
The Church of England in the exercise of Religion, does give Thanks to God for
Mercies Received, and so do the Protestant Dissenters in their Meetings. 3. The
Church of England does instruct Souls from the Holy Scriptures, viz. From the
Law of M^ses, from the Prophets; and from the Epistles and Gospels, and this is
the practice of the Protestant Dissenters in their Meetings, for which they are
Prosecuted. 4. The exercise of Religion in the Church of England is performed
in English, and so it is among the Protestant Dissenters, that all persons may
hear and understand what they say. 5. The Church of England does not allow
praying to the Virgin Mary, nor prayers for Souls in Purgatory, but denies a
Purgatory; they allow but of two Sacraments, viz. Baptism and the Lords Sapper,
they also allow the Cup as well as the Bread to the Lay People in Remembering
the Death of their Redeemer; these things are the principles and practice of
the Protestant Dissenters. 6. The Church of England has declared in her
Articles of Religion, that the visible Church of Christ is a company of
faithful men in which the pure Word of God is Preached, and the Sacraments be
duly ministered, according to Christ's Ordinance in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same, see Article 19. The Protestant Dissenters
profess and declare the very same Principle. 7. The Church of England
declares, that it is not lawful for the Church to Ordain any thing that is
contrary to Gods Word written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture
repugnant to another, see Article 20. This is also solemnly Prosessed by the
Protestant Dissenters.

Observe. 4. That if any Dissenters should have the Liturgy of the Church of
England, and read it all over in their, Meetings, and should mingle Sedition
with, or contrive Insurrections against the Government, that Service Book would
not save them from the punishments provided in the aforesaid Act, because then
they would be Seditious Conventicles, not withstanding the Serv^^^-Book.

Observe. 5. That such as really and visibly perform the exercise of Relig^^^ in
praying to God, praising of God, Hearing and Preaching the Word God, ought not
to be punished by the aforesaid Act, for as much as the^^ things are according
to the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England.

Fourth particular to be considered in the aforesaid Act, is, The manner way of
proceedings against the Offenders mentioned in the said Act, vi^* any Justice
of Peace or chief Magistrate where such Offense aforesaid shall be Committed,
are required and enjoined upon Oath of two Witnesses, or the Confession of the
Party, or Notorious Evidence of the Fact, to make Record of every such Offense
under his Hand and Seal, which shall be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full
and perfect Conviction; and thereupon the said Justice or Magistrate shall
impose on every such Offender so Convict, as aforesaid, the Fine of Five
Shillings for such first Offense; which Record and Conviction shall be
certified by the said Justice, or chief Magistrate at the next Quarter Sessions
of the Peace, for the County or Place where the Offense was committed. From
this part of the Act, observe these things:

Observe. 1. That Justices or chief Magistrates are not bound to make it their
own business to hunt after such Coventicles, but if proof be made to them of
such Meetings, then they are empowered and required to convict such Offenders.

Observe. 2. That one way or another, substantial Proof must be made of the
Offense and Offenders, viz. either Confession of the Party, or Oath of two
Witnesses, or Notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact. Now these words,
Notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact, must be some thing or things
that are equivalent with Confession of the Party, or Oath of Witnesses. It is
not every Justice or Constable thinking, supposing, or dreaming that there are
such Meetings, but it must be Notorious Evidence of the Fact.

Observe. 3. That though a Justice may Convict and Fine the Sum of Five
Shillings for the first Offense, yet here is no direction given to make
Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods and Chattels for the first Offense,
but a Record must be made of the Offense and Offender, and certified to the
next Quarter Sessions.

Fifth Particular to be considered, is, The Offenders repeating the Offense.
And if such Offender shall again commit the like Offense, and be thereof
Convict as in manner aforesaid, then he shall be Fined the Sum of Ten
Shillings, which Fine and Fines for the first and every such Offense, shall be
levied by Distress, and Sale of the Offenders Goods. And in case of the Poverty
of the said Offender, upon the Goods and Chattels of any other Offender who
shall be then Convict in manner aforesaid, so as the Sum do not amount to ab^^^
the Sum of Ten pounds. From hence observe these things:

Observe. 1. That upon the second Offense, a Distress may be made upon the
Offenders Goods and Chattels, for the first as well as for the second Offense.

Observe. 2. That it is somewhat strange, That one Man should suffer for the
Fault of another; yea, one Man for the Faults of a great many.

Observe. 3. That Justices had need be careful that there is so many Persons
Convict, whose Five or Ten Shillings does amount to the Sum of Ten Pounds, if
they levy the Sum of Ten Pounds upon any one Man for the default of others, and
that they be sure such are not able to pay their Five or Ten Shillings Fines.

Sixth Particular to be considered. It is also provided by the aforesaid Act,
That such Officers as go to make Distress upon the Goods and Chattels of the
Offenders; shall have a Warrant under the Hands and Seals of some Justice of
the Peace, or Chief Magistrate so to do, and the money levied to be forthwith
delivered to the same Justice or Chief Magistrate, and so by them to be
distributed one third part to the use of the King, the other third part to the
Poor of the Parish, and the other third part to the Informers, and to such
persons as the said Justice of Peace shall appoint, having regard to their
diligence and industry in discovering and dispersing, and punishing such
Conventicles. From hence observe these things:

Observe. 1. That though Persons be Convict, yet Constables have no power to
make Distress upon any man's Goods, without a Warrant under the Hand and Seal of
some Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate.

Observe. 2. That when Constables have a Warrant to make Distress, this Act does
not empower them to break open any man's door, that so they may take away his
Goods; neither does it require them to lurk about Men's houses, to find
opportunity that they may surprise Men's houses, and therefore they being
Officers of the Peace, ought to depart in Peace.

Observe. 3. That such Officers must be sure that when they make Distress, it be
upon the Offenders own Goods, and not the Goods of other men, which may be in
the Offenders hands, lest they meet with such trouble as they may not easily
defend by Law.

Observe. 4. That the third part of such Fines may be given to the diligent
Assisters, as well as to the Informers; so that the Informers may have but poor
wages, if the Justices should appoint any other persons to be helpful in the
same work, and the third part of Fines distributed as aforesaid.

Seventh particular to be considered in the aforesaid Act, is, The penalty of
every person who shall take upon him to Preach or Teach in any such Meetings,
Assembly or Conventicle, and be Convicted as aforesaid: Shall forfeit for every
such first Offense, the Sum of Twenty Pounds; and if such Offender, shall at
any time again Commit the like Offense, and be Convicted thereof in manner
aforesaid, shall incur the Penalty of Forty Pounds, to be levied and disposed
as aforesaid, and his name and Habitation not known, or is fled and cannot be
found, or in the judgment of the Justice or chief Magistrate thought unable to
pay, then they may levy the same by Warrant upon the Goods and Chattels of any
such persons, who shall be present at the same Conventicle.

From hence Observe,

Observe. 1. That to Preach or Teach in any Meeting, is not a Crime to be
punished by this Act; But to Preach or Teach, in any such Meetings, Assembly or
Conventicle; which words* such Meetings, is to be referred to what is
aforesaid, viz. A Seditious Meeting, and that contriveth Insurrections, and so
it must be understood of Preaching Seditious Doctrine, and fomenting or
promoting Insurrections against His Majesty's Government, and Preaching such
things as are not at all consistent with the Doctrine of the Church of England.

Observe. 2. That such as meet peaceably together without doing any harm to the
Persons of His Majesty's Subjects, and whose Preachers Teach Repentance for
Sin, Faith in Christ, the fear of God, and honoring the King suitable to a
right fearing of God, and love to their Neighbors, ought not to be Prosecuted
or punished by this Act, for as much as this Doctrine is according to the
Doctrine of the Church of England.

Eight particular to be considered, is the penalty of those that admit and
entertain wittingly and willingly such Meetings or unlawful Assemblies
aforesaid in his or her house, out-house, Barn, Yard, or backside, shall
forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds, to be levied in manner aforesaid, and in case
of Poverty of the Person, then to be levied upon the Goods and Chattels of such
Persons as shall be Convicted of being present at the same Conventicle.

From hence observe,

Observe. 1. That such only are Offenders by this Act, as admit and entertain
such* unlawful* Assemblies as aforesaid, viz. Seditious, and Contriving
Insurrections*

Observe. 2. That but one Twenty Pounds as a penalty or forfeit, is mentioned
for the wittingly suffering such a Meeting, it is not said Twenty Pounds for
the first Offense; and if they shall again commit the like Offense, then the
same, or a greater Sum they shall forfeit for every such Offense, as it is
expressed in the Hearer or Preacher's Offense.

Ninth Particular to be considered, Provided also, That in all Cases of this
Act, where the Penalty shall exceed the Sum of Ten Shillings, and such Offender
shall find himself agrieved, it shall and may be lawful for him within one week
after the Penalty shall be paid or levied, to appeal in writing from the
Justice convicting, to the judgment of the Justices of the Peace in their next
Quarter Sessions, whereupon such Offender may plead, and make defense, and have
his Trial by a Jury thereupon, provided always, that every such Appeal shall be
left with the person or persons convicting, as aforesaid, and the Appellant to
enter into Recognizance to prosecute with effect. From hence observe:

Observe. 1. That the Lawmakers did foresee, and were apprehensive of some
damage and injury that might sometimes happen to some of His Majesty's
Subjects, by the ill prosecution of this Act, through a misunderstanding
thereof by the Prosecutors.

Observe. 2. That the best and most legal way to determine Offencest against the
Law in matters between the King and the Subject, and between Man and Man, is by
Juries of wise and honest Men; and therefore the King and Parliament by this
Act, has not given the whole and sole determining of the Cases therein
contained, to any Justice of Peace, or Chief Magistrate.

Tenth Particular to be considered, It is further provided by the Authority
aforesaid, That Justices of the Peace, and Chief Magistrates respectively, or
the Constables, Head-Boroughs, and Tything-Men, by Warrant from the said
Justices, or Chief Magistrate respectively, shall and may take with them such
Aid and Force as they shall think fit, to break open and enter any House, or
other place, after Refusal, or Denial. And that the Lieutenants, or
Deputy Lieutenants, or any Commissionated Officer of the Militia, or other of
His Majesty's Forces off Horse and Foot, and also the Sheriffs, and other
Magistrates and Ministers o Justice, or any of them jointly or severally, on
Certificate made to them respectively under the Hand and Seal of any one
Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate, of his particular Information, or
knowledge of such unlawful Meeting or Conventicle held, or to be held, shall,
by the best means they can, dissolve, dissipate, or prevent all such unlawful
Meetings, and take into their Custody such Persons as they shall think fit, to
the intent they may be proceeded against according to this Act. From hence
observe:

Observe. 1. That Constables and other Officers are not bound nor required to go
to such Meetings, without Warrants from some Justice or Chief Magistrate.

Observe. 2. That the AID and FORCE to assist them, are not to be imposed upon
them, but such as are called and chosen by them, as they shall think fit.

Observe. 3. That Officers have no power to make a FORCIBLE ENTRY into any house
or place, without first a DENIAL or REFUSAL of Entrance, which therefore ought
first to be fairly demanded.

Observe. 4. That the Officers must first be sure that it is such a Meeting or
Conventicle as is aforesaid, viz. Seditious, and that contriveth Insurrections.

Observe. 5. That whereas Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Sheriffs,
Commissionated Officers of the Militia, and other His Majesty's Forces of Horse
and Foot, and other Magistrates jointly or severally are mentioned to assist in
this work of preventing and suppressing such Meetings, they are not to run in
this work of their own ACCORD, but he called thereunto by CERTIFICATE, under
the Hands and Seals of some Justice or Chief Magistrate.

Observe. 6. That such Certificate must proceed from some particular Information
given to such Justice, or from his own certain knowledge of such Meetings held,
or to be held, that so the Country may not be put to trouble, and His
Majesty's Subjects amazed without just cause.

Observe. 7. Magistrates, and other Officers, had need remember and consider,
that there is an Act of Parliament since this against Conventicles, which
forbids the Execution of any Writ, Warrant, Process, Order, Judgment or
Decree, upon the LORD'S DAY, except in Cases of Treason, Felony, or Breach of
the Peace.

If any shall presume to say, That the peaceable Meetings of Protestant
Dissenters, (who spend their time in praying to the God of Peace, for the Peace
of their own Souls, and the Peace of the Realm, and that Preach the Gospel of
Peace, whereby the best Peace is maintained in Families, Cities and Kingdoms)
is a Breach of the Public Peace of this Kingdom, it may be safely concluded,
that such Men do not well understand God's Law, nor the King's Law.

Eleventh Particular to be considered, is the Prosecution of the aforesaid Act
against a Peer of this Realm who is an Offender; Provided, That no Peer of this
Realm shall have his House searched, where he or his Wife shall be then
Resident, but by immediate Warrant from His Majesty under His Sign Manual, or
in the presence of the Lieutenant, or Deputy-Lieutenant, or two Justices of the
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, of the same County or Riding.

Observe. This part of the Act shows the difference between the prosecuting of
a Peer, and a Commoner. A Peers House cannot be searched without an immediate
Warrant from the King, or the presence of the Lieutenant, or Deputy-Lieutenant,
or two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, and no mention
made of breaking open of a Peers doors; but a Commoner may have his doors broke
open by Constables, if they have a Warrant from one Justice of the Peace, and
be denied Entrance, they knowing there is such a Conventicle, as aforesaid.

Twelfth Particular to be considered, is the default of Constables, and other
Officers; That if any Constable, Head-Borough, Tything-Man, Churchwarden or
Over-Seer of the Poor, who shall know, or be credibly informed of any such
Meetings or Conventicles held wiehin his Precincts, Parish or Limits, and shall
not give Information thereof to some Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate,
and endeavor the Conviction of the Parties; or if any person lawfully called in
Aid of the aforesaid Officers, shall wilfully and wittingly omit the
performance of his Duty, in the Execution of this Act, and be thereof Convict,
in manner aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such Offense the Sum of Five
Pounds, to be levied upon his Goods and Chattels, as aforesaid. From this part
of the Act observe these things:

Observe. 1. That Constables and other Officers, are to have CERTAIN KNOWLEDGE
of such Meetings, before they proceed to prosecute this Law against them.

Observe. 2. That this knowledge must be such, as may reach to the Conviction of
the Offender; and therefore they must SO know, as they may be able to SWEAR
matter of Fact expressed in this Act.

Observe. 3. That they cannot SO know of the aforesaid Meetings, with out they
be present there, and take notice who it is that Preaches, and the matter that
is Preached, whether it be Seditious, and promoteth Insurrections.

Observe. 4. That this Act does not require the aforesaid Officers to make it
their Business, to seek out and hunt after such Meetings, so as to neglect
their own being at Church to hear the Word of God, for the welfare of their own
Souls.

Observe. 5. For want of knowledge the Officers are required to proceed upon
credible Information, not every or any kind of Information, but credible
Information, and that is, such as this Act Requires, viz. The Oath of two
Witnesses before a Justice of the Peace or chief Magistrate.

Observe. 6. That if after all this, the aforesaid Officers shall willingly and
wittingly omit their Duty and be convict, as in manner aforesaid, then they
shall forfeit for every such Offense, the Sum of Five Pound, to be levied upon
their Goods and Chattels, and disposed of in manner aforesaid.

Observe. 7. That the Officers must be Convict of their Offense as aforesaid,
and that is by the Oath of two Witnesses.

Thirteenth particular to be considered, is the fault and punishment mentioned
in this Act of the Justices or Chief Magistrate, If they shall wilfully and
wittingly omit their Duty in the Execution of this Act, then the Justices or
Chief Magistrate shall forfeit the Sum of one hundred Pounds; the one moity to
the use of the Kings Majesty, the other moity to the use of the Informer, to be
Recovered by Action, Suit, Bill, or Plaint, in any of His Majesty's Courts at
Westminster.

From hence Observe,

Observe. 1. That but one hundred Pound is mentioned as the forfeit of a Justice
or Chief Magistrate, it is not said for every such Offense or if at any time
such Justice shall again Commit the like Offense, he shall forfeit one hundred
Pounds, as it is expressed in the Offenses of the Meeters and Officers.

Observe. 2. That the said one hundred Pounds is not to be levied upon the Goods
and Chattels of the said Justice of Peace or Chief Magistrate; but it must be
Recovered by Action, Suit, Bill, or Plaint, in any of His Majesty's Courts at
Westminster; where such Justice or Chief Magistrate thus informed against, and
Prosecuted, will have the great Benefit of a Company of their fellow Subjects
called good men and true, viz. A Jury, to hear and Determine the whole matter,
who will without doubt inquire whether the Meetings informed against were for
godly Instruction, or whether they were Seditious Conventicles to contrive
Insurrections, or such Meetings as are inconsistent with the practice of the
Church of England.

Observe. 3. That if upon proof of such Meetings, the one hundred Pounds be
Recovered, then it is to be divided between the King and the Informer.

Observe. 4. That the poor of the Parish is quite shut out from having any
Benefit of the said hundred Pounds. But let us now proceed to the

Fourtenth particular to be considered in this Act, That if any person be sued
for putting in Execution any of the powers contained in this Act, otherwise
then upon Appeal allowed by this Act, such person shall plead the General
Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence; and if the Plantiff be
Nonsuit, or a Verdict pass for the Defendant, or if the Plantiff discontinue
his Action; or if upon Demurrer judgment be given for the Defendant, every such
Defendant shall have his full ^^eble costs. From this part of the Act, observe
these things:

Observe. 1. That such as put in Execution the powers contained in this Act, may
be sued for the same otherwise then by Appeal allowed by this Act, viz. by
other Laws.

Observe. 2. That such person so sued, may plead the general issue, and give the
special matter in Evidence, and that is the particular Crimes expressed in this
Act, viz. Seditious Conventicles Contriving Insurrections.

Observe. 3. If the Plantiff be Nonsuit, or discontinue his Action, or if a
Verdict pass for the Defendant, or upon Demurrer judgment be given for the
Defendant, every such Defendant shall have his treble costs.

Observe. 4. That such as will venture a Trial at Law with the Dissenting
Protestants as the Transgressors of this Act, in hopes to have treble costs,
may meet with a great disappointment, if there be a wise and honest Jury, who
understand Law and good Reason.

Fifteenth particular to be considered in the aforesaid Act; That all Clauses
therein Contained, shall be construed most largly and beneficially for the
suppressing of Conventicles, and for the encouragement of all persons to be
employed in the Execution thereof.

From hence observe these things:

Observe. 1. That these large expressions are not a license to commit violence
either upon the Persons or the Goods of any of His Majesty's Subjects contrary
to other Laws, especially that Law called Magna Charta.

Observe. 2. That if any persons under pretense of Prosecuting this Act, should
commit violence, viz. should Wound or Beat any of His Majesty's peaceable
Subjects, may be Indicted for a Riot; or if they should kill any of them, such
Prosecutors may be Indicted for Murder; or if they should violently Break open
men's Houses to force away their Goods, such may be Indicted of Felony,
notwithstanding the large and beneficial construing of the aforesaid Act.

Observe. 3. The best way to escape harm, is not to do harm; and therefore the
Prosecutors of this and another Laws, had need take heed that they do not run
upon strange Interpretations, but act according to the plain expressions in the
Law.

Sixteenth particular to be considered; That in case any person offending
against this Act, shall be an inhabitant in any other. County or Corporation,
or fly into any other County or Corporation, after the Offense Committed, The
Justice or Chief-Magistrate that Convicted the aforesaid person, shall Certify
the same under his Hand and Seal, to any Justice or Chief Magistrate of such
other County or Corporation; which said Justice or Chief Magistrate is hereby
Authorized and required to levy the Penalty or Penalties in this Act mentioned.

From hence it does plainly appear, that though an Offender be an Inhabitant in
some other County or Corporation, yet he ought to suffer the penalty of the Law
himself, if he be able, and can be found, and therefore a Justice or chief
Magistrate ought not to levy such an ones Fines upon any other persons.

Seventeenth particular to be considered; That no person shall be punished for
any Offense against this Act, unless such an Offender be Prosecuted for the
same within three months after the Offense Committed, and that no person who
shall be punished for any Offenses by virtue of this Act, shall be punished for
the same Offense by virtue of any other Act or Law whatsoever.

From hence Observe,

Observe. 1. That no Offender of this Act can be Prosecuted by this Act after
three months, from the time of the Offense Committed.

Observe. 2. This Act supposes there be other Laws against the same Offenses
mentioned in this Act.

Observe. 3. That such as are punished by this Law for the Offenses therein
mentioned, are freed from the punishments provided by other Laws for such
Offenses.

Eighteenth particular to be considered; That every Alderman of London shall
have the same power and authority within London, and the Liberties thereof,
(for the examining convicting and punishing of all Offenses within this Act
Committed within London which any Justice of Peace has by this Act in any
County of England, and shall be subject to the penalties and punishments for
not doing that which by this Act is directed to be done by any Justice of Peace
in England.

Observe. 1. That every Alderman of London, whether past the Chair or not, is
empowered by this Act to act as a Justice of the Peace, in Examining,
Convicting, and Punnishing all Offenses against this Act, committed within
London.

Observe. 2. That forasmuch as all the Aldermen of the City of London are not
Justices of the peace, so as to act in all Cases of the Laws in general,
therefore he that has only a power to act by this Law, had need take the
greater care, that he do not Act, contrary to the Rules* and Directions,
plainly Expressed in the aforesaid Act, viz. That he does not prosecute godly
meetings* instead of Seditious meetings: nor prosecute quiet and peaceable
meetings, as if they were contrivers of insurrections.

Ninteenth particular to be considered, in the aforesaid Act That if a
Femecovert, cohabiting with her husband be the offender, and be eonvict as
before said the penalties of Five and Ten shillings, shall be levied upon the
Goods and Chattles of the Husband.

Observe. That no higher then Ten shillings fine, can be imposed upon a wife
living with her husband, the sum of Ten Pounds cannot be imposed and levied
upon the Husbands goods and Chattles for the offense of other persons.

Twentieth particular. Provided that no Peer of this Realm shall be attached or
imprisoned by virtue or force of this Act.

Observe. This is some kind of favor to the person of a Peer, more then to the
person of a Commoner, as is also Extended to the house of a Peer, in another
part of this Act.

One and twentieth particular to be considered, That neither this Act, nor any
thing contained therein, shall Extend to invalidate or avoid his Majesty's
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs.

Observe. From hence it does appear, that the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, were very careful to preserve the Supremacy or Power of his Majesty
in Ecclesiastical affairs, and therefore none ought to improve, stretch, or
strain any Expressions in this Act, so as to entrench upon that Power of the
King, as may be more fully understood in the following and concluding words of
this Act.

Two and twentieth particular. But that His Majesty and his Heirs and
Successors, may from time to time, at all times hereafter, Exercise and Enjoy
all Powers and Authorities, in Ecclesiastical affairs, as fully and as amply as
himself, or any of his Predecessors have, or might have done the same, any
thing in this Act notwithstanding. From hence observe,

Observe. 1. That this Act does own and allow his Majesty has Power and
Authority in Ecclesiastical Affairs.

Observe. 2. That his Majesty may from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
Exercise this his power and authority, in Ecclesiastical affairs, as fully and
as amply as himself, or any of his Predecessors, have or might have done. Now
this power of his Majesty, is not only a power to bestow and confer
Ecclesiastical Dignities and Preferments on whomsoever his Majesty shall think
sit; but it is also a power of abating, restraning, or suspending the severity
of procedings, in respect to matters of Conscience, which his Majesty, was
graciously pleased to declare, as his Royal mind, in his Declaration from Breda
April 4. 14. 1660. in these very words, We do declare a liberty to tender
Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted, or called in question for
differences of opinion, in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the peace
of the Kingdom; and that We shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliment, as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to Us, for the full
grantiog that Indulgence.

But besides this Royal Promise of his Majesty from Breda, and since the Act
against seditious Conventicles has been made, and too fiercely prosecuted
against the Protestant Dissenters, His Majesty was graciously pleased, to take
into his Princely compassionate consideration, the severities his loving
subjects had long labored and groaned under, and therefore did assert and
resolve the exercise of his power, in Ecclesiastical matters, as may be
plainly seen in His Majestyes Declaration to all his loving Subjects, published
by the advice of his Privy Council, March 15: 1676. in these very words, page 1.

But it being evident, by the sad experience of twelve years, that there is
very little fruit of all those forceable courses, We think Our Self obliged to
make use of that supreme power in Ecclesiastical matters, which is not only
inherent in Us, but has been declared and Recognized to be so, by several
Statutes and Acts of Parliament; and therefore We do issue this Our Declaration
as well for the quieting the minds of Our good Subjects in these points, as for
inviting strangers in this conjuncture to come and live under us, and for the
better encouragement of all to a cheerful following their Trade and Callings,
from whence we hope by the blessing of God to have many good and happy
advantages to our Government.

And in page 5. of the aforesaid Declaration the King is pleased to declare as
follows.

We do in the next place declare Our will and pleasure to be, That the
Execution of all and all manner of Penal Laws in matters Ecclesiastical,
against whatsoever sort of Nonconformists or Recusants, be immediately
suspended, and they are suspended; and all Judges, Judges of Assiize and
Jail-deliver, Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other
Officers whatsoever, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, are to take notice of it,
and pay due obedience thereunto.

And besides all this, the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, did
lately take into their wise consideration the distresses of many of His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, who to their great damage had greatly suffered
by the prosecution of the 36 Elizabeth, and had prepared a Bill to free His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects from being prosecuted by that Law; but that Bill
unhappyly miscarried, and came not to His Majesty's hand, and so* His Majesty
missed of the opportunity to make a great performance of what he had so long
ago promised at Breda, to give his Royal Assent by consent of Parliament, to
such Acts as might be for relieving his Subjects of Tender conscience.

Therefore to conclude, let these few things be soberly inquired into.

1. Whether the Protestant Dissenters have not now as much need of liberty of
conscience, as when His Majesty did promise it from Breda?

2. Whether the granting liberty of conscience now, will not be as much for the
encouraging of strangers to come under His Majesty's government, and for the
quieting the minds of his Majesty's Subjects, as also for the encouragement of
Trade in the whole Kingdom, as when his Majesty declared an indulgence to all
sorts of his Protestant Subjects in the year Seventy One?

3. Whether it is not more Feizable now, seeing the Lords and Commons lately
assembled in Parliament, were willing to walk in this good path, which his
Majesty so long ago showed his willingness to lead them?

4. Whether the Succoring and Protecting of the Persecuted French Protestants
and Prosecuting of English Protestants, does harmonize and agree together?

5. Whether Protestants Persecuting of Protestants in England* (...) the best
way to convince the French Papists of their Sin in Persecuting the Protestants
in France?

6. Whether the Conforming Protestants in England, if they (...) faithful to
Protestant Principles, will not suffer the same miseries, ( vi^ ^^^nging and
Burning, as the Nonconforming-Protestants may) if ever (...) should get
uppermost in England?

7. Whether it be not best for all such as are in danger of (...) ^ bloody
Enemy, to live together, and love one another as Brethren?

London, Printed for Richard Janeway, 1682.


