Imprimatur.

Guil. Needham Rmo in Christo Patri ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a sacr.
Domest.
Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Iul. 2. 1686.
A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF THE Real Presence OF THE Body and Blood of CHRIST In the
Celebration of the HOLY EUCHARIST: WHEREIN The Witty Artifices of the Bishop of
Meaux and of Monsieur Maimbourg are obviated, whereby they would draw in the
Protestants to embrace the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

John 6. v. 54, 63.

(...).

Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 17.

In sacra sua coena jubet me Christus sub Symbolis panis ac vini corpus ac
sanguinem suum sumere, manducare ac bibere. Nihil dubito quin and ipse vere
porrigat and ego recipiam. Tantum absurda rejicio quae aut coelesti illius
Majestate indigna, aut ab humanae ejus naturae veritate aliena esse, apparet.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1686.

A BRIEF DISCOURSE OF THE Real Presence.
CHAP. I.
1. The occasion of writing this Treatise. 2. The sense of the Church of
England touching Transubstantiation. 3. Three Passages in her Articles,
Liturgy and Homilies that seem to imply a Real Presence. 4. A yielding at
least for the present that the Church of England is for a Real Presence, but of
that Flesh and Blood of Christ which he discourses of in the sixth Chapter of
St. John's Gospel, though she be for a Real Absence of that which hung on the
Cross. 5. That our Savior himself distinguishes betwixt that Flesh and Blood
he bore about with him, and that he there so earnestly discourses of. 6. That
this Divine Food there discoursed of, the Flesh and Blood of Christ, is most
copiously to be fed upon in the Holy Eucharist, and that our Communion-Service
alludes to the same, nor does by such a Real Presence imply any
Transubstantiation.

1. THE occasion of writing this short Treatise was this. I observing the
Papers here in England, published in behalf of the Church of Rome, and for the
drawing off People from the Orthodox Faith of the Church of England, which
holds with the ancient pure Apostolic Church in the Primitive Times, before
that general Degeneracy of the Church came in, to drive at nothing more
earnestly, than the maintaining their grand Error touching the Eucharist, viz.
their Doctrine of Transubstantiation: Into which they would bring back the
Reformed Churches, by taking hold of some Intimations, or more open Professions
of theirs, of a Real Presence (though they absolutely deny the Roman Doctrine
of Transubstantiation) and thus entangling and ensnaring them in those free
professions touching that Mystery of the Eucharist, would by hard pulling hale
them into that rightfully relinquished Error, for which and several others,
they justly left the Communion of the Church of Rome: I thought it my duty so
far as my Age, and Infirmness of my Body will permit, to endeavor to extricate
the Reformation, and especially our Church of England from these Entanglements
with which these witty and cunning Writers would entangle Her, in Her
Concessions touching that mysterious Theory, and to show there is no clashing
betwixt her declaring against Transubstantiation and those Passages which seem
to imply a Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ at the Celebration of
the Holy Eucharist.

2. Concerning which, that we may the more clearly judge, we will bring into
view what She says touching them both. And as touching the former (Article 28.)
her words are these: Transubstantiation (or the change of the substance of
Bread and Wine in the Supper of the Lord) cannot be proved by Holy Writ, but it
is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, overthrows the nature of a
Sacrament, and has given occasion to many Superstitions. And in the latter
part of the Rubric at the end of the Communion-Service, She says, That the
Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very natural Substances, and
therefore may not be adored (for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all
faithful Christians) and the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are
in Heaven and not here, it being against the Truth of Christ's natural Body to
be at one time in more places than one. This is sufficiently express against
Transubstantiation.

3. Now those passages that seem to imply a Real Presence in the Eucharist are
these. In the abovenamed Article 28. The Body of Christ, says our Church, is
given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an Heavenly and Spiritual
manner. And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and eaten in the
Supper, is Faith. Against which our Adversaries suggest; that no Faith can make
us actually receive and eat that, which is God knows how far distant from us,
and that therefore we imply that the Body of Christ is really present in the
Eucharist. Another Passage occurs in our Catechism; where it is told us, That
the inward part of the Sacrament, or thing signified, is the Body and Blood of
Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the
Lord's Supper. Where [verily] and [indeed] seems to imply a Real Presence and
Participation of the Body and Blood of Christ. The last place shall be that in
the Homily, of worthy receiving and reverend esteeming of the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ. The words are these. But thus much we must be sure to
hold, that in the Supper of the Lord there is no vain Ceremony, no bare Sign,
no untrue Figure of a thing absent. But as the Scripture says, the Table of
the Lord, the Bread and Cup of the Lord, the Memory of Christ, the Annunciation
of his Death, yea the Communion of the Body and Blood of the Lord, in a
mavelous Incorporation, which by the Operation of the Holy Ghost (the very
bond of our conjunction with Christ) is through Faith wrought in the Souls of
the faithful. Whereby not only their Souls live to Eternal Life, but they
surely trust to win their Bodies a Resurrection to Immortality. And immediately
there is added, The true understanding of this Fruition and Union which is
betwixt the Body and the Head, betwixt the true Believers and Christ, the
ancient Catholic Fathers both perceiving themselves, and commending to their
people, were not afraid to call this Supper, some of them, the Salve of
Immortality, and sovereign Preservative against Death; others the Deifick
Communion, others the sweet Dainties of our Savior, the Pledge of Eternal
Health, the Defense of Faith, the Hope of the Resurrection; Others the Food of
Immortality, the Healthful Grace and the Conservatory to Everlasting Life.
There are so many high Expressions in these passages, that our Adversaries who
would by this Hook pluck us back again into the Error of Transubstantiation,
will unavoidably imagine and allege from hence that if we will stand to the
Assertions of our own Church, we must acknowledge the Real Presence of the Body
and Blood of our Savior in the Sacrament.

4. And let us be so civil to them as at least for the present to yield, that
understanding it in a due sense, we do acknowledge the Real Presence. But it
does not at all follow from thence that we must hold that that very Body of
Christ that hung upon the Cross, and whose Blood was there shed, is really
present in the Sacrament, but that our Church speaking conformably to Christ's
Discourse on this Matter in the sixth of John, and to the ancient primitive
Fathers, whose expressions do plainly allude to that Discourse of our Savior's
in the sixth of S. John, does assert both a Real Presence of the Body and Blood
of Christ to be received by the faithful in the Eucharist, and also a Real
Absence of that Body and Blood that was crucified and shed on the Cross. And
this seems to be the express Doctrine of our Savior in the above mentioned
Chapter of S. John, where the Eternal Word incarnate speaks thus --

John 6. v. 51. I am the living Bread which came down from Heaven, (viz. the
Manna which the Psalmist calls the Food of Angels also) if any eat of this
Bread he shall live for ever (viz. of this true Manna, of which the Manna in
the Wilderness was but a Type) and the Bread that I will give is my flesh
(which therefore still is that immortalizing Manna, the true Bread from Heaven)
which I will give for the life of the World, that the whole Intellectual
Creation may live thereby, it being their vivifick Food. For as you may gather
by verse. 62, 63. he does not understand his flesh that hung on the Cross. And
it was the ignorance of the Jews that they thought he did: and therefore they
cried out on him, saying, v. 52. How can this man give us his flesh to eat? And
that is because they took him to be a mere man, or an ordinary man, not the
incarnate Logos. Which Logos Clemens Alexandrinus calls (...), the impassible
man; and Trismegistus, (...), that one man the Son of God born of him, which he
says is (...), the Author of Regeneration, as having the Life in him, the
(...), John 1. v. 4. and this (...) or Life the Divine or Spiritual Body, one
necessary Element of Regeneration, which mystery we cannot here insist upon.
But in the mean time let us observe our Savior's Answer to this Scruple of the
Jews, he is so far from receding from what he said, that he with all
earnestness and vehemence asserts the same again.

Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, except you eat the
flesh of the Son of man (that is of the Messiah, or the Word Incarnate) and
drink his blood, you have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my
blood has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh
is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood dwells in me and I in him. As the living Father has sent
me and I live by the Father, so he that eats me (viz. that eats his flesh
and drinks his blood) even he shall live by me. This is that bread that came
down from Heaven, not as your Fathers did eat Manna and are dead; he that
eats of this Bread shall live for ever.

5. This is that earnest, lofty and sublime discourse of our Savior touching
his real Flesh and Blood, that the scandal given to the Jews could not drive
him off from, and persisting in it he gave also offense to his Disciples, that
muttered and said, This is an hard saying, who can hear it? Wherefore I must
confess ingenuously, that it seems to me incredible, that under so lofty
mysterious a Style, and earnest asseveration of what he affirms, though to the
scandal of both the Jews and his own Disciples, there should not be couched
some most weighty and profound Truth concerning some real Flesh and Blood of
his, touching which this vehement and sublime Discourse is framed, which is a
piece of that part of the Christian Philosophy (as some of the Ancients call
Christianity) which Origin terms (...). The Object of this eating and drinking
is the Flesh and Blood of Christ: But to rectify the error of his Disciples,
he plainly affirms, that he does not mean what he said of the Flesh and Blood
he then bore about with him. In v. 61, 62, 63. Does this offend you (says he
to them) what and if you shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before
(then my particular natural Body will be far enough removed from you, and your
selves then from so gross a conceit as to think I understand this of my
natural, particular Body or Flesh). No says he, the flesh profits nothing, it
is the spirit that quickens; the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit
and they are life, that is to say, they are concerning that spiritual Body and
Life or Spirit that accompanies it (That which is born of the flesh is flesh,
and that which is born of the spirit is spirit) the both seed and nourishment
of those that are Regenerate; the Principles of their Regeneration, and the
Divine Food for their Nutrition, whereby they grow up to their due stature in
Christ.

6. And where, or where so fully is this Divine Food to be had, as in that most
solemn and most devotional approaching God in the Celebration of the Communion
of the Body and Blood of Christ, where we both testify and advance thereby our
spiritual union with him, according as he has declared in John chapter 6. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Upon
which our Communion-Service thus glosses: That if with a true penitent heart
and lively faith we receive this Holy Sacrament, we then spiritually eat the
Flesh of Christ and drink his Blood, we dwell in Christ and Christ in us, we
are one with Christ and Christ with us. And whereas the Adversaries of our
Church object, We cannot eat the Flesh of Christ and drink his Blood, in the
Celebration of the Lords Supper, unless his Flesh and Blood be really present;
we do acknowledge that that Flesh and Blood which our Savior discourses of in
St John, and which our Liturgy alludes to, as also those notable sayings of
the Fathers above cited out of the Homily, touching the worthy receiving the
Lord's Supper, is really present in the Eucharist. And that there is that which
Christ calls his Flesh and Blood distinct from that which he then bore about
with him, and was Crucified on the Cross, he does most manifestly declare in
that discourse in St John, as I have already proved. So manifest is it that the
Real Presence does not imply any Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into
the Body and Blood of Christ.

CHAP. II.
1. The Bishop of Meaux his establishing Transubstantiation upon the literal
sense of [This is my Body]. 2. That according to the literal sense, the Bread
that Christ blessed was both Bread and the Body of Christ at once, and that the
avoiding that absurdity cast them upon Transubstantiation. 3. That
Transubstantiation exceeds that avoided Absurdity as contradicting the Senses
as well as Reason, and laboring under the same Absurdity it self. 4. Further
Reasons why the Road of the literal sense is to be left, and that we are to
strike into the Figurative, the former contradicting the Principles of
Physics. 5. Of Metaphysics. 6. Of Mathematics. 7. And of Logic. 8. That
Transubstantiation implies the same thing is and is not at the same time. 9. A
number of Absurdities plainly resulting from Transubstantiation.

1. AND therefore to prop up this great mistake of Transubstantiation, they are
fain to recur and stick to a literal sense of those words of our Savior [This
is my Body] which I finding no where more handsomely done than by the Right
Reverend Bishop of Meaux, I shall produce the Passage in his own words (that is
the translation of them) in his Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, Sect. 10. The Real Presence, says he, of the Body and Blood of our
Savior is solidly established by the words of the Institution (This is my
Body) which we understand literally; and there is no more reason to ask us why
we fix our selves to the proper and literal sense, than there is to ask a
Traveller why he follows the high Road. It is their parts who have recourse to
the Figurative sense and who take bypath, to give a reason for what they do.
As for us, since we find nothing in the words which Jesus Christ makes use of
for the Institution of this Mystery obliging us to take them in a Figurative
sense, we think that to be a sufficient Reason to determine us to the literal.

2. In answer to this, I shall, if it be not too great a Presumption, first
accompany this venerable Person in this high Road of the literal sense of the
words of Institution (This is my Body) and then show how this Road, as fairly
as it looks, is here a mere Angiportus that has no exitus or Passage, so that
we must be forced to divert out of it, or go abck again.

First then, let us take this supposed high Road, and say the words (This is my
Body) are to be understood literally. Wherefore let us produce the whole Text
and follow this kind of Gloss, Luke 22. 19. And he took bread, and gave thanks,
and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my Body, which is given for
you, This do in remembrance of me. Likewise also the cup after supper, saying,
This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. Now if we
keep to the mere literal sense, This Cup (as well as this Bread is the Body of
Christ) must be really the New Testament in Christ's Blood, which is a thing
unavoidable if we tie our selves to the literal sense of the words. But why is
not the Cup the Blood or Covenant in Christ's Blood? But that a Cup and Blood
are Disparata, or in general, Opposita, which to affirm one of another is a
Contradiction; as if one should say a Bear is a Horse, and therefore we are
constrained to leave the literal sense, and to recur to a figurative. But
precisely to keep to the institution of that part of the Sacrament that
respects Christ's Body; It is plain that what he took he gave thanks for, what
he gave thanks for he brake, what he brake he gave to his Disciples, saying,
This (which he took, gave thanks for, brake, and gave to his Disciples, viz.
the abovementioned Bread) is my Body. Wherefore the literal sense must
necessarily be, This Bread (as before it was this Cup) is my body. Insomuch
that according to this literal sense it is both really Bread still, and really
the Body of Christ at once. Which, I believe, there is no Romanist but will be
ashamed to admit. But why cannot he admit this but that Bread and the Body of
Christ are Opposita, and therefore the one cannot be said to be the other
without a perfect repugnancy or contradiction to humane Reason; as absurd as if
one should say a Bear is a Horse, or a Rose a Blackbird, whence, by the bye,
we may note the necessary use of Reason in Matters of Religion, and that what
is a plain Contradiction to humane Reason, such as a Triangle is a Circle, or a
Cow an Horse, are not to be admitted for Articles of the Christian Faith. And
for this Reason, I suppose the Church of Rome fell into the opinion of
Transubstantiation, (from this literal way of expounding these words [This is
my Body]) rather than according to the genuine leading of that way, they would
admit that what Christ gave his Disciples, was both real Bread and the real
Body of Christ at once.

3. But see the infelicity of this Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which does
not only contradict the inviolable Principles of Reason in humane Souls, but
also all the outward senses, upon which account it is more intolerable than
that opinion which they seem so much to abhor, as to prefer Transubstantiation
before it, though it contradict only Reason, not the outward Senses, which
rightly circumstantiated are fit Judges touching sensible Objects, whether they
be this or that, Fish or Fowl, Bread or Flesh. Nay I may add that these
Transubstantiators have fallen over and above that contradiction to the rightly
circumstantiated senses, into that very absurdity, that they seemed so much to
abhor from, that is the confounding two opposite Species into one Individual
Substance, viz. that one and the same Individual Substance should be really
both Bread and Christ's Body at once. But by their transubstantiating the
Individual Substance of the Bread into the Individual Substance of Christ's
Body, they run into this very Repugnancy which they seemed before so cautiously
to avoid; two Individual Substances (as species infimae) being Opposita, and
therefore incapable of being said to be the same, or to be pronounced one of
the other without a Contradiction. It is impossible that the Soul of Socrates,
for example, should be so Transubstantiated into the Soul of Plato, that it
should become his Soul, insomuch that it may be said of Socrates his Soul, that
it is the Soul of Plato; and there is the same Reason of Transubstantiating the
Substance of the Bread into the Substance of the Body of Christ. So that the
Substance of the Bread may be said to be the Body of Christ, or the Substance
of his Body, which it must either be, or be annihilated, and then it is not the
Transubstantiation of the Substance of the Bread, but the Annihilation of it,
into the Body of Christ.

4. And having rid in this fair promising Road of the literal sense, but thus
far, I conceive, I have made it manifest, that it is not passable, but that we
have discovered such difficulties as may very well move me to strike out of it,
or return back. And further, to show I do it not rashly, I shall add several
other Reasons, as this venerable Person (that thinks fittest to keep in it
still) does but rightfully require; as declaring, It is their parts who have
recourse to the Figurative sense, and who take bypaths to give a reason why
they do so. Wherefore besides what I have produced already, I add these
transcribed out of a Treatise of mine writ many years ago. Besides then the
Repugnancy of this Doctrine of Transubstantiation to the common sense of all
men, according to which it cannot but be judged to be Bread still, I shall now
show how it contradicts the Principles of all Arts and Sciences (which if we
may not make use of in Theology, to what great purpose are all the Universities
in Christendom?) the Principles, I say, of Physics, of Metaphysics, of
Mathematics, and of Logic. It is a Principle in Physics, That that Internal
space or place that a body occupies, is equal to the body that occupies it. Now
let us suppose that one and the same body occupies two such internal places or
spaces at once. This body therefore is equal to two spaces which are double to
one single space; wherefore the body is double to that body in one single
space, and therefore one and the same Body double to it self, which is an
enormous Contradiction.

5. Again in Metaphysics, the body of Christ is acknowledged one, and that as
much as any one body else in the World. Now the Metaphysical Notion of [one] is
to be indivisum a se (both quoad parts and quoad totum) as well as divisum a
quolibet alio; but the body of Christ being both in Heaven, and without any
continuance of that body here upon Earth also, the whole body is divided from
the whole body, and therefore is entirely both unum and multa, which is a
perfect contradiction.

6. Thirdly, In the Mathematics (Council. Trident. Sess. 13.) the Council of
Trent saying, that in the separation of the parts of the species (that which
bears the outward show of Bread and Wine) that from this division there is a
parting of the whole, divided into so many entire bodies of Christ, the body of
Christ being always at the same time equal to it self. It follows, that a part
of the division is equal to the whole that is divided, against that common
Notion in Euclid, That the whole is bigger than the part.

7. And lastly, In Logic, it is a Maxim, That the parts agree indeed with the
whole, but disagree one with another; but in the above said division of the
Host or Sacrament, the parts do so well agree, that they are entirely the same
individual thing. And whereas any Division, whether Logical or Physical, is the
Division of some one into many, this is but the Division of one into one and it
self, which is a perfect contradiction.

8. To all which you may add, That the Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine
into the Body and Blood of Christ implys, that the same thing both is and is
not at the same time (which is against that Fundamental Principle in Logic and
Metaphysics, that both parts of a contradiction cannot be true) which I prove
thus. For that Individual thing that can be made, or is to be made of any
thing, is not; the progress in this case being a privatione ad habitum, as the
Schools speak, and the terms of Generation or of being made, viz. a quo and ad
quem being Non esse and Esse, or Non-existent and Existent, so that that
passing, is from Non-existent to Existent. Now the individual body of Christ is
to be made of the Wafer consecrated, for it is turned into his Individual Body.
But his Individual Body was before this Consecration; wherefore it both was and
was not at the same time. For in the making thereof there was a passing from
the terminus a quo, which is the Non-existency of the thing to be made, to the
terminus ad quem, to the Existency of it, which yet was in Being before.

9. These difficulties are sufficient to show that this high Road of the
literal sense taken to establish Transubstantiation is not passable, so that
there is a necessity of diverting or going back. Nor will it be much needful to
hint briefly these or other like absurdities more intelligible to the vulgar
capacity, such as, That the same Body at the same time is greater and lesser
than it self; Is but a foot distant from me or less, and yet many thousand
miles distant from me: That one and the same Person may be entirely present
with himself, and some hundred thousand miles absent from himself at once: That
he may sit still on the Grass, and yet journey and walk at the same time: That
an organized body that has head, feet, hands, etc. is entirely in every part
of it self, the comely parts in the more uncomely: That the same Body now in
Heaven may really present it self on Earth without passing any space either
directly or circuitously: That our Savior Christ communicating with his
Disciples in the last Supper, swallowed down his whole entire Body, limbs,
back, belly, head and mouth and all into his stomach, which might amuze and
puzzle one to conceive how it was possible for his Disciples not to miss the
sight of his hands and head, though his clothes were still visible as not being
swallowed down into his stomach. Or, whether our Savior swallowed down his own
Body into his stomach or no, this puzzle will still remain, how his Disciples
could swallow him down without his clothes, he being still in his clothes; or
how they could swallow him down in his clothes, the bread being not
transubstantiated into his clothes, but into his body only. These and several
such Absurdities it were easy to enumerate. But I hope I have produced so much
already that I may, and any one else, be thought to have very good cause to
leave this high Road of the literal sense, and betake our selves to that more
safe path of the Figurative, whereby Transubstantiation with all its
Absurdities is avoided.

CHAP. III.
1. An evasion of the Incredibility of Transubstantiation drawn from the
Omnipotency of God. 2. Ans. That it is no derogation to God's Omnipotency not
to be able to do what it implies a contradiction to be done. 3. If this
Transubstantiation had been fecible, yet it had been repugnant to the Goodness
and Wisdom of Christ to have effected it. 4. A marvelous witty device of taking
away all the Absurdities of Transubstantiation, by giving to Christ's Body a
supernatural manner of existence. 5. That the neat Artifice of this Sophistry
lies in putting the smooth term of supernatural for counter-essential or
asystatal. 6. That it is an Asystatal manner of Existence, proved from the
Author's description thereof in several particulars. Arguments from the
multiplication of Christ's Body, and difference of time of its production. 7.
From Non-extension of parts. 8. From Independency of place. 9. To make a body
independent of Place as unconceivable as to make it independent of Time. 10.
The Argument from being whole in every part of the Symbols.

1. OUT of which Absurdities the most witty evasion offered to our
consideration that I have met with, is in that ingenious and artfully composed
Treatise, entitled, A Papist misrepresented and represented. In his Chapter of
the Eucharist toward the end, it is well worth the transcribing that I may
offer some brief Answers to the things there comprised. The Papist represented,
says he (page 11. lin. 22.) not at all harkening to his Senses in a matter
where God speaks; he unfeignedly confesses, that he that made the World of
nothing by his sole Word, That cured Diseases by his Word, That raised the Dead
by his Word, that expelled Devils, That commanded the Winds and Seas, That
multiplied Bread, That changed Water into Wine by his Word, and Sinners into
Just men, cannot want Power to change Bread and Wine into his own Body and
Blood by his sole Word.

2. It is an invidious thing to dispute the Power of the Eternal Logos or Word
Incarnate, who is God of God, very God of very God, and therefore Omnipotent,
and can do all things that imply no Contradiction to be done, as most certainly
none of these things there specified do imply it. But things repugnant to be
done we may, and that with due reverence, declare God cannot do. As the Apostle
does not stick to say, God cannot lie, Hebr. 6. 18. And why is it impossible
for God to lie, but that it is repugnant to the Perfection of his Nature, and
particularly that Attribute of his Veracity. Nor will any adventure to affirm
that he can make a Globe or Cylinder which shall be equidistant from, or touch
a Plane though but in half of their Spherical or Cylindrical Superficies: or a
Circle from whose Center the lines drawn shall be unequal, or a Rectangle
Triangle, the Power of whose Hypotenusa shall not be equal to both the Powers
of the Basis and Cathetus. And in fine, there are sixth and immutable Ideas of
things, and such necessary and inseparable respects and properties of them,
that to imagine them mutable, or that God can change them, is to disorder and
change the Eternal and Immutable Intellect of God himself. Of which those
indeleble and necessary Notions, which the minds of all mankind are conscious
to themselves of, if they be but awakned into free attention thereto, is but a
compendious Transcript.

And therefore God his being not able to do any thing that is a Contradiction
to those Eternal Ideas and Habitudes of them in his own mind, is no lessening
of his Omnipotency, but to imagine otherwise, is to dissolve the Eternal Frame
of the Divine Intellect, and under a pretense of amplifying his Omnipotency, to
enable God to destroy himself, or to make him so weak or impotent as to be
capable of being destroyed by himself, which is a thing impossible.

3. But suppose the Eternal Word Incarnate could have turned the Bread and Wine
into his own Individual Body and Blood, and the thing it self were fecible,
though it seems so palpably contradictious to us: yet there would be this
difficulty still remaining, that it is repugnant to his Wisdom and Goodness so
to do (as the Apostle says, it is impossible for God to lie) in that manner he
is supposed to have done it, that is, in declaring, a thing is done that is
repugnant so apparently to our Intellectual Faculties, and leaves so palpable
an assurance to all our Senses, though never so rightly circumstantiated, that
it is not done, but that it is still Bread; and yet that these species of Bread
and Wine should be supported by a Miracle, to obfirm or harden us in our
unbelief of this Mystery of Transubstantiation. How does this suit with either
the Wisdom of God, if he would in good earnest have us to believe this Mystery,
or with his Goodness, to give this Scandal to the World, for whom Christ died,
and to occasion so bloody Persecutions of innumerable innocent Souls, that
could not believe a thing so contrary to all Sense and Reason, and indeed to
Passages of Scripture it self, whose Penmen he did inspire? Wherefore this is a
plain Evincement that our Savior meant figuratively when he said [This is my
Body] and that his Disciples understood him so (there being nothing more usual
in the Jewish Language than to call the Sign by the Name of the thing
signified) and that this literal Gloss has been introduced by After-ages
without any fault of our Savior. But in defense of the literal sense which he
would have to infer Transubstantiation, our Author holds on thus, viz.

4. That this may be done without danger of multiplying his Body, and making as
many Christ's as Altars, or leaving the right hand of his Father, but only by
giving to his Body a Supernatural manner of Existence, by which being left
without Extension of Parts, and rendered independent of Place, it may be one and
the same in many places at once, and whole in every part of the Symbols, and
not obnoxious to any Corporeal Contingencies. And this kind of Existence is no
more than what in a manner he bestows upon every glorified Body, than what his
own Body had when born without the least violation of his Mother's Virginal
Integrity, when he rose from the Dead out of the Sepulcher without removing the
stone; when he entered amongst his Disciples, the Doors being shut.

5. This is, as I said, a witty contrived evasion to elude the abovementioned
Repugnancies I have noted, and exquisitely well fitted for the amusing and
confounding of more vulgar and weak minds, or such as have not leisure to
consider things to the bottom, and for the captivating them into a profession
of what they have no determinate or distinct apprehension of, by distinctions
and exemplifications that give no real support to the cause they are brought in
for to maintain.

For first, to pretend that by a supernatural manner of Existence a body may be
in more places than one at once, at the right hand of God the Father in Heaven,
and on the Altar at the same time, etc. The Artifice of the Sophistry lies in
this, that he has put a more tolerable and soft expression in lieu of one that
(according to his explication of the matter) would sound more harsh, but is
more true and proper in this case. For this manner of Existence of a Body which
he describes is not simply supernatural, which implies it is a Body still, as a
Millstone by a supernatural power held up in the air is a Millstone still,
though it be in that supernatural condition. But the condition he describes is
such as is not only supernatural but counter-essential or Asystatal, that is,
Repugnant to the very Being of a Body, or of any finite substance in the
Universe. It is as if the Millstone were not only supernaturally supported in
the Air, but were as transparent, as soft and fluid, and of as undetermined a
shape as the Air it self, or as if a right-angled Triangle were declared to be
so still, though the Hypotenusa were not of equal power with the Basis and
Cathetus, which is a thing impossible; but if instead of a supernatural manner
of existence, it had been said an Asystatal manner of existence, that is, an
existence repugnant to the very Being of a Body or any finite substance else,
it would have been discovered to be a contradiction at the very first sight,
and therefore such as ought to be rejected, as well as the affirming that what
Christ gave was really Bread and really his Body at once.

6. And now, notwithstanding this soft and smooth term of [supernatural] that
it is an Asystatal manner of existence, that is here given to the Body of
Christ, may appear from our Author's description thereof. For in virtue, he
says, of this supernatural manner of existence, there may be a
Transubstantiation without danger of multiplying Christ's Body, and making as
many Christ's as Altars. But it is impossible this Absurdity should be avoided,
supposing Transubstantiation. For there is not a more certain and infallible
sign of two bodily Persons being two bodily Persons, and not the same Person,
that distance of place, wherein they are separate one from another, and
consequently two not one body, and this is the very case in Transubstantiation,
which manifestly implies, that the body of Christ is in many thousand distant
places at once. Which imagined condition in it is not supernatural but
Asystatal, and contradictious to the very Being of any finite substance
whatever, as has been intimated and firmly proved before, Chap. 2.

And as distance of place necessarily infers difference of Bodies or Persons,
so does also difference of time of their Production. That which was produced,
suppose sixteen hundred Years ago and remains so produced cannot be produced
suppose but yesterday, or at this present moment, and so be sixteen hundred
Years older or younger than it self. This is not only supernatural but
Asystatal, and implies a perfect contradiction; but yet this is the very case
in Transubstantiation. The Body of Christ born suppose sixteen hundred Years
ago, is yet produced out of the Transubstantiated Bread but now or yesterday,
and so the same body is sixteen hundred Years older or younger than it self,
which is a perfect Contradiction.

7. Secondly, The Papist represented declares, That the Body of Christ by
virtue of this supernatural manner of Existence, is left without Extension of
parts, which is a perfect contradiction to the very nature and essence of a
Body, whose universally acknowledged Definition is (...), implying a Trinal
inpenetrable dimension or extension. Besides, did Christ's Body at his last
Supper so soon as he had Transubstantiated the Bread into it, lose all
extension of parts? What then filled out his clothes as he sat with his
Disciples at Table? or how could the Jews lay hold on Christ's Body to Crucify
it, if he had no extension of parts to be laid hold on? How could there be
hands and feet and organization of parts, either at the Table or on the Cross,
if there were no extension of parts to be organized? And lastly, being the
Transubstantiated Bread is the very Individual Body of Christ, if they would
have this being left without extension of parts, to be understood of it, how
can the very same Individual Body of Christ have Extension of Parts and have no
Extension of Parts, have Organization of Parts and have no Organization of
Parts at once: so that the condition of Christ's Body here supposed is plainly
Asystatal, not as is smoothly expressed only Supernatural.

8. Thirdly, Whereas the Papist Represented declares, that this Supernatural
Manner of Existence of Christ's Body renders it Independent of Place, what can
the meaning of that be, but that by virtue of this privilege it might exist
without any Place or Ubi, which Bodies in their natural condition cannot? But
this clashes with the very Story of our Savior Christ, who was certainly in
the Room in which he ate the Passover with his Disciples, after he had
transubstantiated the Bread into his Individual Body, and therefore it did not
exist Independently of Place, in virtue of any such Supernatural Manner of
Existence as is imagined. And as this does not agree with matter of Fact, so it
is a perfect contradiction to the Essence of any Body or finite Substance to be
exempted from all connection with Place or Ubi, but a finite Substance must be
in a definite Ubi, and while it is in such a definite Ubi, it is impossible to
conceive that it is in another Place or Ubi, whether intra or extra moenia
Mundi. He that closely and precisely considers the point, he will not fail, I
think, to discern the thing to be impossible. And what contradiction it implies
I have demonstrated above. So that we see there can be no such Supernatural
Manner of Existence conferred on a Body in making it independent of Place or
Ubiety, as to capacitate it to be one and the same Body in diverse places at
once, but that this supposed Supernatural Manner is truly an Asystatal Manner,
and such as is repugnant to the very Being of a Body, or any finite Substance
whatsoever.

9. To make a body in this sense independent of Place or Ubiety, is as
unconceivable as to make it independent of Time, which yet would so complete
this impossible Hypothesis, that under this pretense when a thing has such a
Supernatural Existence as exempts it from all connection with or relation to
Time, but supposes it utterly independent thereof, as was explained before
touching Place, we may suppose what we will of a Body, that it may be Bread and
not Bread at the same time, that it may be at Thebes and at Athens at the same
time, as we ordinary mortals would phrase it, since it is lifted up above all
Relation and Connection with Time, nor has any thing to do with any Time. But
yet this assuredly is not a mere Supernatural Manner of Existence, but plainly
Asystatal, and such as if God could cause, there would be no Eternal and
Immutable Truths, but under a Pretext of exalting the Omnipotence of God, they
would imply him able to destroy his own Nature, which would argue an Impotency
in him, and to extinguish and confound the Inviolable Ideas of the Divine
Intellect, as I intimated above.

10. And fourthly and lastly, That in virtue of this Supernatural manner of
Existence, the Body of Christ should be whole in every part of the Symbols, and
thereby become not obnoxious to any corporeal Contingencies; (which is said, I
suppose, to avoid the Absurdity of grinding a pieces the Body of Christ with
our Teeth when we chew the supposed Species) thus to exist whole in every part,
is not a mere Supernatural Manner of existing, but Asystatal, and implies
either that the least part of Christ's Body is as big as the whole, or that the
whole Body is God knows how many thousand times bigger than it self. For
certainly the whole Body comprised under the whole Bread or Species of Bread,
is many thousand times bigger than one particle thereof no bigger than a Pins
point. Besides that this making the Body of Christ whole in every part, takes
away all possibility of distinct Organization of his Body, unless you will have
every Pins point of it to have Head, Feet, Hands, Arms, and the rest of the
Parts of an humane Body, or have the same Individual Body organized and
unorganized at the same time, which are as palpable Contradictions as any can
occur to the understanding of a man.

And thus much I thought fit to intimate touching this Witty Distinction of a
Natural and Supernatural Manner of Existence of a Body, and to show that this
pretended Supernatural Manner of the Existence of Christ's Body, arising from
the Bread transubstantiated, as the Papist Represented describes it, is indeed
an Asystatal Manner of Existence, and inconsistent with the Being of any Body,
or finite Substance whatsoever.

CHAP. IV.
1. The Supernatural Manner of the Existence of a Body consisting in
Non-extension of Parts, Independency of Place, and being whole in every Part.
2. The first exemplification of such a Manner of Existence in Glorified Bodies,
not to reach the Case. 3. Nor the second, in Christ's Body born without the
least Violation of his Mothers Virginal Integrity. 4. Nor the third in Christ's
rising out of the Sepuloher without the removing of the stone. 5. Nor the
fourth, in Christ's entering amongst his Disciples the doors being shut. 6.
Transubstantiation implying a number of contradictions as harsh as that of the
same body being both Christ' s Body and Bread at once, and there being no salvo
for them but this device of a supernatural manner of Existence, and this so
plainly failing, it is impossible that Transubstantiation should be the true
mode of the Real Presence.

1. IT remains now that we only touch upon lightly the exemplifications of this
supernatural manner of Existence of a Body, consisting in these peculiarities,
Non-extension of parts, Independency of Place, and being whole in every part,
and to note how none of these instances reach the present case.

2. As first that of a glorified Body. What Scripture, Reason or Authority ever
suggested to us that the glorified Body of Christ himself, much less every
glorified Body, is without extension of parts, has no relation to or connection
with Place, or is whole in every part. For without extension of Parts it cannot
be so much as a Body. And were not Moses and Elias together with Christ at his
Transfiguration on Mount Tabor, at least lively Figures of the state of a
glorified Body, but it is evident by the description that they had extension of
parts, else what should shining Garments do upon what is unextended, and what
glory can issue from a single Mathematical point as I may so call it? And in
that they were on Mount Tabor together, it is manifest they had a connection
with or dependency on Place, nor did exist without being in some ubi. And that
the glorified Body of Christ is in Heaven not on Earth, is plain from Act. 3.
21. and touching his Body he rose in, and therefore was his Resurrection-Body,
Matt. 28. 6. The Angel says, He is not here, for he is risen; which had been a
mere Non sequitur, if his Body could have been in more places than one at once,
which property the Papist represented gives it upon account of
Transubstantiation. And for as much as the Transubstantiated Bread and the Body
of Christ is one and the same Individual Body, and that this that is once
Christ's Body never perishes, it is evident, that the Body he rose in, being
one and the same Body with the Transubstantiated Bread, must have the capacity
by this supernatural manner of Existence above described, to be in more places
than one at once, which is a perfect contradiction to the Angels reasoning: He
is not here, for he is risen, and gone hence. For according to this
supernatural manner of Existence, which they suppose in Christ's Body upon the
account of Transubstantiation, he might be both there and gone thence at once.

3. The second Instance of this supernatural manner of existence of a Body, is
Christ's Body born without the least violation of his Mothers Virginal
Integrity, which is such a secret as the Scripture has not revealed, nor any
sufficient Authority assured us of: The Mother of Christ still continuing a
Virgin, because she had nothing to do with any man, though that which was
conceived in her by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost came out of her Womb in
the same circumstances there, that other humane Births do. But suppose the Body
of Christ passed the wicket of the Womb without opening it, as the Sunbeams
pass through a Crystal or Glass, does this import that his Body is either
Independent of Place, or is devoid of Extension, or whole in every Part? surely
no, no more than that light that passes through the pores of the Crystal: so
that there is nothing repugnant to the nature of a Body in all this. No
Non-extension, no Independency of Place, no penetration of corporeal
Dimensions, nor any being whole in every part.

4. The third Instance is Christ's rising out of the Sepulcher without removing
the Stone. But this Instance may very justly be rejected, it disagreeing with
the very History of the Resurrection, which tells us the Stone was removed,
Matt. 28. 2. And behold there was a great Earthquake, for the Angel descended
from Heaven, and rolled back the Stone from the door, and sat upon it.
Wherefore we see the Stone was removed. Nor can I imagine why this should make
a third Instance, viz. Christ's Body passing out of the Sepulcher, the Stone
unremoved from the door thereof, unless from an heedless reflection on the
foregoing verse (where Mary Magdalen and the other Mary are said to go to see
the Sepulcher) and connecting it to an ill grounded sense with what follows in
the second verse, And behold there was a great Earthquake; as if it were
employed that the Earthquake and the rolling away the Stone were at that very
time that these two Women went to see the Sepulcher, and Christ having risen
before, that it would follow that he rose before the Stone of the Sepulcher was
removed; but this is a mistake. For agreeably to Vatablus his Gloss (who for
erat [and ecce erat terrae motus magnus] puts fuerat, and for descendit,
descenderat, and for devolvit lapidem, devolverat) which implies the thing done
before these Women came to the Sepulcher; it is manifest out of the other
Evangelists that the matter was altogether so; for Mark 16. 2. it is said of
the two above said parties, That very early in the morning, the first day of
the Week they came unto the Sepulcher at the rising of the Sun, and they said
among themselves, Who shall roll us away the Stone from the door of the
Sepulcher, and when they looked they saw the Stone was rolled away, etc. And it
is expressly said in Luke, That they found the Stone rolled away from the
Sepulcher. And the like is recorded in St. John, chapter 20. so that it is a plain
case the Stone was rolled away before their going to the Sepulcher.

What time therefore can we imagine more likely of this rolling away the Stone
and terrible Earthquake, than at the very Resurrection of Christ, who rose in
this awful terror to the Keepers, the Earth quaking, and the too Glorious
Angels officiously opening the stony door of the Sepulcher, that the King of
Glory might pass out, without any further needless or useless Miracle, such as
he ever declined in his life time, before his Death and Resurrection? Wherefore
this third Instance, it is plain, cannot with any show be accommodated to the
present case, it being raised out of a mere mistake of the Story.

5. The fourth and last Instance is, Christ's entering amongst his Disciples,
the doors being shut, recorded John 20. 19, and 26. there the Disciples are
said to be gathered together privately or secretly for fear of the Jews, for
which cause they locked or bolted the doors with-inside, that no man might
suddenly come upon them. But while they were in this privacy or closeness,
Christ, notwithstanding, suddenly presented himself in the midst of them, for
all this closeness or secrecy, and not without a Miracle, supposing himself or
some ministering Angel to unlock or unbolt the door suddenly, and softly, sine
strepitu, which upon this account would be more likely, in that if he had come
in, the doors being still shut, that might have seemed as great an Argument to
Thomas that he was a Spirit, as the feeling his Hands and Side that he was no
Spirit. Wherefore, I conceive, it is no sufficiently firm Hypothesis, that
Christ entered among his Disciples, the doors in the mean time, at his very
entrance, remaining shut. But suppose they were so, this will not prove his
Body devoid of Extension, to be independent of Place, and whole in every part,
more than his passing the wicket of the Womb, like light through Crystal, did
argue the same in the second Instance But the truth of the business will then
be this, That he being then in his Resurrection-body (even that wherewith he
was to ascend into Heaven, which yet he kept in its Terrestrial Modification,
and Organization, for those services it was to do amongst his Disciples while
he conversed with them after his Resurrection upon Earth; as he made use of it
in a particular manner to St Thomas) he had a Power to modifie it into what
Consistencies he pleased, Aerial, Aetherial, or Celestial, it remaining still
that Individual Body, that was crucified. This therefore might easily pass
through the very Pores of the door, and much more easily betwixt the door and
the side-posts there, without any inconvenience more than to other Spiritual
Bodies. For the Resurrection-body is an Heavenly and Spiritual Body, as St Paul
himself expressly declares. But yet as truly a Body as any body else; that is,
it has impenetrable Trinal Dimension, is not without Place or Ubiety, nor
whole in every part. This very Story demonstrates all this, That his Body is
not without Place. For it stood in the midst of the Room amongst his Disciples.
Nor the whole in every part; For here is distinct mention of Christ's Hand and
his Side, as elsewhere of his Flesh and Bones, Luke 24. 26. which would be all
confounded, if every part were in every part. And if there be these distinct
parts, then certainly his Body has Extension, and this ingeniously excogitated
Distinction of the Natural and Supernatural Manner of Existence of a body, can
by no means cover the gross Repugnancies, which are necessarily implied in the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

6. A Doctrine raised from the literal sense of those Words [This is my Body]
which literal sense if we were tied to, it would also follow that that which
Christ gave to his Disciples was as well Real Bread as his Real Body: [This]
plainly referring to what he took, what he blessed, and what he gave, which was
Bread, and of this he says, This is my Body. Wherefore adhering to the literal
sense, it would be both Real Bread and the Real Body of Christ at once. But
this, as being a Repugnancy, as was noted above, and Contradiction to the known
inviolable and immutable Laws of Logic and humane Reason, is justly rejected
by the Church of Rome, for this very Reason, that it implies a Contradiction,
that one and the same Body should be Bread and the Real Body of Christ at once.
Wherefore Transubstantiation containing, as has been proved, so many of such
Contradictions, every jot as repugnant to the inviolable and immutable Laws of
Logic, or humane Reason (that unextinguishable Lamp of the Lord in the Soul of
man) as this of the same body being Real Bread and the Real Body of Christ at
once: And there being no Salvo for these harsh Contradictions, but the pretense
of a Supernatural Manner of Existence of a Body, which God is supposed to give
to the Bread transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, that is, into the very
Individual Body of Christ, they being supposed by Transubstantiation to become
one and the same Body. I say this neat distinction of a Supernatural Manner of
Existing being plainly demonstrated (so as it is by the Papist Represented,
explained) not to be a mere Supernatural Manner of Existence, with which the
being of a Body would yet consist, but a Counter-essential, Asystatal, and
Repugnant manner of Existence, inconsistent with the being of a Body; and none
of the Instances that are produced as Pledges of the truth of the Notion or
Assertion at all reaching the present case, it is manifest that though there be
a Real Presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Celebration of the Holy
Eucharist, acknowledged as well by the Reformed as the Pontifician Party, that
it is impossible that Transubstantiation, which the Papist represented here
declares, should be the true mode thereof.

CHAP. V.
1. The Author's excuse for his civility to the Papist Represented, that he
shows him that the Road he is in is not the way of Truth touching the mode of
the Real Presence. 2. That the Bishop of Meaux makes the Real Presence the
common Doctrine of all the Churches as well Reformed as Un-reformed, and that
it is acknowledged to be the Doctrine of the Church of England, though she is
so wise and so modest as not to define the mode thereof. 3. The sincere Piety
of our Predecessors in believing the Real Presence, and their unfortunateness
afterward in determining the mode by Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation.

1. AND therefore the Papist Represented, being in so palpable a mistake, and
by keeping to the literal sense having so apparently wandered from the path of
Truth, I hope my thus industriously and carefully advertizing him thereof for
his own good, will be no otherwise interpreted than an Act of Humanity or
common Civility, if not of indispensable Christianity, thus of my own accord,
though not Roganti, yet Erranti comiter monstrare viam, or at least to assure
him that this of Transubstantiation is not the right Road to the due
understanding of the manner or mode of the Real Presence of the Body and Blood
of Christ in the Celebration of the Holy Eucharist.

2. Which opinion of the Real Presence the Bishop of Meaux declares to be the
Doctrine of all the Churches as well Reformed as Un-reformed; as I must confess
I have been of that persuasion (ever since I writ my Mystery of Godliness) that
it is the Doctrine of the Church of England, and that the Doctrine is true. And
this I remember I heard from a near Relation of mine when I was a Youth, a
Reverend Dignitary of the Church of England, and that often, viz. That our
Church was for the Real Presence, but for the manner thereof, if asked, he
would answer, Rem scimus, Modum nescimus, We know the thing, but the mode or
manner thereof we know not. And the assurance we have of the thing is from the
common suffrage of the ancient Fathers, such as the above cited place of our
Homilies glances at, and from the Scripture it self, which impressed that
Notion on the minds of our Pious Predecessors in the Church of God.

3. For I do verily believe that out of mere Devotion and sincere Piety, and
out of a Reverend esteem they had of the solemnity of the Eucharist, they
embraced this Doctrine as well as broached it at the first. And if they had
kept to the profession of it in general, without running into
Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation, and had defined no further than the
plain Scriptural Text in the sixth of St. John and the suffrages of the
Primitive Fathers had warranted them, viz. That there was a twofold Body and
Blood of Christ, the one Natural, the other Spiritual or Divine, which we do
really receive in the Holy Communion (within which limits I shall confine my
self here without venturing into any farther curiosities) it had been more for
the Peace and Honor of the Christian Church, and it might have prevented much
scandal to them without, and much Cruelty and Persecution amongst our selves:
The History of which is very horrid even to think of. But though there have
been these Mistakes in declaring the Mode, yet the thing it self is not
therefore to be abandoned, it being so great a Motive for a Reverend
approaching the Lord's Table, and duly celebrating the solemnity of the Holy
Eucharist. Nor can we, as I humbly conceive, relinquish this Doctrine of the
Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ, without the declining the most
easy and natural sense of the Holy Scripture, as it stands written in the
sixth Chapter of St. John.

CHAP. VI.
1. Gratian his distinction of the Flesh and Blood of Christ into Spiritual or
Divine, and into that Flesh that hung on the Cross, and that Blood let out by
the Lance of the Soldier. 2. The same confirmed out of S. Austin, who makes
the Body and Blood of Christ to be partaken of in Baptism, and also from S.
Paul and Philo. 3. Other Citations out of Philo touching the Divine Logos
agreeable with what Christ says of himself in his Discourse John 6. And out of
which it further appears that the Ancient Fathers ate the same Food that we,
the Divine Body of Christ, but not that which hung on the Cross. 4. A strong
Confirmation out of what has been produced, that Gratian his distinction is
true. 5. The first Argument from our Savior's Discourse, That he meant not his
Flesh that hung on the Cross, because he says, that he that eats it has Eternal
Life in him. 6. The second, because his Flesh and Blood is the Object of his
Discourse, not the Manner of eating and drinking them. 7. The third, because of
his answer to his murmuring Disciples, which removes his Natural Body far from
them, and plainly tells them, The Flesh profits nothing. 8. Gratian's
distinction no novel Doctrine.

1. OUT of which sixth Chapter of S. John, that is manifest which a Member of
the Roman Church her self, has declared, an eminent Canonist of theirs,
Gratian, In [Canon dupliciter] as it is cited by Philippus Mornaeus, lib. 4. De
Eucharistia, Cap. 8. Dupliciter intelligitur Caro Christi and Sanguis: vel
Spiritualis illa atque Divina de qua ipse dicit, Caro mea vere est Cibus, and
Sanguis meus vere est Potus, and nisi manducaveritis Carnem meam, and biberitis
Sanguinem meum, non habebitis Vitam Aeternam; vel caro quae Crucifixa est, and
sanguis qui militis effusus est lancea. I the rather take notice of this
Passage, because he makes use of the very Phrases which I used without
consulting him in my Philosophical Hypothesis of the great Mystery of
Regeneration, calling that Body or Flesh which Christ so copiously discourses
of, John 6. Spiritual or Divine, which he plainly distinguishes, as Christ
himself there does, from that Body that hung on the Cross, and that Blood that
was let out by the lance of the Soldier.

2. For we cannot be Regenerate out of these in Baptism, and yet in the same
place S. Augustine says, We are partakers of the Body and Blood of Christ in
Baptism; and therefore as Terrestrial Animals are not fed (as they say the
Chamaeleon is) of the Air, but by food of a Terrestrial Consistency, so our
Regeneration being out of spiritual Principles, our inward man is also
nourished by that Food that is Spiritual or Divine. And that is a mavelous
passage of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 10. where he says, The Fathers did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of
that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ, where St.
Austin, Anselm, Thomas Aquinas, and others, as you may see in Iacobus Capellus,
avouch, That the ancient Patriarchs ate the same Spiritual Food that we, which
therefore must be the Flesh and Blood of Christ, in that sense Christ
understands it in, John 6. And that passage of Philo (that Grotius notes on the
same place) is worth our taking notice of, and that in two several Treatises of
his he interprets the Manna of the (...), the Divine Logos, which agrees hugely
well with our supposing that the Flesh and Blood of which our Savior says, it
is meat indeed and drink indeed, he speaks this as he is the Eternal Logos, to
whom appertains the universal Divine Body, as being the Body of his (...), Life
or Spirit, as I have noted in my Analytical account of the forepart of the
first Chapter of St. John's Gospel. See my Scholia at the end of my Enchiridium
Ethicum.

3. And it is marvellously applicable to our purpose what Philo says on that
Passage of Deuteronomy, Chap. 32. v. 5. He made him to suck honey out of the
Rock, and Oil out of the flinty Rock (in his (...)) where he says the Rock
signifies (...). The solid, steady and infrangible Wisdom of God; implying the
Immutableness and Unalterableness of the Natures, Properties, and Respects of
the Ideas of things in the Divine Intellect, The (...), not to be changed or
violated for any superstitious purposes whatsoever, as I have intimated before.
Wherefore as St Paul calls Christ, who is the Eternal Logos, a Rock, so does
Philo, by saying, that Rock Moses mentions in his Song is the steady, solid and
infrangible Wisdom of God. Which therefore is that Essential Wisdom, the same
that the Divine Logos, or second Hypostasis of the Trinity.

And not many lines after in the same Treatise, the Lawgiver, says he, (...),
calls this Rock Manna the Divine Logos that was before all beings, and without
whom nothing was made that was made, as St John testifies. And in his [(...)]
speaking of Israel, which he would have signify one that sees God: He, says
he, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven sees, and thence receives, ((...)) the Manna,
the Divine Logos, the Heavenly incorruptible food of the Soul devoted to Holy
Speculation. Which Passages I could not forbear to produce, they having so
great an Affinity with that which our Savior professes of himself, that he is
this Bread from Heaven, the true Manna, and incorruptible Food of the Soul,
whereby she is nourished to Eternal Life, John 6. Out of all which may be more
easily understood how the Fathers did all eat the same Spiritual Meat, and
drink the same Spiritual Drink, which cannot well be conceived but of such a
Divine Body and Blood of Christ, as is universal, not restrained to his
particular humane Nature, but belonging to him as he is the Eternal Logos, in
whom is the (...) Life or Spirit, which goes along with the Divine Body of
this Life or Spirit of Christ, and consequently is rightly called his Body.
Which being the necessary Principles of Regeneration (for ex eisdem nutrimur ex
quibus constamus) and there being no Salvation without Regeneration, and no
Regeneration continued and advanced without congenerous Food; we must
necessarily conclude with St Paul, that, The Fathers all ate the same Spiritual
Meat, and drank all the same Spiritual Drink, Water, Honey, Oil out of the same
Rock, Christ, the Eternal Word or Logos. And certainly that Body and Blood of
Christ out of which the Fathers were Regenerate, and by which they were fed,
cannot be the very Body and Blood of Christ which hung on the Cross, and whose
Blood was there let out by the Lance of the Soldier that pierced his side: and
therefore there was a Body and Blood of Christ before he was incarnate, for the
Regenerate Souls of the ancient People of the Jews to feed upon, belonging to
him as he is the Eternal Logos; in whom is the Life and that Spirit of which it
is said, That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of
the Spirit is Spirit. Which things are more fully treated of in (...), or a
Philosophical Hypothesis touching the great Mystery of Regeneration.

4. Wherefore there is all the Reason in the World, if not plain Necessity to
admit, what we cited out of Gratian that famous Canonist of the Church of Rome.
That we are to understand that there is a twofold Flesh and Blood of Christ,
either that Spiritual and Divine Flesh, of which he himself says, My Flesh is
Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed, and, Unless you eat my Flesh and
drink my Blood, ye shall not have Everlasting Life. Or that Flesh which was
crucified, and that Blood that was let out of his side by the Lance of the
Soldier, which we shall now endeavor briefly to demonstrate out of that
Discourse of our Savior in the sixth of St John.

5. First then, That the Flesh of Christ that hung once on the Cross, and into
which the Bread of the Romanists is supposed to be Transubstantiated in the
Sacrament of our Lord's Supper, is not the Flesh here meant is plain from what
is said thereof in this sixth Chapter of St John v. 54. Whosoever eats my Flesh
and drinks my Blood has Eternal Life. But every one that eats the Bread
transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, that once hung upon the Cross, in
the Roman Communion, has not Eternal Life in him. Nay if that Soldier that
pierced our Savior's side and let out his Blood with his Lance had drunk also
thereof, and cut some piece of his flesh from his Body and eaten it, is any one
so fond as to think, that he thereby would have been made Partaker of Eternal
Life? But if Christ meant that Body or Flesh of his and not some other that is
rightly also called his Flesh or Body, it would follow that that Soldier by
doing that savage and inhumane act, would have obtained Everlasting Life.
Wherefore it is plain from hence, that there is another Body or Flesh of Christ
and another Blood, distinct from that Blood that was shed on the Cross, and
from that Body that hung there, which our Savior aims at in his Discourse.

6. Secondly, It is plain that our Savior's Discourse in that Chapter (he
passing from that temporal Food which he had lately procured for the multitude,
to a Spiritual and Eternal) has for its Object or Subject not the Manner or Way
of receiving his Body and Blood, as if it were meant of that very Flesh and
Blood on the Cross, but that it was to be received in a Spiritual Manner, which
Interpreters, several of them, drive at; but the Object of his Discourse is his
very Flesh and Blood it self, to be taken (as the Fish and Loaves were
wherewith he lately fed them) or it is himself in reference to this Flesh and
Blood which belongs to him as he is the Eternal Word, and in this sense he
says, He is the Bread of God that comes down from Heaven and gives Life to
the World, v. 33. And v. 48. (...), I am the Bread of Life, and speaking of the
Manna he presently adds, Your Fathers ate Manna, and yet died, viz. the natural
Death, the natural Manna being no Preservative against the natural Death. And
v. 51. (...), as before he called himself (...). For in him is the (...) (John
1.) or Life and Spirit, and this Spirit or Life in the Divine Body. I am the
living Bread coming down from Heaven (as the Manna is said to do, and to which
Philo compares the Divine Logos) if any one eat of this Bread he shall live for
ever. He speaks not of the manner of eating of it, but of the Bread it self to
be eaten, and yet immediately thereupon he calls this Bread his Flesh, which he
says, he will give for the Life of the World, that is to the end that they may
be enlivened thereby, he thus communicating to them his Divine Body and Spirit
together. And then presently upon the Jews striving amongst themselves and
saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? (the reason whereof was
because they took him to be a mere man, and thought that Christ himself
understood it of his humane Flesh) he affirms with greater earnestness and
vehemence, Verily, verily, I say unto you, unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son
of Man (viz. of the Messiah, who is the Logos incarnate) and drink his Blood,
ye have no Life in you. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood has
Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my Flesh is meat
indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed. And so all along to the very end of his
Discourse, he speaks of a really eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, not
of the Manner of eating, as if it never came nigh them, but only they thought
of Flesh and Blood God knows how far distant from them, and so ate the humane
Flesh of Christ by mere thinking of it, and drank his Blood after the same
imaginary Manner, which would, I think, be a very dilute and frigid sense of
such high and fervid Asseverations of our Savior, if the Mystery reached no
farther than so.

7. But thirdly and lastly, That it does reach further than so, is exceeding
evident from what our Savior utters upon his Disciples being scandalized at
this strange Discourse of his, v. 61. When Jesus knew in himself, that his
Disciples murmured at it, He said unto them, Does this offend you? What if you
shall see the Son of man ascending where he was before, which he must needs
understand of his particular visible Body which he bore about with him, and
which his humane Soul did actuate, and which was appropriated to his humane
nature, which is finite and circumscribed. It is an Elliptical speech of his,
but thus naturally to be supplied as I have also noted above, as if he
suppressed by an Aposiopesis this objurgatory sense insinuated thereby. Will
you then imagine so grossly as if I understood it of this very Flesh I bear
about with me, when as this particular body of mine after my Ascension into
Heaven will be removed at a vast distance from you. I tell you this Flesh of
mine, as to this purpose I have all this time driven at, profits nothing, you
cannot feed of it at such a distance if it were to be fed on.

The Text runs thus, v. 63. (...), it is that quickening spirit I aim at in my
discourse, that Divine or Spiritual Body of mine. (...), that Flesh, which you
understand and are so scandalized at the eating thereof, profits nothing as
to this purpose, nor the Blood taken in your sense has any thing to do here.
The words that I speak unto you they are spirit and they are life. The Object
of those words spoken is my Spiritual Body and Blood, not as I am a Man, but
the Eternal Word, the Divine Logos, which contains in it the (...) or Spirit,
and my Divine Body universal, that belongs to that my Life or Spirit. This is
the true Mystery of the Matter, for by these two things asserted by our
Savior, 1. That we are to eat his Flesh and drink his Blood as we hope ever to
have Eternal Life. 2. And his declaring his Flesh profits nothing, it is
manifest that that distinction of Gratian is true, which he seems to have taken
out of St. Hierom, or some other ancient Father, who tells us the Flesh and
Blood of Christ is twofold, the one natural and which he bore about with him
and hung once on the Cross, the other Spiritual and Divine, which we may really
eat and drink, that is really receive and draw in at the Celebrating the Holy
Eucharist by a sincere, fervid and devotional Faith. And consequently there is
a Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in partaking of the Lord's
Supper, whereby our Souls are nourished to Eternal, Life.

And in that, he says, his natural Flesh profits nothing to this purpose (for
it cannot be said that it profits nothing at all, since in virtue of the
Crucifixion of that Flesh, and Effusion of that Blood on the Cross, we have the
remission of our Sins) Christ plainly infers that he has (which cannot be well
understood but as he is the Eternal Logos) another Flesh, viz. that Spiritual
and Divine Flesh, which is mainly profitable for this purpose, for the
maintaining, perfecting and renewing the inward man, that he may attain to his
due growth in Christ.

And lastly, How can Christ say his Flesh that was Crucified on the Cross
profits nothing, when by being meditated upon at the solemnity of the Holy
Eucharist, and also at other times, it may serve to kindle and inflame our Love
and Devotion toward him, and so urge us to greater degrees of Repentance and
Mortification, and serious Holiness; it therefore being useful and profitable
for all this, I say, why does he then affirm it profits nothing, but that he
does on purpose advertise us that it profits nothing as to the present case
he has spoke to all this while, viz. to be the real meat and food of the inward
man, and to be really received into him, to maintain and increase those Divine
Principles in him out of which he is regenerated. This his particular Flesh and
Blood, that hung on the Cross, cannot be profitable for, nor can be come at, at
such a distance, to be taken in and received; which therefore plainly implies
those other, which were mentioned above out of Gratian (the Divine or Spiritual
Flesh and Blood of Christ only) to be properly useful to this purpose.

8. And for this Divine and Spiritual Flesh and Blood of our Savior
distinguished from his natural; besides St. Hierome you have also the suffrage
of Clemens Alexandrinus, in his Paedagogus, lib. 2. cap. 2. (...). The Blood of
our Lord is twofold, the one carnal, by which we are redeemed from corruption;
the other Spiritual, wherewith we are anointed, and by virtue of drinking
thereof we attain to incorruption. (...). And as he makes the Blood of our Lord
twofold, so we may be sure he makes his Body or Flesh, because his Mystical
Body and Blood go together. According to that which Mr Pelling in his Pious and
Learned Discourse of the Sacrament, quotes out of St Ambrose, who, says he,
speaking of that Body which is received in the Eucharist, calls it the
spiritual Body of Christ, the Body of a Divine Spirit; and he does confidently
affirm of all the Ancients who have either purposely interpreted, or
occasionally quoted the Words of Christ, in the sixth of St John, touching the
eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood, that they all understand him to speak
of a Spiritual Flesh and Blood, distinct not only from the Substance of the
Holy Elements, but also from that natural Body of Christ which he took of the
Substance of the Holy Virgin, page 233. So little Novelty is there in this
distinction of the Body and Blood of Christ into natural, and Spiritual or
Divine.

CHAP. VII.
1. An Apology for being thus operose and copious in inculcating the present
point from the usefulness thereof. 2. The first usefulness in that it defeats
Monsieur de Meaux his Stratagem to reduce us to Transubstantiation, as if no
Real Presence without it. 3. The second usefulness, for the rectifying the
Notion of Consubstantiation. 4. The third for more fully understanding the
Mystery of the Eucharist, with Applications of it to several Passages in our
Communion-Service. 5. The fourth for a very easy and natural Interpretation of
certain Passages in our Church-Catechism. 6. The privilege of the faithful
Receiver, and of what great noment the Celebration of the Eucharist is. 7. The
last usefulness in solidly reconciling the Rubric at the end of the
Communion-Service, with that noted Passage in our Church-Catechism.

1. THE Reader may happily think I have been over operose and copious in
inculcating this Distinction of Gratian's, touching the Body and Blood of
Christ in the Holy Eucharist. But the great usefulness thereof, I hope, may
apologize for this my extraordinary diligence and industry. For the Notion
being both true and unexceptionable, and not at all clashing, so far as I can
discern, with either the Holy Scripture, or right Reason and solid Philosophy,
to say nothing of the Suffrage of the Primitive Fathers, but rather very
agreeable and consentaneous to them all; and also having, as I said, its
weighty usefulness, it was a point, I thought, that was worth my so seriously
insisting upon; and as I have hitherto endeavored faithfully to set out the
Truth thereof, I shall now, though more briefly, intimate its Usefulness.

2. And the first Usefulness is this, Whereas that Reverend Prelate the Bishop
of Meaux tugs so hard to pull back again the Reformed Churches to the Communion
of the Church of Rome, by this Concession, or rather Profession of theirs, that
there is a Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ at the Celebration of
the Eucharist, to be received by the faithful, and that therefore they must
return to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as if there were no other Mode of
a Real Presence to be conceived but it: the force of this Inference is plainly
taken away, by this Distinction that Gratian, one of their own Church, has
luckily hit upon, or rather taken out of some ancient Father, and is more fully
made out in this Discourse, that there is a Spiritual and Divine Body of
Christ, distinct from that particular Body of his that hung on the Cross, which
the faithful partake of in the Lord's Supper. Whence it is plain there is no
need of Transubstantiation, which is encumbered with such abundance of
Impossibilities and Contradictions.

3. Secondly, This Notion of ours is hugely serviceable for the rectifying of
the Doctrine of Consubstantiation in the Lutheran Church, who are for an
Ubiquity of the particular Body of Christ that hung on the Cross, which
assuredly is a grand Mistake. But I believe in the Authors thereof there was a
kind of Parturiency, and more confused Divination of that Truth, which we have
so much insisted upon, and their Mistake consists only in this, that they
attributed to the particular Body of Christ, which belongs to his restrained
and circumscribed humane Nature, that which truly and only belongs to his
Divine Body, as he is the Eternal Logos, in whom is the (...), the Life or
Spirit of the Logos, to which Spirit of his this Body belongs, and therefore is
rightly called his Body, as appertaining to his Spirit. For this Body, this
Divine and Spiritual Flesh, as Gratian calls it, is every where present, though
not to be received as the Food of the Inward man, but only by the Faithful and
Regenerate, so that according to this Notion there may be a Consubstantiation
rightly interpreted, that is a Compresentiation, or rather Compresentiality of
both the Real Bread and Wine, and the Real Body and Blood of Christ at once; so
that they both may be really and indeed received by all true Believers. And
Lutheranism in this point thus heartily interpreted, will prove a sound and
unexceptionable Doctrine. And I charitably believe the first Authors of it, if
they had fully understood their own meaning, meant no more than so. And I wish
I had as much reason to believe that the Pontificians meant no more by their
Transubstantiation, but a firm and fast hold of the Real Presence. I hope the
most ingenuous of them at this time of the day mean no more than so, viz. That
they are as well assured of the Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ
to be received in the Celebration of the Eucharist; as if the very Bread was
turned into his Body, and the Wine into his Blood by a miraculous
Transubstantiation.

4. Thirdly, It is from this Notion or Distinction of the ancient Fathers, as I
hinted above, of the Body and Blood of Christ into Natural and Spiritual or
Divine, that we have ever been well appointed to give a more full and distinct
account of the nature of the Solemnity of the Eucharist as it is celebrated in
our Church, it plainly comprizing these two things. The first the Commemoration
of the Death of Christ, of the breaking his Body or Flesh, viz. the wounding
thereof with Nails and Spears. The other, The partaking of the Divine Body and
Blood of Christ, by which our Inward Man is nourished to Eternal Life: which
our eating the Bread and drinking the Wine are Symbols of. Both which in our
Communion-Service are plainly pointed at. The first fully, in the Exhortation
to Communicants, where it is said, And above all things you must give most
humble and hearty thanks to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for
the Redemption of the World by the Death and Passion of our Savior Christ,
both God and Man, who did humble himself even to the Death upon the Cross for
us miseable sinners -- And to the end we should always remember the exceeding
great love of our Master and only Savior Jesus Christ thus dying for us, and
the innumerable benefits, which by his precious Bloodshedding, he has obtained
to us, he has instituted and ordained Holy Mysteries as pledges of his Love,
and for a continual remembrance of his Death. And in the Prayer of
Consecration, the Celebration of the Eucharist is again said to be a continued
or perpetuated Commemoration of Christ's precious Death till his coming again.

But now for our receiving the Spiritual and Divine Body and Blood of Christ,
such passages as these seem to intimate it. In the Exhortation to the
Communicants, it is there said, if with a true penitent heart and lively faith
we receive this Holy Sacrament, then we spiritually eat the flesh of Christ and
drink his blood, then we dwell in Christ and Christ in us, we are one with
Christ and Christ with us. This passage plainly points to our Savior's
Discourse, John 5. v. 56. where he says, He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood, dwells in me and I in him. And he thus dwelling in us, he enlivens
us, we becoming one with Christ in a manner as the Soul and Body makes one, as
it follows in the next verse, As the living father has sent me, and I live by
the father, so he that eats me shall live by me, and so we become one with
Christ and Christ with us, we living by Christ as he by his Father; that is to
say, as Christ* lives by his Father, so we live by the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in us, Romans 8. 11. which Spirit or Life of Christ always implies the
Divine Body. As he that is joined unto the Lord in this Body is one Spirit, 1
Cor. 6. 17. Now this Exhortation so plainly alluding to this passage of our
Savior's Discourse, which speaks not of his particular natural Flesh, but of
that which is his Spiritual or Divine Flesh, it is plain that the genuine sense
of the Exhortation in this place is, that we really though spiritually (that is
by a fervent and devotional Faith) eat or receive the real Body and Blood of
Christ, viz. that Divine and Spiritual Body and Blood of his abovementioned.
And this passage of our Savior's Discourse is again alluded to in the Prayer
immediately before the Prayer of Consecration in these words, Grant us
therefore, Gracious Lord, so to eat the Flesh of thy Dear Son Jesus Christ, and
to drink his Blood that our sinful Bodies may be made clean by his Body, and
our Souls washed through his most precious Blood, and that we may evermore
dwell in him and he in us, John 6. 56. And these two places so plainly alluding
to our Savior's Discourse in the sixth of St John, it is very easy and
natural to conceive that what occurs in the Thanksgiving after our receiving
the Sacrament does sound to the same purpose. Almighty and everlasting God, we
most heartily thank thee for that thou do vouchsafe to feed us who have duly
received these Holy Mysteries, with the Spiritual Food of the most Precious
Body and Blood of thy Son and our Savior Jesus Christ -- The words even of
themselves do very naturally point at a real though spiritual partaking or
receiving into us the Body and Blood of Christ, namely, of that Flesh and Blood
which our Savior discourses of, John 6. And therefore we may be much more
assured that they do so, if we take notice, the sense is so backed and
strengthened by the other two Passages which do plainly relate to the Body, or
Flesh and Blood Christ discourses of, in the sixth of St John's Gospel.

I will only add one Consideration more, and that is from the Title of our
Communion-Service. Can there be any more likely reason why the Lord's Supper is
called THE HOLY COMMUNION, than that it refers to that of St Paul, 1 Cor. 10.
16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of
Christ? Because there is one Bread, we being many are one Body. For we are all
partakers of that one Bread. Which is that Bread from Heaven, which our Savior
discourses of in the sixth of St John. But the Words I have chiefly my Eye upon
are those: The Cup being called (...), the Communion of the Blood, and the
Bread, (...), the Communion of the Body of Christ; and the word (...), in all
likely hood, having the same sense that it had, 2 Pet. 1. 4. in (...), where we
are said to be called to the Participation of the Divine Nature, Communion here
in St Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians must naturally imply our real receiving
or partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ in the celebrating of this Holy
Communion, and that by thus partaking of that one Divine Body and Blood of his,
signified by the eating and drinking the Bread and Wine, we, though many,
become one Body: not in a Political Sense only, but, if I may so speak,
Divinely natural, we being made all Members of that one Universal Divine Body
of Christ, as he is the Eternal Logos, and so becoming (...), 2 Pet. 1. 4.

Wherefore, That Passage in St Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians, does
marvelous-fully set out the Nature of that part of the Lord's Supper, that is
distinguished from the Commemoration of his Death; and gives the most genuine
Reason of its being called the Holy Communion, it implying the real
Communication of that one Divine Body of Christ to the faithful, and their real
Union thereby with Christ and with one another, which is a full and perfect
Holy Communion indeed.

5. Fourthly, This Notion of the Fathers touching the Spiritual or Divine Body
and Blood of Christ, affords us a very easy and natural Interpretation of that
Passage in our Church-Catechism, touching the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper,
where to the Question, What is the inward part, or thing signified? It is
answered, The Body and Blood of Christ which are verily and indeed taken and
received by the faithful in the Lord's Supper. In the Answer to a former
Question, Why was the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ordained? it is answered,
For a continual Remembrance of the Sacrifice of the Death of Christ, and the
Benefits received thereby. One eminent benefit whereof is the Remission of our
sins through the Blood of Christ shed on the Cross, for without blood there is
no Remission; the other is the feeding of the Regenerate Soul, or Inward man,
by the Real, but Spiritual or Divine Body and Blood of Christ, which contains
in it our through Sanctification, which is also a fruit or benefit of the
Sacrifice of the Death of Christ, forasmuch as we had not been capable of
Regeneration and of growth and degrees of Sanctification by the feeding on and
really receiving the Spiritual and Divine Body of Christ, without our
Reconciliation by his Blood shed on the Cross, which our Church here calls the
Sacrifice of the Death of Christ.

Now as in this Answer there is contained that great Benefit of the Remission
of our Sins in the Blood of Christ, and thereby of our Reconciliation to God;
so in the Answer mentioned before is contained that singular Benefit of
perfecting our Sanctification by the nourishing and corroborating our inward
man by eating or partaking of the Spiritual or Divine Body and Blood of our
Savior, which are verily and indeed taken and received by the faithful in the
Lord's Supper. [Verily] that is to say, (...) or (...), truly, in
counterdistinction to Typically, or Symbolically, the Bread and Wine being but
Types or Symbols of this. Touching which in the Answer to the Question, What
are the Benefits whereof we are made partakers thereby? it is said, The
strengthening and refreshing our Souls by the Body and Blood of Christ, as our
Bodies are by the Bread and Wine, viz. which are but Types of the true,
spiritual or Divine Body and Blood of Christ, but they have a very handsome
Analogy the one to the other. But we proceed to the following words, [And
indeed] that is to say, (...) or (...), revera, or really, not as one
scoptically would make us to profess, that this real participation of the Body
and Blood of Christ, has no reality any where but in our fancy, which we call
Faith. To which sense the Translator of the peaceable method for the re-uniting
Protestants and Catholics, speaks in his Preface to his Translation. To which
exception, this Notion of the Primitive Fathers, according to which our
Communion-Service is framed, and our Homilies allude to, and we so much insist
upon, is not liable. [By the Faithful] and that only by them, which Body and
Blood the Faithful do not receive by champing it with their Teeth, and
swallowing it down their Throat. But by a fervid and living devotional Faith
more than ordinarily kindled at the Celebrating the Holy Eucharist, they draw
this Divine and Celestial Food (the true Manna from Heaven) into their Hearts,
whereby their inward Man is fed and strengthened, and nourished up to Eternal
Life, and so the New Birth getting growth daily, arrives at last to the due
measure of the stature of Christ.

6. This is the Privilege of the faithful Receiver. But for those that are
devoid of this true and living Faith, though the Divine Body and Blood of
Christ is every where present to the faithful, yet they who are unregenerate,
and consequently devoid of the Divine Life, are capable of no union therewith,
nor of any growth or strength therefrom. But it is like the light shining into
a dead man's eye, of which there is no vital effect. But for those who are
regenerate, and consequently have a real hunger and thirst after the
Righteousness of God, though the great Feast upon this Heavenly Food is more
especially and copiosely enjoyed in the Celebration of the Holy Eucharist, yet
they may in some good measure draw it in day by day by Faith and Devotion, as
without the Presence of the Bread and Wine we may at any time devotionally
think of the Sacrifice of the Death of our Savior. But certainly this solemn
Institution of Celebrating his last Supper, being particularly and earnestly
enjoined us by Christ, if we conscientiously observe the same, it will have a
more than ordinary efficacy in us for the ends it was appointed.

7. Sixthly and lastly, as those words of the Catechism [the Body and Blood of
Christ which are verily and indeed taken and received, etc.] have, considered
in themselves, a very easy and natural sense so explained, as we have
according to the Analogy of the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers and our
Church's Homilies that allude to them, explained them; so do they not at all
clash with those words of the Rubric affixed at the end of the
Communion-Service, where it is affirmed, That the Sacramental Bread and Wine
remains still in their very natural substances, and therefore may not be adored
(for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians) and the
natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not here, it
being against the truth of Christ's Natural Body to be at one time in more
places than one. There is I say, in this, no contradiction to what occcurs in
the Catechism, which affirms that there is a Real Presence of the Body and
Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received by the Faithful
in the Lord's Supper, though here a Real Presence is denied of the natural Body
of Christ. But it is to be considered that this Affirmation and Negation is not
of the same Body of Christ, and therefore can be no contradiction, and further
to be observed, how the very Rubric suggests to us this distinction of the
Natural Body of Christ (which is appropriated to his particular Soul, and which
hung on the Cross and was Crucified) and his Divine or Spiritual Body, the Body
of the Essential Life or Spirit of the Eternal Logos, and therefore rightly
termed the Body of the Logos incarnate, or of Christ.

And therefore when passages of the Ancient Fathers in the Primitive Times
before the degeneracy of the Church came in, may some of them favor a Real
Absence, other a Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ according as
different places of the Scripture might occur to their minds touching this
matter, the controversy might well be composed by distinguishing betwixt the
Natural Body of Christ and his Divine or Spiritual Body. According to the
former whereof is the Real Absence, according to the latter the Real Presence
of Christ's Body and Blood, to be received by the Faithful in the Celebration
of the Holy Eucharist.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Monsieur Maimbourg so cunning and cautious as not to attempt to bring the
Protestants to Transubstantiation by their common consent in the Real Presence,
but by a more general Maxim, which, he says, we are all agreed in. 2. The
aforesaid Maxim with the Explication thereof. 3. Six Supposals surmiz'd for
the strengthening this Engine for the pulling the Protestants into the belief
of Transubstantiation. 4. A Counter-Engine consisting of sixteen common
Notions, in which, not only the Romanists and we, but all mankind are agreed
in. 5. An Examination of the strength of Monsieur Maimbourg's Engine, by
recurring upon occasion to these Common Notions; The first Prop examined, viz.
the Churches Infallibility by assistance of the Spirit, and discovered to be
weak from the Dissension of Churches in matters of Faith in his sense. 6. From
the promise of the Spirit being conditional. 7. And from the Predictions in the
Prophetical Writings of a general Degeneracy of the Church. 8. The Examination
of the second Prop, that would have Transubstantiation believed upon the
Synodical decision of a fallible Church. 9. The Examination of the third Prop,
that would have the Synodical decision pass into an Article of Faith. 10. The
fourth Prop examined by defining truly what Heresy and Schism is. 11. The fifth
Prop further explained by Mounsieur Maimbourg, in two Propositions. 12. An
Answer to the two Propositions.

1. I HAVE, I hope by this time, sufficiently proposed and confirmed both the
Truth and Usefulness of the distinction of the Body and Blood of Christ (which
occurs in the Primitive Fathers) into Natural, and Spiritual or Divine. From
whence it may plainly appear to any pious and uprejudiced Reader, that the
Inference of a Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine into the Real Body and
Blood of Christ, from a Real Presence of them in the Lord's Supper, is very
weak and invalid. Which Monsieur Maimbourg (as well as the Bishop of Meaux,
formerly Bishop of Condom) though he take special notice of in his Peaceable
Method, viz. that this Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Lord's Supper, is generally acknowledged by the Protestants, Chap. 3. whom he
will have to hold, That the Sacrament is not a Figure or empty Sign without
Efficacy, but they do maintain, says he, that it does communicate unto us in a
most real and effectual Manner, the Body of Jesus Christ to be the Food of our
Souls; And he will have Monsieur Claud himself acknowledge, that before this
Novelty of Transubstantiation was introduced, every one believed that Jesus
Christ is present in the Sacrament, that his Body and Blood are there truly
received by the faithful; yet he is so wise and cautious as not to trust to the
strength of this Engine for the pulling us back into a belief and profession of
that incredible Hypothesis, but according to the Fineness of his wit, has
spread a more large Net to catch us in and carry us captive, not only into this
gross Error of Transubstantiation, but into all other Errors which the Church
of Rome has broached, or may hereafter broach and propose as Articles of Faith.
And therefore it is a point worth our closest consideration.

2. His general Maxim is this, That that Church in which are found two Parties
concerned, has ever had the power to determine all differences, and to declare
that as matter of Faith, which before there was no obligation to believe, and
that we are bound to acquiesce in her Decisions, under Penalty of being
Schismatics.

By the Church her declaring as matter of Faith (which seems to sound so
harshly) he does not mean, That the Church has Authority to frame New Articles
of Faith, (page 17.) but that She is to act according to a Rule, which is Holy
Scripture, and Tradition truly and purely Apostolical, from which we have also
received the Holy Scripture it self. And (page 18.) The Church never did make,
and undoubtedly never will make any New Articles of Faith, since it is not in
her power to define any thing but according to the Word of God, which she is
always to consult with, as with her Oracle, and the Rule she is bound to follow.

His meaning therefore must be this, That besides those plain and Universally
known Articles of the Christian Faith, and acknowledged from the very beginning
of Christianity, such as are comprised in the Apostles Creed, there have been,
and may be other Articles of Faith more obscurely and uncertainly delivered in
Scripture, which, until the Church in a lawful Synod or Council has determined
the sense of those places of Scripture that appertain to the Controversy, men
have no obligation to believe, but go for the present, for but uncertain and
indifferent Opinions. But when once the true Church, in which the Parties
differing in Opinion are, and her lawful Representative assisted by the Holy
Ghost, (as is affirmed Chap. 2. page 28.) a Canonical Assembly, which alone has
full Power and Sovereign Authority to say juridically (Chap. 4. page 27.) It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, has given definitive Sentence touching
the Controversy, that which before was but an indifferent Opinion, becomes now
Matter of Faith, and is to be received as an Article of Faith by the Dissenting
Party, upon penalty of being Schismatics and Heretics. This I conceive to be
his precise meaning.

But the great Artifice of all is, That he will have this meaning of his to be
the general Opinion also of the Protestant Churches. Who can, says he, (page
27.) question, but the Protestant Churches of England, France, Germany, and
Switzerland and the Low Countries do hold as a Fundamental Maxim, that in such
Controversies as do arise concerning Doctrine in Matters of Religion, the true
Church of which the Dissenting Parties are Members, has full and sovereign
power to declare according to the Word of God, what is of Faith, and that there
is an Obligation of standing to her Decrees, under pain of being Schismatics.
And (page 35.) I demand, says he, nothing more for the present: I will content
my self with what themselves do grant; That that Church of which the Parties
contesting are Members, (be she fallible or infallible) has full power to
decide Differences, and her Decrees do oblige under the Penalty of being
Schismatics.

3. Now from this general Maxim granted, as he conceives, on both sides, and
which he does chiefly endeavor to prove from the carriage of the Synod of
Dort, toward the Arminians (all which things to repeat here would be too
moliminous and inconsistent with the Brevity I intend, a full Answer to
Monsieur Maimbourg's Method requiring some more able Pen) he declining, I say,
all dispute touching the Merit of the Cause, the point of Transubstantiation,
he would hence draw us in, to the embracing that Doctrine merely because we
were once of that Church that has Synodically determined for it, and
consequently reconcile us to all the rest of the Errors of the Church of Rome.
But that we may not so easily be taken in this Net, or pulled in by this
Engine, we will first examine the Supposals that support the strength of it, or
of which it does consist.

The first and chiefest whereof is, That such Synods to whose definitive
sentence he would have us stand, are assisted by the Holy Ghost.

The second, That whether they be or be not, we are to stand to their
determination.

The third, Whatever Matters of Opinion (as they are for the present but such)
are decided by such a Synod, pass into Articles of Faith

The fourth, That those that will not close with these Decisions be they what
they will, they are guilty of Schism, as being bound to assent.

The fifth, That these decisive Synods or Assemblies, are to decide according
to the Rule of the Word of God.

The sixth and last, That both the Protestants and Papists are agreed in all
these.

4. Now before I examine these Particulars, these Supposals, Parts or Props of
his general Maxim, by which he would draw the Protestants again into the Church
of Rome, and make them embrace Transubstantiation, and all other Superstitions
and Errors which they have Synodically decided for matters of Faith: I will,
following the very method of this shrewd Writer, propose not only one Maxim,
but several Maxims, wherein both the Romanists and We, and indeed all mankind
are agreed in, and which therefore I will instead of Maxims call Common
Notions, in allusion to those of Euclid. And the first shall be this,

I. That which in it self is false, no declaring or saying it is true can make
it true.

II. Whatever is plainly repugnant to what is true is certainly false.

III. Whatever is false can be no due Article of a true Faith or Religion.

IV. The senses rightly circumstantiated are true Judges of their Object,
whether such an Object be Earth, Air, Fire, or Water, Body or Spirit, and the
like.

Besides that this is a Common Notion with all mankind, the Incarnate Wisdom
himself has given his suffrage for it, in his arguing with St Thomas, John 20.
v. 27. Then says he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands,
and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless but
believing. What is this but the appealing to the truth of sense by our Savior
himself? And Luke 24. v. 29. Behold my hands and my feet that it is I my self,
handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see I have. Here
is an appeal both to Sense and Reason at once, and that about the very Body of
Christ, touching which the great Controversy is raised.

V. An Essence or Being that is one, so long as it remains so, as it is
distinct from others, so it is undividable or inseparable from it self.

VI. The whole is bigger than the part, and the part less than the whole.

VII. In every Division, though the parts agree with the whole, yet they
disagree amongst themselves. So that the part A. is not the very part B. nor
the part B. the very part C. nor can each part be truly and adequately the
whole by the foregoing common Notion.

VIII. The same Body cannot be actually a Cube and a Globe at once, and there
is the same reason of any other different Figures of a Body.

IX. No Revelation, the Revealing whereof, or the manner of the Revealing
whereof is repugnant to the Divine Attributes, can be from God.

X. No Tradition of any such Revelation can be true, for as much as the
Revelation it self is impossible.

XI. No interpretation of any Divine Revelation that is repugnant to rightly
circumstantiated Sense and pure and unprejudiced Reason, whether it be from a
private or public hand, can be any Inspiration from God.

XII. No Body can be bigger and less than it self at once.

XIII. That Individual Body that is already, nor cease to be, cannot be made
while it is already existing.

XIV. One and the same Body cannot be both present with it self and many
thousand miles absent from it self at once.

XV. One and the same Body cannot be shut up in a Box, and free to walk and run
in the Fields, and to ascend into the very Heavens at the same time.

XVI. And lastly (to omit many other such selfevident Truths or Common Notions)
it is impossible, that a man should swallow his whole Body, Head, Feet, Back,
Belly, Arms, and Thighs, and Stomach it self, through his Mouth, down his
Throat into his Stomach, that is, every whit of himself into one knows not what
of himself, less than a Mathematical point or nothing. For if all be swallowed,
what is there left of the man for it to be swallowed into, but a mere point or
rather nothing?

5. Certainly all the World as well Papists as Protestants, as soon as they do
but conceive the meaning of the Terms, will assent to the Truth of these
Propositions at the very first sight; which therefore has made me call them
Common Notions. Let us now apply our selves to the use of them in the examining
the strength of Monsieur Maimbourg's general Maxim, wherein he will have the
Papists and Protestants agreed.

The first Prop thereof is, That the true Church is infallible by the promise
made to her of being assisted by the Holy Ghost. But here I demand whether this
promise be made to the Universal Church or any Particular Church or Churches
throughout all Ages. That it is not made to the Universal Church throughout all
Ages, is plain, in that the parts thereof have been and are still divided in
several matters of Faith. That no such promise is made to any Particular Church
or Churches, is plain from hence, that these Churches are not named in any part
of the Scripture; which omission is incredible if there had been any such
entailment of Infallibility upon any Particular Church or Churches. But of all
Churches, I humbly conceive, it is impossible it should be the Church of Rome,
unless it be possible that all those Common Notions which I have set down, and
in which all the World, even the Church of Rome her self, if they will speak
their Consciences, are agreed in, be false, which they must be if
Transubstantiation be true. And therefore let any man judge whether is themore
likely, viz. That Transubstantiation should be false or those Common Notions
not true.

6. Again, How does it appear that this promise of the assistance of the Holy
Ghost is not conditional? Indeed Christ says, John 16. 13. When the spirit of
truth is come he will guide you into all truth, viz. the same spirit that is
promised, chap. 14. v. 15, 16, 17. But the words of this pretended Charter of
Infallibility are there set down more fully: If you love me keep my
commandments; And I will pray the father and he shall give you another
comforter that he may abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth whom
the world cannot receive -- The promise of the assistance of the Holy Ghost for
the infallibly concluding what is true, even from the words of this pretended
Charter of Infallibility, is conditional, that is to say, if they so love
Christ as to keep his commandments, and become not worldly and carnal (for the
World cannot receive this spirit of truth) then this spirit which leads into
all truth shall assist them. Wherefore as many as Christ sends this infallible
spirit to, he first fits them for it by mortifying the spirit of the World in
them, and making them members of his truly Holy Church; for the calling
themselves Holy Church, makes them never a jot the more Holy, if they really be
not so, by the first common Notion.

And besides, If the Words of this Charter of Infallibility had not been so
express, yet in common sense and reason this condition would necessarily have
been understood. Forasmuch as nothing can be more absurd than to imagine the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost to be so cheap and trivial a thing, as to be
procured for the concluding Controversies arising or set on foot in the Church,
which are needless and frivolous, or more for satisfying Curiosity than
Edification, and which tend to Division, and tearing the Church violently into
parts, which was one before and in a salvable condition without this Decision,
as Monsieur Maimbourg confesses himself: Or that the Holy Ghost will assist
such Assemblies as are worldly and carnally minded, and are called to conclude
for the worldly Advantage and Interest of a worldly Polity, who for the
upholding and increasing their Temporal Empire (whereby they Lord it over the
World, and ride on the necks of Kings and Princes) call themselves Spiritual.
Certainly when all Christian Truth tends to real and indispensable Holiness, if
mankind were not left to the liberty of their own Will, but Christ would have
them so infallibly wise, he would all along have prepared them for it, by
making them unexceptionably Holy, that they might become wise in his own Way
and Method

7. And lastly, There being Predictions in Daniel and the Apocalpyse of an
Antichristian State in the Church to come (in which there will be such a
general Apostasy from the Apostolic Purity) even according to their own
Interpreters, I demand what assurance we have that these Times came not (in a
very great measure) upon the Church, some hundreds of Years before
Transubstantiation was concluded on by the Roman Church, which therefore must
much invalidate the pretense of the Infallibility of any such Councils. And our
Church of England, as all know, in her Homilies, whether by inspiration or by
mere solid Reason and Judgment refers the vision of the seventeenth Chapter of
the Apocalypse, to the Church of Rome. And, I hope, to any unprejudiced Reader,
that has leisure to examine things, I have even demonstratively made out that
truth in my Exposition of the Apocalypse, and most punctually and distinctly of
all in my Ioint-Exposition of the thirteenth and seventeenth Chapters thereof,
Synops. Prophet. Book 1. Chap. 11, 12, 13, etc. with the preparatory Chapters
thereto. Let any one read them that please, and in the due fear of God consider
them.

Wherefore, to conclude, touching this first Prop of his general Maxim, whereby
he would insinuate that Synods, to whose definitive Sentence he would have us
to stand, are assisted by the Holy Ghost, it does not only not underprop, but
undermine his grand Maxim. Forasmuch as we have no assurance that those Roman
Councils which have concluded for Transubstantiation were assisted by the Holy
Ghost, but rather quite contrary.

8. The second Prop is, That whether a Synod be or be not assisted by the Holy
Ghost, we are to stand to their determination. If the Synod be not assisted by
the Holy Ghost then they are fallible, and may be in the wrong: so that the
sense is, whether the Synod determine right or wrong, yet we are to stand to
their determination. Which as odly as it sounds, yet in some sober sense, I
must confess ingenuously, for ought I know, may be true, that is, in such
things as are really disputable, and which for no sinister base design, but
merely for the peace of the Church and Her Edification, it has been thought fit
to make a Synodical Decision of the Controversy. But is this color enough for
the Church of Rome's Determination to be stood to? Of making the Bread in the
Sacrament to be transubstantiated into the very Body of Christ that hung on the
Cross at Jerusalem (and has ever since his Ascension been in Heaven) by the
Priest's saying over it, This is my Body, the Bread still remaining Bread to
all outward appearance, as before, so that Christ is fain to be at the expense
of a perpetual Miracle to make the transubstantiated Bread look like Bread
still, though it be really the Body of Christ that hung on the Cross at
Jerusalem. Which, as I have noted above, is against his Wisdom and Goodness, in
that, if Transubstantiation be a true Article of the Christian Faith, this is
the most effectual way imaginable to make men, if left to their own free
thought, to mis-believe it, however force and cruelty might constrain them to
profess it: And so it is against his Goodness, to expose so great a part of his
Church to such bloody Persecutions as this Article has occasioned in the
Christian World. That Christ should do a perpetual Miracle not that will
confirm men's Faith, but subvert it, not to edify his Church but distract it,
and lay all in confusion and blood! Let any one consider how likely this is to
be.

This therefore could never be a point, bona fide, disputable, but to such as
were horribly hoodwinkt with prejudice, and blinded with a desire of having a
thing concluded by the Church which was of such unspeakable advantage, as they
then thought, for the magnifying the Priesthood, though I believe nothing will
turn more to their Disrepute and shame in the conclusion. Now I dare appeal to
Monsieur Maimbourg himself, whether we are to stand to the Determination of a
fallible Synod in a Point, that, besides what I have already hinted,
contradicts all those Common Notions, which I have above recited, and in which
all mankind are agreed. And such is this point of Transubstantiation.

9. Now for the third Prop, That whatever Matters of Opinion (as they are for
the present but such) are decided by such a Synod, pass into Articles of Faith;
this Prop is also really a puller down of this general Maxim. For by an Article
of Faith, must be meant such an Article as after the synodical Decision, is
necessary to be believed by all Parties upon pain of Damnation But to this I
answer, first, No Falsehood can be an Article of Faith, nor can what is in it
self false, by all the declaring in the World that it is true, become true, by
the first Common Notion. And secondly, Since the whole Church before, in which
arose the Controversy, were in a salvable Condition, how Unchristian an act
must this be, to put so many thousand Souls in the State of Damnation, by so
unnecessary, nay mischievous a synodical Decision! And therefore what pretense
can there be to the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, which Christ has promised his
Church, when they machinate that, which so manifestly tends, according as the
Synod acknowledges, to the Damnation of such a multitude of Souls, which before
the Decision were in a salvable Condition, and also to most barbarous
Persecutions of their Persons, as it is notoriously known in History, touching
Transubstantiation.

10. The fourth Prop charges those with the guilt of Schism and Heresy that
will not close with the abovesaid Synodical Decisions, be they what they will.
In which matter we cannot judge whether the charge be right, unless we first
understand what is truly and properly Heresy and Schism. The former whereof I
demand what it can be, but a dissent from the Catholic Church even in those
things in it, that are Apostolical. For whatever National Church is found to
have all and nothing else in it but what is Apostolical, or not inconsistent
with the Apostolical Doctrine and Practice, is most assuredly one part of that
one Catholic and Apostolic Church, which we profess our Belief of in our
Creed. And for the latter it can be nothing else but a separation from the
Catholic Church, or from any Church that is part thereof, even then, when she
approves her self to be Catholic, that is to say even then, when she is
Apostolic, or, though she be Apostolic, and offers no opinions or usages but
such as are conformable to the usages and Doctrines of Christ and his Apostles,
or have no repugnancy thereto. To separate from the Church in such
circumstances as these, certainly is that great Crime of Schism; but to
separate from that part of the Church which imposes opinions and practices
plainly repugnant to the Precepts of Christ and his Apostles, this is no Schism
but Union with the truly ancient Catholic and Apostolic Church. And the
declaring it Schism does not, nor can make it so, by Common Notion the first..
And if it were Schism to separate from such a Church as propounds things
repugnant to the Precepts of Christ and his Apostles, the guilt of this Schism
is not upon them that thus separate, but upon those that impose such
Anti-Apostolical matters.

11. The fifth Prop, That these decisive Synods or Assemblies are to decide
according to the Rule of the Word of God, the strength of this Prop he
endeavors more fully to display page 34. and he calls upon the Brethren of the
Reformed Churches to reflect seriously upon these two Propositions he sets down.

The first is, That as the Word of God is infallible in it self, so certainly
the judgment of him who truly judges according to this Rule is also infallible:
And consequently they are obliged to believe, That the Church when she judges
according to this Rule or the Word of God, does not only not err, but that she
also cannot err.

The second, That they [the Reformed] are bound [as well as we the Romanists]
to believe that the Church of God deciding Controversies of Faith, does judge
according to the true sense of the word of God: Because upon the matter it is
concerning this very sense that she gives judgment betwixt the Parties, who
give it a different sense, and who are obliged in Conscience to submit to her
judgment, under pain of being Schismatics and Heretics, as their Synod of
Dort has positively declared.

12. The first of these Propositions may pass for firm and sound, provided that
the meaning of her judging according to this rule is the giving the right and
genuine sense thereof: Of which she can neither assure her self nor any one
else, but by being assured of that Holiness, Integrity, and singleness of
Heart, in those of the Synod, that makes them capable of the Assistance of the
Holy Ghost; and also that their Decision clashes not with those indeleble
Notions in the Humane Soul, that are previous Requisites for the understanding
the meaning of not only the Holy Scriptures, but of any writing whatever. And
unto which if they find any thing in the letter of the Sacred Writ repugnant,
they may be sure it is a Symbolical or Figurative Speech, but in other
writings, that it is either a Figurative Speech or Nonsense. He that has not
this previous furniture, or makes no use of it, it is impossible he should
prove a safe judgeof the sense of Scripture. And if he runs Counter to what is
certainly true, it is evident his Interpretation is false by the second Common
Notion, and that he is not inspired by Common Notion the eleventh.

Touching the second Proposition, I demand how any can be bound to stand to the
judgment of any Synod, if they decline the previous Requisites, without which
it is impossible to understand the right meaning of any writing whatsoever; and
whether their pretending to judge according to a Rule, does not imply, that
there are some Common Principles, in which all Parties are agreed in, according
to which, though they cannot discern that the Synod has certainly defined
right, yet if the Synod run Counter to them, they may be sure they have defined
wrong, touching the very sense controverted between the Parties. Their
professing they judge according to the Rule, implies the Rule is in some
measure known to all that are concerned. Nor does it at all follow, because the
Object of their decision is the very sense controverted between the Parties,
that the Synod may give what judgment she will, break all Laws of Grammar and
Syntax in the expounding the Text, much less contradict those Rules which are
infinitely more Sacred, and inviolable, the Common Notions which God has
imprinted essentially on the Humane Understanding. If such a violence be used
by any Interpreters of Scripture, neither the Synod of Dort, nor any Reformed
Church, has or will declare, That under pain of being Schismatics and
Heretics, they are obliged in Conscience to submit to their determination.

CHAP. IX.
1. The examination of the sixth Prop, by demanding whether the Maxim Monsieur
Maimbourg proproses is to be understood in the full sense, without any Appeal
to any common agreed on Principles of Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic and Morality.
2. Instances of enormous Results from thence, with a demand whether the
Protestant Churches would allow of such absurd Synodical Decisions. 3. That the
Citations of History, touching the Synod of Dort, prove not, that all Synodical
Decisions pass into proper Articles of Faith, with the Authors free judgment
touching the Carriage of that Synod, and of the Parties condemned thereby. 4.
His judgment countenanced from what is observed by Historians to be the
sentiments of King James in the Conference at Hampton Court.

1. AND yet the sixth and last Prop of the general Maxim implies as much,
which affirms, That both the Protestants and Papists are agreed in all the five
foregoing Supposals, or to speak more compendiously in that his general Maxim.
That that Church in which are found the two Parties concerned, has ever had the
power to determine all differences, and to declare that as matter of Faith,
which before there was no obligation to believe, and that we are bound to
aquiesce in their decisions under the penalty of being Schismatics.

But I demand here of Monsieur Maimbourg, whether he will have his Maxim
understood in a full latitude of sense, and that immediately without recourse
to any Principles in which the Synod and the Parties are agreed, and Counter to
which, if any determination be made it is null, such as Grammatical Syntax and
Lexicographical sense of Words; and (which are Laws infinitely more sacred and
inviolable) the Common Notions (as I said before) essentially imprinted on the
Soul of man, either of Truth or Morality, whether without being bounded by
these, the Protestant Churches as well as the Pontifician are agreed, that we
are to stand to the Determination of a Synod, under the penalty of being
Schismatics.

2. As for example, If a Synod should interpret, Drink ye all of this, of the
Clergy only, and declare it does not reach the Laity, though the Apostles and
Primitive Church understood it did: If notwithstanding St Paul's long
Exhortation against Religibus Exercise in an unknown Tongue, 1 Cor. 14. they
should by some distinction or evasion conclude it lawful. If when as it is
said, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image to worship and fall down
before it, they should distinguish and restrain it only to the graven Images of
the Heathen Gods. If when as it is said, Thou shall have no other Gods but me,
they should distinguish Gods into Supreme and Subordinate, and declare, we may
have many Subordinate Gods, but only One Supreme. If when as it said, Honor
thy Father and thy Mother, they should restrain it to a Father or Mother of the
same Religion with our selves, whether Political Father or Natural, otherwise
we are free from this Command, and may despise both our Natural Parents and our
Prince, if they be not of the same persuasion with our selves. And whereas it
is said, Thou shall not commit Adultery, if they should understand it only of
such an Adultery as is committed for the mere pleasure of the Flesh, not for
the health of the Body, or assisting the Conjugal Impotency of his Neighbor.
If the Commandment against Murder, or Killing an Innocent Person, they should
restrain to Murder that is accompanied with delight in Cruelty, not that which
is committed to raise a livelihood, or secure an Interest the Murderer has
espoused. If the Commandment against Stealing, they should restrain to such
Theft as is against Men of our Religion and Persuasion, but that we may rob and
steal from others without sin. And according to the same tenor they should
interpret, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor, etc. I
demand, I say, whether Monsieur Maimbourg does conceive, that the Protestants,
nay, or his own Party, are agreed that all such determinations are to be
submitted to upon penalty of being Schismatics. Let him ask the Reformed
Churches if they be thus agreed, or rather let him ask his own Conscience, if
he think they are. Wherefore it is plain, that what he produces out of the
History of the Synod of Dort, reaches not the point that he drives at, that is
to say, That it is acknowledged by them, that after a Synod has decided the
Controversy, or given the sense of places of Scripture controverted, be it
what it will be, the Decision is to be stood to, under penalty of being
Schismatics, and that there are not some commonly known Truths, common Notions
of Reason and Morality, with which if the determination of a Synod does clash,
it is ipso facto null, and a demonstration that the Spirit of God did not
assist.

3. I observe farther, That all the Citations that are produced either by
Monsieur Maimbourg himself, or his Translator, in his Preface and Appendix,
will not amount to the Protestants professing that every Controversy or
controverted Opinion, after the Decision of the Synod, passes into an Article
of Faith, which properly signifies such a Doctrine, as without the Belief of
which, when it is proposed, he that mis-believes it forfeits his Salvation; for
hereby the Synod of Dort had damned all the Lutheran Churches. For my own part
I must confess, that in points that are so obscure, intricate, and abstruse,
and which, as touching the main part of them, have exercised and much baffled
humane understanding through all Ages, it had been a great piece of Christian
Prudence for that Synod to have made Decrees against all bitterness of speech
of the disagreeing Parties one against another, and to have admonished them
that they were bound, notwithstanding their difference of Opinion, to live in
mutual Love one to another, which is the true Badge of Christ's genuine
Disciples, rather than to have exasperated one Party against another, by making
that Doctrine Authentic, which is really in it self from places of Scripture,
and Reason so intricate and disputable. But it seems to have been the sleight of Satan for the weakening the Reformed Churches that drove them to it. But I
must say, on the other side, that when the Synod had determined, they who were
determined against, ought to have submitted to her determination in a thing so
really disputable, and by this Christian Policy to have conserved the peace of
the Church, and outwitted the Devil. For if they had had any modesty in them,
they might very well in such abstruse, dark and disputable points have
compromised with the Synod, and preferred the peace and safety of the Reformed
Churches, before the satisfaction of their own Opinionativeness.

4. And that wise Prince, King James the first of Blessed Memory, seems to come
near to what I have said, in the words delivered by his Ambassador at the
Synod of Dort, as they are cited by Monsieur Maimbourg himself in his Peaceable
Method, page 23. That for the allaying those troubles, There was but that one
only means which the Church had ever made use of, a National Synod, which was
to be judge in the case, and to decide which of the two Opinions was more
conformable to the Word of God: or at least how and in what manner the one or
the other might be tolerated in the Church of God. Which latter part is
cunningly left out by the Translator, in his Preface, page 3. But in those
latter words, King James plainly intimates his moderate Sentiments touching the
Controversy, and that he would not have the Decision made too rigidly and
pinchingly on either side. And sutably to this excellent judgment of his, in
the Conference at Hampton Court, when the Puritans would have had the nine
Lambeth Articles, which are more full and express against the points of
Arminianism, to be embodyed into the Articles of our Church, concluded on in
the Convocation holden at London, in the Year 1562. the King earnestly refused
it. And in his Instructions to his Divines he sent over to the Synod of Dort,
this remarkable one was amongst the rest, That they would advise the Churches
that the Ministers do not deliver in Pulpit to the People those things for
ordinary Doctrines, which are the highest points of the Schools, and not fit
for vulgar Capacities, but disputable on both sides. And we may be sure when he
was so careful in this for the foreign Churches, he would not neglect to infuse
the same good Principles into his own. And that he could not easily believe
that upon the Decision of the Synod of Dort, that passed into an Article of
Faith, without which there is no Salvation, which yet he would have hid from
the knowledge of the People.

CHAP. X.
1. What Synodical Decisions are capable of passing into proper Articles of
Faith, and what not. 2. The necessity of distinguishing the doctrinal Decisions
of Synods into Articles of Faith, properly so called, and Articles of
Communion. 3. The meaning of the King's Answer to Mr. Knewstub, in the
Conference at Hampton Court: And that Synods have unlimited Power to put what
sense they please on places of Scripture, and make them pass into Articles of
Faith, not proved to be the Opinion of the Protestant Churches. 4. That our
English Church is against it, largely proved out of her Articles. 5. No Article
of Faith pre-existent in Scripture that cannot be fetched thence but by
interpreting against the Proleptick Principles of rightly circumstantiated
Sense and Common Notions ingrafted essentially in the Humane Understanding. 6.
Of Decision of points necessary to Salvation, and to the justifying the
Christian Worship, and those that are less necessary, and less clear, and
lastly, those that have an Insuperable Difficulty on both sides. 7. Monsieur
Maimbourg's general Maxim, that it is not agreed in by the Protestant
Churches, abundantly demonstrated, with a Note of the Subtilty of the Romanists
in declining the Dispute of the particular merits of their Cause, and making it
their business to persuade, first, that their Church is Infallible. 8. A
Meeting with Monsieur Maimbourg once more in his own Method, and thereby
demonstrating that Transubstantiation is grossly false, and consequently the
Church of Rome fallible, with an hint of a true peaceable Method of reconciling
Papists and Protestants.

1. WHerefore it seems needful to take notice of this distinction of the
Doctrinal Decisions of Synods, that some pass into, or rather are of the nature
of the Articles of Faith, the knowledge of them being necessary to keep us from
Sin and Damnation. And such were the Doctrinal Decisions of those ancient
Primitive Councils, who out of Scripture plainly declared, the truth of the
Divinity of Christ and Triunity of the Godhead, without which the Church would
be involved in gross Idolatry. And therefore the Decisions of the Controversies
did naturally pass into professed Articles of the Christian Faith, and such as
our Salvation depended on. But to imagine that every Doctrinal Decision of a
Synod passes into a proper Article of Faith, without which there is no
Salvation, and that a Synod has power to make that an Article of Faith, before
which men were safe and sinless as to that point, is to put it into the power
of a Synod to damn God knows how many Myriads of men which Christ dyed for, and
had it not been for these curious, or rather mischievous Decisions, might have
been saved; than which what can be more prodigious?

2. Whence we see plainly it is most necessary to make this distinction in
Doctrinal Decisions of Synods, that some may be Articles of Faith, others only
Articles of Communion, that if any oppose or disparage the said Articles,
whether they be of the Clergy or Laity, they make themselves obnoxious to
Excommunication; and if a Clergyman does not subscribe to them, he makes
himself incapable of Ecclesiastical Employment. This is all that Monsieur
Maimbourg can squeeze out of all his Citations out of the story of the Synod of
Dort, so far as I can perceive, or his Translator in his Preface and Appendix,
out of those he produces touching the Church of England.

3. And that which his Translator in his Preface would make such a great
business of, viz, This wise Kings answer to Mr Knewstubs, at the Conference at
Hampton Court, when he was asked, How far an Ordinance of the Church was to
bind men without impeachment of their Christian Liberty: to which he said, he
would not argue that point with him, but answer therein as Kings are wont to
speak in Parliament, Le Roy s'avisera. And therefore I charge you never speak
more to that point how far you are bound to obey when the Church has once
ordained it. I say nothing more can be collected out of this answer, but that
he modestly intimated his Opinion, that he meant not that all Synodical
Decisions passed into Articles of Faith, but may be only Articles of Communion
in the sense I have already explained. And what I have already said, if
seriously and considerately applied to what he produces in his Appendix, will
easily discover that they prove nothing more touching the Church of England,
than what we have already allowed to be her Doctrine touching the Authority of
Synods.

But that a Synod without any limitation or appeal to certain Principles in
which both the Synod and Parties contesting are all agreed in, may by her bare
immediate Authority, give what sense she pleases on places of Scripture,
alleged in the Controversy, and that her Decision passes into an Artiticle of
Faith, which the Parties cast are bound to assent to, under the pain of
becoming Heretics and Schismatics. Nothing can be more contrary than this to
the Declarations of the Church of England. So far is it from truth, That all
the Protestant Churches are agreed in his grand Maxim above mentioned.

4. Let the Church of England speak for her self, Artic. 19. As the Church of
Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch, so also the Church of Rome has erred, not
only in their Living and Ceremonies, but also in Matters of Faith. And Article
21. General Councils may not be gathered together without the Commandment and
Will of Princes. And when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an
Assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and Word of God)
they may err, and sometimes have erred even in things appertaining to God,
wherefore things ordained by them, as necessary to Salvation, have neither
Strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of the
Holy Scriptures. Here our Church plainly declares, that forasmuch as a Council
or Synod consists of fallible Persons, they can determine nothing necessary to
Salvation, but what they can make out that it is clearly, to any unprejudiced
Eye, contained in the Scripture, not fetched out by weak and precarious
Consequences, or phanciful Surmises, much less by a distorted Interpretation,
and repugnant to Common Sense and Reason, which are necessarily supposed in the
understanding of any Scripture or Writing whatsoever, as I have intimated above.

And even that Article (20.) which the Translator produces in his Preface, in
the behalf of Monsieur Maimbourg's grand Maxim, do but produce the whole
Article and it is plainly against it. For the words are these: The Church has
power to decree Rites and Ceremonies and Authority in Controversies of Faith;
and yet it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to
God's Word written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture that it be
repugnant to another. Wherefore although the Church be a Witness and Keeper of
Holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so beside
the same, ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for Necessity of
Salvation. It is true, the Church is here said to have Authority in
Controversies of Faith. As certainly if any should raise new Stirs in any
National Church, touching such points as the Ancient Primitive Synods have
concluded for, in the behalf of the Divinity of Christ, and Triunity of the
Godhead, pretending they have clearer demonstrations than ever yet were
proposed against those Decisions or any of like nature, which may concern the
Iustifiableness of our Christian Worship, and indispensable way of Salvation,
the Church has Authority as she ever had, in such Controversies, to ratify
such Articles of Faith, but she is not said to have Authority to make every
Synodical Decision an Article of Faith, whether the nature thereof will bear it
or no. Nay her Authority is excluded from enforcing any thing besides what is
clearly enough contained in the Scripture (as assuredly those points are above
mentioned, though with weak or cavilling men they have been made questionable)
to be believed for Necessity of Salvation. Which is the proper Character of an
Article of Faith, according as the Preface to the Athanasian Creed intimates.
And Monsieur Maimbourg himself is so sensible of this main Truth, that in the
Explication of his general Maxim, he acknowledges that the Church has no
Authority to coin any New Articles of Faith, but only to declare she has
discovered them existent before in the Scriptures, but not so clearly espied or
discerned as by an assembled Synod.

5. But certainly no Article of Faith, that is to say, no Truth necessary to
Salvation can be said to be pre existent in the Scriptures, and having lain hid
to be discovered afterward, that is not discovered but by such forced
Interpretations of the Text, that are repugnant to Common Sense and Reason. Is
not this a Reproach to the Wisdom of God, that he should inspire the Holy
Penmen to set down Truth necessary to Salvation so obscurely, that the meaning
cannot be reached without doing violence to Common Sense and Reason, and
running counter to those previous Principles, without which it is impossible to
make sense of any writing whatever? Or without interpreting one place of
Scripture repugnantly to the plain sense of another. Which this Article
expressly forbids as unlawful. So plain is it that our Church limits the
Authority of a Synod to certain Rules agreed of on all hands, against which
they have no Authority to define any thing: And plain places of Scripture is
one Rule, contrary to which it is not lawful to interpret any either
pretendedly or really obscure place. Nor can any place at all be plain without
the admittance of those Proleptick Principles of rightly circumstantiated sense
and common undeniable Notions essentially ingrafted in the mind of man, whether
they relate to Reason or Morality. These, both Synod and Contesters, are
supposed to be agreed on, and therefore no Synodical Decision repugnant to
these according to our Church in interpreting of Scripture (if I rightly
understand her) ought to have Authority with it.

6. But as for doctrinal Decisions, such as concern the Justifiableness of the
Christian Worship, and are of Necessity to Salvation, and such as, although
either weak or willful cavilling men may make questionable, yet are clearly
enough delivered in Scripture, these, questionless, a Synod has Authority to
determine as Articles of Faith. And such as have not the like Clearness nor
Necessity, as also innocent and indifferent Rites and Ceremonies, when the one
and the other seem advantageous to the Church, such Synodical Decisions may
pass into Articles of Communion, in that sense I have above explained. And
lastly, As in that case of the Synod of Dort, when the points controverted have
on both sides that invincible Obscurity and Intricacy, and there seems to be
forcible Arguments for either conclusion. What, I humbly conceive, is to be
done in that case, I have fully enough expressed already, and therefore think
it needless again to repeat.

7. In the mean time, I hope, I have made it manifoldly apparent that Monsieur
Maimbourg's general Maxim, viz. That the Church, in which are found the two
Parties concerned, has ever had the Power to determine all differences, and to
declare that as Matter of Faith, which before there was no Obligation to
believe; And that we are bound to acquiesce in her Decisions under the penalty
of being Schismatics, is not, (especially as he would have his Maxim
understood) agreed on by all Churches, as well Protestant as Pontifician. And
that therefore this Snare or Net, wherewith he would catch and carry Captive
the Protestants into a Profession of the Infallibility of the Church in
Synodical Decisions; so that the Church must be first allowed Infallible, that
we may glibly swallow down whatsoever she decides, even Transubstantiation it
self, with all other Errors of the Church of Rome; this Net or Snare, I hope,
I have sufficiently broken. And I will only note by the bye, how the subtilest
Romanists declining the Merits of the Cause, labor Tooth and Nail to establish
the absolute Infallibility of their Church. But our Savior tells us, By the
fruit you shall know them. Wherefore any man or Company of men that profess
themselves infallible, their Infallibility must be examined by their Doctrines,
which if they be plainly any one of them false, their boast of Infallibility
most certainly is not true.

8. But forasmuch as an Appeal to a Maxim pretended to be agreed upon by both
sides, both Papists and Protestants, is made use of with so much Wit and
Artifice, to engage the Protestants to embrace Transubstantiation and the rest
of the Romish Errors: I hope Monsieur Maimbourg will not take it amiss, if I
civilly meet him again in his own Way, and show him by an Appeal, not only to
one Maxim but above a dozen at least of Common Notions, which I did above
recite, and in which both Papists and Protestants, and all mankind are agreed,
that it may demonstratively be made evident that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is grossly false.

For that which in it self is false, no declaring or saying it is true, though
by the vote of an entire Synod, can make it true, by the first of the Common
Notions abovementioned, Chap. 8. Sect. 4.

Secondly, Whatever is plainly repugnant to what is true, is certainly false,
and consequently can be no due Article of a true Faith or Religion, by the
second and third Common Notions. And therefore Transubstantiation cannot pass
into an Article of Faith by the Authority of any Synod whatever.

Thirdly, Now that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is false, is manifest
from the assurance of our Senses rightly circumstantiated. To which our Savior
Christ appeals, who is wiser than all the Synods that ever were or will be, as
was observed in Common Notion the fourth. But our Senses assure us it is Bread
still, not the Body of Christ.

Fourthly, If Transubstantiation be true, an Essence or Being that is one
remaining still one, may be divided or separated from it self, which is
repugnant to the fifth Common Notion.

Fifthly, If Transubstantiation be true, the whole is not bigger than the part,
nor the part less than the whole, which contradicts the sixth Common Notion.

Sixthly, If Transubstantiation be true, the parts in a Division do not only
agree with the whole, but agree one with another, and are indeed absolutely the
same; for divide a consecrated Wafer into two, viz. A. and B. this A. and B.
are the same entire Individual Body of Christ according to this Doctrine, which
contradicts the seventh Common Notion.

Seventhly, If the said Doctrine be true, one and the same Body may be a Cube
and a Globe at once, have the figure of an Humane Body and of a Pyramid and
Cylinder at the same time, according as they shall mould the Consecrated Bread,
which is repugnant to the eighth Common Notion.

Eighthly, Transubstantiation, if it be any truth at all, it is a Revealed
Truth; but no Revelation the Revealing whereof, or the manner of Revealing is
repugnant to the Divine Attributes, can be from God, by Common Notion the
ninth: but if this Doctrine of Transubstantiation were a Truth, it seems not to
suit with the Wisdom of God to reveal a Truth that seems so palpably to
overthrow and thwart all the innate Principles of humane Understanding, and the
assurance of the rightly circumstantiated Senses, to both which Christ himself
appeals, and without which we have no certainty of the Miracles of Christ and
his Apostles. And he hence exposes his Church to be befooled by all the
lucriferous fictions of a fallacious Priesthood.

And besides this, the circumstances or manner of its first Revelation at the
Lord's Supper as they would have it, shows it cannot be; for the Consecrated
Bread retaining still the shape and all other sensible qualities of Bread
without any change, and that by a miraculous supporting them, now not inherent
in their proper subject Bread, which is transubstantiated into that very Body
that holds it in his hands, or seems so to do. I say, as I have also intimated
before, to be thus at the expense of so vast a Miracle here at his last Supper,
and to repeat the same Miracle upon all the Consecrations of the Bread by the
Priest, which is the most effectual means to make all men Infidels, as to the
belief of Transubstantiation, and to occasion thence such cruel and bloody
Persecutions, is apparently contrary to the Divine Wisdom and Goodness; and
therefore neither pretended Tradition nor fresh Interpretation of the inspired
Text, can make so gross a falsehood true, by the tenth and eleventh Common
Notions.

Ninthly, If Transubstantiation be true, one and the same Body may be many
thousand times bigger or less than it self at the same time, forasmuch as the
least Atom or particle of his Body or Transubstantiated Bread is his whole Body
as well as the bigger lump according to this Doctrine, which contradicts the
twelfth Common Notion.

Tenthly, If this Doctrine be true, The same Individual Body still existing and
having existed many Years, may notwithstanding be made whiles it already
exists, which contradicts the thirteenth Common Notion.

Eleventhly, If Transubstantiation be true, one and the same Body may be
present with it self and many thousands of miles absent from it self at once,
be shut up in a Box and free to walk in the Field, and to ascend into Heaven at
the same time, contrary to the fourteenth and fifteenth Common Notions.

And lastly, If this Doctrine be true, a man may swallow his own Body whole,
Head, Feet, Back, Belly, Arms, and Thighs, and Stomach it self through his
Mouth, down his Throat into his Stomach, that is to say, every whit of himself
into one knows not what of himself, less than a Mathematical Point or nothing.
This Christ might have done, and actually did if he did eat the Consecrated
Bread with his Disciples, which contradicts the sixteenth Common Notion.

Wherefore since in virtue of one single Maxim, Monsieur Maimbourg supposing
the Protestants as well as the Paepists agreeing therein (though in that, as I
have showed, he is mistaken) would draw in the Protestants to embrace the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and other Ertors of the Roman Church, I appeal
to him how much more reasonable it is, that he and as many as are of his
persuasion should relinquish that Doctrine, it contradicting so many Common
Notions, which not only all Papists and Protestants, but indeed all the whole
World are agreed in. And hence clearly discerning the Infallibility of the
Roman Church, upon which this and other erroneous Doctrines are built (such as
Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of Images, and the like) plainly to fail, that
they should bethink themselves what need there is to reform their Church from
such gross errors, and to pray to God to put it into the mind of their
Governors so to do; which would be a peaceable method indeed for the reuniting
Protestants and Catholics in matters of Faith, and principally in the subject
of the Holy Eucharist, as the Title of his Method has it.

But to require an Union, things standing as they are, is to expect of us that
we cease to be men to become Christians of a novel Mode unknown to the
Primitive Church, and under pretense of Faith to abjure the indeleble
Principles of sound Reason, those immutable Common Notions which the Eternal
Logos has essentially ingrafted in our Souls, and without which neither
Certainty of Faith can consist, nor any assured sense of either the Holy
Scriptures or any Writing else be found out or understood.

Soli Deo Gloria.


