THE BOOKSELLER TO The READER.
THis History or Narrative of the Great Level of the Fenns, called Bedford
Level, coming to my Hands, I thought might be of good Use to inform such as are
concerned in the said Level, and yet may not well know the Constitution
thereof. And it is hoped may also convince many that have had a prejudice
against the Undertaking in general, without well considering and understanding
the true State thereof. And that all Persons may see this Work is of great
Advantage to all that Part of the Country where the Draining is and has been,
and must still be carried on (the Preservation thereof) with great Charge and
Industry: Which said Reasons, have induced me to make the same Public, and
hope 'twill find a favorable Interpretation, and answer the Ends Proposed.

THE HISTORY OR NARRATIVE Of the GREAT LEVEL OF THE FENNS, CALLED Bedford
Level, With a Large MAP of the said LEVEL, as Drained, Surveyed, and Described
by Sir Jonas Moore Knight, His late Majesty's Surveyor-General of his Ordnance.

LONDON, Printed for Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

map of the Great Level of the Fens

In this History or Narrative of the Great Level of the Fenns, called BEDFORD
LEVEL, Is set forth and Declared
HOw this Level was supposed to be many Hundred years ago, and how come to be
afterward Fenns, when Application was first made for the Draining.

How many Attempts were made for the Draining at vast charges, and all became
fruitless. And afterward undertaken by Francis and William Earls of Bedford.
And what Proceedings were had in the Draining under the pretended Act of
Parliament, in 1649.

How this Work of Draining was by His late Majesty, King Charles the Second,
recommended to the Parliament. And thereupon an Act passed in the Fifteenth of
his Reign, constituting a Corporation for the Settlement and future Government
thereof.

The Bounds and Extents of the Level in General.

The Powers given to the said Corporation.

A Particular of the several Lotts or Shares enjoyed by the Adventurers, and
how Rated to the Draining.

The Division of the Level as now called 3 Levels. And what Proportion each
Level Pays to Draining Taxes. And the several Rivers and Drains and Works of
the Corporation made therein.

Bylaws made by the Corporation for better Preservation of their Works.

The great Advantage that this Draining is to the several Towns and Places
within the respective Levels.

The Names of the present Corporation and their Officers, and how and by whom
they are Yearly to be chosen. And the Oa hs they take.

A Large Map of the said Great Level, as Drained, Surveyed and Described by Sir
Jonas Moore, and now New Printed and Enlarged by Moses Pit.

THE HISTORY OR NARRATIVE OF THE Great Level of the Fenns, CALLED BEDFORD LEVEL.
THis Great Level contains about How this Level was supposed to be many Hundred
years since, and how came to be Fenns.
300000 Acres of Fenny Ground, lying within the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk,
Cambridge and the Isle of Ely, Huntingdon, Northampton and Lincoln, as
Surveyed and Described by Sir Jonas Moore; And in all probability, as appears
by Historians and the relations following, was once firm dry Land, and not
annoyed with any extraordinary Inundation from the Sea, or Stagnation of the
fresh water. For there have been abundance of Timber Trees found of several
kinds, but most Oak, and few severed from the roots, which stood below the
Moore. When it is well known, that in Moore ground and water, Timber Trees will
not thrive or grow. In making some of the Great Rivers, diverse of the Trees
were taken up, Six, Eight, Ten foot deep and upwards. And there also has been
found Stone and Bricks and other materials for Building, which shows that this
Moore or Fenn has covered over the face of the Land, and changed it from what
it formerly had been. In setting down a Sluice there was found Sixteen foot deep
a Smith's Forge, and all Tools thereunto belonging, and several Horse-shooes.
This Level is bounded on all Parts (except by the Sea) with High Lands in form
of an Horse-shooe, which makes it much like a Bay, and in former times must
have been a pleasant Country. The History of William of Malmsbury, (vouched by
Mr. Camden) who lived about 1200 Years since, says, That in his time, Thorney
Abbey within this Level, now belonging to the Earl of Bedford, was represented
a very Paradise, for that, in pleasure and delight, it resembles Heaven it
self; [In the very Marshes bearing Trees, that for their straight tallness, and
the same without knots, strive to touch the Stars. APlain there was as even as
the Sea, which with green grass allureth the Eye: so Smooth and Level, that if
any walk along the Fields, they shall find nothing to stumble at. There is not
the least parcel of Ground that lies wast and void there; here you shall find
the Earth rising somewhere for Apple Trees; there shall you have a Field set
with Vines, which either creep upon the ground, or mount on high upon Poles to
support them, etc.] For in those days Vineyards were very frequent in England.
The like may be said of the Abbey of Crowland, and of the Great Lordship of
Whittlesea. Now by what means it came to pass to be so drowned, It is believed,
that the Ocean at first did break into it, with such violence, as that the
Buildings and Woods, then standing throughout the same, became turned up by the
roots; and so great a proportion of Silt brought in, as not only for diverse
miles next toward the Sea, did cover the ground to an extraordinary depth, but
to the remotest Parts, even to the Verge of the High-Lands, as by One further
Discovery or Instance of late Years was seen, at the Skirt of Connington in
Huntingdonshire, where upon making a Pool by Sir Robert Cotton Baronet, he
found there a Skeliton of a large Sea Fish (near Twenty foot long as then
conjectured) lying in perfect Silt, above Six foot below the Superficies of the
ground, and as much above the present Level of the Fenns. But when and how that
violent Breach and Inundation of the Sea was first made into this Country, is
not positively known. Therefore it must be conjectured from the most rational
probabilities, which is, That it was by some great Earthquake. That such
dreadful Accidents have occasioned the like, We have unquestionable Testimony.

Lib. 7. xv. Anno Christi CCCLXVIII.
Coss. Valentiniano and Valente, (says the Tripartite History) terrae motus
factus, multas diruit Civitates, sed etiam Mare terminos proprios mutavit; et
in quibusdam locis in tantum ibi fluxit, ut loca quae pridem ambulari doterant,
remigarentur; ab aliis vero locis tantum recessit, ut arida tellus inveniretur.
In the time of the Consulship of Valentinian and Valens, there was an
Earthquake, which not only overthrew diverse Cities, but altered the very Bounds
of the Sea; which so flowed in some Parts, that men might Sail in those places,
where before they did walk; and forsook other, that they became dry Land. The
like relation of the same Earthquake, but somewhat more largely, does Amianus
Lib. 26.
Marcell. make. And to the like purpose also is that of Ovid's,

Ovid Meta. lib. xv.
Vidi ego quod fuerat quondam Solidissima Tellus,

Esse fretum; vidi factas ex aequore terras;

Et procul a Pelago Conchae jacuere Marinae;

Et Vetus inventa est in montibus Anchora Summis.

Quodque fuit Campus, vallem decursus aquarum

Fecit, et eluvie Mons est deductus in aequor;

Aeque paludosa siccis humus aret Arenis.

Thus Translated into English by G. Sandys.

Where once were solid Lands, Seas have I seen,

And solid Land where once deep Seas have been;

Shells far from Sea like Quarries in the Ground,

And Anchors have in Mountain Tops been found.

Torrents have made a Valley of a Plain, High Hills by deluges born to the
Main. Deep standing Lakes sucked dry by thirsty Sand,

And on late Thirsty Earth now Lakes do stand.

Who would imagine that the City of Gant in Flanders had been an Haven Town;
yet that so it was about DCCC. years since, appears in the Life of Charles
the Great, Written by the Learned Hist. Fran. 2. f. 48.
Du Chesne. Neither do we want Examples here in some part of England of this
kind; Ratesborough, otherwise called Richborough in Kent, (sometime a Colony of
the Romans) was, or ever the River of Sture did turn his bottom or old Canale
within the Isle of Thanett, (as Lel. Col. Vol. 3. p. 138.
Leland affirms) and by likelihood the main Sea came to the very foot of the
Castle; but now it is off from it a Mile, by reason of the Wose that has there
swollen it up. So also Ib. f. 141.
Lymme-hill or Lymme, was sometime a Haven and good for Ships that might come
to the foot of the Hill. And Rumney (four Miles distant from Lymme-hill) one of
the Cinque Ports, has been a meetly good Haven, Insomuch (says the same Ibid.
p. 142.
Leland, who lived in King Henry the Eighth's time) as within remembrance of
Men, Ships have come up hard to the Town, and cast Anchor in one of the
Churchyards; but is now two Miles from the Town, which is so sore decayed
thereby, that where there were three great Parishes and Churches sometime,
there is now scant one well maintained.

And concerning Eye in Suffolk, It is not a little observable what he likewise
Lel. Col. Vol. 3. p. 24.
expresses, viz. That it should seem anciently to have been in a manner
totally encompassed with Waters; Eye in our English signifying an Island: but
now (says he) there is no such store tho it be a moist place especially in the
Winter Season; which manifestly shows, that it was heretofore a standing
Fenn. Adding, That in old time, Barges came up thither from the Haven of
Chromar or some Creek near unto it, there having been found by the Monks of
Eye, in Scowring of their Ditches, large Rudders, done over with Pitch; as also
Barge Nails, with other Naval Instruments, tho then no Vessels came nearer to
it, than Burstan, which is 12 Miles distant.

And as some places have got from the Sea, so some other have lost, as may seem
Ib. p. 104.
by Skegnesse in Lincolnshire, which was heretofore a great Haven Town (as the
before specified Author relates) and Walled, having a Castle; but the Old Town
is clean consumed and eaten up of the Sea. Not unapplicable hereunto is
therefore that of the Poet.

Haud procul hinc Stagnum, Tellus habitabilis Ovid. Met. lib. 8.
olim,

Nunc celebres mergis, fulicisque palustribus undae.

Hard by a Lake once habitable ground,

Where Coots and fishing Cormorants abound.

The Principal Rivers or Drains formerly passing through this Level were Eight,
viz. Gleane, Welland, Neane, Ouze, Grant, Mildenhall, Brandon, and Stoake. The
said Rivers had three several Outfalls from the Fenns into the Sea, viz.
Welland, Wisbich, and Salters Load by Lynn.

This Level is Broad and of a great Extent, and lies very flat, with little or
no descent of its own, and was full of Hassacks, Sedge, Reed, and Weeds that
the Waters could not go but slowly from the Lands, but came in swift from the
Up-land Countries, where the Rivers have great Falls. Also there were large
Sands on the Sea side, thrown up by the Tides, which stop and choke the Outfall
Rivers Mouth. At bottoming of Wisbich River in the year 1635. Eight foot lower
than the then Bottom, was found another Bottom, which was set with Stones and
old Boats overwhelmed with the Silt that had lain many Ages. And so at digging
of a Foundation for the Great Sasse at Salters Load, was found mixed Earth and
Silt that had been cast up, and the natural Bottom Earth was above 10 foot
deeper.

This Level being of so vast an Extent and great depth of fresh Water lying
therein, That the Moore is increased by such standing of the Waters in some
places from 10 to 20 foot deep: So that instead of the benefit which this Level
might receive from their Overflowings, in case they had enjoyed its free and
natural Passage, and good Outfalls, it has been made for the most part for
diverse Ages an unhealthful Stagnation of putrid and muddy Waters; The Earth
spungy, unfast and boggy, such as are the inconveniences of Drowned Lands, and
yielding no considerable Profit to the Inhabitants that bordered upon it.

The Inhabitants and Parts adjoining When application was first made for
Draining.
finding this to be their sad Conditions, having no Communication one with the
other but by Boats; and sometimes in Winter, when the Ice was strong enough to
hinder the passage thereof (and yet not able to bear a Man) the Inhabitants in
the Fenn Towns could hardly get help of Food for Soul or Body, being so
debarred of coming each to others assistance; therefore they did in several
Kings Reigns represent this their sad Attempts made for Draining being
fruitless till undertaken by Francis and William Earls of Bedford.
Condition, and had diverse Commissions of Sewers granted for the Cleaning and
opening the Outfalls of the Waters to the Sea. But all was fruitless for want
of a general Draining, whereby new Rivers and Drains imbanked might be made to
carry off the Waters through so slat a Country.

At last they made it their Suit and Lynn Law, 12 Jan. 6 Car. 1.
Petition to Francis Earl of Bedford, that he would undertake the Work of
Draining, which the said Earl consented then unto. And by Agreement was to have
95000 Acres to be set out in several Parts of the Level, together with the
Ways, Passages, Banks, Forelands, New Rivers, Cutts, Drains, (and Fishings of
the same) to be made by him or his Assigns; of which 12000 Acres thereof was to
the King or his Assigns for his Royal Assent.

The said Earl having so taken this St. Ives Law, 13 Car. 1.
Draining upon him, Land was set out accordingly; And thereupon the said Earl
admits diverse Persons Adventurers and Participants with him; They cast 80000
Acres thereof into 20 Lotts or Shares, consisting of 4000 Acres to a Lot (as
equal of Value as could then be well judged) and proceed therein to the
spending of about 100000 l. But Complaints being still made that it was not
Drained. Huntingdon and Wisbich, 14 Car.
Thereupon His Majesty King Charles the First, undertook the better Draining
thereof, but was to have an Addition of 57000 Acres more, and went on with the
perfecting the same, till the late unhappy Wars and Differences came, and then
all lay wast, and so continued several years, till William now Earl of Bedford
and his Participants, in the year 1649. did again undertake the said Works for
his former Proportion of 95000 Acres, and proceeded so far therein as to
perfect the same in manner as in the Map described, at their further Charge of
about 300000 l. to the undoing of many, being a much greater Sum than the 95000
Acres are worth. But for the better encouraging the said Earl and his
Participants in so His Majesty K. Charles the Second's Recommendation to the
Parliament, and their Passing an Act.
great a Work, His late Majesty did recommend the Settlement and future
Performance thereof unto the Parliament; who Anno decimo quinto Caroli Secundi
Regis, made an Act for the Preservation thereof, Entitled, An Act for Settling
the Draining of the Great Level of the Fenns, called Bedford Level.

And by the said Act the Bounds thereof 15 Car. 2.
of are settled as follows.

Eastward from the Bridge and Cawsey Bounds of the Level.
of Stoake unto Brandon Bridge upon the Up-lands of Northwold, Methwold;
Feltwell, Hockwold and Wilton, i^ the County of Norfolk, and from Brandon
Bridge unto the End of Worlington Load upon Mildenhall River, upon the Uplands
of Brandon, the Low Grounds of Wainsford excluding the same. The Up-lands of
Lakingheath, the Low grounds of Earsewell excluding the same. And the Up-lands
of Mildenhall in the County of Suffolk Southward from Worlington Load unto
Burwell Block upon the Up-lands of Freckingham, Isleham, Fordham, Soham and
Wickin in the County of Cambridge, and excluding the Low grounds of Burwell,
Lanward, and other places lying Eastward from Burwell Block aforesaid; and from
thence unto the Mill near Anglesey Abbey upon the Uplands of Burwell, Reach,
Swaffham Prior, Swaffham Bulbeck and Botsham in the County of Cambridge. And
from thence unto the Ferrey-place at Clay-hith upon the Up-lands called
Quy-hall, the Low ground called Low-fenn, and the Uplands of Hormingsey and
Clay-hith in the said County, excluding the Low grounds called Low-fenn and
Offenn, and from the said Ferrey-place unto Overload upon the Up-lands of
Waterbeach, Cottenham, Rampton, Wivelingham and Over in the said County of
Cambridge, and upon the Low grounds of Swacey in the said County, excluding the
same Westward from Erith unto the Damme lately made upon the River Neane near
Standground upon the Up-lands of Somersham and the Soake thereof, Warbois,
Wistow, Berrey, Ramsey, Vpwood, Raveley, Woodwalton, Sawtrey, Connington,
Glatton and Holme, Caldecott, Denton, Stilton, Yaxley, Fassett and Standground
in the County of Huntingdon, excluding the Low grounds lying on the North side
about the River Ouze about Erith; and from the said Damme unto Peterborough
Bridge upon the said River of Neane, and thence unto the Ferrey-place near
Waldramhall upon the Up-lands of Peterborough, and the Soake thereof, in the
County of Northampton, and Northward from the said Ferrey-place near
Waldram-hall unto Crowland Bridge upon the River of Welland; and from thence to
Dowsedale upon the Bank of Great Porsand, and from thence to Guyhurne upon the
South Ea Bank, and from thence unto Tilneyhurne upon the Bank of the Fenn
ground called Waldersea, and from thence unto Elm Leame at Granger's House
upon the Bank of the Fenn ground called Coldham, and from thence unto the River
Neane near Thurlings in Vpwell upon the Bank of Needham called Bishops Dyke,
and from thence unto Well-Creeke, at the North-west Corner of Wassingham Fenn,
upon the Bank of the Grounds in Vpwell and Outwell, called Playfield and
Churchfield, excluding the aforesaid Fenns and Grounds called Waldersea,
Coldham, Needham, Playfield and Churchfield. And from thence unto Salters Load
upon the New Podike Bank, and from thence unto the Mouth of the River Wissey,
upon the River Ouze Note, Tho the Bounds of the Level are so set, yet their
Works of Draining may and do extend further.
and from thence unto Helgey Bridge upon the River Wissey, and from thence unto
the Up-lands at the end of the Bank of the Grounds late of Edmund Skipwith Esquire
deceased, upon the said Bank, and from thence unto Stoake Bridge upon the Up
lands of Roxham, Deerham, Weereham, Wretton and Stoake on the said County of
Norfolk; except the imbanked Grounds, late of Edmund Skipwith Esquire lying on the
North side of the River Ouze.

And constituted a Corporation by the 15 Car. 2. Corporation for governing the
Level consti^uted, and their Powers.
Nam^ of The Governors, Bailiffs, and Commonalty of the Company of Conservators
of the Great Level of the Fenns. Which Corporation consists of One Governor,
Six Bailiffs, Twenty Conservators and Commonalty. And are to use a Common Seal,
and assemble and meet together, when, where, and as often as they please; and
appoint a Register, Receiver, one or more Sergeants at Mace, and other
Officers, and remove them at their Pleasures. And vesteth in the said
Corporation all the aforesaid 83000 Acres, part of the said 95000 Acres, with
the Ways, Passages, New Rivers, Cutts, Drains, Banks, and Forelands made by
Francis and William Earls of Bedford, and their Participants, according to such
Parts and Proportions as they held or enjoyed at the time of Passing the
aforesaid Act, 15 Car. 2. to be held of the Manor of East Greenwich, by fealty
only in free and Common Soccage, and not otherwise. The remainder 12000 Acres,
10000 Acres thereof vested in His late Majesty King Charles the Second, who
assigned the same to His now Majesty, the 2000 Acres in the Earl of Portland.

The Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators, or any five or more o^ them, whereof
the said Governor, Bailiffs, or any of them to be two, makes a Quorum, to act
in all Cases as Commissioners of Sewers, and may lay Taxes only on the 95000
Acres, for Support, Maintenance, and Preservation of the said Level, and Levy
the same with Penalties for Non-Payment, not exceeding the third part of the
Tax. And all other things do in order to the Support, Maintenance, and
Preservation of the said Great Level, and Works made, and to be made within or
without the said Level, for carrying the Waters of the Level to its Outfall, as
they in their Judgments think best. And no other Commissioners of Sewers are to
intermeddle in the said Level, or the Works thereunto belonging, out of the
said Level.

All Conveyances of the 95000 Acres are to be entered with the Register, and no
Leases, Grant or Conveyance of, or Charge out of, or upon the said 95000 Acres,
or any part thereof (except Leases for Seven years or under) in Possession
shall be of force, but from the time it shall be entered with the said Register
as aforesaid, the Entrey whereof being endorsed by the said Register upon such
Lease, Grant, Conveyance or Charge, shall be as good and effectual in the Law,
as if the Original Book of Entreys were produced at any Trial at Law, or
otherwise.

The Governor, Bailiffs, and Conservators by the said Act, were to meet on 15
Car. 2.
Wednesday and Thursday in Whitsun-week at the Shire-house at Ely to lay Taxes
on the said 95000 Acres. And for all such Taxes and Penalties in Arrear four
Months, they had Power then to Sell so much of the 95000 Acres, as would raise
the Tax and Penalty then in Arrear. And the Person to whom the Governor,
Bailiffs and Conservators should make Sale unto, 20 Car. 2.
should be a lawful Purchaser thereof (these days and times for laying Taxes
are since altered by an Act made 20 Car. 2. as ^hereafter is declared). By the
said Act 15 Car. 2. The Corporation have Power from time to time to Erect and
make any New Works within or without the said Great Level for conveying the
Waters of the said Level by convenient Outfalls to the Sea, they giving
recompense and Satisfaction for what they shall so Cut and take out of several
Grounds. If any Person shall Cut, throw down, or destroy any of the said Works
for Draining, made, or to be made as aforesaid; The Parties offending shall
answer treble Damages to the said Corporation, and Costs of Suit to be
recovered in any Action of Trespass to be brought by the said Corporation in
any of His Majesty's Courts of Record. And if such cutting, throwing down or
destroying shall be maliciously done, the same shall be punished, as for
Cutting the Podike in Marshland, which is Felony.

The said Governor, Bailiffs, Conservators and Commonalty upon Wednesday in
Whitsun-week yearly (at a Public Meeting to be then held by the said
Corporation, or the greater Number then present (whereof the said Governor or
one of the Bailiffs is to be one) are to Elect the Governor, Bailiffs, and
Conservators respectively, for the year ensuing. Provided, That none be capable
to be or continue Governor or Bailiff, that has not 400 Acres or more of the
said 95000 Acres; nor to be a Conservator, that has not 200 Acres or more of
the said 95000 Acres; nor any of the Commonalty to have a Voice in Elections
that has not 100 Acres or more of the said 95000 Acres. The said Governor,
Bailiffs, and Conservators, or any of them may be removed by the said Governor,
Bailiffs, and Conservators, and Commonalty, or the greater number of them
present at their Public Meetings, whereof the said Governor, Bailiffs, or any
of them to be two, and new chosen in the place of him or them so dead or
removed. And the said Governor, Bailiffs, and Conservators, are (before they
take upon them to act) to take an Oath, Well and truly to execute Office; and
likewise to take the Oath, 23 Hen. 8. Chap. 5.
which by Law is to be taken by Commissioners of Sewers. And the said Governor,
Bailiffs, Conservators, and Commonalty are the Corporation for taking of the
Accounts; And all other Matters may do, other than the acting as Commissioners
of Sewers. And if any Suit be Commenced against the said Corporation, or any
Person for any Matter or thing done in Pursuance of this Act, Then he or they
shall or may Plead the general Issue, and give the special Matter in Evidence
upon any Trial to be had touching the same; which shall be as good and
effectual in Law, as if the same had been specially Pleaded: And the Jury upon
the Trial to give a Verdict accordingly.

By the said Act it is declared, That if any Breaches happen in any of the
Banks, Sluices, etc. or other Works of Draining in or out of the said Level, for
the carrying the Waters of the said Level to the Outfalls at Sea, That the same
are to be repaired by the said Corporation in convenient time, but no other
charge to be laid on the said Corporation; nor to give any Recompense for any
Loss or Damage, which has or shall happen by reason of their making such
necessary and sufficient Works for defending the said Level from being
overflown, and for leading the Waters of the Level in their Chanals.

The 80000 Acres, part of the 95000 Acres, which were at the first undertaking
cast into Lotts; Every Adventurer then had his Share in that Division of good
and bad Land, and all Land taxed alike per Acre; But afterward being divided
into diverse Hands, as People become Purchasers of good or bad, the bad Land
alone would not bear the burden of the Tax, for that there being much
difference in the Soil of the said Lands, and some part much more subject to
Overflowing than others, and not capable to be so well Drained. Therefore by
Act 20 Car. 2. The Power given to the Governor, Bailiffs, and Conservators for
their laying of Taxes and Selling Land for Non-Payment was altered from
Whitsun-week unto Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday after the first Sunday in
April in every year, and at no other time (the time of the year being found
then most convenient). And by the said Act for the Reasons aforesaid the 95000
Acres were for future to be rated by way of a Gradual Acre Tax of Eleven
Degrees or Rates, as are particularly hereafter mentioned in the Lotts. Except
the 12000 Acres which are rated at 1 s. 3 d. per Acre, when the 83000 Acres are
taxed at 6110 l. 7 s. 1 d.. and so in Proportion. And the Sergeant at Mace of
the Great Level, by Precept under the Seal of the Corporation in the Nature of
a Writ of Habere facias Possessionem at Common Law, is to deliver Possession
unto such Purchaser as shall Purchase for Non-Payment of Taxes, any part of the
said 95000 Acres.

Several other Powers and Authorities are granted to the said Corporation by
the aforesaid Acts of Parliament, as by the said Acts may appear.

There is of the 83000 Acres part of the 95000 Acres of Adventure Land 80000
Acres divided into 20 Lotts or Shares, 4000 Acres in each Lot. The Remainder
3000 Acres lies Overplus. The 20 Lotts, and how rated, now to the Draining
Taxes are as follows.
First Lot.
Sorts rated. Acres. r. p. 5 HAddenham Common A. 100 0 00 70^ 6 Botsham High
Fenn 140 0 00 70 7 6 Sutton Meadlands next Middlemore 131 0 00 3 Westmore No
Bedford River A. 400 0 00 3 Coveney Severals A. 073 0 00 4 Helgey Common by
Capt. Skipwith's Bank. 318 0 00 2 Townemoores, Arkinstall, Vnley Several,
Eastmore or Little Shell, and Thompson's Fenn in Lakingheath, and the two Sedge
Fenns, and Coplow Fenn in Mildenhall A. 200 0 00 4 Whelpmoore, Lowellmoore and
Spaindelfe A. 478 0 00 4 Stuntney Common. 032 0 00 4 Stuntney Farm. 022 0 00 4
Stuntney small Severals. 012 0 00 3 Part of Thorney. 100 0 00 4 One Several in
Woodwalton. 015 0 00 3 Grunty Fenn A. 100 0 00 3 Beezlings Fenn in Doddington.
344 0 00 3 Creek Fenn in Doddington A. next March. 200 0 00 4 Stoney Fenn and
Block Fenn Common A. 500 0 00 5 Somersham Common A. 300 0 00 4 Great
Bradnymoore a Several in Doddington. 162 2 00 4 Severals of Doddington. 032 2
00 2 Hale Fenn Common, and Sedge Fenn a Several by Welney next Welney A. 200 0
00 5 Severals of Well and Welney. 040 0 00 3 Westmoore No. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore
So. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00

Second Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 5 Haddenham Common B. 100 0 00 5 Sutton in North Fenn. 272
0 00 3 Westmoore North B. 400 0 00 3 Coveney Severals B. 073 0 00 1 Methwold
Common, and Feltwell North Fenn A. 400 0 00 1 Townemoores in Lakingheath, etc.
B. 200 0 00 4 Whelpmoore, etc. B. 461 0 00 4 Ladus Fenn A. next unto Creek
Fenn. 115 0 00 1 Botsham, Quy and Ditton part inter-Common A. next Botsham
Load. 100 0 00 4 Langwood Fenn in Chartresse A. 300 0 00 3 Creek Fenn in
Doddington B. 260 0 00 4 Stoney and Block Fenn Common B. 400 0 00 4 Severals in
March. 068 0 00 4 Somersham Common B. 300 0 00 2 Vpwood Fenn, lying next
toward Ramsey. 451 0 00 2 Westmoore South, the 20th piece from Welney. 050 0
00 3 Westmoore North. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Third Lot.
Sorts: Acres. r. p. 2 Isleham Common, A. 250 0 00 3 Middleditch Fenn in
Wivelingham. 077 1 00 11 Great Shelfould in Wivelingham. 012 3 00 11 Sutton the
remainder of North Fenn, And the Middle next toward Chartres Fenns, and 6 0 26
in West Fenn adjoining. 032 0 00 4 Westmore North. 200 0 00 3 Westmore South,
A. 200 0 00 2 Ramsey Severals A. 073 0 00 5 Methwold Common, etc. B. 400 0 00 1
Townmoores, etc. C. 200 0 00 1 Brandon Commons. 350 0 00 3 North Cloud a Common
of Lakingheath. 058 0 00 4 Severals of Lakingheath, A. 052 0 00 3 Ladus Fenn,
B. 115 0 00 3 Grunty Fenn, B. 100 0 00 3 Langwood Fenn, B. 300 0 00 4
Whitemoore in Doddington, A. the Parcel of 300 Acres diked out. 300 0 00 4
Stoney and Block Fenn Common, C. 400 0 00 4 Eusymoore, Well Pingle and Farmers
Fenn, A. 500 0 00 3 Connington Severals A. in the greater Fenn. 200 0 00 4 Well
and Welney Severals. 079 0 00 3 Westmoore North N. the Thirteenth, etc. 050 0
00 2 Westmoore South S. etc. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Fourth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 5 Haddenham Common C. 100 0 00 7 Barway Middle and Fordy
in Soham. 231 0 00 5 Honey Fenn in Chartres. 040 0 00 2 Westmoore South B. 400
0 00 5 Ramsey Severals B. 074 0 00 1 Methwold Common, etc. C. 400 0 00 1
Townemoores, etc. D. 200 0 00 4 Whelpmoore, etc. C. 461 0 00 3 Sir Miles
Sandy's imbanked ground B. 115 0 00 3 Grunty Fenn C. 126 0 00 4 Wenny Fenn in
Chartres. 300 0 00 4 Whitmoore in Doddington B. next unto the 300 Acres diked
out 400 0 00 3 Eusymoore, etc. C. 548 0 00 4 Somersham C. 300 0 00 2 Feltwell
Severals D. 080 0 00 2 Caldecott Severals. 056 0 00 3 Mr. Tirrill's ground by
Priests Houses 24. and 3. 027 0 00 4 Severals of Doddington. 042 0 00 3
Westmoore North E. the Fifth, etc. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore South K. etc. 050 0 00
-- 4000 0 00 --

Fifth Lot.
Sorts Acres. r. p. 5 Haddenham Common D. 078 0 00 5 Stretham Common. 172 2 00
5 Sutton South of Bedford River next unto the Fenns of Haddenham and Wentworth.
120 0 00 2 Westmoore South C. 400 0 00 5 Berrey Mow Fenn. 045 0 00 7 Ramsey
Severals D. 008 0 00 5 Wickham Common 10 Acres, and Several A. 4 Acres. 014 0
00 5 Chartres Severals. 005 0 00 3 Deereham Commons. 200 0 00 3 Lakingheath
Townemoores, etc. E. 200 0 00 5 Whelpmoore, etc. D. 661 0 00 3 Knights Fenn in
Hockwold and Redmoore grounds A. 111 0 00 6 Throcken-holt by Clows Cross A.
next Clows Cross. 005 0 00 4 Grunty Fenn, D. 100 0 00 3 Norwold Common, A. next
unto Stoake Bridge. 200 0 00 3 West Fenn and West Fenn Close, A. 483 0 00 5
Whitmoore, C. next unto Wisbich Fenns. 300 0 00 4 Somersham Commons, D. 300 0
00 4 Middlemoore in Ramsey, A. 400 0 00 3 Connington Severals, B. 081 0 00 5
Severals of Well and Welney. 016 0 00 2 Westmoore South, R. the fourth piece
from Welney. 050 0 00 3 Westmoore North. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Sixth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. Isleham, B. 250 0 00 11 Clattocks or Longbridge in
Wivelingham. 053 0 00 11 Babyshurne in Wivelingham. 013 3 00 11 Vpmeare Farm in
Wicken. 005 0 00 5 Lammas Ground in Wicken, near Vpmeare Farm. 023 1 00 6
Sutton in Meadlands, next to the Grounds mentioned in the first Lot. 025 0 00
2 Westmoore South, D. 400 0 00 4 Mepall Severals, A. 073 0 00 1 Methwold, etc.
D. 400 0 00 2 Townemoores, etc. F. 200 0 00 2 VVhelpmoore, etc. E. 461 0 00 4
Ladus Fenn, C. 115 0 00 2 VVeereham, VVretton, and Stoake Common next toward
Stoake. 336 0 00 4 Gurfe and Gore in Chartres, A. next Chartres. 200 0 00 3
Dicamoore next VVestwater. 156 0 00 3 Horsemoore in Doddington, A. 200 0 00 3
Eusymoore, etc. B. 500 0 00 2 Hale Fenn and Sedge Fenn by Welney, B. 200 0 00 5
Severals of Well and VVelney. 289 0 00 3 Westmoore North, C. 050 0 00 2
Westmoore South, H. etc. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Seventh Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 2 Isleham Common, C. 230 0 00 3 VVilburton Common and
Several. 124 0 00 9 Rampton Commons. 016 0 00 8 VVestmoore South, E. 400 0 00 2
Mepall Severals, B. 075 0 00 4 Methwold, etc. E. 400 0 00 1 Townemoores, etc.
G. 200 0 00 2 Feltwell South Fenn and Mow Fenn A. 161 0 00 2 Mildenhall burnt
Fenn, Ely great Shell and Shippey A. 300 0 00 3 Sir Miles Sandy's imbanked
ground C. next Crouchmoore 115 0 00 3 Sir Henry Willoughby's Several in
Southerey West of the River Ouze. 076 0 00 4 Curfe and Gore in Chartres B. next
Doddington. 200 0 00 4 Dicamoore in Doddington A. 200 0 00 3 Horsemoore B. 200
0 00 2 Hale Fenn and Sedge Fenn by Welney C. next unto the remaining part of
Sedge Fenn. 195 0 00 2 Eusymoore, etc. D. 500 0 00 3 Middlemoore in Ramsey B.
400 0 00 3 Sir Oliver Cromwell's Severals in Ramsey A. 108 0 00 3 Westmoore
North K. etc. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore South O. etc. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Eighth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 3 Swafham High Fenn A. 200 0 00 8 Haddenham Severals. 138
0 00 11 Sutton South of Bedford River. 032 0 00 5 Byall Fenn A. 400 0 00 4
Mepall Common. 053 0 00 4 Severals of Mepall C. 022 0 00 4 Helgey and Southerey
Commons A. 300 0 00 3 Lakingheath, etc. H. 200 0 00 1 Mildenhall, etc. B. 300 0
00 2 Feltwell South Fenn and Mow Fenn B. 161 0 00 3 Knights Fenn and Redmoore
grounds B. 115 0 00 2 Botsham, Horningsey, etc. B. 100 0 00 2 Norwold Common by
Stoake North of Wissey. 029 0 00 1 Langwood Fenn in Chartres. 320 0 00 7 West
Fenn and West Fenn Close B. 525 0 00 4 Middlemore C. 400 0 00 3 Poolings in
Hockwold. 100 0 00 3 Sir John Watt's grounds in Londiners Fenn. 352 1 00 1 010
0 00 4 Severals of Doddington. 042 3 00 3 Westmoore North, etc. O. 050 0 00 2
Westmoore South, C. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Ninth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 7 Denver Fenn South of Bedford River. 124 0 00 6 Mr.
VVendye's Ground in Chartres.. 234 0 00 4 VViddon Severals in Mepall. 008 0 00
11 Bream Farm by Ely. 004 0 00 2 VVestmoore South, F. 200 0 00 4 Byall Fenn, B.
200 0 00 3 Coveney Severals C. 075 0 00 3 Helgey and Southerey Commons, B. 300
0 00 2 Mildenhall, etc. C. 300 0 00 3 Townemoores, etc. I. 200 0 00 1 A Several
in Lakingheath by Crossewater. 008 0 00 3 Hockwold and Wilton Common, A. 253 0
00 2 Ladus Fenn, D. 115 0 00 4 Read's Fenn in Helgey. 360 0 00 3 Swafham Sedge
Fenn 180 Acres, part of high Fenn 5 Acres, part of Croyle 4 Acres. 189 0 00 1
West Fenn and West Fenn* Close C. 500 0 00 3 VVarbois Fenn, VVistow Fenn,
Ramsey, Eastmoore and Pulver Fenn, and Turfe Fenn in Doddington, A. 500 0 00 2
Denton Common. 156 0 00 4 Knobballs in VVelney South of Bedford River. 019 0 00
2 Common-peice of VVelney. 134 0 00 2 Loveokes, a several adjoining to
Common-peice. 021 0 00 3 VVestmoore North, T. etc. 050 0 00 2 VVestmoore South,
T. etc. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Tenth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 8 Denver Fenn North of Bedford River. 256 0 00 9 Several
of Denver by the Grounds of Well. 004 0 00 8 Sir Henry Willoughby's Several in
Southerey East of Ouze. 076 0 00 5 Lammas Grounds in Wicken, next unto High
Fenn. 021 0 00 7 Mr. Barrow's imbanked Ground in Wicken. 007 0 00 2 Stacks in
Wivelingham. 007 0 00 2 Croyle in Swafham A. next the Hard Lands. 200 0 00 2
Burwell Common A. 247 0 00 2 Sir Edward Peyton's Sedgey Several in Wicken. 014
0 00 6 Rowey in Somersham. 011 0 00 3 Helgey and Southerey Common C. 300 0 00 1
Townemoores, etc. K. 200 0 00 2 Mildenhall, etc. D. 300 0 00 3 Hockwold and
Wilton Common B. 222 0 00 1 Littleport Severals A: 041 0 00 4 Mr. Gibbon's
ground, called Warners, A. next Redmoore. 115 0 00 3 Botsham, Horningsey, etc.
C. 100 0 00 1 Norwold Common B. 200 0 00 3 Normoore in Chartres A. next to
Honey. 400 0 00 4 Warbois, etc. B. 500 0 00 3 Horsemoore, etc. D. 287 0 00 3
Sir Robert Bell's ground in Londiners Fenn. 136 2 00 4 Sir Lewis Tresham's
grounds in Londiners Fenn. 093 1 00 4 Mr. Fincham's ground in Londiners Fenn.
011 3 00 4 The Ground in Londiners Fenn, late Mr. Fincham's. 013 1 00 4 Part of
Sedge Fenn in Welney North of Bedford River, Eastward. 001 0 00 2 Part of
Knobballs in Welney North of Bedford River. 009 0 00 3 Three Severals in Well,
lying between Popham's Eau and Newdike. 065 0 00 5 Severals in Doddington. 062
1 00 3 Westmoore North, H. etc. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore South, etc. 050 0 00 --
4000 0 00 --

Eleventh Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 5 Neatmoore in Vpwell A. 250 0 00 5 Middlemore in Sutton.
037 0 00 5 Corkeist's and Mr. Jetherell's Hamlet in Sutton. 006 0 00 5 West
Fenn near unto Sutton Meadlands A. 076 0 00 4 Byall Fenn C. 400 0 00 4 Mepall
Severals of Mr. Cartev's by Turfe Fenn. 018 0 00 3 Coveney Severals D. 056 0 00
2 Methwold, etc. F. 488 0 00 1 Townemoores, etc. L. 200 0 00 3 Norney Farm. 079
0 00 4 Littleport Severals B. 203 0 00 3 Roxham Common. 094 0 00 5 Sutton in
Holland, A. next unto the Wride. 115 0 00 4 Pymoore near Wichford. 152 0 00 4
Normoore in Chartres, B. 400 0 00 4 The Middle in Doddington. 200 0 00 3
Warbois, etc. C. 500 0 00 3 Raveley Fenn in Ramsey. 229 0 00 4 Sir William
Cockaines ground in Londiners Fenn. 171 0 00 2 Part of Sedge Fenn in Welney,
lying next of Bedford River. 010 0 00 1 Feltwell Severals, A. 216 0 00 3
Westmoore North, etc. A. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore South, etc. S. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0
00 --

Twelfth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 4 Waterbeach, Joyst Fenn, Lammas Ground adjoining unto
Joyst Fen, and the Several Grounds of Sir Edward Peyton and Mr. Dalton, A. 250
0 00 5 Sutton Grounds, South of Bedford River, lying nexts to the Grounds of
Sutton of the first Lot. 109 2 00 5 Part of Sutton West Fenn, B. 010 2 00 2
Croyle in Swafham, B. 200 0 00 6 One Several in Woodwalton. 036 0 00 1 The
remainder of Sawtrey Fenn from the King's part. 006 2 00 5 Severals of
Chartres, A. 230 0 00 3 Helgey and Southerey Common, D. 300 0 00 2 Townemoores,
etc. M. 200 0 00 1 Whelpmoore, etc. F. 562 0 00 4 Ladus Fenn, E. 115 0 00 4
Downeham in the Isle Common and Severals. 390 0 00 1 Elm Common and Severals.
250 0 00 3 West Fenn and West Fenn Close, D. 500 0 00 3 Stoney and Block Fenn
Common, D. 400 0 00 3 Somersham Common E. 333 0 00 4 Langbeach, a Several in
Vpwell. 007 2 00 3 Westmoore North, etc. F. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore South, etc. M.
050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Thirteenth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 4 Neatmoore by Vpwell, B. 250 0 00 7 Wicken High Fenn, A.
next toward Wicken. 120 0 00 3 Hale Fenn near Coveney. 180 0 00 1 Burwell
Common B. 293 0 00 2 Sir Robert Heath's Several grounds in Soham. 420 0 00 3
Lakingheath Severals B. 094 0 00 1 Townemoores, etc. M. 200 0 00 1 South Cloud
a Common of Lakingheath. 047 0 00 2 Mildenhall, etc. E. 300 0 00 3 Sir Miles
Sandy's imbanked ground A. next Pr. houses. 070 0 00 3 Mr. Hawkyns Crouchmoore
next Hale Fenn. 045 0 00 2 Weereham, Wretton, and Stoake Common B. next toward
Deereham. 200 0 00 3 Stilton Common. 160 0 00 2 West Fenn and West Fenn Close
E. 500 0 00 4 Warbois, etc. D. 500 0 00 3 Vpwood Fenn adjoining to Whittlesea
way. 405 0 00 3 Sir Oliver Cromwell's Severals B. 069 0 00 2 Severals of
Welney. 020 0 00 4 Severals of March and Doddington. 026 0 00 3 Westmoore
North, etc. C. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore South, etc. E. 040 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Fourteenth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 2 Isleham Common D. 200 0 00 3 Over Common. 171 0 00 11
Wicken Sedge Fenn. 300 0 00 2 Mr. Barrow's Sedgey Several. 021 0 00 2 Fordham
Common. 027 0 00 2 Wickham Severals B. 056 0 00 5 Crollode in Somersham. 070 0
00 5 Helgey and Southerey Common E. 282 0 00 3 Mildenhall, etc. F. 325 0 00 2
Whelpmoore, etc. G. 454 0 00 3 Sutton in Holland B. 115 0 00 2 Horningsey High
Fenn. 100 0 00 4 Burroughmoore in March. 500 0 00 2 Mr. Dr. Samm's Horsemoore
imbanked. 225 0 00 4 Stoney Fenn Several A. 300 0 00 3 Warbois, etc. E. 500 0
00 3 Ramsey Common by Delfe dike. 108 0 00 4 Feltwell Severals B. 146 0 00 3
Westmoore North, etc. S. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore South, etc. D. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0
00 --

Fifteenth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 4 Swafham High Fenn, B. 200 0 00 10 Hempstall in
Wivelingham. 053 0 00 5 Sutton West Fenn, C. 117 0 00 4 Wisbich Common, B. 313
0 00 2 Burwell Common, C. 160 0 00 2 Great Metlam, Little Metlam, and the Hale
in Soham, A. 500 0 00 1 Townemoores, etc. O. 200 0 00 2 Mildenhall, etc. G. 300
0 00 3 Thorney Farm by Stuntney. 047 0 00 4 Quaney Farm. 012 0 00 4 Richard
Ward's Several in Littleport by Prall's Wear. 003 0 00 4 Several of
Welney-Chappel in Littleport. 001 0 00 4 Sutton in Holland, G. 095 0 00 5 Mr.
Gibbon's ground in Southerey lying by Priest's Houses. 020 0 00 5 Shevens in
Well next to the Town of Vpwell. 100 0 00 4 White Fenn in Swafham next Botsham
High Fenn. 200 0 00 1 Normoore in Chartres, D. 410 0 00 4 Stoney Fenn Severals,
B. 300 0 00 4 Warbois, etc. F. 500 0 00 4 Methwold Several. 357 0 00 2 Several
of Mr. Strange in Londiners Fenn. 012 0 00 3 Westmoore North, etc. L. 050 0 00
2 Westmoore South, etc. N. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Sixteenth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 4 Waterbeach; etc. B. 250 0 00 2 Byall Fenn; South of
Bedford River next to Oxwillowe Load. 100 0 00 5 Sutton West Fenn, D. 020 0 00
1 Wisbich Common, lying between Moreton's Leame and 25 foot Drain. 424 2 00 6
The remainder of Holme Fenn from the Earl of Portland's Part. 049 0 00 3 Helgey
and Southerey Commons, F. 300 0 00 1 Lakingheath Townmoors, etc. P. 295 0 00 1
Mildenhall, etc. I. 300 0 00 3 Feltwell South Fenn and Mow Fenn, C. 166 0 00 2
Sutton in Holland, D. 115 0 00 5 Maney Common and Several. 250 0 00 4 Normoore
in Chartres C. 400 0 00 4 Great Bynnimoore and Grayes Fenn in Doddington, lying
next unto Grayes Fenn. 294 0 00 2 Stoney Fenn Several, C. 425 0 00 4 Warbois,
etc. G. 500 0 00 3 Severals of Doddington. 011 2 00 3 Westmoore North, etc. R.
050 0 00 2 Westmoore South, etc. I. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Seventeenth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 4 Waterbeach, etc. C. 201 3 00 2 Byall Fenn, etc. 100 0 00
4 Fidwell Fenn in Stretham. 060 0 00 11 Little Shelfould in Wivelingham. 007 1
00 11 By Erith Sluice. 002 0 00 4 Wisbich Common, A. 473 0 00 2 Great Metlam,
etc. B. 500 0 00 2 Feltwell South Fenn and Mow Fenn. 269 0 00 1 Hockwold and
Wilton Common, C. 293 0 00 4 Ladus Fenn, F. 105 0 00 2 Mr. Pratt's Several in
Hockwold. 010 0 00 4 Shevens next toward Welney. 100 0 00 1 White Fenn next
toward the Hard Lands. 211 0 00 2 Which Fenn and Stow Fenn in March. 200 0 00 3
Dicamoore, B. 200 0 00 3 Stoney Fenn Severals, D. 300 0 00 3 Warbois, etc. H.
500 0 00 4 Mr. Peyton's Severals by Hobb's Dike in March. 133 0 20 4 Peter
Williams adjoining Severals. 034 2 10 3 White's Fenn a Several by Benwick. 119
1 00 4 Browne's Fenn by Benwick a Several by Dr. Samms. 050 0 20 5 Severals of
Well and Welney. 030 3 30 3 Westmoore North, etc. U. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore
South, etc. B. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Eighteenth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 4 Neatmoore, C. 250 0 00 5 Wicken High Fenn. 030 0 00 6
Langmoore and Botsgangs in Stretham. 017 2 00 5 Sutton West Fenn E. 073 2 00 4
Wisbich Common, C. 473 0 00 2 Soham Commons in Great Metlam, etc. C. 569 0 00 6
Two Severals of Soham. 009 0 00 2 Hocwold and Wilton Common. 182 0 00 2
Mildenhall, etc. H. 300 0 00 3 Mr. Gibbons ground called Warners, B. 075 0 00 3
Throcken holt, B. 040 0 00 6 Ashwellmoore by Coveney, the South-west part. 271
0 00 2 Rough Westmoore in Chartres A. next Chartres. 300 0 00 4 Horsemoore, C.
200 0 00 3 Warbois, etc. I. 500 0 00 3 Middlemoore, D. 300 0 00 3 Great
Bynnimoore and Grays Fenn next toward the River Neane. 200 0 00 2 Marmond a
Several in Vpwell. 027 1 00 6 The Several Ground in Well by News Cote. 017 3 00
5 The Severals of Doddington. 065 0 00 3 Westmoore North, etc. P. 050 0 00 2
Westmoore South, etc. F. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Nineteenth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 7 Waterbeach Fenn by Garden Tree. 112 0 00 9 Cottenham
Common. 240 0 00 6 Sutton in the Meadlands next toward West Fenn. 018 0 00 4
Wisbich Common. D. 473 0 00 2 Mildenhall, etc. K. 300 0 00 3 Whelpmoore, etc.
H. 760 0 00 2 Mr. Towers Crouchmoore in Littleport. 070 0 00 3 Part of Mr.
Hawkyns Crouchmoore adjoining. 010 0 00 3 Throcken holt, C. 035 0 00 6
Ashwellmoore next unto Downeham West Fenn. 152 0 00 3 Rough Westmoore in
Chartres, B. next Beezling's Fenn. 296 0 00 4 Dicamoore, C. 200 0 00 3 Warbois,
etc. K. 550 0 00 3 Middlemoore in Ramsey, E. 375 0 00 4 Feltwell Severals, C.
309 0 00 3 Westmoore North, etc. I. 050 0 00 2 Westmoore South, etc. Q. 050 0
00 -- 4000 0 00 --

Twentieth Lot.
Sorts. Acres. r. p. 3 Thorney Knarr Fenn. 3900 0 00 3 Westmoore North, etc.
050 0 00 2 Westmoore South, etc. L. 050 0 00 -- 4000 0 00 --

The Three Thousand Acres Overplus.
2 Woodwalton Common. 937 0 00 3 Higney Grounds. 100 0 00 6 Part of Holme Fennl
963 0 00 4 Part of Byall Fenn, etc. 1000 0 00 -- 3000 0 00

Note, That when a Tax of 5000 l. is raised on the 95000 Acres (which is called
a single Tax, then the first sort Land is taxed 4 d. per Acre; and so on to
Eleven Groats.

The Division of the LEVEL into Three Levels.
THis Great Level the Works thereof have divided the same so as it lies in
Three Levels; and are now called by the Names of

The North Middle and South
Level.

The North Level lies between the North Level.
River Welland, and the (...) of Moreton's Leame, and bears in Proportion of
the Draining Taxes of the whole 95000 Acres, about a Sixth part of the Tax.

The Banks, Rivers, and Drains maintained by the said Corporation in this part
of the Level, are, viz.

The Bank against Welland River from Peakirk to the Bars at the West end of
Crowland and the Wear Dike to the same.

Weareington new Drain, with its Banks and Wear Dike.

The Drain called the Stoor-nook Drain from Stoor nook to the Adventurers Lands
in Borrow Great Fenn, and from thence by the Outring Dike of of the said
Adventurers Lands to the East Corner thereof, and from thence by Pepper Lake to
New South Ea, and from from thence by the New South Ea, to Clows Cross, and
from thence by the Shier Drain to the Sea.

The Wride Stream.

The Eighteen foot Drain through Murrow Common to Clows Cross.

The Old South Ea from Guyhurne Corner to Clows Cross.

Thorney Dike from Catswater by Willow-Hall, as far as the Sasse in the North
Bank of Moreton's Leame.

The North Bank of Moreton's Leame and Wear Dikes.

The Middle Level lies between the Middle Level.
(...) Moreton's Leame, and the North Bank of Bedford River, and bears in
proportion of the Draining Taxes about a Twenty fifth part.

The Banks, Rivers, or Drains in this part of the Level now maintained by the
Corporation, are,

The South Bank of Moreton's Leame and Wear Dikes.

Standground Sasse.

The Old course of the River Neane from Standground Sasse to Well Creek Sasse,
with the Sasses at Floods Ferrey near Whittlesea Dike's end, and the Sasse at
the lower end of Well Creek.

Whittlesea Dike.

Bevill's Leame from Whittlesea Mere to the Sasse near Baldwin Glossom's House,
at the lower end of Waldersea Receptacle.

Moore's Drain from Bevill's Leame to the Old Neane below March.

The Delfe Dike from Whittlesea to the Old Neane.

New Dike from Connington Brook at the upper Corner of (...) to Hook Load.

And Hook Load to the Old Neane by Burbridge Stream into the Old Neane.

Monke's Load.

The Drain from Raveley's Nook to Burbridge Stream, between Woodwalton Common,
and Ramsey and Raveley Common.

The Forty foot Drain from the West Outring Dike of the Adventurers Lands,
taken out of Doddington, Warbois, Ramsey, etc. to Welche's Damm.

The West water from the Forty foot through Benwick.

The Drain leading from Chartres Ferrey to Slade Gate, and so to the Forty foot
Drain.

The Twenty foot Drain from Erith Common to Well Creek, with the Bank thereof,
and Sluices therein.

That part of the West water from Somersham Town by Holwoods and Middlemore,
and so to the Counter wash between the Twenty foot Bank, and the North Bank of
Bedford River, with the Sluices and Tunnels therein.

Hammond's Ea from the Adventurers Lands in Somersham High Fenn to the Twenty
foot Drain aforesaid.

Old Bedford River, with the Bank thereof, from Erith to the Old Ouze, with the
Sluices thereunto belonging.

The Sixteen soot Drain, from the Thirty foot Drain to Popham's Ea.

Darcy Load from the Sixteen foot Drain to Maid Load, and so to the Twenty foot
Drain.

Popham's Ea, with the Brick Sluice therein.

London's Load, with a Drain through Londiners Fenn to the Twenty foot Drain,
called Fortrey's Drain.

The Drain called the Tongs from Nordel Sluice through Downeham Common to the
Sluice at the end thereof near Stow Town's end, with the Sluices and Tunnels to
the same belonging.

The South Level is from the North South Level.
Bank of Old Bedford River to Stoake, Feltwell, Mildenhall, and that part of
the Up land Country there adjoining, and bears in Proportion of the Draining
Taxes about a Seventeenth part.

The Banks, Rivers, and Drains in this Level maintained by the said Corporation
are as follows, viz.

South Bank of the River Ouze, from the Hard Lands of Swacey, etc. to the
Hermitage and the Sasse or Sluice there.

The River called New Bedford River, from the Hermitage to Salters Load, with
the Banks, Forelands, Wear Dikes, and Sluices thereof.

The Drain that leads from Ewel-Fenn to Audrey Causey, and from thence into the
Old Ouze at Audrey Bridge.

Grunty Fenn Drain, from Grunty Fenn to the Old Ouze at Littleport Chair, with
its Banks.

Part of Old Welney River.

Littleport Drain.

Maid Load and Modney Drain, with the Sluices to the same.

The Drain that carries away Hoggington Brook, with the Banks to be raised.

The River of Grant, from Clay-hith to Harrimeere, with the Banks, Forelands,
Wear Dikes, and Sluices thereof.

The Banks of the Old Ouze, from Harrimeere to Chitterings.

The New long Drain, from Wicken High Fenn to the Tunnels under Soham new
River, and so to the Tunnel under Mildenhall River; from thence to the Tunnel
under Brandon River, and so to the Tunnel under Wissey or Stoake River; and
from thence through Downeham's Ea to the Sluices at the lower end thereof, near
Stow Bridge.

The East Banks of Ouze, from Harrimeere to the Brick Sluice at Prick-willo,
with the Wear Dike thereof.

The New Bank on the West side of the River Ouze, from Harrimeere to Ely High
Bridge.

The Drain from the East end of the Adventurers Lands, taken out of Soham
Common, to the Wear Dike of Mildenhall River.

Mildenhall River, with the Banks, Forelands, and Wear Dikes thereof.

The East Banks of the River Ouze, from Mildenhall River to the Sluice at the
lower end of Mildenhall Drain, near Littleport Chair.

Mildenhall Drain from the last mentioned Sluice to Mildenhall Common.

The River of Ouze, with the Banks, Forelands, Wear Dikes, Sluices and Tunnels,
thereof, from Littleport Chair to Denver Damm, Excepting the Sluices, Tunnels
and Waterworks heretofore made and maintained by Edmund Skipwith Esquire deceased,
and others particular Owners of Lands within or near the said Great Level, for
his or their own private Use or Benefit.

Lakingheath Drain, from Wainsford Brook to the Tunnel under Lakingheath New
Load, and so to the Tunnels under Brandon River.

Brandon River, with the Banks, Forelands, and Wear Dikes thereto belonging.

Feltwell Drain to its Outfall into the River of Ouze, at Palmer's House.

Sam's Cut from Feltwell to the River Ouze.

Stoake River, with the Banks, Forelands, Wear Dikes, and Sluices.

A Tunnel under Methwold Load for the Draining of Norwold Fenns.

Roxham Drain, with the Banks thereof.

These Works and Drains, and such others as the Corporation shall think fit,
are from time to time preserved and maintained at the Costs and Charges of the
said Corporation and their Successors, Owners of the said Ninety five Thousand
Acres mentioned in the aforesaid Act, 15 Car. 2. and not by the Owners of any
the Lands within the said Great Level, other than of the said Ninety five
Thousand Acres; Except in Cases where particular Contracts have been made by
the said Corporation.

And the said Corporation, as Commissioners Bylaws made by the Corporation.
of Sewers, for the better Draining and Preservation of the Country, Pursuant
to the Act of Parliament, has made several Orders and Bylaws, which all
Persons concerned therein are bound to take Notice of.

The Chief thereof are these:

That all and every other the Drains, Division Dikes, and Fence Dikes between
Counties, Lords of Manors, Parishes, Townships, and particular Owners, and the
Fence Dikes of every Parish, Hamlet, or Township, between their Fences and
their Corn Fields, and between their Feed-fenns and Mowe-fenns, and between the
Severals and Commons, shall be kept and maintained with all Necessary
Reparations from time to time, at the proper Costs and Charges of the Owners,
Occupiers or Persons interested in the Fenns and Grounds next adjoining
thereunto; or that have heretofore, or of right ought to do the same, at their
Ancient or Present Dimensions, or so as the Court of Sewers shall from time to
time direct and appoint for the better Conveyance of the Waters of the said
Level into the Great Rivers, or to their Outfall at Sea.

That no Person or Persons shall at any time hereafter upon, any Pretense, or
by any ways or means whatsoever, make any Encroachment upon or straiten the
present Dimensions of any River, Wash, Drain or Sewers, within or without the
said Great Level; Nor shall Cut, Burn, Cast down, Break up, or do any hurt or
damage to any River, Bank, Wash or Foreland, within the said Great Level, or
without the said Great Level, made by the said Earl and Participants, or the
said Governor, Bailiffs and Conservators; nor shall Cut, Damme, Burn, Cast
down, Break open, or do any hurt or damage unto any Sluice, Sasse, Lock, Tunnel,
Bridge, Gate or Rail made within or without the said Great Level, for, or
conducing to the Draining of the said Great Level, or the Preservation thereof,
otherwise than by Order or Decree of the Commissioners of Sewers for the time
being, appointed by the said Act; Nor shall make, or cause to be made, any
Damms, Stops, Wears, or other Letts, Impediments or Nuseances, in, or without
any of the Rivers, Drains, Outring Dikes, Sewers, Washes, Forelands, or other
Work made within or without the said Great Level, for the Draining of the said
Great Level, or Preservation thereof; Nor shall encroach upon, straiten or do
any hurt or damage to any Drove way within the said Great Level, set out upon
Occasion of the Draining of the same.

And that no Person or Persons shall at any time hereafter make, or cause to be
made, any Waterings or Place for Watering of Cattle within Ten foot of any the
said Rivers, Public Drains, or any Outring or Division Dike, or Lot, Division
Dike, within the said Level, to the stopping, Annoyance or Prejudice of them or
any of them, or of any part of them or any of them; the which are declared to
be Nuseances.

And that no Person or Persons whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter put, or
cause any Swine to be put or kept, into, or upon any of the Banks or Forelands
of any of the Rivers or Sewers within or without the said Great Level made as
aforesaid, or used as conducing to the Preservation of the same, under such
Penalties as the said Commissioners of Sewers shall think fit to Charge on such
Offenders.

Most of the Commons in the Map described, The great Advantage that the
Draining is to the respective Places within the Level.
out of which the 95000 Acres were taken, are (by the Country) in Pursuance of
the Act 15 Car. 2. lately divided and enjoyed as Severals to particular Owners
and Commoners of each respective Towns to which those Commons belonged. And
others finding that such Division and Cutting of the Commons, proved a great
wast of Ground, and the Fences hard to be kept, and great diminution of Stock,
and decay of Houses; many Selling their Lands from the same, to the increasing
of the Poor. Therefore they would not divide, but have by Agreement decreed in
Chancery the same by way of a Stint to feed the same, every House alike; so
that in some Towns there is above 2000 Milch Cows, besides a great running
Stock fed thereon, viz. Cottenham, Chartresse, March, Wimblington, Maney, and
other Towns to their great Improvement and Enriching. Though some few People
that had formerly nothing to live on, but what they got by Fishing and Fowling;
and some discontented Persons, that would neither do themselves good, or suffer
others, are apt to clamor against this Noble Work of Draining, and the
Undertakers thereof. But if they would but seriously Consider the small benefit
formerly made, and the great Advantage now; The Profit given the Undertakers,
was not considerable to the Charge and Hazard, which they have been at and
still must be for the yearly maintaining the Level, (to the Ruin of several of
the first Original Undertakers) the Undertakers can be blamed for nothing save
Indiscretion to hazard their Estates so much for the good of the Public.

There was a Complaint in 1653. Complaint in 1653. against the Draining.
made by some Persons against this Undertaking, alleging that it was as much
worth before the Draining in Reed and Sedge as since; Whereupon there was then
an Estimate given in of what was that year made, when but about 28000 Acres of
the aforesaid Fenn Grounds, was Drained and made Use of, being sown with
Coleseed, Wheat, Barley, Oats, and Flax; which is now here offered to
Consideration.

Every Acre for Hassocking burning the Hassocks, Plowing Burning the Soord, and
sowing with Coleseed, cost 1 l. which came into the hands of such as would
work, whether Poor or Rich. l. s. d. 28000 00 00 Every Acre of Seed, Wheat,
Barley or Oats that were sown, being near 10000 Acres, cost in Seed 8 s. per
Acre, which came to the hands of the Country. 04000 00 00 The small Division
Dikes since the Adjudication came clear to the poor Laborers. 03000 00 00
Exppended for Timber, Carpenters, Bricklayers, and other Laborers in Building
Houses above. 10000 00 00 The Reaping, Threshing and Carriage of Coleseed to be
fit for the Boats, to poor Laborers at 3 l. per Last. 25000 00 00 The Reaping,
Threshing, and Carriage of Wheat, Rye, Oats, Barley, and Flax, to Laborers.
05000 00 00 The Carriage of far above 5000 Last of Coleseed, and above 1000 of
Wheat and other Commodities to the Watermen of Lynn and Wisbich. 02700 00 00
The Transportation by Water of Materials for Houses to Watermen, and other
Works. 00300 00 00 The Chambering of 3000 Last at the least in Lynn and
thereabouts at 4 d. the Last per Week for 13 Weeks. 00650 00 00 At Lynn to
Meeters and Porters at 12 d. per Last. 00150 00 00 100 Last of Seed, Wheat, and
other Grain to London, and other Parts by Shipping. 10000 00 00 There was also
in order for the next year expended to Work men and Laborers in Hassocking,
Plaining, Burning, Sowing, and of Cropps. 30000 00 00 The State in Custom,
Excise, and Impost for Coleseed, Oil, and otherwise. 05000 00 00

By which (besides the great Charge of Draining this year) it appears there is
expended, To the Laborers, Workmen, and others. 95000 00 00 In Lynn, Chambers,
Porters, and Workmen. 03600 00 00 The Shipping. 10000 00 00 The State. 05000 00
00 -- -- -- These are the Advantages which have accrued to the State, the
Country, and the Poor this year, by a small Quantity of about 28000 Acres,
besides the intrinsical Commodities themselves produced by this charge to the
Kingdom, not here set down. 113600 00 00

And if above 100000 l. Advantage arises by so small a Quantity under so many
Discouragements, a good Commonwealth's man will easily Judge what Annual
Profit and Benefit redounds to this Nation by the Improvement of the whole.

The Governor, Bailiffs, and Conservators for the present year 1684. are as
follows,
The Governor. The Right Honorable William Earl of Bedford, Baron of
Thornhaugh, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter. The Six Bailiffs.
The Right Honorable Arthur Earl of Anglesey. The Right Honorable Richard Lord
Gorges, Baron of Dundalke in the Kingdom of Ireland. The Right Honorable Sir
Thomas Chicheley Knight, Chancellor of the Duchy, and one of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council. Sir Lionel Walden Knight. Rob. Hamson Sergeant at
Law. Roger Jenyns, Esquire
The twenty Conservators. Sir Thomas Willis Baronet. Sir Henry North Baronet.
Sir John Hewett Baronet. Sir Nicholas Pedley Knight. Sir John Chicheley Knight.
Sir Thomas Fitch Knight. Doctor William Denton. Silius Titus Esquire Ralph
Widdrington Esquire Richard Marryott Esquire George Nicholas Esquire Thomas Wright Esquire
Samuel Fortrey Esquire Lionel Walden Esquire Edward Woodward Esquire John Fincham Esquire John
Jenyns Esquire Christopher Cratford Gent. William Bagnall Gent. Robert Mingay Gent.

The Chief Officers of the Corporation are,
The Right Honorable Richard L. Gorges, Surveyor General, and Superintendant of
all other the Officers, He issues out his Warrants by Order of the
Corporation, for all Moneys by them expended, And from time to time receives an
Account from the respective Officers how the Affairs of the Corporation are
carried on; and reports the same to the Corporation at their Public Meetings.
Richard Marryott Esquire Auditor of the Accounts. Richard Bland Gent. Register.
Robert Mingay Gent. Receiver. William Bourne Gent. Sergeant at Mace. Mark le
Pla Surveyor of the North Level. Surveyors of the Middle Level. Samuel Fortrey
Esquire and the said William Bourne, Ralph Pierson Gentleman Surveyor of the South
Level.
The Officers take all Oaths, Well and truly to Execute their respective
Offices.

And the Surveyors of the respective Levels take also this Oath following, Viz.

YOU shall Swear that you shall well and truly serve this Corporation in the
Office of Surveyor of (...) Level under your Charge, and shall make all your
Contracts in the most Husbandly manner, and at the Cheapest Rates you can for
this said Corporation; and shall not Certify any Flooring Work, Bank Work, or
Rodd Work to be done, but what is or shall be supervised and taken up in your
Presence, and according to the real Truth of the Work done and Value thereof to
the best of your Knowledge and Understanding, and that you shall faithfully and
truly Execute and Perform all other Matters and things relating to your Office,
Trust, and Employment, for the Benefit and Advantage of the said Corporation,
according to the best of your Skill, Knowledge and Understanding. So help you
God.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT OF THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
I Have had come to my hands the Verses following, which I find were formerly
writ on this Subject by some Ingenious hand; And therefore I thought it might
not be amiss to annex them hereunto.

A TRUE and NATURAL DESCRIPTION OF THE Great Level OF THE FENNS.
I Sing no Battles fought, nor Armies foiled,
Nor Cities razed, nor Commonwealths embroiled,
Nor any History, which may move your tears,
Or raise your Spleens, or multiply your Fears;
But I bespeak your wonder, your delight,
And would your Emulation fain invite.
I sing Floods muzled, and the Ocean tamed,
Luxurious Rivers governed, and reclam'd,
Waters with Banks confined, as in a Gaol,
Till kinder Sluices let them go on Bail;
Streams curbed with Dammes like Brid^es, taught to obey,
And run as strait, as if they saw their way.
I sing of heaps of Water turned to Land,
Like an Elixir by the Chemists hand
Of Dropsies cured, where not one Limb was sound,
The Liver rotted, all the Vitals drowned.
No late discovered Isle, nor Old Plantation
New Christened, but a kind of New Creation.
I sing of heaps of Gold, and Indian Ore,
Of private Profit, and of Public Store;
No fine Romance, nor Fables I invent,
Nor coin Vtopia's, but a Scene present,
Which with such rare, yet real bliss does Swell,
As would persuade a Monk to leave his Cell.
I sing of an Atchievment, from above,
Both Blessed and Crowned, which God and good Men Love,
Which Kings and States encourage and protect
With Prudent Power, which none can disaffect,
But the poor Fish, who now wants room to play,
Hassocks, and Men with Heads more rough than they.
Go on, Brave Undertakers, and Succeed,
In spite of Brutish Clamours, take no heed
To those that curse your Generous labors; he
That good refrains, 'cause Men unthankful be,
Mistakes true Virtues aim, each worthy Act
Does a Reward, beyond Applause, expect.
Make universal Plenty, and restore
What Ten years Wars have ruined; let the Poor
Share your wise Alms, some will, perhaps, confess
Their Obligation, and your Virtues bless;
But if the present Age forget their Friends,
Be sure, Posterity will make amends.
They Will be indifferent Judges, at what Rates,
And with what Arts you purchased your Estates,
They will not grudge that you took so much Land,
But wonder, why you did not more demand;
They Will heartily believe, that Public Zeal
Had more of Influence here, than Private Weal.
When by your Noble Pattern, and Success,
Taught and encouraged, all Men shall profess
A hate of Sloth, and so the Sea shall more
Feel your Example, than your Skill before,
Whilst all to work that Public Tyrant's bane,
At once Conspire, as if he were a Dane.
When such as have no Wit, but to defame
All generous Works, and blast them with the Name
Of giddy Projects, are described to be
But Slaves to Custom, Friends to Popery,
And ranckt with those, who, lest they should accuse
Their Sires, no harness, but the Tail, will use.
When to your Glory, all your Banks shall stand
Like the immortal Pyramide, and your Land
Forget it e're was Sea, when those dull Wits,
That Judge by Sense, become time's Proselytes,
And such as know no other Argument,
Shall be at last confuted by the Event.
When Bedford's stately Bank, and noble Drain,
Shall Parallel the Streights of Magellane,
Or Hercules his Pillars, in due Fame,
Because they wear your Livery in their Name,
And your Renown shall snare the Bays with theirs,
Who, in times past, built Amphitheaters.
When Cities shall be built, and Housestall,
As the proud Oak, which you their Founders call,
Fair Orchards Planted, and the Myrtle Grove,
Adorned, as if it were the Scene of Love.
Gardens with Flowers of such auspicious hew,
You Would swear, that Eden in the Desert grew.
When it appears, the All-sufficient Soil,
With Primitive Strength, yields as much Corn as Oil,
To make our Hearts strong, as our Faces gay,
Meadows so blessed with Grass, so charged with Hay,
With goodly Kine, and Beeves replenisht so,
As if they stood upon the Banks of Po.
When all dire Vapors (if there any were,
Besides the Peoples breath) are turned to Air,
Pure as the Upper Region; and the Sun,
Shall shine like one well pleased with what is done,
When Agues, Scurveys, Coughs, Consumptions, Wind,
All Crude Distempers here their Cure shall find.
When with the change of Elements, suddenly
There shall a change of Men and Manners be;
Hearts, thick and tough as Hydes, shall feel Remorse,
And Souls of Sedge shall understand Discourse,
New hands shall learn to Work, forget to Steal,
New legs shall go to Church, new knees shall kneel.
When Ouse proves Helicon, when the Nean forsake
Their lofty Mountain, and themselves betake
To this delicious Vale, when Caps and Gowns
Are seen at Wisbich; when for sordid Clowns,
And savage Scythians, There Succeeds a Race,
Worthy the Bliss and Genius of the place.
What Trophies will you Purchase then? what Bays
Will ye acquire? what Acclamations raise?
What greater Satisfaction? what Reward
Of higher price, can all the World afford,
Than in a Work of such Renown and Merit,
TO engross the Glory, and the bliss to inherit?
Mean while proceed, and Opposition slight,
Envy perhaps may bark, it cannot bite.
Your Cause is good, your Friends are great, your Foes
Have neither Power nor Color, to oppose.
Rubbs you may meet with; why should that displease?
Would you accomplish Vast designs with Ease?
But vainly I, with weak insinuations,
Your Wisdoms importune; such fond persuasions
Fit none but drooping Minds, whom fears oppress;
No terror; no alarm can you possess,
Who, free from sinful Canaanites annoy,
The Land of Promise, now in part enjoy.
Your Proudest foes begin to sue for Peace,
And with their hopes, their malice does decrease;
They all confess, that Heaven with you Combines,
Sit down therefore in safety. Your designs
Begun with Virtue, shall with Fortune, end,
For Profit public thoughts do still attend.
And now a Muse as fruitful as the Land,
Assist me, whilst my too unskilful hand
Describes the Glories of this Place, a Skill
Which might perhaps deserve some Laureats Quill.
But I presume, the Reader's Charity
And wise Conjecture will my faults supply.
All Seeds, all Plants and Herbs, this Noble field
Does, with a kind of Emulation, yield;
Would you see Plenty, It is stored with Grain,
Like Egypt when Romes Pride it did maintain,
With roots of Monstrous bulk, flesh, fowl, and fish,
All that the Belly or the Taste can wish.
Here thrives the lusty Hemp, of Strength untamed,
Whereof vast Sails, and mighty Cables framed,
Serve for our Royal Fleets, Flax soft and fine
To the East Countries envy, could we join
To England's Blessings, Holland's industry,
We all the World in wealth should far outvie.
Here grows proud Rape, whose price and plenty foyls
The Greenland Trade, and checks the Spanish Oils,
Whose branch thick, large, and tall, the Earth so shrowds,
As heaps of Snow, the Alps, or pregnant Clouds,
The azure Sky, or like that Heavenly Bread,
Which in the Wilderness God's bounty shed.
After long Tillage, it does then abound
With Grass so plentiful, so sweet, so sound,
Scarce any tract but this can Pastures show
So large, so rich, And, if you wisely Sow
The fine Dutch Clover, with such Beanty spreads,
As if it meant to affront our English Meads.
The Gentle Ozier, placed in goodly ranks,
At small Expense, upon the comely Banks,
Shoots forth to admiration here, and yields
Revenues certain, as the Rents of Fields,
And for a Crown unto this blessed Plantation,
Almost in every Ditch, there is Navigation.
To scan all its Perfections, would desire
A Volume, and as great a Skill require,
As that which Drayn'd the Country; in one word,
It yields whatever our Climate will afford;
And did the Sun with kinder beams reflect,
You might Wine, Sugar, Silk and Spice expect.
Fond witless Usurer, to rest content
In that thy Money yields thee 6 per Cent,
Which thou with hazard of the Principal,
Do rigorously extort from Men in thrall,
Come here, and look for gain both vast and just,
And yet so constant, that thou need'st not trust.
Unhappy Farmer that employ'st thy Skill,
And wastes thy Strength upon some barren Hill,
Which too ungrateful, scarce the borrowed Seed
At length restores, much less relieves thy need.
These Fields shall yield thee Gold, And yet require
No labor, but the Alchymie of Fire.
Poor Curate, whom thine envious Stars prefer
To be some hide-bound Parsons Pensioner,
On such hard Terms, that if thy Flock were fed
As ill as thou, their Souls might starve for Bread;
When these fair Fields are Plowed, then cast with me
How large, how fat, the Livings here must be.
Ye busy Gentlemen, that plant the Hop,
And dream vast gains from that deceitful Crop,
Or by manuring what you ought to Let
Thrive backwards, and too dearly purchase Wit,
Leave off these Lotteries, and here take your Lot;
The Profit's certain, and with ease, it is got.
Courageous Merchants, who, confronting fates,
Trust Seas and Pirates with your whole Estates,
Part in this bank, methinks were far more sure;
And ye, whom hopes of sudden Wealth allure,
Or wants into Virginia, force to fly,
Even spare your pains; here is Florida hard by.
Fair Damsels, that your Portions would advance,
Employ them on this blessed Inheritance;
And faithful Guardians, that would quit the trust
In you reposed, like Men, as wise as just,
Here, here, bestow your Orphans Talents, ye
Shall now no longer Friends, but Fathers be.
All ye that Treasures either want, or love.
(And who is he, whom Profit will not move?)
Would you repair your fortunes, would you make,
To this most fruitful Land your selves betake,
Where first your Money doubles, in a trice,
And then by new Progression, multiplies.
If therefore Gain, or Honor, or Delight,
Or care of Public Good, will Men invite
Into this fortunate Isle, now let them enter
With confidence; since here they all concenter;
But if all these be choakt, and drowned with phlegm,
Let them enjoy their Sloth, sit still, and dream.
FINIS.

