RELIGIO MILITIS: OR, A Soldier's Religion.

Writ by a FIELD-OFFICER OF THE ARMY. IN HIS WINTER QUARTERS.

W. MORGAN.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Dring at the Harrow and Crown, at the Corner of
Cliffords-Inn-Lane in Fleetstreet, and Sold by John VVhitlock near
Stationers' Hall, 1695.

To the whole ARMY, both Officers and Soldiers, from the Generals, down to the
Private Sentinels.
Gentlemen,
It Is for your sake, and in your Vindication, as well as my Own, I have at this
time drawn my Pen; for it is a general (tho false) Imputation upon Our
Profession, That We are Men of no Religion, but a Lewd, Debauched, and
Rakehelly sort of People; and without regard for the Honor and Interest of Our
Country, fight only for Bread. I must confess this would be severe, if true,
and expose Us to much Contempt; but being otherwise, it is of no Weight or
Consideration.

I am not a little proud of having chosen You for my Patrons, as bad as you are
thought to be; for I am sure if there be any true Honor left in the World,
it is to be found in the Armies now on Foot, and more in Our Own than any where
else, thanks to our Heroic King and General, who has bravely fought at the
Head of us, and roused us from the inglorious Ease and Luxury of the former
Reigns, and once again taught us to draw our Swords, and handle our Arms, to
which we were (to our shame be it spoke!) almost become Strangers. How can we
reflect upon the many and well known, glorious and renowned Achievements of
our Ancestors, and not blush, that we have done nothing at all worthy of them
or our selves? What an everlasting Fame have they established in History? How
beautiful and how lovely are their Names? And how dear and valuable is their
very Memory to this present Age? The famed Battles fought and won from our
Neighbors by our ancient Heroes, have not only swelled but embelish'd our
Story. But thus much to your and mine, and indeed to the whole Nations, nay,
and all Europe's Joy too! I will, and dare say, and without the least pretense
to Prophecy or Inspiration; This gallant Prince whom we have the Honor and
Happiness to call our Own, is the Man cut out and destined by God and Nature to
reduce the Haughty Monarch of France, that Leviathan! that Behemoth! that has
made such a noise in the World for many Years past, and to restore Peace to the
Longing World, together with the Dominions of the several Princes our
Neighbors, from whom they have been so violently and injuriously torn, by that
Monster, some even before War was declared.

But now to my Text, I have undertaken a bold, nice and hazardous Matter, --
Religion! The People's Darling! the Priest's Diana! away with profane Hands
they cry, come not near Us, it is our Sanctum Sanctorum; peep not into, much
less set your Foot here. It Is our Magazine, our Warehouse: This is our Trade,
our Traffic, for hence arise our Profits and Honors, and thus we easily gull
and wheedle the poor unthinking, unwary Fools, of which this World is chiefly
made up; so we make a gainful Business on it, We keep the Folks in Ignorance and
in Darkness, it is our Interest, and we will do it as long as we can, but your
penetrating Eyes that look into, and search so narrowly after our Holy Cheats,
and pretended Sanctity, that you almost spoil our Trade, which we had
engrossed, and monopoliz'd, till you discovered and proclaimed aloud our
Impostures to the dull and insipid Crowd, who swallow all we tell them, for
want of Sense to distinguish? It Is you have ruined our Gain, we must even shut
up and give over, and become Priestrupts, or Broken Priests, which you please,
in spite of all our Conduct and Cunning.

Gentlemen,

You may see plainly it is the Priests in general I aim at, I have endeavored
to lash them lightly, for they deserve it: This seems to be a Reforming Age, I
hope it will reform them too! I have often reflected (and with grief of Mind)
upon the Affairs of the World, to see how tame and easy Princes and Great Men
are to suffer this sort of Vermin among them; sure some Death-like Lethargy has
seized upon and stupefied them, that has hindered them, from banishing these
useless Fellows out of their Territories for what they have done and may yet
do. How fresh in our Memory are the late horrid Confusions, Tumults and Uproars
occasioned by the two furious Blackcoats of Hamburgh, the whole City was
inflamed by their intemperate Heat and immoderate Zeal; and nothing could
appease them, (after Chairs and Stools thrown at each others Heads, and other
silly and ridiculous Outrages committed in their Assemblies) but the Banishment
of one, tho of both (nay and all the rest too!) would have been much better?
It Is those Sons of Peace (as they tho falsely call themselves) that thus
continually disturb and destroy the Repose and Quiet of Mankind. I must confess
I ought not to be so very angry with, or fierce against them; for they often
help us to many a good stroke of Work; Religion, (at least the name and
pretense) has frequently employed our Swords, which might else have rusted in
their Scabbards; so that, to do them Justice, they are not so much our Enemies
as some think; for they set the Folks together by the Ears, and we must knock
'em on the Head to make 'em quiet again. I remember I heard a Piece of Wit,
(which some think so rare among us) from a Private Sentinel, who being at his
Post, was thus accosted by a Priest, Brother, says he to the Soldier, I wish
you Peace: Damn ye for a Rogue, says he to the Priest, I wish you no Purgatory,
and then we shall both be Beggars. Oh, that is a fine profitable Trade!

I cannot but with some Rage exclaim against the hardened Impudence of these
Savoy Priests, that dare obtrude upon the World, their own dull, insipid,
leaden Notions, for pure and stanch Divinity; all is Divinity forsooth! that
comes from them, tho there be not a word in it, but they gloss it over, and set
a grave and religious Face upon it; and how common in their Mouths are violent
Invectives against the Pleasures in general of this World? And who pursue them
more than themselves? Or indulge themselves more than they do? They call them
empty and insipid, but they don't think them so, and thus they openly seem to
treat Honor and Wealth, but privately solicit, and eagerly sue for them; and
when obtained, hug them heartily. They are as proud and covetous as other
People, (nay, rather worse, because they pretend to a greater Purity) and when
they preach up, and seem to use Humility, it is but to serve their Pride. And
pray what Good has all their Whining and Canting, their Preaching and Prating,
their Scribbling and Printing, done for these sixteen hundred and odd years? It
might with little pains and great plainness be showed that a great deal of
Mischief has been done thereby; but I shall leave them to the Reformers of this
present Age, to see if they can do any good with them; for I fear I cannot, tho
I have used my hearty Endeavor. Indeed I do not see that the World is a whit
the better (or like to be) for them, or their Preaching, or their Books; when I
find less Roguery and Villainy in it, and more Honor and Honesty, if they are
the Cause of it, I may change my Opinion.

And now, Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers, I shall take my leave of you, and
wish you and my self an early and happy Campaigne, where I hope to see you
suddenly; for be it spoke to the Eternal Honor of the English Parliament, they
have done their Business well and early, and given great and hearty Supplies to
our Glorious Master, and great and fresh Encouragement to us, and therefore let
us haste away, and do our Duty, that we may deserve their Care of and Kindness
to Us, and I hope God will give Us a signal and eminent Victory this Year over
our Enemies in Flanders, and then, Boys, for France.

Adieu.
RELIGIO MILITIS: OR, A Soldier's Religion.
THE whole Pagan, Mohammedan, and Christian World, have been long (too long)
plagued with Priests and Priestcraft; the common Theme, the daily Discourse,
the general Complaint, the fatal Malady, the eternal Grievance and State-Sore,
believed it to be incurable; and therefore born as an Affliction without Remedy.

What it is that so universally clouds (except they have entirely abandoned
their whole Reason) the Mass of People of all Nations of the known inhabited
Globe (especially of Europe, who are thought to be wiser and clearer-sighted,
at least in Matters of this kind; having at this time more Learning among 'em
than all the World besides) with this Stupidity, fatal and most pernicious
Blindness, this detestable and most ridiculous Bigotry, I know not; that,
Comet-like, with fiery blazing Tail hovers over whole Kingdoms; Ominous,
Portentous, Boding, Malevolent, threatening naught but Death of Multitudes,
Destruction of Cities, Towns, and Villages, utter Ruin to, and absolute
Extirpation of Families and Governments. For thus much scrupulous,
superstitious Fools, and fly Hypocrites, when heated by Religion (pretended)
have done, and may also do again.

What have we left now (after the dear Experience of whole Centuries of Years,
and many of them tumultuous, rebellious, and bloody ones too! to the Priest's
eternal Shame be it spoke, who presented and gave fire too) but the mere empty
Name and sound of Religion; the vast Numbers (Liberaries almost I may say) of
Books and Pamphlets of Controversy, which tend not to the Pacification, but
rather general Disturbance and Confusion of Mankind, in their Opinions,
Notions, and even Practices of it? Nay, of Books too, that only bear the Gloss
and Varnish of Religion? I shall say nothing of the mighty Breach of Civil
Society, by foolish and unnatural Heats; the Pulpit and the Press go hand in
hand, confederated, to improve the Mischief, and spread the Evil. Surely it
must be for their Interest they bawl so boldly, and print so abundantly. Ah,
this Interest! this damned prevailing Interest! that governs all the World (and
even those Good Men too) that rules the Roast everywhere; that in all places
so absolutely plays the Tyrant, enslaving most (and would if they could all)
Men's Persons, Purses, and Senses, notwithstanding all their specious and
gilded Pretenses to the contrary: Nay, they tell the World, that by their kind
Assistance and never-failing Help, they shall all be made wise here, and happy
hereafter; but believe them who will for me.

Whither then shall we fly, in search of that which is really (and not only
called) True Religion? I mean the Essential, not Nominal, which is in every
body's mouth, and only there; that Religion which is to guide us in the dark
and difficult Paths we move in, and which must hereafter save our main Stake.

If we go to the Church-National in every Kingdom (not to say one Word of our
own, for they must not be meddled with; the Press must be broke, and the Book
burned, if they are touched, though never so gently) how wretched! how
miserably are they divided, rent, and torn among themselves! You would think
your self amongst the feigned Furies, or amidst the Sons of Mars in Battle, and
not with the Ministers of Peace; so hot, so violent, so furious (nay, and
revengeful too, in due time) are they in their empty Disputes! And what a orry
Account ( God knows) do they give of the Business of the other World, of which
they make so great a Noise, and know nothing; (not that I deny a future State)
whereas indeed to speak strictly, and home to the purpose, they are so much
concerned for, and busied in, and with the Profits, Honors, and Pleasures of
this World, that they trouble themselves very little about that. Good Men!
you will say there is a great deal of reason they should be so much esteemed and
respected as they are. But, 'pray', by whom are they so? By the Mobb, and some
soft Heads amongst the Richer (not Wiser) sort of People; not by one Man of
Sense, I am sure.

And for that Hydra of Separation, of more Names than Heads; those red-hot
Monsters, that Salamander-like can live (for ever) in the Fire of Contention;
those Mount Aetnas, that belch out nothing but Fire and Brimstone, Hell and
Damnation; their Doctrines (not to mention their Practices, wholly
contradictory, selfish, worldly, and to our Cost, for we can rember it, very
bloody) are so terrible, so full of Horror and Despair, and Heaven gained by
their Assistance, which is seldom, if ever) with so much difficulty, that many
of their Hearers have gone immediately from their Auditories, and poisoned,
hanged, or drowned themselves; and others left in a desponding Condition, only
fit for Pity and Compassion; there Men well not help us at all in this matter.

What if we should take a Taste of the New Roman (Catholic, as they call it
themselves, though falsely, everybody knows) Religion? I doubt we shall relish
it but very indifferently; not to run through the several Orders of Crafty
Jesuits, Letcherous Priests, and Lazy Monks; but to stick a little upon the
Jesuits (who have often stuck upon our Skirts) their greatest Champions, their
Captain-Generals; those cunning Rogues, that, Mole-like, love, live, and act
underground, and in the dark; those Hocus-Pocus's, those German, French,
Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian Juglers, with their Powders of Pimper de Pimp
(I mean their Politics) have confounded and embroiled the greatest part of the
World, (where they have had to do) though, I think, we of England are highly
obliged to them, for a Civility they lately did us, in easing us of a King that
began to be very troublesome to us; it must be avowed, they are ingenuous and
modest Men, for they don't pretend to abundance of Religion; they spend their
time in, and bend their Studies wholly to Politics (let the other Orders look
to what Religion is left, and cultivate it, if they will or can;) they content
themselves with the secular Government of the World. Alas! they are Men of some
Ambition, and love to Rule, but hate to be Ruled, no, not by their own
Provincial (who, I am sure, has lately complained to the Pope of them) and
instead of Pulpits, you may find them in Princes Cabinets: It Is not enough for
them to be their Confessors, but they must be their most private Counselors
too; and it may be those Princes are not altogether in the wrong, because all
their Applications tend to assist them in their Mysteries (as they call them)
of State, those Arcana Imperii. But let those golden Heads have a care, and
look to themselves, lest they be served (by them) as a Gentleman was that
traveled some Years since to France (the second time; though one would have
thought he had had enough of the first, at least if had reflected upon his and
his Brother's good Usage there, and from their dear (indeed) Brother Lewis too)
to learn the Trade of Empire, or to better his Air (I am sure he has not
bettered his Condition by it) or to learn to Cock his Hat a little handsomer
a-la-mode de France. Well; it is no great matter which; he has had time and
leisure enough to bemoan his Misfortunes, and seriously to consider whence they
sprung. And, to conclude this Paragraph, may they all be so treated, who adhere
so stiffly to the Society of Jesus, or indeed to any other of the Black Gang.

And for the poor Mahometans and Pagans, we can expect but little help from
them, we may rather pity their Blindness and Ignorance (of both which, the
World seems agreed they have enough) though I am of Opinion, there are many
curious and fine Heads amongst them, that plainly see, and fain would cure the
worst Disease in their State; I mean being rid by their own Asses, I should
have said Priests.

Well; whether shall we now go? Not to the Royal Courts of the World, I hope,
amongst the Terrestrial Gods, to find out Religion; I fancy we shou'l lose our
Labor, and have nothing but that for our Pains; and because we are unwilling
to peep into the private Chapels, or in the least to reflect upon the Religion
of the Folks that live there, (because they are great Ones, and it may be they
will smoke us off for it, and punish our saucy Curiosity) we will even let them
alone, especially in matters of that kind.

But what do you think if we should bear down upon the Navy, and board them?
They are a sort of Soldiers as well as we, therefore one would think we might
allow them some Religion, being in a manner a part of us; no, we must at last
to the Army, (the Camp is indeed the proper Seat of it) especially if we are
able to make any thing of our Title out. Well; we'll march thither by and bye;
but before we part with the honest jolly Tarpollins, we must have a fling at
them, and their Commanders too, who have not much more Sense than they,
whatever they may have of Religion: Alas, poor Rogues! when on Salt Water, they
readily swallow the Common, or any Prayer, or the Directory, and by wholesale,
as they do Punch or Flip; but seldom are over-zealous till they return to Land,
when they, with their whole Family, hasten away to the Conventicles, where
Cant, Noise, and Nonsense, Whining and Sighing, are much in Admiration. So that
where so little Reason resides, we cannot, with any Hopes or Justice, expect to
find Religion.

Come on then, let us away to the Field of Mars, and there we shall find it. I
have examined all Religions, and that very seriously too, and yet cannot tell
what to think of them; for all pretend to be in the right; Ours, they all cry,
is the purest, the best, the most holy Religion: And how shall we be satisfied
in this matter? For they not only boldly affirm theirs to be the True Religion,
and all the others false; but most of them will fight (and desperately too) as
well as prate for it; more-especially when their Zeal is over-hot by the
impudent Pulpiteers: But if you strictly examine into their Lives and Actions,
you will find them like the rest of the World; and if they do differ, it is only
in being more craftily and completely wicked.

Were I yet to choose my Religion, I would not by any means turn Turk, though
for no other Reason but that the Alcoran so strictly and severely forbids the
Use of Wine; not but that I think some Amends is made for this, in their sweet
and pleasing (and perhaps Rational) Doctrine of Polygamy; and Mahomet's Promise
to his Followers, of the Enjoyment of beautiful Women in Paradise. In which
Points (for my particular) I esteem them less Erroneous; nor am I a little
pleased with the Observations of the Learned, that the same Hebrew Word in the
Old Testament that stands for an Hostess, signifies also an Harlot. For what
can be more unreasonable than to tie me to one Wife, who am to eat my Bread in
more Countries than one?

And though I am not absolutely a Turk, in propagating my Religion by the
Sword, and it be none of my Opinion, that Soldiers are the only Missionaries;
yet I am so much a Christian to declare my own ought to be defended with my
Life; for I ever thought it the noble Posture of defending the Creed, after the
manner of the Knights of Malta, with Swords drawn: And what is of great
consideration with me, in the receiving the Nicene Creed into my Belief, and
indeed has strongly confirmed me in it, is, That in the Muster-Rolls of the
Councils, it had been, upon a just Calculation, computed, That the Fathers who
carried it for the Creed, were Three hundred and eighteen; the precise Number
of Abraham's Family which he listed in the Field.

I must confess, the Pagan Religion, which consisted chiefly in bloody
Sacrifices, taught its Professors more Gallantry, and bred in them greater
Principles of Honor than the Christian, which in this particular also receded
(not that I will say degenerated) from the Jew, who bravely professed with
Circumcision, and so even in his tender Years, sealed his first Sacrament with
Blood. To say nothing of the other (many) Instances, in which the Pagan had the
Advantage of the Christian Religion; as, in the Institutions of their Games,
and their Triumphs, their Prizes, and their Crowns, which they awarded to their
Conquerours, and those that got the Mastery in their Games. But then what again
reconciles me much to the Christian Religion, is, Her Declaration in the
Canticles, That the Church is Terrible as an Army with Banners; and Her
assuring me, That even the Life of Man is a Warfare upon Earth: Which seems the
true and genuine Language, of the Church-Misitant; and she appeared no less in
the Age of the Holy War, and of the Expedition of Christian Princes to the Holy
Land; since which time, She has split into innumerable Sects at Home, for want
of keeping her Men in constant Breath and Exercise against the Turks and
Saracens abroad: And Christian Princes have spent their Metal upon each other,
which they employed with much more Honor against the Common Enemy of
CHRISTENDOM.

It was indeed an Age of Gallantry, the Genius of it truly Martial and Heroic,
and the Race of Men such as seemed born to distinguish Themselves in Feats of
Arms, even in their Sports and Exercises, which were Noble and Manly; and what
is yet more, even in their very Tales and Romances; for much about that time,
as some think, were all those bold Fables of Knights and Giants first hatched;
which contributed not a little perhaps to that Expedition, as in succeeding
Times they grew up to the Illustrious Orders of Knighthood of Saint George, and
the Golden Fleece.

While these Legions had a Power over Men's Minds, they became bold by
Meditation; their Heads were filled with Notions of Braves and Hero's; and they
were carried, even beyond themselves, to Great and Generous Enterprises.

Thus Alexander, by having Homer under his Pillow, became a Conqueror; and
Thucydides, as it is reported, by hearing Herodotus read, could not contain
himself from Tears, but was spirited into an Historian, by mere force of
Emulation. But, alas! these Tales have long since lost their Reputation; the
Love-Romances and Novels are altogether in Vogue and Esteem; whilst those of
Chivalry are wholly laid aside, and in Disgrace.

Other Notions have prevailed, with which Men have been too long unhappily
perverted and debauched: Feats of Arms, heretofore in the greatest Admiration,
are now ridiculed and run down, under the odious Terms of Knight-Errantry; so
visible are the Decays of the ancient Courage, that, in the Opinion of some,
the Degeneracy of the Spaniards, from their former Reputation in Arms, is, in a
manner, owing to the Buffoonries of Don Quixot.

I remember to have read the Statute of 33 Hen. 8. cap. 9. which ascribes the
Growth of Debauchery, and Decay of Military Discipline with us here in England,
to the Disuse of Archery; and the change of the ancient Exercise of the
Long-Bow, for the more unmanly new Exercises of Tennis, Bowls, and Nine-Pins;
to which might be added, the Desuetude of those Martial Sports once in use, of
Tilting, Tournaments, and Running at the Quintin; as also the Discontinuance of
the Trial once so frequent in criminal Cases, by Battle or Combat; a
Privilege, which if it be denied to others, yet, if I may be allowed to speak
in the behalf of my Profession, I think it hard to bar us from claiming it as
our Right: For why should my Hands be tied up, when my Life is in question more
strictly by Formalities of Common Law, than I am by Civil Law, in making my
Will to dispose of my Estate; since the Emperors made duly this Provision for
the ease of Soldiers, That their last Wills should be good, though made without
Solemnities of Law; the reason of which is plainly declared to be in
consideration of their Ignorance of the Law, as an Allowance less than
necessary to our close Attendance on our Colors: Nor is it reason to expect
the Skill of other Arts from us, whose sole Profession is the Art of War; and
to this purpose Juvenal, Satyr XVI. By ancient Laws and Customs sacred held
By Great Camillus, Soldiers never were compelled
Tappear in Courts; but in the Camp to abide,
And by their own Commanders to be Tried.
Though had the Trial by Battle been a Right in such Cases, yet indulged to
all, I am of Opinion, it might have been no less a means to redeem the ancient
Honor of the English Nation, than the Juego de Toros, or the Bull-Feast has
been esteemed among the Spaniards, to retrieve their lost Reputation in Arms;
which has so visibly declined of late among them, that Don Quixot, considering
the general Entertainment he has met with in so many Nations, and his
Translation into so many Languages, seems at present to have a better Right to
the Universal Monarchy, than they, who once laid claim to it themselves,
notwithstanding he turns all Fighting into a Jest; and his Story is no less
than a most accomplished Libel, on all the Soldiers of Christendom.

It were to be wished, however, the witty Spaniard had infected only his own
Countrymen; but it is to be feared, alas! the Poison has been transplanted too
far in so short a time; and that it has taken but too deep root with too many
of their (once Renowned) Neighbors; nay, and even of our own Nation too: For I
have been credibly informed, of one of the Senior Fellows of a certain College
in Oxford (too well known to need Naming) who having imbibed a fond Opinion,
That whatever was the last Employment of a Soul at the point of Death, would
hold the same even to the Day of Judgment. He, in pursuance of such an Opinion,
when he apprehended himself near his last Moments, made all the haste his
Extremity of Age would allow, to turn over the Leaves of Don Quixot; as if he
courted no better an Employment for his Soul, than to be engaged in that
Comieal History until the Day of Judgment. What shall I say else to the
applauded Satyr against Man, of one of our admired Wits, wherein he has bid
Defiance to our Profession, and to all Mankind at once, in telling us, That All
Men would be Cowards, if they durst, but only this, That if Cowards bid so fair
for Universal Monarchy, the Spaniards even yet may hope not to be excluded. But
this, alas! is but the Gospel of a Poet, who was supposed to have said this in
defense of himself, who lay under some Scandal of that kind.

But what do we talk of single Persons, when of late there is risen up a New
Sect among us, who make Conscience of Cowardice, and entail Religion upon it; I
mean the sneaking Anabaptists, who are proper Patrons for such a Doctrine as
this, That all Wars are unlawful. I shall not press them with the Heroic
Description of the War-Horse in the Book of Job, because I hear that has not
the Authority of Canonical Scripture with them, but is reputed no less
Apocryphal than our Profession. But what do they say to the Practice of one of
the first Reformers abroad; Zuinglius, who scrupled not to be a Captain, and
died bravely in his Calling at the Battle of Zurick; leaving an Example behind
him, which those of the Helvetian Reformation have followed close ever since,
as all Republics taste much of their first Beginnings, since the Swiss-Cantons
are in effect but a Commonwealth of Soldiers; who by hiring of War abroad among
their Neighbour-Princes, have wisely found the way to free their Country from
Thieves, as also from the unhappy and dismal Effects of Civil Wars at home (as
they are generally called) though I think for the most part very rude and
sharp, and indeed the worst sort of all.

Where are they now that accuse Rapine and Poverty, as the natural and
immediate Results of War; since it appears, by a juster Calculation of
Astrology, that Beggars entered into all Christian Countries, upon the
Dissolution of Slaves; as even the Republic of Switzers affords us a Glorious
Instance in the other respect, since no Commonwealth furnishes out more
Soldiers, or has fewer Thieves.

I take Mr. Hobbs to be a far better Divine than any of the Anabaptists, in his
Opinion, That the State of Nature is a State of War, where every Man's Sword is
against another. Nor do I think his other Opinion, That Dominion is sounded in
Power, altogether so ill-grounded and extravagant, since it cuts off so many
nice Disputes about Princes Titles, and the Rights and Justice, or Lawfulness
of their Wars, which seems so unreasonable to engage Men of our Profession in,
that it appears a Task much fitter for an Army of Casuists than Soldiers.

Did the Anabaptists look for Miracles, their condemning all Camps as unlawful,
might merit the same Excuse, as their condemning all Colleges and Schools, as
vain and superfluous, from their Pretenses to Inspiration; for so the Argument
would hold alike fair, and concluding for banishing both Soldiers and Scholars
out of the World; and as they make one step to make Dunces by Divine Right for
company.

I deny not but that I gaze often, as I ought, with profound Reverence and
Admiration, upon Sampson's killing Heaps upon Heaps, with the Jaw Bone of an
Ass; and upon the Walls of Jericho falling flat before the Trumpets of
Rams-horns; and upon Gideon's miraculous Campaign with his Three hundred Men,
armed with their Lamps lighted, and their Pitchers in their hands. These I look
upon as very extraordinary and magnificent Scenes in that Age of Miracles: But
now that these miraculous Militia's are ceased, which it may be were peculiar
to that State, I frankly own, That the Sword of God and Gideon is to me more
intelligible; and I ingenuously profess my self much of the same Belief of that
Spanish Marshal, who used to say, He trusted in God and great Squadrons.

FINIS.

