Paralipomena Prophetica Containing several Supplements and Defenses OF Dr
HENRY MORE HIS EXPOSITIONS OF THE PROPHET DANIEL AND THE APOCALYPSE, WHEREBY
The impregnable Firmness and Solidity of the said EXPOSITIONS is further
evidenced to the World.

Whereunto is also added Phililicrines upon R. B. his Notes on the Revelation
of S. John.

1 Esdras Chap. 4. v. 38, 40. As for Truth it endures and is always strong, it
lives and conquereth for ever. -- Blessed be the God of Truth. LONDON, Printed
for Walter Kettilby at the Sign of the Bishops Head in S. Paul's Churchyard,
1685.

The ERRATA correct thus.
Paralipomena Prophetica.
For Read Page 3. l. 9. to many of so so many and of so p. 30. l. 2.
Quintiliaeus's Quintilian's p. 50. l. 33. certainty, ass. certainly ass. p. 54.
l. 13. perusing phrasing p. 60. l. 24. Juliano 13. Juliano 3. p. 61. l. 25.
(...) (...) p. 70. l. 13. Muserius Mulerius p. 85. l. 23. Sextius Sentius p.
89. l. 16. (...) (...) p. 104. l. 23. Saturninus. How Saturninus; How p. 128.
l. 34. (...) (...) p. 143. l. 17. (...) (...) p. 145 l. 28. Bossus Bassus p.
151. l. 6. takes takes place p. 156. l. 4. Scribes, esp. Scribes esp. p. 179.
l. 13. Prophecy Prophecies p. 181. l. 6. that that what p. 220. l. 15. that
it is that when it is Ibid. l. 17. that it p. 243. l. 1. and v. And v. p. 257. l.
26. fall till p. 261. l. 22. for a year to a year p. 270. l. 15. Pharos Pharas
p. 290. l. 10. (...) (...) p. 298. l. 29. past put p. 336. l. 1. higher lighter
p. 351. l. 18. made of of p. 419. l. 24. Witness Witnesses p. 420. l. 18.
thorough after thorough; after p. 421. l. 22. this that p. 429. l. 30. the
Fanat. his Fanat. p. 444. l. 13. Genius a Genius p. 469. l. 6. takes takes off
Phililicrines Parrhesiastes.
For Read Page 3. l. 20. Corruption Corruptions Ibid. l. 29. Chap. V. 1. Chap.
I. v. 5. Ibid. l. 29. conceive receive p. 4. l. 18. Names Pains p. 6. l. 12. no
not p. 9. l. 11. (...) (...) Ibid. (...) (...) p. 11. l. 11. to have to have
made p. 13. l. 3. obnoxious to obnoxious; to p. 18. l. 32. welome welcome p.
19. l. 22. the World this World

IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Needham Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Dno Dno Wilbielmo
Archi-Episc. Cantuar. a Sacr. Domest.
Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Sept. 23. A. D. 1685.
THE PREFACE.
Reader,
BEing firmly assured in my own Reason and Judgment of the truth of my
Expositions of the Visions of Daniel and the Apocalypse, especially for the
main; that the assurance of this Truth might also appear to others, I was
desirous that those who have a Genius to these studies, should freely and
diligently search and examine these Expositions if they could find any flaw in
them. And how unexceptionable they are, may appear from the Answer to S. E. the
Remarker, to any unprejudiced Peruser of the Answer and Remarks. But these were
but from one hand. But in this present Treatise which I call Paralipomena
Prophetica, there are Answers to Objections from more and more skilful hands,
than that of the Remarker, who have exercised their Wits in objecting what they
could. Whereby he that has a Genius and leisure to peruse what is written, I
hope, will discover how sound, solid and unexceptionable my Expositions are
throughout.

Concerning the Acceptance whereof in the World I should not have the tenth
part of this solicitude, were I not as fully persuaded of the weighty
Usefulness of the Expositions, as I am of the Truth of them. For it being so
incredible a thing, since the Visions as well of Daniel as the Apocalypse
(which were written and recorded for the use of the Church) do reach, the
former higher, the other from the beginning of the Church to the End of the
World, that they should omit the Prefiguring of that great Degeneracy which
would come into the Church, those coarse Corruptions in Doctrine and Worship
and bloody Persecutions of them that could not submit to them; And being the
Visions are so easily interpretable that way, nor any cunningly distorted
Glosses able to hide their genuine sense from him that has but half an eye to
discern what is true; And this grand Truth being, as too often others are,
abused to popular Faction and Tumult, to Dissentions and Schisms even in the
Reformed Churches themselves, some brooding in their Fanatical minds vain
conceits of a Rising of the Witnesses to come, whenas that Vision most
certainly has had its accomplishment many years ago, and joining with the ruin
of Antichrist, the abolishing of Monarchy, if not of all Political Government,
and interpreting grossly those Victories which the true Apostolic Church is to
have against the Man of Sin (who is to be destroyed by the breath of Christ's
mouth and the Sword of the Spirit) as to be obtained by an arm of flesh and
most fierce and salvage Wars and Bloodshed; And that they may thereby avoid
that noble Testimony to the Reformation (especially to this of the Church of
England, which is so exquisitely and professedly reformed according to the
Pattern of the Primitive Times while the Church remained Symmetral) they
minting also false Glosses touching the measuring of the Temple, Apoc. 11. and
pretending the Witnesses are not yet risen, nor will be till such a Reformation
come as will fit their unaccountable Humors; I say therefore, my Exposition of
the Apocalypse being so diametrically opposite to this Enthusiastic Frenzy,
and I being not only assured of the Truth, but of this apparent Usefulness
thereof, for the general Peace of Christendom, for Loyalty to Sovereigns,
whether they be of the Reformed or Unreformed Religion, for securing to
Monarchs their Crowns, for the preventing barbarous Bloodshed in the Christian
World, and for the extinguishing Sects and Schisms, especially here in our own
Nation, I thought I could not be over-diligent in evidencing the truth of my
Expositions, and in publishing my NOTES at the same time with my Paralipomena
Prophetica, they serving to both these and other weighty Purposes which I have
mentioned in my Prefaces to the said Expositions. Where, in that to the Visions
of Daniel, Sect. 36, 37, 38. I have set down a lively Description of the
Philadelphian Spirit, which is the only Weapon whereby the Reformed Churches
will be able to run down their Adversaries, and the Conquest and Victory of
such will prove even the Joy and Advantage of them that are vanquished and
overcome. So little harm can come to the Christian World, or indeed Universal
Mankind, from the right understanding of those admirable Records of Providence,
Daniel and the Apocalypse.

But what a peculiar aptness and efficacy it has to reconcile the Sectaries to
the Church of England, and to shame them for separating from so Authentic a
Constitution to follow the Guidance of private Spirits; I cannot better express
it than I have already done in my Advertisement on Jos. Glanvil his Letter to
my self, printed with the last Edidition of Saducismus Triumphatus. It is upon
the occasion of his Converse with a certain Gentleman who had followed all the
sorts of these Private-Spirit-Guides, which at last plunged him into downright
Atheism. The Harangue is something long, but I hope not of so lazy a strain
but it will keep the Reader attentive, especially it being so useful and
seasonable.

To forsake the sentiments of the ancient Apostolic Church (for such are the
Reformed Churches freed from the filth of the predicted Apostasy, and such in
a special manner is the Church of England) to follow any private Spirit, is
such a piece of Folly and Giddiness, that the Extravagance thereof is above
expression, and the danger so obvious, that they must be very blind and stupid
that discern it not at first sight. All are not born to be Philosophers or
Theologers, and to have a faculty to decide Controversies by the edge of their
own Wit and Reason. Wherefore it is both their duty and safety to adhere to the
sense of the Church Catholic before the Apostasy, such as it was for about
four hundred years after Christ. Within which time the Divinity of Christ and
Triunity of the Godhead was professed as public Articles of the Church, and
the distinction of Bishops and Presbyters owned. Whence it is demonstrable how
innocent the one is, and how Orthodox the other. For if the Articles of the
Divinity of Christ and Triunity of the Godhead were false, they had also been
Idolatrous, and the Apostasy had begun much sooner than it is predicted to
begin in that admirable Book of Prophecies the Apocalypse. Nor was the late
Reformation, which yet certainly it is (and I have undeniably demonstrated it
in the second Part of the Appendage to my Exposition of Daniel's Visions) the
Rising of the Witnesses. For they had been strange Witnesses that should still
profess the Divinity of Christ and Triunity of the Godhead, if those Articles
were false, since it necessarily follows, that they were ipso facto grossly
Idolatrous; or retained Episcopacy, if it had been Antichristian. These things
are so exceeding plain, that no man can deny them, that has parts and leisure,
and without prejudice considers them. And if the Sectaries that pretend so much
to the Spirit above others, had the Spirit of interpreting and understanding
Prophecies aright, it would convince them of their Error and Schism. But if
this slowly goes down with them, they are to examine themselves if it be not an
humor with them to deny any such Symmetral Times of the Church for about four
hundred years, that they may still find matter for eternal Cavils and Schisms.

But now the main Articles of our Faith being thus redoubtedly assured to us
both from the Symmetricalness of the Primitive Times for about four hundred
years and the Testimonies of the Risen Witnesses, of which Political
Resurrection neither Quaker, Familist, nor Socinian partook of, as appears by
the Harmony of Confessions of the Reformed Churches, no Reformed Church owning
their Opinions; how just, how sober and Christian a thing is it for every
private man to adhere to this common Faith touching these main Articles, and
not to commit himself to these Ignes Fatui of private Spirits, which may lead
him so about as at last to plunge him into the Dregs of Atheism, as it happened
to the abovementioned Gentleman.

That Spirit which leads from the Communion of the ancient Apostolic Church
(which is a Light set upon an Hill, and so certainly to be known by those
Characters abovenamed) and carries men into the dark Holes of Schismatical
Conventicles, is most assuredly, let them pretend to what they will, the Spirit
of Error and Delusion of the Devil, and a certain Symptom, that such men are
carnal, as highly as they think of themselves, having not the Spirit; most
assuredly having not the Spirit in that measure, whereby they become such
living Members of the true Catholic Church, which is the Body of Christ, that
they plainly feel what hurts it, at least what palpably stops its growth, what
wounds it, what hazards the very life and being of it. Can they pretend to the
Spirit of Christ in any due measure that are devoid of this necessary Sympathy
and sense of the common good of his Body and the Interest of his Kingdom, which
is Reformed Christendom? The Enemies whereof what do they desire? What do they
endeavor more than to divide and subdivide us? to hurry us into Opinions and
Practices as unlike the ancient and Apostolic Church as may be, to make us
appear as whimsical and ungovernable as they can, thereby to expose us to
contempt and loathing, and to harden the hearts of the Princes and Prelates of
Christendom against a just Reformation, and those that have reformed to make
them sick and weary of the Reformation, by reason of the unsetledness and
distraction of the people. Does the Spirit of Christ then lead to the
destroying and laying waste his own Church and Kingdom? Certainly that Spirit
that hinders the growth, and hazards the being of the Kingdom of Christ, must
be, not the Spirit of God, but the Spirit of Giddiness, of Error and of
Delusion.

Wherefore the ancient Authority of the Church, while it was Symmetral, is to
be acknowledged, and those main Points touching Faith and Worship to be adhered
to and professed, the Holy Ghost having set his Seal thereto in those Divine
Prophecies of the Apocalypse, and this detestable Pride and loathsome
Ingratitude (whenas yet things are so well settled by lawful Authority in the
late Rising of the Witnesses) in thus breaking from so Authentic a
Constitution, and setting up Schismatical Congregations, is heartily to be
repented of; nor are we any longer to be deluded by that false Spirit, that
under pretense of bringing in a more pure and spiritual Dispensation,
undermines and hazards the very Being of the true Kingdom of Christ by this
odious spectacle of multifarious Schisms.

It is not the breath of any mere Man that can convey the Spirit of God to us,
and it is a false pretense of those high-flown Spiritualists, that think in
their Schismatical Worship they have nearer Communion with God than those that
adhere to the way of the ancient Apostolic Faith and Practice. For they in
their Meetings are but taught by men, and those speaking the sense of a private
Spirit, they being Straglers from the Fold of Christ, as having bid adieu to
the ancient Catholic and Apostolic Church; of which yet the Church of
England, which they have forsaken, is a genuine part, and therefore its
Ministry more safe and Autoritative, they speaking the sense of the ancient
Apostolic Church, not any blind Conceits and Phancies of their own. And for
the saving Operations of the Spirit, nothing is more inculcated than that in
our Public Service. Nor is the Ministry of man so much the conveyer of it, as
the sincerity of the Party who desires to partake of it. It is the gift of
Christ to the sincere, who has told us from his own mouth here upon Earth, That
blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
satisfied.

It is not the hearing of a gracious man once or twice a week, or being present
sometimes in the Meetings, whether silent or vocal, of a Company of sullen
Melancholists or Histrionical Mock-Prophets, but a firm and unshaken Faith in
the power of the promised Spirit of Christ for the subduing our Corruptions, a
fixed and continued Resolution of not offending the God of Heaven in any thing,
small or great, a close Guard upon our Words and Actions, as having a sense of
the Presence of the Divine Majesty all the day long, a perpetual exercise of
mortifying the impetuosities of our own Will, and of extinguishing all the
sweet Relishes of Self-interest and vainglory, and a constant endeavor of
wholly resigning our selves to God and his Service, who has wholly made us Body
and Soul, and strictly and conscientiously walking according to His Will
revealed in his written Word, that is the Method of attaining to a more near
Communion with God, and the only way of more fully participating of his Spirit.
And this certainly may as well be done holding still Communion with the Church
of England, as in any newfangled way, that either the cunning of man or
subtilty of Satan can invent. And therefore it is rather a wanton kind of
Hypocrisy in men, or Insincerity to true Religion indeed that makes them break
from the established Religion of the Church of England reformed according to
the old Symmetral and Apostolical Pattern, than any color of Necessity driving
them thereto.

And thus much briefly to those high-flown Spiritualists. But what I now shall
utter is still more weighty, forasmuch as it concerns a greater number of men
that have an honest inclination to Religion, but their Education, Parts and
Calling do not capacitate them to make so strict inquiry into the Doctrines
thereof, as others may make, but seek some external Authority to support their
Faith, and thereby lie obnoxious to the solicitations of the Emissaries of
Rome, who boast so much of the safe Anchorage of their Church. To these men
therefore I appeal, what can be more safe for them than to adhere to the
Authority and Profession of the ancient Apostolic and truly Catholic Church,
such as it was found before the Apostasy, and is bore witness to in the
Oracles of the Holy Scripture, as I have above declared; To adhere, I say, and
keep close to this steady Rock, and stop their ears against the vain pretenses
of any idle Fanatical New Lights or bold Enthusiasts? Now he that adheres to
the Church of England, does adhere to this ancient Apostolic Church, the
Church of England being reformed according to that Pattern, as to the frame of
Government and Articles of Faith; And for the Precepts of an holy Life, besides
what occurs in our Liturgy, Litany and Catechism, they are so plain in the
Scripture, and so fully and effectually declared by those in our own Church in
printed Sermons and several other Writings, to say nothing of the good
Preaching up and down, that no well-minded Christian can want any due
Instruction.

This is a consideration the best accommodate that I know to keep us all in
one, which is to acknowledge the Authority and Undeceivedness in matters of any
moment, though not Undeceivableness or Infallibility of the ancient Catholic
Church before the Apostasy came in. Which true and just ground will give us
all the Advantages and more than that false Boast of the Roman Church, as if
she forsooth were infallible, and therefore irrefragable; whenas that one
Tenent of Transubstantiation alone sufficiently demonstrates it to be a
groundless Pretense, that Doctrine being plainly a Fardel of Impossibilities
and Contradictions; to say nothing of their infinite Superstitions, Impostures
and gross Idolatries, and barbarous and bloody Persecutions and Murders for not
submitting to them. So that she is a Church all over besmeared with
sordidly-gainful Superstitions, Idolatries and Blood. And therefore she being
deprehended so grossly and enormously erroneous, or imposturous and deceitful,
and supporting all her absonous Opinions upon that single pretense of her
Infallibility, she has manifestly forfeited her Credit before all the World,
and most justly lost her Authority, that no man that has leisure and freedom to
examine the Truth, can easily be persuaded to rely or lean upon this broken
Reed of Egypt; which is a fictitious and certainly false Pretense to
Infallibility by an Apostatized Church, shamelesly obtruding upon those they
can deceive, all the Abominations that are declared against in Daniel and the
Apocalypse, where the Visions represent the state of those Times, into which
this grand Apostasy fell. How unsafe therefore is it for any one to repose
himself on the Authority of such a Church! God open the eyes of all that mean
sincerely in Religion, that they never fall into such a dangerous Ditch as
this. But the Church of England keeping to the ancient Symmetral Church, to
whom the Divine Oracles bear witness, is in truth infallible in the main Points
abovementioned, and in all things else material to Salvation, and therefore
all sorts of people, learned and unlearned, may safely embosom themselves in
her, so long as she continues, which I wish may be for ever.

In the mean time we see what a mighty advantage it would be, if that, as our
own Church in particular, so all the Reformed Churches would jointly exhibit
the same unexceptionable Pattern of Antiquity to be followed that bears a just
Authority with it, which the generality of men may safely rely on, and that
Independency and the guidance of private Spirits seducing men from the National
Churches, framed to that ancient Platform, were quite out of fashion in all
Reformed Christendom, and that all men with alacrity of mind and sincerely
loyal affections, would show themselves morigerous to their Supreme Governors.
For this is the only effectual and warrantable way that I can conceive for the
enlarging the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, and the overthrowing the Kingdom of
Antichrist.

The other Scene of things, as I noted above, hardens the hearts of the Princes
and Prelates of Christendom, who cannot but think it a sorry exchange to accept
of Presbytery, which would prove but a Democratical Papacy, for the Order of
Episcopacy, or a dismal Spectacle to see the Body of Christ mouldred into an
infinity of Sects and Schisms, as a dead Carcass dissolved into a multitude of
crawling worms, and the decent grandeur and splendor of the Church to dwindle
into dispersed Companies of obscure Conventicles, and the just and honorable
Revenues of it to shrink into the poor arbitrarious Pittances of either the
appointment of the State, or uncertain benevolence of the fickle People. That
Scene of things, I say, cannot but harden their hearts against listening to
never so just a Reformation for the further enlargement of Christ's Kingdom,
and hazard the very Being of the Reformed Churches. Whenas this way, I wish may
obtain, would silence Atheism and Fanaticism at once, and be the readiest means
of bringing on those happy Times of the Church which God has promised and
predicted by the mouth of his holy Prophets.

But this is the gross iniquity and madness of the Sectaries, that they think
so goodly and choicely every one of their own Party, that they think it worth
the while to hazard the safety of Reformed Christendom to support any how and
keep up for the present the small freaks and conceits of their own selfchosen
Way and Sect. Than which nothing can be conceived more enormous and outrageous
amongst the dealings of the Sons of men, to bring into imminent danger so
solemn and sacrosanct a Constitution as the Reformation, for the Dreams and
Opinions of private Spirits, which no sober Christian would hazard for small
indifferent dispensable things, though they had the stamp of public allowance
upon them, which, it is and ought to be, in the hand of the Sovereign Power to
alter for the common good. And verily this Fanatical distemper is so heinous
and abominable, that they that are on the right side ought to take heed how in
the least show they imitate it. For a man may be factiously affected in a right
Cause, and bear an over-proportionated zeal for things of smaller concern out
of an over-heightned Animosity against the present Sects, to the hazarding the
quiet settlement of the whole. And if any one be so affected, I appeal to the
sober, if he may not justly be reputed to play the Sectarian himself, though it
be against the Sectaries. No such Cure for our Breaches and Wounds as the most
profound Humility in all Parties, and unfeigned mutual Love and Charity. Of
which Virtues or Graces, whosoever is found destitute, let him call himself (of
whatever denomination) Christian, as loud as he please, be has really in him
not one spark of saving Christianity.

This (or to this sense at least, and most what in the very same words) I wrote
and published about two or three years ago (to fence Peoples minds from Popery,
and reclaim them from Schism, and persuade them to adhere to the ancient
Primitive Church, according to which our English Church is reformed, and whose
Principles she professes, and has ever practiced, as to the point of the
Primitive Christians their not resisting the Sovereign Power, though with
undaunted Courage they professed the Truth of Christianity against the Vanities
and Idolatries of Paganism) and now for its present seasonableness and
usefulness I have here transcribed it, if the sincere vehemence wherewith I
writ it may but have a suitable effect for the persuading the Sectaries to
leave off their Schism, and reconcile themselves to the Church of England.
Whereby, besides the Purity and Decency of Divine Worship and soundness in the
Faith, Loyalty and Monarchy may be secured, and they become good Christians and
good Subjects at once.

Thus much I thought fit to write by way of Preface to intimate the more
particular Usefulness of this present Treatise. Other things are taken notice
of in the Introduction, in which then I was not aware that I should have so
much to do with those affected Rationalists, who pretend that Prophecies,
especially those of Daniel and the Apocalypse, are utterly unintelligible. In
which conceit, though they may applaud themselves as more special Admirers of
dry Reason, yet I cannot see how their Opinion can well comport with serious
Piety and a sound Mind. For in their thus oddly adhering to their imagined
Reason in this thing, they point blank contradict the Scripture, which
declares, Dan. 12. That the wicked indeed shall not understand, but the wise
shall understand. And that is but a sorry Triumph of Reason that is pretended
to be over true Wisdom. And then for the Apocalypse, let us but consider what
Pomp and Applause the Communication of the Visions of the Book-Prophecy to our
Savior from his Father is set out by; Apoc. Chap. V. and then judge of the
unreasonableness of this Imputation of Unintelligibleness.

And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the Throne a Book written
within and on the backside, sealed with seven Seals. And I saw a strong Angel
proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the Book, and to loose the
Seals thereof? And no man in Heaven nor in Earth nor under the Earth was able
to open the Book, neither to look thereon. And I wept much, because no man was
found worthy to open and to read the Book, neither to look thereon. But at last
the slain Lamb, v. 7. came and took the Book out of the right hand of him that
sat upon the Throne, and thereupon the four Beasts and four and twenty Elders
fall down before the Lamb, and to their Harps chant out this new Song, v. 9.
Thou art worthy to take the Book, and open the Seals thereof, for thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God, etc. And immediately upon this, v. 11.
there is heard the voice of many Angels about the Throne, even of ten thousand
times ten thousand and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud voice, Worthy
is the Lamb that was slain, etc. Let us therefore in the fear of God consider
not only how ridiculous, but how blasphemous a thing it is to think that this
pompous Introduction (than which nothing can be contrived more highly solemn
and pompous) should be to a Book of Prophecies that are utterly unintelligible;
As if the incarnate Wisdom did not only sport with the Children of men, but
delude and mock them. What can be conceived more horrid and impious? Wherefore
without doubt the Visions of the Book-Prophecy are clearly intelligible.

And for the Epistolar Prophecy, the Epistles to the seven Churches, that they
are also clearly intelligible, may appear from the Introductory Vision there
also. For Christ in his Pontifical Habit there dictates them. And therefore
they are as so many Oracles given out from the Urim and Thummim of our
High Priest Christ Jesus, which the Seventy interpret (...), that is, clear
declaration and certain Truth, in counterdistinction to the obscure and
ambiguous Answers of the Heathen Oracles, and the Uncertainty of their Event.

And this is an Argument for the Intelligibleness and Truth of the whole Book
of the Apocalypse, it being all the Revelation of Jesus Christ, the true
High Priest with his Urim and Thummim, (...), clear Declaration to them that
understand the Prophetic Style, Synchronism and History, and such as will be
accompanied with Truth and certainty of Event. And it is a flat Contradiction
to the very Inscription of this Book the Apocalypse or Revelation, if it were
not intelligible, for then nothing thereby would be revealed. Wherefore to
admit the Apocalypse to be a Book inspired and not intelligible, that the
Church of Christ may be edified thereby, is plainly to reproach Christ and the
Spirit of Prophecy, and to set the Title of the Book and the Book it self at
odds.

Nor is this Argument from the Urim and Thummim of our High Priest to be
confined to the Apocalypse, but it will reach into Daniel's Visions also.
Forasmuch as in the Introduction to the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth,
Chap. 10. Christ appears there also in his Pontifical Habit, and imparts the
whole Prophecy (Chap. 11, 12.) of the Scripture of Truth unto Daniel. And as
Palmoni, Christ our High Priest, employs the Angel Gabriel to make Daniel
understand the Vision of the Evening and Morning, Chap. 8. so questionless all
the Prophetic Visions in Daniel are from the direction and illumination of
Palmoni our designed High Priest from everlasting and for ever after the order
of Melchizedeck, and who has ever had the Archetypal Urim and Thummim with him,
and therefore imparts no Oracles or Prophecies but such as have both (...) and
(...), certain intelligible sense and signification and Truth or Assuredness of
Event.

Nor does what the Reverend and Learned Dean of Ely has writ in his De Legibus
Hebraeorum Ritualibus touching Aaron's Urim and Thummim at all clash with this
Interpretation of the Seventy, in their translating it (...), if he had but
made Thummim to signify Angels as well as Urim, which latter there is no
question but it does. For Teraphim and Seraphim being the same words, and
differing only in Dialect, and signifying the same that Urim, viz. Ignes
splendentes; and the Teraphim and Ephod, though at first used lawfully by the
ancient Patriarchs, being after perverted into an Idolatrous way of Divination
by the Heathen, whereby these Names may seem to have contracted a pollution as
to this use; therefore Urim was put in lieu of them, viz. of Teraphim or
Seraphim, which have the same signification, as I noted before, denoting Angels
who are of a fiery Nature.

But now, being several bad Angels as well as good are so, Thummim is added to
denote their Holiness, Uprightness and Perfection: As it is said in Daniel,
Chap. 4.13. And behold a watcher and an holy one came down, etc. Which is
spoken of one and the same Angel, denoting that it was a good Angel. And there
is the same reason of joining Watchers and Holy ones, v. 17. Wherefore hence it
may appear, that Urim and Thummim are not two kinds of things, but one kind of
Being, viz. the holy Angels of God, of whom the Cherubims over the Ark in the
Holy of Holies is the symbolical Presence, and from betwixt them He gave his
Answers when he was consulted by Moses. Whence that most Holy place was called
(...), which word the Seventy leave untranslated, and called it Dabir, which
signifies Loquutorium, as the Highpriests Breast Plate is translated (...) or
(...) from (...). Verbum, as Dabir is from (...) Verbum, because the Answer or
Oracular Word was heard from betwixt the Urim and Thummim in the Breast Plate
as well as from betwixt the Cherubim, in the Sanctum Sanctorum. Which was the
larger Dabir or (...), they both signifying the same thing. But Aaron's
Breast Plate was the lesser Dabir, and answers exquisitely in Analogy to the
greater.

For in all likelihood the Urim and Thummim were no other shapes than those of
the Cherubim, nor were (...), as Philo seems to intimate, but (...), one
Cloth-contexture artificially wrought with gold and silk, representing two
Angelical Images over an Ark in imitation of the great Dabir where the work is
statuary; but were both a symbolical Representation of the Divine Presence, and
therefore thither to be resorted to, to hear the Answers of God: But in neither
to be seen by him that consults the Oracle.

This seems to me infinitely more credible than that Conceit of Christopher
Caster, that makes two statuary Poppets of the Urim and Thummim, which must
needs bear out Aaron's Breast Plate, very uglily and ill-favour'dly while they
are there, besides the scandal of bringing them out into view, and of
conversing so with visible vocal Images, which was the degeneracy of the
ancient Ephod and Teraphim, as I noted above. But this square Cloth-texture of
gold and silk was placed handsomely and easily within the Breast Plate, and
remained invisible, but a Voice was heard coming forth as from before the
Breast Plate, and was the sure and true Oracle of God, and uttered happily by the
Ministry of some inspired good Angel, as Urim and Thummim put together
signify, and therefore carried with it both (...) and (...), both clearness of
sense and certainty of Truth, as I noted before. And all Oracles and Prophecies
our High Priest Christ Jesus is entitled to we may be sure are such, which was
the thing I drove at.

Nor do I, I hope, rashly dissent from the Opinion of that Reverend Author, who
has so much obliged the World by his Learned pains in giving an Account of the
Ritual Laws of Moses, qua Politicus; If either he or any one else would take
the like pains to give an account of the said Laws of Moses, qua Propheta, it
would be a very useful and commendable work. For I must confess I am prone to
think, that the main of the Mosaical Constitutions and frame of things is one
wonderful and illustrious Prophecy of Christ and his Church; that kind of
Prophecy which is called Prophetia (...), as other Prophecies are (...), and
that this is the chief scope of the Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies, as
appertaining not to one Nation, an handful of people in comparison, and but for
a small time, but to the Church of Christ which is to fill the whole World, and
to last to the End of Ages. Besides that the Resolving of the Ritual Laws of
Moses into his Political skill, only testifies he was a prudent Lawgiver and a
wise Governor of the People, but the showing they are easy, natural and
lively Types of Christ and his Church demonstrates that Moses was a singular
Prophet indeed, and illustrates the stupendous Foreknowledge of God and his
Providence over his Church that he has so lively and exquisitely prefigured the
state thereof in the Economy of Moses so many Ages before.

As the Crucifixion of Christ and the benefit thereof is lively set out by the
Erection of the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness. To say nothing of the Paschal
Lamb, the red Heifer, and the like. And in the Feast of Expiation, though it
was not fit nor could be, that Aaron (who yet doubtless was a Type of Christ)
should dye and rise again, and ascend into Heaven, of which the Sanctum
Sanctorum is a Type even of the highest and purest part thereof; yet instead of
his own Blood, he entered into the Sanctum Sanctorum with the blood of a Bullock
and Goat, which was a Type of the Bloodshed of Christ, of whom Aaron was also a
Type: which therefore plainly implies the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ,
who outdid the Type: and with his own Blood entered into the Holy of Holies. And
whereas both the Spiritual or Immortal Nature of Christ, and his Terrestrial
and Mortal could not be set out by one thing; two Goats are made to typifie
them, the sacrificed Goat his crucified Flesh or Body on the Cross, which
likewise lay dead in the Grave while the Scapegoat (an Emblem of his (...), as
Plotinus somewhere calls it) his Immortal part was sent free into the
Wilderness the Won of Spirits and Ghosts, to Azazel, (if that be a proper Name)
a mighty Prince in those Regions of the Dead, according to that Clause in the
Creed, if rightly understood, He descended into Hell: Or that of the Apostle, 1
Pet. 3.18. Being put to death in the flesh, but alive in the Spirit, by which
he also went and preached to the Spirits in prison. These were the weighty
Negotiations of the Scapegoat, the Immortal part of Christ, till his visible
Resurrection by resuming his Body out of the Grave. And there is the like
reason of the two Birds, one killed and the other let fly into the fields,
Levit. 14.4. These the more we search into them, the more easy and natural
Types they will be found of those Passages touching Christ his Death and
Resurrection, as the entering of Aaron with the blood of the Goat (a Type of
Christ (as to his Suffering) as well as Aaron was a Type of him) into the
Sanctum Sanctorum, is a plain Type of his Ascension into Heaven, and
Intercession there, in virtue of his own Blood shed on the Cross in his
Crucifixion.

But it is besides my present Scope to insist on these things. I will only give
one Instance more, and that is of Aaron in his Priestly Habiliments: In which
Spectacle we may so plainly read not only those three Offices of Christ (whose
Type he is) King, Priest and Prophet, his golden Diadem denoting the first, his
Vestments in common with other Priests, the second, and his Urim and Thummim
the last: (The durable effect whereof is discovered in those Visions,
especially of Daniel and the Apocalypse, that run through all the conditions of
the Church to the End of the World) but there is yet a further Mystery
discernible, viz. the Divinity of Christ, in that he is clothed with the
Universe, which is a Vestment cannot belong to Aaron as a man, but as he is a
Type of the Eternal Logos that made the World. See the Appendix to the Defense
of my Philosophic Cabbala, Chap. 5. Sect. 3, 4. And the Name Jehovah, viz.
(...) engraven on his golden Diadem, an Orthodox Cabbalist will be prone to
conceive, and not without better reason perhaps than any can bring to the
contrary, that the Triplicity of those Letters (...) and ((...)) denote the
Trinity of Hypostases in the Godhead (...), and (...), which the Platonists
also term (...), and we Christians call Father, Son, and Spirit. Which Spirit
((...)) is set after ((...)) as well as after ((...)) as if we were to be
instructed thereby, that the Spirit proceeds as well from the Son as from the
Father: Though I do not hope that such a Cabbalistical Notion will suddenly end
the Controversy betwixt the Greek Church and the Latin.

But I must beg my Reader's pardon for this not altogether (I hope) useless
Digression. I had before made a competent Supply for my not bestowing one
entire Chapter in my Paralipomena to prove the Intelligibleness of the Visions
of Daniel and the Apocalypse, without which all endeavor to interpret them is
ridiculous and vain. And I need the less here expatiate on this Argument,
Phililicrines Parrhesiastes in his Reflections on R. B. having done so much of
that work to my hand, but in a way that partakes much of Mirth and Satyr, for
which he may happily incur the Censure of the more grave and sour, and it may be
more for being merry than Satirical. And the first I must confess is the
greatest infirmity I have observed in that Party. But it is a sign he has all
this time served a good Master, and that it is not the deepness of Melancholy
(as some superficial Souls may be prone to fancy) that has plunged his mind
into such serious studies, as the searching out the right sense of inspired
Visions and Prophecies, and the like, but that there is such a Life and Spirit
in him that loves the exercise of Reason, Wit, and Divine Speculation at once.

And if by that of Satyr any contempt fall upon R. B. for his contempt of the
ancient Primitive Times of the Church, and for his presumption of making
himself a Guide to People upon his private Spirit against the wholesome
Instructions of the Homilies of the Church of England and Authority of both
Crown and Mitre, and for his foul slurring, as much as in him lies, the
peculiar Privilege and Glory of the Christian Religion, as to have its state
from the beginning to the end so certainly prefigured by Divine Visions and
Prophecies, he hypocritically pretending the Apocalypse to be altogether
unintelligible, now it is so clearly to be understood against Fanaticism and
Bloodshed, thus cancelling the seasonable usefulness thereof, and casting dirt
upon the pious and learned Labors of the best Writers of our Church: I say, if
any contempt fall upon him from what of Satyr is found in those Reflections of
Phililicrines Parrhesiastes, he may, as I conceive, fairly thank himself, there
being nothing, I dare say, intended by that free Satyrist, but the peace and
good of the Church, and the reducing of R. B. to a better Judgment, and
exposing the profane and frivolous Spirit of those that pride themselves in a
boastful profession, that to them, forsooth, great Wits as they are! the holy
Visions of the Divinely inspired Prophets, are altogether Unintelligible.

Books written by the same Author, and printed for Walter Kettilby at the Sign
of the Bishop's Head in S. Paul's Churchyard.
HEnrici Mori Opera Theologica and Philosophica, 3. Vol. Fol. His Exposition on
Daniel, Quarto. His Exposition on the Apocalypse, Quarto. His Answer to several
Remarks on his Expositions on Daniel and the Apocalypse. His Illustration of
those two, abstruse Books in Holy Scripture, the Book of Daniel and the
Revelation of S. John, by continued, brief, but clear Notes from Chapter to
Chapter, and from Verse to Verse, with very useful and apposite Arguments
prefixed to each Chapter, framed out of the Expositions of Dr. Henry More,
Quarto, 1685. His Confutation of Judiciary Astrology against Butler, Quarto.
His Reply to the Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry, with his Appendix,
Octavo. His Remarks on Judge Hales of Fluid Bodies, Octavo.
Paralipomena Prophetica.
THE INTRODUCTION. The occasion of the Author's writing his Paralipomena
Prophetica. His design in writing them, to show there is but one true way of
interpreting Daniel and the Apocalypse. How himself was discouraged in his
younger days by the variety of Interpretations; with a solution of that
fallacy. His Apology for his great care and diligence in managing this
Province of rightly interpreting the above said Prophecies.
WHEN I wrote my Expositions of the Visions of Daniel and the Apocalypse, I was
solicitous only of these two things, that my continued Interpretations should
be unforced, natural and coherent, solid, true and agreeing with History. And
that I might dispatch them as timely as I could for present public use. Which
latter therefore made me more compendious than otherwise I might have been; my
main anxiety being, that nothing should pass my Pen, but what was sound and
true, not being at all careful to bring all into view which might give further
strength and light to what I had written, or to obviate all objections which,
by scrupulous Wits, might be made. What therefore I may seem to have omitted
then, I shall make a supply of now. And those Omissions (which I therefore call
Paralipomena, they being then passed by for the present, but) now for the
further confirmation or illustration of several passages in those Expositions
compiled into one Book, I offer thus collected unto thy serious Perusal.

In which compilement I have observed no order, as in this case being needless;
but as matters came into my mind, or occasion was given, I writ and have set
them down. They are easily referred to the passages of the Expositions
themselves, whether on Daniel, or the Apocalypse, which are sufficiently
orderly and coherent. My main design in general is to make those Expositions as
settled and unexceptionable, as possibly I can, that the Reader may perceive
that the Interpretation of Prophecies is no such uncertain and lubricous thing,
but that there is one sense of them genuine and natural, and far beyond any
other pretended Interpretations whatever: That so he may be released from that
distraction and confusion of multiplicity of Interpretations, which weakens the
belief of any, and makes the pretense of understanding Prophecies either
heartless, or ridiculous. I must confess, when I was young, that very thing
hugely turned my stomach from those studies. But it might as well have done so
from the study of Philosophy; the reasons of the Phenomenon of Nature which
Philosophers give, being as various and repugnant as the Interpretations of a
Prophecy. But that which is solid and sound in either, when it is once light
on, will plainly, by the impartial and judicious, be discerned to be such, and
he will rest fully satisfied therein.

That I should manage this Province with so much care and solicitude, no man
that has any kindness for Christian Religion, can take amiss, Prophecy being
the peculiar strength and glory of Christianity, no Religion in the World being
able to produce the like. Which being to many of so great moment, and of so
clear and indubitable Interpretation in virtue of demonstrable Synchronisms and
palpable Applicability and exquisitely suitable significancy of the Visions to
the Events, they do not only put the truth of Christianity beyond all doubt,
but is one of the most irrefragable Arguments for Natural Religion, viz. for
the Existence of God and of Angels, and for a Divine Providence over the
affairs of men, and a reward after this life, according to what we have done,
whether it be good or evil, that can be desired. But having more fully
suggested these things in my Prefaces to my Expositions, I shall detain the
Reader no longer here with them, but fall upon my present design.

CHAP. I. Tho. Lydiat 's Epoch of the twentieth of Artaxerxes Longimanus for
the compute of Daniel 's weeks more fully to be insisted on. Two undeniable
Postulatums in order thereto. The passage of the Prophecy that respects the
Epoch of the weeks. Four Decrees, but only two of them Competitors for the
Epochate, viz. that of the seventh, and that of the twentieth of Artaxerxes,
the one granted to Ezra, the other to Nehemiah. The Commissions granted to
each, and some circumstances of the execution of them. The comparing of them
with the Epoch described in the Prophecy. That Nehemiah 's nuncupatory
Commission does the more exactly agree with the said description. That the Jews
had never any Decree to build the walls of Jerusalem till that of Nehemiah.
Further Arguments to the same purpose. In what sense the City may be said to be
built before the Commission of Nehemiah. An Answer to an Objection from those
words, Ezra 9.9. to give us a wall. Further Reasons to prove that Ezra had no
Commission to build the walls of Jerusalem. The testimony of the Son of Sirach.
No Commission but that of Nehemiah had the Title of building the walls. That it
is so plain a case, that Nehemiah 's Commission is the true Epoch of the
weeks, that learned men have betaken themselves to Lunar years to compute by,
rather than desert it. The unsuccessfulness of that device.
WE shall begin with that passage of the Exposition of Daniel's Weeks, that
notable Prophecy concerning the coming of Christ, and as clear, if rightly
managed, as notable for its weight and importance. The passage is, the placing
the Epoch of these seventy Weeks in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus. Funccius and several others would fix it in the seventh of his
Reign; which Opinion I was once inclined to my self, till I was convinced of
the truth of the other. I have produced something for the confirmation thereof
out of Thomas Lydiat in my Notes upon my Exposition of that Prophecy. But the
business being of so great moment, I shall here resume it again afresh, that I
may do him right by more fully bringing into view (and yet as briefly as may
be) whether out of himself, or from elsewhere, what makes for the confirmation
of his Opinion. And this I shall do gradually. First, by setting down two
Postulatums, which I hope no reasonable man will ever deny me. Secondly, I
shall represent out of the Prophecy it self that part that respects the Epoch
of the Weeks, and out of the History of Ezra and Nehemiah the state of the
Controversy, Whether of these two Epocha's bid the fairer to be the Epoch of
the seventy Weeks? And lastly, I will consider the twentieth of Artaxerxes in
Thomas Lydiat's sense what grounds he has for it. The two Postulatums are these.

The first Postulatum.
That we are to acknowledge that sense of any passage of a Prophecy, whether it
respects the Epoch thereof, or any other part, to be the true sense, that is
least forced, or is most easy and natural, and most plainly agreeable to the
words of the Prophecy, and that does the least or no violence to the words of
that passage whose sense is controverted.

This Postulatum is of it self so clearly reasonable, that nothing can be added
to make it more firm, unless this ill consequence of denying it, that we shall
not ever know when we have the right sense of any Prophecy, or indeed of any
place of Scripture else, if this be not the Touchstone thereof.

The second Postulatum.
When Historians disagree in their Story or Chronology; forasmuch as profane
History (as it is vulgarly called) is not infallible, but some may be right in
one thing, some in another, we are to embrace that story or passage of
Chronology that suits best with, or does the least violence to the certain
Verity of the Sacred Writ. And there is the same reason of one and the same
Historian that varies from himself, or writes in one place what is repugnant to
what he has writ in another. We are to account that passage the truest that
agrees best with the Holy Scriptures, and to acknowledge, as touching the
other, that ignorance or inadvertence has misguided his Pen.

This Postulatum is as reasonable and undeniable as the former, because, as
Aristotle says, (...). Truth is always consonant to truth: whence that which is
dissonant thereto, must necessarily be false. Wherefore that Historian that
speaks consonantly and consistently with the infallible Holy Writ, in the thing
that he so speaks, he is to be judged to speak true, compared with the other
that in the point, contradicts the Holy Writ; or if one and the same Historian
speak repugnantly to himself, if one part of that Repugnancy agrees with the
Sacred Text, the same is to be esteemed the right, the other an error or
mistake.

Now for that passage of the Prophecy that respects the Epoch of the Weeks,
the words are these: Dan. 9.25. Know therefore and understand, that from the
going forth of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah
the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks; the street
shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.

Here the Epoch is to be taken without all Controversy from the going forth
of a Command or Decree; of which there were four, one in the first year of
Cyrus, another in the second year of Darius Hystaspis, a third in the seventh
year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, and a fourth in the twentieth year of his Reign.
But the first Decrees, and consequently the Epocha's from them, are pitched so
high, that they fall many years short, even of the Nativity of Christ, so that
they are plainly shut out from any pretense of claim to be Epocha's of this
Prophecy. The competition therefore is only betwixt the Edict or Decree given
out the seventh year of Artaxerxes Longimanus to Ezra, and that given out in
the twentieth of his Reign to Nehemiah. Let us therefore consider the History
of each, and whether of them agree best with the Prophecy, Ezra, Chap. 7. v.
11. Now this is the Copy of the Letter that the King Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra
the Priest -- v. 13. I make a Decree, That all they of the people of Israel and
of his Priests ( viz. of the God of Heaven) and Levites in my Realm, which are
minded of their own free will to go up to Jerusalem, go with thee. And so from
this 13. v. to v. 25. all is concerning the Temple and the Priests and the
Worshp of the God of Israel. But v. 25. his Commission is enlarged to Civil
Judicature. And thou, Ezra, after the Wisdom of thy God that is in thy hand,
set Magistrates and Judges which may judge all the People which are beyond the
River, all such as know the Laws of thy God, and teach ye them that know them
not. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
Judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to
Banishment, or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment. This is the sum
of the Decree given out the seventh year of Artaxerxes unto Ezra.

Now that Commission given to Nehemiah is set down thus, Nehem. Chap. 2. And it
came to pass in the month Nisan in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the King,
that wine was before him, and I took up the wine, and gave it to the King; Now
I had not been before time sad in his Presence. Wherefore the King said unto
me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? This is nothing but
sorrow of heart. Then I was very sore afraid, and said unto the King, Let the
King live for ever. Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City, the
place of my Fathers Sepulchers, lies waste, and the Gates thereof are consumed
with fire? Then the King said unto me, For what do thou make request? So I
prayed to the God of Heaven; And I said unto the King, If it please the King,
and if thy servant have found favor in thy sight, that thou would send me
unto Judah unto the City of my Fathers Sepulchers, that I may build it. And the
King said unto me, For how long shall thy journey be? and when will thou
return? So it pleased the King to send me, and I set him a time. Moreover, I
said unto the King, If it please the King, let Letters be given to the
Governors beyond the River, that they may convey me over till I come into
Judah. And a Letter unto Asaph, the Keeper of the Kings Forest, that he may
give me timber to make beams for the gates of the Palace which appertained to
the house, and for the wall of the City, and for the house that I shall enter
into; and the King granted me according to the good hand of my God upon me.
This is plainly a Grant from the King to Nehemiah to build the City of
Jerusalem, and to wall it about.

We will add also out of Chap. 4. what straits they were put to at the building
of the wall, v. 7. And it came to pass, that when Sanballat and Tobiah and the
Arabians and the Ammonites and the Ashdodites heard that the walls of Jerusalem
were making up, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very
wroth, and conspired all of them together to come and fight against Jerusalem
and hinder it. And v. 16. And it came to pass from that time forth, that the
half of my servants wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both
the Spears, the Shields, and the Bows, and the Habergeons -- They which builded
on the wall, and they which bare burdens, and those that laded, every one with
one of his hands wrought in the work, and in the other hand held a weapon.

I have set before the Readers eyes that passage in the Prophecy that describes
the Epoch from whence the seventy weeks are to commence. It is from the going
forth of a Decree or Grant to restore and build Jerusalem: The Streets, says
the Decree or Prophecy, shall be built again, and the Wall, and that in
troublous times. Now in the Commission given to Ezra, in the seventh of
Artaxerxes's Reign, there is no mention of building the City, much less of the
Walls, nor in the History of the execution of that Decree any mention of
troublesome times. But quite contrary it is said, Ezra 8.36. And they delivered
the Kings Commission unto the Kings Lieutenants, and to the Governors on this
side the River, and they furthered the people and the house of God. But in the
Commission given to Nehemiah the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, there is mention
of both building the City and the Wall; and in the History of the execution of
the Commission, there is mention of troublous times indeed, when they were
forced to defend the workers at the Wall by Arms; nay, the very men that
wrought at the Wall, were fain, as they did their work with one hand, to hold a
Sword in the other. So exquisitely does this Decree, and the History of the
execution thereof, suit with the words of the Prophecy which respect the Epoch
and Decree. So that it cannot be but with infinite violence done to the Sacred
Text, to pitch upon the Commission given to Ezra in the seventh year of
Artaxerxes, instead of that given to Nehemiah in the twentieth.

I must confess that the full of Ezra's Commission is set down in writing in a
more formal and ample way, whenas that Commission to Nehemiah seems rather to
be by word of mouth, or nuncupatory, saving that the Letters to the Governors
beyond the River for safe conduct, and a Letter to Asaph the Keeper of the
Kings Forest, etc. But this is so far from diminishing, that it adds (if any
thing more need be added) to the certainty, that the Commission given to
Nehemiah is the Decree which is the Epoch of the seventy Weeks. For the words
of the Original, which our English Translation renders [from the going forth of
the Commandment] are (...), which is as much as to say, from the going forth of
the Word, or pronouncing the Word that Jerusalem should be rebuilt, etc. And
both the vulgar Latin and Vatablus render it, ab exitu sermonis; and the LXX.
(...).

Now as this is unexceptionably plain in it self, so it bears a most exact
correspondency with more passages of the History, than I have yet taken notice
of Nehem. Chap. 1. There Anani tells Nehemiah, inquiring of the welfare of his
brethren at Jerusalem, that the Remnant that are left of the Captivity there,
in the Province, are in great affliction and reproach. For the Wall of
Jerusalem is broken down, and the Gates thereof are burnt with fire. This I
conceive is the natural sense of the place, we rendering ((...)) not praeterea,
or also, as our English Translation does, but [For] it being a grief to the
Jews, and a reproach and disgrace to them, whenas their Temple was rebuilt, and
they had houses, such as they were, and some better than they deserved, before
the Temple was finished, (which was in the sixth year of Darius Hystaspis) that
the wall of the City was yet unbuilt, whereby they lay open to insolences of
their Neighbors, and were obnoxious to their taunts and jears. This sad
condition Anani was exceeding sensible of himself, nor did he tell it as a
piece of News to Nehemiah (for he knew the walls of Jerusalem had been
demolished this long time, and that the Gates were burnt with fire, but with a
moving and empassionating Rhetoric he put him in mind of it; who being an
hearty Lover of his Country, and seriously considering it, what an huge thing
was yet wanting to complete their felicity, it first cast him into tears, and
presently after into a serious religious sadness, so that he fasted and prayed
for some days, nor did conceal the sorrow of his heart when he waited on the
King, and gave him the Cup of Wine, but the King read it easily in his
countenance. Wherefore the thing being of such vast consequence to have this
evil redressed by procuring a Decree to build the City, and wall it about, it
is plain they never had any leave to build it, till the Commission granted to
Nehemiah. For if it had been granted to Ezra in his Commission, it was so
transcending a favor and privilege, that he could not but have taken notice
of it in his thanksgiving to God, Chap. 7. v. 27. where he says, Blessed be the
Lord God of our fathers, which has put such a thing as this in the Kings
heart, to beautify the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem: But for the
building, or rather the rebuilding of the City, he speaks not a word, though it
was a thing of that vast moment, that it cost Nehemiah many sighs, tears,
fastings and prayers. Wherefore Ezra had been very ungrateful to omit giving
God thanks for this, as well as beautifying the Temple, if the King had granted
him any such thing.

Nor could there be conceived a Grant for the Instauration or Re-edification of
Jerusalem, unless it were in some measure according to the City standing in
David's time, of which it is said, Psalm. 48. Walk about Sion, and go round
about her, tell the towers thereof, mark ye well her bulwarks, consider well
her palaces, that ye may tell it to the generations to come. Contemplamini
moenia urbis, palatiae, muros ac turres, VISIONVM APOCALYPTICARVM TABVLA
GENERALIS
Pref: page. 13

so Munster on the place. A Grant to restore or rebuild Jerusalem must reach
thus far, or else it is no Instauration thereof. But this, before the Grant to
Nehemiah, was never permitted to them, and the attempting of it had been such a
mischief to them, that their Enemies, to enrage the King against them, forged
that crime, as if they had been guilty of it, as you may see Ezr. Chap. 4. v.
12. though they had then a Commission to build the Temple. Nor was any such
thing granted to Ezra in his Commission, which contained all his petition or
request. For whence should we know better what he requested, all his request
being granted, than from the Grant it self, which is largely set down in the
King's Letter to him, Ezr. 7. from v. 11. to 27. There is not a word there of
rebuilding the City at all, much less in this full and proper sense, no more
than there is in the Grant of Cyrus and Darius, which were only for the
building of the Temple.

But being that those that resorted to Jerusalem on this occasion, were not to
live, like Beasts, without houses: it is a forced thing to imagine, but that by
the natural consequence of that Grant, or necessary connivence, private houses
would be built in Jerusalem, and so in some meaner kind of sense the City may
be said to be in building thereby. And this is consonant to the words of the
Prophet Esaias, Chap. 24. v. 28. that says of Cyrus, He is my Shepherd, and
shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built,
and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid. And Chap. 45.13. I have raised
him up in righteousness, viz. Cyrus, he shall build my City, and let go my
Captives. Which would be but an hard bargain, if they might not build
themselves houses when they came to Jerusalem. Wherefore in that meaner sense
Cyrus may be said by his Decree, though it was no Decree to build the City, to
build it, or because his first Decree, for building of the Temple, was the
ground of all the good Grants they afterward obtained of the Kings of Persia.
In that sense all in fullness might be attributed to him, as being the first
Founder of all. Nor would God suffer the words of his Servant the Prophet to
fall to the ground.

And according to that meaner sense may also be understood that passage in
Ezra's Prayer, Ezr. 9.9. Thou have extended thy mercy unto us in the sight of
the Kings of Persia, to give us a reviving to set up the House of our God, and
to repair the desolations thereof, and to give us, that is, every Master of a
Family amongst us, (...) (our English Translation renders it) a Wall. But then
by a Synecdoche it may signify an house, and properly of the meaner sort;
(...) signifying Maceria, a more rudely and slightly built wall with dry stones
without mortar, or with mortar, and watling of sticks, and the like. The LXX.
render (...) sundry times, and also (...), which is as much as an Hovel, a Hut,
a Cottage or Sheepcoat, which may easily assure us (...) here may not signify
any thing above the convenience of the common walls of a private habitation.
But if (...) be rendered (...), as the LXX. here render it, and (...) be taken
in the highest sense for a wall of Defense and Strength, undoubtedly it is to
be understood of the wall of the Temple, whose wall toward the South-East
quarter was a strong defense, and the Temple a most magnificent Fort or Castle,
where the Priests and Levites were engarrison'd part of the Army of the God of
Israel, who is the Lord of Hosts, as I have observed in my Notes upon Daniel
out of Grotius. Wherefore the Temple being such a place of Defense, this gave
some colorable pretense to Rehum the Chancellor and the rest, while the Jews
were busy in building the Temple, to accuse them in a Letter to Artaxerxes,
Ezr. 4. as if they were building the rebellious City, and setting up the Walls
thereof, v. 12. when it was only the (...), Moenia, or walls of the Temple. And
upon Artaxerxes's Answer to that Letter, it is said, v. 24. Then ceased the
work of the House of God, which is at Jerusalem; so it ceased to the second
year of the Reign of Darius King of Persia: As if the Jews themselves were
conscious, that the walls and buildings of the Temple were a kind of
Fortification. But they are hugely out that fancy, that by this wall (...) is
meant a Wall about the City for Fortification, which before Nehemiah, they
never had any Commission to build; and it had been their undoing, if they had
gone about it, Sanballat, you may be sure, would have been on their backs to
the purpose, they having no Commission, when he was so vexatious to them when
they had one. Nor is there any story in Ezra touching their going about any
such work, no more than any mention in the Commission for it.

Moreover Nehemiah's application to Artaxerxes plainly implies, that the
Commission Ezra had, had no clause in it to warrant the rebuilding of the
Walls, and repairing the Gates which were broke down and burnt by
Nebuchadnezzar, and so lay till that very time, though sundry private houses
were rebuilt, some it may be in a better sort, but most very mean, and hand
over head without order. For if Ezra had had that Commission, Nehemiah would
have framed his Petition accordingly, and reminded the King, that he only
desired him to ratify again what he had before granted to Ezra, and told a sad
story of Sanballat and his wicked Companions, that they had demolished the
Wall, and burnt the Gates of the City, which Ezra by his Royal Grant had
repaired again and built up. Which considerations could not but conduce to the
more easy obtaining his Request of the King, which being omitted, plainly
argues they were not true. And that there was no rebuilding of the City, in
that proper sense I above described, but by Nehemiah; of whom it is said by the
Son of Sirach, ( Chap. 49.13.) having in the foregoing verses spoke the praises
of Zorobabel and Joshuah, who in their time builded the House, and set up an
holy Temple to the Lord, That amongst the Elect was Nehemiah, whose renown is
great, who raised up for us the Walls that were fallen, and set up the Gates
and the Bars, and raised up our ruins again. So infinitely plain is it every
way, that his was the only Commission for the rebuilding the City and the Wall
thereof, and is the only Commission that has that Title. So that, if Ezra's
Commission had any clause in it for the building of the City, as it assuredly
had none; yet the Commission of Nehemiah only bearing that Title, the granting
of his Commission must, by unavoidable necessity, be the Epoch of the seventy
Weeks of Daniel.

Which is a point so plain and undeniable, that not only Julius Africanus of
old, but also Daniel Huetius, a late learned and ingenious Writer, rather than
he would quit this certain truth, that the Epoch of Daniel's Weeks is from the
Commission granted to Nehemiah by Artaxerxes in the twentieth of his Reign,
adheres to that ancient Conceit, That the years that Daniel's Weeks are to be
numbered by, are not Solar years, but Lunar, which are less by eleven days in a
year than the Solar, the Solar containing 365 days, the Lunar but 354. Which is
something an hard Hypothesis, there being not an Example in all the Bible again
of numbering of time by Lunar years. And Lyranus, who himself was an Hebrew, and
very skilful in their Learning and Customs, declares expressly, Falluntur, says
he, qui putant Hebraeos lunaribus annis usos aliquando, alioqui tota veteris
Instrumenti series vacillet, as Cornelius a Lapide cites him on the place. And
indeed it seems improbable, but the Angel that imparted the Vision to Daniel,
should mean such years as would be most universally in use in the Church of
God, who is so much concerned in this Prophecy. And besides, if we compute from
the Springtime of the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, (for the Decree was made
in the month Nisan) which twentieth year falls in with the 4269. year of the
Julian Period, unto the Springtime of the year which falls in with the year
4745. of the said Period, when our Savior suffered, viz. Olympiad. 202. Anno
quarto finiente, and in the nineteenth year of Tiberius his Reign, according to
Seth Calvisius, Funccius and Helvicus; this Interval of time will make 476
Solar years complete, which 476 Solar years make 173859 days with the
Bissextile days added to them, and divided by 354, give 491 Lunar years with
some 45 days over. So that by this account our Savior would be so far from
suffering in the midst of the seventieth week, that his Passion would fall in
the second year after the expiration thereof: which is a thing intolerable.

CHAP. II. Though Julius Africanus his Conceit for computing Daniel 's Weeks by
Lunar years, be witty, yet it is not true. That there is a necessity of
computing by Solar years, as well as of retaining the Epoch of the twentieth
of Artaxerxes: But withal of removing the Commencement of Artaxerxes his Reign
higher in Chronology than Chronologers usually place it. Petavius his device
of making Artaxerxes 's Reign ten years with his Father, proposed. An
Examination of this Hypothesis. The infirmness of the ground thereof out of
Herodotus, (...), not signifying, as Petavius would have it. And if it did,
this (...) would be either in the fifth year of Xerxes, or three or four years
after the twelfth, and therefore uncompliable with Petavius his design. How
incredible it is, that Ezra 's and Nehemiah 's Decree should not be reckoned
from the same Epoch of Artaxerxes his Reign. What a glorious achievement it
is to discover a twentieth of Artaxerxes 's reigning alone, from whence,
computing by Solar years, the Passion of Christ will fall into the midst of the
last week.
IT is necessary then to relinquish this old Conceit of Julius Africanus of
computing Daniel's Weeks by Lunar years, though it is not without some Wit and
Ingenie, while from that expression of the LXX. [(...).] (...), Septuaginta
Hebdomades abbreviatae sunt super populum tuum: he argues, that the Weeks must
be computed by Lunar years, they being (...), shorter years, than the Solar by
eleven days in a year. But this shortness of the years makes their number
exceed the seventy Weeks, and places the Passion of Christ in the second year
after their expiration, as I have noted already.

And therefore there is a necessity of betaking our selves to that usual and
unexceptionable way of reckoning by Solar years, and as great a necessity still
to stick to that indubitable Epoch of the Weeks, the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, though here we shall be cast into great straits, if we
stick to the ordinary Opinion of Chronologers, who fix the beginning of the
Reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus in the first year of the 79. Olympiad, and the
289. V.C. which Seth Calvisius, Helvicus, and Funccius, with others, agree in.
Whence it will follow, that the twentieth year of Artaxerxes will fall in with
the fourth year of the 83. Olympiad, and the 308. V.C. But now if the seventy
Weeks commence in 308. V.C. or in the fourth year of the 83. Olympiad, it will
likewise follow, that they end in the 797. year V.C. and the first of 206.
Olympiad, which is the fifth year of Claudius. Whence it would be concludible,
that Christ was crucified in the second year of Claudius, that year being the
midst of the last week. Whenas every School boy knows that Imperante Augusto
natus est Christus, imperante Tiberio est crucifixus.

This therefore is so gross an absurdity, that there is a necessity of placing
the beginning of the Reign of Artaxerxes in some sense or other higher in
Chronology than it is usually pitched. Petavius therefore has espoused this
quaint Conceit, That the Reign of Artaxerxes has two Epocha's; the one the same
that Calvisius, Helvicus and Funccius agree in: the other ten years sooner,
namely, the twelfth year of Xerxes, or the third year of the 76. Olympiad, when
he was assumed into the participation of the Empire by his Father Xerxes, at
his going upon an Expedition out of Persia: which he grounds upon that passage
in Herodotus, lib. 7. That there was a great strife amongst Darius Hystaspis
his Sons, who should be King, if he died in the War: (...). So that he ought to
appoint who should be King, according to the Law of the Persians, and so go
upon his Expedition. From this passage Petavius would infer, that Artaxerxes
reigned some years with his Father, he assuming him into a participation of the
Empire sometime when he went to War out of the Empire of Persia. And for the
greater color to this Conceit, he adds, This is the only way to salve the
Credit of famous Historians, some whereof say, That Themistocles's flight from
the Athenians was in Xerxes his time, as Ephorus, Dinon, Clitarchus, Heraclides
and Diodorus; others, that it was in his Son's time Artaxerxes, as Thucydides,
Charon, Cornelius Nepos and Plutarch. Wherefore they both reigning together,
the Credit of both Parties of the Historians is salved, they both saying true.
And that he sets the Epoch of Artaxerxes's Reign with his Father ten years
before his Reign alone after his Father's death, is, because taking the Epoch
of the Weeks from the twentieth of his Reign, when he reigned alone, there will
be ten years wanting to make our Savior's Passion fall in the midst of the
week, as it is to fall according to the Prophecy of the seventy Weeks, it being
granted, that he suffered in the fourth year toward the ending of the 202.
Olympiad.

This is a trim Hypothesis, if it were as solid as trim. For, First, the main
Basis thereof, methinks, is very precarious, viz. That the Kings of Persia,
when they went to War against foreign Kingdoms in Person, actually constituted
one of their Sons King. The very words of Herodotus may import no more than
this, viz. to declare who was to be King, or succeed in the Crown, if it should
so happen, that the present King were slain in the War. This is all that we can
be assured is meant by (...) here, to point out him that he intends to be his
Successor in his Kingdom.

Secondly, If it were granted, that (...) here is to make one actually King,
then this making must be upon Xerxes's entering upon that Expedition of his
against Greece the fifth year of his Reign; betwixt which, and the twelfth of
Xerxes his Reign, there is seven years difference, which makes this Conceit
utterly unserviceable to the end it was invented for. And that he made any
Expedition himself, besides that in Person, is incredible, the general Current
of Historians declaring, as Pezelius observes, that the Greeks carried the War
into Asia, not the Persians into Greece; nor that War, which was managed by the
Persians, was carried on by Xerxes in Person, but only by his Commanders.
Diodorus names Tithraustes a bastard Son of Xerxes, and Pheredates, Xerxes his
Nephew. Justin indeed writes thus: Igitur Xerxes cum proditionis dolum (namely,
Pausanias his, who would have betrayed Greece to Xerxes) publicatum videret, ex
integro bellum instituit, Graeci quoque ducem constituunt Cimonem -- qui Xerxem
terrestri navalique bello superatum trepidum recipere se in regnum coegit.
Whereby is noted that notable Fight and Victory by Sea and Land that Cimon the
Athenian had against the Persians at the River Eurymedon. This Victory he got
the third year of the 77. Olympiad, which Fight Diodorus fully and particularly
describing, and making no mention of Xerxes himself, makes me prone to imagine,
that Justin speaks figuratively, or else is hugely mistaken. Or if he be not,
Xerxes his Expedition being the third year of the 77. Olympiad, he must (...),
declare Artaxerxes King, either this year, or the year before, which again will
spoil this fine Conceit, and make it useless for the end it was intended. For
then the Passion of Christ will fall out, not in the middle of the last week,
but at the beginning thereof.

And Thirdly and lastly, It is a thing beyond all credibility, That whenas Ezra
computes the Decree granted to him by Artaxerxes Longimanus from the seventh
year of his real Reign, or his reigning alone: (For if Xerxes had been alive,
he had been named, and not Artaxerxes) that Nehemiah telling us he had his
Commission granted the twentieth of Artaxerxes, should count from another
Epoch ten years different from the former, and so puzzle and confound the
Chronology of the Sacred History, and of so concerning a Prophecy. These few
things are enough to show the vanity of this surmise. But if any one would be
more fully satisfied, let him read Daniel Huetius his Demonstratio Evangelica,
Prop. 9. page 370.

As for the salving the Credit of these differing Historians by this quaint
device, it will be more seasonable to speak to that hereafter. In the mean time
there being a necessity to keep to the Epoch of the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes's Reign, and not only to number by Solar years, but from the
twentieth year, as we are now convinced, of his Reign from his Father Xerxes
his death, he that can make out the true Epoch of Artaxerxes his Reign in this
sense, so that from the twentieth year thereof, if we count Daniel's Weeks, the
Crucifixion of our Savior will be found in the midst of the last of these
Weeks, this man must merit immortal praise, for this excellent piece of service
he has done the Church of Christ and Christianity.

CHAP. III. A just Encomium of Thomas Lydiat. His fixing the beginning of the
real Reign of Artaxerxes in the second year of the 77. Olympiad, with the
consequences thereof. The proof of the abovementioned Epoch from the time of
Themistocles flight into Asia, which was in that year. That he got to the
Persian Court in a very short time, proved out of Plutarch. Of the confounding
of the Names of Xerxes and Artaxerxes. And that Themistocles came to the
Persian Court about the time of the Exitus of the one, and Succession of the
other.
AND this is that which I am well assured in my self, that that excellent
Person Thomas Lydiat (a man of a free and stout Spirit, of a quick Sagacity,
clear and firm Judgment, great reading and industry, and singular Piety, and as
it were a Martyr in the late times (as you may see in that elegant Preface
prefixed to his Posthumous Works, for his Loyalty to the King, and Faithfulness
to the Church of England, of which he was a worthy Minister, and eximious
Ornament) has solidly and irrefutably performed. He has, I say, laying aside
all fine conceits and groundless surmises, with a downright stroke fixed the
beginning of Artaxerxes his Reign, properly so called, namely the succeeding
his Father after his death, in the second year of the 77. Olympiad. Whence it
will follow, that the true twentieth year of his Reign will be the first year
of the 82. Olympiad, or the 4262. year of the Julian Period. And, which will be
the consequent upon this, the 70 Weeks of Daniel will expire in the 4751. year
of the Julian Period, or the second year of the Reign of Caius Caligula,
according to Helvicus, Funccius, and Seth Calvisius, and the Crucifixion of
Christ fall out in the 22d year of Tiberius his Reign, which is the middle of
the last week, according to the mind of Thomas Lydiat. In which sum of years
betwixt the twentieth of Artaxerxes, and second of Caligula, he and other
Chronologers are agreed. How particular parcels of time in the Reign of some
Kings will be adjusted, will be discerned in the procedure of the business.

In the mean time we are to note, That this fixing of the beginning of the
Reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus in the second year of the 77. Olympiad, which is
at least six years higher than other Chronologers place it, is no fictitious or
arbitrarious thing, but a thing necessary, and firmly made out by most
Authentic History. For first, the flight of Themistocles into Asia to get to
the King of Persia, Tho. Lydiat has made out with undeniable clearness out of
Diodorus Siculus, that it was the second year of the 77. Olympiad, and Petavius
himself acknowledges the truth thereof. Now when he was upon his journey, that
he made no delay, but got thither in a short time that very year, appears from
what Plutarch writes in his Life, That when he had arrived to Cuma, a Town near
the Sea, he made no stay there for fear of the Overseers of Sea-affairs,
especially Ergoteles and Pythodorus, but betook himself presently to Aegae, a
Town in the same Country of Aeolia, where he was entertained by his Friend, to
whom alone he was there known, one Nicogenes (a Person of great Quality and
much Riches, and befriended much by the Nobles of the Persian Court) with whom
having stayed but a few days, after Supper upon a certain Sacrifice, Nicogenes
Childrens Schoolmaster Olbius, (...), being in a Divine rapture, cried out in
these words, (...). Which words, as it seems, implied, Night would prove
Oracular to Themistocles, and suggest such counsel to him as would prove very
successful. After this therefore Themistocles falling asleep, dreamed he saw a
Dragon winding about his belly, and creeping up to his neck; but as soon as it
touched his face, that it was changed into an Eagle, which spreading his wings,
took him up, and carried him a long way, and set him firmly upon a Caduceum or
Heralds staff made of Gold, freeing him thus from immense fear and
consternation of mind. Wherefore upon this, Nicogenes presently sent him away
to the Persian Court in such a close Coach as their Women use to be carried in.
And the less stay then in his journey, certainly it was the better. It is plain
therefore, that this very year Themistocles came to the Persian Court.

But whether to Xerxes or Artaxerxes his Son, is a Question amongst
Chronologers from the different Reports of Historians. And some also make a
Question, Whether Xerxes and Artaxerxes be not Names or Titles promiscuously
used for a King of Persia; Artaxerxes signifying no more than great Xerxes, as
if one should say one while the Mogul, another while the great Mogul. Cornelius
a Lapide is expressly for this conceit upon the Weeks of Daniel: Historici,
says he, subinde confundunt nomina haec Xerxes and Artaxerxes. Xerxes enim
Persice significat Bellatorem, Artaxerxes magnum Bellatorem. But I think it is
already without Controversy, That Themistocles came to the Persian Court the
very same year he set out in, and as shall be made out, that Xerxes died, and
Artaxerxes began to reign in, and in all likelihood very near the time, not
many months distance from the exitus of the one, and succession of the other.
For the Right of the Kingdom devolved immediately upon Artaxerxes so soon as he
was next Heir to the Crown. Wherefore Themistocles coming to the Persian Court
in such a nick of time, I mean so near to the contermination of the Exitus of
Xerxes, and the succeeding of Artaxerxes, it is the less to be wondered at, that
some Historians say, he came to Xerxes, others to Artaxerxes.

CHAP. IV. That Themistocles in the second year of the 77. Olympiad, came to
Artaxerxes newly beginning to reign, proved out of Thucydides. As also from the
Testimony of Charon Lampsacenus. And the Suffrage of Plutarch. As likewise of
Cornelius Nepos. To which is added the Judgment of that modern Historian
Johannes Sleidanus. Why Plutarch preferred the Testimonies of Charon and
Thucydides before those of Ephorus, Dinon, Cleitarchus, Heraclides, and others.
The Characters of them. A probable way of salving all their Credits, and that
they do not clash with the Testimony of Charon and Thucydides, at least in any
thing considerable.
BUT Thomas Lydiat produces the irrefragable Authority of that unexceptionable
Historian Thucydides, that Themistocles came to the Son of Xerxes, viz.
Artaxerxes, (...), newly coming to the Throne. Whence it is undeniably true,
that Artaxerxes Longimanus began his Reign the second year of the 77. Olympiad,
which was the thing to be demonstrated.

Charon Lampsacenus also a Person of Quality, and a famous Historian, he
likewise declares, that Themistocles's flight and address was to the Son, not
to his Father Xerxes, his Father, as he writes, being dead. And who, I pray,
should be a more idoneous Witness, than he who lived and flourished in that
time, and whose native Town was Lampsacum, which Artaxerxes gave to
Themistocles to yield him Wines, as he did Magnesia to yield him Bread-corn,
and Myus the delicacy of Victuals, that Town having (...), as Diodorus speaks.

Plutarch also is of opinion, that Themistocles his address was to the Son of
Xerxes, not to Xerxes himself who was dead, and readily subscribes to the
Testimony of Thucydides, and of Charon Lampsacenus in this, as more
consentaneous to the truth of Chronology. And Cornelius Nepos prefers the
Authority of Thucydides before all those that write the contrary, Quod aetate
proximus erat qui illorum temporum historiam reliquerunt, and ejusdem Civitatis
fuit, namely, an Athenian, as Themistocles was, of which Thomas Lydiat makes
excellent use, as you may see in his Emendatio Temporum, An. Mund. 3534. And
for that passage of Nepos, [Qui illorum temporum historiam reliquerunt] what
can it more fitly relate to, than the History of Charon Lampsacenus, who was
contemporary to Themistocles, Xerxes and Artaxerxes, and was born at that very
Town Lampsacum, (and reckoned by Strabo amongst the Illustres Lampsaceni) which
Artaxerxes bestowed with the other two upon Themistocles? Whose Testimony can
be so much credited, as such an one as he? But Thucydides's Testimony alone is
of that value, that Pezelius conceives, that from thence that excellent and
judicious Historian Johannes Sleidanus declares thus; Xerxi successit filius
Artaxerxes Longimanus, ad hunc Themistocles exul profugit, etc.

Wherefore here is most ample and authentic Testimony, Charon Lampsacenus,
Thucydides, Plutarch, and Cornelius Nepos, that it was Artaxerxes Longimanus,
not Xerxes, to whom Themistocles in his Exile made his applications. But,
methinks, I hear you say, Plutarch in the same place where he subscribes to
Thucydides and Charon, tells us, that Ephorus and Dinon and Clitarchus and
Heraclides, with several other Historians, say, that Themistocles's address was
made to Xerxes. It may be so. But from thence it is then more clear, what a
great value he had for the Truth and Authority of those two Writers, when he
preferred their two Testimonies before the Testimony of so many. For the voices
of many are not so considerable in such cases, the mistake of one famous
Historian, such suppose as Herodotus, making all that succeed him, follow him;
as when one Sheep on a Bridge leaps off the Bridge into the water, it endangers
all the rest that follow, to leap after him. But Charon Lampsacenus was out of
this danger, he being much seniour to Herodotus, and flourishing in the very
times of Xerxes and Artaxerxes, whenas Herodotus was born but four years before
Xerxes his Expedition into Greece. And we may be sure, that Thucydides, who was
so extreme careful of writing nothing but what was true, consulted Charon
Lampsacenus (who lived and flourished in the times of Xerxes and Artaxerxes:
and wrote the Persian History of his Times, to which his own were so near, or
rather coincident.) For which very cause Cornelius Nepos prefers his Testimony
before any other that contradict it.

Now for Ephorus, he is a good while after Thucydides, and it is Seneca's
Character of him, Ephorus non religiosissimae fidei saepe decipitur, saepe
decipit. Dinon, though much later than he, Nepos seems to have a good opinion
of; but Pliny laughs at him for his Indian Sirens, who, he says, by their sweet
singing lull men asleep, and in their sleep seize on them, and devour them. And
for Clitarchus that followed Alexander the Great in his Expedition into Asia,
Quintiliaeus's Elogium of him is, Clitarchi probatur ingenium, fides infamatur.
Now for Heraclides, there were many of that Name, and those Historians too; but
it is likely this was Heraclides Cumanus who wrote five Books, De rebus
Persicis, junior to Clitarchus: he seeming to be ranged with those that lived
in Ptolemaeus Philometor's time by Gerardus Vossius, in his Treatise De
Historicis Graecis; but for his Character, I find none cited by Vossius either
good or bad out of any Author. And it may be, it was not altogether necessary
to mention those of the other, there being another way of answering, and more
consistent with their Credits.

For being it is merely known of them, that they relate Themistocles his
address, when he fled into Asia, to have been made to Xerxes; according to
Cornelius a Lapide's Opinion, there being no more difference betwixt Xerxes and
Artaxerxes, than betwixt the Mogul and the great Mogul, (for Artaxerxes
signifies no more than the great Xerxes) those that say he came to Xerxes, may
be judged to say the same thing that they who-relate he came to Artaxerxes. And
this is the very way that A Lapide salves the credit of these seemingly
clashing Historians. To which I will further add, That Themistocles's flight
into Asia, being so near the contermination of the Death of Xerxes, and the
Succession of his Son Artaxerxes, who was Heir to the Crown as soon as his
Brother Darius was slain, which was immediately upon the death of Xerxes killed
by Artabanus: the Credit of these clashing Historians is sufficiently salved,
in that the error in time is so very little, whether they say Themistocles
came to the Persian Court while Xerxes was alive, or in the Reign of his Son
Artaxerxes.

CHAP. V. What is to be answered to the Testimony of Diodorus Siculus, that
makes Xerxes live five or six years after his Conference with Themistocles. How
Diodorus came to be wheedled into this mistake. Ctesias Cnidius his Authority
to be preferred before Herodotus touching the term of years that Darius
Hystaspis reigned. (...) for (...) in Hecataeus Milesius writ through the
oscitancy of the Scribe; Or five years added to the Reign of Darius Hystaspis
wittingly by Herodotus to exercise his wit and invention thereon to please the
Reader. A further weight added to the Authority of Ctesias Cnidius in this
point from the second Postulatum.
BUT there is one more besides those four that Plutarch names, taken notice of
by Petavius, which I must confess this Salvo will not reach, and that is
Diodorus Siculus, who placing the flight of Themistocles in the second year of
the 77. Olympiad, does notwithstanding place the death of Xerxes in the fourth
year of the 78. Olympiad; so that Xerxes, according to him, lived five or six
years after his Conference with Themistocles in Persia. Wherefore here we must
ingenuously confess, that Diodorus has committed a mistake, though otherwise a
very creditable Historian. But it is a consequential mistake to a more
primitive Error, which he had imbibed from Herodotus, who makes Darius
Hystaspis to have reigned five years longer than in truth he did. Which
therefore must needs shove down the beginning of Xerxes his Reign (whom all are
agreed to have reigned but about twenty years) and consequently the beginning
of Artaxerxes's Reign, five years lower than in truth it was.

But though this must be acknowledged an error in Diodorus, yet we are to
pardon him from that modest deference he gave to the Authority of Herodotus, he
being reputed Parens Historiae, as Tully calls him, the Father of History; and
also because by his happy discovery of the true time of Themistocles's flight
to the King of Persia, he has again rescued us from that inveterate Error of
Herodotus; Charon and Thucydides, two unexceptionable and irrefragable Authors,
and elder than all that have related to the contrary, affirming, that it was
Artaxerxes Longimanus that Themistocles came to, and that at the beginning of
his Reign. But this coming of Themistocles, Diodorus assures us was in the
second year of the 77. Olympiad. And therefore it is apparent, that Xerxes died
five or six years earlier in the series of time than Diodorus makes him, though
acknowledged by all to have reigned twenty years, or thereabout.

Whence his Father Darius Hystaspis must of necessity not have reigned above
thirty one years, or thereabout, as Ctesias Cnidius also affirms he did not,
who being Physician to Artaxerxes Memor, had the opportunity to know the truth
of these things better than Herodotus. And it seems a special piece of
Providence, though length of time, or carelessness of Transcribers, may have
corrupted other numberings of his, that this of the Reign of Darius Hystaspis
has been kept unviolated, it agreeing so well with the undeniable Testimonies
of Charon and Thucydides, such ancient Writers.

Hecataeus Milesius indeed is something ancienter than Charon, he flourishing
in the beginning of the Reign of Darius Hystaspis, and being longaevous, may
well reach many years beyond his Reign; and if his History (for some make this
Hecataeus the Parent of History, and Herodotus to have gleaned from him) was
kept incorrupt without mistakes of the Transcribers, and so came to Herodotus
his hand, it might have been a safe direction touching the years of Darius his
Reign. But Thomas Lydiat conceits, that the carelessness of the Scribes may have
writ (...) for (...), it being but the change of one letter. And truly if it
was verbatim in Hecataeus, as Herodotus sets it down, (...), had it been (...)
after (...), this (...) being of such a full and swelling sound and sense, and
that which immediately followed it [(...)] so little, lank and dwindling, the
drowsy fancy of the Scribe might heedlesly suggest (...) instead of (...),
and being too lazy to mend it, or too mindless to observe the error, pass it
glibly, (...), for (...).

Such a slight Salvo as this, is more for the credit of Herodotus, than to
fancy that he would willingly produce the Reign of Darius about five years
longer than in truth it was, that he might give him room enough to make vast
preparations for War against the Greeks after his defeat at Marathon, and so
have occasion to bring in the pretty story of Demaratus assisting Xerxes in his
pleading for Succession in the Kingdom, that his Father Darius, as the Persian
use is, would declare him his Successor, himself being now to go out suddenly
on a foreign Expedition; and that in the heat of all these things, and vast
preparations, and eager purpose of revenging himself on his Enemies, and
recovering his Credit, he might die just in the very nick of time, when he
intended to have strutted out with a mighty Army, and achieved glorious
Exploits. What can be better contrived for the moving of passion in the Reader,
which is the pleasure of History? And Herodotus may well seem to be the very
Homer of Historians, and that his nine Books are not named after the Names of
the nine Muses for nothing. And Harpocration or Aelius would easily surmise so:
and Gerard Vossius tells us that Strabo's judgment is, that this was the scope
of Herodotus his writing, Vt Poetarum modo oblectaret lectorem suum, atque eam
esse causam cur multa asperserit a fide aliena. And he has given us a Specimen
of his Art and Cunning, in adding five years to Darius his Reign, wherein
nothing was done, no Expeditions actually undertaken against foreign Nations;
but only, as he is pleased to feign, huge preparations made, whereby this
figment of his five years longer reigning, than Ctesias Cnidius makes him, was
the less liable to discovery. For if there had been a War actually made against
any Foreign people, it would have been noted amongst them who it was that made
the War, Darius or his Son Xerxes; but this not being to be done, it made him
the more secure in his witty fiction.

Wherefore it is apparent, that the Authority of Ctesias is to be preferred
before Herodotus's in this point; It comporting also so well with the Epoch of
Artaxerxes Longimanus's Reign, which unless it be fixed in the second year of
the 77. Olympiad, the Epoch of Daniel's Weeks cannot commence with the
twentieth of Artaxerxes, which is above demonstrated, must be the true Epoch
of the Weeks. Whence we must conclude by the second Postulatum, that as to the
years of Darius his Reign, Ctesias, who makes them thirty one years, is nearer
the right than Herodotus that makes them thirty six.

CHAP. VI. A passage in the Proem of Thucydides compared with Ctesias to prove,
that Darius dyed after the Pugna Marathonia. The Suffrage of Georgius Syncellus
to the same purpose. The same thing proved out of the Chronicon Marmoreum
Arundelianum. The Authentickness and genuineness of Themistocles his Epistle to
Polygnotus. It is clear out of this Epistle, that Themistocles his flight was
near the contermination of Xerxes his Death, and Artxerxes succeeding him.
Themistocles 's speed to the Persian Court so soon as he got into Asia. A
passage or two in the abovesaid Epistle that clearly demonstrate, that it was
Artaxerxes that Themistocles conferred with, his Father Xerxes being dead. The
ample consent of Testimonies to this Truth.
BUT to let go the use of that mawling Engine for the present, I will add some
few Proofs more out of humane Authority, such as occur in Thomas Lydiat's
Canones Chronici. Where first he alleges that passage in Thucydides in the
very Proem of his Book, (...), etc. that is, Pauloque ante Medicum bellum, ac
Darii mortem, qui post Cambysen regnum Persarum obtinuit, etc. Where he argues
from Thucydides his immediately joining the Death of Darius with the Pugna
Marathonia, where the Persians were quite overthrown and vanquished, that
Darius his death must be dependent upon this, and that he survived but a very
little while that great defeat given him and his Army, as Ctesias relates the
story, that after he had returned into Persia from that Expedition, he fell
sick, and lay by it some thirty days, and so died after he had reigned thirty
one years; which therefore must needs be presently after the Pugna Marathonia.

And the ill success of that War, which Thomas Lydiat notes in the second
place, is thought by some to have broke his heart, which is an easy and
natural conjecture. And Georgius Syncellus, a Greek Historian, who lived in the
time of Constantinus and Irene, whether upon the Authority of Ctesias Cnidius
or Dinon, or some other, even of those Greek Historians that declare, that
Themistocles his communication was with Xerxes (for by reason of the nearness
of Themistocles his flight to the contermination of Xerxes his Death and
succeeding of Artaxerxes, that is consistent enough) does not only relate, that
after some days sickness upon his return into Persia, Darius died after he had
reigned thirty years: But he adds further, that Cladis contumeliam indigne
ferens, animo dolor exulcerato, occubuit. Scaliger indeed crows over this
Georgius Syncellus for committing several and some gross mistakes in
Chronology, but so Petavius does over Scaliger, as well as Georgius Syncellus
over Eusebius (as Gerard Vossius tells us) and that rudely enough; but withal
Vossius confesses, Syncellum saepe merito ab Eusebio dissentire.

Thirdly, Out of the Chronicon Marmoreum Arundelianum he alleges, that on one
Marble there is an Inscription that records the Battle at Marathon betwixt the
Athenians and Persians to have been such an one being Archon at Athens, but the
name it self, the Marble being injured by time, is defaced. But what follows,
is, that there was another of that name heretofore Archon, namely Phanippus, as
will appear out of Plutarch. For the same Marble tells, that Darius died, and
his Son Xerxes succeeded him that year that Aristides was Archon. Now therefore
out of Aristides's Life in Plutarch, where it is expressly said, (...), (That
after Phanippus, in whose time the Athenians won the Battle at Marathon,
Aristides was presently made Archon) he rightly infers, that Darius died a
little after his return into Persia from the War against the Greeks; And did
not survive five years after it, as Herodotus would make us believe he did. For
he shows also, that Phanippus was Archon the first year of the 48. Olympiad, as
the Marble intimates, there was one of the same Name Archon heretofore that he
was of, that was Archon when the Marathonian Battle was fought. So exquisitely
do all things agree.

Fourthly and lastly, That Themistocles came to Artaxerxes, not to Xerxes (as
Thucydides also expressly relates, that after he arrived into Asia, he wrote a
Letter, (...), To King Artaxerxes the Son of Xerxes newly reigning, or newly
begun to reign. Which shows, that Darius died what time Ctesias and the
Chronicon Marmoreum relate he did) he proves from a plain Narrative, where
there is no mention of any vociferant Ecstatical Olbius, or any Divinatory
Dream of a Dragon, Eagle and golden Caduceum; but it is an unaffected story of
his Exile, and his Arrival into Persia, his Communication with the King, and
the success thereof written by Themistocles his own hand in a Letter to
Polygnotus, his intimate Friend, after his return from the Persian Court, and
his Residence near the Seacoasts in the Prefecture of Artabazus in the lesser
Asia. Which Letter, as I said, is written with that unaffectedness and
punctualness withal, and so consentaneously to the true Chronology of Gelo's
Reign, and the Succession of his Brother Hiero, which Thomas Lydiat had
exquisitely made out in a single Diatriba of his about that matter, before he
met with Themistocles his Epistles, or the Chronicon Marmoreum, that whatever
may be thought of the eleventh Epistle, which is to Leager (which is filled
with abundance of Wit and Rhetoric and ranting Passion in it; besides, that it
makes as if there were intercourse of Letters betwixt the Persian King and
Themistocles while he was at Ephesus where he first landed) this Epistle as
well as any of the others, and it is unlikely but that there were several
Epistles written by so great a Man in such exigencies of affairs, and that the
Nobleness of his Person, and greatness of his Fame, would make men careful to
preserve them; this Epistle, I say, must needs be genuine.

But in this unexceptionable Epistle it is clear, that the flight of
Themistocles was near the contermination of Xerxes's death, and Artaxerxes's
succeeding him. For so soon as he was got to Ephesus, there, says he, I found
certain Persians, (...), the Garrison-Souldiers of Caria, whom Artabazus had
placed there. And now, says he, I could safely make known who I was, even to
Xerxes; which shows plainly, that at first he took Xerxes to be still alive;
but being better informed by the Soldiers, he holds on, and speaks more
cautiously, and says I told them my Name, and said, I came (...), to do great
service to the King's house, that is, to his Family or Offspring. These
Soldiers, says he, told Artabazus what I said, and they led me to the
Phrygians, for Artabazus was in Phrygia, who when he heard the rest from my
self, and my purpose of going to the King (and certainly there was but one King
then) (...), he liked my design, and sent me away forthwith, and bestows on me
two Horses and two Servants, besides that he appointed thirteen Persians, to
whom were committed the care of conducting him, and providing all necessaries,
as he went, for his journey.

What a plain and unaffected an account is this of Themistocles his own, in
comparison of that which I briefly above recited out of Plutarch; but both
concur in this, that he hasted away presently (as soon as he arrived into Asia)
unto the Persian Court, which is the thing I drove at then, and note here
again; That no slippery Wit may pretend, that though Themistocles's flight
indeed was the second year of the 77. Olympiad, yet there may be some years
before he came to the Persian Court; and though it was Artaxerxes that he then
addressed to, yet it does not follow, that Xerxes died in the second year of
the abovesaid Olympiad. But as it is plain out of Thucydides, that Xerxes was
dead in this very year of Themistocles's flight, so it is more manifest still
out of this Epistle of Themistocles to Polygnotus.

In which he writes thus, a little after he has given a brief description of
the Journey he had. And at last, says he, we finished our Journey, (...), and
we came to the King, whither we hasted. If there had been two Kings then
reigning, Xerxes and Artaxerxes his Son, certainly he would have intimated so
much; and if there were, yet he not giving notice to the contrary, Xerxes the
Father must necessarily be understood by the King here. And then consider what
sense that Saying of the King to him will have. Art thou the Themistocles which
the Medes say, [(...)] to have been the cause, that neither I nor my Father
became Masters of the Greeks, or Masters of Greece. What, does the King when he
says, [my Father] mean Darius Hystaspis? No surely, he means Xerxes, as is
manifest from Themistocles his Answer. Wherein he recounts what service he did
Xerxes in hastening his Navy to Salamis, and after in dissuading the Greeks
from cutting the Bridge over the Hellespont, on purpose that Xerxes might
safely escape. Wherefore it is as clear as the Sun, that Xerxes was dead that
year when Themistocles fled to the Persian Court; and consequently that the
Reign of Artaxerxes begins in the second year of the 77. Olympiad, viz. six
years sooner than the vulgar Chronologers place it, who pretend it began not
till the fourth year of the 78. Olympiad.

This is no rash Assertion, nor destitute of History, but a solid Truth,
confirmed by the Authority of Charon Lampsacenus, of Thucydides, of Ctesias
Cnidius, nay, of Diodorus Siculus by undeniable consequence) of Chronicon
Marmoreum, of Plutarchus, of Cornelius Nepos, and of Themistocles in his
Epistle to Polygnotus, and of Georgius Syncellus, to omit other judicious
Historians of later times.

CHAP. VII. An Answer to a notable Objection fetched out of Ptolemy 's Canon.
Of the Authority and Antiquity of that Canon. That it is looked upon as
considerable by all Chronologers: But so, as that both Scaliger and Petavius
acknowledge an uncertainty and disputableness in some particular Kings Reigns,
though the sum of years from Nabonassar to the Death of Alexander, is of all
hands held to be right. That careless Transcribers, or partial Correctors of
the Canon, in favor of Herodotus, or of the Canon it self, may have added
faults thereunto. Ptolemy not concerned in those Miscorrections, they not
happening in the years the Eclipses are set down in, which reach but to the 31
of Darius Primus. The other Eclipses noted are affixed to the Archons of
Athens. The Royal Records of the Persian Kings, which Ctesias had the use of,
preferable to Ptolemy 's Canon in the present Controversy. That Ptolemy,
notwithstanding his skill in Astronomy, might after Herodotus be involved in
that vulgar Error touching the years of Darius Primus his Reign. The
Application of the second Postulatum to the case. The intricateness of Records
that concern the right Epoch of Daniel's Weeks, how consistent with Providence.
BUT the most terrible Argument against this so sound a Truth is the Canon of
Ptolemy, which Petavius and others have taken notice of, and which assigns
thirty six years to Darius Hystaspis. As for the Antiquity of it, I find
neither in Petavius, nor Scaliger, nor Calvisius, (for it is not a Canon made,
but only made use of by Ptolemy, it was extant long before his time) any thing
said thereof. But that which is most probable, and may make most for the Credit
of it, may be this surmise, That some Greek Virtuoso that accompanied Alexander
in his Expedition against the Persians, either to satisfy his own curiosity,
or the curiosity of some Friend, got this Canon of the Successions of the Kings
of Babylon. Which all Historians and Chronologers look upon as a considerable
and useful Record.

But suppose it exact and right at first, yet the injury of time, and
negligence of Scribes, may well have much corrupted it, though Scaliger will
scarce allow it was right at first. For in the third Book of his Canones
Isagogici he calls it indeed Egregium Vetustatis Monumentum, if it had been
incontaminate. Sed vanidica, says he, and futilis Genethliacorum Natio regum
quidem ipsorum memoriam fideliter conservavit, annos vero eorum foedissime
conturbavit. And he acknowledges, as Petavius and other Chronologers do, that
the sum of the years from the beginning of the Reign of Nabonassar to the
Death of Alexander the Great, viz. 424 years, is right, however the years of
the Reign of some particular Kings may be uncertain and disputable. The very
words of Petavius in his De doctrina Temporum, lib. 3. cap. 52. concerning the
Canon Mathematicus Babyloniorum Regum, as it is there styled, out of Georgius
Syncellus, I suppose, he says, that though the sum of the Anni collecti be
right, In aliis tamen quibusdam mendosus est Canon, quod sigillatim propriis
locis constabit. And so both he and Scaliger make no bones of mending the Canon
out of Berosus and such like Historians wherever they conceive it faulty.

And can we persuade our selves, besides what the injury of time may have done,
and the carelessness of Transcribers, that long before Ptolemy's Age, ignorance
and partiality of busy Correctors of this Babylonish Canon, may not have added
some faults to it, and so they presuming upon the Authority of that Father of
History Herodotus that adds five years more to Darius Hystaspis his Reign than
is due, when the ancient Canon had but thirty one, that they may not have made
bold to make it thirty six, either to save the credit of Herodotus, or of the
Canon it self, that it might not seem to contradict the Authority of that
Father of History? Some bold Greek that had to do with this Canon, might very
early make this false correction, and that the sum of the years might not be
disturbed, whenas Artaxerxes Longimanus reigned 46 years, make him reign but
forty one.

Nor does this Error passing the hands of Ptolemy even in that most correct
MS. of this Canon that Dr. Overall, Dean of Paul's, sent to Calvisius, and
which he has inserted into his Isagoge Chronologica, afford any credit to it,
as to be therefore concluded a Truth. Forasmuch as none of his Eclipses he
takes notice of, are found in any of those five affictitious years which
Herodotus has clapped to the Reign of Darius the First. For there is no more than
two Eclipses noted in the Reign of Darius Primus, one in the twentieth year of
his Reign, the other in the thirty first. Wherefore whether there were five
years more of his Reign or no, Ptolemy was little concerned, he fixing the
Observations of Eclipses recorded no further to the Reign of any Persian Kings
than so.

He does indeed take notice of other Eclipses that fell within the Reign of
Artaxerxes Mnemon or Artaxerxes Secundus, but he fixes them to the year of no
Persian King, but to the Archons of Athens, as he finds them set down by
Hipparchus, two while Phanostratus was Archon in the year of Nabonassar 366.
another while Evander in the year 367.

Wherefore upon the whole matter, though this Canon of Ptolemy makes such a
noise, especially that of the most correct Edition which Calvisius has put out,
inserting it in his Isagoge; yet, I think, if one rattle the (...), the Royal
Parchments or Authentic Rolls of the Kings of Persia, in which the Persians by
a Law were obliged to record the ancient Acts of their Princes (which Ctesias
Cnidius, as Diodorus takes notice, had the use of, living in the quality of a
Physician in Artaxerxes Mnemons's Court seventeen years together, and so had
the opportunity (...), accurately and particularly to set down every thing) I
say, if one rattle the Royal Rolls of Parchment against the noise of Ptolemy's
Canon, I think it may justly silence the loudness thereof, and make any
impartial person give credit to Ctesias, who says, Darius Hystaspis reigned but
thirty one years, rather than to Ptolemy's Canon, which pretends he reigned
thirty six. And yet I will not deny but that Ptolemy might adjust that Canon as
near to the truth as his judgment would reach. For though Astronomy may
certainly inform us, by virtue of Eclipses, touching the distance of the years
of Nabonassar, whether such an Eclipse in such a year of Nabonassar be
consistent with such an Eclipse in such a year, at such a distance; yet it is
History only that can adjust rightly the endings and beginnings of Kings Reigns
within that Interval. And therefore notwithstanding Ptolemy's skill in
Astronomy, he might with the rest, after Herodotus, be involved in that vulgar
Error.

And lastly, besides all this, according to the second Postulatum, Ctesias
pronouncing consonantly to the Divine Oracles, which, as I have above proved,
we can make no sense of, unless the twentieth of Artaxerxes be the Epoch of
Daniel's Weeks, we are in all reason to subscribe to Ctesias. For Ptolemy's
Canon, though it be called Canon Mathematicus, yet it is no Canonical
Scripture, nor must vie with those infallible Oracles of holy Writ.

It may seem a great flaw in Providence to some, that the true Epoch of a
Prophecy of so mighty importance, as this of Daniel's Weeks, should be involved
in so much obscurity and perplexedness, by reason of the clashing of the most
famous Histories and Records one with another, that are proper for the settling
of this point. But if we more narrowly and seriously consider the matter, this
which thus rashly is accounted a flaw, will prove an argument of a more
accurate and punctual Providence of God over the Affairs of his Church, and
that he permits nothing to fall out that would turn so much to their detriment,
as this is conceived to do. Wherefore, I say, there was an egregious usefulness
of letting the knowledge of the true Epoch of Daniel's Weeks become so
exceeding obscure and intricate. For thereby, first, the Faith and Spirit of
discernment in the Church had the better scope to be exercised at the
appearance of imposturous Messias's, and the unbelieving Jews justly left the
more obnoxious to those Delusions.

Besides, if the true Epoch had been then easily discoverable by humane helps,
it had been such a forcible conviction that Jesus was the Messiah, that the
Jews could not have had the confidence to crucify him, or when they had
crucified him, not presently to have acknowledged their mistake, and been
universally converted to the Faith, and so put abundance of the ancient
Prophecies at a loss for a true and genuine Interpretation and Impletion.

And lastly, Christ's offering himself to John to be baptized in that very nick
of time that this Prophecy of Daniel points at, numbering the Weeks from the
true Epoch, no humane helps being then able to discover it, least of all any
humane Literature of Jesus the Carpenters Son, we may be sure it was by Divine
Inspiration that he came to John to be baptized in that year of his Ministry
that he did, it lasting, as will be proved, about four years together. He was
merely (...) driven by the Divine Spirit to receive his Baptism then. Which
consideration is wanting to that vulgar Opinion that pinches up the Baptism of
Christ into the very first year of John's Ministry. But Jesus being once thus,
by the Instigation of the Spirit, baptized by John, then even from the Prophecy
it self he might collect what year he was to suffer in, he being in the midst
of that week (which commenced with his Manifestation) to make the Jewish
Sacrifices to cease by the Sacrifice of Himself on the Cross. Which retaining
in his memory, that he might not frustrate the Prediction, he in a voluntary
compliance therewith, spoke his present mind, Joh. 7. Go ye up unto this feast,
I go not up unto this feast, for my time is not yet full come. For he knew the
Jews had a mind to kill him, but he would not be killed before his time, but
comply with the Prophecy. Wherefore whereas he went after unto the Feast, he
did it as (...), there being after given him an inspired assurance that they
should not touch him at that time; as it is said, Chap. 8. v. 20. These words
spoke Jesus in the Treasury as he taught in the Temple, and no man laid hands
on him, for his hour was not yet come, viz. the middle Day of the last week of
the seventy Weeks of Daniel. And this I think is enough to vindicate Providence
from any flaw in permitting such an almost inextricable difficulty for a time
to adhere to the Investigation of the true Epoch of Daniel's Weeks. Which
same, Providence however, now in this last Age wherein the Prophet has
predicted that knowledge shall abound, has been pleased to discover with a more
perfect understanding also of the rest of the Prophecies of Daniel.

CHAP. VIII. The necessary Consequences from the discovery of the right year of
the beginning of Artaxerxes his Reign, viz. the second year of the 77.
Olympiad. (1) That the twentieth which is the first year of the 82. Olympiad,
is the true Epoch of Daniel 's Weeks. (2) That the Weeks end in the second
year of Caligula 's Reign. (3) That Christ suffered in the twenty second year
of Tiberius. (4) That his Manifestation as the Messiah was in the nineteenth of
Tiberius. (5) That he was born L. Aelius Lamia and M. Servilius Geminus being
Consuls. These four last point, to be proved ordine retrogrado by History and
Reason. That there is no more violence done by Tho. Lydiat 's placing the
Nativity of Christ two years later than the Dionysian account, than by Scaliger
's placing it two years sooner, nor so much as by Suslyga and Kepler 's placing
it four or five years sooner than Dionysius.
BUT having thus clearly and irrefragably made out, that the beginning of the
Reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus was in the second year of the 77. Olympiad, the
277. of Nabonassar, and the 4243. of the Julian Period, whence the twentieth of
Artaxerxes (which is the only true and genuine Epoch of Daniel's Weeks) is
found to be in the first year of the 82. Olympiad, and the 296. of Nabonassar,
or the 4262. of the Julian Period, we are now to take notice what will be the
consequence, viz. That first it will necessarily follow, that the last year of
Daniel's Weeks will be in the second year of the 204. Olympiad, the 785. of
Nabonassar, and the 4751. of the Julian Period, that is to say, The Weeks will
end in the second year of Caligula's Reign, according to Helvicus. Secondly, in
virtue of the Prophecy of Daniel, which tells us, that the Messiah, by his
Sacrifice upon the Cross, shall null the Judaick Sacrifices, and that in the
midst of this last Week, precisely taking it for the middle of the Week, it
hence follows, that Christ suffered in the 4748. year of the Julian Period,
that is, in the 22d year of the Reign of Tiberius. And thirdly, partly because
the Prophecy says he will confirm a Covenant with many this one Week, in the
midst of which he died, whence his own personal Ministration can be but three
years and an half; and partly, because it is said in the Prophecy, that to
Messiah the Prince, viz. his Manifestation was seven weeks and sixty two, that
is to say, sixty nine weeks or 483 years, which 483 years from the Epoch, (the
Decree which went out the twentieth of Artaxerxes in the month Nisan) reach to
the 4745. year of the Julian Period, we are to conclude, that the Messiah was
manifested in the nineteenth of Tiberius, in which year Christ was baptized by
John, the Holy Ghost descending upon him in the shape of a Dove, and a Voice
from Heaven saying unto him, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well
pleased, Luke 3.22.

This is the Manifestation of the Messiah made in the 4745. year of the Julian
Period, and in the nineteenth year of the Reign of Tiberius. At what time the
Evangelist, in the forecited place, expressly says, that Jesus was about thirty
years old, (...), entering then upon his Ministry. From whence lastly it
follows, if we reckon thirty years backward, that Christ was born in the 4716.
year of the Julian Period, that is to say, in the Consulship of Lucius Aelius
Lamia and M. Servilius Geminus, as Thomas Lydiat contends he was.

These things may seem Paradoxes to such as have not impartially and carefully
considered the matter, but they are genuine and necessary Confectaries from the
admission of that only true Epoch of Daniel's Weeks the twentieth of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, beginning his Reign in the second year of the 77.
Olympiad, not the first of the 79. But now if these seeming Paradoxes, shall be
also in several countenanced and confirmed by authentic History and Reason, or
both, what can we require more for the certainty, assuring us, that this is the
true Chronological account of this Prophecy of Daniel, and as assured an
Account as can be had of any thing in History and Chronology that ever was put
to question.

Though we went in a Retrograde Order before, we will begin now first with the
first, and propose what is said for proof, that Christ was born in the
Consulship of L. Aelius Lamia and M. Servilius Geminus, or in the 4716. year of
the Julian Period: which is two years later than Dionysius, or the vulgar
Account places the Nativity of our Savior. Which yet is no more Paradoxical
than Scaliger's placing it two years sooner, nor so much as Laurentius
Suslyga's and Johannes Kepler's their placing it, the one four years, the other
five years sooner than Dionysius. Whence Tho. Lydiat had the more injury done
him from those that received his Paradox with so much rudeness and incivility.
But how he maintains it, let us now consider.

CHAP. IX. That Christ was born four years before the death of Herod, according
to Epiphanius and Sulpitius Severus. That Herod dyed, Metellus and Nerva being
Consuls, proved out of Josephus, which is just four years after the Consulship
of Lamia and Geminus. That it is most certain that Herod was but betwixt
fifteen and sixteen years of Age when he was made Prefect of Galilee, and
ridiculous to think that [(...).] was writ for [(...).] by the negligence of
the Scribe. A full Answer to the passage of Josephus. A difficult knot not
otherwise to be untyed, than by supposing two Epocha's of Herod 's Reign, the
latter when he was restored to his forfeited Kingdom by Augustus. The fitness
and necessity of this solution, a further Argument that Herod dyed in the
Consulship of Metellus and Nerva. Reasons to prove this latter Epoch. And that
it was his chief Epoch, and most affected by Herod. That Eusebius makes use of
this Epoch. And also Epiphanius, as likewise the ancient Graeci Fasti. That
computing from this Epoch, Herod 's 37 years Reign reaches to Nerva and
Metellus, and that consequently Christ's Birth is in the Consulship of Lamia
and Geminus.
THE first Point is made out thus. First, from the Authority of the most
ancient Fathers, he proves that Christ was born four years before the Death of
Herod. This Epiphanius says more than once: first in these words. Servator in
triginta and septem annis principatus ipsius Herodis puer erat quatuor annorum,
quando Herodes impletis annis triginta septem vitam finivit. And then in
another place: Tricesimo tertio anno Herodis nascitur Christus Dominus,
tricesimo quinto venerunt Magi, tricesimo septimo mortuus est Herodes. And
Sulpicius Severus as expressly writes thus: Sub hoc Herod anno imperii ejus
tertio and tricesimo Christus natus est, etc. herodes post Nativitatem Domini
regnavit annos quatuor. I omit to add what he brings out of Eusebius, that
being more operose and involved. But this is a fair Testimony of the most
ancient Fathers, who, one would think, the best knew what the Tradition was,
nor did any within the first 500 years, as T. L. alleges, define what year of
Herod Christ was born, but these. See the first Chapter of his Recensio.

Wherefore the main business is now to inquire when Herod died. And according
to the Testimony of the above cited Fathers, if Christ was born, Aelius Lamia
and Servilius Geminus being Consuls, Herod must die in the Consulship of
Metellus and Nerva; for that is four years after the Consulship of Lamia and
Geminus. And that he died then, first is manifestly proved out of Josephus,
that tells us more than once, that Herod, when he died, was about seventy years
old. And the same Author says expressly, that when he was made Prefect of
Galilee by Antipater his Father, Antiq. Jud. lib. 14. cap. 17. this Charge was
conferred upon him, (...), when he was extremely young, he having arrived only
to fifteen years of Age. Now this Prefecture was bestowed upon him in the year
of the Consulship of Calenus and Vatinius, in which Julius Caesar having
dispatched the Alexandrian War in Egypt, made Antipater, for his good Service
done, Prefect of Judaea. Wherefore reckon now in Helvicus all the Consulates
from Calenus and Vatinius to Metellus and Nerva inclusively, and you will find
them to be fifty four. And whereas Josephus says, that Herod was arrived to no
more years than fifteen, let us but suppose him betwixt fifteen and sixteen
(which (...) being the Preterpluperfect tense, does plainly imply) when he was
made Prefect of Galilee by his Father, and add these years to the fifty four,
and we shall come, I trow, very near to seventy years. And Josephus himself
does not say absolutely that he lived to the seventieth year of his Age, but in
one place that he was (...), Antiq. Jud. lib. 17. cap. 8. And Bell. Jud. lib.
1. cap. 21. that he was (...), about the seventieth year, and near seventy
years. And so he is, I think, that has arrived to the sixty ninth year of his
Age.

We see therefore how well this passage of Josephus suits with the placing of
the Nativity of our Savior in the Consulship of Lamia and Geminus. Nor is
there any evasion out of this clear proof, that is worth the taking notice of.
For in vain do they pretend that it is a lapse of the Scribe, and that it
should have been (...). not (...). twenty five, not fifteen. Whenas Photius in
his Bibliotheca, not in figures, but in words, declares expressly, that his Age
was fifteen years. (...). And let any one judge how the perusing of the
business in Josephus can suit with such a fond conceit, when he says that Herod
was (...), excessively young, as if he were a (...), a Chick newly come out of
the shell, as the Saying is; and then (...) again argues the paucity of his
years, that they were but betwixt fifteen and sixteen. For how absurdly would
it run, if it were twenty five: He was excessively young, being twenty five
years of Age; but his youngness, says Josephus, was no hindrance to him,
because he was (...), of a manly mind or courage, and quickly took occasion to
give a Specimen of his Valor, in apprehending that (...), that Arch-Thief or
Robber Ezechias, that infested the Borders of Syria; but Herod being but a
Stripling of twenty five years old, accompanied with part of the Militia of
Galilee, took the Knave, and slew him, with others of his thieving Companions.
Is not this an Exploit indeed to argue one of twenty five years old to have
parts and courage beyond the pitch of his Age? Whenas Augustus, when he was but
nineteen years of Age, or thereabout, applied himself to Civil and Military
Affairs, (so speaks the Monumentum Ancyranum for him, Annos undeviginti natus
exercitum privato consilio privataque impensa comparavi) was one of the
Triumviri Reipublicae constituendae with M. Antony and Lepidus, and had made
himself Master of Spain by that time he was twenty five years old. And
Alexander the Great, besides what he did in his Father Philip's time, (for when
he was but sixteen years old, he overthrew certain Thracians bordering on
Macedonia, which had revolted while his Father was absent in his War against
the Byzantines, took their City, expelled the Barbarians, and let it to others,
and called it Alexandropolis after his own Name. And when he was eighteen years
old, in a Battle with his Father against the Greeks at Chaeronea, he quit
himself as well as Philip himself, or any Commander in the Army) besides these
Exploits, I say, when he succeeded his Father, being then but twenty years old,
and entering upon a very disturbed Kingdom; yet he did not only compose all at
home amongst the Greeks, but in the second year of his Reign undertook his
Expedition into Asia, vanquished Darius, and made himself Master of the Persian
Empire by that time he was twenty five years old. So ridiculous is it to
fancy that Josephus set down (...) not (...) but that the oscitancy of the
Scribe had changed the Kappa into an Iota. For it was no strange thing to
Josephus that Herod should be fit for such a Province at fifteen years of Age,
(...), as he speaks of him, Bell. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 8. being of a mighty active
Genius, which property is suitable enough with such an Age, when he was
conscious to himself that he had that ripeness of Wit and Parts, that when he
was but fourteen years old, the Chief Priests and Elders of the City would come
and consult him touching the sense of their Law, as he tells us in his Life
writ by himself.

This Point therefore is very clear, that Herod was but betwixt fifteen and
sixteen years old when his Father Antipater made him Prefect of Galilee. Nor is
that little surmise of any validity, which is drawn from that passage in
Josephus, Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 23. where M. Antony is said to constitute
Antipater's two Sons, Phasaelus and Herod Tetrarchs of Judaea, (...). Where
(...) will signify no more than [having a peculiar kindness for them] which
was upon the score of their Father, whose house Antonius and Gabinius had been
at, and were freely received there, when Gabinius was Prefect of Syria. This
passage does not so much as imply Herod born then, much less that Antonius had
contracted any friendship or familiarity with Herod at that time, whereby they
would conclude him of a greater Age than fifteen when his Father made him
Prefect of Galilee. And that it was not upon the account of any acquaintance
with them, but his friendship and familiarity with Antipater their Father,
which made him the more willing to make them Tetrarchs of Judaea, is further
confirmed from Josephus his telling the same story, Bell. Jud. lib. 1. cap. 10.
where this (...) is omitted, and instead thereof Antonius is said to be (...),
Hospes eorum paternus: (...), friendly and benignly received by their Father
Antipater; which might be properly said, though the two Sons were yet unborn,
and yet they were both in being at that time when Gabinius was Prefect of Syria.

But in the mean time it is past all doubt with me, that Herod was not more
than betwixt fifteen and sixteen years old, when his Father made him Prefect of
Galilee. He was, suppose, in the sixteenth year of his Age. From whence it
follows, that he was not passing twenty two when he was made King of Judaea by
M. Antony and the Senate, which was in the fourth year of the 184. Olympiad.
And the consequence of this is, that he was not passing fifty nine years when
he died; his Reign, both according to Josephus himself and the ancient Fathers
abovenamed, being only thirty seven years. So that he died in the first year
of the 194. Olympiad, and according to the Tradition of those Fathers that say,
Christ was born before Herod's death, Christ must be born in the first year of
the 193. Olympiad, that is, eight years sooner than the Dionysian Account has
it. Wherefore, that Josephus may not contradict himself, who expressly says in
more places than one, that Herod lived about seventy years of Age, nor those
Fathers speak so extravagantly touching the Nativity of Christ, were it not
desirable that there were two Epocha's of Herod's Reign, to see if that will
not unty this difficult knot? And most certainly there is another notorious
Epoch, when Herod having forfeited his Crown and Kingdom, by taking part with
M. Antony against Augustus, he was created King anew by the favor of Augustus
and the Senate presently after the Victoria Actiaca, viz. in the second year of
the 187. Olympiad, and in the thirty second year of Herod's Age, according to
the aboveframed Compute out of Josephus. Reckon from this Epoch, which is the
4683. of the Julian Period, to the Consulate of Nerva and Metellus, and in that
year Herod's sixty nine years of Age, and thirty seven years of his Reign, will
end together. And the ancient Fathers Credit, which make Christ born four years
before Herod's Death, will thus be salved, and Josephus made to speak
consistently to himself, that gives about seventy years of Age to Herod, but
only 37 years to his Reign, though he makes him but betwixt fifteen and sixteen
years old when his Father Antipater appointed him Prefect of Galilee.

Now this happy Hit and handsome Congruity and well According of such clashing
Chronological Assertions, may well alone be an Argument, that this year of the
Victoria Actiaca, wherein Augustus did as it were of anew create Herod King of
Judaea, were the Epoch of his Reign ever after used in his Public Acts and
Records. Which therefore will be another strong proof that Herod died in the
Consulship of Metellus and Nerva, and consequently that Christ was born four
years before in the Consulship of Lamia and Geminus, according to the Doctrine
of the above cited Fathers.

Certainly if there was ever good occasion for two several Epocha's of one
King's Reign, it was here. For Herod having forfeited his Crown and Life too,
to Augustus, by his siding with M. Antony against him, and there being a new
Creation, as it were, of Herod, and restoring of him to the Crown, what greater
occasion can there be given than this (he beginning, as it were, the World
again upon a new account) for a new Epoch of his Reign. This was a more
surprising Change than Sosius his taking Jerusalem, and Antonius his slaying of
Antigonus, that the Kingdom might be made more sure to Herod, who was made King
by the Roman Senate four years before; and yet Josephus himself, Antiq. Jud.
lib. 15. cap. 7. makes his getting possession of Jerusalem and slaughter of
Antigonus, which Herod procured, one Epoch of his Reign, expressly there
affirming, that the Fight at Actium betwixt Caesar and Antonius, was in the
seventh year of Herod, which is downright false, unless you number from that
later Epoch.

Well therefore may this restitution of Herod to his Crown, after he had
forfeited all, become the more solemn Epoch of the years of his Reign; and
well may he be thought to affect that Epoch, the more to ingratiate himself
with his great Patron Augustus, signifying thereby, that only now at length he
was rightfully King, since he received his Kingdom from Augustus, the sole
legitimate Prince of the Roman Empire. Whenas on the other side, if he had
continued to reckon his Reign from the time he was made King by the favor of
M. Antony, Augustus his Enemy, he might still seem to favor the Cause of
Antonius, and insinuate Augustus his War against him to have been unjust, and
soil the Glory of the Actiacal Victory. That also he might please himself in,
and applaud his Politic modesty, that he would not have his Reign to commence
higher than the Monarchy of Augustus, which began with the Actiacal Victory.
And certainly he would think it a piece of impudence in himself, if he should
have suffered (...), as Josephus speaks, a day of Inauguration into his
Kingdom, which was annually solemnized by him to be done in Honor to M.
Antony, and not solely to Augustus. Whence it will naturally follow, that it
was in reference to the time that he was made King by him, and so this became a
most celebrated Epoch. This is highly credible, if not necessary and certain,
if we consider how Herod did all things with all the studiousness imaginable to
get and keep the favor of Augustus, adventuring rather to entrench upon the
Sacred customs of his Religion, than to omit any thing whereby to curry favor
with that Emperor, that gave him, after the Forfeiture, both his Life and
Crown at once. And lastly, others may add to all this, Hyrcanus who had an
hereditary Right to the Crown, being at the same time taken out of the way,
this Epoch upon that account also is most perfect and most proper.

And now as this is most reasonable in it self, so Authors are found to begin
the Reign of Herod from this Epoch, as well as from his being made King by M.
Antony and the Senate, or from the Death of Antigonus. As Writers also make use
of those various Epocha's of Augustus his Reign, sometimes reckoning it from
the Consulship of Hirtius and Pansa, Anno Juliano 13. sometimes from that of
Pulcher and Flaccus, An. Jul. 8. and other sometimes from Victoria Actiaca, An.
Jul. 15. and lastly, sometimes from the time he accepted of the Sacrosanct
Supreme Tribunitial Power, An. Jul. 23. or in Calphurnius Piso's, and his own
eleventh Consulship.

Eusebius more than once makes Herod's being constituted King of Judaea by
Augustus and the Roman Senate, the Epoch of his Reign. For lib. 8.
Demonstrationis Evangelicae, Demonst. 1. There he says, Herod first of any
(...), being an Alien from the Jewish race, was by Augustus and the Roman
Senate made King of the Jews. Where therefore he plainly pitches the Epoch, or
the beginning of his Reign, on that time that Augustus his Monarchy began,
which was upon the vanquishing of M. Antony in the Fight at Actium.

And again, Demonstrat. 2. he joins Herod's Reign and the Monarchy of Augustus
together, as commencing at the same time. (...). But most express in the same
Demonstration some pages after: (...). After whom, viz. after Hyrcanus, Herod
the Son of Antipater, having slain Hyrcanus, obtained the Kingdom of the Jews,
from the Senate of Rome. Wherefore it is plain, that Eusebius makes use of this
third Epoch of the Reign of Herod, letting that from Antigonus his death, and
his first being made King by the favor of Antony, alone.

Epiphanius also plainly points at this Epoch in his 51. Heresy, which he
calls, (...), Number. 22. where he says, (...). It was the thirteenth year from
Augustus his Reign, viz. from Hirtius and Pansa, till the perfect conjunction
of Judaea with the Romans. But he says afterward, that this (...) or Coalition
was perfected (...), when the Princes of Juda failed (who ended with the death
of Hyrcanus) and Herod of the stock of the Gentiles was constituted (...),
Prince or King of the Jews. Which being done in the thirteenth year of Augustus
his Reign from the Consulate of Hirtius and Pansa, it is plain that Epiphanius
places the beginning or Epoch of Herod's Reign in the year that Augustus
re-established him in his forfeited Kingdom, by his own Authority and the
Suffrage of the Roman Senate.

And thirdly and lastly, The ancient Graeci Fasti, as T. L. has taken notice,
do simply and absolutely refer the beginning of Herod's Reign, together with
the slaying of Hyrcanus, to the year of Crassus and Octavius Augustus his being
the fourth time Consul a matter of four months after the Victoria Actiaca, and
to the eighth year of the Reign of Augustus himself, viz. reckoned from the
Consulship of Claudius Pulcher and Norbanus Flaccus; and, says he, they thence
compute the Reign of Herod to have been thirty seven years. What can be more
plain and express? And what better assurance can a man desire to place the
Epoch of Herod's Reign in his immediate succeeding Hyrcanus, or restitution by
Augustus, when all things are so fitly adjusted by it, as we noted before?

Thus we see, that by computing as we ought the thirty seven years Reign of
Herod from his Restitution by Augustus, the end of his Reign will fall into the
year of Metellus and Nerva; And the Birth of Christ consequently into the year
of Lamia and Geminus, which is the thing was aimed at. And the same thing will
be brought to pass (which will also further confirm the use of this Epoch in
this case) by proving that Herod died in the Consulship of Nerva and Metellus.

CHAP. X. That Herod dyed in the Consulship of Nerva and Metellus, proved from
the time of Archelaus his Marriage of Glaphyra. From Dion Cassius his placing
Herod 's Sons impleading one another before Augustus in the Consulship of
Lepidus and Aruntius. From Quirinius his confiscating Archelaus his Goods,
Statilius Taurus and Scribonius Libo being Consuls. A gross Parepochism
committed by Josephus. From Philip the Tetrarchs dying, Proculus and Nigrinus
being Consuls. From Eusebius and Sulpicius 's allotting twenty four years to
Herod the Tetrarch after the Relegation of Archelaus, and those twenty four
years ending with the fourth of Caius Caligula. From that famous Eclipse of the
Moon preceding Herod 's death. A Narrative of Herod 's Affairs corresponding
with that Eclipse. That there was such an huge Eclipse about a month before
Herod 's Death, in the Consulship of Nerva and Metellus, T. L. makes good by
Astronomical Calculation. The same Eclipse calculated over again by the
Ptolemaick, Alphonsine and Copernican Tables in N. Mulerius, and found rather
bigger than what T. L. declares it. The gross absurdity of making the seventh
of Artaxerxes the Epoch of Daniel 's Weeks, it implying that Christ was
baptized by John, before the Baptist enired on his Ministry. Lydiat 's Eclipse
compared with Petavius 's; as also with the Eclipses of the 4711, 4712, and
4713 years of the I. P. And more particularly with that last, and the ineptness
thereof discovered. And therefore Herod dying in the year of Lydiat 's Eclipse,
Christ must be born, Lamia and Geminus being Consuls.
THAT Herod died in the Consulship of Metellus and Nerva, which is the 52.
Julian year, or the 4720. of the Julian Period, is proved thus. Archelaus
enjoyed his Ethnarchy of Judaea after his Father Herod's death, nine years and
better, as is manifest out of Josephus, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and Sulpicius
Severus. But the said Archelaus, a little before his Relegation, married
Glaphyra, the Widow of Juba, King of Mauritania, as Josephus twice testifies.
Whence, till Juba's death, the Exile of Archelaus could not be. But Tho. Lydiat
makes it good out of Strabo, that Juba was alive in the first, suppose, or the
second year of Tiberius; or if you will, in the Consulate of Statilius Taurus
and Scribonius Libo. Before that time Archelaus was not banished. Wherefore he
not reigning above nine years and a little more, if we reckon to the ninth
Consulate from this backward, we shall fall into that of M. Furius Camillus and
Sext. Non. Quintilianus, into which the first year of Archelaus his Reign
reaches, and which immediately the Consulate of Metellus and Nerva precedes:
And in which therefore Herod died. See T. L. his Recensio, cap. 5.

Secondly, Dion Cassius in his Roman History in the year of Aemylius Lepidus
and Lucius Aruntius Consuls, writes thus. Herodes Palaestinus, (...), being
accused by his Brethren, was banished beyond the Alps, and part of his Dition
laid to the Public. Dion indeed here, either for brevity sake, or out of
ignorance, joins the Banishment of these Brethren close to their impleading one
another before Augustus, presently upon their Father Herod's death; but in that
he makes this impleading, which is at large described in Josephus, Antiq. Jud.
lib. 17. cap. 11. in the year of Aemylius Lepidus and Lucius Aruntius; this
joins it very near to the time of Herod's death, which we contend for. For the
Consulate of Lepidus and Aruntius immediately precedes that of Metellus and
Nerva. So that from this otherwise confused passage, there is some glimmerings
of this great Truth.

Thirdly, Josephus tells us, Antiq. Jud. lib. 18. cap. 3. that Quirinius, in
execution of the Tax that was concluded on, in the 37. year after Augustus his
Victory over M. Antony at Actium, sold and confiscated the Goods of Archelaus.
Now, as Suetonius notes in his Life, cap. 27. Censum populi ter egit Augustus,
primum and tertium cum Collega, medium solus. This Collega or Yoke Fellow in
Office was Tiberius in the third Tax, which must necessarily be here meant,
Herod being alive in the two former. But this third was even in the very close
of Augustus his days, who died, Sextus Pompeius and Sextus Apuleius being
Consuls: But as T. L. makes out by History (see his Recensio, cap. 15.) was
executed in the Consulship of Statilius Taurus and Scribonius Libo. Wherefore
Quirinius confiscating Archelaus his Goods in that year, it is an Argument that
then was the time of his Relegation, which is a matter of nine or ten years
from the Consulship of Nerva and Metellus: whence again it is manifest, that
Herod died when they two were Consuls. It Is true, here Josephus makes this Tax
to be in the 37. year of Augustus his Monarchy, which is a contradiction to the
time of this third Tax; but it is a mere Parachronismus, or rather
Parepochismus, the taking one Epoch for another, that of Augustus his
Monarchical Reign, the Actiaca Victoria, for the time of his accepting of the
Sacrosanct and absolute Sovereign Tribunitian Power, which was not till nine
years after the Victoria Actiaca; namely, when himself was the eleventh time
Consul. Take but that Epoch, and all runs smooth; but without it, this passage
of Josephus is a contradiction to it self. And yet this passage, compared with
the story of Glaphyra, does notably confirm the true time of Herod's death,
that it was in the Consulship of Metellus and Nerva.

Fourthly, Josephus in the same eighteenth Book, Chap. 6. tells, that Philippus
the Tetrarch died the 37. year of his Reign, (...), where Ruffinus, an ancient
Interpreter of Josephus, ascribing to Philip the Tetrarch thirty two years,
does fairly insinuate, that we should read in the Greek Copy, not (...), but
rather (...), thirty one years, viz. thirty one years current. Now, as T. L.
affirms, and Helvicus also consents thereto, Tiberius and Philip died in the
same year, viz. Proculus and Nigrinus being Consuls: in which very year
Petavius places the death of Tiberius. Number therefore thirty one years from
Proculus and Nigrinus, and they will end in the Consulship of Nerva and
Metellus, in which we contend that Herod, the Father of Philip, died.

Fifthly, Eusebius in his Chronicon, Number. MM XXX. and Sulpicius Severus, lib.
2. Histor. Sacr. give twenty four years to Herod the Tetrarch after the
Relegation of Archelaus. Now Josephus, Antiq. Jud. lib. 19. in the last
Chapter, making out the seven years of Agrippa's Reign, writes thus. Four
years, says he, he reigned in Caius Caesar's time, three years of which he
enjoyed the Tetrarchy of Philip, but in the fourth year there was added to him
the Tetrarchy of Herod, and three years more he reigned in the time of Claudius
Caesar. Whence it is manifest, from this exquisite and punctual account of
these seven years Reign of Agrippa, that Herod the Tetrarch's Reign ended with
the fourth year of Caius Caligula. From which year, reckoning the 24 years of
Herod's Reign after the Exile of Archelaus, and adding thereto the nine or ten
years of Archelaus his Reign after his Father Herod's death, and it will reach
to the Consulate of Metellus and Nerva, at what time Herod, the Son of
Antipater, died.

Sixthly and lastly, For a further confirmation of this Truth, that Herod died
in the Consulate of Metellus and Nerva, let us add that notable Argument which
T. L. draws from the Eclipse that Josephus takes notice of, as happening a
little before Herod's death. And it is worth the observing, that it is the only
Eclipse which that Historian has set down in all his History. Which argues not
only the seasonableness of its appearing, but the extraordinary greatness
thereof, else it had not stuck in the minds of the Beholders so firmly, that
the Fame thereof might cause Josephus to record it, when he records none
besides. The Narrative is briefly this, Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 8. There he tells
us, that Herod being desperately ill, beyond all hope of Recovery (which caused
some Zelots for the Law to pull down the golden Eagle which Herod had erected
over the greater Gate of the Temple; of which bold Feat the two Matthias's
were, the one suspected, the other found guilty) Herod, says he, depriving
Matthias the High Priest of his High Priesthood, he burnt the other Matthias,
who was the Author of the Sedition, together with Judas and other of his
Accomplices alive, (...), and the Moon that very same night in which they were
burnt, suffered an Eclipse. For it naturally implies that they were burnt that
night, as well as the Moon was then Eclipsed. Now for the time of year when
this Eclipse happened, it is plainly set down in the eleventh Chapter, that it
was the Full Moon immediately preceding the Full Moon at which they keep their
Passover, viz. the first Full Moon of their month Abib or Nisan: so that Herod
died within a month after he had burned Matthias and Judas, and other
Confederates, in pulling down and demolishing the golden Eagle that he had
dedicated and set up over the great Gate of the Temple. Nor can any one that
will impartially consider the nature of these things that are said to be done
by himself, while alive, or by others after his death betwixt those two Full
Moons; and the scantness of the Country of Judaea, and the smalness of the time
requisite for the doing of them, but he must needs conceive that Herod died
betwixt these two Full Moons, the Eclipsed one and Paschal, else they must
protract his life near to the next Paschal Moon, and make him live in a manner
a whole year longer, which is hugely dissonant from the Narrative of Josephus.

Now that there was such an huge Eclipse, not only at such a season of the
year, but at a fit time of the night, when men's spirits were more than
ordinarily awakened in an hurry upon the burning those Zelots for their Law,
who happily might be brought out to be burnt about seven or eight a clock of the
Night (as Nero is said to have burned the Christians in the night-season) T. L.
does make good by Astronomical Calculation, that such an Eclipse so
circumstantiated, did happen in the year when Nerva and Metellus were Consuls:
which is the third year of the 196. Olympiad, and the 52. Julian Year, and the
4720. Year of the Julian Period, viz. when Metellus and Nerva were Consuls,
according to Helvieus and Petavius, as well as T. L. And this year T. L. in his
Recensio finds by Compute, Prima vigilia Noctis insecutae vicesimum diem
Februarii medium Plenilunium contigisse una and viginti horis, ac quinquaginta
quinque scrupulis sexagenariis transactis a praecedente primi diei septimanae
media nocte Hierosolymis. And the Prosthaphaeresis of the Sun and Moon being
found by him in a manner equal, the time of the Plenilunium medium and verum is
concluded by him in a manner the same. And this Plenilunium happening una and
viginti horis, ac quinquaginta quinque scrupulis, etc. that is, at 55 minutes
after nine a clock at Night; it is plain the middle of the Eclipse fell not
within the Vigilia prima, but its beginning might fall within it, even within
the second hour of the prima Vigilia, 55 minutes after seven; the Moon being
eclipsed according to his Computation above 18 digits, and the Eclipse
continuing near two hours, and she being perfectly obscured, and so wading in
the shade of the Earth more than three quarters of an hour together. This is a
remarkable Eclipse, and would, especially falling out at such a time, stick in
the memories of the Beholders, and they transmit it to Posterity. And now there
being no such Eclipse to be found so suited for greatness and seasonableness in
any year they would pitch upon for the death of Herod, that would deduce the
Weeks of Daniel from the seventh of Artaxerxes his Reign: this, amongst other
things, is a fair demonstration that they have chosen a wrong Epoch.

The truth of this is so material, that I had the curiosity, and gave my self
the trouble of calculating this Eclipse of the Moon that fell out in the
Consulate of Nerva and Metellus, Anno Periodi Julianae 4720, by more Tables
than one, by the Copernican Tables, the Alfonsine and Ptolemaick Tables, as
Nicolaus Muserius, that excellent Astronomo Chronologer, and highly valued both
by Scaliger and Petavius, (though at odds betwixt themselves) has adjusted them
for this use, and find by them all that the Eclipse is rather greater than T.
L. has computed. According to the Alfonsine Tables, the Moon was Eclipsed
digits 19.; according to the Copernican and Ptolemaick Tables, 21 digits at
least. According to them all, the duration of her Eclipse was above four hours,
and her stay within the shadow of the Earth totally obscured two hours, bating
some few minutes. Whence in all likelihood it was a most terrible and dismal
Eclipse, and such as would make an indeleble impression on the fancy of them
that beheld it. But now as for the beginning of the Eclipse, according to the
Ptolemaick Tables, it was a little after ten of the Clock at night. According
to the Alfonsine a little before nine; and according to the Copernican, about
half an hour after nine. The latest of which times is soon enough to engage the
Spectators eyes to behold it, the Zelots being burnt in the same Night, and
happily not sooner than betwixt seven and eight of the Clock, and people would be
abroad after that hurry longer than the latest beginning of this Eclipse.

We shall understand the appositeness of this Eclipse for the purpose the
better, if we compare it with the Eclipse that Petavius takes notice of Anno P.
I. 4710. in which year, according to Josephus his Account, Herod died. For then
reckoning from Anno P. I. 4674. as the first year of his Reign, upon his being
made King of Judaea, by the Favor of Antony and the Roman Senate, he will have
reigned thirty seven years. And now because I was mentioning the Epoch of
Daniel's Week from the seventh year of Artaxerxes, which is the year of P. I.
4256. this being made the Epoch, the last year of the weeks will be Anno P. I.
4745. Now therefore accordingly as the Prophecy will naturally cast us upon it,
reckoning backwards from the year 4745. (which is the nineteenth year of
Tiberius, and the last year of the seventieth week) to the Passion of Christ,
who in the midst of this week put an end to the Judaical Sacrifices by his own
Sacrifice on the Cross, and we come to the sixteenth year of Tiberius. And the
other half of this last week will reach to the thirteenth year of Tiberius, the
year of Christ's Manifestation and Baptism by John, which is two years before
John's preaching, who began to preach the fifteenth of Tiberius, as the Gospel
tells us; as also that Christ was not baptized by John, till after he had begun
his preaching. Which therefore is an horrible flaw in this Epoch from the
seventh of Artaxerxes.

When Christ was baptized by John, he was about thirty years of Age, suppose
him going on his one and thirty, it will then follow, that he was born Anno P.
I. 4709. the year before the death of Herod, as Petavius has also noted. Now
besides the impossibility of this seventh of Artaxerxes, being the true Epoch
of Daniel's Weeks, in that it makes Christ to be baptized by John before he
began his preaching, which was in the fifteenth of Tiberius; and also the very
little distance betwixt Christ's Birth and Herod's Death, this Eclipse noted by
Petavius at the death of Herod, Sabinus and Rufus being Consuls, is a pitiful
small business, and unsuitable, if compared with that Eclipse which happened in
the Consulship of Nerva and Metellus. For calculating that Eclipse, which
Petavius mentions, which I did, before I met with it in Petavius, I computed
it, as he has done, to have been Martii XIII. Hor. 2. a media nocte, but we
differ in minutes, he says 45 minutes, but my Compute has only 23, which is
more favorable to him than his own. And yet according to my Account, the
Eclipse began not till near one of the Clock in the Morning. According to his,
it would be at past one. But that which he conceals, the Moon was then Eclipsed
but about six digits and. But what is seven digits to thrice seven, or 21
digits, or indeed to 20? And then it beginning not till one a Clock in the
Morning, it was not likely to be taken notice of, or to be talked of, such
little Eclipses being ordinary. Nor is it credible, that Josephus taking no
notice in all his History of any Eclipses but this, that he would have recorded
this, but that it was so notorious, and so much talked of amongst the people
for the hugeness and dismalness thereof.

Nor can those that make the seventh of Artaxerxes the Epoch of the Weeks, set
the death of Herod at a more probable distance from the Birth of Christ, both
because that they would then desert the Authority of Josephus, and that they
are also destitute of an Eclipse for the purpose. For in the year 4711. P. J.
there are indeed two Ecliptical Plenilunium medium's, the one in March, the
other in July; but both of them not passing two or three degrees within the
Termini Ecliptici: so that they will prove miserable megre Eclipses, if any at
all. And in the 4712. there I meet with but one Eclipse, and that in Jul. 16.
much more considerable for bigness, but at too great a distance from the
Paschal Moon ensuing. And besides, this Plenilunium verum happens at Leowardia
at seven a Clock 12 minutes past Midnight; but at Jerusalem at nine a Clock 48
minutes a media nocte, that is, within a very little of ten a Clock in the
Morning; and therefore not possible to be seen by the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
but rather by their Antipodes. In the Year 4713. Cornelius Lentulus and
Calphurnius Piso being Consuls, there is indeed an Eclipse Jan. 10. that for
bigness may compare with that under Nerva and Metellus, but not for
seasonableness. For it is neither the immediately preceding Plenilunium to the
Paschal; and being so in the Winter, it ill suits with Herod's being advised by
his Physicians to make use of the Waters of Callirrhoe beyond Jordan, and the
beginning of it is not till after twelve a Clock at Night, when people are gone
to bed. And in the same year on the sixth of July, there is a considerable
Eclipse; but it falling out near Noon-time at Jerusalem, it is plain it is
little to the purpose.

The Eclipses of these four years of the Julian Period I have considered,
because the ancient Fathers relate that Herod lived four years after the Birth
of Christ, and we see that in all the Eclipses that happened after the Birth of
Christ, fixed in the Year 4709. P. J. (where they must fix it that make the
Epoch of Daniel's Weeks the seventh of Artaxerxes) till the Year 4713. which
is the fourth after the Birth of Christ so fixed; that there is none that can
stand in competition with that Eclipse that happened Anno P. J. 4720. Nerva and
Metellus being Consuls. The most plausible is that of Jan. 10. Cornelius
Lentulus and Calphurnius Piso being Consuls. But besides other incongruities in
it, which I noted before, though it be removed enough to be the fourth year
after Christ's Nativity, according to the Opinion of the ancient Fathers, yet
it is removed too much from the end of Herod's Reign, from his being
constituted King by the Favor of M. Antony and the Senate. For his thirty
seven years of reigning expire in the 4710. year P. J. and this makes him live
three years after. Which nulls the Authority of Josephus, on which they build,
and thwarts the Current of History. Wherefore it is an invincible Argument from
the Eclipse in the Consulate of Nerva and Metellus, that Herod died that year,
and that Christ, according to the Opinion of the ancient Fathers, was born four
years before in the Consulate of L. Aelius Lamia and M. Servilius Geminus:
which was the thing to be proved.

CHAP. XI. Josephus his inconsisteney with himself in matters of Chronology.
The first Objection taken out of passages in him against Herod 's dying
Metellus and Nerva being Consuls, that plainly imply that he reigned but thirty
seven years in all, and that from his first being made King by the favor of M.
Antony. The second Objection from Antipater 's sending his Children to the King
of Arabia, when he began his War with Aristobulus: which was in the first year
of the 178. Olympiad. Whence Herod is concluded twenty five years old when he
was made Prefect of Galilee. In order to an Answer, two assured parcels of
Josephus his Materia Historica are premised. The first, that Herod was but
fifteen years old when he was made Prefect of Galilee, several other passages
in Josephus complying therewith. The second, that he was about seventy years of
Age, and had reigned but thirty seven when he dyed. No occasion for Josephus to
mistake in the former parcel, but a very obvious one in the latter. That none
of the five Children mentioned in the second Objection, were those sent to the
King of Arabia. That it is a contradiction to what Josephus elsewhere says of
Phasaelus and Herod. If Josephus meant those five, that it is upon his having
committed a Parepochism, to which his second Historical Parcel lay obnoxious.
Whence his Testimony to his first parcel preponderates that to the second, and
its repugnancy with the time of Christ's Baptism and true Epoch of Daniel 's
Weeks, demonstrates him to have missed the right Epoch of Herod 's Reign:
which with ease reconciles all these clashings.
AND thus we have seen with what firmness and steadiness this Demonstration has
been carried on for the fixing of Christ's Nativity in the Consulate of Lamia
and Geminus, if Historians themselves were so firm and fixed; or rather so
consistent in their Assertions, as not to speak repugnantly to themselves. This
I speak in reference to Josephus, who makes Herod but fifteen years old when
Antipater made him Prefect of Galilee: And he makes him reign but thirty seven
years from his being made King by M. Antony and the Roman Senate, and yet to
have reached to be about seventy years of Age.

This therefore is one of the two great Objections which is brought against
Herod's dying in the year of Metellus and Nerva, and that notable Eclipse above
taken notice of, viz. That Josephus, Antiq. Jud. lib. 17. cap. 8. expressly
declares, that Herod in that desperate sickness of which he died, was upon
seventy years of Age, which he repeats again lib. 1. cap. 21. De Bello Judaico.
And yet Antiq. Jud. lib. 17. cap. 10. five days after he had settled his Will,
and put to death his Son Antipater, Herod, says he, dies, (...). And the very
same thing he repeats again lib. 1. cap. 21. De Bello Judaico; but more
perfectly as to that of his being made King by the Roman Senate. For (...),
which was left out before, is put in here, (...). From which places it is
collected, that though Herod was about seventy years of Age when he died, yet
he reigned but thirty seven years from the time that he was declared King of
Judaea by the Romans upon the procurement of M. Antony, and not from that time
that the Roman Senate and Augustus made him King upon the Forfeiture of his
Kingdom, because it is said in both places, that it was thirty four years from
the death of Antigonus, as well as thirty seven from his being made King by the
Favor of the Roman Senate; for that is understood by Romans in these places,
and there is three years distance betwixt Antigonus his death and that. Whence,
say they, it is manifest, that Herod did not die in the Year 4720. P. J.
Metellus and Nerva being Consuls, but in the Year 4710. in the Consulship of
Sabinus and Rufus; and that Herod was not fifteen years of Age when he was made
Prefect of Galilee by his Father Antipater, but twenty five.

The second Objection, or rather the Confirmation of this former, is taken out
of Josephus, Antiq. Jud. lib. 14. cap. 12. where describing the Family of
Antipater, he says, that of his Wife Cypris he had four Sons and a Daughter,
Phasaelus, and Herod, who was afterward King, Josephus and Pheroras, and
lastly, Salome a Daughter. And whereas he did affect the acquaintance and
friendship of several Potentates about him, yet in a more special manner he
caressed and obliged the King of Arabia, (...), To whose trust and tutelage he
committed his Children, (...), his Daughter, as well as Sons, when he made War
against Aristobulus. And the same thing he repeats again De Bello Judaico, lib.
1. cap. 6. the latter part whereof he phrases thus: (...), viz. to the King of
Arabia, (...). Et quoniam bellum cum Aristobulo gerendum susceperat, liberos
suos fidei ejus commendans, ad eum misit. He sent them, (...), as a Depositum,
(...), because he had undertaken a War against Aristobulus. Whence it is
manifest, that Antipater sent his Children to Aretas, the King of Arabia, a
little before the beginning of that War against Aristobulus.

We are now to inquire when this War begun, which we shall understand out of
Josephus, Antiq. Jud. lib. 14. cap. 1. where he tells us, that Hyrcanus was
invested in his Pontificate or High Priesthood the third year of the 177.
Olympiad, Q. Hortensius and Q. Metellus being Consuls; it is rather the fourth
year of that Olympiad, Metellus and Hortensius being Consuls then, according to
both Helvicus and Petavius, and Lydiat too. But presently upon his being
High Priest, his Brother Aristobulus makes War against him, and at a Battle at
Jericho puts him to flight, and that very year constrained him to lay down his
High Priesthood, and betake himself to a private life. When Antipater saw this,
he never ceased from soliciting Hyrcanus to recover his Right, but within a
years time, suppose, or thereabout, persuaded him to fly to Aretas King of
Arabia, in whom he had a great interest, which in all probability, according to
Josephus his account, was done in the first year of the 178. Olympiad. And here
Antipater undertaking the War against Aristobulus with the aid of Aretas, this
must be the time of his conveying his five Children to his Court for safety. At
what time it cannot be conceived but that Herod was at least three years old,
Salome being the fourth from him: Let him be going on his fourth. From this
first year of the 178. Olympiad to the Consulship of Calenus and Vatinius, when
Herod was made Prefect of Galilee, is twenty two years: add the three years
complete when Herod was with the rest of Antipater's Children sent to the King
of Arabia; and then it will follow, that Herod was twenty five years old when
he was made Prefect of Galilee. And so Herod must have died Anno P. J. 4710.
not 4720. viz. in the Consulship of Nerva and Metellus. These are the most
shrewd Objections that I can pick out of Josephus, and I have set them off to
the best advantage I could.

But now in order to the answering of these difficulties, I shall first
premise, that Josephus took these two things for certain and assured Parcels of
his Historical Materials, viz. (1.) That Herod, when his Father made him
Prefect of Galilee, was not more years than fifteen complete. That there is no
lapse of the Scribe in this Compute, but that it is set down according to
Josephus his own mind, I have abundantly proved Chap. 9. And the matter is so
plainly true, that Petavius himself does acknowledge it no lapse of the Scribe,
but that Josephus in that place wrote as he thought, De doctrina Temp. lib. 10.
cap. 65. And how consentaneous to this Position his story of Glaphyra is, and
his making Quirinius to confiscate the Goods of Archelaus in the year when
Statilius Taurus and Scribonius Libo were Consuls, as also the making Herod the
Tetrarch's Reign end with the fourth year of Caligula; and lastly, his taking
notice of the Eclipse that happened in the year of Herod's death, I have
observed in the foregoing Chapter. To which I will only add how consequential
to this is Josephus his calling Phasaelus and Herod ( Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 23.)
(...), Adolescentuli, when M. Antony made them Tetrarchs of Judaea. But if
Herod was twenty five years old when he was made Prefect of Galilee, he was
above thirty now, and his Brother Phasaelus happily betwixt thirty and forty,
both of them (...), according to the Persian Account, the utmost bounds of
their Adolescentia being but twenty seven years. After that, they are (...), as
you may see in Xenophon. And yet here Phasaelus and Herod, the one betwixt
thirty and forty years of Age, the other a year or two above thirty, are not
only called Adolescentes, but Adolescentuli. Wherefore that they are called
(...), Adolescentuli, is plainly consequential to this assured Parcel of
Josephus his Historical Materials; That Herod, when he was made Prefect of
Galilee, was but about fifteen years of Age.

And the other assured Parcel of his Materia Historica was this, That Herod was
about seventy years of Age when he died, and that he reigned thirty seven
years. This he was ascertained of by some Records that he had met with and
could confide in. Nor is there with me any question made, but that both these
parcels of his Materia Historica are true. But that he reckons the thirty seven
years of Herod's Reign from his first being made King by the Favor of M.
Antony and the Senate: I deny that he had any Authentic Record for that, but I
deem it a mere surmise of his own. Wherefore going no further for the present,
but weighing the Testimony of Josephus in one place with his Testimony in
another, I answer thus;

That his Assertion, that Herod was but fifteen years old when he was Prefect
of Galilee, is the Assertion of such a thing in which there is no occasion or
allurement to err in; nor is it credible he would ever have writ so, it seeming
so unplausible a thing in it self, that the Government of a Country should be
committed to one so extremely young, unless he had found it amongst the assured
Materials of his History. But now for the other assured parcel of his
Historical Matter, Herod's dying at seventy years of Age, and reigning but
thirty seven: here Josephus might well find himself in Bivio as it were; and
the way forking it self into two Roads, that which seemed the more fair and
direct, he might be tempted presently to take it, though he mistook himself in
it. I speak this in reference to the two Epocha's of Herod's Reign, the one
when he was made King of Judaea by the Favor of M. Antony, the other when by
the Favor of Augustus. The former, as being first, is the more naturally
enticing to be made choice of, which therefore Josephus out of overmuch
inadvertence or beedlesness adventured upon, and so fairly committed a
Parepochism, the taking one Epoch for another. Now the matter of his other
Assertion being not liable to any such mistake, it is plain the Testimony of
Josephus in that point is to preponderate his Testimony in this, or in any
thing else that depends upon it. For (...), as Aristotle speaks, (...), One
Absurdity admitted, others will follow.

Secondly, For the answering the second Difficulty I shall premise, That it is
not probable, at least we have no assurance, that those five, namely,
Phasaelus, Herod, Josephus, Pheroras and Salome, were all the Children that
Antipater had by Cypris, because there is none of these but make part of his
History; but there might be in all likelihood other Children that died when
they were Children, and so left no memory behind them. And furthermore add,
that it is no such extraordinary thing for a man to have more than twice as
many Children of one Wife, as Herod had of his.

Whence therefore I answer first, That though this Argument looks very
plausible on it, it so fitting their conceit that would have Herod twenty five
years old (as Petavius, amongst others, would have him) when he was made
Prefect of Galilee; yet there is no firmness nor certainty in it. For Josephus
in the place above cited does not say, that those very five Children were
committed to the Trust of the King of Arabia, which he names a little before
(every one of them acting a part in his History) but to show how gracious
Antipater was with the great ones of Arabia, as well as of Idumaea, and the
sure Friendship and Confidence betwixt the King of Arabia and him, he says he
deposited his Children with him when he began his War against Aristobulus,
whether these or others, more or less, there is no mention thereof. Wherefore
for any thing this place will prove to the contrary, they might be two or three
Children that Antipater deposited with Aretas, before Phasaelus, or any of the
other four mentioned, were born.

Secondly, That these five should be the Children, and so Herod be twenty five
years of Age when he was made Prefect of Galilee, it will make him above thirty
when M. Antony made him Tetrarch of Judaea: at what time notwithstanding
Josephus calls him (...), Adolescentulus, a Stripling, and so contradicts
himself.

Thirdly and lastly, If Josephus meant these five to be the (...), the dear
Depositum with the King of Arabia, it is then upon his surmise that the thirty
seven years of Herod's Reign are to be numbered from the first Epoch; but there
being only the Testimony of Josephus for that against Josephus in a matter less
liable to mistake, this latter Testimony of Josephus is to be preferred before
his former, or any thing else that depends thereon, as I noted before. And thus
we see that appealing to the mere humane Authority of Josephus, the Testimony
of Josephus himself plainly prevails against that Testimony of his that would
disprove our fixing the Nativity of Christ to the Consulship of Lamia and
Geminus, and the Death of Herod to that of Nerva and Metellus. How infinitely
then must it preponderate when the Divine Testimony is added thereunto? For
that vanquished Testimony of Josephus by his prevalent Testimony does clash
also with the Testimony of Holy Scripture. Because, if the first Epoch of
Herod's thirty seven years Reign be taken, Herod must die in the year of the
Julian Period 4710. And therefore Christ cannot be born later than the year
before, viz. 4709. for he was born while Herod was living, who sought the
Child's life. And the Evangelist Luke plainly declares, that he was about
thirty years old when he was baptized of John, nay, but beginning to be about
thirty years old, as Beza and our English Translation has it; but I think (...)
has another meaning there. But let him be full thirty years old, going if you
will on his thirty one, which will then be Anno P. J. 4739. and the thirteenth
year of Tiberius. But John did not begin his preaching before the fifteenth of
Tiberius his Reign: nor was Christ baptized by him before he had begun his
preaching, as it is plain out of that Gospel. Wherefore the taking the first
Epoch of Herod's Reign instead of the latter, is a plain contradiction to the
Testimony of Holy Writ. To which, especially the self-vanquished Testimony of
Josephus, must of necessity yield.

Moreover, besides the particular clashing with this Testimony of S. Luke that
sets the Baptism of Christ by John after the fifteenth of Tiberius, the first
Epoch of Herod's thirty seven years Reign, is repugnant to the Epoch of
Daniel's Weeks fixed in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, which the
Holy Writ makes the only Epoch of Daniel's Weeks, as I have demonstrated
above. Now therefore, though the Testimony of Josephus in one place were equal
to his Testimony in another place, even in this case, that part of the
contradiction is infallibly to be held for the truth that corresponds with the
Holy Scriptures according to the second Postulatum in the first Chapter. That
when Historians clash one with another, or one and the same Historian with
himself, that part of the contradiction is to be held true that best complies
with the Holy Writ. This is, I say, undeniably reasonable, though the parts of
the contradiction stood upon equal terms. How much more then when the weight of
Divine Testimony is added to that part that has the advantage already?

Wherefore he that has but half an eye, as they say, may easily discern that
Josephus has committed a Parepochismus in choosing the first Epoch for Herod's
Reign of thirty seven years instead of the second. Which if he had chosen, he
had neither contradicted himself nor the Holy Scriptures, but all would be in
perfect ease and Harmony, Josephus with the Sacred Scriptures and ancient
Fathers, and also with himself. And Herod will be found dying in the Consulship
of Nerva and Metellus, and Christ born according to the opinion of the most
ancient Fathers four years before in the Consulship of L. Aelius Lamia and M.
Servilius Geminus, which was the thing to be demonstrated. For thirty seven
years from that second Epoch, viz. the Victoria Actiaca or Herod's being made
King by Augustus, do reach exactly into the year of the Consulship of Metellus
and Nerva.

CHAP. XII. The second way of proving Christ born in the Consulate of Lamia and
Geminus, viz. from the Tax mentioned by S. Luke. Three general Taxes ordered by
Augustus. The Text in S. Luke touching this Tax explained, and the Tax found
the first of those two which were carried on by Cyrenius. That this Tax is that
mentioned in Suetonius and the Monumentum Ancyranum, viz. the middle Tax, and
finished in the Consulate of Aelius Catus and Sextius Saturninus according to
T. L. the year after that of Lamia and Geminus. That Christ was born Lamia and
Geminus being Consuls, proved from Augustus his Decennial Resumptions of his
Power Censorian and Monarchical. And also from the Time-eaten Monument of
Ancyra. From the testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus placing the Birth of our
Lord in the twenty eighth year when the Decree for the Tax first went out after
Octavius had the Name of Augustus conferred upon him. Five several Epocha's of
Augustus his Reign, any whereof directing in compute to that time of Christ's
Nativity that is pointed at by the true Epoch of Daniel 's Weeks, is
argumentative and confirms the same. That Epiphanius his twenty nine years from
the perfect accord and subjection of the Jews to the Romans, reach into the
Consulate of Vinicius and Alfinius. The great advantage the twentieth of
Artaxerxes has above the seventh, there being no sense of this latter to be
made from any Epocha's. Christ born in the forty first year of Augustus
according to Irenaeus, Tertullian and other Fathers, which from a right Epoch
reaches unto the Consulate of Lamia and Geminus. A clear proof that Christ was
then born, out of Eusebius his Chronicon. An Argument offered at by T. L. from
a passage in Chrysostom 's Homily De Natali Johannis Baptistae.
AND thus much concerning the first way which T. L. uses to prove our Savior
born (as the true Epoch of Daniel's Weeks fixes it) in the Consulship of Lamia
and Geminus, viz. from the years of the Reign of Herod, his Age, and the year
of his Death. For he dying in the Consulship of Nerva and Metellus, it follows
by consequence, the ancient Fathers putting four years distance betwixt Herod's
Death and Christ's Birth, that he must be born Anno 4716. P. J. Aelius Lamia
and Servilius Geminus being Consuls. This is punctually made out to a year by
Reason and Authentic Testimonies, though the History in S. Matthew tells us no
more than that after Herod was dead, Christ was termed (...). For the Angel
tells Mary, Matt. 2.20. That they were dead that sought (...), the little
Child's life. From whence can only be gathered that Christ was very young when
Herod died, but not exactly how many years he was old then. And thus it is also
with that Note that Luke gives of his Nativity. He does not expressly tell the
very year when Christ was born, but he tells us such a circumstance of his
Birth, that a sagacious Historian may collect the very year, as Tho. Lydiat, to
his commendation, has done, namely, from the Tax under which Christ was born
Luke 2.2. And this is the second way that T.L. takes to prove that Christ was
born in the Consulate of Lamia and Geminus.

For the better understanding of which Method we are first to take notice, That
there were three more general Taxes ordered by Augustus. This, Suetonius, as I
have noted above, expressly tells us in Augustus his Life, cap. 27. Recepit and
morum legumque regimen aeque perpetuum ( viz. as perpetual as his Tribunitian
Power) quo jure quanquam sine censurae honor, censum tamen populi ter egit;
primum ac tertium cum Collega, medium solus. But in a Monument erected by him
or by some body for him in Ancyra, a City of either Phrygia or Galatia in Asia
minor, some forty two years after his first Tax, not only the three Taxes, but
the Collegae in his first and last Tax are mentioned, as also that he ordered
the middle Tax himself alone. The Collega in his first Tax, according to that
Monument in Ancyra, was M. Agrippa; and the Tax finished, himself being the
sixth time Consul, and Agrippa the second. His Collega in the last Tax was
Tiberius, and the Tax finished Lustro condito, Sext. Pompeius and Sext.
Apuleius being Consuls, in the very year when Augustus died. See Suetonius in
Vita Augusti, cap. 97. and In Vita Tiberii, cap. 21. And that the first Tax was
ordered by him and finished Agrippa being his Collega in the first Consulship
of Apuleius and his own fifth, and his own sixth and Agrippa's second, T. L.
makes clear out of Dion Cassius.

These things being premised, let us consider the Text of S. Luke Chap. 2. And
it came to pass in those days that there went out a Decree from Caesar Augustus
that all the World should be taxed, or enrolled. Hence it is plain that it was,
as I may so speak, an Ecumenical Tax or Enrolment thus appointed by Augustus.
But there is a further Character in the following verse: (...). For so it is to
be read, the Comma left out betwixt (...) and (...). And then the sense is
this, This is the first of the two Taxes which were carried on the times when
Cyrenius was Governor of Syria.

Two Characters therefore here offer themselves of Christ's Birth. (1.) An
Ecumenical Tax appointed by Augustus. (2.) The same Tax, the first of those
that were carried on by Cyrenius, the times he was Governor of Syria.

Now that this Ecumenical Tax mentioned in S. Luke is the same with the Tax
which Suetonius and the Monumentum Ancyranum say, that Augustus ordered alone
without a Colleague, is necessarily concluded from this very Reason, because it
is Ecumenical. For what can be more absurd than to conceive so famous or
universal Tax or Enrolment as this to be left out of that Monument? But now to
find out the time when this Ecumenical Enrolment was; It is plain in Dion,
lib. 55. that in the year before the Consulate of Messala and Cinna, that is to
say, in the year when Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus were Consuls,
Augustus alone without a Colleague (else in all likelihood he had been named to
lessen the invidiousness of the thing, and besides this Tax, being neither the
first nor the last, must be the middle which he ordered alone) he ended, I say,
a Tax in the year of those two Consuls condito lustro, as the Latin Phrase is.
The words of Dion are these; (...) (viz. Augustus) (...). Augustus taxed those
that lived in Italy, and were possessed of two hundred Sestertia, omitting the
poorer sort, and those that lived out of Italy, lest they should cause any
stirs. And that he might not seem to do this as a Censor, he was invested with
Proconsular Authority, for the more contentfully peracting this Tax and the
Lustral Sacrifice that concluded the same. It is true, some may scruple here
how this can be called an Ecumenical Tax, when it is said to be confined to
Italy. But T. L. suggests that which is very rational, viz. That this Tax, as
to the old mode of Taxes, extended no further than Italy; but the Enrolment of
Names and Estates might reach all over: and that this Ecumenical Tax was
rather a Project to make his Rationarium Imperii more correct and complete, for
the settling a constant and perpetual Revenue out of all the Provinces of the
Empire to maintain his numerous Armies and Navies, than to levy such a Tax at
that time, in the usual sense of Taxing, upon the whole Empire. This T. L.
makes out with very solid Reason from History. See his Recensio, cap. 6. And
consentaneously to this he cites that Famous Historian and Antiquary Hubertus
Golizius, who in his Annalis Historia of Augustus, mentions the Numerousness of
his Soldiers at that time, and the distribution of his ordinary Legions
throughout the Provinces, and the Institution of the settled Revenue in the
Consulate of Aelius Lamia and Servilius Geminus, which immediately precedes
that of Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus, in which the middle Tax was
finished, as appears out of Dion. From whose Authority alone it is evident that
this middle Tax ended the next year following that of Aelius Lamia and
Servilius Geminus. How easy is it then to conceive that it began at least that
very year, if not the year before? Whence it will be plain, that this is the
Tax and time when Christ was born, viz. in the year of Lamia and Geminus,
according as the right Epoch of Daniel's Weeks requires, and the Age of
Christ, when he was baptized of John, demonstrates to be true. See Chap. 8.
When the thing is brought so near, even by profane History, we may be sure the
exquisite truth of it will reach to that which we know to be true by Testimony
Divine.

But Secondly, It is observed out of the same Dion, that such was the Policy of
Augustus, that he made a show as if he would keep the Government such as he
received of the Senate, which was to be (...), Magister Correctorque Morum
(which was looked upon as a more fair and plausible Title than (...) Censor)
and so for his being Emperor; that he used to resume this Censorian Power,
(...), as he did the Imperatorial, (...), only for a set time, namely, from ten
years to ten years. Now the times of these resumed Powers at a complete
decennial interval follow the first of them the first Tax of Augustus, begun
Agrippa being then his Colleague; but the latter, viz. the Resumption of his
Imperatorial Power follows the said Tax transacted, and begins in the year when
Augustus was the seventh time, and Agrippa the third time Consuls, and ends
with the year when P. Cornelius Lentulus and Cn. Cornelius Lentulus were
Consuls, as the other with the year before Saturninus and Vespillo being
Consuls. Wherefore reckoning on still by complete Decenniums, the third
Decennium from Saturninus and Vespillo of the Censorian Power will end in the
year before the Consulship of Silius and Munatius: but the third of the
Imperatorial in that very year; In which Dion says, that Augustus did (...),
that he then entered upon the fifth ten-years of his Imperial Reign or
Government. But now count backward from the year before inclusively, his last
ten years of Censorian Rule will reach into the year of Aelius Lamia and
Servilius Geminus: the middle year in all likelihood of this middle Tax.

Thirdly, The Time-eaten Names of the Consuls in that Monumentum Ancyranum
abovementioned, as riddled out by T. L. fairly confirms, that the midst of
this middle Tax was in the Consulship of Aelius Lamia and Servilius Geminus.
For as he notes well [Censorum -- Sinio cos.] and a little after this [in
consulatu Fi -- ] the former of these cannot be understood of Asinius Gallus,
as some would have it, who was ten years before Vinicius and Alfinius; because
in Dion, lib. 55. neither in the Consulship of Drusus and Crispinus immediately
before his, nor in Tiberius and Piso's that immediately follows, nor in his own
is there any mention of any Tax or Lustral Sacrifice wherewith they wont to be
concluded. To which I add, it being said in that Monument, of this middle Tax;
Nuper lustrum solus feci legi censorum -- Sinio cos. it being at least twenty
years from the erection of this Monument by Augustus to Asinius Gallus his
Consulship, Nuper would be very improperly applied in this case and
circumstances, but more naturally to ten years later, the true time of this
middle Tax. And therefore this [ -- Sinio] T. L. does not rashly fancy to be
for Sentio, for the Consul Sentius Saturninus. Which happily may proceed from
hence, that he that read this Monument to the Scribe that was to write it fair
for the Carver in stone, pronounced the E in Sentio like an I, as one [(...)]
in the Hebrew of old served for both E and I; and in sundry words we may
observe how E is changed into I. Thus the Ionians for (...) say (...), and in
derivations of words out of Greek; as for (...), we say Sicilia; for (...),
tingo; for (...), animus, and the like, which shows how easily E runs into the
sound of I. Whence we may fairly conceive, how either the Reader sounded Sintio
for Sentio, or they being so near in sound, the Scribe took it for Sintio. And
if we remember that it is a false Pronunciation to sound S for T, but that they
pronounced it like the Greek Tau in old time before I, as well as before other
Vowels; and that this T after N was usually sounded like D, it follows then
that it was sounded by the Reader Sindio. Which D in this word makes so faint
an impress on the ear, that the Scribe might very well think the Reader to him,
to say, Sinio, and wrote so accordingly.

And now for the latter, [in consulatu Fi -- ] which all Antiquaries look upon
as a desperate business to make sense of, T. L. conceives the whole word is
either Alfinii or Vinicii, as if it were Finicii. For F and V consonant have
muchwhat the same sound (the Digamma Aeolicum, that is, F being rendered by V
consonant in Latin words derived from the Greek, as from the Aeolick (...) are
the Latin Vis, Vinum, Vespera.) and so the Scribe might fancy him that read
to him to have said Finicii, not Vinicii, and so to have wrote accordingly. I
must confess that the picking out sense out of old overworn Marble Monuments
from an eager desire of serving some Hypothesis, may justly too often seem like
the disease of young Maids that have the Greensickness, and pick strange stuff
out of mud Walls to satisfy their longings: so that these ingenious Conceits
alone of T. L. would little avail with me, but that they fall in with other
manifest indications in the same Monument; as when it says [ -- cum nuper
lustrum solus feci legi] that is to say, transigi vel condi: which is very
harsh to refer in things of this nature to the distance of twenty years before,
whenas the Lustrums were every fifth year. Wherefore it can be no Tax in
Asinius Gallus his Consulship. And besides this it is observable in the first
Tax of these three, though it was begun in the year when Sext. Apuleius and
Augustus was, the fifth time, Consul, as appears out of the ending of the 52.
Book of Dion, and the beginning of the 53. in the former it is (...), in the
latter (...), yet the Monument speaks thus, or rather Augustus in the Monument:
In consulatu sexto censum populi cum lega M. Agrippa egi, lustrumque post annum
abhinc alterum and quadragesimum feci legi, and so names that year wherein the
Tax was ended lustro condito, not that in which it began. In like manner in the
middle Tax he says [ -- Cum nuper lustrum solus feci -- censorum -- Sinio cos.]
that is, Sentio Consule, which is the year of that Consul in which the Tax was
ended lustro condito; And saying afterward, [in Consulatu Fi -- or rather Vi
-- ] it intimates the Consulate of Vinicius in which the Tax begun. These
correspondencies, I say, falling in with the ingenious Conjectures of T. L.
about these Time-eaten Names, makes them seem to me not at all rash nor
trifling, but to have their weight; and therefore I thought fit not to omit
them. See his Recensio, cap. 6, and 7.

Fourthly, From the year when Augustus was the seventh, and Agrippa the third
time Consul, to the Consulship of Vinicius and Alfinius when the middle Tax
begun, are twenty eight years complete. But that year of his seventh Consulship
was the year in which he was first called by the Vote of the Senate, Augustus,
as Dion tells us lib. 53. which they intended as a most magnificent Title,
(...), as Dion phrases it: (...), i. e. Augustus, signifying something more
than man, as he intimates. And this very year is the Epoch of the Anni
Augustorum. His fourth Argument therefore is drawn from the Authority of
Clemens Alexandrinus, who expressly writes in the first Book of his (...) thus:
(...). Of which the genuine sense is, That our Lord was born in the twenty
eighth year when the Command first went out after Caesar Octavius was called
Augustus, that there should be a taxing of the people. Which therefore must be
meant of this middle Tax, decreed after he had the Title of Augustus conferred
upon him, else it is not the first Tax he commanded or decreed. And this shows
that it ought to be understood of the twenty eighth Annus Augustorum in the
Roman sense, not in the Egyptian, whose Anni Augustorum commenced two years
before, viz. in the year after the Victoria Actiaca, as Censorinus also notes,
and that was before Octavius was called Augustus. Wherefore however Clemens
Alexandrinus or others compute these years, it is manifest their true Epoch is
from the seventh Consulate of Augustus. Whence the ending of the twenty eighth
year will touch upon the year of Vinicius and Alfinius when the Tax began, as
it should do, and signifies that Clemens light of a right Record of the years
from the Epoch of the Anni Augustorum to Christ's Nativity or near upon,
though he might be prone, he being an Alexandrian, to apply it to the Egyptian
Account.

And it is here seasonable to observe how those Numbers of the years of
Augustus his Reign that are applied to the discovering or defining the time of
the Nativity of Christ, may be numbered from several Epocha's. From the
Consulship of Hirtius and Pansa, from the Consulship of Pulcher and Flaccus,
from the Victoria Actiaca, from the year of Augustus his being the seventh
time, and Agrippa the third time Consul, when he first obtained the Title of
Augustus. From his eleventh Consulship which he bore with his Fellow-Consul
Calphurnius Piso when he was first invested with that most Sovereign and
Sacrosanct Tribunitian Power which Tacitus calls summi Fastigii vocabulum; And
Dion lib. 53. describes to be the most absolute Power imaginable above all Law
whatever, so that Emperors in virtue of this Power, this (...), Tribunitian
Power, if they took themselves to be injured the least tittle in word or deed,
they might (...), they might without any Trial or Judgment kill him forthwith
that did it; as if he were a most accursed Wretch that had affronted the Divine
Majesty it self: I say, though these years of the Reign of Augustus are
misapplied by ancient Authors, who thereby fix Christ's Nativity to a time
uncompliable with the true Epoch of Daniel's Weeks (which the Prophecy and
Scripture-History plainly declare to be the twentieth of Artaxerxes) and with
the true time the Scripture declares that John the Baptist began to preach and
exercise his Ministry, and with the true Age of him when John baptized him
according to Scripture-declaration (which nulls all Testimony that contradicts
it) yet if they be found from a right Epoch to touch upon, or reach into the
middle Tax of Augustus begun in the Consulate of Vinicius and Alfinius, and
ended in the Consulate of Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus, which exactly
agrees with the true Epoch of Daniel's Weeks, they are, notwithstanding those
heedless misapplications of the Ancients, really argumentative for the proving
this true time of the Nativity of Christ, which the right Epoch of Daniel's
Weeks points at; and it is thence apparent, that T. L. is not destitute of
Historical Records, but abundantly furnished therewith, for the maintaining his
Assertion, and knows how to use them, when others have abused them. Wherefore
having given this notice by the bye, I proceed.

Fifthly, Epiphanius in his abovementioned (...), which is his 51. Heresy,
Sect. 22. though he have there overmuch Parachronistick stuff, yet he plainly
enough drives at this to define the time of the Nativity of Christ from the
time of that state of the Jews when there was (...) (I may also add (...), for
before that there were (...), as Epiphanius speaks, some smaller pittances of
beneficence) (...). And (...), and lastly (...), perfect conjunction and
beneficent friendship of the Romans with the Jews, and a perfect surrendering of
Judaea to the Romans, and bringing it under Tribute; Twenty nine years from
this state of things was our Savior born, according to Epiphanius. Now this
state of things, as T. L. makes it out sufficiently in his Recensio, cap. 8.
happened in the ending of the year when Augustus was the sixth time, and
Agrippa the second time Consul, or the beginning of the next year when they
were both Consuls again, and Octavius first received the Title of Augustus.
Then was that (...) the full reducing of Judaea under Tribute, the first of the
three famous Taxes being then finished in the year just before Octavius
received the Title of Augustus: And by that time, which respects the (...) and
(...) of the Romans to the Jews, Augustus had bestowed on Herod for his
officiousness and serviceableness to him and his Armies, to enlarge his
Dominion, not only what Cleopatra had taken from it, but also Gadara, Hippos,
Samaria, Gaza, Anthedon, Joppa, and Pyrgos Stratonis, and lastly Trachonitis,
Batanaea, and Auronitis, as you may see in Josephus. Which last he tells us, De
Bello Judaico, lib. 1. cap. 17. he gave him (...) after the first Actiacal
Solemnity which was in the beginning of the 188. Olympiad, the year when
Octavius was first called Augustus. And these, I trow, are no little scraps of
bounty (...), but large Lunchions of Munificence. And Herod being thus
possessed of all Judaea, as much as the Israelites ever possessed, he being so
faithful and obliged a Client of Augustus and the Romans, did, which respects
the (...), no question, acknowledge himself and it entirely at the service of
Augustus and the Romans. This certainly is the time that Epiphanius aimed at,
but he counting that the twenty nine years from this time will end in the year
when Augustus was the thirteenth time Consul with his Colleague Sylvanus, that
implies that he made the Victoria Actiaca the Epoch of these twenty nine
years, and so committed a Parepochism, beginning the twenty nine years sooner
than the thing will bear; but counting from the true Epoch of them, which is
the year of Octavius his first being called Augustus, the twenty nine years
will reach into the Consulate of Vinicius and Alfinius, which is not the forty
second year of Augustus from any Epoch, but it is of Herod's Reign from his
first being made King in the Consulate of Calvinus and Pollio. And how
Epiphanius has blundred in this Chronological piece of his, see T. L. his
Recensio, cap. 8.

By the bye I will only note, That though it were admitted that Christ was born
the forty second year of Augustus his Reign from Hirtius and Pansa, and in the
thirteenth Consulate of Augustus, this will not serve the turn of them that
would reckon Daniel's Weeks from the seventh year of Artaxerxes, and so in the
rest of the Computes of the ancient Fathers, taking them from their Epocha's.
And the seventh of Artaxerxes and the twentieth being the only Epocha's in
competition, it is apparent what an infinite advantage the latter has above the
former, the Number of years from a right Epoch suiting with the latter Epoch
of the Weeks, but with the former from none, but runs into Contradictions to
express Scripture.

Sixthly therefore, Irenaeus contra Haereses, lib. 3. cap. 25. says expressly,
Natus est Dominus noster circa primum and quadragesimum annum Augusti Imperii.
And Tertullian adversus Judaeos, cap. 8. Quadragesimo and primo anno Imperii
Augusti nascitur Christus. And Hieronymus on Daniel, cap. 9. Quadragesimo primo
anno Caesaris Augusti Christus natus est in Judaea. To these you may add
Cassiodorus, Sulpicius Severus, and others. So that there is no question but
about this time of the years of Augustus his Reign Christ was born, according
to the Opinion of those Fathers. But now if we deduce these forty one years
from the Consulate of Hirtius and Pansa, they will end in the 4711. year P. J.
From which, if you count thirty years, the time of the Age of Christ when he
was baptized by John, you will make him baptized a year before John began to
preach and baptize. But if you count from the last year of the seventy Weeks
backward (supposing the seventh of Artaxerxes to be the Epoch of them)
Christ's Baptism or Manifestation being in the year immediately preceding the
last week, or at least in the beginning of the first year thereof, Christ will
be baptized in the twelfth or thirteenth of Tiberius, two or three years before
John began to baptize; nor will he be then thirty years old, unless he was born
two or three years sooner than this reckoning the forty one years from the
Consulate of Hirtius and Pansa makes him. So useless and unsuitable for the
adjusting of Daniel's Weeks is this Epoch of Hirtius and Pansa's Consulships.

But there is another most Public Epoch of Augustus his Reign, which was
usually called Era Caesaris, and publicly received in a manner over all the
Empire, unless in Alexandria (see Lydiat's Canones Chronici and his Recensio,
cap. 9.) which is fixed in the Consulate of Claudius Pulcher and Norbanus
Flaccus, from which if you reckon the forty one years of Augustus his Reign, in
the last whereof Irenaeus and the rest of the ancient Fathers say Christ was
born, you will be brought into the Consulship of Aelius Lamia and Servilius
Geminus, the middle year of the middle Tax, which we cannot think harsh to
continue three years, whenas the first of those three famous Taxes recorded in
the Monumentum Ancyranum continued two years, and the last near as much.
Reckoning therefore from this right Epoch of Pulcher and Flaccus, those
Repugnancies I noted before are avoided, and all made coherent and smooth, and
the Authorities of those Fathers made very pregnant for the proving that Christ
was born in the Consulate of Lamia and Geminus.

Seventhly, That Christ was born in the Consulate of Lamia and Geminus appears
from hence. Augustus in the Consulate of Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus
adopted Tiberius, and communicated to him the Tribunitian Power as T. L.
plainly proves out of Velleius Paterculus, and Dion, in his Recensio, cap. 10.
And Petavius places this Adoption of Tiberius and his obtaining Tribunitian
Power under the abovesaid Consuls. Now Eusebius in his Chronicon expressly
places the Nativity of Christ in the year before the Adoption of Tiberius. His
very words are, which relate to the second year of Christ, Augustus Tiberium
and Agrippam in filios adoptavit. But it was proved before to have been done in
the Consulship of Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus, viz. the Consulship
immediately succeeding that of Aelius Lamia and Servilius Geminus. Whence it is
evident, that Christ, according to the Testimony of Eusebius, was born Lamia
and Geminus being Consuls. Which is the forty first year from that notable and
true Epoch, the Consulate of Pulcher and Flaccus. Which if Eusebius had
considered, he would not have placed the Birth of Christ, as he has done, in
his Chronicon, in the forty second year of Augustus his Reign, but in the forty
first, agreeably to what there he cites out of Tertullian, who in his Book
against the Jews affirms, that Christ was born the forty first year of the
Reign of Augustus, though neither he nor Tertullian knew the right Epoch to
count from. But let Eusebius his own Epoch be taken, viz. from the Consulate
of Hirtius and Pansa. Count forty two years thence, and you will fall into the
Consulship of C. Julius Caesar, and L. Aemilius Paulus which is the vulgar
Dionysian Era Christi, and will cast Christ's Crucifixion with them that make
the seventh of Artaxerxes the Epoch of Daniel's Weeks, not into the middle of
the last week, but drive it quite beyond it.

Eighthly and lastly, Thomas Lydiat from those words in Chrysostom, De Natali
Johannis Baptistae, viz. Conceptus est Dominus mense Martio, octavo Calendarum
Aprilium, Luna quinta decima fuit, etc. And from those somewhat before in the
same Homily, Gesta autem sunt ( viz. about the Conception of the Baptist) ante
primum annum Imperii Tiberii Caesaris, etc. who at once, as Tacitus phrases it,
Filius, Collega Imperii and Consors Tribunitiae potestatis ab Augusto assumptus
est; and that (as we heard before) in the Consulship of Aelius Catus and
Sentius Saturninus, from whence, I say, Thomas Lydiat does conclude (forasmuch
as Luna decima quinta joins near to the eighth of the Calends of April, that is
to say, the 25. of March in the year when C. Julius Caesar and L. Aemilius
Paulus were Consuls, which is the 4714. year P. J. and that Luna decima quinta,
and the 25. of March come not so near together for eight years before) that
Christ must be born in the year of these Consuls, of Julius Caesar and Aemilius
Paulus, near the expiration thereof very close to the year of the Consulship of
Vinicius and Alfinius, when the middle Tax began, which Chrysostom, according
to the vulgar Error, took to last but one year, and but for which Error and
the groundless Tradition of Zacharias being High Priest when the Angel spoke to
him, and in the Holiest of Holies, that day being the Feast of Expiation
celebrated in the Month Tizri that answers to the Roman September, he conceives
that Chrysostom would have placed our Savior's Birth really before the Reign
of Tiberius, viz. in the Consulate of Lamia and Geminus: But as he has done, it
gives countenance to this middle Taxes beginning in the year of Vinicius and
Alfinius; I say, though this be witty and ingenious, yet because the Homily is
but dubiae fidei, and according to that passage, it proves no more than that
Christ was born the 4714. year P. J. which is the common Dionysian Era
Christi, and that upon Calculation by Ptolemy's Tables in N. Mulerius, I do not
find that the Luna decima quinta falls in with the 25. of March, no nor yet
with the 27. as Tho. Lydiat would have it, though that discrepancy is too
great, but with the 28. the Novilunium verum falling near within an hour of the
14. of March, if you fit your Computation to the Meridian of Judaea, where
Christ was conceived and born, and add the Tempus Prosthaphaereticum that the
Prosthaphaereses of the Sun and Moon direct to, which is very large: and
lastly, because the Argument is more fine and operose than convictive, I shall
rest content with the seven preceding ones, which without any implicateness or
operosity from Authentic Testimonies and fit Epocha's, confirm to us that the
Ecumenical Tax decreed by Augustus, and mentioned by S. Luke, happened about
the Consulship of L. Aelius Lamia and M. Servilius Geminus. And thus much for
the first Note of the Time of Christ's Birth out of the Evangelist, taken from
the Ecumenical Tax appointed or decreed by Augustus.

CHAP. XIII. That Christ was born in the Consulate of Lamia and Geminus, proved
from the abovesaid middle Tax of Augustus at carried on by Cyrenius in his
first Presidency (...) Syria. A Parepochism committed by Joseph^^ (...) this
matter. A Chronological disposure of certain years for the more assured finding
out the true time of Cyrenius his being first President of Syria, and carrying
on Augustus his middle Tax. A brief Descant thereon. The time of Caius his
going into the East, the main point to guide us to the first Presidency of
Cyrenius and the Nativity of Christ. Proved by many Arguments that Augustus
sent not Caius into the East before his thirteenth Consulate. Cyrenius
appointed Tutor to Caius upon Lollius his death, Vinicius and Alfinius being
Consuls, and upon Caius being unhappily wounded, becomes Governor of Syria
that year, which therefore is his first Presidency over Syria, and the
beginning of his first Tax when Augustus also renewed his Censorian Power in
quartum Decennium. This Tax continuing from Vinicius and Alfinius to the
Consulship of Catus Aelius and Sentius Saturninus. How naturally Christ's Birth
is cast into the Consulate betwixt, it agreeing also so punctually with the
true Epoch of Daniel 's Weeks. That the Temple of Janus was the third time
shut, and Augustus refused the Title of Dominus ( Characters of Christ's
Nativity in Orosius) Lamia and Geminus being Consuls.
THE second Note of Christ's Nativity is taken from the same Tax, but as in
executing by Cyrenius at one of those times when he was Governor of Syria. For
he was two sundry times Governor of that Province, the latter time was after
the Relegation of Archelaus, when his Dominion was added to Syria. Then was he
sent by Caesar (...), that he might carry on the Tax thorough Syria, and sell
the House and Goods of Archelaus. So Josephus, Antiq. Jud. lib. 17. toward the
end. And in the beginning of the next Book, he says that Cyrenius was come into
Syria from Caesar, (...), sent thither, ut Jura populis redderet facultatesque
censeret omnium. And lastly, in the beginning of the third Chapter of the same
Book he tells the very time when Cyrenius ordered this Tax, viz. the 37. year
after the Victoria Actiaca, though he commits a Parepochism therein, counting
from the Victoria Actiaca instead of the eleventh Consulate of Augustus, when
he was first invested with that Sacrosanct Tribunitian Power. Thirty seven
years from thence will cast Herod's death also into the Consulship of Nerva and
Metellus, there being about eight or nine years from Nerva and Metellus's
Consulship to that time. But this is more than enough to prove that there were
two Taxes and two Presidings of Cyrenius over Syria; and these latter being
after Herod's death, and after the Relegation of his Son Archelaus, (...), as
S. Luke calls it, his first Taxing must be that which was in Herod's time, and
near the time of Christ's Nativity. For the knowing the exact time of which we
are to find out the beginning and ending of that time wherein Cyrenius was
first Governor of Syria. Which T. L. to give him his due, has accurately
sifted out, and by authentic Testimonies of Historians proved the matter in
his Recensio, cap. 11, and 12. and orderly digested it in his Series summorum
Magistratuum and Triumphorum Romanorum.

I care not if I set down briefly what things are most material out of him
under the several Consulships under which they are found, prefixing the Julian
Year to each Consulship; As for Example,

Anno Jul. 39. Cl. Tiberius Nero and Cn. Calphurnius Piso being Consuls; Near
the end of this year Augustus conferred upon Tiberius one five years of
Tribunitian Power.

Anno Jul. 40. Laelius Balbus and Antistius Vetus Coss. about the beginning of
this year Tiberius the Son-in-law of Augustus, and his Partner in the
Tribunitian Power, straightways retires to the Island Rhodes, and there as it
were in Exile, spends seven years.

Anno Jul. 44. Caesar Augustus 13. and Plautius Sylvanus Coss. In this year
Augustus dedicates a Temple to Mars, and exhibits noble Spectacles or Shows of
Sword-plays and Sea Fights, exiles his Daughter Julia, the Mother of Caius and
Lucius Caesar's, for her notorious Adulteries and infamous Debaucheries, into
Pandateria, an Island in the Tuscan Sea; And sends Caius, going of his nineteen
years of Age, into Syria and the Oriental Provinces (appointing M. Lollius his
Tutour or Governor) for the Recovering Armenia, which Phraates King of the
Parthians revolting from the Romans, had got possession of.

Anno Jul. 45. Cossus Cornelius Lentulus and L. Calphurnius Piso Coss. In this
year Tiberius, his quinquennial Tribunitian Power being run out, grew anxious
and melancholic after his Visit of Caius at Chios or Samos, whom, by reason of
Lollius his traducing of him, he found not so friendly as heretofore. But
Phraates hearing of Caius his coming, delivered his four Sons to Titius, then
President of Syria, for Hostages to the Romans.

Anno Jul. 46. C. Julius Caesar Vipsanianus and L. Aemilius Paulus Coss. In
this year Caius Caesar and Saraspades, the eldest Son of Phraates, conclude a
Peace in an Island of Euphrates, feasting one another. At what time Lollius his
perfidiousness being discovered by a certain Parthian, he died a few days
after, and hereupon leave was granted to Tiberius to return to Rome. This also
is the year wherein the Temple of Janus was shut the third time by Augustus.

Anno Jul. 47. P. Vinicius and P. Alfinius Varus Coss. Tiberius returns from
Rhodes to Rome six years after he departed thence, and two years after his
Tribunitian Power was expired. And in this year, Lollius being dead, Cyrenius
President of Cilicia is appointed Governor by Augustus to Caius, having
regained Armenia, which he administered prosperously a while, till he chanced to
be wounded by a perfidious Fellow, and became presently unserviceable to the
Public; so that the Prefecture of Syria and the Oriental Provinces necessarily
fell to the Administration of Quirinius or Cyrenius. About this time also
Lucius Caesar, Caius his Brother, died at Marseils, as he was going for Spain.
And Augustus renewed his Censorian Power for a fourth ten years, and so began
his Tax in this, and ended it in the Consulship of Aelius Catus and Sentius
Saturninus.

Anno Jul. 48. L. Aelius Lamia and M. Servilius Geminus Coss. In this year
Caius Caesar returning toward Italy, died in Lycia, and C. Sentius Saturninus
his appointed Successor by Augustus, carries on the Tax which Quirinius begun.
In the year of these same Consuls, as T. L. notes, Hubertus Goltzius collects
out of Dion, Suetonius and Tacitus, that Augustus guarded the Roman Empire with
no less than twenty five Legions of Roman Soldiers distributed through the
Provinces, besides Auxiliaries and numerous Companies of Horse and Foot, and
three great Navies to guard the Seacoasts of Italy and France: And therefore
that there might be without difficulty a perpetual Supply for the maintaining
such vast Forces, that he ordered a Tribute of the hundred and twentieth part,
together with three Overseers of the Treasury.

Anno Jul. 49. Sext. Aelius Catus and C. Sentius Saturninus Coss. In this year
the two young Princes, Lucius and Caius, being dead, that were Tiberius his
Corrivals, Augustus does again impart to Tiberius, after the intermission of
his quinquennial for four years near upon, a decennial Tribunitian Power.

This is the Chronological Disposure of things for these years, according to T.
L. which he makes good from Authentic Testimonies of Historians, such as
Tacitus, Velleius Paterculus, Suetonius, Dion, etc. in his Recensio, cap. 11,
and 12. and the things themselves lie in a very natural order and coherency.
His placing Tiberius his obtaining a quinquennial Tribunitian Power at the end
of the thirty ninth Julian year, is but a small difference from Dionysius
Petavius his placing it out of Dion in the beginning of the fortieth, when
Balbus and Antistius were Consuls. But that makes it the more sure, that Caius
his going into the East to reduce the Parthians, was at least not before the
thirteenth Consulship of Augustus, he being saluted by Tiberius at Samos or
Chios after the expiration of his quinquennial Tribunitian Power. But according
to Suetonius in his Life, Cap. 11, and 12. there being such Transactions
betwixt the expiration of his quinquennial Tribunitian Power, and his saluting
Caius in Samos, as would take up some time; this I conceive made T. L. place
the beginning of that quinquennial Power toward the latter end of Nero's and
Piso's Consulship, rather than about the beginning of the Consulship of Balbus
and Antistius; so that it will come all to one.

And this is the main Point that will conduct us to the true time of Publius
Quirinius or Cyrenius his being Governor of Syria, and the time of the Tax and
Christ's Nativity. Which that it was not some years before the thirteenth
Consulship of Augustus, T. L. in his 12. Chapter of his Recensio makes clearly
out against the Conceits of Scaliger, Petavius, Suslyga, Kepler and others. For
not only Velleius and Suetonius, but Dion also placing the time of Caius his
going into the East after the Banishment of his Mother Julia, it is plain, says
he, from the Age of Julia, that she could not be banished before the thirteenth
Consulship of Augustus. For she was born in the beginning of the Consulship of
Marcus Censorinus and Calvisius Sabinus, and she lived in the favor of
Augustus till she was thirty eight years old, as Macrobius witnesses in his
Saturnalia. But now from Censorinus and Sabinus his Consulship to the
thirteenth Consulship of Augustus, take it inclusively, there is no less than
thirty eight years; so that she could not be banished till then.

Again, Suetonius writes, that five years after her Banishment she was recalled
by Augustus. The time of her being recalled, Dion tells us, was in the
Consulate of Aelius and Sentius, from which Consulate, if you reckon backwards
five years, you will fall again into the thirteenth Consulate of Augustus.

Thirdly, Sempronius Gracchus, one of Julia's Adulterers, and banished to
Circina, an Island in the African Sea, when she was to Pandateria, at the end
of his fourteenth year's Banishment was put to death by Tiberius, Pompeius and
Apuleius being Consuls. Now there are fourteen years distance betwixt the
thirteenth Consulship of Augustus and the Consulship of Apuleius and Pompeius.

Fourthly and lastly, Caius was born Apuleius and Nerva being Consuls, as Dion
notes: and he took his Expedition against the Parthians (Parthe dabis poenas)
when he was about nineteen or twenty, the Age of his Father Augustus when he
gathered an Army, (as was noted above, out of the Monumentum Ancyranum)
according as Ovid tells us in his Complemental Verses to him, Auspiciis
annisque patris puer arma movebis,
Et vinces annis auspiciisque patris.
Wherefore, though he be a false Prophet, yet he is a pleasant Poet and true
Witness of the Age of Caius. Which if he be, the Expedition will naturally fall
into the Consulate of Lentulus and Piso, as is above noted. Then was he on his
Expedition with his Rector or Governor M. Lollius. Whence we see plainly, that
Augustus sent not Caius into the East before his thirteenth Consulate, but that
T. L. his Chronology which I have proposed by Consulships and Julian years, is
true.

Now as we are assured of the time when Caius was upon his Parthian Expedition
by the expiration of Tiberius his quinquennial Tribunitian Power, Anno Jul. 45.
Lentulus and Piso being Consuls, so we are by the same assured that it was the
next year that Caius concluded the Peace with the Parthians, at what time M.
Lollius died, and so fairly gave occasion for a new Tutour to Caius, which
within a competent time Augustus would appoint him. The next year therefore
when Caius had taken possession of Armenia, Publius Quirinius is appointed his
Rector or Tutor, as Tacitus plainly tells us Annal. lib. 3. where speaking of
the Honors conferred upon him, he says, Consulatum sub Divo Augusto, ( viz.
Anno Jul. 34.) mox expugnatis per Ciliciam (of which Province he had the
Prefecture, not of Syria then, else you may be sure Tacitus would not have
omitted so great an Honor) Homonadensium castellis, insignia Triumphi adeptus,
datusque Rector Caio Caesari Armeniam obtinenti. What can be more pat, Cilicia
being near Armenia, nor Quirinius made Caius his Rectour till his Recuperation
of Armenia. But Caius a little time after his ingress into Armenia, being so
unhappily wounded, and grown unfit for the Administration of Affairs, the whole
Government of Syria naturally fell into the hands of Quirinius or Cyrenius this
Anno Jul. 47. when Vinicius and Alfinius were Consuls, and is the year of
Augustus his renewing his Censorian Power in quartum Decennium, so great
congruity there is of things. Here therefore commences the first Presidentship
of Cyrenius over Syria, and here is the beginning of this first Tax in the
first time of his being Governor thereof, and is consequently that very
Ecumenical Tax of Augustus that the Evangelist mentions, and the middle of the
three recorded by Suetonius and the Monumentum Ancyranum, and the Tax wherein
Christ was born, which lasting three Consulships together, (for as it began in
the Consulship of Vinicius and Alfinius, so it ended in the Consulship of
Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus, as was above proved out of Dion; and as
the forepart of it was carried on by Cyrenius, so the latter part of it by
Sentius Saturninus the Consuls Father and Cyrenius his Successor in the
Government of Syria, as appears out of Tertullian)

It is natural therefore and obvious to place the Birth of Christ in the middle
Consulship, viz. that of Aelius Lamia and Servilius Geminus, nothing clashing
therewith in History, and it so fitly complying with the true Epoch of
Daniel's Weeks, the thirtieth Consulate from thence being the thirtieth year of
Christ's Age when he was baptized by John the first year of the last week, and
the Prophecy says expressly, that there were seven weeks and sixty two weeks,
that is, sixty nine weeks from the Decree to build Jerusalem to the Messiah.
Wherefore his Manifestation (which was made at his Baptism) was to be expected
in the first year of the last week, as it did indeed fall out according to this
Compute. Wherefore this Note of Christ's Birth from the carrying on the Tax by
Cyrenius Governor of Syria mentioned in S. Luke, I take to be a firm Argument
to prove that Christ was born Anno Jul. 48. Aelius Lamia and Servilius Geminus
being Consuls. We will add but one Argument more, and then conclude.

The last Argument T. L. uses, is taken from a passage of Paulus Orosius, lib.
6. Histor. adversus Paganos, toward the end. Wherein briefly these two things
are noted, That Christ was born when there was an universal Peace over the
Roman Empire, and the Gates of Janus were the third time shut by Augustus, and
in the year when Augustus refused to be called Dominus, Lord. Orosius his
mistakes in that long Paragraph, it is besides my Scope to take notice of. But
as for those two notable Characters of the time of our Savior's Nativity, we
have noted before that Anno Jul. 46. C. Julius Caesar and L. Aemilius Paulus
being Consuls, Caius Caesar concluded a Peace with Phraates King of the
Parthians, and that the Temple of Janus was the third time shut by Augustus
that year (as it was before twice, the first time in his fifth Consulship,
Sextus Apuleius being Consul with him, and then in his ninth, Junius Silanus
being Consul in the same year) during which Ecumenical calm over the Empire
Christ was born. And if in the year when Augustus refused the style of Lord,
then it must be in the Consulship of Lamia and Geminus, because Dion just in
the same place where he says, that Augustus refused to be called (...) (it is
not (...)) Lord, he says there presently that (...), that his third Decennium
being fully out, he accepted of a fourth. Now that the fourth Decennium of his
Censorian Power began in the Consulate of Aelius Lamia and Servilius Geminus, I
have proved above in the twelfth Chapter. But we had produced Arguments enough
before this to demonstrate, That the Nativity of Christ was indeed Anno Jul.
48. or Anno P. J. 47.16. L. Aelius Lamia and M. Servilius Geminus being Consuls.

CHAP. XIV. Two Objections out of Josephus that would prove that Caius took not
his Expedition into the East till after Herod was dead. (1.) Because Josephus
mentions no Civilities done by Herod to Caius as he passed Judaea. (2.)
Josephus expressly says, that Caius was at that Council that was called at Rome
touching the disposing of Herod 's Kingdom upon his decease. The
Defectuousness, Remisness and Carelessness of Josephus in several things, noted
by Tho. Lydiat and others. His gross mistake in the time of the Commission
granted to Nehemiah noted by the Author. That he cannot be excused from the
distance of Time or remoteness of Country. An Answer to the first Objection.
Whether it was ignorance or dissimulation in Josephus that he writes nothing of
Caius his Expedition into the East. Herod 's Policy in forecasting his journey
to Rome, while Caius went into the East. An Answer to the second Objection,
that supposing there was any Son of Augustus at the abovementioned Council,
Josephus has committed a Misnomer, and set down Caius for Agrippa Posthumus.
Several Allegations out of Historians, that it could not be Agrippa that
Augustus so honored in that Council. Passages out of Tacitus and Dion that
imply that it might be he. That if Josephus did really mean Caius, he must do
it on a ground wherein he grossly contradicts himself, and wherein he was more
obnoxious to Error, than in the other part of the Contradiction. That this
story of Caius his Precedence in the abovenamed Council is no rash fiction of
Josephus, but handsomely furmised upon his committing that notable Parepochism
touching Herod 's Reign.
WE have seen how agreeable that time of the Nativity of Christ, viz. the
Consulship of Lamia and Geminus, which the true Epoch of Daniel's Weeks, from
the twentieth of Artaxerxes, points at, is to History. We should now show in
like manner how agreeable to History the Times of Christ's Manifestation or
Baptism and of his Passion are to be found. But we must first answer an
Objection or two, that seem of great moment against a chief Argument we have
made use of, namely the last but one, which is grounded upon the time of Caius
Caesar's Expedition into the East, when he was made Governor of Syria, and
sent to conclude a Peace with Phraates King of the Parthians (after which it is
concluded on all sides that he never returned again to Rome, but died in the
way when he was returning thither) and supposes that he undertook this
Expedition before the Death of Herod.

Now the main Objections against this, is First, That if Caius had took his
Journey into the East while Herod was alive, since he might needs sail by
Judaea, that Josephus would not have failed to record Herod's Civilities and
Attendances on him, as he does those done to Augustus and Agrippa when they
passed by. And then, Secondly, That Josephus expressly affirms both in his De
Bello Judaico, and also in his Jewish Antiquities, That Caius was at Rome after
the Death of Herod, present at that Meeting called about the dividing Herod's
Kingdom amongst his Sons upon his decease. And therefore Caius his Expedition
into the East being Anno Jul. 44. according to T. L. himself, and Herod dead
the year before, or at least the same year, and Christ born at least the year
before that, or sooner, suppose Anno Jul. 43, or 42. Christ will be born five
or six years before the Consulship of L. Aelius Lamia and M. Servilius Geminus.
And yet the words of Josephus are express, De Bello Judaico, lib. 2. cap. 1, or
4. according to the Greek. There says he, speaking of this matter, that
Augustus considering the Largeness of the Revenues of Herod's Kingdom, and the
Numerousness of his Posterity, (...). which last words in his Antiq. Jud. lib.
17. cap. 11. he varies thus, (...). But the sense is perfectly the same, nor
need (...) in the former be turned into (...).

In Answer to which two Objections we are first to consider whether Josephus,
though he be a worthy Writer, and a Man questionless of neat Wit and
Contrivance; yet whether he be so watchful, diligent and consummate an
Historian, that we must pin our belief on him in every thing he writes. For we
have observed in our eleventh Chapter how repugnantly he has written to himself
touching the Age of Herod and years of his Reign. Petavius in his Rationarium
Temporum does not think him so infallible, careful or diligent, but that he
cries out Part 2. lib. 3. cap. 5. Hic vero Josephi mira est oscitantia, qui
illos ipsos, unde hanc Historiam descripsit, auctores incuriose legit, but how
rightfully I will not here determine. And for the defectuousness of his History
T. L. seems justly to complain thereof when he wholly omitted the Expedition of
Caius Caesar into the East, which yet is a thing as memorable as any thing
almost in that Age, and the Peace which he there concluded with the Parthian,
was the occasion of Augustus his shutting Janus his Temple the third time. Nor
must we omit what T. L. takes notice of in his Recensio, cap. 15. That Josephus
in his Antiquities, lib. 18. cap. 3. affirms, that that Tax in which Quirinius
Governor of Syria sold and confiscated the Goods of banished Archelaus, fell
in the 37. year of the Victoria Actiaca, whenas it is impossible but this
should be the third of those three that Augustus decreed; forasmuch as the
second was carried on and finished Aelius Catus and Sentius Saturninus being
Consuls, as has been above demonstrated, that is to say, in the 34. year of the
Victoria Actiaca, Herod, Archelaus his Father, being then living, as is
manifest out of Sacred Writ. But the third and last Tax was finished a little
before Augustus his Death Pompeius and Apuleius being Consuls in the 44. year
of the Victoria Actiaca. Wherefore it is plain, that either out of ignorance or
oscitancy Josephus, as I have noted before, has committed a Parepochismus, and
taken the Epoch of Augustus his Monarchy simply so understood from the time he
reigned alone, for the Epoch of his absolute Monarchy when he was invested
with that most Sovereign and Sacrosanct Tribunitian Power which was nine years
after the Victoria Actiaca. From that Epoch only it is true that the Tax in
which Quirinius sold and confiscated Archelaus his Goods, fell in the 37. year
of Augustus his Monarchy. In which though the description was made, yet the
Execution was some two years afterward. See T. L. in that Chapter where he
fully makes out the matter.

But I do not love to dwell on such a Theme. I will only add one thing more of
my own Observation. Josephus in his Antiquities, lib. 11. cap. 5. affirms that
that Commission which was granted to Nehemiah for rebuilding Jerusalem was
granted by Xerxes, instead of Artaxerxes, which is a gross Antonomasma. And as
he is out in the Name, so in the Number of the years of the Reign of that
Prince when he granted that Commission, which he makes the twenty fifth,
instead of the twentieth; and then in the extent of the Reign of Xerxes he
makes him to reign twenty eight years, contrary to Ptolemy's Canon, which makes
him reign but twenty one years, and contrary to the Testimony of all other
Historians. And that which was not done till after the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes Longimanus, viz. the rebuilding of the Walls of Jerusalem and the
Palaces thereof, etc. he expressly affirms (...), These things were done in the
Reign of Xerxes. What can be more wild and absurd?

But happily it will be replied, That though he commit such gross mistakes in
times so far removed from the Age he lived in, and in Countries so much remote
from his own, yet he may be more exact in such things as respect his own
Country, and were done so near his own times, as the Affairs of Herod were. But
though Persia was far from Judaea, and the Reign of Xerxes and Artaxerxes far
from the times of Josephus, yet the Records of his own Country, the Books of
Ezra and Nehemiah were near him, and within his reach, one would think, whence
he might have informed himself better, and not committed such gross errors, if
he had not been remiss and careless. And thus much shall serve for the
preparing the way to an Answer to those two main Objections, which we shall be
able now briefly to dispatch.

We answer therefore to the first, That it is an unreasonable thing, Josephus
wholly omitting the Expedition of Caius Caesar into the East, and his making
Peace with Phraates King of Parthia, that we should expect of him the
commemorating any Civilities or Attendances of Herod upon Caius Caesar as he
passed by Judaea, it being a contradiction, the whole entirely omitted, there
should be mention of any part of that affair. This argues a great defect in
Josephus his History, but none in T. L. his arguing in this matter. But whether
Josephus his ignorance, or his dissembling the truth, was the cause of this
great omission, is not so easy to determine. Suetonius in the Life of Augustus
writes of him thus: Caium nepotem quod Judaeam praetervehens apud Hierosolymam
non supplicasset, collaudavit. This pride therefore and contempt of Josephus
his Religion, who was a Jew, might lie in his stomach, and make him omit the
whole business of Caius, for his omitting his duty, as he thought, to the God
of Israel in worshipping him at his holy Temple, as other Grandees of Rome had
done. He avoided the Recording the whole Affair of Caius, that he might not
record this slur put upon his Religion. Or it may be it was out of ignorance of
this affair, it having no complication with Herod's at all; Herod out of
cautiousness and policy, that he might neither offend Caius by omitting any
Civilities he might expect in his passage by Judaea, nor Tiberius his Corrival
by doing them, casting his journey so, that he was on his way to Rome, (which
is the last he made thither) while the other was on his Expedition into the
East, insomuch that Herod was absent from Judaea in that very year when Christ
was born. This T. L. copiously makes out in his Recensio, cap. 14. but it is
little to our present purpose to pursue it any further: Only this I will note
by the bye, that Christ being born this very year of Herod's last journey to
Rome, there are so many things done by Herod after his return recorded by
Josephus, that less than three or four years cannot suffice for the atchieving
the same. Which therefore much confirms the Opinion of the ancient Fathers,
that declare that Herod lived four years after Christ was born.

And now for the other, which is the more weighty Objection, the Answer is
short, but I hope sound. I say therefore, that Josephus in his Narration of
Caius his being present at the Council when the Cause of Herod's Sons was
pleaded, who should succeed him in his Kingdom, (supposing there was any of
Augustus his Sons at that Pleading, which I speak, because no other ancient
Writer I know of mentions it but himself) that he has committed a mere
Antonomasma or Misnomer therein, as he did in attributing such things to Xerxes
which belong to Artaxerxes, and as Epiphanius is observed by Petavius to set
down Claudius instead of Cocceius Nerva (see my Synopsis Prophetica, lib. 2.
cap. 2. sect. 8.) But this Antonomasma of Josephus in this place is more
excusable than those others, every thing exquisitely agreeing saving the Name.
For Augustus might place first in the Council an adopted Son of his born of
Agrippa and his Daughter Julia, but his Name was not Caius, but Agrippa
Posthumus.

Nor could there be the least doubt but that it is an Antonomastick mistake,
but that Writers give such an ill Character of Agrippa Posthumus. As Velleius
Paterculus, lib. 2. Hoc fere tempore, says he, qui eodem die quo Tiberius,
adoptatus ab avo suo naturali, and jam ante biennium qualis esset apparere
coeperat, mira pravitate animi atque ingenii in praecipitia conversus, patris
atque ejusdem avi sui animum alienavit sibi, moxque crescentibus indies vitiis
dignum furore suo habuit exitum. This last I verily conceive is meant for a
justification of Tiberius his killing of him immediately after Augustus his
death, and Velleius is a great Flatterer and high Encomiast of Tiberius every
where in his Writings.

And again Suetonius in the Life of Augustus, cap. 65. mentioning his three
Grandchildren Lucius, Caius and Agrippa: Brevi, (that is, a little after
Augustus had adopted him the same time he did Tiberius) ob ingenium sordidum ac
ferox abdicavit, seposuitque Surrentum, cast him off and confined him to
Surrentum. And then toward the end of that Chapter he says, Agrippam nihilo
tract abiliorem immo indies amentiorem (this in all likelihood is spoken in
imitation of Velleius his [dignum furore suo habuit exitum]) in Insulam
transportavit sepsitque insuper custodia militum.

And lastly, Dion Cassius, lib. 55. describes Agrippa as one that was (...),
and did (...), love to be much on the Sea a fishing, and thence styled himself
Neptunus, that he would reproach Livia as a Stepmother, and mutter against
Augustus (...), as if he had more of his Father Agrippa's Goods than was fit.
For this Carriage therefore he was at last abdicated by Augustus, and banished
into the Island Planasia. These things I thought fit to bring into view, that I
might not seem to trepan any one unawares into an opinion, by concealing what
might make him more shy and wary.

But now that I have produced the worst, let us see what it will amount to. In
all likelihood to no more than Tacitus sets down in the beginning of his
Annals. Senem Augustum Livia devinxerat, adeo ut Nepotem unicum Agrippam
Posthumum in Insulam Planasiam projiceret, rudem sane bonarum artium and robore
corporis stolide ferocem, nullius tamen flagitii compertum. Livia had got
Augustus grown old so much under her girdle, that at last she caused him to
banish Agrippa his only Grandchild against his own inclination into the Island
Planasia; as happily she at first was the cause of his Confinement to Surrentum
for a while. But the affection of Augustus did so firmly cleave to his only
Grandchild left M. Agrippa Posthumus, that he is said, as the same Historian
writes, not long before his death to have given him a private Visit, with some
few he could confide in ( Fabius Maximus accompanying him) at Planasia. Multas
illic utriusque lachrymas and signa caritatis, spemque ex eo fore ut juvenis
penatibus Avi redderetur. ( Dion also lib. 56. speaks to the same purpose,
(...)) Which secret coming out by Martia Fabius his Wife, and Livia knowing
thereof, occasioned her to hasten Augustus his death by poisoned Figs, the
better to secure the Empire to her Son Tiberius. See the full story in Tacitus
and Dion. Wherefore to save Josephus his credit, and to make him mistaken only
nomine tenus, (as Plutarch in his (...), who puts Fulvius for Fabius
abovenamed, in which story it is most manifest how cleaving Augustus his
affection was to his Grandchild Agrippa to the very last) to commit, I say,
only an Antonomastick error T. L. ingeniously supposes that Augustus had not
so little favor for Agrippa Posthumus, but that to see how this might work
upon him, he caused him to be present at the Pleading of the Cause of Herod's
Children, who should succeed; Tiberius being then absent and employed in the
German or Illyrick Wars. Which unexpected eruption of Favor toward Agrippa
might so nettle Livia and her Relations, that thereupon she might the more
forcibly urge Augustus to discard Agrippa toward the latter end of that year,
and banish him into the Island Planasia. This is the only way I know to save
Josephus his credit.

But if it be stood upon, that Josephus did really mean Caius, not Agrippa
Posthumus upon his own supposition or declaration that Herod reigned not above
thirty seven years, or thereabout, and that the beginning of his Reign is from
his first being made King of the Jews by the Roman Senate and Favor of M.
Antony; from whence it follows, that the abovesaid Council held touching the
Succession into Herod's Kingdom, fell out seasonably in the year before Caius
took his Expedition into the East, and so was yet present at Rome, the
Controversy will then come to this: Whether Josephus when he affirms thus, or
whether when he affirms what is plainly repugnant thereto [That Herod was but
about fifteen years of Age when his Father Antipater made him Prefect of
Galilee, (which implies that Herod died about ten years later)] is to be
believed. But this Controversy is sufficiently determined to our hands already
in our eleventh Chapter. Which the Reader may peruse again, if he find it
needful. It is not needful for me to repeat it again here.

CHAP. XV. That Christ was baptized the nineteenth of Tiberius, proved from the
Prophecy of Daniel from the year of Christ's Nativity and his Age when
baptized. Nothing in S. Luke repugnant to Christ's being baptized in the fourth
year of the Baptist 's Ministry, with the childishness of their fancy that
pretend to the contrary. The genuine sense of that expression of S. Paul [ As
John had fulfilled his course.] Four Arguments couched together for the proving
Christ was baptized the nineteenth of Tiberius. Historical passages which
comport with the Baptist 's four years Ministry: As that of the Jews saying to
Christ, Forty six years was this Temple in building, etc. John not beheaded
till Vitellius was Prefect of Syria ( which was in the twenty first of
Tiberius, about two years after he had baptized Christ. That the slaughter of
the Galileans or Samaritans by Pilate was in the last year of his own
Prefecture, and Tiberius his Reign, while Christ was alive.
WE have cleared the time of the Nativity of Christ, and showed how consonant
it is to manifold Testimonies of Authentic History. We proceed now to Christ's
Manifestation or Baptism, which according to the indigitation of the true
Epoch of Daniel's Weeks and History of Scripture, is the year 4745. P. J. and
the nineteenth year of the Reign of Tiberius, the time of the Manifestation of
the Messiah, according to the Prophecy of Daniel, being 69 weeks or 483 years
complete, and Christ, according to the Testimony of S. Luke, being about thirty
years of Age when he was baptized by John the Baptist; which was the time of
his Manifestation, the Holy Ghost then descending upon him in the shape of a
Dove, and a Voice from Heaven witnessing of him, that he was the Messiah the
Son of God. If you reckon inclusively from the Consulship of Lamia and Geminus,
which was in the 4716. year P. J. you will find it just thirty years. Which
alone, the time of the Nativity of Christ being so fully cleared, might assure
us that the Baptism of Christ was in the nineteenth year of Tiberius.

Nor is there any thing in S. Luke's Gospel that contradicts this Chronology of
Christ's Baptism pointed at by the true Epoch of Daniel's Weeks, I mean the
Lydiatean Epoch, which counts the time from the twentieth of Artaxerxes
Longimanus; whenas the Funccian counts from the seventh. Whence the Lydiatean
Epoch has a vast advantage of the Funccian, the Funccian casting the Baptism
of Christ on the thirteenth year of Tiberius, two years before John began to
baptize; which therefore is a plain contradiction to the Testimony of
Scripture. But the Lydiatean places it after the fifteenth year of Tiberius,
according to the Testimony of S. Luke; and though about four years later than
others have placed it, yet consistently enough with the Testimony of S. Luke,
he declaring only that it was after the fifteenth year of Tiberius, not how
many years after the same. But because there is no distinct mention of years
betwixt John's beginning to preach and baptize, and the time he baptized
Christ, they have clapped Christ's Baptism close to the first year, as Children
and Idiots fancy the Sky and Moon or Sun at the Horizon to touch the Earth,
because they see nothing betwixt. But as wise men correct their fancy by
Reason, and in virtue thereof, while the Sky or Moon seems to touch the Earth,
assure themselves it is as distant therefrom as when it is nearer their Zenith:
so considerate persons that ponder with themselves that weighty Province that
lay on John the Baptist's shoulders (as the Angel Gabriel predescribes it to
Zachary his Father, Luke 1.17. And many of the Children of Israel, says he,
shall he turn to the Lord their God, and he shall go before him in the Power
and Spirit of Elias to turn the heart of the Fathers to the Children, and
disobedient to the wisdom of the Just, to make ready a people prepared for the
Lord, that is, for the Lord Christ) they, I say, that rightly consider this,
must needs conclude, that it must be a work of some years to effect it,
especially John working no Miracles, and yet having gained the esteem of the
people so far, by his long and diligent Converse with them, and repeated
Instructions to them (whereby he converted many to a pious sense of their
duties) that they began to conceive that he might be the promised Messiah.

Wherefore Paul being aware of the nature of the Baptist's Province, that he
was to go before the face of the Lord Jesus to prepare the way for his being
acknowledged the promised Messiah, calls the performance thereof the finishing
his course, (...), Acts 13.25. And as John fulfilled his course, etc. Whenas
others out of heedlesness or ignorance have phansied that John went but a
stride or two before our Savior in the Inchoation of their Ministry, like some
Mace-bearer before a Chief Magistrate. But this savours of too much
Idioticalness and Puerility.

We have couched therefore together at least three, if not four Arguments in
one, for the proving that the Baptism of Christ was in the nineteenth year of
Tiberius, not in the fifteenth, as is vulgarly conceited. First, in that it is
the year immediate to the expiration of the sixty nine Weeks of Daniel which
butt upon the Manifestation of the Messiah, according as that Prophecy assures
us: From the going forth of the Decree to rebuild Jerusalem to Messiah the
Prince are seven weeks and sixty two weeks, Dan. 9.25. Secondly, in that it is
the first year in the last week wherein the Messiah is predicted to make a
Covenant with many. Thirdly, in that it is the thirtieth year of Christ's Age,
and so many years there are from the Consulship of Lamia and Geminus to the
nineteenth year of Tiberius. And lastly, it being requisite for so great an
Undertaking as John the Baptist's was, to have some number of years to perform
it in, and not to tie our Savior's Baptism up to the first year of John's
baptizing, no more than the Baptist's imprisoning and beheading, which no man
will say was in the same year he began to baptize, because the year it was done
in is not mentioned, but the nature of the thing requiring some years, we are
to be determined for the number by the Prophecy, which plainly points out the
nineteenth of Tiberius for the Messias's Manifestation, which was at John's
baptizing him. Whence it is manifest, that the whole course of the Baptist, as
S. Paul calls it, was about four years. In which, though things are not
digested into Annals, questionless John bestirred himself notably in the
discharging of his Province. The Heads only of his Actions are set down Luke 3.
where at last he concludes, And many other things (besides what was written)
preached he in his exhortations to the people.

But though there be no distinct History of each year of the Baptist's
Ministry, yet there are many passages of History that comport with this four
years extension of his Ministry before he baptized Christ; namely, that he
baptized him in the nineteenth year of Tiberius. Which first, that passage in
S. John seems to imply, Joh. 2.19. Jesus said unto them, Destroy this Temple,
and in three days I will raise it up. Then said the Jews, Forty and six years
was this Temple in building, and will thou rear it up in three days? This
passage was when Christ was come to the first Passover ensuing his Baptism,
which was in the month Marchesvan or Dius of the Syromacedones, which takes in
some few days of October, but the rest runs into November. And Tiberius
beginning his Reign in Autumn, it is manifest this first Passover was within
the same year that Christ was baptized. Which we say is the nineteenth of
Tiberius, and that this passage in the Gospel confirms the same. For this is
most certainly spoken of Herod's Temple, the other Temple being demolished, and
that built instead thereof. The words of Josephus are express, Antiq. lib. 15.
cap. 14. (...). Besides that Chronologers are horribly out in their endeavors
of adjusting the number of years to the other. Wherefore this must be spoke of
Herod's Temple. And the time that this Temple was begun to be built is the
eighteenth year of Herod's Reign. Some make the Epoch of this his Reign to be
in the year of the Consulship of Agrippa and Caninius, when by the help of
Sosius against Antigonus, Herod took Jerusalem, and so possessed himself of the
Metropolis of his Kingdom. But besides that this Epoch is more obscure and
slight than those other two, the first when by the Favor of Antony, the other
of Augustus he was made King of Judaea, it falls a year or two short even of
the fifteenth of Tiberius, till when John did not baptize at all. But the
Epoch of his first being made King of the Jews, namely by M. Antony, that is
yet more impertinent, and anticipates the fifteenth of Tiberius four or five
years.

Wherefore there is a necessity of reckoning Herod's eighteen years, from his
being made King by Augustus, or from the Victoria Actiaca. And from the
eighteenth year of his Reign from this Epoch (which will fall into the year of
the Consulship of Claudius Nero and Quintilius Varus) to the nineteenth year of
Tiberius is just forty five years. So that the Jews reckoned right within a
single year. Which the Authority of Josephus, and the infallible Testimony of
Daniel's Prophecy may very well have a right to rectify. Or for their better
credit we may conceive (forasmuch as Herod is said, ( De Bello Judaico, lib. 1.
cap. 16.) by Josephus to have done something to the Temple the fifteenth year
of his Reign, before he undertook this vast Design mentioned before) that in
the two or three years space preceding, whatever doing or undoing of things
there were, they might guess upon the whole Compute, that there was a years
furtherance toward the building of the Temple before the commencement of this
grand Enterprise indeed, which added antecedently to forty five years makes
forty six, nor disturbs the years of the right Epoch, but adjusts all well,
and makes all three agree, Daniel, Josephus, and the Jews that made this smart
Repartie to our Savior. They having so fair a Plea for it, it is no wonder
they stretched one single year above the time from the right Epoch of
Numbering. But in the mean time it is evident, that this is no mean proof for
the placing the Baptism of Christ in the nineteenth year of Tiberius.

Again, T. L. in his Recensio, cap. 19. out of Josephus makes it plain, that
John the Baptist was not beheaded till about the time that Vitellius was
Prefect of Syria. Now Lucius Vitellius, as appears out of the sixth Book of
Tacitus his Annals, was made Governor of the East, Cestius Gallus and
Servilius Rufus being Consuls about the midst of the twenty first year of
Tiberius. Wherefore John the Baptist, who lived not quite two years after his
baptizing Christ, could not be killed before the beginning of the one and
twentieth of Tiberius. Which therefore plainly argues, that he baptized Christ
in the nineteenth year of his Reign.

Thirdly and lastly, Luke 13. there is mention of some that told Jesus of the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices. Which abundance as
well of the Protestant Writers as the Pontifician, look upon to be the same
persons that those Samaritans were, of whom Josephus and Hegesippus write, the
former Antiq. lib. 18. cap. 5. the other lib. 2. cap. 5. De excidio
Hierosolymitano, that Pilate slew them when they met together to sacrifice on
Mount Gerazim. For Pilate, as Hegesippus intimates, made as if he had a mind
Eorum mysteria cognoscere. But the Samaritans or Galileans intending to
sacrifice, though they were cut off by Pilate before they had ascended the
Hill, and were in the very Act, Fame, that loves to add to things of this
nature, what may make them more Tragical, astonishing and surprising, might
phrase it so, that they mingled their blood with their Sacrifices, and tell
that they were slain in the very Act of sacrificing. These two stories are so
exceeding like one another, that a sagacious Spirit, notwithstanding the little
difference in some things, will easily acknowledge them the same. For that
difference of Name, those in S. Luke calling them Galileans, whenas Josephus
and Hegesippus call them Samaritans, is but a slight business, since the same
persons may be both Samaritans and Galileans at once, by Religion Samaritans,
by Country Galileans, and such T. L. contends these were, and observes how our
Savior himself was termed in this very respect a Samaritan sometimes as well
as Galilean. And for the difference of time, that is only an imaginary
difference, which prejudice has conceived through mistake. For they have only
phansied the story of Josephus and Hegesippus to be some four or five years
later than that which those tell of the Galileans in S. Luke, because they have
presumed that our Savior's Passion was so many years sooner than indeed it was.

But this very Narration in Josephus does T. L. make use of, and that
rationally and judiciously to prove that our Savior was alive till about the
middle of the twenty second year of Tiberius, forasmuch as Josephus in the
forenamed place does write, that the Chief of the Samaritans by Religion, and
Galileans by Nation (and that was the cause of Pilate and Herod's falling out,
that Pilate would presume to do execution upon persons that belonged to Herod's
Jurisdiction, and they were Friends again upon Pilate's sending Christ a
Galilean to Herod, Luke 23.12.) addressing, I say, themselves to Vitellius
Governor of Syria, accused Pilate of the Murder committed on these Galileans.
Whereupon Vitellius sending his Friend Marcellus to be Procurator of Judaea,
commands Pilate to pack to Rome to answer his Accusers there before the
Emperor. Whereupon Pilate not daring to do otherwise, betakes himself to his
journey; but before he arrived at Rome, the Emperor Tiberius died. Whence,
says T. L. As this address of the Samaritans or Galileans could not be made
before toward the end of the Summer of that year wherein Plautius Laelianus and
Papinius Gallienus were Consuls, Vitellius then being returned out of
Mesopotamia from the Parthick War, which held two Summers from the beginning of
his Prefecture ( quae duabus aestatibus gesta conjunxi, says Tacitus, Annal.
lib. 6.) which Prefecture commenced in the midst of the 21. of Tiberius; so it
appears manifestly, that the slaughter was committed by Pilate within the last
year of his own Prefecture and Tiberius his Reign. Which therefore was a little
before the Crucifixion of Christ, and consequently both in the twenty second
year of Tiberius in the midst of the last week of Daniel. Which again
necessarily casts the Baptism of Christ into the ninteenth year of Tiberius.
Atque haec ratio est in primis valida, says T. L. and I think any one that
considers things freely and without prejudice, will be of his mind.

CHAP. XVI. What Arguments prove Christ crucified the twenty second of
Tiberius, prove him baptized the nineteenth; and the Ministry of John to have
continued four years before. That Christ suffered the twenty second of Tiberius
proved out of Epiphanius: As also from what is said Joh. 11.49. That Caiaphas
was High Priest that year. And likewise from Pilate 's not acquainting Tiberius
with the News of Christ's Resurrection till the twenty second of his Reign. The
Baptism of Christ in the nineteenth of Tiberius proved from the troubles that
fell upon the Jews in the third of Caius Caligula. From the Tradition of
Apollonius, that Christ charged the Apostles not to preach the Gospel to the
Gentiles till twelve years after the commencement thereof. From Paul 's
journeying from Antioch to Jerusalem when Herod King of Chalcis dyed. The
mistake of Eusebius and some others that confound the story of Herod in the
Acts with that of Agrippa in Josephus. From there being fourteen years since
Paul 's Conversion in the eleventh of Claudius. From Paul 's departing from
Athens to Corinth, being not till after the twelfth of Claudius. From the time
of Gallio 's being Deputy of Achaia, which could not be till after Claudius his
death. From the ten years of Felix his Presiding over Judaea. From Peter 's
suffering Martyrdom in the eleventh year of Nero, when he had been possessed of
the Sacerdotal Chair twenty five years from the expiration of the twelve years
restraint of the Apostles from preaching to the Gentiles. A further
Confirmation thereof out of the Chronicle of Marcellinus Comes. The Unjustness
of that Imputation, that T. L. his account of the Epoch of Daniel 's Weeks, is
a Fiction destitute of History.
THE three last Arguments for the proving Christ's Baptism to have been the
nineteenth of Tiberius his Reign, were drawn from such passages as fell out
betwixt the Baptism of Christ and his Crucifixion; those that follow are such
as prove the Crucifixion of Christ to fall out in the twenty second of
Tiberius, or Manifestation in the nineteenth. And here note, That whatever
Arguments prove that Christ was crucified in the twenty second year of
Tiberius, ipso facto prove he was baptized in the nineteenth of his Reign; it
being generally acknowledged, that the time of Christ's Ministry after his
Baptism till his Crucifixion is about three years and an half. So that though
the time of the Baptist's Ministry be not digested into so many distinct years
in the Evangelists, yet there are so many distinct Arguments to prove it lasted
from the fifteenth of Tiberius till the nineteenth of his Reign, that it may
well compensate that defect, and assure us that the Paradox is true.

First then, Epiphanius in his (...), where he makes Herod the Tetrarch, who
was present at Jerusalem the time that Christ was crucified, to succeed
Archelaus after his nine years Reign, declares expressly, (...), etc. i. e. In
the twentieth year of Herod the Tetrarch our Savior suffered, etc. Now
Eusebius in his Chronicon, and Sulpicius Severus, Histor. Sacrae lib. 2.
ascribe to Herod the Tetrarch twenty four years after the Banishment of
Archelaus; And Josephus, Antiq. lib. 19. cap. ult. tells us, that Caius added
his Tetrarchy to the Kingdom of Agrippa about the beginning of the fourth year
of his Reign, about the middle of the twenty fourth year from the second year
of Tiberius his Reign complete. From hence therefore reckon twenty years, and
you shall fall into the twenty second of Tiberius. So that Epiphanius declaring
that Christ suffered in the twentieth year of Herod the Tetrarch after the
Banishment of Archelaus, does therewith subscribe to Tho. Lydiat's Opinion,
that our Savior suffered the twenty second of Tiberius his Reign.

Secondly, Joh. 11.49. There Caiaphas is said to be High Priest that year. And
so he was for several years before, as may appear out of Josephus. Wherefore it
naturally implies, that that was the last year of his being High Priest, and
that in the year following he should be put out of his Office, as he was by
Vitellius near the time of Tiberius his Death, and Jonathan put in his room.
And so within a year after he had delivered Christ upon pretense of Blasphemy
to Pilate the Roman President to be crucified, himself was deprived of his
High-Priestood, Pilate of his Presidentship of Judaea, and the Emperor
Tiberius of the pleasures of this present life, of which with him Lust and
Cruelty was no small share.

Thirdly, Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 2. cap. 1. tells us how
Pilate wrote to Tiberius to acquaint him with that astonishing Miracle that had
happened in Judaea, viz. our Savior Christ his Resurrection from the Dead, and
his Assumption or Ascension into Heaven. Which thing being so notable and so
certain, according to the custom of the Provincial Magistrates it was
impossible but Pilate should acquaint Tiberius with it so soon as it was done.
But he did not acquaint him with it by Letters till the twenty second or toward
the twenty third year of Tiberius his Reign, according to Eusebius his own
Chronicon, where he sets it down last in the twenty second year of Tiberius.
Wherefore Christ did not rise again and ascend into Heaven, nor consequently
suffer till the twenty second of Tiberius.

Fourthly, As these three last Arguments by proving the time of Christ's
Crucifixion and Resurrection, prove also the time of his Baptism and
Manifestation; so there are other Arguments taken from the time of the
Expiration of Daniel's last Week, wherein he tells us the Messiah will make a
Covenant with many (intimating a more peaceful condition of the Jews for those
seven years) that argue the Manifestation of the Messiah or his Baptism to be
in the nineteenth of Tiberius. Eusebius in his Chronicon tells us, that Caius
Caligula in the third year of his Reign, Petronio Praefecto Syriae praecepit ut
in Hierosolymis statuam suam sub nomine Jovis Optimi Maximi poneret. Nay, he
says, Toto orb Romano in Synagogis Judaeorum statuae and imagines and arae C.
Caesari consecratae. What a Cloud of mischief does there appear for the Jews
just upon the expiration of the seventieth or last Week of Daniel? For the last
year of that week was the year going before from the true Epoch of Daniel's
Weeks. But about this very time the Jewish Ambassadors from Alexandria, Egypt
and Cyrene, come to Rome to complain of the denying of the Immunities granted
heretofore by the Ptolemies, were most injuriously and contumeliously dealt
with, and grievously handled even before the Emperor, as Philo Judaeus
reports. And Josephus writes, that about the same time ( Antiq. lib. 28. cap.
12.) in Seleucia and Ctesiphon, two chief Cities of Babylonia and Mesopotamia,
there were above fifty thousand Jews slain, and the rest expelled and banished
out of most of the Cities of those Countries. Which beginning of misery to the
Jewish Nation commencing then just at the expiration of the last week, is no
mean confirmation that the weeks expired the year before, and that therefore
Christ was baptized, or the Messiah manifested the seventh year before that,
viz. in the nineteenth of Tiberius.

Fifthly, Something like to this way of arguing is that other of T. L. from a
Tradition recorded in Eusebius his Historia Ecclesiast. lib. 5. cap. 16. from
Apollonius: Dominum Apostolis suis praecepisse ne ante duodecim annorum
terminum Hierosolymis discederent. Which were a childish thing to conceive our
Savior meant grossly of the City Jerusalem, but of the Nation of the Jews, that
they should not preach the Gospel to the Gentiles till twelve years after the
beginning of the preaching thereof. Which we all know was begun by John the
Baptist in the fifteenth year of Tiberius. Now the twelfth year from the
fifteenth of Tiberius is the third year of Caius Caligula, and under this year
does Spondanus place the Conversion of Cornelius the Centurion by Peter. Hoc
anno, says he, Caio iterum and Apronio Consulibus Petrus Apostolus divina
visione omnigenarum animantium de ostio Ecclesiae Gentibus aperiendo monitus
primum omnium Gentilem Cornelium Centurionem baptizavit. Now Alstedius and
others place the Conversion of Cornelius the Centurion in the fifth year after
Christ's Passion and Ascension. Wherefore reckon backward from the third year
of Caius, and the fifth year falls into the twenty second of Tiberius, which
again argues the Baptism of Christ to have been in the nineteenth of Tiberius.
There are yet several other Arguments to evince the same, from matters done by
S. Paul some four years later than Chronologers vulgarly deem them. Wherefore
add these four years to the eighteenth year of Tiberius, wherein Petavius and
others will have Christ to have been crucified, and we shall find him crucified
in the twenty second of Tiberius, and consequently baptized in the nineteenth.

Sixthly therefore, Herod mentioned in the Acts, who was King of Chalcis, and
invested by Claudius with a Power over the Temple at Jerusalem and the
High Priesthood, and upon that might the better presume to put James the
Apostle, the Brother of John, to death, and Peter into prison: This Herod,
Josephus expressly tells us died in the eighth year of the Reign of Claudius.
But Paul, as it appears in the Acts of the Apostles, brought the Contribution
of the Christians of Antioch to Jerusalem, upon the account of a general Famine
at that time when this Herod is said to be eaten up of worms. Wherefore this
journeying of Paul from Antioch to Jerusalem, which Chronologers ordinarily
place in the fourth year of Claudius, being found to be in the eighth, it must
needs pull down the whole Series of S. Paul's actions four years lower than
ordinarily they are set. And his Conversion must not be in the twentieth year
of Tiberius, as Petavius would have it, but in the first of Caius Caligula; and
all being agreed, there is but about two years distance from the Passion of
Christ and Paul's Conversion, Christ must suffer in the twenty second of
Tiberius, and be baptized in the nineteenth.

It is true that Eusebius, Histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 2. cap. 12. makes this
Herod in the Acts the same person with Agrippa, of whom Josephus tells a story
of his death somewhat like this in the Acts touching Herod; but for the greater
grace of the business, he converts the Owl there mentioned sitting on an
extended Rope into an Angel, and in the end confesses that either the Party of
whom the story is told, had two Names, or the Scribe out of mistake set down
Agrippa for Herod. But this ancient Writer leading the way, the generality of
Interpreters have followed him, Erasmus, Grotius and several others. But how
considerately, I appeal to the judicious and unprejudiced Reader. For the Case
stands thus: Agrippa and Herod were two Brothers, and both Kings, and had those
distinct Names to be known by, and it is a Fiction that all the Progeny of
Herod the Great were called Herod's, they succeed him in their distinct Names,
Archelaus, Herod and Philip. And Archelaus being dead, Herod and Philip as
surviving Tetrarchs, are mentioned in their proper Names, Luke 3. and so
questionless this Herod in the Acts (Brother to Agrippa) that was (...), eaten
by worms, is called by his proper Name, as well as the former. And we may be
the more assured of it that it was not his Brother Agrippa but he, because it
had been an unspeakable injury to Herod to have his Name used in a wrong place,
if those actions of murdering John, and imprisoning of Peter, and acting these
Cruelties to please the people, and dying so execrable and ignominious a death,
belonged to Agrippa, and not to him. What can be more intolerable than such a
conceit as this? Besides that Josephus gives a very fair Character of Agrippa
inconsistent with that Cruelty that is noted in Herod. And Agrippa not guilty
of that murderousness and persecution of the Church which this Herod was, it
must seem a very severe hand of God upon him to be so horribly punished for not
rebuking the people for a Complement, which signifies no more, than that he
seemed to them like an Angel of God, who are called (...). And so they explain
themselves, that they looked upon him (...), not that he was thought or called
by them the Eternal God, but assimilated to an immortal Angel. Achish, 1 Samuel
19.9. says as much to David, I know thou art good in my sight, as an Angel of
God; and yet David reproves him not, nor is struck by the hand of God for not
reproving him. All these things duly consisidered may assure any one, that it
was not this Agrippa that was thus eaten up with worms, but Herod King of
Chalcis, his Brother, and that whenas the story belonged to one of the two
Brothers, Josephus has happened out of heedlesuess or ignorance to apply that
manner of death, though in somewhat a depraved disguise, to Agrippa that
belonged to his Brother Herod; as Tacitus has also happened to apply the year
of Herod's death to Agrippa. Such slips there will be in Historians. But
careful and judicious Readers of them, such as T. L. was, will discern where
the Truth lies.

Seventhly therefore, Forasmuch as the former journeying of S. Paul from
Antioch to Jerusalem at the time when Herod died, viz. in the eighth year of
Claudius, is about three years distant from his latter which he took to
Jerusalem from Antioch about the Controversy touching Circumcision, upon which
occasion a Synod was called at Jerusalem, where Paul also was present, Acts 15.
which journeying of Paul, as appears from Galat. 2. was fourteen years after
his Conversion, as Vatablus expressly declares upon the place: It is manifest,
that in the eleventh year of Claudius it was fourteen years since the
Conversion of S. Paul. Tell therefore from the eleventh of Claudius backward
till you come to the fourteenth year, and you fall into the second year of
Caius Caligula. Then therefore was Paul converted. But all are agreed it was
but about two years after the Passion of Christ. Whence therefore again it will
be found that Christ suffered in the twenty second of Tiberius, and was
baptized in the nineteenth year of his Reign.

Eighthly, In the Acts, Chap. 18. there Paul having departed from Athens came
to Corinth, and finds Aquila and Priscilla Jews lately come from Italy, because
Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome, as Suetonius also notes in
the Life of Claudius. But that these Stirs and Decree were about the twelfth
year of Claudius, Josephus informs us, Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 5. where presently
upon the story of those Stirs raised in Judaea by the Jews and Samaritans,
several of whom were sent to answer it before the Emperor at Rome, which gave
Claudius occasion, as Orosius intimates, to make that Decree of expelling the
Jews out of the City, presently: I say, upon that story Josephus says, (...),
etc. And having completed the twelfth year of his Reign (and therefore going
on his thirteenth) he bestowed Philip's Tetrarchy on Agrippa junior (Newphew to
Herod King of Chalcis) and Batanaea and Trachonitis with Abila, which was the
Tetrarchy of Lysias, but took from him Chalcis when he had been Ruler of it
four years, as succeeding his Uncle Herod, who died in the eighth year of
Claudius his Reign, as was observed above. Which shows plainly, that the Stirs
and the Decree against the Jews, to send them packing from Rome, was in the
twelfth of Claudius his Reign. Which Stirs of the Jews and Samaritans, Tacitus
(Annal. lib. 12.) places under the Consulship of Faustus Sylla and Salvius
Otho, who bore that Office in the twelfth of Claudius his Reign. Wherefore
Paul's departure from Athens to Corinth being not till after the twelfth of
Claudius completed, which is three or four years later than Spondanus, Petavius
and others place it, they placing it in the ninth year of Claudius, the Series
of the Acts of Paul will bring down his Conversion about three or four years
later, and consequently the Crucifixion and Baptism of Christ.

Ninthly, It is written Acts 18. v. 12. And when Gallio was Deputy of Achaia,
the Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul, etc. Now there was
that Enmity betwixt Claudius and Gallio the Brother of Seneca (both which are
famous for their scoffings at, or rather uttering bitter Sarcasms against
Claudius when he was dead, Seneca writing a Satyr against him which he called
(...), which may signify either as much as (...) (both alluding to (...), or
being made a God after death) his either being killed by a poisoned Mushrom,
and sent up to Heaven thereby, or else by Transmigration, his being after death
transformed into a Fungus or Mushrom, both bitter Sarcasms upon his being
poisoned by Agrippina by a Mushrom which Locusta had prepared for him; And
Gallio's was a brief but as bitter a Sarcasm, when he said, (...), Claudium
unco raptum fuisse in coelum, alluding to the usage of Malefactors put to death
in the Prison, who were dragged with Iron hooks into the streets, and so at
last cast into Tyber. And that of young Nero, Agrippina's Son, who succeeded,
falls not much short of the two other, who, as Dion tells ( lib. 60.) (...),
That Mushroms were the meat of the Gods, forasmuch as Claudius by eating one,
had become a God) There being therefore, I say, this compliance of Seneca and
Gallio with Agrippina and Nero, and feud and enmity against Claudius, you may
be sure Gallio got no preferment while Claudius was alive, nor missed of it he
once being dead, and therefore was made Deputy of Achaia within the very first
year of Nero, upon Claudius his death, who reigned thirteen years and eight
months. Wherefore Paul's departure from Corinth (where he is said to have
stayed a year and six months, Acts 18.11.) cannot be till then, till about the
end of the first year of Nero. Which therefore is a Ratification of the time of
his Arrival there, and implies more roundly that it was four years later than
Spondanus and Petavius place it.

Tenthly, Acts 24. (...), etc. But after two years Porcius Festus came into
Felix his room. Surely most naturally this (...) must refer either to Felix or
Paul, they being the Persons spoken of, not to Nero, of whom there is no
mention; nor to Paul, for though in bonds, yet being in libera custodia, he
would not have been idle, nor the story omit his acts that interim from his
Sermon to Felix and Drusilla till Felix went out of his Office, which certainly
he continued in many years above two, as is implied v. 10. Wherefore it is
hugely credible that we should read (...), that is, the ten years being
finished that Felix had been Governor of Judaea, Porcius Festus succeeded him.
For that Felix had by this time been President ten years, appears thus:

Josephus in his Life declares of himself, that he was born in the first year
of the Reign of Caius, and that being full twenty six years old he came to Rome
to free certain Jewish Priests of his acquaintance that Felix had sent thither
while he was President of Judaea, that he did effect his business by the Favor
of Poppaea, Nero's Wife. Wherefore Josephus being born the first year of Caius,
he was twenty six years of Age about the eighth year of Nero's Reign, Marius
and Asinius being Consuls; At what time Tacitus relates Annal. lib. 14. that
Poppaea was married to Nero. Now this sending of these Priests to Rome by
Felix, being at the end of his Presidency (for these Priests he sent being
Josephus his special Friends [(...)] he differred no time for their
deliverance) it is plain that Felix was President of Judaea about ten years,
and that Festus succeeded him in the seventh of Nero's Reign, not the second,
and that therefore Paul's being brought bound to Rome, is full four years later
than Petavius has placed it, who places it in the third year of Nero, Volusius
Saturninus and Cornelius Scipio being Consuls. See Helvicus, Funccius and
Calvisius that place the beginning of Felix his Presidency in the third year of
the 207. Olympiad, and the eleventh of Claudius; and Tacitus, who leaps from
Felix to Florus, taking no notice of Festus and Albinus, by reason of their
short stay in Office. Paul's being brought bound to Rome therefore being four
years later, his Conversion is necessarily four years later, not in the
twentieth of Tiberius, as Petavius has put it, but in the second of Caius.
Whence Christ's Crucifixion is again in the twenty second of Tiberius, and his
Baptism in the nineteenth.

This is a pregnant proof, out of which there is no evasion, unless, with
Baronius, we will impute ignorance to Josephus of those things himself was an
Actor in, and say he knew not his own Age, but mistook five or six years, which
is next to the not knowing his own Name, as T. L. has well noted against
Baronius.

Lastly, (for it were too long to bring all T. L. his Arguments into view) It
is acknowledged by Petavius, contended for by T. L. and proved out of Tacitus,
that the first Persecution (which was under Nero) was in the eleventh year of
his Reign, Lecanius Bossus and Licinius Crassus being Consuls. The occasion to
which Persecution was Nero's own burning of Rome, which horrid Fact he would
have cast upon the Christians to conceal himself. Ergo abolendo rumori Nero
subdidit reos, and quaesitissimis poenis affecit quos vulgus Christianos
appellabat, etc. Igitur primi correpti qui fatebantur, deinde indicio eorum
multitudo ingens, haud perinde in crimine incendii quam odio humani generis
convicti sunt, etc. Wherefore the Christians being so universally hated, and
Peter and Paul being then at Rome, and the great Sticklers for and Promoters of
that Religion it is incredible but they went to pot with the first; besides
that this cruel Freak of Nero seems, out of Tacitus, to be but one continued
Act of his, the abovenamed Lecanius and Licinius being Consuls. Peter
therefore suffered Martyrdom in the eleventh year of Nero. But in Eusebius his
Chronicon, lib. 1. and also in S. Jerome in the Life of S. Peter, Peter is said
to have been possessed of the Sacerdotal Chair twenty five years at his death.
But where he was possessed of it, at Antioch or Rome, and from what time,
whether from the last of Tiberius, or from the second or third of Claudius, or
from what other time, is uncertain and controversial; yet this in general seems
less dubitable, that this twenty five years is his time of his Apostleship,
since the Apostles dispersing themselves upon the expiration of the twelve
years, that our Savior is said to restrain them to Jerusalem, or rather to the
Nation of the Jews. What so likely an Epoch of the twenty five years as this?
And if you count from the eleventh of Nero till twenty five backwards, you fall
into the fourth of Caius Caligula, which immediately succeeds the expiration of
the twelve years abovesaid: so that the fourth of Caius is the Epoch of
Peter's Cathedra Sacerdotalis. Which yet is further confirmed out of the
Chronicon of Marcellinus Comes, who writes that, Indictione tertia, Philoxenus
and Probus being Consuls ( Helvicus calls him Probinus, and places them in the
year of our Lord 525.) Pope John came to Constantinople in the 485 year of the
Sessions of the Popes of Rome from Peter. Now, what is an easy concession, if
we but suppose these five hundred twenty five years, and four hundred eighty
five complete, so that it may imply the two hundred fifty six, and four hundred
eighty six current, Philoxenus and Probus or Probinus being Consuls, if you
count but from that Consulate four hundred eighty, six years backwards, you
will again fall into the fourth year of Caius, and then, as was noted in the
fifth Argument, the twelfth year of the Apostles restraint to the Jewish
Nation, being the fifth from Christ's Ascension, it is again manifest that
Christ suffered in the twenty second of Tiberius, and was baptized in the
nineteenth.

And thus there being so many happy hits in Historians and Chronologers
comporting and complying with the Times of the Baptism and Passion of our
Savior pointed to by the true Epoch of Daniel's Weeks, namely the twentieth
of Artaxerxes Longimanus in T. L. his sense, which we have explained and made
out in the 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 Chapters of this Book, no man can with any
reason say, that Thomas Lydiat's Account of Daniel's Weeks is a Figment
destitute of History. That those that make choice of that other Epoch, the
seventh of Artaxerxes, produce Historians and Chronologers of their side also,
is with all readiness acknowledged. Nor is there any Point controverted in
Chronology and History, but there must be such Testimonies alleged on both
sides, else it could be no Controversy. But the main Allegations of the
adverse Party, and on which the greatest stress of their Opinion lies, have
been sufficiently answered by us above, even keeping our selves within the
bounds of humane Testimony. But the weight of our second Postulatum being added
thereto, which I have set down in the first Chapter, shows their pretense to be
infinitely light and vain. So that I hope the unprejudiced and considerate will
easily perceive and acknowledge that the genuine Epoch of Daniel's Weeks is
rightly settled and determined for ever to the Glory of God, the Edification of
his Church, and the immortal Credit of Thomas Lydiat, a learned, industrious
and faithful Member thereof, and painful Protestant Minister of the Church of
England. To abet whom in so rightful a Cause, I thought but a piece of Justice
due to Him, to the Truth, and to the Honor of our English Church and Nation.

CHAP. XVII. A Tripartition of a Letter to a Friend touching the first
Resurrection and the Calling of the Jews. The first part thereof. What
Exposition the most easy and natural. That the primitive Fathers following
this Rule expounded the first Resurrection in a Physical sense, not Political.
That Grotius also expounds it so, but in what deficient. An Objection from two
places of Scripture [Luke 14.14.] and [2 Timothy 4.8.] An Answer to the first. Who
as well as Martrys capable of the first Resurrection? An Answer to the second.
What meant by the Day of Christ's appearing. That it may be the time of his
Millennial Kingdom. That the Martyrs receive their reward in the Morning of
that day. Others at the Evening thereof.
SIR,
I Have received yours, and am glad that you have reaped that satisfaction in
reading my Exposition of the Apocalypse, that you profess you have, saving in
that one passage, Chap. 20. v. 4, 5, 6. where I take the first Resurrection
applied to the Martyrs in a literal sense. I am glad so good a Wit and Judgment
as yours rests satisfied in the rest. I shall therefore endeavor to convince
you, that my Exposition in this passage is as easy, natural and smooth as in
others. For I conceive that Exposition is most easy and natural that has the
least tricks and devices in it, and runs not from the proper signification of
Words to Allegories and Metaphors, when there is no necessity so to do. Which
Rule in this very place the Primitive Christians followed, being persuaded from
hence, that a first Resurrection in the proper sense was the peculiar
Privilege of the Martyrs, from which persuasion they were also the better
encouraged to suffer Martyrdom. And I appeal to your self, supposing there were
such a first Resurrection belonging to the Martyrs, whether the words of the
Text do not exquisitely well fit it, which therefore must be, if true, the most
natural and easy sense thereof. Consider that Saying of our Savior Christ to
the Church of Smyrna, which is that interval of the Church wherein so many
suffered Martyrdom: He that overcomes (namely, by courageously suffering
Martyrdom) shall not be hurt of the second death, and compare it with what
occurs here Chap. 20. v. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
Resurrection, on such the second death has no power.

Where Holy (Sanctus) Grotius interprets thus: Sanctus hic idem quod semotus ab
omni malo. Omne enim quod inviolabile est sanctum dicitur. Therefore this is a
peculiar Privilege of security to the Martyrs. Which Grotius upon [(...)]
explains thus: Animae quae sunt (...), non dicuntur (...), sed eae demum quae
translatae sunt sub solium gloriae, ut loquuntur Hebraei, sic vocant
perfectissimum statum animarum ante Resurrectionem Vniversalem. And upon those
words [(...)] says he, Illa Martyrum in Caelum evectio potest (...) dici.
Wherefore it is plain, that not a Political nor Moral, but a Physical sense
here in the word (...), is acknowledged also by Grotius. But is it not more
full, easy and natural to take it in the proper physical sense, than in this
more maimed and dwindling sense, and to confess that this first Resurrection is
also a Resuscitation of the Soul into a perfect blessed Immortality by her
union with an Heavenly or glorified Body? And your self also acknowledges, that
there is a great fitness in the thing, that when the Millennial state takes,
the Martyrs should receive some Crown or Triumphal honor in Heaven. And if
then be their evectio in Coelum, as Grotius speaks, how fitly does it fall in,
that they should then be invested in Heavenly bodies? Think seriously on that:
Heaven is the fittest place for an Heavenly body, Is it not?

But you will say, If they be thus aforehand clothed with Heavenly bodies, this
seems to anticipate the general Day of Judgment, which our Savior, Luke 14.14.
emphatically calls the Resurrection of the Just: till which time the Crown or
their being clothed with Celestial bodies is a Depostium, which S. Paul did
not expect from the hands of the righteous Judge till that day, 2 Timothy 4.8.
viz. till the day of his appearing, as is said in the following words of the
Text.

But to these two places of Scripture I briefly answer thus. To the first, That
it rather implies a first Resurrection distinct from the Universal, than
contradicts it. For if it were meant of the day of the Universal Resurrection,
our Savior would rather have said, the Resurrection of the dead, than the
Resurrection of the just: But there being supposed two distinct parts of time,
the first when none but the just arise, the other when both just and unjust,
the former of these will naturally be called the Resurrection of the just (by
themselves) as the other the Universal Resurrection, or at large the
Resurrection of the dead. Which former part, though it be most peculiar to the
Martyrs, yet other singularly sanctified men, and that have the deepest dye of
the Christian Spirit in them, viz. of Humility and Charity, the fruits whereof
our Savior commends in that place Luke 14.13. may commence Coelicolae at the
same time, and be invested with Heavenly bodies. Though a man give all away to
the poor, and profess voluntary poverty himself, or give his body to be burnt,
and have not this Spirit of Humility and Charity, he is nothing esteemed.
Therefore they that excel in these may well, with the Martyrs, have a share in
the first Resurrection.

This is one solid way of answering that place of Scripture. But it may be also
briefly answered thus: That the Resurrection of the just does not signify
there Individually, as I may so speak, taken for some one solitary set time of
their Rising, but generally or at large, that when the just rise, and receive
their reward, this charitable man shall receive his amongst them, whether at
the beginning of the Millennium, or after the ending, it matters not so
curiously to define, and so it seems to make neither pro nor con as to either
Opinion.

The other place, 2 Timothy 4.8. seems to pinch more sorely: I have fought a good
fight -- Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but
unto all them also that love his appearing. This seems to imply that Paul shall
not have his Crown, a blessed Immortality in an Heavenly glorified body, till
all the rest of good Christians that love the appearing of Christ shall have it.

But in Answer to this I say, we are to consider what is meant by this Day of
Christ's appearing. And there is nothing more obvious to observe in Scripture,
than that [a day] signifies as large as [time] let it be of what years you
will. So that this Day of the appearing of Christ, may be the whole Millennium
or more, nay, reach from the beginning of the Millennium to the end of the
World or Conflagration. For so long continues Christ's Kingdom on Earth when
once it is begun in that eximious sense after his Victory over the Dragon,
Beast and false Prophet. Read the 19. Chapter of the Apocalypse. Now this
appearing of Christ and his glorious Reign in the Kingdom of his Saints is all
one, as appears from the first verse of this very Chapter: I charge thee
therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and
the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom. The appearing mentioned v. 8. is the
same with this, and this with his Kingdom. The words in the Original are (...).
Which may signify in the time of his appearing and Kingdom, and may be an
(...), and be rendered in the time of the appearing of his Kingdom, that Kingdom
(...), as I noted before, touching which are those Voices, Rev. 19. And I heard
as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and
as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: For the Lord God
omnipotent reigns. In this Reign Christ will most gloriously and triumphantly
administer Justice, and most righteously order all affairs, whether concerning
the living or the dead. And then (...), or (...), the Martyrs that suffered for
Christ, they shall be raised first, and be invested in their glorified bodies.
This affair will be dispatched at the beginning of Christ's Reign, but at the
end all shall be raised, both good and bad, and receive according to their
works: both these things will be done in one and the same day, in the day of
his Reign, which will be filled with glorious appearances of his Power all
along.

And thus Paul might well say, and say truly: Henceforth there is laid up for
me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me
at that day, and not unto me only, but unto all them also that loved his
appearing, that is, the appearing of his Kingdom in the power thereof, and
daily prayed for it, Thy Kingdom come, as every good Christian ought to do.
Paul was to receive his Crown of righteousness in the Morning of that long Day,
others at the Evening or Close thereof, but thus both receive it at that day,
as receiving it both in the same day. Wherefore the difficulty of these two
Texts being removed, I hope that part of my Exposition, which takes the first
Resurrection in a literal sense, will seem now as easy, natural and agreeable
as any of the other passages. Those Interpreters that balk this obvious and
natural sense, and such as the Primitive Christians conceived of it, as you may
see in Mr Mede, keep a fearful pudder, and so flunder and confound all, that it
is tedious to read them, much more would it be to write of them, or meddle with
their Conceits. Rectum est Index sui and obliqui. And therefore I will give
neither you nor my self any unnecessary trouble.

CHAP. XVIII. The second part of the Letter, touching the Calling of the Jews.
Whether they be not to be converted by some Miraculous way, suppose by a Voice
or Vision from Heaven. Whether that of Zachary ( Chap. 12. v. 10.) import so
much. That the words of our Savior (Matt. 23. v. 39.) seem to imply some such
thing: As also that of S. Paul (1 Timothy 1.16.) The probability of the way of the
Jews Conversion from these three places of Scripture.
AS for that other Point in your Letter, which you rightly deem a less needful
Curiosity, viz. whether the Jews be not to be converted by some miraculous way,
suppose by Voice and Vision from Heaven, Mr. Mede, though not fully satisfied
himself therein, is likely to give you the best satisfaction of any that I
know. There are three places of Scripture that he takes notice of not
impertinently. The first is Zach. Chap. 12. v. 10. They shall see him whom they
have pierced. Which Sentence, though considered alone, may seem to have little
force in it; yet if you read it with the Context, which seems to predict and
describe the very Conversion of the Jews and excellent state of the Christian
Church at that time, it will appear not a little to the purpose. Nor do I know
how its force can easily be avoided, unless they interpret this seeing of him
whom they have pierced, of the sight of Faith. Which others happily will look
upon but as a frigid evasion.

The second place is Matt. 23. v. 39. Ye shall not see me henceforth till you
say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. This our Savior spoke
some few days before his Passion, and looking upon himself now as a dead man,
and gone into the other World, he told the Chief Priests and Scribes,
especially (who, Matt. 21. rebuked the people for their Acclamations they made
to him, viz. in those words, Hosanna to the Son of David, Blessed is he that
comes in the Name of the Lord. Which Grotius glosseth thus: Foelix sit Rex a
Deo nobis datus) that they should see him no more till the time when they
should say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, i.e. shall say,
Foelix sit Rex a Deo nobis datus, and so acknowledge him their King and
promised Messiah. That this must be understood of seeing him again after his
being gone into the other World is plain, because it had not been true, if he
had understood it of seeing him again before his death. For certainly they saw
him at his Arraignment and Crucifixion. Wherefore the words seem naturally to
imply such a seeing of him as S. Paul had by Vision from Heaven, whereby he was
converted and forced to say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord,
to recant his Judaism, and sing Hosanna to Christ the Son of David, and profess
himself a Christian.

And accordingly; which is the third place pointed at by Mr. Mede; S. Paul (1 Timothy 1.16. (...)) But for this very reason, says he, I (who out of ignorance
had been a Blasphemer, a Persecuter and Injurer of Christ) obtained mercy,
(...), that in me first (as the Primitiae of the Jewish Nation that is to be
converted in such a miraculous manner as I was) Jesus Christ might show forth
all long-suffering (...), not (as our English has it) for a pattern to them
(for then it should have been (...)) but for a representative Figure or Type of
them, which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. This seems to
be the natural sense of the place. For why should he say (...), in me first, if
others were not to follow that should be converted in such a miraculous manner
as he was by Vision and Voices from Heaven? For in other ways of Conversion he
was not the first of the Jews that were converted. Wherefore there must be a
Conversion of the Jews by such a mean as S. Paul was converted, and of which,
the manner of Paul's Conversion was (...), a Prophetic Type or Figure.

These three Scriptures may incline a rational man to believe that some chief
of the Jews, the most able, the most noted, and most zealous of them for the
Jewish Religion, may be called as Paul was. Whose Testimonies will awake all
the Jewish Nation, and cause them more impartially to consider the Truth of
Christian Religion; And the Completion of Prophecies, and their genuine
Interpretation, the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, and the lives of the
Reformed Christians, a sort of them at least may be so considerably perfected
by that time (those few Names in Sardis by that time being well increased) that
things being so fitly prepared, it may seem a Miracle for any honest sincere
Jew in those days not to be converted. These are my own proper thoughts on
these three places of Scripture. But for fuller satisfaction you may consult
Mr. Mede. I do not love to dwell long on an Argument that I cannot so certainly
and assuredly master.

CHAP. XIX. The last part of the Letter. The Reinforcement of his Objection
against the literal or physical sense of the first Resurrection, from two
parallel places of Daniel and John. An Answer to that Reinforcement from those
very parallel places. The Genius of the Prophetic Style in Daniel and John, in
intimating one Antitheton by another. What Antitheton to [those awakened into
Eternal life] in Daniel is to be found in the Apocalypse. What is meant by the
Devil's detrusion into the Abyss. That the first Resurrection is Physical, not
Political, proved from the Text it self, Apoc. 20. v. 4. That the Judgment
there did pass upon those that were either naturally or politically dead before
the Millennium, when the wicked were not politically so, and therefore cannot
be those revived (in a Political sense) after the Millennium. Further Arguments
that the first Resurrection is Physical.
THUS far I wrote before I received your last, which contains a Reinforcement
of your former Objection against the taking the first Resurrection, Apoc. 2^.
in a literal or Physical sense, and not in a Political. What you add, I
confess, is sober and ingenious, and may suit with some men's palates the best;
but though I have thought several times of this very thing before of my self,
yet mine ever refused it. I will set it down in your own words, that I may not
disadvantage the strength of the sense you aim at. You ask, Whether, since my
self make that place of Daniel, Chap. 12. parallel to that of Apoc. 20. the
first Resurrection mentioned there, by S. John, may not be understood rather in
a Political sense, of the state of the Church in the Millennium, than in a
natural and Physical concerning the Martyrs? For [those others] say you, in
Daniel, which awake to shame and everlasting contempt, perhaps may be
answerable to the (...) in the Apocalypse, and the [awakening] there parallel
to the [living] here, etc. And whereas it is said by S. John, The rest of the
dead lived not again till the thousand years were finished, what hinders, say
you, but it may be understood of the wicked getting into Political power again
after the expiration of the Millennium. That is briefly your sense, if not your
very words.

To this I answer, That though the attempt be ingenious to object thus from
those two parallel places, yet the places themselves that are parallel will
jointly bear off the force of the Objection, and show that a mere Political
sense for these places is harsh and forced. For what can be more violent and
harsh than to interpret, Dan. 12.2. (...), in a Political sense. This is the
main place that the Jews allege for their Article of the Resurrection in a
Physical sense, as also the Christians. And (...) is the very Gospel-phrase
again and again inculcated that signifies a blessed Immortality in a glorified
body. And besides this, as Apoc. 20.12. there is mention of Books being opened
at the general and Physical Resurrection (as all well in their wits must needs
understand it) so before this Resurrection in Daniel there is mention of the
Book, in which those whose Names are written are to be saved, as it is said
Apoc. 20.15. that those whose Names are not found in the Book of Life were cast
into the Lake of fire. These things considered, methinks, make it certain that
the [awaking here in Daniel into everlasting life] signifies not a Political,
but Physical Resurrection, let Porphyrius and Grotius fancy what they please.

And therefore in this parallel place of the Apocalypse, the (...), their
living and reigning with Christ must have a Physical sense, not a Political,
and signify their Vivification into celestial bodies, and their reigning with
him in Heaven. And so those that had not worshipped the Beast, nor received his
mark, etc. they answer (...), in eodem genere, that is to say, in a Political
sense to those that in Daniel are to be in shame and everlasting contempt, one
(...) implying the opposite thereto, and the opposite to that in Daniel is here
made choice of in the Apocalypse. For it is the Genius of the Prophetic style
in these two Prophets, Daniel and John, to intimate one (...) by another. I
have observed several Examples, though I have not the command of them in my
memory for the present. That in the Epistle to the Church of Laodicea seems to
be one instance, The beginning of the Creation of God, the Alpha: but his main
intent is to intimate thereby, that he is the Omega, the Ender or Finisher of
what he has begun. And so in the Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, where he
says, He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death. This is no
Privilege of the Smyrnean Martyrs, the same being common to all Christians
that are saved, but its Antitheton insinuated by it, is; viz. the first
Resurrection opposed to the second Death. There is yet a third comes into my
mind, from what I noted above, most pertinent of all, Apoc. 20.15. And if that
any one was not found in the Book of Life, he was cast into the Lake of fire.
This is at the general Resurrection plainly, where there is no mention made of
the opposite party, the righteous and their Reward, but the Antitheton is to be
fetched out of Daniel, Chap. 12. Every one that shall be found written in the
Book (...), shall be saved. So that Daniel and S. John, as touching such (...)
or (...), do as it were keep Tallies in several, which joined together, adjust
the true sense, and make the account clear and complete.

Wherefore this Prophetic Ellipsis, by which one Antitheton being named we are
to gather the other, shows how naturally in the Apocalypse [those that had not
worshipped the Beast nor his image reigned, etc.] are set in opposition to
[those that are doomed to shame and everlasting contempt] they being mere
Underlings in the Millennial Reign of Christ, and so each of them understood in
a Political sense. And so we see from hence, that there is not any just ground
for making a Political sense of [those that awake into eternal life] though
[those that are doomed to everlasting contempt] is to be understood
Politically, because it respects another Antitheton in the Apocalypse (and not
that) which is immediately opposite in eodem genere. Let but Daniel and S. John
join Tallies, and the account will be clear.

And now this it may be you will say were more easy to admit, if [those that
awake into everlasting life] had something also in eodem genere that were an
Antitheton to it. But I have already proved, that have it or have it not, it is
necessarily to be understood of a Physical Resurrection, not Political.

But for your greater ease, what if I should allow that about that time that
these Martyrs in the first Resurrection are awakened into everlasting life in
their Heavenly bodies, and so ascend into Heaven, that the Ghosts of the cruel
and barbarous Persecutors (whether Pagan or Pagano-Christian) of the Saints of
God, together with their chief Inspirers and Instigators thereto, those Devils
that were most active upon them for that work, shall be thrust down into the
nethermost Hell into that Dungeon of the Rephaim, which the Annotator upon Lux
Orientalis describes in his Annotations, if you have seen the Book? It Is but
interpreting the casting the old Dragon and his Accomplices (the Ghosts of that
cruel murderous Crew of Persecutors, whether Pagano-Christian or Pagan) into
the bottomless Pit, or rather Abyss in a Physical sense, and the business is
done.

I have in my Exposition interpreted it in a Political sense, which therefore
may answer to [those which are doomed to shame and everlasting contempt]. Add
but this Physical sense; (And most Interpreters take it in such a literal
sense, but being ignorant or mindless of a Prophetic Henopoeia therein,
interpret it of one single great Devil, and not in Conjunction with those of
his Kingdom of Darkness. But by a Prophetic Henopoeia, not only the Prince of
the Devils, but all those Devils and evil Spirits that were active in the Pagan
and Pagano-Christian Persecutions may be here understood, and then their
Physical detrusion into the Abyss at this time is no mean Argument that those
whom they persecuted were at the same time exalted into Heaven, that the other
were thrust down into the nethermost Hell, not able to get out thence till the
Claviger of the Abyss with his Ministers brings them out again after the
thousand years to exercise the sleepy Laodicean Church, but to be triumphed
over in the Conclusion, as Pharaoh was, who when he thought to have reduced the
Israelites under his Bondage again, was overwhelmed with a Sea of Water, as
Satan with all his numerous Forces, Gog and Magog, will be overthrown in a Lake
or Sea of Fire) Add, I say, but this Physical sense to answer in opposition to
the Martyrs ascending into Heaven in their glorified bodies, while those
Wretches are thrust down into the nethermost Hell, into the Abyss, of which
they are so much afraid Luke 8.31. and all is complete. And this imprisoning of
these disturbers of the World is very suitable, and fitly falls in with the
peaceful and righteous Reign of Christ upon Earth. Thus much we have gained by
considering the Text of Daniel, now let us cast our eyes upon its parallel
place in the Apocalypse, Chap. 20. v. 4.

And I saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, etc.
Certainly this denotes them dead in a Physical or natural sense, not Political,
and in what sense they are dead they must be said to be revived, viz. in a
Physical, unless we do manifest violence to the Text. Which same violence would
be offered, if we did not interpret that which follows [but the rest of the
dead lived not again till the thousand years were finished] in a Physical sense
too. From whence it follows likewise, that [This is the first Resurrection]
must have a Physical sense also, not a Political, nor yet a Moral, and so will
answer directly to [those some awakened into everlasting life] in Daniel. And
thus the parallel places support the true sense of each other. And then that
which follows in the Apocalypse, Blessed and holy is he (that is to say,
Blessed in having a peculiar and separate Privilege above others in partaking
of the first Resurrection, he being already secure from the second Death which
is the Lake of Fire, from which none are actually secured till they obtain
their Heavenly bodies) will have a natural and easy coherence with what
preceded, as also a very fit reference to that passage of the Epistle to the
Church in Smyrna (that interval of the Church wherein the Pagan Persecution did
so rage, and there were so many (...) beheaded, or otherwise martyred for the
witness of Jesus) He that overcomes shall not be hurt by the second death;
which implies by that usual Antithesis I spoke of above, that he shall be made
partaker of the first Resurrection, and enjoy that peculiar Privilege for his
Sufferings, according to the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers.

This hinders me from allowing that [The rest of the dead lived not again till
the thousand years were finished] may be understood of the wicked's reviving
Politically after the expiration of the Millennium; and the rather, because the
sense of the place carries it for those that at the Millennium were heretofore
dead, either naturally or Politically, (and so Judgment proceeds upon them
Apoc. 20.4.) which the wicked were not in a Political sense, and therefore
(...) [they lived not again] must refer to that Physical Resurrection we
contend for.

Add to all this, that if the first Resurrection were understood in a Political
sense, and meant in general as well of them that were beheaded as those that
worshipped not the Beast, and in no other sense than so, there is no reason why
S. John should use the word (...) at first, and then (...). And we might
demand, if that be the first Political Resurrection, which is the second?
unless we will (...). And how it can be appropriated to this first Resurrection
as a special Privilege of the partakers thereof, that the second Death shall
have no power over them, this by promise belonging to all true Believers,
though not Martyrs, from the beginning of the Church to the end of the World.
But to obtain a glorified body before the second Death or the Lake of Fire be
in being, which by its own Nature exempts from the harm thereof, or of any
thing like it in being, this is a peculiar Privilege indeed. And blessed and
holy and peculiarly happy is he that has his share in such a first Resurrection
as this, for he is actually out of the reach of all harm that may come from the
Lake of Fire, (the being within the reach of whose power is to be obnoxious to
the second Death) and according to the Apocalyptick Antithetical implications
or intimations he is possessed already of everlasting life in a glorified body,
whenas others are but Candidates for the same.

I hope by this time you perceive how easy, smooth and natural my Exposition
of the first Resurrection in a Physical sense is, and how intricate, harsh and
perplex the contrary way would be, etc.

CHAP. XX. That the Description of the New Jerusalem is a Description of a
state of the Church on Earth. The high expressions therein, but such as are
used in the Prophets touching the people of the Jews. The Plea of those that
will have it merely a Description of the Church Triumphant in Heaven,
consisting of seven Arguments out of Alcazar. An Answer to those seven
Arguments. A more moderate way betwixt them that hold the Description of the
New Jerusalem, the one, to signify merely such a state of the Church on Earth,
the other the state of the Church in Heaven, viz. That though it be a Prophecy
of an excellent state of the Church on Earth, yet the Description of that state
is an intended Type also of the state of the Church Triumphant in Heaven.
THERE is a wide difference betwixt some Interpreters touching the Description
of the New Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. some understanding it to be a Description of
the State of the Church here on Earth, others of the State in Heaven. Amongst
these latter is S. Augustine especially, and after him Ribera, Alcazar, Pareus
and others. Amongst the former Justin Martyr, Grotius, Dr. Hammond, Brightman
with others. And I must confess I am altogether of that Opinion, that it is the
Description of the State of the Church on Earth after the ruin of Antichrist,
and so have expounded it continuedly throughout in my Exposition of the
Apocalypse, and have carefully suggested Arguments all along from the Text it
self, that it is so to be expounded.

So that there wants nothing for any further confirmation thereof, unless I
should take notice how there are no expressions so high in this Description but
what are in other places of the Prophets, and generally understood by
Interpreters of the State of the Church on Earth, namely such expressions as
these: In that Prophetical Thanksgiving of Tobit, Chap. 13. Jerusalem shall be
built up with Sapphirs and Emeralds and precious Stones, thy Walls and Towers
with pure Gold. And the streets of Jerusalem shall be paved with Beryl and
Carbuncle and Stones of Ophir. In the Prophecy of Isaiah, Chap. 65. v. 17.
Behold, I create new Heavens and a new Earth, and the former shall not be
remembered nor come into mind. But be you glad and rejoice for ever in what I
create, for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy, See
also Chap. 66.22. In the Prophecy of Ezekiel: My Tabernacle also shall be with
them, yea I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Again, Isa. 25.8.
The Lord will wipe away tears from all faces. And 54.11. Oh thou afflicted,
tossed with Tempests and not comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with fair
colors, and thy foundations with Sapphirs, I will make thy windows of Agates,
and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. And Chap.
60.19. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall
the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting
light, and thy God thy glory. Thy Sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy
Moon withdraw it self, for the Lord shall be thine everlasting-light, and the
days of thy mourning shall be ended. What more exalted expressions than these
are there in the Apocalypse, in the description of the New Jerusalem? All which
places notwithstanding are understood of a state of the Church on Earth. And so
the City which Ezekiel describes, by which is understood the Church on Earth,
the twelve Gates, the River, Trees and Fruit, they are all transcribed into the
Description of this New Jerusalem in the Apocalypse. So assured a thing is it,
that the Apocalyptick Description of the New Jerusalem does denote a state of
the Church here on Earth.

Wherefore it were a more fit thing to bring into view the Plea of the other
Party, who are so confident that it is a description of the state of Heaven,
than to concern our selves in any further proofs that it is a state of the
Church on Earth, that we may give a right judgment of the matter. Alcazar, who
is very stiff for this Opinion, produces no fewer than seven Arguments for the
same.

The first is the Authority of S. Augustine, who bluntly says in his De
Civitate Dei, lib. 20. cap. 17. That it is mere impudence to assert otherwise,
because it is said, Absterget Deus omnem lacrymam ab oculis eorum, and mors jam
non erit, neque luctus, neque clamor, sed nec ullus erit dolor. And at the end
of that Chapter he says, That these things are so clearly spoken of the World
to come, and the Immortality and Eternity of the Saints, that we must not
pretend that any thing is manifest in Scripture, if this place be obscure.

The second is taken from the Order of the Apocalypse, which having set down at
the end of the preceding Chapter a description of the Day of Judgment, and
punishment of the Wicked, it necessarily follows that in the next place should
be set down a description of the everlasting glory and happiness of the Elect
in Heaven.

The third is, from that it is said Chap. 20. v. 11. That the Heaven and the
Earth fled away from the face of him that sat upon the white Throne, and there
was found no place for them, and this to have been in the last day of Judgment.
Wherefore the New Heaven and the New Earth mentioned in the beginning of the
next Chapter, forasmuch as the Universe cannot be without an Heaven and Earth,
must be the renewed Heaven and Earth after the Day of Judgment, in which the
glorified Saints enjoy themselves in their Heavenly state, which is called the
New Jerusalem.

The fourth is taken from Chap. 21.7, 8. He that overcomes shall inherit all
things, but the fearful and unbelieving, etc. shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Whence, says
he, it is manifest, that it is the Heavenly Bliss that is here promised to the
Victor, and that this Jerusalem therefore is a state in Heaven, not on Earth.

Fifthly, The side of the Square Area of Ezekiel's City by which the Church
Militant is prefigured, is but four thousand five hundred reeds or forty five
furlongs; but the side of the Square of the Area of the New Jerusalem in the
Apocalypse is extended unto twelve thousand furlongs, which makes the Area of
the New Jerusalem seventy one thousand and an hundred and eleven times bigger
than the Area of Ezekiel's City, and therefore Ezekiel's City being the Church
Militant, this New Jerusalem, by reason of the vast difference in their
capaciousnesses, and S. John's City containing not the Elect of some one time,
but of all Ages, must needs be the Church Triumphant.

Sixthly, Those words, I saw no Temple there, imply, That this description of
the New Jerusalem is not of the Church Militant, but Triumphant. For the Church
Militant is not without Temples.

Seventhly and lastly, In that it is said, There is no Night, no Death, no
Pain, no Curse, That without are Dogs, etc. And that the Inhabitants of this
City shall always enjoy the sight of the Face of God and the Lamb, these are
manifest indications that the state described is not of the Church Militant,
but Triumphant. These are the notable Arguments of Alcazar, which Pareus also
applauds or approves as stiff in Alcazar's Opinion as himself. But I shall
answer them in order.

To the first therefore I say, That the true understanding of the Apocalypse
being by Divine Providence reserved for these latter times, (as it is
manifestly intimated in Daniel, Chap. 12.9.) As it is no disparagement for the
ancient Fathers not to be knowing in matters which the Wisdom of God thought
fit to conceal from them, so it is no rudeness or injury to their Authority,
that it is not admitted in cases wherein they are no competent Judges. They had
not the advantage we have, who have so much of the Prophecies of the Apocalypse
so clearly fulfilled before our eyes; the fulfilling of Prophecies being the
most certain Key for the opening of them. It is not likely that S. Austin
understood, that the Whore of Babylon is the Apostatized Church, that great
City or Polity Antichristian and Idolatrous, that was to be destroyed by the
pouring out of the Vials; upon the destruction whereof one of the Vial-Angels
showed this City or Polity the New Jerusalem to John, as that Power or Polity
that was to succeed in the others room, in which the Servants of God that
adhered to the pure Gospel, nor would submit to the Roman Superstitions and
Idolatries, were cruelly persecuted, tortured, and murdered many hundred
thousands of them, which could not be without the tears of them that were
concerned. These things, I say, S. Austin being ignorant of, we may well excuse
him for his confident mistake: who, if he had known them, would have easily
discerned the Speech to have been figurative, when it is said, there shall be
no more death, nor crying, nor sorrow, nor pain, and that God will wipe all
tears from their eyes, viz. that by a Synecdoche generis those kinds of death,
sorrow, pain, crying and tears are pointed at that were caused by that
Antichristian Polity that so barbarously persecuted the Saints of God; that in
this New Jerusalem state they should be free from these. Which is an easy and
obvious sense thus understood. And indeed the observing that the description of
the New Jerusalem is in opposition to the Polity of Babylon which it succeeds,
is a special Key for the rightly opening the meaning of the Description all
along, as may be observed in my Exposition thereof.

To the second I answer, (1.) That the Object of the opened Book-Prophecy, of
which the Description of the New Jerusalem is part, is not the state of the
Church in Heaven, but the state thereof on Earth. And therefore though a
description of the state of the Church in Heaven would follow here handsomely,
yet it being quite Heterogeneous to the nature of this Prophecy, we may be sure
it is not here described but a state on Earth in the Millennium, and that
therefore there is a going back into those times in this Description; the
placing of the Visions being no certain Argument of the order of time they
belong to, as all know that know any thing in the Apocalypse.

Again, That there is an holy and happy state of the Church of Christ in his
Millennial Reign on Earth is plain, and that that State or Polity opposite to
the Polity or City of Babylon, is no where so fully described as the Whore of
Babylon is, Chap. 17. is as plain. Wherefore what can be more likely, than that
this City the New Jerusalem is described as a Polity opposite to the City of
Babylon, which was drunk with the blood of the Saints and the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, from which barbarous Persecutions the Saints are secured in
this New Jerusalem state. Whence it is said, There shall be no more death, nor
sorrow, nor crying, but that God will wipe all tears from their eyes, etc.
Chap. 21.4.

Thirdly, Those many passages noted in my Exposition of this Description of the
New Jerusalem, which is needless here to repeat, plainly demonstrate it to be a
description of the state of the Church on Earth.

And lastly, The Vial-Angel, the last doubtless, as being nearest to this time
that shows John the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, in opposition to the bloody Whore
of Babylon, destroyed by him under the seventh Vial, how naturally does his
showing John the City, New Jerusalem, upon his having destroyed the City of
Babylon, imply, that he shows him that Polity that is to succeed that of
Babylon, and that therefore this New Jerusalem is here upon Earth.

To the third I say, That that high expression of the Heaven and Earth flying
away, or vanishing from the face of him that sat upon the Throne, and that
there was found no place for them, is only to set out the exceeding great Glory
of him that sat upon the Throne, that they could neither see Earth nor the
Azure Sky, their eyes being so filled and taken up with the great resplendency
and brightness of that light. But the real stress of the Argument, if there be
any in it, is, That there is a new Heaven and a new Earth after the
Conflagration (which accompanies the last Judgment) mentioned in the beginning
of the ensuing Chapter. But from what has been faid to the second Argument it
is apparent, that it is a mere Lemmatosynechia, that is, the continuing
together of the Visions in the outward Cortex of the Apocalypse, as if that
were the very order of time in the things they prefigure, when it is quite
otherwise in the true sense of the Visions. This is one part of the artifice of
Concealment affected by the Apocalypse, of which there are many instances; As
that Chap. 4.1. where after the Vision of the seven Churches, John is bid to
come up, that he might be shown what things must come to pass (...), after
these things. Which Lemmatosynechia has so imposed upon some otherwise learned
and of notable parts, that they have joined the beginning of the sealed
Book-Prophecy with the ending of the affairs of Laodicea. That also seems to be
a Lemmatosynechia, Chap. 13.14. where the two-horned Beast is said to make an
Image to the Beast that had the wound by the Sword and did live, as if the
ten-horned Beast in the immediately foregoing Vision were meant, which is a
glib correspondency in the Cortex when the inward sense is otherwise. But there
is not a more elegant Lemmatosynechia than that Chap. 11.9. where the three
days and an half of the Witnesses being dead, are immediately placed after the
twelve hundred and sixty days of their mournful prophesying; when yet the three
days and an half are the same time or Synchronal to the twelve hundred and
sixty days, as I have elsewhere proved by impregnable Arguments. I will only
add one instance more, Chap. 16. v. 18, 19. where the City is said to be
divided into three parts upon the Earthquake there mentioned, whenas that
Tripartition of the City was before, but it is a very smooth and trim
Lemmatosynechia in the Cortex. And such a Lemmatosynechia is this in naming a
New Heaven and a New Earth immediately after the Conflagration, which is a
wonderful smooth connection in the Cortex, when yet in truth, this New Heaven
and New Earth is a Political Heaven and Earth, answering to that of Isaiah,
Chap. 65.17. and created in the beginning of the Millennium. This is the
promised New Heaven and New Earth mentioned by S. Peter, (alluding to that of
Isaiah) wherein dwells righteousness, whenas the Polity of Babylon was full
of persecution, injustice and blood. Wherefore Alcazar being not aware of this
usual Artifice of Concealment intended in the Apocalypse, which I call
Lemmatosynechia, has produced that for a strong Argument, which, the matter
rightly understood, has no strength in it at all.

To his fourth I answer, That we are both agreed in this, that the 7. and 8.
verses of Chap. 21. respect the state of men to come after the Day of Judgment,
the Lake of fire, and the Inheritance of Heaven. For I declare in my
Exposition, That from the second verse to the ninth is a brief description of
the affairs of the Church from the second Thunder to the last, or to the end of
the World, to the last Reward of the Godly, and Punishment of the Wicked. But
as after a brief mention of the destruction of Babylon, Chap. 16. v. 19. there
is a large description of her and her destruction in the two following
Chapters, 17. and 18. so here after a brief intimation of the emersion of the
New Jerusalem into being, there is a full and glorious Description thereof from
the ninth verse of this 21. Chapter to the sixth of the next. And I may here
further add, that as in the foregoing Chapter, v. 9, 10. the Conflagration is
glanced at in the destruction of Gog and Magog by fire, who besieged the holy
City, but the Judgment of the wicked and fiery Lake or Conflagration more fully
prosecuted from v. 11. to the end of the Chapter: So here after the brief
mentioning of the state of the New Jerusalem in the five first verses, it is
more fully described from the ninth verse to the end of this Chapter, and some
part of the next. So small force has this fourth Argument to infer that these
descriptions of the New Jerusalem belong to the state of the Church in Heaven.

The fifth Argument makes a pretty show, but it is grounded upon a gross
mistake, as if the twelve thousand furlongs were the side of the Square Area of
the New Jerusalem; whenas it is a solid Number, whose Cubick root multiplied by
four, gives the same Perimeter in a manner that Ezekiel's four thousand five
hundred multiplied into four do give, that is, eighteen thousand, not Reeds,
but Cubits, as both Gaspar Sanctius and Villalpandus conceive them to be, both
of them learned and industrious Commentators upon Ezekiel. By which solid
account the seeming force of this fifth Argument quite vanishes. See Mr.
Potter's Interpretation of the Number 666. Chap. 5. And the Equality of
Perimeters of the Square Area of Ezekiel's and S. John's Cities (supposing the
solid measure of S. John's City to be twelve thousand furlongs, as the Text it
self seems to intimate, [and he measured the City with a Reed (...), in all
twelve thousand furlongs], and he presently thereupon adding, the length,
breadth and height of it are equal, implies they are solid furlongs) this
Equality, I say, added to the twelve Gates in each City, twelve Tribes, the
River and the Trees and Fruit, is a plain Argument that S. John's City and
Ezekiel's are Figures of the same thing, and Ezekiel's being of the State of
the Church on Earth, S. John's must be so also.

And now for his sixth Argument from, I saw no Temple there. It consists very
well with the state of the Church in those best and most glorious times thereof
in the Millennial Reign of Christ, which the Cabbalists also call the Reign of
the Spirit, when God will find, in abundance, such Worshippers as he seeks for,
viz. such as shall worship him in Spirit and in Truth. And this passage seems
inserted on purpose to be a Key to the Jews that will then be converted, how to
understand Ezekiel's Prophecy of the same state of the Church, by the City he
describes and makes so much to do with the Temple and Rituals thereof; they
will by this Note understand that it is an Hylastick Parable, of which the
Truth is to be followed, and the shadow to fly away.

And lastly, For what is alleged in the seventh Argument, they are but such
things as are already answered by my answering the first, where I have
explained in what sense there is said to be no death, nor sorrow, nor pain. And
it being said there is no curse, that is, no (...), that respects the Papal
Curses, as is noted in my Exposition. And that there is no Night, is no more
than is said by Esaias of the state of the Church on Earth, Thy Sun shall no more
go down, etc. Chap. 60. And this state of the Church being so holy on Earth, it
is no wonder that such ill people as are called Dogs, Sorcerers, Whoremongers,
Idolaters, etc. are excluded from it, and not admitted into their Communion:
And in that they are said to enjoy the sight of the face of God and of the
Lamb; what is this more than what S. Paul witnesses we are capable of in this
life? That God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, may shine in
our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ. So that there being so many indications, as I have observed in
my Notes, that the description of this New Jerusalem is a description of a
state of the Church on Earth, and the best Arguments alleged against it being
really invalid, it remains manifest, that the state of the Church in the
Millennial Reign of Christ on the Earth is predicted and described by this
Description of the New Jerusalem.

But now after the pondering of the Plea of both Parties, though I am very
confident, that the description of the New Jerusalem is a description of the
Church on Earth in the Millennium, yet I am on the other side as confident of
what is not at all repugnant to this, that this excellent Millennial state of
the Church is a Type (and so intended to be in its description) of that more
transcendently blessed and glorious state of the Church Triumphant in Heaven.
And the reasons that induce me to this belief in brief are these.

First, It seems handsome and congruous, that it being so universally
acknowledged on all sides, that the State and Economy of the Jewish Church was
a Type of the Christian Church which was to succeed it; so the best state of
the Christian Church Militant, which is the Millennial state or rather the
state of the New Jerusalem here described, which the Heavenly state succeeds,
should be a Type of the succeeding Church Triumphant in Heaven.

Secondly, There is a sufficient lively Description and sensible Representation
of the state of the second Death which succeeds the general Judgment, the Lake
burning with brimstone and fire; why therefore should there not be as lively,
or rather more lively description of the state of Eternal life, to which the
Godly are adjudged, as well as the Wicked to the other state?

Thirdly, therefore, The Description of the New Jerusalem State or Polity, for
it is the Kingdom of Heaven immediately succeeding this Lake of fire in the
very next Chapter under the very name of a new Heaven and a new Earth the same
with the New Jerusalem, and this after the Conflagration, we are fairly invited
thereby to conclude, that the state of the New Jerusalem on Earth is so
described, that it is also a Type of the Triumphant Jerusalem in Heaven. And
thus far we will allow force in Alcazar's second and third Argument, that they
may fairly warrant, in conjunction with other Considerations, the description
of the New Jerusalem on Earth to be a Type of the Church Triumphant in Heaven.

Fourthly, This being a most Holy Book of Divine Visions, and this of the New
Jerusalem the last of the Visions, what can be a more proper Vision than this,
that typifies also the glorious and blissful state of the Saints in Heaven, to
be the close of all, and which not only this Book of the Apocalypse, but the
whole Bible aims at?

Fifthly and lastly, It is observable, and I have noted it in my Mystery of
Godliness, Book 7. Chap. 7. That in a Prophecy that may have a meaner
fulfilling at the first, and is really intended for that fulfilling, yet by
reason of the high actuation of the Spirit of the Prophet, some expressions may
come from him that much better fit the Antitype, than the Type in which the
Prophecy is first fulfilled. This is so over and over again verified in the
Prophecy Typical of our Savior Christ, that it is needless pains to name any;
And many such instances also are observable in the Typical Prophecies of
Antichrist, as that in the Prince of Type, etc. Now this being so observable in
Predictions that are but Types, of what there will be a fuller completion; that
there are strokes in them that properly belong not (but only figuratively) to
the Type, but to its Antitype, there being this very case in the description of
the New Jerusalem a Prophecy of the Millennial state of the Church on Earth;
that is to say, there being such expressions therein that more naturally
describe the state of Heaven, as S. Augustine has well observed in the first
Argument, and Alcazar in the last: the genuine Result of this Consideration is
this, That it is a Prophecy of such a State of the Church on Earth, as is a
lively Type withal of that transcendent Happiness the Saints will find in
Heaven, where there shall be, not only no more death, sorrow, crying, tears,
pain or torture from that bloody persecutive Polity of Babylon (which are
intimated by a Synecdoche Generis) but absolutely and properly (speaking
without a Figure) there shall be none of these things at all. These are the
Reasons that move me to think, that though the description of the New Jerusalem
be a Prophecy of the blessed Reign of Christ on Earth, that yet it is withal a
Type of the Joys and Glory of the Kingdom of Heaven, wherewith the Saints are
rewarded after the Conflagration.

CHAP. XXI. The occasion of his more fully making out that grand Truth, that
the whole Apocalypse in a manner consists of three main Prophecies, beginning
with the Church, and reaching to the end of the World, viz. the Epistolar
Prophecy, Sealed Book- Prophecy, and Opened Book- Prophecy, with the three
Introductory Visions prefixed thereto. That the Epistolar Prophecy is such a
Prophecy. That the Sealed Book- Prophecy is such. And also the Opened Book-
Prophecy. The Reference of the three Introductory Visions to the Title of the
Book of the Apocalypse. Introductory Visions to Prophecies in Isaiah, Ezekiel
and Daniel, and that they are not properly Prophecies themselves. The Meaning
of the Introductory Vision of the Epistolar Prophecy. The like Meaning of the
Introductory Vision to the Prophecy of the Sealed Book. The drift of the third
Introductory Vision, muchwhat the same with the two former, and that the Angel
there appearing, is Christ. That this third Introductory Vision is a kind of
Transitionary Introduction to the Opened Book- Prophecy. Proved briefly from
the Oath of the Angel, that the Sealed Book- Prophecy reaches to the End of the
World.
FOrasmuch as I am fully persuaded in my own judgment, that I have suggested in
my Exposition of the Apocalypse touching that Volume of Divine Visions is true,
namely, that the whole in a manner consists of three main Prophecies, which
reach each of them from the beginning of the Church to the End of the World,
viz. the Epistolar Prophecy to the Seven Churches, the Sealed Book-Prophecy,
and the Opened Book-Prophecy, and of three Introductory Visions, each of the
three Prophecies having prefixed to it one. And because this is so fundamental
a Truth, that no man with success can interpret any part of the Apocalypse
repugnantly thereto, yet knowing certainly and experimentally, that men of
Learning, Wit and Parts, and of a Genius to these kind of studies, have
notwithstanding overlooked this necessary Principle, and thereby have bewildred
themselves, and lost themselves in inextricable Labyrinths; therefore for the
more sure inculcating so sound and necessary a Notion, I have thought fit
something more fully here to insist on the proof thereof; but more especially
that those three Visions prefixed to these three Prophecies, are rather
Introductions to the said Prophecies, than Prophecies themselves.

That the Epistles to the Seven Churches is a Prophecy, I have in my Exposition
demonstrated by no Iess than twenty solid Arguments, which are also set down at
the end of my Exposition of the Visions of Daniel, and the scope thereof is
enforced by Notes thereon. But that it is a Prophecy reaching from the
beginning of the Church to the End of the World, that one Consideration might
assure any one that is not hoodwinkt with prejudice, viz. that these Seven
Churches imply seven Intervals from the beginning of the Church (as any will
grant that is convinced it is a Prophecy) and the Number Seven every where in
the Apocalypse implies All from the Terminus whence the Reckoning is, and
therefore it necessarily implies all the intervals of the Church from the
beginning to the end thereof. This must be indubitable to him that understands
the style of the Apocalypse. And taking this ground, and observing the
intervals we have chosen, and applying History to each of them, the Epistles
are found an exquisite Prefiguration of the things in each interval, and the
Paronomastical allusions hugely expressive of the Events of every interval,
which is as full a confirmation as one can desire, that the Epistolar Prophecy
reaches from the beginning of the Church to the end of the World.

And now that the Sealed Book-Prophecy does so too, it is evident from the same
Argument drawn from the Septenary, which is an Apocalyptick Symbol of
Universality, taking in from the term it commences all the space of mundane
Affairs wherein the Church may be concerned, and Divine Providence and Prophecy
employed, which therefore is to the end of the World. And thus not only the
seven Seals reach to the end of the World, but by the same reason the seven
Trumpets commencing with the seventh Seal and seven Thunders commencing with
the seventh Trumpet, must reach to the end of the World. And the Angel, Chap.
10. swears to this Truth, That there shall be no more time, saving that wherein
the seventh Angel shall sound, and the Mystery of God be finished, as I shall
make good afterward. Wherefore here is abundance of Evidence, that the Sealed
Book-Prophecy reaches from the beginning of the Church to the end of the World.

And that the Opened Book-Prophecy does the like, that is, reaches to the end
of the World, is manifest, because it reaches to the last Judgment and
Conflagration, Chap. 20. And that the Visions of Chap. 12. respect the
beginning of the Church, viz. the Woman in Childbirth, and the Fight of Michael
with the Dragon, no man of common sense can deny. From whence yet it will
naturally follow, That the measuring of the Temple of God and the Altar, etc.
respects also or reaches the beginning of the Church, for the Church was
Symmetral as soon as it began. But these three Points there was less need to
insist upon, they being sufficiently made out elsewhere.

The chief thing intended here is to prove, that the three Visions prefixed to
these three main Prophecies, are Introductions only to those Prophecies, and
not properly Prophecies themselves. For the better clearing this Truth, we will
take our rise from the Title of the Book comprised in verse. 1. The Revelation
of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him to show unto his servants things which
must shortly come to pass, and he sent and signified ( viz. the things to come
to pass, some sooner, some later) by his Angel to his servant John. Here we see
how methodically in a plain vulgar style is set down the sum of this Book,
viz. that the Book is a Book predicting things to come, that is to say, a Book
of Prophecies. That this Book of Prophecies is a Revelation of Jesus Christ,
that he is the Revealer of these things to come, and that unto John by
Angelical Ministry; But that the Man Christ Jesus had this Revelation from God,
it being the high Privilege of the Soul of the Messiah to have such Secrets
revealed unto him. The two main things therefore included in this Title are
these: That this Book is a Revelation of things to come: That this Revelation
is from the Man Christ, or through the Humanity of Christ, but by the Gift of
the Eternal Godhead. Both these things are set down here in an ordinary vulgar
style. But forasmuch as those Predictions in the three main Prophecies, which
might have been made also or expressed in such a vulgar plain style, but yet
are not but in pompous and Aenigmatical Phrases, it was very suitable and
congruous, that the signifying that these three Prophecies were the Revelation
of the Man Jesus Christ by the gift of God, should be expressed with
correspondent Pomp and Magnificency. And this is the thing I contend for, that
those Visions prefixed to these three main Prophecies, that the main design of
them is to entitle the succeeding Prophecy to the Revelation of Jesus Christ by
the gift of God, and that the Godhead is joined with him in every one of these
three Introductory Visions, and so makes good that part of the general Title of
the whole Book, and in as magnificent a manner as the Prophetical part it self
is set out therein.

That there are such Introductory Visions prefixed before eminent Prophecies,
is observable in very illustrious Examples thereof. As Isai. Chap. 6. I saw the
Lord sitting upon a Throne high and lifted up, and his train filled the Temple.
Above stood the Seraphims, etc. Which Vision is no Prophecy, but a
signification of Isaiah's Mission and Inspiration from God, whereby he was
enabled to utter infallible Prophecies. The like Introductory Vision and more
ample of the glory of the God of Israel enthroned above the Cherubims is
prefixed before Ezekiel's Book of Prophecies, but is no Prophecy it self, but a
sign of Ezekiel his Call and Inspiration from God to prophecy: He upon the
Throne speaking to him, Chap. 2.3. and saying, Son of man, I send thee to the
Children of Israel, etc. there is his Mission, and then reaching him a roll of a
Book to eat, whereby (as John, Apoc. 10. doing the like) he was enabled to
prophecy. I will add a third Example out of Daniel of that Vision of an Angel
habited like Aaron the High Priest, Chap. 10.5. prefixed before the Prophecy of
the Scripture of Truth, who communicated to Daniel the said Prophecy. But now
as no man is so senseless as to take those Introductory Visions in Isaiah,
Ezekiel and Daniel to be proper Prophecies, but only or chiefly significations
of the Divine Inspiration of those Prophets, that they were enabled thus to
prophecy by the Spirit of the Lord: So it is a wonder to me, that any one of
wit and parts and learning should be so heedless and grossly mistaken as to make
any of these Introductory Visions to the Epistolar Prophecy, the Sealed
Book-Prophecy and the Opened Book-Prophecy, to be Prophecies properly so
called, and not Introductory Visions (such as those in Daniel, Ezekiel and
Isaiah) whose proper scope is to intimate the Divine Inspiration of John in
writing those Prophecies, which were communicated to him by Angelical Ministry
upon the appointment of Christ, whose Merit obtained this Revelation from the
Eternal Godhead. That this is the genuine meaning of those three Introductory
Visions I shall now endeavor to make good in order as they lie.

And it is exceeding manifest in the first, that the Appearance to John of one
in the Pontifical Habit, like that of Aaron, is hugely like that Appearance to
Daniel, Chap. 10.5. Wherefore why should this be more a Prophecy than that? But
both these Appearances being in the High Priests Habit, who was a Type of
Christ, it is a plain Argument that it is Christ himself that appeared or was
represented in both places. And this very Appearance dictating the Epistles
(sent to the seven Churches) unto John, as if he were his Amanuensis or
Secretary, and these Epistles being the Epistolar Prophecy it self, it is plain
that it is the first part of the Revelation of Jesus Christ signified to his
Servant John. And that God is here in Conjunction with Christ, is manifest from
his Pontifical Habit, which is a Symbol of the visible World; as Philo takes
notice, though he knew not the right System thereof. But what an excellent
Hieroglyphick those Aaronical Habiliments are of the true Pythagorick System
thereof I have abundantly made out in the Appendix to the Defense of my
Philosophic Cabbala, Chap. 5. Sect. 3, 4. See also the Latin Scholia thereon.
Wherefore the Assistance of the Eternal Divinity to the Soul of the Messiah or
Humanity of Christ, is hence easily conceived.

And the like may be observed in that Vision prefixed before the Sealed
Book-Prophecy contained in Chap. 4, and 5. It is no more a Prophecy than the
Vision prefixed before Ezekiel's Book of Prophecies, and the less likely, it
being in a manner the same Vision with it. And therefore why should it be a
Prophecy more here than there? Nay, if it be a Prophecy of any King or Queen
sitting on their Throne in Christendom, it is a very ancient Prophecy of them
indeed. For that Vision in Ezekiel is the very same which Moses and the Elders
saw on Mount Sinai. Some intimation thereof is from the mention of the Sapphir
stone on which he is said to stand in the one, and to sit in the other; but
there is that which is yet more pressing. For as Ezekiel says of his Vision,
that it was the Appearance of the glory of the Lord, Chap. 1.28. and the glory
of the God of Israel, Chap. 10.19. so it is said Exodus 24. that the glory of
the Lord abode on Mount Sinai. Which therefore what it was is amply indicated
in the Vision of Ezekiel, which I doubt not but is a Symbol of the spiritual
and invisible Kingdom of the God of Israel, where he sits enthroned amidst his
bright Angelical Squadrons, and the Psalmist briefly notes, The Chariots of God
are twenty thousands, even many thousands of Angels, the Lord is among them as
in Sinai: where there was the Representation of his Glory and Majesty in his
Angelical Kingdom, and it is likely on a Sapphir Throne, whose very Scabellum
was also Sapphir, and so his feet (which is all from the Hip to the Toes)
rested on Sapphir. For to fancy him standing does not so well agree with the
Representation of Majesty. But the strongest Argument is yet behind, viz. That
the Cherubims and the order of the Camp of Israel answer so exquisitely to this
Vision of Ezekiel. Whence it must be plain to him that will see, Moses being to
order all things according to the Pattern in the Mount, that the order of the
Camp of Israel and the Tabernacle, etc. was according to the Representation of
the Glory of the God of Israel on the Mount in his Spiritual Kingdom. To the
perfection whereof it being not the Lot of the Church of the Jews to reach,
they bore notwithstanding the external and Ritual figure thereof in the order
of their Camp, Tabernacle, etc. Wherefore that Vision in the Mount again seen
by Ezekiel, and lastly here by S. John with some few alterations only, and
prefixed before his Prophecy of the Sealed Book, as it is before Ezekiel's Book
of Prophecies, how awkward a thing is it to conceit this a proper and formal
Prophecy it self, of the same nature that the three main Apocalyptick
Prophecies are? whenas it is of no other nature than the Vision prefixed before
the Epistolar Prophecy, some parts of which Vision are made use of in the
Epistolar Prophecy it self, as there is of this in the Sealed Book-Prophecy.
And as that Vision being a Representation of Christ in Conjunction with his
Church, may have some general and less distinct significancies of her
condition: so this Vision prefixed before the Sealed Book-Prophecy, it being
really a Symbol of the Spiritual Kingdom of the God of Israel, may be so framed
as to have some glances on those times when this Spiritual Kingdom of the God
of Israel in Heaven (which is the chief aim of all) shall descend thence from
God, and be found on Earth in the New Jerusalem state of his Church. This being
the great scope of all contained in both the Sealed and Opened Book-Prophecies,
it is not irrational to conceive this ancient Vision, seen by Moses and
Ezekiel, to be so attempered in this seen by S. John, as to have some glances
at those most excellent times, of which the Spiritual Kingdom of the God of
Israel is the Archetypon, and it being so, it is prefigurative of them
naturally of it self. But the special intention of prefixing it here, is to
signify in this magnificent manner, that the Sealed Book-Prophecy is the
second part of the Revelation of the Man Jesus Christ which God gave him. For
it is plain, that the Man Christ Jesus signified by the Lamb that was slain,
took the Book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the Throne, Chap.
5.7. which is the Eternal Godhead, and opened the Seals in order Chap. 6. and
so communicated the Visions of each Seal to John, a thing which no Creature in
Heaven nor Earth nor under the Earth was found worthy or able to do besides
him. This therefore is the special and particular defign of prefixing this
Vision of the Spiritual Kingdom of the God of Israel before the Sealed Book
Prophecy; which yet is so attempered, as I said before, that the parties
represented in it; seem to exhibit a Dramatical show that has a prefigurative
signification of the Happiness of the Millennial state of the Church. For it is
the privilege of the Angelical Kingdom, that they can exhibit Prophetical
Shows or Plays, when we Mortals can only exhibit Historical ones. Wherefore,
though the more special end of this Vision is that which has been already
declared, and such in a manner as of that in Isaiah and Ezekiel, yet the thing
so naturally bearing it, nothing hinders but that it may have a kind of general
Prefigurativeness of the Joy and Glory of Christ's Kingdom in the Millennium.

And now for the third Introductory Vision prefixed before the Opened
Book-Prophecy, That the special intent thereof is the same with the two former
Introductory Visions, viz. to intimate that this third Prophecy is the
Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave him, may appear from hence; In that
Christ is understood by this Angel. Which Title or Representation cannot be
thought too mean for him, when he is represented and called a Lamb before.
Besides, in Isaiah, Chap. 9. he is called (...). And in Malachy, Chap. 3.
Angelus Foederis. And Christ that led the Children of Israel out of Egypt
bears the Title of an Angel sometimes, and under this Title and Garb he has
appeared unto some of the Patriarchs. Wherefore there can be no scruple but for
all that he is called an Angel he may be Christ. And that he is really Christ,
may appear from comparing Dan. 12.7. with Apoc. 10 5, 6. where both these
Angels do the same thing. But he in Daniel is Christ, as has been proved from
his Aaronical Habit, which no Angel can appear in not sustaining the person of
Christ. Besides, it is said that his Face was as the Sun, which is like that
Chap. 1.16. And his countenance was as the Sun shining in its strength, which
is said there of Christ; And his feet like Pillars of fire answer to his feet
like fine Brass burning in a Furnace, and Pillars will answer to the strength
of Brass. And lastly, the Rainbow over his head is an infallible token (taken
out of Ezekiel's Vision and that of S. John here again) of the glory of the God
of Israel, viz. Christ, according as S. John says, He came to his own, and his
own received him not. Furthermore, there being the unsealed or opened Book in
his Hand, which the Lamb received and opened, it is the most easy and natural
to conceive that the Book remained with the same party now transformed into
another shape. Add also that his speech does bewray him, (that is, his roaring
like a Lion) that he is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, as he is called Chap.
5.5. These congruities must needs persuade any one that is not over-tough or
stiff, that this Angel is really Christ. And then it naturally follows, that
John receiving this opened Book of this Angel, and by eating thereof being
enabled to prophecy before many Peoples, Nations, Tongues and Kings, that this
Opened Book-Prophecy is also the Revelation of Jesus Christ which he received
of God, for he took the Book from him, Chap. 5. and here signifies the things
therein contained to his Servant John in the Visions following.

Thus we see that this Introductory Vision to the Opened Book-Prophecy serves
the same end that the other two Introductory Visions do, and is therefore of
the same nature with them, not a Vision that sets out any particular affairs,
though it may have some more general Presignificances of the state of things in
the times it may thus presignifie, as the Introductory Vision to the Sealed
Book-Prophecy has touching the Millennium. And that roaring of the Angel like a
Lion, to supply the place of the seventh Trumpet, and the seven Thunders
uttering their voices the mean time (whereby they naturally divide the seventh
Trumpet into seven Intervals, as the seven Trumpets do the seventh Seal) this
Roaring and Thundering has a presignificancy in general of the Calamities and
Miseries that will befall that Party that this roaring and thundering is against
during the space of the seventh Trumpet: So that this Introductory Vision is a
kind of Transitionary Introduction to the Opened Book-Prophecy, and dispatches
the Sealed Book-Prophecy with that general Account of the Roaring of that
Lion-like Angel, and of the seven Thunders during that Roaring, which fill up
the space of the seventh Trumpet, and consequently of the Sealed Book-Prophecy,
that so there might be an orderly proceeding to the Opened Book-Prophecy, the
Sealed Book-Prophecy reaching to the end of the World, as is confirmed by the
Oath of the Angel, as I promised to make out, which I do thus.

This roaring of the mighty Angel is put in the place of the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, and therefore must occupy the same space of time with it, or
be Synchronal thereto. And that it supplies the place of the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, is manifest from that it immediately follows the sixth, and
also is distinguished into seven Thunders, as the seventh Seal is into seven
Trumpets. This may assure any one that is not blinded with prejudice, that the
roaring of this mighty Angel supplies the place of the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet, and consequently that it is Synchronal thereto. But now forasmuch as
Chap. 10.6, 7. that Oath of the Angel in the Greek, (...), is maimed sense or
nonsense, if (...) there does not signify as much as (...) or (...), the true
translation of this Oath is this: That there shall be no more time, saving in
the days of the Voice of the seventh Angel when he shall sound, and the Mystery
of God be finished. This is certainly the true and genuine sense of the Oath of
the Angel according to the Original Text, as is more fully proved in the Answer
to the Remarks. But it is plain from this Oath of the Angel, that the sounding
of the seventh Trumpet reaches to the end of the World. Therefore the roaring
of the Angel Synchronal thereto, reaches to the end of the World, and
consequently the Sealed Book-Prophecy reaches thither also, which is the thing
that was to be demonstrated. And it suits mighty well with the last Thunder
reaching to the end of the World, which falls in with the Conflagration or Lake
of Fire, and with the Exit of the Laodicean interval, so called in allusion to
Ptolemy's (...), Laodicea combusta. Wherefore the distribution of the main of
the Apocalypse into those three Prophecies which from the beginning of the
Church reach unto the end of the World, viz. the Epistolar Prophecy, the Sealed
Book-Prophecy, and the Opened Book-Prophecy, and the Introductory Visions
belonging to each of them, being thus demonstrably true, I do again pronounce
as at first, whoever goes about to interpret the Apocalypse repugnantly to this
grand Principle, he must necessarily run himself into the Briars, and fall into
such Labyrinths, as he will never be able handsomely to get out of.

CHAP. XXII. A Mechanical frame of the Seven-sealed Book, so contrived, as is
requisite for no more Writing than what belongs to the present Seal, to be seen
at once. The different Opinions of Interpreters what this Book signifies. The
mistake of the Ancients in conceiving it to be the Bible. What this Book really
is the Symbol of. That this Book its being said to be written within and
without, denotes a twofold sense, that of the Symbolical Letter, and that of
the inward Prophetical meaning of those Symbols. Arguments to prove this to be
the right sense of being writ within and without. Ezekiel 's Roll writ within
and without, compared with this Seven-sealed Book of the Apocalypse. Three
useful Consectaries deduced therefrom.
IT is a matter of no slight moment to understand clearly and assuredly what is
the right meaning of the Book (in the right hand of him that sits upon the
Throne, Apoc. 5.) its being said to be writ within and without, to be Liber
Opisthographus. In order to which we are first to take notice what was the
fashion of the Books of the Ancients, viz. that they were one Membrane, some
longer, some shorter, rolled upon a round stick, or some stiff thing, as we
sometimes do Maps. Which makes me conceive, that this Book with seven Seals
consisted of at least twice seven such Membranes, Parchments or Papers fastened
together so at one end, that it might be stiff enough to have all those leaves
of paper rolled about it. And, I say, there must be at least twice seven, that
no more Writing may be seen than what belongs to each Seal in their order by
opening. Therefore there is to be a leaf of paper with a Label at it to cover
the leaf that has the Vision of the first Seal, and then another leaf with a
Label at it to cover the leaf of the Vision of the second Seal, and so a
Label-leaf before the Vision-leaf till you come to the Number of seven in each,
that no more of the Writing may be seen at a time than what belongs to each
present Seal, saving in the last, where you breaking open the Seal that belongs
to the seventh Label, not only the Vision of the seventh Seal is discoverable,
which are the seven Trumpets and the seven Thunders, but all the Visions of the
Opened Book-Prophecy. So that there must be as many leaves without Labels
placed after the seventh Label-leaf, as will serve to contain all the Visions
of the seven Trumpets, and also all the Opened Book-Prophecy. Which must be
some number of leaves, though writ within and without (...), within and on the
backside, as the foregoing Vision-leaves are conceived to be, that is, written
on the concave and unequal side of this Roll of leaves. And thus in the breaking
open the Seals, the unequal side of the Vision-leaf will occur first, in every
unsealing.

This I conceive is the most probable Mechanical frame of this Book written
within and without, and sealed with seven Seals. But what this Book is a Symbol
of, there is a wide difference amongst Expositors. The generality of the
Ancients, as A Lapide has noted, take it to be the Bible, and that which is
writ without to be the Old Testament, and that within the New, the Old
Testament being as it were the Velamentum or Covering of the New. Or that which
is writ without to be the literal sense, that within, the Spiritual or
Mystical. But this general Conceit of the Ancients is but a general Mistake,
because this Book was sealed up till the Apocalypse was communicated to S.
John, which was at the end of Domitian's Reign, and therefore would imply that
the Old and New Testament or Gospel were a sealed Book not to be understood
till then. Which yet certainly the Apostles understood, and taught the people
rightly to understand it, so that it was no sealed Book to them. But that this
sealed Book is a Book that contains all the Prophetic Visions set down after
the opening of it in the Apocalypse, is so exceeding plain, that it would amaze
a man how it should come into the thoughts of so many of the Ancients, that
this Book with seven Seals should be the entire Bible, whenas it is not so much
as the entire Apocalypse, but contains only the sealed Book, and the Opened
Book-Prophecies, but that the being written within and without, intimates a
literal and mystical sense of the Book, how near they come to the Truth
therein, we shall observe in the main Point we drive at.

In the mean time I cannot but approve of Cornelius A Lapide's Verdict in the
Case, who says, Liber hic non est aliud quam Divinae Providentiae consilium and
praefinitio, etc. This Book is nothing else but the Counsel and Determination
of Divine Providence, whereby God has purposed with himself either to permit or
effect things in the World wherein his Church is concerned in such a way as is
prefigured in this Book of Prophecies. Which is to the same sense that the
Answerer to S. E. has declared touching the Prophecy of the Scripture of Truth,
that it is what is decreed and recorded in the Divine Mind. The standing
Intellect of God, in which are described all the Laws and Decrees of his
Providence, is that Writing or Book of God, which is so often mentioned in the
Bible, as Exodus 32. Psalm. 56. and 139. And this Book represented to John sealed
and unsealed, is but a Symbol of part of this Book or Writing, as I may so
speak. And to the Scripture of Truth in Daniel, as well as to the Roll in
Ezekiel, in all likelihood may this Apocalyptick sealed and unsealed Book
allude.

And now to come more near to the main Point in hand, though I have given such
a Mechanical account of this sealed Book written within and without, yet I am
still utterly of the mind of the Answerer to S. E. his Remarks, Apoc. Chap. 5.
that it is a childish thing to think that the Book seen by John, was written
with all those words contained in that part of the Apocalypse, but it was a
Symbol of the Compages of those Prophetical Representations and of the inward
meaning of them contained in the Mind of Christ and the holy Angel sent to
John. And that as the Book in general was a Symbol of the figurative
Representations and the inward meaning of them (in the mind of the Angel) or of
the inward Prophetical sense of them, so the being writ within and without,
distinctly signifies the latter the external Representations or Symbols of the
Prophecies, and the being writ within the real Prophetic sense of those
Figures.

That this is the necessary sense of this Book's being writ within and without,
may appear from hence, because there is no evasion from it, but supposing the
Visions and Prophecies so large, that the inside or concave side of this Roll
of papers would not contain them, to denote the exuberancy or fullness of this
Spirit of Prophecy, as that of Poetry.

Scriptus and in tergo necdum finitus Orestes. This is the general account of
Interpreters, which is a very lank, empty, and an useless account. But this
intimation of those two senses I have noted is useful and weighty, the wildness
and vanity of those Interpreters being discovered thereby that confound the
Symbolical sense with the real or Prophetical, as R. H. has done. See my
Epilogue to my Exposition of the Apocalypse, Sect. 10. And there are those so
weak, as to give credit to his Expositions. Whence we see how needful it was to
give this intimation for this twofold sense of this Book, and worthy the Spirit
of Prophecy so to do.

But that this being writ within and without is not said in regard of the
exuberancy of the matter or scantness in the concave sides of the Vision-papers
to contain it all, may appear from that necessary Mechanical account I have
given of this seven-sealed Roll, if any Mechanical account is to be looked
after. For the largest of the Visions of the first six Seals are so little,
that they cannot well be conceived to fill so much as one side, viz. the
Concave of each Vision-paper. Wherefore how can the exuberancy of the matter
cause them to be writ as well on the unequal side as concave, or what account
can there be of making use of both sides so needlessly, but that it may be said
to be writ within and without, as a Symbol of a twofold sense belonging to
these Prophecies, that of the Cortex or Letter, and that of the things
prefigured. And as the Cortical or literal sense is first and most obvious, so
according to our Mechanical frame of this Seven-sealed Book, the Unequal or
outward side of the Vision-leaf, upon opening each Seal, offers it self first
to the eye of the Beholder, the Concave is underneath not to be seen, but by
the turning up of the Vision-leaf, and so reading downwards.

But if John's declaring the Book sealed with seven Seals was written within
and without before any of the Seals were opened, insinuate that there was
really no such Mechanical frame of this seven-sealed Roll within, as we have
described; then it is a plain indication to any one of an ordinary sagacity,
that this is said merely to intimate those two senses of the Visions: the
external Cortical sense, which is so contrived, as if it were a complete thing
of it self, and the real Prophetical sense that lies hid under this Symbolical
Cortex. Nor does it seem likely, that John at the opening each Seal saw in the
Book those Visions mentioned at each Seal opening, but they were represented to
him as other Visions were, and that he saw them no more in the Book at the
opening of the Seals, than he read the Opened Book, when it was given him,
before he ate it; but the opening of the Seals by the Lamb, and the Angel
giving him the Book unsealed to eat, are only to signify that both those
Prophecies of the Sealed Book and Opened Book are the Revelation of Jesus
Christ to his Servant John, as you heard in the foregoing Chapter. But if it
may be thought, that when John received the Opened Book, he might then observe
that there were things written on the unequal sides and concave sides of what I
called the Vision-leaves, and from hence pronounce in the beginning that this
Seven-sealed Book was writ within and without according to some such Mechanic
way as I have described, then our former reasoning will take place, and so
every way we may be assured that this is the right meaning of the Book (in the
hand of him that sat on the Throne) its being said to be writ within and
without, that thereby is intimated an external Literal sense and internal
Mystical sense, of which the other is but an Hieroglyphick, Type or Figure.

And this being so plain and assured in this Apocalyptick Seven-sealed Book or
Roll, that to be writ within and without signifies an external or literal
sense, and a sense internal and mystical. And we finding in Ezekiel a Roll so
described Chap. 2.9. And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me, and
lo, a Roll of a Book therein. And he spread it before me, and it was written
within and without; which answers with strange exactness to this of the
Apocalypse, and still more full, if you read the following Chapter: where he is
bid to eat this Roll, and does so accordingly, and declares it was in his mouth
as sweet as Honey; As if what we find Apoc. Chap. 10. v. 9, 10. were
transcribed out of Ezekiel. And as this happened to John after the sight of the
Angel with a Rainbow, viz. Christ or the God of Israel, so this happened to
Ezekiel immediately after he had seen the appearance of the glory of the Lord,
which was as the appearance of the Bow which is in the Cloud in the Day of
Rain, which is a further confirmation that it is the God of Israel that is
signified by this Note of the Rainbow in both places.

Wherefore, I say, this being so plain, that to be writ within and without
bears such a sense in this place of the Apocalypse, viz. an exterior and
interior meaning of the Visions or Prophecies, and this of the Roll in Ezekiel
being so exactly parallel thereto, and set at the beginning of his Prophecies
after the Introductory Vision, how can we avoid concluding that the Prophecies
of Ezekiel the main of them are parts of the Roll written within and without,
and have an interior sense as well as an exterior? And so those Visions or
Prophecies that in their first or exterior sense may seem only to concern
Jerusalem, suppose, and Samaria, Edom and Mount Seir, the Prince of Tire and
Pharaoh King of Egypt, the Army of Gog, the Jewish City and Temple, and the
like, may in their interior sense concern the state of the Christian Church or
of its Enemies, and prove Types of their condition. Which Consideration will
justify against the idle Cavils of the Unskilful what we have writ in Synopsis
Prophetica, Book 2. Chap. 16. touching the Visions of the King of Tire in
Ezekiel, applying them to the Bishop of Rome.

And now in the next place we may also note, That as in Ezekiel, his eating of
the Roll does not signify that he was thereby to expound Prophecies, but to
utter Prophecies himself: so in like manner S. John's taking the Opened Book
from the hand of the Angel, and eating it, and his being bid thereupon to
prophecy, does not signify expounding Prophecies, but the uttering Prophecies
himself, as he begins to do immediately in the next Chapter; so that a man may
justly wonder that any thing should blind any one so, as to interpret John's
being bid to prophecy, after his eating the Book, of either preaching or
expounding Prophecies.

And thirdly and lastly, As Ezekiel his sight of the Appearance of the Glory of
the Lord, as of the Bow in the Cloud in the Day of Rain, was an Introductory
Vision to his eating of the Roll and prophesying; John also seeing this Glory
of the God of Israel, this great Angel of the Covenant, Christ, with the
Rainbow on his Head, from whose hand he takes the Opened Book, eats it and
prophesies: what can this signify more naturally than that this Appearance of
this glorious Angel is an Introductory Vision to S. John's Opened
Book-Prophecy, as the Appearance of the Glory of the God of Israel was to
Ezekiel's Prophecies, as was concluded before in the foregoing Chapter?

CHAP. XXIII. His reason of inserting here his Demonstration, that the
Reformation begun by Luther is the Rising of the Witnesses. The two first
Visions of the Opened Book- Prophecy proved Synchronal. The agreement of the
fore-parts of these two Visions, and the exquisite correspondency of the
middle-parts one with another. Whence the Fall of Babylon in the second Vision
is proved to be the same with the Fall of the City and Rising of the Witnesses
in the first. That consequently the Fall of Babylon in the second Vision is
after the sixth Trumpet. That the Fall of Babylon and Rising of the Witnesses
is the Object of those Acclamations in Heaven, Chap. 11. and of the Doxology of
the Elders. As also of the Song of Moses and the Lamb sung by the Victors over
the Beast. That this Song therefore follows the sixth Trumpet. And that all the
Viols follow that Song. From whence the abovementioned Demonstration is
concluded.
THAT excellent usefulness of having an assured knowledge that the blessed
Reformation begun by Luther, and here in England more especially, perfected,
was the Rising of the Witnesses, which most naturally must beget a peaceful
mind in men, and due value for our Church, makes me resume again the seven
Arguments at the end of the Answer to S. E. his Remarks on my Apology,
enlarging at least upon some of them more fully, that so useful and necessary a
Matter may not be omitted or maimedly managed in these Paralipomena. That the
abovesaid Reformation therefore is the Rising of the Witnesses, I demonstrate
thus.

First, We are to observe in the two first Visions of the Opened Book Prophecy,
viz. the Visions comprised, the first of them in the eleventh Chapter of the
Apocalypse; and the other in the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth Chapters,
that they begin from the same Epoch, and that they end in the same times,
namely with the last Vial, which contains a full and final overthrow of Babylon
or of the Beast and false Prophet. Whence these two Visions must be concluded
Synchronal. Now that they begin from the same Epoch we prove thus: They both
begin from the beginning of the Church. For the Vision in the eleventh Chapter
being the first Vision S. John sets down after his eating the Opened Book, and
his being bid to prophecy, that is to say, to prefigure or predict things to
come, as Ezekiel did after his eating the Roll, and what is set down Chap. 11.
being plainly a Prophecy, it is plain this is the first Prophecy of the Opened
Book, and therefore according to indispensable Method, if any Visions of the
Opened Book-Prophecy begin from the beginning of the Church, this first must,
and not be Visio (...), a decollated Vision with its head struck off. But that
the Vision of the Fight of Michael with the Dragon, and of the Woman in the
pangs of Childbirth commence with the beginning of the Church (which are parts
of the entire Vision of the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth Chapters) is so
plain a thing, that impudence it self, if not stark blind, cannot deny it.
Wherefore the Vision of the eleventh Chapter must begin from the beginning of
the Church as well as the other, and so must have the same Epoch. And as the
fore part of the Vision, Chap. 11. viz. the Temple measured and the Worshippers
therein, denote the Purity of the Primitive Times as to Worship: so the
forepart of the other Vision, the part contained in Chap. 12. viz. the Combat
of Michael with the Dragon and the pangs of the childbearing Woman, denote
their fortitude and patience in suffering for the Truth.

Now that these two Visions end in the same times is plain from hence, in that
the end of the first, Chap. 11.19. is a lively description of the seventh Vial.
There were Lightnings and Voices, and Thunderings and an Earthquake and great
Hail, the same description that is found Chap. 16. v. 18, 21. and no where else
are those five Phenomenon put in the whole Apocalypse: So that the first of
these two Visions ends in the seventh. Vial. That the second does so too is
plain, for that it ends with the treading of the Wine Press, where blood came
out even to the Horse-bridles. Which therefore must be the slaughter by that
mighty Heroes on the white Horse, Apoc. 19. Commander of the Army in the Battle
of that great day of God Almighty, which is plainly under the seventh Vial.
Wherefore these two Visions beginning from one Epoch, and ending with the
seventh Vial, do Synchronize.

Secondly, As the forepart of these two Synchronizing Visions represent a pure
Church conflicting with the Pagans, over whom at last they get the Victory,
Chap. 12. v. 9, 10. so in the next or middle parts of these two Visions, the
former from v. 2. to v. 11. in Chap. 11. the latter the whole thirteenth
Chapter, there is contained the like Conflict betwixt the pure Apostolic
Church, and the Apostatized Church or Pagano-Christians, and a Victory noted
Chap. 11. v. 11, 12, 13. in the former and in the latter Chap. 14. v. 8. the
foregoing verses being referrable to this Conflict as the description of the
Soldiers of the Lamb. So that the middle-parts of the two Visions exquisitely
answer one another, these middle-parts of both the first and second Vision
containing a War of the Witnesses or Soldiers of the Lamb or Saints with the
Beast: and we are to observe that the event of that War is an actual but
partial overthrow of the Beast or Babylon called the great City, as is manifest
from Chap. 11. v. 11, 12, 13. unto which answers the actual Fall of Babylon in
the second Vision. Which must needs be Actual, else the Angel would speak an
untruth in saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, Chap. 14. v. 8. and but
partial, because it both answers to that in the first Vision, and precedes the
seventh Vial in the second, before which the full and final overthrow of
Babylon is not. And whereas Prophecy is anticipatory History, and yet no actual
success of the forty two months War, but this Fall of Babylon is prefigured in
this second Vision, it is plain that this is the success thereof, and
immediately before menaced by the first Angel, declaring the Judgments of God
against the Idolatrous Bestians, and therefore the very same with the partial
Fall of the great City and the Rising of the Witnesses in the first Vision:
which was in the last Half-Day of the three days and an half, or in the last
Half-Time of the three times and an half. Whence the Fall of Babylon the Angel
brings news of, must be so too, and not before, because the upshot of that War
also was not till then. We see therefore what a perfect Correspondency the
middle parts of the two Visions (which parts are terminated in the success of
the Beast's War with the Saints or Witnesses) have one with another.

Thirdly therefore, Forasmuch as the Fall of Babylon in the second Vision is
the same with the Fall of the great City and Rising of the Witnesses in the
first, and this latter, viz. the Fall of the City and the Rising of the
Witnesses is just at the close of the sixth Trumpet, the former must be so too,
viz. the Fall of Babylon must be at the close of the sixth Trumpet also, and
the third or remaining part of each Vision must be after the sixth Trumpet for
the same reason.

Fourthly, Forasmuch as this Fall of Babylon and Rising of the Witnesses is an
ample object of Joy and Thanksgiving to the Evangelici the Witnesses and sealed
Soldiers of the Lamb against whom the Beast warred, and was too hard for them
all along, though they held out through Patience and Faith and Hope of promised
success at last, Chap. 13. v. 9, 10. (these being encouraged as well as the
Bestians menaced by the first Angel) therefore as there is a joyful Message by
the second Angel of the actual Fall of Babylon in the second Vision, Chap. 14.
v. 8. so it is impossible but those Acclamations in Heaven and Doxology of the
Elders, Chap. 11. v. 15, 16, 17. should respect the partial but actual Fall of
the City and Rising of the Witnesses, it being so ample an Object of those
joyful Acclamations and of that thankful Doxology, and there being nothing
betwixt but the graceful ushering them in with the sound of the seventh
Trumpet. For though they may glance at more enlarged hopes of future
Accessions, yet the principal Object and Occasion of this Thanksgiving is the
actual Rising of the Witnesses. For were it not so, this signal Providence and
illustrious Victory would be without any Doxology or Thanksgiving, which is
grossly absurd, that there should be no shout nor sign of Joy at such a
surprising Providence as this, namely, at the reviving of the two Witnesses,
when they had lain slain three days and an half in the streets of the City: nor
at their ascending in a Cloud into Heaven in the view of all the people, the
tenth part of their City who slew them, falling in the mean time by an
Earthquake, and many thousands of their Enemies buried in the Ruins. How
incredible, how unsuitable a thing is it, that so happy a Catastrophe of the
Witnesses sufferings as this should pass without a Plaudite? Therefore it is a
senseless thing not to make the Rising of the Witnesses and the Fall of the City
the Object of those Acclamations and of the Doxology of the Elders, and
contrary to the usual Mode of the Apocalypse that ever closes the good success
of the Church with some indications of Joy and Thankfulness: as Chap. 12. v. 10
12. Chap. 19. v. 1. and again v. 21. which concludes with a Feast of Joy and
Thanksgiving for the Victory of the Rider of the white Horse. Wherefore it is
abundantly plain, that those Acclamations and the Elders Doxology respect this
event of the Rising of the Witnesses; And is yet further manifest from that
passage in the Doxology it self, v. 27. where thanks is given to God Almighty,
because he has taken to him his great Power and has reigned, viz. in that Fall
of the great City and Rising of the Witnesses, in this he resumed a
considerable part of his Kingdom which Antichrist had usurped. But if it
respect not this, the very Assertion is false, and Thanks is given for nothing.

Fifthly therefore, We being so well assured that the partial Fall of Babylon
and Rising of the Witnesses is the Object of the joyful Annunciation of the
second Angel, Chap. 14. and of the Doxology of the Elders, Chap. 11. and
meeting in the very next Vision to these, viz. that of the Vials with a Song
(prefixed thereto) of Praise and Thanksgiving by the Victos over the Beast for
an actual but partial Victory, such as that was over him in the two foregoing
Visions (and this in this Song discovers it self to be actual, because it is
said therein, Chap. 15. v. 4. For thy judgments are made manifest, viz. in that
late Fall of Babylon, and yet the Victory implied in this Song is but partial,
because the Song is prefixed before the Vials which are to bring to pass the
full and final ruin thereof) and there being no precedent actual and partial
Victory but this in the Fall of the City and Rising of the Witnesses, which may
be the Object of this Song of Thanksgiving, like that of Moses upon the
Overthrow of Pharaoh at the Red Sea, it is impossible but this Song must be to
the same effect with the Doxology of the Elders, and synchronize with it.

Sixthly therefore, It is as clear as Noonday, that that Doxology of the
Elders immediately following the sixth Trumpet, this Song of Moses and the Lamb
must immediately follow the sixth Trumpet.

And now Seventhly and lastly, All the Vials following the Song of Moses and
the Lamb, it is apparent that they all follow the sixth Trumpet and the Rising
of the Witnesses, and consequently there being no part of the two first Visions
of the Opened Book (which begin from one Epoch, and end with the seventh Vial)
which prefigures that notable and indeed stupendous Achievement of Providence
(which therefore cannot but be predicted within this space) in causing so many
Provinces, Principalities, Nations and Kingdoms to cast off the Pope in the
late Reformation begun by Luther, unless this of the partial Fall of Babylon
and Rising of the Witnesses (For all the Vials are after their Rising: And if
any one will be so freakish, as notwithstanding to pitch upon some one of the
Vials to be a Prediction of the late Reformation, I demand what Event before
the Reformation is the fulfilling of that illustrious Vision of the Rising of
the Witnesses, for the Event that answers to it must be so notorious, that it
cannot be passed by in History) It necessarily therefore follows, that the
aforesaid Reformation only, can be the Event that answers to the Vision of the
partial Fall of Babylon and Rising of the Witnesses, and consequently be that
which the Song of Moses and the Lamb gives thanks for. Which was the thing to
be demonstrated.

CHAP. XXIV. Whether the Witnesses wear sackcloth for any time after their
being risen. Whether the Vial-Angels received their Vials before or after the
Song of Moses and the Lamb sung by the Victors over the Beast. What is the
adequate Visum of the sixth Trumpet. What the full meaning of the Lamb's being
found worthy to open the Seals of the Seven-sealed Book. Whether a year in the
Apocalypse any where signifies a Year of years. Whether there be any mystical
meaning in noting Prophetic Time sometimes by Days, sometimes by Months.
IT is demonstrated in the foregoing Chapter with Evidence plainly
Mathematical, that the Reformation begun by Luther is the Rising of the
Witnesses: but there being some ingenious and diligent Studiers of the
Apocalypse, who, though they are convinced that the abovesaid Reformation is
the fulfilling of the Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses, yet think their
wearing of sackcloth may be extended to a longer time; I shall endeavor here
to clear that Point. And in order thereto we are first to consider, that the
wearing of sackcloth is not literally to be expounded, but is only a Symbol of
a mean and squalid condition, and of a grieved and pensive heart, which are
things inconsistent with the Witnesses being risen from the death they were in,
viz. a Political Death, whose Resurrection implies the contrary, prosperity and
respect according to their different degrees of Quality. Wherefore the nature
of the thing it self may teach us that the risen Witnesses, in their being
risen, did ipso facto put off their sackcloth, and were clad with garments of
Joy. Besides, the Text does assure us thereof, Chap. 11. v. 15, 16, 17. For
what were those Acclamations in Heaven there, and the four and twenty Elders
Doxology, but an intimation what a time of Joy and Triumph it would be on Earth
upon the Rising of the Witnesses; and could they themselves then be in such a
squalid and forlorn condition as to wear sackcloth? Again, Chap. 15. the Song
of Moses and the Lamb is said to be sung by them that had got the Victory over
the Beast and over his Image, and over his Mark and over the Number of his
Name. Which Victors over the Beast most assuredly are the very Witnesses
against whom he warred, this Song being Synchronal to the Acclamations in
Heaven and Doxology of the Elders. What then shall we think that these
Triumphant Witnesses while they had the Harps of God in their hands, and sung
this joyful Epinikion to them, wore sackcloth on their backs, what can be more
incongruous?

But I will yet add a third place, Chap. 7. there is mention of the 144000
sealed ones which synchronize, and indeed are the same with the 144000, Chap.
14. which are the Soldiers of the Lamb, the Saints or Witnesses, and who are
warred against by the Beast during the time of the first six Trumpets. For
though in the Cortex of the Prophecy this Sealing seems to be done at once
immediately before the first Trumpet sounds, yet undoubtedly it is a continued
thing all along the time of the first six Trumpets, which is for about twelve
hundred years, for such a space the sealed Soldiers of the Lamb, as
conflicting with the Beast, are conceived to continue, but at the end of the
sixth Trumpet the Victory is obtained, Babylon falls, viz. the tenth part
thereof, and the Witnesses rise, and as I noted before, sing the Song of Moses
and the Lamb; and as that is the sign of their Victory there, so their being
clothed in white Robes, and having Palms in their hands, Chap. 7.9. denotes
the same here. And v. 14. in that they are said to be those that came out of
great Tribulation, it implies their fresh emergency out of the calamities they
suffered under the entire Reign and Tyranny of the Beast. After which Victory
of the Saints or Witnesses, you see they forthwith appear clothed in white
Robes, which is a plain Argument they had put off their sackcloth, which is the
thing I aimed at.

Nor can the Argument be eluded by pretending, that these here clothed in
white Robes with Palms in their hands, are those mentioned Chap. 6. to whom
white Robes are given, viz. the Primitive Martyrs who obtain a blessed
Resurrection at this time for suffering under the Dragon, as those do at the
beginning of the Millennium for suffering under the Beast, the description also
of their condition implying it to be their assumption into Heaven, not a state
on Earth: For to this I answer, besides the absurdity of making more
Resurrections than two, the correspondency of the 144000 sealed ones to the
144000 with the Lamb on Mount Sion, shows plainly that instating of these
Palm-bearing Victors in their white Robes, into that State here described, is
not till after the sixth Trumpet at the Rising of the Witnesses. There begins
the joyful condition of the Palm-bearers, and reaches to the end of all
including the New Jerusalem-state and blessed Millennium. Which New
Jerusalem-state being so described as to be also a fit Type of the Church
Triumphant in Heaven, it is very congruous that this Vision also may be so
framed as to be Typical of that state likewise, though in the mean time it is a
Prophecy of the state of the Church on Earth. But that those in white Robes,
Chap. 6. v. 11. answers so handsomely to the Palm-bearing Victors in white
Robes, Chap. 7.9. this is but a pleasant Lemmatosynechia in the Cortex which
occurs often, and which entraps many heedless Readers of the Apocalypse before
they be aware. Wherefore I think it is a plain case, that these Palm-bearing
Victors in white Robes are the same with the Victors over the Beast, Chap. 15.
and they with the Risen Witnesses, Chap. 11. who being upon their Victory and
fresh emergency out of great tribulation clothed in white Robes, did not
continue any time after their Conquest clothed in Sackcloth.

Something akin to this protracting the time of the Witnesses wearing sackcloth
beyond their Rising, is that opinion of some, who, although they acknowledge
the Reformation to be the Rising of the Witnesses, yet will not have the
fulfilling of the Vision of their Rising completed therein, but expect a
further Rising of them signified, as they would have it, by this very Vision.
But the mistake of this Opinion I shall manifestly discover in the following
Chapter.

The next thing I will consider here is this: Whether the Vial-Angels received
their Vials before or after the Song of Moses and the Lamb, Chap. 15. That they
received them after, any one may be well assured that observes, First, That one
continued Vision is divided sometimes into several Chapters: As the
Introductory Vision to the Sealed Book-Prophecy, Chap. 4, and 5. as also that
one Vision comprised in the 12.13. and 14. Chapters. Which answers to that
contained in the eleventh. Secondly, That in like manner the Vision of the
Vial-Angels is contained in the 15. and 16. Chapters. Thirdly, That to so large
a Vision the first verse of Chap. 15. [And I saw another sign in Heaven great
and wonderful, seven Angels having the seven last Plagues, etc.] is but the
general Title thereof, and the Vials are not so much as mentioned in this
Title. Fourthly; That before he falls upon the Vision it self, there is an
Introduction thereto, a kind of Dramatical Interlude, which is not as in
ordinary Plays, merely for delight, but for some weighty instruction, else
there can be no sense of clapping it immediately after the summary Title of
this Vision. What then can it be but to intimate, that the Order of the Vials
is to be after this Song of Moses and the Lamb. Wherefore it being said v. 5.
After that (that is after the singing of this Song) I looked, and behold, etc.
viz. After this the seven Vial-Angels came out of the Temple, having the seven
Plagues, but not yet said to have the Vials, but immediately to receive them of
one of the four Beasts, and in the beginning of the next Chapter bid to pour
them on the Earth. If the sense of this express order of things be not, that
the Angels received their Vials after the Song of Moses and the Lamb, we cannot
be assured of the certain sense of any passage of the Apocalypse, nor of the
whole Bible, no nor of any Writing whatsoever. Insomuch that I have been amazed
that it ever came into any man's mind to think otherwise.

A third thing is, What the adequate Visum is of the sixth Trumpet, i. e. what
affairs in the World or Church are noted to fall out during the sounding of
that Trumpet. To which I answer, That it is that which is set down Chap. 9.
from v. 13. to the end of the Chapter. Whereby is signified the Overrunning of
the Eastern Empire and the Church by the Turks with the possessing themselves
of Constantinople, and the general Impenitency of the Western Church and
Empire, notwithstanding this notorious Judgment of God upon the Eastern. Which
latter part is fully expressed v. 20, 21. And the rest of the men that were not
killed with these Plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that
they should not worship Demons and Idols of Gold and Silver and Brass and
Stone, etc. Neither repented they of their Murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor
of their Fornication, nor of their Thefts. That this is the adequate object of
the Vision of the sixth Trumpet I conceive is plain from hence. First, That
immediately after this, instead of the Angel of the sixth Trumpet that sounded,
steps in a mighty Angel to roar out the next Interval the last of the seven,
divided also into seven Thunders, as the seventh Seal into seven Trumpets.
Secondly, Because if this be not the precise Visum or Object of the Vision of
the sixth Trumpet, there will be no stop till you come to the 14. verse of
Chap. 11. The second we is past, etc. Which is the most outrageous wild thing
to be conceived as can be, the Vision of the Witnesses in sackcloth running up
as high as the first Trumpet, to say nothing of the measuring the Court of the
Temple and Altar. And thirdly and lastly, which nicks the business, methinks,
marvellously well, The Rising of the Witnesses and Fall of the City is a
Prophecy of a considerable Reformation, that is, of the Repentance of a
considerable part of the Western Church and Empire, or of their ceasing to be
impenitent, which was the latter part of the Visum of the sixth Trumpet.
Wherefore immediately upon this Rising of the Witnesses and Fall of the City,
that is, upon the ceasing of that general Impenitency, it being said the second
Woe is past, it is manifest, that the Turks overrunning the Eastern Empire and
the general Impenitency of the Western thereupon was the adequate Visum of the
sixth Trumpet. And these three Points respect the foregoing Chapter. There are
three Points behind that have no such reference.

The first is, what may be the full meaning of the Lamb's being found worthy to
open the Seals of the Seven-sealed Book. For the fullness of this meaning being
rightly understood, we shall therewithal better discern how well the Doxologies
of the four Beasts and twenty four Elders, and after of those numerous Quires
of Angels, and indeed of the whole Creation in this Dramatical Theater in
Heaven, are made to prefigure the Joy and Rejoicing which will be in the
blessed Millennium on Earth, when the Power given to the Lamb of opening the
Seals shall have that glorious effect in introducing those times of the New
Jerusalem, which these Angelical Actors on an Heavenly Stage are made to
prefigure in the sight and hearing of S. John after his being caught up into
Heaven in his Divine Rapture mentioned Chap. 4. v. 2.

Wherefore in brief I conceive that the Lamb's receiving the Book, and
therewith a power of opening the Seals, implies these two things. The first is
the representing to John, by way of Prophetical Vision, the state of the Church
and of the World, so far forth as the Church is concerned in the affairs
thereof through a long Series of time to the end of all, even to the very
Conflagration. That this is one meaning of this power of opening the Seals is
plain from Chap. 6. v. 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 12. and Chap. 8.1. in which seven places
the Lamb is said orderly to open the Seals one after another, and upon the
opening each Seal a Prophetic Vision follows. Whence it is manifest, that his
Power of opening the seven Seals, is the Power of imparting this whole Book of
Visions to his Servant John. For at the Opening of the seventh Seal all the
whole Book of the Prophetic Visions was opened, as is to be understood from
the frame of the Book above described.

But now forasmuch as the truly opening of the Seals would not be absolutely
put into the hand of Christ, unless he had also Power given from him that sits
on the Throne to guide the affairs of this sublunary World, so as that he might
bring to pass by permission or impulsion and positive motion the things that
are prefigured (For the Effect brought to pass both argues the truth and
discovers the right sense of the Prophetic Vision at once) this Power of
administering all things, and ordering them so, that they shall certainly answer
to the Prophetic Prefigurations of them, is necessarily the other thing that
is included in this power of opening the Seals given to the Lamb. And hence
(...), and (...) are ascribed to him as well as (...), Might, Power, and
Strength as well as Wisdom in those Doxologies of the four Beasts and twenty
four Elders, of the numerous Quires of Angels, and of the whole Creation
glancing in this Prophetical Rapture at those times wherein the effect of this
power of opening the Seals will appear to all the world most resplendent and
glorious. So that those Arehetypal Millennial Kings, viz. the twenty four
Elders are made to sing the Song of those Ectypal Kings in the Millennium, who
will experimentally find what is prophetically set down here in the Song of the
twenty four crowned Elders, Thou art worthy to receive the Book, and open the
Seals thereof, etc. and have made us Kings and Priests to our God, and we shall
reign upon Earth, viz. in this blessed Millennium which thou have as well
effected as predicted through that Power given thee of thy Father.

The second Point is, Whether a Year in the Apocalypse any where may signify a
Year of years? The meaning of which Question is, Whether that express word
[Year] whether it be (...) or (...) (for that (...) which signifies Time, and
in the literal meaning a Year, denotes a year of years in those places where a
Time and Times and half a Time do occur, is without question) whether these, I
say, any where signify a Year of years, or in correspondence to other places
of the Apocalypse are to signify so? That the word (...) which is rendered a
Year, signifies a Year of years, Apoc. 9.15. where the four Angels on the great
River Euphrates are said to be prepared for an hour and a day and a month and a
year, seems very probable. Because interpreting a day, month and year; [a year,
a month of years, and a year of years] it makes up three hundred ninety six
years, which is exactly the time from Togrulbec Prince of the Turks his
Inauguration by the Caliph Chaiim Biamrilla (after the taking of Bagdad) to the
taking of Constantinople by Mahomet the Second. Which is not probable to be a
fortuitous hit, and therefore plain that (...) [a year] in this place signifies
a year of years, and it is the only Example in all the Apocalypse. But there is
not so much as one Example of (...) signifying a year of years, but an
assurance rather of the contrary, that it signifies a common year consisting of
three hundred sixty five days. Otherwise if this (...) as well as (...) should
signify a year of years, the Millennium would last 365000 years, which seems a
thing utterly incredible; though I will not deny but this Millenary Number
signifying symbolically, it need not be pent up to just a thousand years, but
may extend it self further. And lastly, if any one will contend that (...) and
(...) is all one, and signify both [a year] this is the only truth that can be
asserted touching the meaning of a year in the Apocalypse, that it is but a
single year, though numbered with other names of Time of less quantity, as days
and months, that signifies a year of years, but that a year, in Connumeration
with other years, which are Times of like quantity with it self, it then
signifies a common Year and no more. This is all touching this thing that can
be made out of the Apocalypse so far as I know.

The third and last Point is, Whether there be any Mystery in setting down
Prophetic Time one while by Days, another while by Months? To which the Answer
is brief and easy, viz. That in those places of the Apocalypse where the
Apostolical and Apostatical Church are compared and opposed one to the other,
there the time of their conditions is also differenced, the time of the
Evangelical Church being reckoned by days, of the Apostatical or Antichristian
by months. This is constant in this (...), where days and months are named. But
where these Antistaechal Parties are unconcerned in reference to one another,
neither month nor day has any such Mystery in it, as in that passage Chap. 9.
where the four Angels at Euphrates are said to be prepared for an hour and a
day and a month and a year.

CHAP. XXV. Nine Queries with Notes thereon to a Friend, leading to undeniable
assurance, that not a Prophetical Day nor Month but a Semi-time is the Unite
for the computing the Time of the Event in the Medial Visions.
Query 1. WHether the Reformation begun by Luther, and propagated into so many
parts of Christendom within the space of the seventh Semi-time, be not the
fulfilling of the Vision of the partial Fall of Babylon, or the great City, and
of the then Rising of the Witnesses?

Query 2. Whether the first six Trumpets and the forty two months prosperous
War of the Beast, and the other Medial Visions do not all synchronize one with
another?

Query 3. Whether the War of the Beast with the Witnesses, Chap. 11. and with
the Saints, Chap. 13. be not one and the same War?

Query 4. Whether the three days and an half wherein the Witnesses are said to
lie slain, be not the same with the forty two months of the prosperous or
victorious War of the Beast against the Saints? Chap. 13.

Query 5. Whether the issue of this slaughtering and victorious War of the
Beast against the Witnesses and Saints for three days and an half or forty two
months (wherein their Faith and Patience was so much tried) was not the Rising
of the Witnesses or the partial Fall of Babylon or great City?

Query 6. Whether the Rising of the Witnesses and partial Fall of Babylon be
not the final issue of the three days and an half, or forty two months
slaughtering War of the Beast against the Saints or Witnesses?

Query 7. Whether the three days and an half's slaughtering War, or forty two
months victorious War against the Saints or Witnesses, can be produced any
further than to the final issue of the said War?

Query 8. Whether the abovementioned Reformation, it being the fulfilling of
the Vision of the partial Fall of Babylon and of the then Rising of the
Witnesses, be not the final issue of the once prosperous War of the Beast
against the Saints and Witnesses?

Query 9. And lastly, Forasmuch as the abovementioned Reformation began but a
little after the commencement of the last Semi-time, and had its full growth
before the expiring of the same, the partial Fall of Babylon being effected
before the last Semitime expired, I query, Whether it be not evident, nay
necessary, that we make a Semi-time the Unite in the Computation of the Events
of the Medial Visions, however Daniel's Time and Times and Half a Time be
varied into twelve hundred and sixty days and forty two months. Which is the
main Scope of Arithmetica Apocalyptica. These be the Queries, the Notes follow.

Note 1. The Affirmative of the first Query we are both agreed in, and I have
invincibly demonstrated it in my Apology, and in my Answer to S. E. the
Remarker upon the said Apology. The Reader may see what is nearer at hand in
(...) twenty third Chapter of these Paralipomena.

Note 2. The second Query I did put, (the Affirmative whereof is demonstrated
by Mr. Mede, nor do I believe you do in the least doubt of it) that you may
thereby understand that the Medial Vision of the Time of the mournful
Witnesses, as also of all the other Medial Visions (which synchronize one with
another) expires with the sixth Trumpet, which expires with the partial Fall of
the great City and the then Rising of the Witnesses, viz. with the
abovementioned Reformation.

Note 3. The Affirmative of the third Query I conceive you will not stick to
acknowledge, it being made so clear in the Answer to the Remarks on the
Apology. Let the Reader see again these Paralipomena, Chap. 23.

Note 4. And my Apology and Defense of it against the Remarker, has no less
than demonstrated the Affirmative of this Query also. How strong the Arguments
are, you will quickly recollect by merely reminding you of them. (1.) The three
Times and an half equal to forty two Months plainly answer to three Days and an
half. Three Integrals and an half to the three Integrals and an half. (2.) That
there is no likelihood that in the Apocalypse a Number should be computed to
the curiosity of half a year. (3.) That if the Evangelical Church should ever
be reduced to such a condition as is set out by the Witnesses lying slain in
the streets, it is incredible they should get up again within three years and
an half. (4.) If the three years and an half be restrained to the end of their
prophesying, nothing in the Vision is a Symbol of their Political Death to
which their Resurrection relates. (5.) They having been politically dead all
along the forty two months, and often persecuted, martyred and massacred, it is
unimaginable what other more direful condition should befall them signified by
their lying slain three days and an half, than what befell them before; so that
it must be a Symbol really of their three times and an half sufferings. (6.)
And lastly, If the Beast war not with them till they have finished their
Testimony, as those that oppose us would have it, then till the end of their
prophesying, there is neither any war nor overcoming, nor killing of the
Witnesses, which is point blank against the Truth of History.

Note 5. The Affirmative of the fifth Query is plain and express from the Text
it self, Chap. 11. v. 11, 14. and Chap. 14.8. which intimates the issue of the
War of the Beast with the Saints.

Note 6. That the Affirmative of this Query is true may likewise appear from
the Text it self, namely, that it is the final issue of the War. For this Issue
is said to be after the three days and an half, Chap. 11.11. which as I doubt
not but that it is the same with Daniel's three times and an half, and
consequently with the forty two months and twelve hundred and sixty days; so
though we should yield they signify but three years and an half, and thus
these three days and an half were either the three last years of the twelve
hundred and sixty, or three years and an half added to them, yet it does
invincibly follow from this Text, that the issue of the once prosperous War of
the Beast against the Saints and Witnesses is a final Issue, it being just at
the end of the time of that War.

Note 7. The Negative of this Query is plain at first sight. No man can
conceive a War produced further than the final issue thereof. This
consideration and what has been said on the foregoing Query, puts all out of
doubt. Let us only here note by the bye, that there is no forty two months
Reign of the Beast distinct from his prosperous warring against the Saints and
Witnesses. His prosperous War or prosperous reigning and retaining the
entireness of his Dominions is restrained to this time of forty two months, but
his reigning at large is not.

Note 8. The Affirmative of this eighth Query is manifest from the Affirmative
of the sixth, where it is made plain, in what is said thereon, that the partial
Fall of the great City, and the then Rising of the Witnesses, is the final
issue of the War of the Beast against the Saints and Witnesses. And that the
Rising of the Witnesses is the abovesaid Reformation, is the Affirmative of the
first Query.

Note 9. The Affirmative of this last Query is unavoidably true. And therefore
we may here adore the Wisdom of God, or his Spirit of Prophecy, who (foreseeing
how the Events would be in the Completion of this Vision of the Rising of the
Witnesses in the abovementioned Reformation, which was to fall out as it did
so early in the last Semi-time, and was completed so long before the expiring
thereof) gives us such a seasonable hint in the Conclusion of the Vision of the
two Witnesses (by adumbrating the time of their Sufferings under the Beast by
three days and an half, which so obviously reminds us of Daniel's three Times
and an half) as thereby to instruct us and warrant us to compute the Event of
the Medial Visions by Semi-times. And after the last Semi-time current, which
answers to the Half-Day, did fall out according to Prediction the partial Fall
of Babylon and the Rising of the Witnesses, viz. the late blessed Reformation,
and ceased to get further ground or enlargement before the Semi-time expired.
Which is a Demonstration that this Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses can be
continued no further. But whatever Accessions for the future are made to the
Kingdom of Christ, by his Victories over Antichrist, they must be prefigured by
other Visions. And all the Vials, as has been proved in the foregoing Chapter,
follow the Rising of the Witnesses.

CHAP. XXVI. Whether the forty two months Reign of the Beast commence with the
Apostasy, or begin fifty or sixty years after, out of an Answer to a Letter
from a worthy Friend. Three Arguments to prove it did not commence with the
Apostasy. Several things premised in order to an Answer to those Arguments. An
Answer to the first and second Arguments. An Answer to the third. Hints of an
Answer to other Particulars in the abovesaid Letter. Of the Author's twofold
Rising of the Witnesses, Speciminal and Gradual. And who are properly to be
accounted Witnesses. In what sense the Author says they were risen above thirty
years ago. Daniel 's Semi-times how illustrated by the Apocalypse. What the
forty two months Reign of the Beast. The Extension of Time in the Witnesses
Rising not to be eluded by the comparing it to the felling of a Tree at the
last stroke. In what sense the Author makes the Days of the Witnesses expire
Anno 1652. What is the fullest and largest sense of the Witnesses Political
Death.
THAT the forty two months Reign of the Beast does not commence with the
Apostasy, but fifty or sixty years after, these three Arguments are produced
to prove the same.

1. That the forty two months of the Beast cannot begin till Supremacy and
Idolatry be joined in one Sovereignty or seventh Head, which was not till the
Empire was divided into ten Kingdoms, which is fifty or sixty years after the
Apostasy appeared in the Empire.

2. As the Empire was not accounted the Kingdom of Christ till the supreme Head
the Caesar's were turned Christian: So the Christian Empire cannot be deemed the
Beast till the supreme Head thereof become Pagano-Christian, and this was not
till it was actually ten-horned.

3. The Beast did not come into being until the ten Kings rose in the Empire,
and it became divided into ten Kingdoms, forasmuch as the Beast is represented
with ten Crowns in the Vision upon his Horns. Which implies the actual Division
of the Empire into ten Kingdoms. Which yet was not till about sixty years after
the Apostasy.

Before I answer to these three Arguments I think it not amiss to profess, that
I agree with him that produces them in the Conclusion they are produced for,
viz. That it is not rational to begin the account of the Beasts forty two
months Reign sooner than the Empire became Idolatrous in the Supreme or
Sovereign Power of it. For this Beast is under the seventh Head (though eighth
King) and therefore under a Pagano-Christian Head. But I cannot but here take
notice of that passage of the Prophecy that indicates this eighth King, Chap.
7. v. 11. And the Beast that was and is not, he is the eighth. Where he names
the Beast it self instead of the Head thereof: not surely as if he had no Head,
but to intimate the difficulty to find whom to make this seventh Head or eighth
King, whether the Secular Caesar's or that Rex Sacrorum the two-horned Beast,
which from the beginning had in a manner all the sway in matters of Religion,
and is the same with the Woman on the Beast, which from the beginning of the
Apostasy she rid and guided, and what is that but to be his Sovereign or Head?
As the man is said to be the Head of the woman, because he has the Rule over
her, so in this sense may the woman be said to be the Head of the Beast. And
indeed from the time of the Apostasy to the Reformation the Roman Empire seems
to have been Sacerdotal or Hierarchical, as if the Clay, not the Iron were the
Kingdom, as Daniel seems to intimate Chap. 2.41. where he says, The Kingdom
shall be divided, but there shall be in it of the strength of the Iron: as if
indeed the Clay were the Kingdom, but it should be strengthened with the Iron.
So that by this rate the whole Paganc-christianizing Hierarchy (as well Eastern
as Western) or the two horned Beast which signifies the same, may prove the
eighth King or seventh Head of the Beast.

Whether this Hierarchical Pagano-Christian Head, or whether the
Pagano-christianizing Caesar's or Emperors, till the Pope over-top't them even
in Secular Power be the seventh Head, the Prophecy seems shy in determining,
leaving every one to his own judgment. And truly I have been always very prone
to think that the Pagano-christianizing Caesar's or Emperors, till the Pope
usurped Jus utriusque gladii, were the seventh Head of the Beast. For they
giving their Power to the two-horned Beast, and countenancing or conniving at
or not opposing his Pagano-Christian Institutes (Qui non vetat peccare cum
possit jubet) they themselves become guilty of Pagano-Christianism. Besides,
that it is no question but they practiced with the Church those Idolatrous
Superstitions that refer to the Mahuzzim, etc. But if any one will make the
Pagano-Christian Hierarchy the seventh Head, there is so much to be said for
it, that I will not greatly quarrel with him. And I am inclined to think that
this is the very Mystery of that passage in the Prophecy, Chap. 17.11. of
naming the Beast himself instead of his Head, to leave it thus in medio,
whether you will have it Hierarchical or Caesarean. And having premised thus
much, I shall now briefly answer to the Arguments.

1. To the first then I say, That so soon as the Apostasy came in, which
includes in it Pagano-Christian Superstitions and some degrees at least of
Idolatry, there was a seventh Head of that very hue, whether you will deem it
the Hierarchical Head who were the Introducers of this Apostasy, or the
Caesarean, who by countenancing, complying with, or not opposing this
Apostasy, became guilty of the same, and chargeable therewith in the Prophecy.
But if you will not have the Christian Caesar's after the Apostasy chargeable
with Idolatry till they make Decrees for it, and incorporate it into the Law of
the Empire, as Justinian did the Orthodox Faith out of the Ecumenical
Councils, the Reign of the Beast will not begin till six or seven hundred years
after Christ. And then the Rising of the Witnesses, which is the final issue of
the forty two months War (and therefore must be at least in the last month,
viz. the forty second) will happen in the thirty first or twenty seventh month,
so that all will break a pieces.

2. As to the second I answer, That the supreme Head of the Beast became
Pagano-Christian before the Empire was divided into ten Kingdoms, even at the
beginning of the Apostasy, as was answered to the first.

3. To the third I say, The Beast was in being before the ten Kings rose in the
Empire. For it was not the ten Horns that made it a Beast, that is, its being
divided into ten Kingdoms, but its Paganochristianizing, its reintroducing old
Pagan Rites and Superstitious and Idolatrous usages into Christianity, and so
making the Empire the Beast, That was, is not, and yet is. This was a doing,
and in some sort done at the sounding of the first Trumpet, which begins with
the Epoch of this Apostasy, and brings in those Commanders of the Northern
Nations, whose very Invasion of the Empire is the beginning of their catching
at Crowns and Principalities, though it was about half an hundred years till
they all ten were served or sped, the Church advancing still more and more in
her Apostasy as the time went on. And the Division of the Empire into ten
Kingdoms signified by the ten Horns, is a sure Note of the beginning of the
Apostasy, it beginning at a time of their catching at Kingdoms, which began
with the sound of the first Trumpet, and with the forty two months War or
prosperous Reign of the Beast, which ended with the Rising of the Witnesses and
last blast of the sixth Trumpet. So exact is the Synchronism of the forty two
months and the six first Trumpets rightly. understood.

Nor is the Beast represented in the Vision with its ten Horns crowned to
signify the Empire was not a Beast till it was thus actually divided into ten
Kingdoms, but that it was a Bestianizing while the ten Horns were catching at
and actually obtaining one after another their respective Kingdoms. So that the
Beast began to be at least with the catching at and obtaining a Kingdom by the
first of the ten Horns. But all the ten Horns are exhibited as crowned in
Counter-distinction to the Representation of the Roman Empire Pagan, where
there are seven Heads and ten Horns, but the Horns without Crowns, that we may
be sure the Vision belongs to the Empire after it had become Christian. And
thus the forty two months of the Beast and the sound of the first Trumpet
beginning with the time of the Apostasy, it is evident the twelve hundred and
sixty days of the mournful Prophecy of the Witnesses and the rest of the
synchronizing Medial Visions commence from the same Epoch, and consequently
that the twelve hundred and sixty days expired about thirty years ago.

The rest of the most material things in your Letter I will answer very
briefly. What you allege therefore out of my self, that I allow of a double
Rising of the Witnesses (Synops. Prophet. lib. 2. cap. 7. sect. 7, 11.) one
quoad speciem, the other quoad gradus, you are to take notice, that that
distinction is mentioned by me only to this end, that no man should expect at
the Expiration of the forty two months an universal Rising of the Witnesses or
total Fall of Babylon, but only speciminal. But that after this speciminal
Rising I allow the following Victories of Christ against Antichrist to be
called the further Rising of the Witnesses. This, though by some Analogy it may
be called (and is so by me called) a further gradual Rising of the Witnesses,
yet I must confess I think it now more proper and safe to call nothing the
Rising of the Witnesses but what is included within the Time of the forty two
months, and intimated by the partial Fall of the City. Whatever other
Accessions are made to the Kingdom of Christ under the Vials, must take their
denomination from the Vial they happen under. And looking upon the thing it
self, those that bore Testimony in those Times that the Cause of Truth seemed
so obscure in, that none would own it but those Witnesses, these, I say, have
a more special Right to that Title. But the Cause is now plainly decided by the
manifest Judgment of God in giving Victory to the Witnesses, and fulfilling
exquisitely the Prophecy recorded Apoc. 11.11. in the blessed Reformation. So
that further witnessing in a decided Cause seems superfluous, men now that
stick to the Truth decided, are rather honest conscientious Professors of the
Truth than Witnesses to it, and they that suffer for it, may rather be said to
be murdered than martyred for the Truth, though the Merit of their Suffering is
muchwhat alike to the other.

And now in this proper sense of the Rising of the Witnesses, when I say they
are risen above thirty years ago, this is no contradiction out of forgetfulness
to my own sentiments who make the Rising of the Witnesses to begin about the
middle of the second month of the last Hexamenon or Semi-time, and end about
the middle of the fifth from mine own Epoch, Anno 393. or 400. as if hereby I
finished their Rising later than about the midst of the fifth month of the last
Hexamenon, and so differ about fifty years from my self. For where I say above
thirty years ago, I speak in the Language of them that by the twelve hundred
and sixty years will have so many years Extent signified. My meaning therefore
is, that even according to them, granting that Extent to them, yet the
Witnesses are risen above thirty years ago, counting from the right Epoch, so
that there is no further fulfilling of that Prophecy. But though there is no
more counting on any further Accessions to the Kingdom of Christ under the
Notion of the twelve hundred and sixty days unexpired or Rising of the
Witnesses, yet there is from the Effects of the Vials, as I have hinted
already: but we go on.

Daniel's Semi-times are illustrated by the Apocalypse, (1) In that they are by
changing them into twelve hundred and sixty days or forty two months declared
to be but three times and an half. And (2) it is declared by placing three days
and an half at the close of the Vision of the Witnesses, that they are the
measure that the Events of the Medial Visions are to be computed by, that is,
that a Semi-time is the Unite, not a Month or Day. And withal we must remember
that the Artifice of Concealment is as well intended in the Apocalypse as the
Certainty of Revealment.

Furthermore, Remember that the forty two months Reign of the Beast is not
understood of his Reign at large, but of his prosperous belligerant Reign
against the Saints and Witnesses, till their Rising and the partial Fall of the
City, so that these necessarily synchronize.

Your Comparison of the last stroke at the Tree felling the Tree is witty, but
not so well fitted to this case. The Rising of the Witnesses, or falling of the
City, is rather like the mowing of a Meadow, which is not said to be mowed just
at the last cut, as the Tree to be felled at the last stroke of the Ax, but it
is mowed and a mowing all the time till the last Sithe-full: such is the nature
of the Rising of the Witnesses. Their Rising was in succession, not at one
joint Jump, as the falling of the grass is in succession, not all at one stroke
of the Sith.

In Arithm. Apocalypt. page 382. I make the twelve hundred and sixty days of
the Witnesses expire Anno 1652. speaking according to their Hypothesis that
understand the full Extent of so many years by them; yet, say I, they expired
in the year 1652. from the true Epoch, though they were so to be extended, and
though we did not measure the time of the Medial Visions by Semi-times. But
this is but one true Tale to say, they expired An. 1652. from the true Epoch,
according to that Hypothesis of some, but that the Witnesses Rising was past in
a different year (from the said Epoch) consulting History and measuring by
Semi-times, or making a Semi-time the Unite. It Is much you did not understand
my meaning before.

And whereas you conceive the Witnesses could not be politically dead from the
very beginning of the Apostasy, that word [Political] was the best word I
could hit on to oppose to [Natural] death. But it is to be understood in a
larger meaning than to be grossly put out of Office. This Death, I mean, is
gradual, and the first degree thereof is, when those that stood up for the
Truth against the introducing the Pagano-Christian Rites, etc. were found so
weak, that they could not stop the Tide of Ecclesiastical Corruptions flowing
in, but their attempts were ineffectual, so that as to any efficiency to stop
the incroaching Pagano-Christianism, they were as mere Ciphers or dead men that
can do nothing. This is included in [Political Death] in that large sense I
take it in. I mean this Inefficiency or Inability to carry on things that
appertain to the Order or Polity of the Church, or of the State in Matters
respecting Religion against the Authors and Countenancers of the growing
Corruptions. And the Apostasy being the very Wilderness of the Church, the
Woman was in it as soon as it was. These are Hints of an Answer to your former
Letter, I shall offer the like to your latter.

CHAP. XXVII. Hints of an Answer to a second Letter from the same Hand. A
Semi-time the Unite in computing the Events of the Medial Visions proved by the
Author. Not four hundred thirty two, but three hundred ninety three, the
Author's Epoch for the Medial Visions. The odd Semi-time in Daniel added to
good purpose. The prevailing of the little Horn, Dan. 7. how to be understood.
The meaning of [After three days and an half]. His Friend's mistake touching
the second Query. His use of a Prophetic Henopoeia in Answer to the sixth
Query, but no avoiding thereby but that Luther 's Reformation will be the final
Issue of the forty two months War, and a Semi-time the Unite for computing the
Medial Visions.
YOU understand aright what I mean by making a Semi-time (which I call also in
one word an Hexamenon) an Unite in computing the time of Events in the Medial
Visions. But I am amazed that you say I only suppose or assert this, whenas I
have evidently demonstrated it in the brief Method of the nine Queries and
Notes thereon, if you patiently and closely attend thereto. And I have noted
above that from my Epoch the Witnesses began to rise about the midst of the
second month, and were rising till about at least the midst of the fifth in the
last Semi-time. And therefore it is no wonder that so large an Unite as an
Hexamenon or Hecatouogdoconthemeron, that is, an hundred and eighty Prophetic
days should be the Unite by which so large an Event should be computed. Nor is
there any other eventual measure of Time signified by the forty two months or
twelve hundred and sixty days than Daniel's seven Semi-times, as I shall remind
you again in the Conclusion. And it is not this partial Victory signified by
the Rising of the Witnesses, but that total Victory of the Rider of the white
Horse under the seventh Vial that secures the Saints for ever falling again
under the power of the Beast. Now to your Paragraphs.

To (1) In Synopsis Prophetica, lib. 2. cap. 5. sect. 4. there I say only, that
the Epoch of the Beast's forty two months is at least so early as four hundred
thirty two years; but the Epoch I stick to, is three hundred ninety three. And
according to that Epoch the Rising of the Witnesses will begin about the
middle of the second month, and reach into at least the middle of the fifth
month of the last Hexamenon or Semi-time. And I say, that all the Variations of
the time of the continuance of the Medial Visions signify no more than that
they shall continue for seven Semi-times, which are the seven Unites in this
Compute. And therefore if the Continuance reach into the seventh Unite
(especially the Event aimed at filling that Unite so competently well as it
does, viz. the Rising of the Witnesses and partial Fall of the great City) the
fulfilling of the Prophecy is plain and exact.

To (2) What you say here is neat, supposing your Epoch of four hundred fifty
six years, when the Beast became ten-horned, were true. For then Luther's
beginning the Reformation would fall short of the seventh Semi-time. But I
stand to that one Epoch of three hundred ninety three years, according to
which the Rising of the Witnesses will begin about the middle of the second
month of the last Hexamenon or Half-time, and reach into the midst of the fifth
month at least. So that the Half-Time is added to the three Times to very good
purpose in Daniel.

To (3) The little Horn prevailed against the Saints for a time and times and
half a time; but in the last Half-time he was not so prevalent or prosperous in
his War, but that part of his Kingdom was given to the Saints in the Rising of
the Witnesses, as it is said Dan. Chap. 7. v. 26. And they shall take away his
Kingdom, which was in part done in the Rising of the Witnesses and Fall of the
tenth part of the City, viz. in the Reformation; but the consuming and
destroying it to the end is left to the Vials that succeed the Rising of the
Witnesses, and will be completed under the seventh, at that great Battle under
the Conduct of the Heroes on the white Horse with a Sword issuing out of his
mouth. And the Vials succeed the sixth Trumpet, and consequently the Time and
Times and Half a Time. Which Vials would have no Kingdom of the Beast left to
be poured upon, if the fulfilling of the Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses
and Fall of the City were more than partial. What can be more plain?

To (4) After three days and an half, or after three times and an half,
doubtless is to be understood of the Three and Half current, not expired. But
this Expression [After] does plainly assure us, that this is the final issue of
that forty two months War of the Beast with the Witnesses, and that the final
issue of that War is but a partial Fall of the City, and no more Rising of the
Witnesses than was commensurate thereto, I pray you think seriously on that.
The regaining of the tenth part of the Kingdom of Antichrist into the hands of
Christ, and the Rising of the Witnesses in that tenth part, is plainly the
final Result of the forty two months (that is, of the Time and Times and half a
Time) War of the Beast with the Witnesses. The Vision says so expressly.

As for your Answer to my second Query; It is not my Query you answer to. For
my Query is, Whether the forty two months prosperous War of the Beast does not
synchronize with the first six Trumpets, and you give your Answer touching the
Reign or War of the Beast at large; which indeed reigns still, and wars still,
but not with like continued success, as in the forty two months continued War
noted in the Vision.

In Answer to my sixth Query, it is a pretty ingenious use you make of the
Prophetic Henopoeia, and I acknowledge there is a Prophetic Henopoeia in this
part of the Vision, the Rising of the Witnesses. For though in the fulfilling
of the Prediction the Witnesses rose in several places and at several times
successively one part after another, and with some Intervals of time betwixt,
though still within the last Semi-time, yet by an Henopoeia all these Risings
are represented as one Rising, this is acknowledged. But here we are carefully
to observe, that all these Risings put together is by the Vision it self
restrained to a partial Rising, forasmuch as it is said, That the tenth part
(at the self same hour) of the great City fell, and it is most certain the
Rising was extended no further than the falling of the City. But this partial
Fall and Rising was after the three days and an half, and consequently after
the forty two months and twelve hundred and sixty days equipollent only to
Daniel's three Times and an half or seven Semi-times, and the Reformation is
this partial Fall of the City and Rising of the Witnesses commensurate thereto,
nor any other than a partial Reformation is represented by the Prophecy;
wherefore the Reformation being said to fall out after the three days and an
half current, it is hence evident that both the Reformation is the final issue
of the three Times and an half's prosperous War of the Beast, and that we are
to reckon the Medial Visions (the time of their Event) by Semi-times, the
Reformation being both begun and ended within the last Semi-time, and taking so
large a space therein. This wants nothing but freely and closely thinking of,
and it will appear as clear as the Sun. If the Rising of the Witnesses were
universal, or there were a total Fall of the great City at the close of the
sixth Trumpet when this is, forasmuch as the Vials certainly follow the sixth
Trumpet, there would yet be then no Kingdom of the Beast left for them to be
poured upon, as I noted above. Think seriously on this.

CHAP. XXVIII. Hints of an Answer to a third Letter. Further Victories against
Antichrist after the Reformation not to be called any Rising of the Witnesses.
Who Competitors for being the seventh Head or eighth King. An Hierarchical
Pagano-Christian Head, how easily conceived to precede in order of Nature
before the Caesarean, and that it was as soon as the Apostasy came in. That
the Author affirms not that the Caesar's continued purely Christian an hundred
and twenty years. That the Christian Caesar's complied with the Apostasy of the
Church from the beginning amply made out by Reason and History. In what sense
the forty two months War of the Beast may be said to commence as early as the
Apostasy. The Beast is in being before the ten Kings, the Empire ipso facto
becoming a Beast by the Apostasy, which commenced before they were risen. That
(...) Apoc. 13.5. does not signify to continue at large, not supposed by the
Author, but proved by him.
1. WE are both agreed, that there will be further Victories over the Beast
besides this of the Reformation. But I absolutely deny that those Victories
belong to the forty two months War, or that they are (if we speak properly, and
keep to the Apocalyptick style) to be called the Rising of the Witnesses, but
are to take their denomination from the Vials they happen under.

2. Whereas you say, it does not appear to you difficult at all to determine,
whether the two-horned or ten-horned Beast be the seventh Head or eighth King;
I say it is impossible the Ten-horned Beast should be the eighth King or
seventh Head; because the Beast is not his Head. But it is a figurative Speech
when it is said, The Beast that was and is not he is the eighth. By a
Synecdoche the whole Beast is put for part, viz. his Head. Therefore the
Competition is not betwixt the two-horned Beast and Ten-horned, that is,
betwixt the Whore or Apostatized Hierarchy and the Empire divided into ten
Kingdoms, but betwixt the said Hierarchy and the Apostatizing Caesar's.

3. There was an Hierarchical apostatizing Head so soon as the Apostasy came
in, viz. the two-horned Beast, the same with the Whore that rides and guides
the Beast, and therefore has the Office of an Head, as I noted in my former.
And Vigilantius who lived about the end of the fourth Century, how he was
against the worshipping of the Relics of Martyrs, how he said the Miracles
done at their Monuments were the prestigious delusion of Devils, that he
condemned also the burning of Wax-Candles at their Altars in the daytime, and
how sharply he was inveighed against by S. Jerome for this, is too too well
known in History. These Idolatrous Superstitions therefore coming in, and being
thus countenanced by the lapsing Hierarchy, and the Hierarchy being the Head of
the Empire quoad Spiritualia, it is plain there is a Pagano-Christian Head so
soon as the Apostasy came in. And it is the two-horned Beast, Rev. 13. that is
the Maker of the Image of the Beast, And as for the little Horn appearing after
the ten Horns in Daniel, Chap. 7. it is said v. 8. that he appeared or came up
amongst them. Nor is he said to come up after them, v. 20. and v. 24. where he
is said to rise after them: from the Greek and Hebrew it may signify no more
than behind them, he stealing his growth upon them and with them; or it may
refer to the time of his more eminent and conspicuous growth, respecting by an
Idiconoea the Papacy chiefly. And though the Vision of the Rise of the
two-horned Beast follow that of the Ten-horned Beast, Chap. 13. yet the Method
of thus placing them is good, the Effect being notius nobis than the Cause.
Wherefore this strange Phenomenon of the Re-paganizing Empire is represented
in the first place, and the Efficient cause thereof the Apostatical Hierarchy
in the second, which is the two-horned Beast and Maker of the Image of the
Pagan Beast, which the ten-horned is. So easy is it to conceive an
Hierarchical Pagano-Christian Head at least in order of Nature before a
Caesarean. But there is no likelihood but the Caesar's Religion was immediately
conformed to the prevailing Hierarchy all along, and Mr. Mede you know makes
the two-horned and ten-horned Beasts to synchronize.

4. Now for the Christian Caesar's continuing purely Christian for an hundred
twenty years, according to my own account, this is an odd passage and to be
wondered at, and contrary to what I precisely profess in the place you allude
to. Synops. Prophet. lib. 2. cap. 5. Consect. 2. and Sect. 4. where are these
very words: But what I leave more lax here will be more particularly bounded in
the proportion of the Inner and Outer Court of the Temple, which will gird in
this time a little within four hundred years. And do not three hundred ninety
three years do so? Which is the Epoch I stand to.

5. That is also somewhat harshly said, That it does not so much as appear
probable that the Christian Caesar's complied with the Apostasy of the Church
from the beginning thereof; whenas it was their Interest to comply with that
which had the more common vogue of Holiness in the Empire. But it appears de
facto to be true: Else why did Arcadius and Honorius the Emperors in
Vigilantius his time not side with him against the sway of the two-horned
Beast, so much given in those times to the Superstitious and even Idolatrous
Veneration of the Relics of Martyrs? Where is there one Edict to stop the
current of Superstition and Idolatry in the whole Succession of Emperors from
Theodosius M. his time till Leo Isaurus the Iconoclast? But they were all
asleep till at last they seemed to be awakened by the Judgments of God in the
Invasion of the Saracens, I mean Leo Isaurus and some of his Successors. Is it
not a mavelous thing that Valentinianus, Theodosius and Arcadius should be so
curious as in their Edicts to take notice of the hair of Deaconesses, and say
nothing against the exorbitant. Veneration of Martyrs and their Relics,
unless they complied therewith? And how easy was it for the Christian
Emperors in those days to swallow down with sweetness all that extravagant
Devotion toward the Martyrs and their Relics, who did not disgust, but
assume such suspected Titles as these to themselves, Nostrum Numen, (...), Our
Godhead, our Divinity wills thus and thus? Which Phrases occur in the Rescripts
or Edicts of Theodosius M. and Justinian, and is by some noted as a kind of
Political Idolatry. To say nothing how they did not with sufficient severity
and earnestness forbid (no not any of them) the circumgestation and Adoration
of their own Images. For speaking against which Chrysostom incurred the
displeasure of the Court. And S. Jerome, otherwise superstitious enough, says,
Those that worship the Emperors Statues or Images do that which the three
Children denying to do were well-pleasing to God, comparing thus the
worshipping those Images or Statues with the worshipping the golden Statue
which Nebuchadnezzar had set up. And yet, as Gotfredus observes in Cod.
Theodos. de Imaginibus Imperialibus, Sed neque insania co hactenus processit,
ut ingenti numero sumptuque hae statuae excitarentur, verum ut cum Adorationis
fastigio erigerentur exciperenturque, quomodo and alias hoc aevo Divina
pleraque Imperatoribus tribuebantur, quae hujus Aevi labes fuit. And this was
the very Age in which the Apostasy began. Is it therefore not so much as
probable that the Christian Caesar's complied with the Apostasy of the Church
from the beginning, who were so insensible of the Idolatry committed on
themselves? And as the Superstition and Idolatry in worshipping the Saints and
their Relics increased, so did this Political Idolatry toward the Emperors
Images. For as the abovenamed Gotfredus cites it out of the second Council of
Nice, the people, when those Imperial Images were sent into the Provinces, met
them with Tapers and Incense, as if it were the Image of some God. What scruple
therefore is there now left but the Emperors swam down in the common stream of
Superstition and Idolatry from the first Apostasy of the Church to Leo
Isaurus's time, and that therefore from the very beginning of the Apostasy
till the Pope played the Caesar, and would be above the Emperors, the
Emperors themselves were the Pagano-Christian Head of the Beast.

And yet that the Emperors were more positively active in the Apostasy of the
Church, appears plainly out of History. For to omit Constantine (who with an
innocent zeal toward the Martyrs, caused the holy Relics of Andrew, Luke and
Timothy to be with pompous Solemnity translated to Constantinople, there to be
entempled in more illustrious Temples; though Cyril against Julian plainly
shows, that the most famous Temples of the Heathen were in truth no other than
the Sepulchers or Monuments of the dead; but Constantine intended nothing but a
kind of civil Honor hereby to the said Martyrs:) Arcadius also in a time when
the generality of the Empire grew mad after the Relics of Saints and Martyrs
(having a superstitious confidence of strange Virtue in them, of preserving
them from Evil and the place where they were entempled) ordered the Bones of
the Prophet Samuel to be translated out of Judaea into Thrace with mavelous
Pomp, the people receiving the Relics of the Prophet with Adoration, but not
to him forsooth, but Christ, as S. Jerome says, and is the present excuse of
the Romanists at this day. And how active Theodosius was in translating
Chrysostom's Relics to Constantinople you may see in Spondanus and others.
And that of S. Austin here is also worth the noting: Videtis Imperii
nobilissimi eminentissimum Culmen ad sepulchrum Piscatoris Petri submisso
diademate supplicare. So that it is plain the Emperors went along with the
practice of the Church and People.

Nay, as to the ordering of the Relics of Saints and Martyrs and the
translation of them in those Times, nothing was to be done sine affatibus
Augusti, without the permission of the Emperor. And therefore Theodosius M.
made an Edict against the vagabond Monks selling of Relics, but therein
allows the entempling of them with all Magnificence: which yet plainly answers
to the entempling the Pagan Heroes. As the Athenians after the Spectrum of
Theseus had appeared fighting for them in the Plains of Marathon, were bid by
their Oracle to find out the Bones of Theseus and bring them to Athens, and to
build an Heroon to him or Temple, and give him Religious Worship, that thereby
he might become the Safeguard of their State and City. The Egyptians also
frequented the Sepulcher of the Prophet Jeremy with great Devotion, because
they conceited he defended them from Asps and Crocodiles. And the Successors
of Alexander strove who should translate his Body into their Dominions, and
build an Heroon to him, as deeming thereby that they should engage him to be a
Defense or Safeguard to their Kingdom.

This is the genuine meaning of the Pagans entempling the Bones or Bodies of
their Heroes. And this was the Conceit of the generality of Christians toward
the latter end of the fourth Century, and the beginning of the fifth, that the
Relics of the Saints and Martyrs in their Martyria or places they were
entempled in, were the Forts, Bulwarks, and the Defenders of the City and
Country where they were enshrined. This was not only the ordinary Conceit of
the common people, but the voice of the Fathers in public Sermons in those
Times. Whence we may be sure the Emperors (having such a deference for the
Bishops, especially Theodosius M.) were successively imbued with the same sense
of things, which yet is no less than to be guilty of the Worship of the
Mahuzzim, in thus reposing their confidence in them, when no invisible Power is
to be confided in but God alone. See Chemnitius and Mr. Mede.

And lastly, The Care of Religion belonging also to the Emperors (though they
mainly entrusted the Hierarchy with it) and they giving no check by any Edict
or Rescript from Theodosius M. his time to Leo Isaurus, as I noted above, this
not forbidding is plainly encouraging, commanding or assuring them in this
erroneous way; as he that rides an Horse and has the reins in his hands, is
supposed to approve of the way the Horse goes, if he checks him not with the
bridle, and so direct him into the right way. So that the Apostasy thus begun
under the Emperors, it is manifest they stand guilty thereof, and so became
Apostatical or Pagano-Christian Heads of the Beast so soon as the Apostasy
began. Which is the thing that was to be demonstrated.

6. And that the forty two months War of the Beast commenced as early as the
Apostasy, may be easily understood by any body that understands the Genius of
the Apocalyptick Style, which is highly figurative and of a lofty vigorous
sense-striking strain, using the fullest and strongest Metaphors; and therefore
it is no wonder that all the Contest and Tug betwixt the Apostatizing Empire
and the Witnesses from the beginning to the end of the Contest, is set out by
that one high-sounding Word or Phrase of War; though at first it was only a
Dispute and Contest in words, as in the Case of S. Jerome and Vigilantius: And
the Metaphor is so easy and natural, though so grandisonant, that our
Theological Controversies and Disputes are ordinarily called Polemical
Divinity, that is in plain English, Warring or Warlike Divinity. And this War
is not said to be betwixt the Head of the Beast and the Witnesses (as if the
War could not begin till the Head of the Beast positively opposed the
Witnesses) but betwixt the Beast and the Witnesses; so that even while there
was no Edict of the Emperors against the Witnesses, yet the War might be begun
and continued betwixt the Beast and the Witnesses; unless a man will be so
humoursom, as in the Fight of an Horse with a Bear, because the Horse bites not
with his head, but only kicks with his heels, to deny he fights with the Bear.
And yet how positively the Emperors did concur with the Apostatizing part of
the Empire, has been declared above.

7. That the Beast was in being before the ten Kings rose in the Empire, is
demonstrated from your own Concession, viz. That the Apostasy of the Empire
was before the ten Kings rose in the Empire. For the Apostasy into
Pagano-Christianism is that very Form or Essence that turned the Empire into
that state which the Prophetic Style calls, The Beast that was, is not, and
yet is. And its being divided into ten Kingdoms, confers no more to its being a
Beast, than quartering a slain Mutton into four quarters by a Butcher,
contributes to its being a slain Mutton, which it was as fully before. So that
this Division in neither case is a Causa sine qua non, of the thing being so.
Nor does it follow because the Apostatized Empire is represented by the Beast
with ten Horns crowned, that therefore it was not a Beast before those
ten-crowned Horns, no more than it follows that the Apostatized Hierarchy
represented by the Whore, Chap. 17. so drunk with the blood of the Saints, and
so gorgeously apparelled, was not a Whore till she was grown so extremely
sumptuous in her Ornaments, and barbarously cruel in her Persecutions. The use
of the ten Horns crowned in the Representation of the Beast, Chap. 13. is not
to signify it was not a Beast till those actually crowned Horns, but to
distinguish him from the Dragon with ten Horns uncrowned, Chap. 12. and so to
intimate that this Beast, Chap. 13. is a Representation of the Empire after it
had degenerated into a Pagano-Christian State. For the Division of the Empire
into ten Kingdoms was not till after it had become Christian.

8. And lastly, As for your Postscript: I do not ground my distinction of the
Beast's forty two months prosperous Reign from his Reign at large upon the
different Readings of Rev. 13.5. but prove that their Reading that read v. 5.
That power was given him to make forty two months War with the Saints, or that
he was to proceed prosperously, or do prosperously forty two months (and not to
continue at large) is the best and truest sense. As is proved in the Preface to
the Answer to the Remarks. I say that Reading or sense I contend for, is not
supposed, but proved; forasmuch as the issue, even the final issue of that War
is but a partial Fall of the City and correspondent Rising of the Witnesses. I
pray consider the sixth, seventh and eighth Queries and the Notes on them, and
I think it will be impossible for you not to be convinced.

CHAP. XXIX. Hints of an Answer to a fourth Letter. That the Rising of the
Witnesses, Rev. 11. denotes a partial Regaining only of the Kingdom of
Antichrist into the hands of Christ. A further Enforcement of the same Truth.
The Event of the forty two months War of the Beast in what sense partial, in
what final. The whole Event of the Rising of the Witnesses the Object of the
Prediction. The Times and Half reach not beyond the sixth Trumpet. The Object
and Subject of the three Wo-Trumpets not the same. The continued Conflict
betwixt the Antichristian and Evangelical Party with the Effects thereof to
what Visions referrable. Passages in Daniel, Chap. 7. amply explained. That
even from our Antagonists Epoch the Reckoning not by Years but Semi-times in
the Medial Visions is necessary. No hopes of foretelling from the Medial
Numbers to a year or thereabout, when the Church's Affliction shall cease,
proved by many Arguments. The danger of forcing out pleasing Interpretations of
the Prophetical Visions when they will not afford them.
1. TO your first Paragraph I say, That which falls out after the War of forty
two months, equal and Synchronal to the three days and an half, to the three
Times and an Half, and to the rest that synchronize with these, and is the
issue of this forty two months War is the final issue thereof. But the Rising
of the Witnesses falls out as the issue of that War betwixt the Beast and them
after the three days and an half (equal and Synchronal to the forty two months)
according to the express intimation of the Text, Chap. 11.11. Wherefore the
Rising of the Witnesses commensurate to the partial Fall of Babylon or of the
great City, is the final issue of the forty two months War of the Beast against
the Saints and Witnesses, according to the express indication of the Vision.
This is the final issue of the forty two months War which closes with the Exit
of the sixth Trumpet which the Vials follow, and are intended for a further
Ruin of the Beast afterward. So that this so plain a Truth is not
inconsistent with the regaining of larger shares, nay the whole Kingdom of
Antichrist into Christ's own hands again. And these first Acquists are as it
were the Primitiae and Pledges thereof. So plain is it every way that this
Vision, Chap. 11. touching the Witnesses, drives only at a partial regaining of
the Kingdom of Antichrist into the hands of Christ. The Judgment indeed is here
begun of the little Horn, they begin to take away his Dominion, but consuming
and destroying it even unto the end, that is the work of the Vials.

2. To your second. Bring by a Prophetic Henopoeia as many Risings of the
Witnesses, and as distant in time and place as you will, and fancy them as
strongly as you will to be made within the last Semi-time, or before the forty
two months, according to your Epoch, be expired; yet the Vision does expressly
declare, that all this can amount to no more than the Fall of the tenth part of
the City Babylon, and a commensurate Rising of the Witnesses. Upon which
consideration one would think it were impossible but you should find your self
in a wrong Box, and that my way is the genuine Interpretation of the Prophecy.
But that your Epoch is also false, is abundantly made out from what we have
said to your third Letter, viz. That the Beast and his War with the Witnesses
commenced as early as the Apostasy which your self acknowledges to begin about
four hundred years after Christ, which is above fifty years earlier than your
Epoch. This, if you thoroughly consider it, is a full Answer to whatever you
offer in your second Paragraph. And it is tedious to me to multiply words.

3. To the third. This invincible Reasoning of mine touching this Vision you
seem to be aware of in this next Paragraph, and yet you are not sufficiently
pierced by it, but would shuffle it off by saying, If the Event of this forty
two months War be but partial, how can it be final, as if there were an
inconsistency therein, because the one signifies there is more of the same kind
to follow, whereas final signifies the contrary? Answ. But this is a mere piece
of Sophistry; The pretended inconsistency not observing the Laws of real
Opposition, which must respect the same thing. But final here respects the
Extension of the forty two months War, but partial, the Extension of the
Kingdom the Witnesses or Saints warred against, the vanquishing of part whereof
may well be the final result of the forty two months War or of the Time and
Times and half a Times War, though there may be more of the same Kingdom still
behind to be conquered and subdued. This is so open a Fallacy, that it needs no
illustration to set off the inconsequence thereof. But you proceed.

4. To your next I answer briefly, That [After three days and an half, or three
times and an half] I understand to signify as much as, After the last Unite,
of the Eventual Computation, current, which is a Semi-time, as I have
demonstrated in my Arithmetica Apocalyptica, and more concisely in my Nine
Queries and Notes. And a Semi-time being the Unite in Eventual Compute, and so
adapted to the nature of the Event predicted, too big for either a Prophetical
Day or Month; and not the beginning of the Event, but the whole Event it self
being the Object of the Prediction, and the whole Event reaching from about the
midst of the second month of the last Hexamenon or Semi-time into the fifth, if
not sixth thereof, the Accomplishment of the Prediction is as exquisite and
complete, as if the Unite in Compute had been a Year, and the Event had fallen
out after the last year current of suppose twelve hundred and sixty years.
This, if you consider it, is a plain and full Answer to what you allege in
this Paragraph.

5. In the next many things are said, but nothing that in the least infringes
that grand Truth, viz. That the final issue of the forty two months War betwixt
the Beast and the Witnesses is only the Fall of the tenth part of the City and
the Rising of the Witnesses proportionate thereto. You readily grant that the
Vials succeed the sixth Trumpet, but you say, that the Vials succeed the three
Times and an half, does not thence follow, unless I had first proved that the
Three times and an Half reached no further than to the end of the sixth
Trumpet, which you say you never yet saw proved. This I wonder at, because Mr.
Mede has sufficiently demonstrated, that the Woman to be nourished for a Time,
and Times and half a Time in the Wilderness, synchronizeth with the first six
Trumpets. Consult his Table of Synchronisms, and you will see it, and peruse
his little Treatise of Synchronisms, and there you will find it proved. Besides
that, till after the three days and an Half the second Woe, or sixth Trumpet is
not past, Rev. 11. And this is a plain demonstration that the final issue of
the forty two months War is but a partial Fall of Babylon or partial Ruin of
the Kingdom of the Beast and not a total, because there would be no Beast left
to be ruined by the Vials after the Expiration of the sixth Trumpet and last
Semi-time. Think seriously on this.

You say the three Woes have the same subject and the same object, which is a
mistake. For the first two Woes are the Invasion of the Saracens and Turks upon
the Idolatrous Empire at large the Ten-horned Beast, and belong to the Sealed
Book Prophecy, but the third Woe more peculiarly respects the two horned Beast
or Idolatrous Hierarchy, and belongs to the Opened Book-Prophecy. But all three
agree in this, that they are Woes, and so the transition is from one Woe to
another. But that proves not that they have one adequate Subject and Object, no
more than that they belong to one and the same Prophecy, whenas it is manifest
the last Woe belongs to the Opened Book-Prophecy, the other two to the Sealed.
Nor is the last Wo-Trumpet divided adequately into seven Vials, but into seven
Thunders, and the first Thunder into the seven Vials: which is needless here to
insist on, and you may find satisfaction elsewhere. See the Answer to the
Remarks on the place, and also Appendicula Apocalyptica. So that there is not
the least pretense of continuing the forty two months War betwixt the Beast and
the Witnesses beyond the partial Fall of the great City and the Rising of the
Witnesses proportionate thereunto.

That there is still a struggle betwixt the Antichristian and Evangelical
Party, and that the Evangelical Party may sometimes receive damage, is true:
yet this is not to be reckoned to the forty two months War, but to take
denomination from other Visions or Prophecies, from the Menaces to the Church
of Sardis, and from the Vials especially. And their attacks to do the
Evangelical Party mischief, is to be referred to their noisome and grievous sore
as an effect thereof inflicted on them under the first Vial, and sticking to
them, or at least irritable in them all along; as this sore is mentioned even
in the fifth Vial. And when so horrible a War was raised against the
Evangelical Party here in England in Eighty eight, and that by the great
Providence of God they were so defeated; this is referrible to the third Vial.
And if in the midst of the sedulous Attacks of the Antichristian Party, some
mighty Potentate in Christendom should by God's Providence be raised up in
their behalf, the hearts of Kings being in the hand of God, this were
referrible to the fourth Vial. But according to the Apocalyptick Style, this is
to be accounted neither any part of the forty two months War, nor of the Rising
of the Witnesses. It is something tedious to insist on things so plain.

6. In your sixth Paragraph you lay great stress upon that Passage Apoc. 17.17.
touching the ten Kings that God has put into their hearts to fulfill his Will,
and to agree and give their Kingdom to the Beast until the words of God shall
be fulfilled, which words of God you understand of Daniel's Prophecy of the
little Horn having the Saints given into his hands until a Time and Times and
dividing of a Time; And of those other words of Daniel, where he says, I
beheld, and the same Horn made War with the Saints, and prevailed against them
until the Ancient of days came, and Judgment was given to the Saints of the
most High, and the time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom, Dan. 7.21,
22. and then you skip from v. 22. to v. 27. adding, And what Kingdom that is he
tells in the following words (but they follow a great way off) The Kingdom and
Dominion and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven. And you say,
you suppose, I will not say this Kingdom is so given and possessed yet; and if
not, how can you say the little Horns making War with the Saints, and
prevailing against them for a time and times and half a time, is expired? I
pray you, Sir, think seriously on this.

Answ. Well, I have thought seriously on it, and find what you lay such great
stress on, has no strength in it at all. I easily admit those words of Apoc.
17.17. may allude to these passages of Daniel. But there is nothing here that
infers that the forty two months War of the Beast with the Saints extends any
further than the partial Fall of the great City, and the then commensurate
Rising of the Witnesses. Which Time I call the prosperous Reign and War of the
Beast, which are the Time and Times and half a Time here mentioned in Daniel,
and in which Fall the last Semi-time current he made War, and prevailed against
the Saints, as Daniel also has foretold. And this was till the Ancient of Days
came, and Judgment was given to the Saints of the most High, v. 22. which is
further explained v. 26. (which you wisely skipped over) But the Judgment shall
sit, and they shall take away his ( viz. the little Horn's) Dominion, not all
of it at once (as it was not at the Fall of the tenth part of the City and
commensurate Rising of the Witnesses) but leisurely by degrees. Which
Apocalyptick Vision therefore is an excellent Commentary on this Text of
Daniel. God has adjudged the Cause to the Evangelical Party by this partial
Fall of Babylon and the then Rising of the Witnesses. This taking away part of
the little Horn's Dominion, is a Pledge of the having it consumed and destroyed
even to the end. But this destruction and consumption is not the issue of the
forty two months War, wherein the Beast prevailed for such a time against the
Saints, but at last he was partially vanquished, but it is the result of the
Effusion of the Vials; so that things that lay so close wrapped up in Daniel, are
thus distinctly and explicitly set out in the Apocalypse, and the Explication
found to be the easy and natural sense of Daniel. Do not wink wilfully against
Truth, and you will easily discern it. See my Exposition of Daniel's second
Vision on this place, v. 26.

And though this is so easily answered, yet you are earnest with me again at
the close of your Letter to observe that the Time, Times and half a Time reach
as far as till the Ancient of Days shall come, and till the Judgment shall be
given to the Saints, etc. Which thing I grant you, viz. That the Time and Times
and half a Time of the Horns prevailing War against the Saints, did reach so
far till the Ancient of Days gave him so notorious a check and counterbuff in
the partial Fall of the City and the then Rising of the Witnesses. This was the
final issue of the forty two months once prosperous War of the little Horn or
Beast against the Saints. Which Time and Times and half a Time is no where
mentioned in the Vision of Daniel, Chap. 7. but in v. 25. then comes that in
the 26. verse, which is evidently to be expounded as I have above expounded it,
That upon the Judgment being set. his Dominion in part was taken away in the
partial Fall of the great City, to which the Time and Times and half a Time do
reach and comprize in the last Semi-time. This is the issue of the three days
and an half's War or seven Semi-times War of the little Horn or the Beast with
the Saints. But the consuming and destroying his Dominion to the end, that is
the work of the seven Vials, which being done, then it follows v. 27. And the
Kingdom and Dominion and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven
shall be given to the Saints of the most High. For then is the descent of the
New Jerusalem in opposition to the great City of Babylon now quite abolished,
and after comes in the blessed Millennial Reign of Christ upon Earth, which is
the greatness of his Kingdom under the whole Heaven. All which glorious
Providence you would crumple up within the three Times and an half, whenas it
is demonstrated in Mr. Mede, that the three Times and an half reach but to the
Exit of the sixth Trumpet, which you acknowledge the seven Vials to follow.
Consider seriously these things. But to proceed to the seventh Paragraph.

7. Here I only briefly advertise you, that the first appearance of the Rising
of the Witnesses, falling some eighteen years short of the last Semi-time,
according to your Epoch, or not reaching it by eighteen years, that this is a
greater Argument against the truth of your Epoch, than against my Hypothesis,
that a Semi-time is the only Authentic Unite in the Eventual Computation of
the Medial Visions. For according to your Epoch the Rising of the Witnesses
will not begin after the seventh Semi-time current but before it, which is
expressly against the Text [After three days and an half] which absurdity cannot
be salved but by making the entire Resurrection of the Witnesses the adequate
Object of the Prediction, and so it will reach about seventy years at least
into the last Semi-time or Hexamenon, that is, into the third month thereof;
Though this is but a defectuous scambling thing in comparison of what falls out
according to the true Epoch I have pitched upon. But that your Epoch is
false, I have in my former demonstrated, it being not pitched in the beginning
of the Apostasy and of the War of the Beast with the Witnesses. And in the
mean time you see plainly, even according to your own Epoch, that the seventh
Semi-time is not superfluous, and that the reckoning not by Years, but by
Semi-times, is necessary.

8. And now eighthly, Whereas you say you hope the more the time of the End of
the Churches affliction from her Enemies draws near, the more God will stir up
here and there some to look more diligently into those Divine Prophecies which
tell us how long and no longer it shall last, and to enlighten his people that
they better understand them for the encouragement and consolation of his
Church: I do not question but this may be a pleasing and pious hope in you. But
if this respect any of the Numbers of the Medial Visions (and the true Epoch
of the two thousand and three hundred Evening-Mornings in Daniel taken in a
Typical sense, defers the cleansing of the Sanctuary till about four hundred
years hence) I must ingenuously confess I think your hope is groundless, for
any one to tell to a year or thereabout from any of the Medial Numbers when the
affliction of the Church shall cease. And my Reasons are these,

First, That computing from the true Epoch (as I have proved it) the Medial
Numbers twelve hundred and sixty days or forty two months expired above thirty
years ago.

Secondly, The number of three days and an half, or three times and an half
Synchronal to the twelve hundred and sixty days or forty two months are
assigned to indicate only the time of the ending of the prevailing War of the
Beast or little Horn against the Witnesses, by a partial Fall of Babylon and a
commensurate Rising then of the Witnesses. Which I have demonstrated as clearly
as any thing is demonstrated in Euclide. Wherefore the Medial Numbers cannot
possibly tell us, nor any one from them how long and no longer the Churches
Afflictions shall last.

Thirdly, It is better and more expedient for the Church not to know so
precisely for a year or thereabout how long and no longer her afflictions shall
last, lest upon a lazy confidence that God will then be as good as his word and
deliver them, they neglect the fitting themselves for that deliverance and the
prosperity thence ensuing. Which fitting themselves consists in an hearty
Holiness of life by virtue of real Regeneration, in an inviolable Loyalty to
their Prince, in prudent Conversation and sincere Benignity to all men.

Fourthly, This predicting how long and no longer (to a year or thereabout) the
afflictions of the Church should last, is a Privilege that was not granted to
the Primitive Christians themselves, who yet lay under more grievous
Persecutions, than the Mercy of God is like to permit his Church to suffer
during the space of the pouring out of the Vials that is yet to come. And yet
they had no more precise notice how long and no longer, than the order of the
six Visions under the first six Seals could indicate to them. And such an
indication have we, and every whit as certain from the Order of the seven
Vials. And when the true Christianity shall more generally appear in the
Reformed Churches accompanied with a most faithful and fast Loyalty to their
Sovereigns, and ready and cheerful obedience to all lawful Commands for Peace,
Order and Safety in Church and State, this will be an indication of the near
approach of the pouring out of the fourth Vial on the Sun, and of the greatest
Potentates in Christendom their inclining to reform and to shake off the
servile Yoke of Antichrist and all the Idolatrous Trumperies thereunto
belonging, and of ordering things so, that a great deadness and darkness will
seize upon the Seat of the Beast, and prove the pouring forth of the fifth
Vial. And the sixth is manifestly touching the Conversion of the Jew^^ And when
the lovely Philadelphian Spirit shall more universally break forth and shine in
all the Enjoyers of, or Well-willers to the Reformation, then let them look up
and lift up their Heads, for that more consummate Redemption and vast
enlargement of the true Church draws nigh, and will be achieved in the
Battle of that great Day of God Almighty under the auspicuous Conduct of that
mighty Heroes on the white Horse, out of whose mouth goes a sharp Sword, and
whose Title is the Word of God, which is sharper than any two-edged Sword, and
this is to fall out under the seventh Vial. And after this is the descent of
the New Jerusalem or Creation of the New Heaven and New Earth, wherein
Righteousness shall dwell upon the dissolution of the former Constitution of
Things, whether Pagan, Infidel or Antichristian Polities. Wherefore then
seeing, as the Apostle speaks, that all those things shall be dissolved, what
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness, not
only looking for, but hasting on (as the Original has it) the coming of the day
of God, even of that great day of God Almighty in the Battle abovementioned.
But if this Day was fixed to a certain year or thereabout, how could we be said
to either hasten it or slacken it? But there is no such fixed time set, that we
be not tempted to wanton security and laziness, but reminded of our duty, may
hasten, as much as in us lies, that great day we expect and desire by
perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, if we be sincere and not Hypocrites.
But this thing I have touched upon already. In the mean time it appears we have
at least as certain indications of the Time of the Churches deliverance as the
Primitive Christians had before us, in which we are to acquiesce with humility
and thankfulness, and improve them to our best advantage to confirm our Faith,
and support our Courage.

And therefore fifthly and lastly, There being so visible and palpable an order
of Revolutions of the Affairs of the World under the Series of the Vials,
whereby the nearer and nearer approach of the consummate deliverance of the
Church of Christ and enlargements of his Kingdom may plainly be discerned, it
seems altogether needless that the Numbers of the Medial Visions should
signify any thing more than the terminating the forty two months prosperous
War of the Beast in his unprosperous counterbuff by Divine Providence, in the
partial Fall of the great City and commensurate Rising of the Witnesses in the
last Semi-time current, according to what I contend for, and have so manifestly
demonstrated.

9. And now in the last place to answer to what occurs in what I will call your
ninth and last Paragraph, where you say, You cannot but look on those labors
as ill bestowed which tend to obscure those Prophecies (I suppose you mean of
the Medial Visions and that of the prevailing War of the little Horn against
the Saints for a Time and Times and half a Time) as if we could not by them
take any measure of the Time of the Churches sufferings and her deliverance out
of them. To this I answer, That pains may be faithfully and judiciously
bestowed by them that remonstrate to the World, that the Numbers of the Medial
Visions indicate only a partial deliverance, a thing which I have invincibly
demonstrated. And I have shown even now, that though there be no Prediction
(unless we recur to the two thousand three hundred Evening-Mornings, whose full
Exitus is at least four hundred years hence) how long and no longer to a year
or thereabout, till the deliverance of the Church will be fully consummated and
perfected; yet the Order of the Vials, which reach to a full Victory of the
Church and complete deliverance, gives us some measures to collect the nearer
approaches to that happy Time. So that in this case to complain is to be
unthankful; especially if we consider that we are at least as well provided for
as the Primitive Christians were in their most grievous Persecutions under the
red Dragon.

Wherefore those that would squeez out of the abovesaid Medial Prophecies,
whether of the Apocalypse or Daniel, such a precise determinate time of the
Churches full deliverance, when the nature of those Medial Numbers and
Prophecies will not afford it, what shall we say of their labor? Is it not in
vain? if not worse. For without good ground to set a precise time of the
general deliverance of the Church, from a pretended true Interpretation of the
Holy Prophecies, when there is really no such thing predicted by them, is to
make our selves more wise and benign than the Divine Spirit the Author of these
Prophecies, as if he had omitted what was so requisite for his Church, and is
to delude and mock the expectation of God's people, and to slur the Holy
Prophecies themselves, and discountenance all pretense of rightly interpreting
them. Which has been the Fate of many curious Interpreters, who from the
Numbers of the Medial Visions, have presumed to calculate the final Ruin of
Antichrist to a very year. And therefore those that have made it their business
to demonstrate the groundlesness of this Pretense, I hope their labors will
prove well bestowed, nor be found vain in the Lord, being earnestly pursued for
him and the Honor of his Word, who is the Amen, the faithful and true Witness,
and predicts nothing but what will come to pass, and therefore we must not make
him predict any thing that will not, either as to time or the thing it self.

CHAP. XXX. Two Arguments out of a fifth Letter from the same hand to prove,
That the Roman Beast under the seventh Head was not in being till the ten Kings
signified by the ten Horns were risen up in the Empire. Certain things premised
in order to an Answer to the said Arguments. Amongst which is the true Notion
of the Head of a Beast in the Prophetic Style, in counterdistinction to his
Horns. An Enumeration of the Heads of the Beast, and what the fullest sense of
the seventh Head. An Answer to the first Argument. An Answer to the second
Argument. Two Arguments of the Author 's to prove, that the Roman Beast under
the seventh Head was in being before the ten Kings signified by the ten Horns
were risen up in the Empire. That the placing the Epoch of the forty two
months War of the Beast in the beginning of the Apostasy is unexceptionably
right, with the gross absurdities of the other Opinion.
THE first Argument. If the Roman Beast under the seventh Head did rise before
the ten Kings in the Empire, then these then Kings will make an eighth Head of
themselves, or at least conjoined with the Emperor as one of their number,
when the other nine had possessed so great a part of his Empire, and were as
absolute in their Kingdoms as he in that share was left to him, he having no
preeminence above them but what was merely Titular or Honorary. Wherefore these
together, and not the Emperors separately, ever made the seventh Head of the
Beast. For the seven sorts of successive Governors in Chief of the Roman
Empire as Idolatrous, they as such made the seven Heads of the Beast, and these
ten Kings taking in the Greek Emperor, made one Head of the Beast as being
such. For they ruled as Chief in the Empire, and their Government was
Idolatrous. Wherefore or they are the seventh Head (nor was the Beast revived
before its Head) or else the Emperors separately before was the seventh Head;
which cannot be. For then the revived Beast would have an eighth Head, whenas
there are but seven Heads of Blasphemy according to the Visions. Therefore the
Roman Beast under the seventh Head was not in being till the ten Kings,
signified by the ten Horns, were risen up in the Empire.

The second Argument. There being seven sorts of Government, but all agreeing
in this, that they are Idolatrous, the Sovereignty of the ten Kings ruling the
whole Empire, every one in his share ought to be deemed the seventh Head, it
being a seventh sort of Idolatrous Government; whenas the Pagano-Christian
Caesar's, though Idolatrous indeed as the six preceding sorts of Government were
(accounted the first six Heads of the Beast's) would not be properly the
seventh Head of the Beast, but the sixth Head again brought into being, as
being again Idolatrous Caesar's or Emperors. Wherefore since the Beast cannot
be conceived to be in being without an Head, nor is supposed to be again in
being according to the Visions before the seventh Head, and the
Pagano-Christian Caesar's separately being only the sixth Head revived, not a
seventh, it follows that the abovesaid ten Kings are the seventh Head, and that
the Beast under the seventh Head was not in being till they were risen in the
Empire.

These two Arguments are pretty press and close to the purpose, and therefore
before I go about to answer them I will premise some few things, and settle
some Terms or Notions that occur in the Question and the Prophecies.

1. First therefore, We are to consider what in the Prophetic Style is such an
Head of a Beast as may be said to have Horns on it, so that there may be some
distinction betwixt the Head and the Horn or Horns thereof, and that they may
not seem to denote the very same thing. Such an Head therefore of a Beast as
here we are searching for, I conceive to be this according to the Prophetic
Style, viz. Idolatrous Sovereignty in the general abstractive comprehension and
succession thereof: Something like that in the Apocalypse touching the Woman
the Church our Mother, which comprehends the whole Community of the Church in a
general Notion, and yet if you speak of any particular persons of that
Community, though the whole be the Woman (which whole takes in all) yet those
particular persons belonging to that Community are her Seed or Children
according to the Prophetic Style. But to come yet nearer to the matter; This
Notion is plainly ratified by that passage in Daniel, Chap. 8. v. 5, 21. where
the Kingdom of Greece is set out by an He-goat with a great Horn betwixt his
eyes, and it is said v. 8. that when that great Horn was broken, four other
Horns rose after it. Here is plainly a Beast the He-goat with its Head: for
there is mention of its Eyes and of a Horn on its Head betwixt these two Eyes,
and of other Horns rising successively on this Head, we may be sure (not on his
Back) and yet that great Horn is said to be the first King: And if so, then the
other four Horns must be four Kings after him, and yet there is an Head
distinct from the Horns plainly in the Vision. Wherefore what can that Head be
but the Idolatrous Sovereignty in this Beast the Goat in the general
abstractive comprehension and succession thereof? And therefore the Kings that
in concreto are the real Heads of the Greek Empire are in this abstractive
Generality called the Horns thereof. And hence it is plain, that the Idolatrous
Sovereignty in the general abstractive comprehension and succession thereof is
the Head, according to the Prophetic Style, of which the succeeding Kings may
be said to be the Horns.

2. The next thing which we will premise by way of Postulate is this. That the
revived Beast set out Apoc. 13, and 17. was not revived without an Head, there
being nothing more absurd than to imagine a Beast to recover out of the state
of Death, or Nonexistence, and leave its Head behind it. And it being
acknowledged on both sides, that its Recovery is not till under the seventh
Head, we premise also that the abovesaid Beast did not recover till the seventh
Head, and that there were no more Heads than seven.

3. Thirdly therefore, We are to inquire what in truth this seventh Head of the
Beast in the full sense thereof is, and in what it differs from the other six,
forasmuch as all seven are acknowledged on both sides to be Idolatrous. The
seven Idolatrous Sovereignties or Heads of the Roman Beast are these, The
Regal, the Consular, the Tribuno-Consular, the Decemviral, the Dictatorial,
Imperatorial, and Hieratico-Political or Ecclesiastico-Secular Sovereignties or
Heads of the Beast. Which last is most palpably differenced and specifically
from any of the six former, so that this is the very seventh Head. Which will
appear, if we seriously contemplate the Vision of the Beast, and the Whore
riding him, Apoc. Chap. 17. Here we see the Beast and the Whore. By the Beast
undoubtedly is understood the Civil part of the Empire, which must also have a
Civil Head for his Civil Horns to be grassed upon, which is nothing else but
Secular Idolatrous Sovereignty in the general abstractive comprehension and
succession thereof, as was noted above. It is also agreed on both sides, that
the Whore is the Sacerdotal or Hieratical part of the Empire. But in that this
Whore rides this Beast, it is apparent that she rules him, and guides him, and
governs him; as an Heroes on a Pharos or goodly Steed is the very Symbol of an
Emperor. Wherefore here is plainly in the Vision two Sovereignties Hieratical
or Sacerdotal, and Political or Civil, distinctly described, and both supposed
Idolatrous.

But now for their Coalescency into one seventh Sovereignty, that is as
apparent as the other in the Vision. For the Whore having the guidance of the
Secular Head of the Beast, has the guidance of the Beast and his Horns as they
come up, come they up as fast or slowly as they will. Wherefore the Head and
Horns being at the guidance or governance of the Whore, and both aiming at the
same end, the advancing or maintaining the Idolatrous State of the Empire (for
that is that which the Vision drives at, not Secular affairs) they do evidently
constitute this complex Sovereignty (to which there is nothing like in all the
six foregoing Sovereignties) which I call Hieratico-Political or
Ecclesiastico-Secular, the Ecclesiastic and Secular Sovereignty complying
together to make the Empire a Beast again, that is, bloody and Idolatrous. So
that whereas in my former Answers I was at a loss in a manner to define,
whether the Hieratical Sovereignty or Secular was the Head of the Beast, here I
have fairly and solidly, I hope, compounded the matter by making them both but
one Hieratico-Political Head of the Roman revived Beast or Apostatized Empire.
With which, as I have noted in my former Answers, that passage in Daniel
excellently well agrees that seems to make the Roman Empire in the time of the
ten Toes of the Metalline Image, rather Sacerdotal than Secular, Chap. 2. v.
41. The Kingdom shall be divided, but there shall be in it of the strength of
Iron, forasmuch as thou saw the Iron mixed with the miry Cla^. There shall
be of the strength of the Iron in this Kingdom; as if that was but accessory to
it, but the Kingdom it self. Clay, i. e. Sacerdotal. And so the Iron is said to
be mixed with the miry Clay, as if the Clay (which is the Sacerdotal Sovereignty
or Empire) were the Principal again, the Iron accessory. As when the greater
share is of water in the Cup we say there is Wine mingled with the Water; but
if the greater share be Wine, we say Water is mingled with the Wine. And out of
this Sacerdotal Empire, how naturally does the Pope rise at last quite to
overtop all, and how easily is the Papal Hierarchy conceived to be the little
Horn arising properly out of the Hieratical part of this Complex Sovereignty of
the Empire?

4. Fourthly and lastly, We will take notice of the genuine meaning of those
words, Apoc. 17.12. That the ten Kings receive power as Kings one hour with the
Beast; whose natural and unforced sense is this, That at what time the Empire
began to be a Beast, and to Apostatize into gross Superstitions and Idolatry,
the ten Kings would be catching at and obtaining Kingdoms, some here, some
there, some sooner, some later till about the four hundred and fifty sixth year
after Christ they had all sped. For that this one hour does signify a pretty
latitude of time all Interpreters consent, and History witnesses that it was at
least forty years till there appeared ten Kingdoms in the divided Empire. And
therefore if the Beast be not till the tenth King appear, they cannot be said
to receive Kingdoms with the Beast but before him. Which is plainly to
contradict the Text of the Prophecy. These things being premised, we answer,

To the first Argument, (1.) That what is here presumed is not proved, nor will
prove true, if examined, viz. That the Emperors had no more Sovereignty over
the other Kings than what was merely Titular or Honorary. For it is well known
that those Kings submitted to the Laws of the Roman Emperors, which Justinian
caused to be collected, not for the use of his share only of the Empire, but
for the use of the Roman Empire at large, insomuch that some fancy that to be
the reviving of the Roman Beast again, or making his Image. (2.) History
calling them Roman Emperors, that is, the Emperors of the Roman Empire, and
Prophecy being but Anticipatory History, and the Emperors of an Empire being
the Heads thereof, it is wonderfully easy and natural to imagine the
Pagano-Christian Caesar's to be the seventh Head of the Beast, till the Pope
played the Caesar himself, and perked up above them. (3.) The secular Head of
the Beast upon which the Horns grow, is of a more general and abstracted
nature, than to be confined either to the Idolatrous or Pagano-Christian
Emperors separately, or to the ten Kings taking the Emperor in for one. It is
only a Pagano-Christian or Idolatrous Secular Sovereignty in the general
abstractive comprehension and succession thereof, which is the seventh Head of
this revived Beast; as the He-goats head in Daniel, which takes in the great
Horn, but one, and the four Horns after, with their successions, and this all
but one Goats Head, and therefore the Idolatrous or Pagano-Christian Emperors
separately, and after taken in as one of the ten Kings, all this makes but one
seventh secular Idolatrous Sovereignty or seventh secular Head of the Beast, as
may appear out of the first and third Premises. (4.) And lastly therefore, The
Emperors separately first, and then in Conjunction with the Kings to make them
ten, being but one continued Idolatrous or Pagano Christian Sovereignty (which
is all the Vision aims at) and so but one Head of the Beast, it is manifest
that an eighth Head is shut out of doors, and the force of the first Argument
plainly enervated; And that therefore for all this, the Beast was in being
before the Kings were risen, and commences as high as the Re-paganizing Caesar's
and Apostasy of the Empire. Which is also confirmed from the fourth or last
Premiss.

To the second Argument we answer, (1.) That the Pagano-Christian Caesar's or
Emperors, though they be Idolatrous and Emperors, yet it does not follow that
they are only the sixth Head (which was Idolatrous Emperors) re-introduced on
the Stage, not a seventh. For these Pagano-Christian Emperors, though they be
Idolatrous, yet they are considerably Christian in their way, they professing
the true Fundamentals of Christianity, and therefore are rightly deemed a
distinct Head of the Empire as well as (...) (the other not yet come) is
accounted a distinct King or Head of the Empire for being purely Christian. He
is according to the Declaration of the Angel the seventh King or Head of the
Empire, though not of the Beast, the Empire then ceasing to be a Beast in his
Reign. Wherefore if Christianity did constitute the purely Christian Caesar's or
Emperors a seventh Head of the Empire distinct from the sixth Head (the
Idolatrous Emperors Pagan) during the Time the Empire ceased to be a Beast,
surely Pagano-Christianity or Idolatry mixed with Christianity in the Caesar's
and Empire will make the Pagano-Christian Caesar's or Emperors, the
Christianity in them, a Head distinct from the sixth Head the Pagan Idolatrous
Caesar's; and the Idolatry in them will make them, not the Head of the Empire
ceasing to be a Beast (as it did under the Reign of the purely Christian
Caesar's) but the Head of the Empire grown a Beast again by its Apostatized
condition into Idolatry. And thus the Pagano-Christian Caesar's will prove
plainly the next Successors to the sixth Head of the Roman Beast, though not
of the Roman Empire, and therefore will consequently be part at least of the
successive Sovereignty, that is, the seventh Head of the Beast. (2.) But in the
second place I answer, That the real, full and complete seventh Head of the
Beast is that Hieratico-Political Sovereignty described in the third Premiss:
nor do I doubt but that it is the most full and perfect Notion of the seventh
Head of the Beast. And this Hieratico-Political Sovereignty commenced as early
as the Apostasy of the Empire, as may be made out from my Answers which
declare the early complying of the Emperors with the Apostasy of the Empire
into Paganick Superstitions and Idolatries, etc. Whence it plainly follows,
that to restrain the seventh Head to the time of the ten Kings risen in the
Empire, upon pretense that there was no seventh Head distinct from the sixth
till then, is to conclude a thing upon no sufficient grounds. For at the very
first sight this Hieratico-Political Head is manifestly a sort or Species of
Head distinct not only from the sixth Head of the Beast, but also from all the
five foregoing Heads in the very Constitution thereof. The thing is so plain of
it self, that there wants no insisting upon it. Consider but the third Premiss,
and the thing will be abundantly clear.

Thus are these two Arguments for the proving that the Roman Beast under the
seventh Head was not in being till the ten Kings, signified by the ten Horns,
were risen up in the Empire, utterly defeated. I shall hint only now two brief
Arguments against the Conclusion the other two would infer, to prove the
contradictory thereto, and so conclude; that is to say, to prove, That the
Roman Beast under the seventh Head was in being before the ten Kings signified
by the ten Horns were risen up in the Empire.

1. My first Argument shall be grounded on the fourth or last Premiss, which is
the genuine sense of Apoc. 17.12. The ten Kings receive power as Kings one hour
with the Beast. Of which the easy and natural sense is, That at what time the
Empire grows into that state of Apostasy, viz. into Paganish Superstition and
Idolatry, that according to the Prophetic Style, it may be called a Beast, at
that very time will the barbarous Commanders that invade the Roman Empire be
catching at and obtaining Kingdoms, some here, some there, some sooner, some
later for a matter of forty or fifty years together at least, till all ten
appear upon the Stage. Wherefore if the Beast be not under the seventh Head
till then, the ten Kings, at least nine of them, will not receive their
Kingdoms with the Beast, but before the Beast is, which is point blank against
the words of the Prophecy. Wherefore this alone may demonstrate, That the Beast
was in being under the seventh Head, unless you will make an headless Beast of
him (which shall be my second Argument) before the ten Horns, i. e. the ten
Kings rose up in the Empire.

2. The other Argument is taken from the second Premiss. So soon as the Empire
apostatized into Paganish Superstition and Idolatry, the Empire became a Beast,
according to the Prophetic Style, and as soon as it was a Beast again it had
an head, and that very seventh Head exhibited in the Prophetic Visions, by
Premiss the second. But this State commenced at least fifty years before the
ten Horns, that is, the ten Kings were all risen up in the Empire. Wherefore
the Beast under the seventh Head was in being before the ten Kings or ten Horns
were risen up in the Empire. Which was the thing to be demonstrated, and which
I conceive can never be confuted, nor solidly answered by any one that
acknowledges the Apostasy began at least fifty years before the ten Kings
appeared in the Roman Empire. In the interval indeed betwixt the Pagan and
Pagano-Christian Caesar's there was no Head of the Beast, but that was the time
wherein there was no Beast. It was that time in which that part of the Name of
the Beast was made good, viz. [Is not] (was and is not) as that part is made
good under the Pagano Christian Caesar's, or at large under the seventh Head,
viz. [Is not and yet is]. For then it is rightly said of him, He is not that
old Pagan Beast; and yet being again then revived into the Image of the former
Pagan Beast in this Pagano-Christianity, it is rightly said of him that he is,
and so the whole is fulfilled, [Is not and yet is]. But certainly whenever he
was, either in his primitive or revived state, he was not without an Head by
Premiss the second.

And thus we have seen how solid and unexceptionable their Opinion is, that
place the Epoch of the forty two months War of the Beast with the Saints or
Witnesses as high as the Apostasy of the Empire into Paganish Superstition and
Idolatry, that is to say, about three hundred ninety three or four hundred
years after Christ. According to which Epoch the Reformation begun by Luther,
which is the partial Fall of Babylon, and the then commensurate Rising of the
Witnesses will commence about the middle of the second month of the last
Hexamenon or Semi-time, and reach into the middle of the fifth, if not into the
sixth month, which is a wonderful, easy, natural and congruous completion of
the time of the Event of that Vision. But if the Epoch of that forty two
months War be placed fifty or sixty years later, viz. at the Rising up of the
tenth King or tenth Horn in the Roman Empire, the Rising of the Witnesses will
begin about twenty years before the last Semi-time, which is harsh and
incongruous. Besides that it would not reach the end this Epoch is intended
for: viz. to show there will be a further fulfilling of this Vision of the
Rising of the Witnesses even to a full ruin of the City of Babylon or the
Beast, so that the deliverance of the Church will be fully completed before the
Expiration of the forty two months. Which is plainly repugnant to express
indications in the Vision it self.

For first, The partial Fall or Fall of the tenth part of the City is plainly
said to come to pass after the three days and an half, which is the same with a
Time and Times and half a Time or forty two months. So that it is as evident as
if it were writ with a beam of the Sun, that the final issue of the forty two
months War of the Beast with the Saints or Witnesses, is no other than the
partial Fall or Fall of the tenth part of the City, and not of the whole City,
and a Rising then of the Witnesses commensurate thereto.

And then in the second place, If the completion of this Vision of the Fall of
the City and Rising of the Witnesses were (within the forty two months space)
extended to a full deliverance of the true Church and an utter Ruin of Babylon
or the Beast, since the fulfilling of this Vision of the Rising of the
Witnesses is before the Exitus of the sixth Trumpet, Apoc. 11.14. and that it
is confessed on both sides that the Vials all of them follow the sixth Trumpet,
and are in the seventh, and that yet these Vials are to be poured upon the
Beast; by this reckoning there will be no Beast left for them to be poured
upon. Which is a most manifest Repugnancy.

CHAP. XXXI. The Ichnography of Ezekiel 's Temple, according to Villalpandus,
with two ways of computing the proportion of the Outer Court to the Inner
thereby.
THE right and assured understanding of the Extent of the Symmetral Times of
the Church being of so good use and great moment, and that depending upon the
knowledge of the proportion which the Outer Court has to the Inner; which
proportion is to be understood out of the Ichnography of Ezekiel's Temple,
which that learned, industrious, and judicious Writer on this Subject Johannes
Baptista Villalpandus has delineated: I shall first set down this Ichnography
of the Temple, so far as is useful to this purpose, according to the mind of
Villalpandus, and after prove the truth and solidity thereof.

SW Africus.

NW Caurus

SE Eurus

NE Aquilo

map of temple

The entire Area of the whole Temple, on which it is built, viz. a. b. c. d. is
five hundred Cubits long, and as many broad, and therefore is a perfect Square.
A perpetual Porticus, noted with three Lines, of which the middle is
punctulated or made by points, fifty Cubits broad divides this whole Area into
seven equal square Area's SW. NW. X. Y. SE. Z. NE and into one oblong Area, a.
b. g. d. having the length of two hundred and fifty Cubits, but the breadth of
an hundred Cubits. And there is a perpetual middle Ambulation or Walk in this
perpetual Porticus; And the middle Line, viz. that which is punctulated drawn
through the midst of this Walk, does fitly and that perpetually divide the
Porticus, in respect of the said Area's into exterior and interior. Which
being done, it will be manifest that the oblong Area with the interior
Porticus lying about it, and appertaining to it, viz. e. x. e. th. will bear
precisely a double proportion to each of the seven Area's with their interior
Porticus's belonging to them, and looking into them single, as in e. i. chapter l.
and so of the rest. For the interior Porticus's look into their own proper
Area's or Courts, the exterior into their neighboring Courts or Area's,
excepting the outmost of all, as m. i. r. n. and the rest which are placed on
the Perimeter. For these look out into the fields. But from hence we may
understand how naturally all the Porticus's which have Courts and Area's placed
on both sides, as s. a. g. n. and ph. chapter ps. o. are divided long-wise into two
equal parts, and that those parts only which look into the next Area, are to be
reckoned to be the Porticus of that Area. And therefore whenas that long
Porticus which on all sides compasses the rest of the space of the Temple, can
be rightly thought to look into a neighboring Area only by one half of it self
divided long-wise, it is very reasonable that that interior half part only of
the Porticus should be every where assigned to its adjacent Area. Whence seven
Area's with their interior Porticus's that encompass them (for the exterior
belong not to them) will be exactly equal. And all the seven single Area's
entire, consisting of themselves, and of the addition of the Spaces of the
interior Porticus's that encompass them, will have a sub-double proportion to
that oblong Area mentioned above, and consisting of it self and the space of
the Porticus's twenty five Cubits broad, and encompassing it. Whence the entire
Area's of the seven Courts with their Porticus's reckoned thereto, will be to
the entire oblong Area with its Porticus's also taken in to the Reckoning, as
seven is to two.

And truly this, as it is sufficiently congruous and handsome in it self, so it
may have some further use not at all to be contemned. For whereas Villalpandus
will have in Solomon's Temple a certain Court of the Gentiles, exterior to the
Court which is termed Atrium Israelis, why may not the exterior part of this
Porticus which is adjacent to the whole Perimeter of the Temple be accounted
for part of the Court of the Gentiles, and be encompassed with a Wall (of which
there is mention Ezekiel. Chap. 4. v. 5.) a Reed broad and a Reed high, although
at what distance it is from this Porticus, there is no certainty at all. For if
what occurs Chap. 42. v. 16, 17, etc. in the Hebrew Text is to be retained,
that measuring by Reeds is to be mystically understood which prefigures a large
extent of the Church of the Gentiles in comparison of the Jewish Church. But
that there was some other Wall without, or at least one represented to the
Prophet by way of Type, seems very probable, and that the exterior part of the
Perimetral Porticus has a reference thereto. For this description of the Temple
is a Prophetical Vision, and exhibited for the use of the Christian Church
which was to come.

In the mean time it is plain out of what has been said, that this is one way
from whence we may understand that the proportion (...), of the Outer Court to
the Inner, that is, of the Court SW. X. SE. Z. NE. Y. NW. to e. x. e. th. is as
7. to 2. or Ratio iripla sesquialtera. But there is yet another Method less
operose, nor happily less true for all that, to be understood from what has been
delivered; namely, if letting go the Porticus's we compare only the Nine square
Area's each an hundred Cubits long, and as many broad, of which seven belong to
the Atrium Israelis or the Outer Court, the other two are found in the Court of
the Temple and Priests. For those seven in the Atrium Israelis, viz. SW. X. SE.
Z NE. Y. NW. have to the other two a. b. n. x. and o. p. u. d. Rationem triplam
sesquialteram, the proportion of three and an half to one. And verily, which is
worth the noting by the bye, Castellio in his Description of the Temple does
acknowledge, that there are nine such equal square Area's, though he had not
the skill or luck to place them right.

But now this second way seems to me to be most expedite, if it may be fitly
applied to the Text. Let us therefore try what will become of it, Apoc. Chap.
11. (...), etc. Rise and measure the Temple of God and the Altar. Here no man
imagines that the Temple it self and the Altar are to be measured, no more than
those that worship there literally are, but as much as respects place, that the
Area's on which the Temple and Altar are seated, are to be measured. But we
have noted above, that there is a square Area, a. b. n. z. upon the greatest
part whereof the Temple T stands, measured by the Angel, as we shall note in
the next Chapter; and that there is another such equal square Area measured by
him, viz. o. p. g. d. upon which the brazen Altar stands: and that therefore
this Area is to be measured, and not the Altar it self, is evident. Nor is
there any need that (...) here should be understood of the place where they
sacrificed, in force of the following words, (...), forasmuch as (...) and
(...) do not only signify [in] but [at] or [near by]. And (...) may also be
referred to (...), to the Temple. Wherefore when these two square Area's upon
which the Temple and Altar were built, are here understood to be the Object of
measuring, it is very easy and natural by (...), by the outer Court of the
Temple to understand those seven equal square Area's of which the Outer Court
did consist (leaving out again the Porticus's) to be the Object of that
commanded Rejection, by the Angel, from being measured. And thus evidently the
Outer Court to the Inner will be as 7. to 2. And this is a very easy and
perspicuous Compute, and as firm as the former, and both of them sufficiently
firm, if so be Villalpandus his delineation of the Temple be so, which we will
now out of him or other how endeavor to prove.

CHAP. XXXII. Three equal square Area's of the Temple measured by the Angel
full East, full North, and full South. Another square Area equal to the former
belonging to the Inner Court, and placed in the midst of the former, with
Inferences therefrom. A full West square Area equal to the former, measured by
the Angel, with Villalpandus his descant thereon. How from these five equal
square Area's in form of a Cross, and from the discovery of a North-West square
Area, Villalpandus collects the whole Edifice of the Temple to be both square,
and also to have nine equal square Area's appertaining thereto. Another way of
proving the Squareness of the whole House of God or Temple. A Description of
the North-West Court out of Ezekiel, with Villalpandus his descant thereon. A
Confirmation of Villalpandus his dimensions of the Courts of the Temple from
the Heathen Oracle recorded in S. Austin. The Pagan Demons not unskilled in
Mathematics, proved from Apollo 's bidding the Greeks double his Altar in
Delos.
THREE equal square Area's of the Outer Temple the Angel measured in the
beginning of the Vision thereof. The first toward the East, Ezekiel. 40. v. 19.
Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower Gate unto the
forefront of the inner Court from without an hundred Cubits Eastward and
Northward. This is the Area Z. an hundred Cubits square. That the Septuagint
have put instead of (...). it is certainly, I think, a mistake in them, they
not sufficiently heeding the conciseness and Ellipticalness of the Prophetic
Style, otherwise they would not have interserted (...), but would have followed
(...) the Hebrew of which the sense is plain, if the Ellipsis be supplied thus:
He measured from the forefront of the lower Gate unto the forefront of the
inner Court from without an hundred Cubits Eastward, and he measured also an
hundred Cubits from South to North. Or more briefly thus: Vminnegeb meah ammah
hatzaphon. And an hundred Cubits from the South to the North.

SW Africus.

NW Caurus

SE Eurus

NE Aquilo

map of temple

The second Area Y is full North, Ezekiel. 40. v. 23. And the Gate of the inner
Court was over against the Gate toward the North, and toward the East, and he
measured from Gate to Gate an hundred Cubits. According to the Hebrew read
thus: And the Gate of the inner Court against the North Gate (and then (...)
read for (...)) and the Gate of the inner Court against the East Gate. The East
Gate is at E, the North Gate at N: and when it is said he measured from Gate to
Gate an hundred Cubits, it may be understood from Gate to Gate in Z as well as
in Y, though it chiefly speaks of the Square Y, but implies that from Gate to
Gate in each it is an hundred Cubits. This is the best sense, unless happily for
toward the East (...) it was to be writ (...) toward the South. The third Area
is full South, viz. the Area X, Ezekiel Chap. 40. v. 27. And there was a Gate in
the inner Court toward the South, and he measured from Gate to Gate toward the
South an hundred Cubits.

But now in the midst of these three the Angel measured another square Area,
viz. the Area A equal to the foresaid Area's, which he calls the inner Court,
Ezekiel. Chap. 40. v. 47. So he measured the Court 100 Cubits long and 100 Cubits
broad four square, and the Altar before the House. Where note, That this middle
Area being expressly said to have the length of 100 Cubits, and the breadth of
100 Cubits, and that it is square, that its being placed in the midst of the
three other Area's, which were measured only from Gate to Gate, and found 100
Cubits, that the Squareness of this Area shows them to be 100 Cubits
Cross-ways, as well as from Gate to Gate, and consequently that all four are
equal square Area's. And it is here further observable from this Note, that
though the Septuagints reading were admitted, (...), yet but allowing an
hundred Cubits from the East Gate to the West Gate, this East Area will be an
hundred Cubits from South to North, in virtue of the positure of that middle
square Area A.

And now lastly, The Angel measured another square Area on the West, viz.
(...). the greatest part of which the Temple it self or House of God T stands
upon, Ezekiel. 41. v. 15. And he measured the length of the Building over against
the separate place which was behind it, and the Galleries thereof on the one
side, and on the other side an hundred Cubits, with the inner Temple and the
Porches of the Court. Note, That [on the one side and the other side] must of
necessity be understood of the North and South sides of the Buildings about the
Gisrath, the separate place. Forasmuch as the breadth of the Gisrath or Temple
is not an hundred Cubits; so that there must be a square Area on which the
Temple is placed, is most certain: which is the Square (...). But let us hear
Villalpandus himself descant upon this last Verse: This measure, says he, is
duly to be considered, as being that which seems most necessary for fully
conceiving the measures of the Courts or of the general Ichnography of the
Temple. For here, says he, a certain Occidental Area of the Temple is
described, having the length and breadth of an hundred Cubits, which hitherto
the Angel had not measured. Which Area equal to the others, and of the like
positure with the others, which had been measured in the beginning, plainly
shows both that the whole entire Area of the Temple was square, and that
Porticus's likewise ran thorough the whole Ground-plot of the Temple, and
divided it into nine equal square Area's, as you see in the Ichnography thereof.

It is evident from the places quoted, that there are five equal square Area's
with their Porticus's disposed into the form of a Cross. But now it is plain
out of Ezekiel, Chap. 46. v. 19, 20, 21, 22. where he speaks of the Courts for
boiling and baking, that there is a square Area encompassed with like
Porticus's over against the fifth square Area upon a great part of which the
Temple stands; forasmuch as there are four Atriola or little Courts in every
corner of that exterior Court so placed, as was said. And there is the same
Reason of the other three Courts which answer to this in situation, viz. that
there are three other such Courts encompassed with like Porticus's toward the
South-West quarter, South-East quarter and North-East quarter, viz. those noted
with SW. SE. NE. as this toward the North-West quarter with NW, unless we will
have the (...) or Temple at large to be very maimed and deformed. And what has
hitherto been said proves the space on which the Temple with its Courts and
Porticus's is placed, not only to be square, but to be divided into nine square
Area's encompassed with their respective Porticus's, all of them quite round,
save the fifth, and the next lying full East of it: these two have Porticus's
only on three sides.

But that the squareness of this whole Space on which the Temple stands, is
rightly gathered by Villalpandus, may further appear from Ezekiel. Chap. 42. v.
15. Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner House, he brought me
forth toward the Gate, whose Prospect is toward the East, and measured it (
viz. the House) round about. When he had finished the Measures of the inner
House, (...), of the House as to its inner parts, and nearer to the Center of
the whole House, which is in the middle point of the Thysiasterion A, he
brought me by the way of the Gate which looks toward the East way (so the
Original) and he measured it; not the East way, as I noted above, but the
House. For the Hebrew has it (...) where the affix (...) is the Mascline
gender, and agrees with (...) the House, not with (...) the way. For if that
had been intended, it would have been the Feminine affix to show that it agreed
with (...) which is Feminine as well as Masculine. Besides, the East way cannot
be measured round about, because it is only one side; but (...) signifies
thorough the whole Perimeter of the House. Which plainly implies, that there
were Porticus's or a Building [Binian] all along the whole Perimeter, otherwise
the Perimeter of the House had been Cruciform or Cross-like, nor would have
been toward each of the four quarters of the World five hundred Cubits, but two
hundred only, measurable in one and the same Line. Wherefore the House of God
it self or holy Edifice, in account of its Binian or Porticus's, that it was
extended into a Square, is clear from hence, and the words (...) relating to
the word (...) the inner House, intimate a Perimetral dimension thereof, namely
of the House, not of a mere Wall, as Castellio is fain to make a Wall about,
square, five hundred Cubits each side thereof, though he makes no Porticus's go
along with it. But it is plain the exterior House it self is here a measuring.
And the Septuagint say expressly, (...), And he measured the Platform of the
House round about in order, and so finds each side five hundred Cubits to each
quarter of the World. Five hundred Cubits in the measuring Reed (so Ludovicus
Capellus, Castellio and others) not five hundred Reeds. And whereas it is said
v. 17. He measured the North side five hundred Cubits, etc. (...) round about,
how can one single side be round about? Wherefore (...) is as much as if he
should say, in Perimetro, in the Perimeter. Doubtless that is the genuine
meaning of that word in these places here. For the sides single do not
encompass the House, but all put together. But every single side is part of the
Perimeter, which does really environ this square House or Building.

And this may add also strength to those Considerations which Villalpandus has
on v. 21. of the 46. Chapter of Ezekiel, Then he brought me forth into the
outer Court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the Court, and behold
in every corner of the Court there was a Court. And it was through the Atriola
in every corner that he passed, and so passed by or through each Corner, at
once, while he passed thorough those Courts. But let us hear Villalpandus upon
the place: This, says he, seems to be one of the seven exterior Courts, even
that which is placed North-West. For v. 19. the Prophet is led by the Angel
into the holy Chambers of the Priests which looked toward the North, that is,
whose doors opened toward the North, and their Chambers were over against the
Sanctuary, and there was a place there verging toward the West, namely at the
end of the holy Chambers of the Priests, a SW Africus.

NW Caurus

SE Eurus

NE Aquilo

map of temple place on the two sides West-wards. Here, says Villalpandus, a
North-West Porticus over against the Temple is plainly described, which is
divided into two rows of Chambers, a middle Walk lying betwixt. And of these
two rows of Chambers the one looks out into the outer Court Northward, the
other into the inner Southward, and of this the Prophet speaks, there is here
no mention of the other, namely, in this nineteenth verse. Again, whenas the
lower Porticus is distributed into eight Arches by seven interjacent Posts or
Pillars, the upper Porticus must be also distributed into so many Chambers; And
of those eight Chambers the first toward the East is wholly taken up with
Stair-cases, the six middle most were designed for the Priests eating the
consecrated flesh; but the furthest toward the West, that is the place v. 20.
where the Priests boil the Trespass offering and the Sin-offering, etc. But out
of this Porticus of the inner Court and the place even now named, the Angel
brought the Prophet into the outer Court, this very Court doubtless which looks
North-West-ward, viz. the Court NW. And being it is manifest out of what has
been said, that the House is continued through the whole Perimeter which the
Angel measured, and that the Prophet was led about through the four corners of
this Court NW. and there was an Atriolum or little Court found in every corner,
it is very reasonable to think, that in the four corners of the other three
angular and outer Courts placed South-West, South-East, North-East, viz. the
Courts SW. SE. NE. have the like Atriola or little Courts in their corners, and
that the whole Fabric of the Temple, (...), or the House of God is such in
Figure, general parts and Symmetry, as Villalpandus has described it, whose
skill and success in this Argument is so exceeding great, that he is highly
admired and applauded by Grotius, Ludovicus Capellus, and generally of the
learned World, whose Curiosity has carried them to the study of these things.
And this may be enough to secure any one that is not at leisure to canvase
things of this nature himself to rest in his Judgment.

And yet there is still a pretty odd confirmation of the matter behind, which I
conceive is worth the noting. It is indeed a Paganick Oracle, and such as
implies the Pagan Demon to have supposed or rather known the proportion of the
outer Court to the inner according to these Dimensions of Villalpandus. The
thing is recorded in S. Augustine, De Civitate Dei, lib. 18. cap. penult. and
ult. In the year of our Lord 313. the Gentiles were informed by the Oracles of
their Demons, that Peter, forsooth, had so bewitched the World, that the Name
of Christ should be worshipped for three hundred sixty five years, but after
the said number of years being completed, forthwith there would be an end, viz.
of this Worship of Christ. And to this Oracle, says the Father, the Gentiles
gave such great credit, that they were called back from the Christian
Profession, nor would embrace it till the end of the said years, after they had
found the Oracle to be false. Now that the Oracles of the Demons should
circumscribe the continuance of the Worship of Christ within three hundred
sixty five years, verily it is hugely difficult to divine whence they drew that
Conjecture, unless from that Apocalyptick Vision, Chap. 11. (where John is
commanded to measure the Temple and Altar, but for the outer Court to cast it
out to be trodden under foot by the Gentiles for forty two months) compared
with the Courts of Solomon's Temple, whose dimensions, by reason of their great
Longevity, they very well knew and discerned the outer Court to have to the
inner Rationem triplam sesquialteram, the proportion of three and an half to
one. From whence they easily collected the outer Court being to the inner as
the Conculcation of the Gentiles for forty two months to the Worship of the
Name of Christ, that the Worship of Christ was to continue but twelve
Prophetic months, or three hundred and sixty years. For as seven is to two, so
forty two to twelve. But for greater Caution they added five years, which might
answer to the (...), the five adjectitious days in the Egyptian year. So
careful, forsooth, was the Devil in framing the Prophecy, lest his Clients
might over-hastily expect the Event, and so himself seem to have been deceived.
And being he was so careful of not seeming to be deceived, it is a sign he would
not have given out this Oracular Compute, unless he had been sure of the
proportion of the outer Court to the inner: which is a notable confirmation of
Villalpandus's dimensions of the said Courts of the Temple. But as cunning as
he was, the Devil was egregiously deceived in this, that he thought the Worship
of Christ would cease at the end of those years, whenas the Vision only
intimates that his Worship after three hundred and sixty years would be
contaminated with the Idolatrous Rites and Superstitions of the Gentiles, but
not that pure Paganism should ever return again.

Some happily may be ready to laugh at this Mathematical skill in the Devils, of
measuring the Courts of the Temple, whereas in the mean time they themselves
are more to be laughed at for their own unskilfulness or ignorance in History,
which informs us, that the Oracle told the Inhabitants of Delos, (...), that
their present Evils and of the rest of the Greeks would cease (...), if they
doubled the Altar in Delos, as Plutarch relates in his De Socratis Genio. Which
Answer of the Oracle Plato interpreted of the study of Mathematical Sciences:
as if those studies were recommended to the people by Apollo, whose Oracle was
at Delos; (...). For it is not the work of a bad or dull-sighted Wit, but of
one extremely well exercised in the skill of Lines, to find or take two middle
Proportionals. And yet this is the only way of doubling, suppose, the Cubick
Altar at Delos. But it was much more easy to find the proportion of the outer
Court to the inner, that no man distrust but the Devil might accurately effect
that, whenas it is plain their skill is much greater. But in the mean time this
does notably confirm the truth of Villalpandus's dimensions of the Courts of
the Temple, when both their Computations conclude the same proportion betwixt
the outer and inner Court, and the same years of the Church as yet not lapsed
into her Apostasy. And the Demons could not be ignorant of the true Symmetry
of Solomon's Temple, they being so longaevous, and many of them in all
likelihood having looked down upon it and contemplated it.

CHAP. XXXIII. Four Questions touching some Particulars in the Vision contained
in the fourth and fifth Chapters of the Apocalypse, with Answers thereto. As,
what meant by Opening the Seals. Who the Sitter on the Throne. Who the
Assistents about the Throne. And who the slain Lamb.
THESE four Questions upon occasion of some Papers from one not unversed in
Apocalyptick Speculations, I think fit to consider and to answer touching the
Vision contained in the fourth and fifth Chapter of the Apocalypse. (1.) What
is meant by opening the Seals of the seven-sealed Book. (2.) Who is he that
sits on the Throne with that Book in his right hand. (3.) Who are that Company
that are assistent or about the Throne. (4.) Who is that Lamb slain to whom the
Book is given. I shall first set down the Opinion of those Papers orderly one
after another, and then give my own Judgment.

1. I affirm, says the Author of those Papers, that by opening this Book of
Prophecies is meant explaining it and making it intelligible to those that read
it. For the truth of this Proposition I appeal to the constant and
unquestionable use of that Phrase of opening a sealed Prophecy wherever it is
used throughout the Scripture, there being no one instance, that I know of, to
the contrary. But where sealing signifies concealing the sense of a Mystery,
and opening signifies explaining it, there are many. As Dan. 9.24. Seal up the
Vision, and 12.4. Seal the Book even to the time of the end. Where also the
Phrase is made parallel to shutting up the words of it, viz. that they might
not be understood till the time of the end. Also Isai. 29.11. mention is made
of a sealed Book, viz. a Book which no man could understand. Also that Opening
signifies Explaining is manifest from Luke 24 32. where Christ is said to have
opened the Scriptures. And Acts 17.3. S. Paul is said to have opened and
alleged ( viz. out of the Prophecies of the Scripture) that Christ must needs
have suffered. Whence it cannot be doubted (as to me it seems) but that by
opening the sealed Book, or Mystery, is meant explaining it.

Answ. This makes a pretty confident show, and may impose upon the heedless.
But the wary will easily perceive, that unless he could prove that the word
Opening simply in it self signified Explaining; and sealing, hiding the sense
of a Writing by mystical Aenigms, the Argument proves nothing. That obvious
Phrase of opening a Bible and opening a Text shows plainly, the word Opening
has its determinate sense from the thing it is spoken of. To open the Bible is
to unclaspe it, and so open the Book, that we may come at the Text. To open the
Text is to explain the sense of it. (...) signifies to explain Mysteries, or to
open Mysteries sometimes; but Luke 4.17. it signifies only to open the Book
where the Mysteries lie, viz. the Book of Esaias the Prophet which past into the
hand of Christ, he is said (...), to open the Book and to find the place, etc.
It is one thing therefore to open a sealed Book where the Prophecy is, and
another to open a sealed Prophecy. The Book may be first opened to come at the
Prophecy. Which is plainly the case here of the seven-sealed Book. But to make
the opening the Book and loosing the Seals to be the explaining the Prophecies
of this Book, Chap. 5.2. is a plain contradiction to the very Text, Chap. 6.
where the opening the first six Seals is the exhibiting to John so many
particular Prophetical Visions of things to come, not the explaining those
Visions. And so the opening the seventh Seal is the exhibiting the Visions of
the seven Trumpets, etc. Chap. 8. and not the explaining of them. So that I
wonder it should ever, against so palpable an intimation to the contrary, enter
into any man's mind that the opening the Book and loosing the Seals should be
understood of explaining the Prophecies, and not of a power of coming at the
Prophecies themselves set out in Aenigmatical Visions, and to be afterward
explained by the Servants of Christ, and the meaning of the Aenigmata
discovered. But to make this latter to be understood as a Completion of this
Vision of the opening of the Seals, is a plain repugnancy to the Visions
Interpretation of it self. The Completion of this part of the Vision of opening
the Seals, is our having these Apocalyptick Visions in our hands and under our
eyes, no other Completion is to be dreamt of.

2. Touching the second Question the abovesaid Papers declare thus, That by him
that sits on the Throne with the Book in his right hand is not meant God
himself, but rather some Man of highest Authority sitting in the Throne of God,
and representing him there. A reverend and learned Doctor phansies him to be
the Bishop of Jerusalem, the Author of the Papers to be some earthly King.

Answ. But this to me seems point blank against the Text, nor has Grotius
himself the confidence to interpret it of any other than of God Almighty, by
reason of that Hymn, I suppose, or Doxology, v. 8. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. This Hymn is sung to him that sits
on the Throne the Eternal, who is said to live for ever and ever, v. 9. Now as
this is but one single visionary Hymn, so no man can have any just ground to
imagine any more than one visionary Person on the Throne, there is not the
least show or shadow in the Vision of any more. Whence comparing this Hymn with
that single Person, it must of necessity be God Almighty himself, no earthly
Potentate Representative of Him. Nor is the Hymn fit to be sung to a
Representative (though of God) sitting on the Throne. For if to Him, he is the
Object of this Doxology, and the Text says expressly, it is to him that sits on
the Throne. And therefore it must be to God himself that sits on the Throne,
unless we will make this a visionary Scene of palpable Idolatry, which I take
to be a gross absurdity. Besides that, as for earthly Potentates, Kings or
Monarchs, they are most lively described in the twenty four crowned Elders,
like so many Millennial David's, playing on their Harps before God. The Rainbow
also plainly intimates it, as in Ezekiel, to be the Representation of the glory
of the God of Israel. So that I find no congruity or probability in this
Opinion.

3. Now for the third Question, the words of the Paper are these. I affirm,
says he, that the fourth and fifth Chapters of the Revelation are a
description of a Church, or a Company of faithful people on Earth; adding, This
is so evident, that I know of no man that denies it. This therefore he takes
for granted without any further proof.

Answ. Here I refer the Reader to what I have wrote in the twenty first Chapter
of this Book touching this Introductory Vision to the sealed Book-Prophecy.
Where, though it be an Introductory Vision; and a Symbol of the spiritual
Kingdom of God in Heaven, yet I acknowledge that it is in some things so
attemperated, that it is significative also of the State of the Church on
Earth; as that suppose of the Millennium. And that the Church on Earth is some
way and in some things concerned in this Vision, is plainly intimated Chap. 5.
v. 10. And have made us Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth. But
this will not serve the end of these Papers.

4. And lastly, for the fourth Question, By the Lamb slain, according to those
Papers, some good King or other (some mystical Christ, as Mr. Mede calls
Constantine upon Rev. 12.5.) is to be understood, who after his having suffered
like a Lamb, was to be again advanced to the Throne of God. Some such sense,
quoth he, as this we shall be obliged to put upon it; forasmuch as it exceeds
all belief to think that when the Book aforesaid shall be to be opened, God
himself in Person shall appear amongst us sitting on a Throne with a Book in
his right hand, and that after Proclamation made for one to open it, in the
Ears of all the World, his Son Jesus shall appear coming to his Father, and
take it out of his hand, etc. Or which is equally absurd, the four Beasts and
twenty four Elders shall be taken up into Heaven to see the same things acted
there. Whence it is concluded, That the sealed Book is not to be opened by the
Lamb himself in person, but by some mortal man or other whom he shall employ in
this service.

Answ. This is argued handsomely enough, were it not upon a double false
Foundation: The first is, That opening the Seals is explaining the Prophecies,
which I have already shown to be a mistake. The other is, That this Vision is
an absolute Vision, not an Introductory Vision to the Book-Prophecy, which
point I have cleared Chap. 21. nor need I here repeat things. And in the third
and last place. The individual Person of Christ is so exquisitely described,
that no other but himself can be meant. For besides that he is said to be
slain, and to have redeemed us with his Blood, and to have made us Kings and
Priests, he is styled the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and the Root of David.
How is it possible that any one but Christ himself can be meant by this
description? This is no description of a mystical Christ, but of the very
Person of Christ himself. I am thus brief in answering this last Question,
because there will be an abundant supplement made in the answering the
Confutatory part of his Papers, where he endeavors to entangle my Hypothesis
with as many difficulties as he can. Wherefore I will in the next Chapter give
a summary Account of my sense of this Vision, and then answer to his
Allegations against it.

CHAP. XXXIV. A summary Account of the forementioned Vision, and the sense of
several Particulars acknowledged by the Expositor. Ten Objections to entangle
the abovesaid Account and the sense of the Particulars. Distinct Answers to the
said ten Objections.
COncerning this Introductory Vision comprised in the fourth and fifth Chapter
of the Apocalypse, I have spoke so fully in the twenty first Chapter of this
Treatise, that I may well be allowed to content my self only with a summary
Account of that Vision here, which is this. This Vision (impressed on the
raptured Imagination of S. John) is a Theatrick Representation of the Glory of
the God of Israel in his Angelical or spiritual Kingdom in Heaven, which,
besides that common use of all the Introductory Visions (which is to signify
that the succeeding Prophecy, (as this Book-Prophecy in counterdistinction to
the Epistolar Prophecy) is the Revelation of Jesus Christ obtained of God, and
communicated to his Servant John) it is framed in such a Dramatical way, as
both to be prefigurative of several things appertaining to the glorious and
joyful state of the blessed Millennium, and also significative what a dear
regard God has to his Son Christ, even according to his humane Nature, and what
an inestimable value is to be put upon this Book-Prophecy, in which is
comprehended both the sealed Book-Prophecy and the opened Book-Prophecy. This
is a brief summary Account of this Vision.

In which we admit that the four Beasts and twenty four-Elders, though they
represent the spiritual or Angelical Kingdom in Heaven, are also prefigurative
of Believers some time to be on Earth. We likewise further assert, That he that
sits on the Throne is God Almighty himself, and no other. That the slain Lamb
is no other than Christ in his own Person. That the seven-sealed Book is a
Symbol of the secret Counsel and Foreknowledge of God touching the affairs or
state of his Church and of the World as much as concerns his Church from the
beginning thereof to the last Judgment. And God his giving this Book to Christ,
signifies his communicating these his Secrets to him. And the Lamb or Christ
his opening the Seals in the sight of John, denotes his imparting this Scene of
future things to his Servant John, though no man yet understood the meaning of
those Typical Prefigurations. All this for my part I own, whatever other
Interpreters do. And now let us see what the ingenious Objector can say to
entangle so solid an Hypothesis.

1. I demand only, says he, these few things. First, Where was ever any such
loud Proclamation made at God's delivering this Book to his Son, as is spoken
of Rev. 5.2?

2. Secondly, How unlikely a thing is it, that the things therein contained,
being only in the Mind of God (as is supposed) there should be any such
Proclamation made at all to find out one that was worthy to know them. For it
may seem to be too much trifling in a weighty matter.

3. Thirdly, But if any such Proclamation were ever made, who-ever heard it?
For it must needs be supposed that the Proclamation was made in the ears of a
great many.

4. Fourthly, And where was Christ when this Proclamation was made, that it is
said, No man in Heaven, in Earth, or under the Earth was found able to open the
Book, or look on it?

5. Fifthly, But if the meaning be, that none but Christ was found able, how
comes S. John to weep for that? Who could he expect or desire should do it
besides?

6. Sixthly, How comes an Elder to know of Christ's taking the Book out of his
Father's hand sooner than S. John himself?

7. Seventhly, What Elder was that that gave the first notice to S. John, that
Christ had prevailed to do it?

8. Eighthly, Who are they all that are set so near the Throne of God and of
Christ, as these Beasts and Elders are said to have been, when God communicated
the knowledge of these things to his Son, and who are said upon that occasion
to have sung a new Song with Harps, etc. to this effect: Thou art worthy to
take the Book, and to open the seven Seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and
have redeemed us to God, etc. and have made us Kings and Priests unto God, and
we shall reign upon the Earth. And there is the like reason of the Angelical
Address that follows, etc.

9. Ninthly, Interpreters interpreting this Angelical Address, of Angels
literally so called (as they also interpret the strong Angel v. 2.) contradict
themselves and all Interpreters in other places who expound Angels to be meant
of men.

10. Tenthly and lastly, But the greatest and most manifest Omission of all,
says he, is that whereas in the next place it is said, That every Creature in
Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth, etc. I John heard saying, Blessing and
Honor and Glory and Power be unto him that sits on the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever: no Interpreter shows this to have been done after
Christ's taking of the Book, more than before. From whence it is plain to me,
says he, that they go upon a wrong Hypothesis. For if there had been any such
things done on Earth, no doubt some footsteps of it would have been found in
History. These few things, as he calls them, being thought by him pressing and
weighty, I am concerned to answer, that the truth of my Exposition may not seem
to be obscured thereby.

1. To the first then I answer, That this Proclamation was made only in this
Dramatical Vision, and is no more than a visionary Proclamation, and brought in
in this Dramatical manner to signify the singular Prerogative of Christ given
to him by his Father, that he should have the ability of predicting and
effecting such things as no Creature besides in the World had the like; general
Proclamation being made to find them out, if there were any such. And the Angel
is said to be strong, and his Voice loud, that it might pierce as it were
through the Universe, to summon any one that would pretend to such a
Prerogative as has been described.

2. To the second I say, There is neither any unlikeliness nor trifling in this
Proclamation, because it sets off the peculiarness of Christ's Prerogative, in
that it was given to him to open the sealed Book. And it being not yet opened,
but being known in general to be a Book of Secrets as yet only in the Mind of
God, what unlikeliness or Indecorum is it, that Proclamation be made who he is,
that shall be vouchsafed this power of opening the Book, and distinctly knowing
those Secrets which were only in the Mind of God before?

3. To the third I answer as to the first, That the Proclamation is only
visionary, and of what it is significative I have already said, nor need again
repeat.

4. To the fourth, I say, it seems a kind of capricious Query, as if it implied
from that account of the Proclamation made, that no man in Heaven, on Earth, or
under the Earth was found able to open the Book, that Christ was no where then,
else he would have been found able. But as S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.27. But when
he says, all things are put under him, it is manifest he is excepted which did
put all things under him; so say I, whenas this Proclamation was made to
remonstrate to the World, that no man in Heaven, nor Earth, nor under the Earth
was found able, saving Christ himself, to open the Book, it is manifest he is
to be excepted out of that Negative Catalogue, as being the only Creature that
was able.

5. To the fifth, Incogitancy I think suggested this Query to the Objector. For
it implies S. John wept after he understood that Christ had obtained the power
of opening the sealed Book, whenas his weeping was before. He says so plainly
himself, v. 4. And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and
read the Book, neither to look thereon. Which is also a Dramatical passage on
this Theater intended to signify nothing else but the great Needfulness and
Desirableness of such a Book of Prophecies for the use of God's Church and
their guidance in all the Tossings, Changes and Revolutions in this transitory
World. Such a Book was so necessary and requisite, that it would grieve any
good Christian at the very heart, who is solicitous for the Church, to want
such a Load-star or Cynosura.

6. To the sixth I answer, That these crowned Elders, though they be
prefigurative also of the Millennial Kings or Monarchs, they are here some
principal Angels of the spiritual Kingdom of the God of Israel in Heaven. And
why may not such an Angel be thought to be wiser than John, and able to
instruct him. There is nothing incongruous or indecorous in this Dramatical
passage, and John was called up into Heaven to be instructed by his Betters.
This celestial Actor may well be conceived to know how the Scene would go,
though John in the mean time was as yet ignorant thereof.

7. To the seventh. Truly this is a very curious Question, if it imply that one
should declare who this crowned Elder was by Name. It is sufficient to say it
was one of the Elders that was next him, and so most conveniently placed to
instruct John, and comfort him upon his weeping, and so take that kue to carry
on this Divine Scene from v. 4. to v. 8. till the slain Lamb had taken the Book
out of the hand of him that sat on the Throne, and had obtained power to open
it. By which no Event is prefigured that was to come to pass some Ages after
John's receiving the Apocalypse, but it is only signified in this pompous
Dramatical way, That this Book-Prophecy is the Revelation of Jesus Christ which
God gave him, and which he imparted to his Servant John. So that the curiosity
of naming the Party whom this Elder may prefigure, vanishes.

8. To the eighth I say, Those that are set so near the Throne of God are
Members of his spiritual or Angelical Kingdom in Heaven, but prefigurative
withal of his Millennial Kingdom on Earth, which is the main scope of his
Providence over his Church, that it shall at last come to pass, that the
Heavenly Jerusalem in Image and Resemblance shall descend from God on this
Earth, and his Tabernacle be with men. And therefore the glory of the God of
Israel is here so represented, that it may also prefigure the State of the
Church under the New Jerusalem, as the other Introductory Visions have some
glances or more general strokes at Prophetic Events in some passages. And now
for the new Song sung by the four Beasts and twenty four Elders, (...), Dignus
es qui acciperes, Thou were worthy to receive the Book (for so the Original is
interpretable) and to open the Seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have
redeemed us to God, and made us Kings and Priests to reign upon Earth: This new
Song is prefigurative of the Joy and Happiness of that State of the Church, of
which it is said, Apoc. 21.5. Behold, I make all things new, which is the New
Jerusalem state. In which there will be such triumphant Praises sung unto the
Lamb, when it will be so evident he has carried his Church safe, for whom he
gave his Life and Blood, through all the predicted conditions thereof, and at
last has placed them in that happy and glorious Millennial State by his
faithful Conduct, Wisdom and Power. Which are included in the Faculty granted
him by his Father of opening the Seals of the Book, as I have noted elsewhere.
And whenas presently afterward the whole Universe is made to ring with a loud
Doxology from numerous Quires of Angels and of all Creatures in Heaven and
Earth and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in
them, to him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, to what times
possibly can this belong but to the holy, happy and glorious Millennial Reign
of Christ in his Saints upon Earth? The Song of the twenty four Elders and four
Beasts prefigure the Joy of the Millennial Monarchs and People, that of the
Angels the Joy of the Angels in Heaven at this flourishing State of the Church
on Earth, and that of the rest of the Creatures the Conviction of all the
World, that the Lord Jesus was no less than he declared himself to be, the Son
of God and Savior of the World, to whom the Father had given all Power in
Heaven and Earth, of which this Millennial State of the Church is a most
illustrious and glorious Effect filling all the World with wonder and
amazement. And this I hope may satisfy the eighth Query.

9. Ninthly, To the ninth Allegation I answer, That the Doxology of the
Angelical Quires does prefigure the Joy of Angels in Heaven for that blessed
condition of the Church in the New Jerusalem state on Earth. So that though
this Vision which is a Representation of the glory of the God of Israel in his
Spiritual or Angelical Kingdom, in the Dramatical frame of things, is so
contrived, that the four and twenty crowned Elders and four Beasts prefigure
also the Monarchs and People of the Millennium, yet there are left numerous
Quires of Angels in counterdistinction to these to signify Angels literally so
called, and the Song is to signify their Joy at this State of the Church on
Earth. Nor has that strong Angel that makes the Proclamation any other sense
than so, that he was one of the Angelical Retinue of the God of Israel in
Heaven. Nor is that Rule of interpreting Angels of men in the Apocalypse
universally true, I am sure not in the Introductory Visions. The word Angel
occurs in several places of the Introductory Visions where it stands for an
Angel literally so called, not for a man, to say nothing of other places. So
little force has this ninth Allegation.

10. And lastly for the tenth, which urges, That if there had been any such
universal Doxology to Him that sits on the Throne and to the Lamb after he had
taken the Book, that there would have been some traces or footsteps of it in
History. To this I answer, That it is a mavelous groundless conceit and
expectation, that what is here Parabolically and Dramatically set down only to
express that Joy and Happiness which would redound to the whole Creation from
Christ's being invested with this Power of opening the seven-sealed Book, that
is, to be enabled both to foretell and guide the affairs of his Church so, as
that the state thereof will be so glorious and prosperous at last here upon
Earth, that all the World will be convinced of his stupendous Foresight,
Wisdom and Power: that therefore there shall be such an universal Te Deum --
sung to him throughout the whole Universe at once, so that the Solemnity might
be recorded in History. This is not the meaning of the Prophetic Style. And
besides if it were, the time is not yet come when this is to be. For such
expressions as these can suit with no meaner State of the Church on the Earth,
than that of the Millennial Reign; when the four and twenty Millennial Monarchs
including both the Jewish and Gentile Sovereigns or Princes, may seasonably
sing this Song, Thou have redeemed us with thy blood, and made us Kings and
Priests, and we shall reign upon Earth, viz. in Christ's Millennial Empire. But
to expect Records of such a Doxology in History before the Doxology has been,
is a great Incongruity. Wherefore I hope any indifferent eye may easily
discern, that notwithstanding all these ten Allegations, my Exposition of this
Vision, comprised in the fourth and fifth Chapters of the Apocalypse, is
unexceptionably true.

CHAP. XXXV. Three Objections from a considerate hand. The first against our
making the three Times and an Half, the forty two months and twelve hundred and
sixty days to be the same time. The second, against oun affirming the
Euphratean Horsemen to have subdued the Eastern Roman Empire with Fire-Guns.
The last, against our making the Egyptian year to consist only of three
hundred and sixty days in Arithmetica Apocalyptica, but in Apocalypsis
Apocalypseos, of three hundred and sixty five: with Answers to all three.
THE first Objection. Every day in the forty two months signifying a year,
makes in the whole twelve hundred seventy seven years at least, there being
really in every year (not three hundred and sixty, but) three hundred and sixty
five days. This seems to make the three Times and an Half or forty two months
and twelve hundred and sixty days not to be the same.

Answ. That the forty two months are Egyptian Months, and consist of just
thirty days apiece, is manifest, in that thirty times forty two make just
twelve hundred and sixty days. And these days and those months are the time of
the mourning of the Witnesses and of that which all along occasions their
mourning, viz. the outer Court being trodden down by the Gentiles, which is a
plain indication that the twelve hundred and sixty days are a note of no more
nor less time than the forty two months, and that therefore they must be
Egyptian Months. And as it is plain that the months are Egyptian, so we must
conceive that the years in the three Times and an Half are so many Egyptian
years and an half consisting of Egyptian Months, which therefore make, each of
them, three hundred and sixty days. See Rev. Chap. 12. v. 6, 14. This is their
solid Year consisting of so many months, to which they add the (...), as they
are called, the Dies adjectitii, which are five, which here the Spirit of
Prophecy takes no notice of, but resolving the forty two Egyptian months,
which is three solid Egyptian Years and an half, into just twelve hundred and
sixty days, shows that no more years than so are to be understood thereby. And
this not respecting at all the (...) or five adjectitious days in this Compute
of the Time of the Medial Visions (all which synchronize one with another)
complies excellently well with that Truth which I have made out, viz. That the
eventual measure of the Medial Visions is not a Year (which has been thought
hitherto so to be) but a Semi-time, in respect of which seventeen years or more
is not at all considerable. So that there was no need of being so precise as to
take the Dies adjectitii into the Reckoning, and so to make the whole twelve
hundred and seventy seven years at least, as you would infer. Wherefore though
every day in the forty two months stands for a year, yet these months being
Egyptian months, and consisting of just thirty days apiece, and there is the
same reason of the three Times and an Half, it will not amount to twelve
hundred and seventy seven, but twelve hundred and sixty years only.

2. Object. In Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, page 91. the Turks are said to invade
the Roman Empire An. Dom. 1289. subduing them with Fire-Guns, etc. ( Chap. 9.
v. 18.) which is ninety one years before the use of Fire-Guns is said to be
made known to the World, viz. An. Dom. 1380. Notes on v. 17. page 92.

Answ. The words in the Text, Chap. 9. v. 18. are these. By these were the
third part of men killed by the Fire and by the Smoke, etc. that is to say,
whenas the Saracens vexed the Roman Empire, but could not utterly subdue it,
and so seize on it and possess it, the Turks quite vanquished it, viz. the
Eastern Empire by those Fire-Guns in the taking of Constantinople, and so
seizing on the whole Eastern Empire, which they have done for so long a time.
So that the Prophecy seems to respect those times more especially when
Constantinople was taken, as appears from v. 15. also. And the Angels were
loosed which were prepared for an hour and a day and a month and a year for to
slay the third part of men, that is, utterly to subdue them, and to seize and
possess the Eastern Roman Empire. For from the Inauguration of Togrulbec by
Caliph Chaiim Biamrilla to the year Constantinople was taken, is a Prophetical
day and a month and a year, that is, three hundred ninety six years. And the
use of Fire-Guns in that taking of Constantinople is notorious, as you may see
in Laonicus Chalcocondylas De Rebus Turcicis, one of the Byzantine Historians,
lib. 7. who there makes mention of a Cannon of so vast a bigness, that it was
fain to be drawn by seventy yoke of Oxen and two thousand men. You may guess at
the rest by this as to the use of Fire-Guns in the killing the third part of
men. And the vast number that is said to be at this Siege, v. 16. two hundred
thousand thousand, I say by this definite vast number is understood an huge
indefinite number; as indeed there was at the Siege of this one City, viz.
about four hundred thousand, as Laonicus Chalcocondylas sets it down in the
same place: (...). Which is another intimation that the Prophecy has an eye to
this famous Siege. But this only by the bye.

Wherefore the Prophecy pointing chiefly at this Achievement of the Turks,
there is no necessity at all that the Turks should be conceived to have had the
use of Fire-Guns from their very first irruption into the Empire. And though
their irruption was ninety one years before the use of Fire-Guns, yet it was
above seventy years before the Turks took Constantinople, that the use of
Fire-Guns was known in War. And if Zieglerus his account be as Authentic as
Alstedius his, which for ought I know it may be, that German invention of Guns
was about the year 1354. and then the use of Guns will be an hundred years
before the Turks took Constantinople. Nor is it requisite in the Prophetic
Representations of any Body Politic, that those Characters it is set out by be
every one of them of the same continuance with the said Body, but that they be
notorious and of a Characteristick nature, and such as tends to the assuring
the sense of the Vision. An Observation so obviously true, that I need not at
all insist thereon: which alone may serve to take away this scruple.

3. Object. In the 359. page of Arithmetica Apocalyptica the number twelve
hundred and sixty varied into forty two months, makes three hundred and sixty
days to each year; but in Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, page 87. the year is three
hundred sixty five, the Prophetic day, month and year being there accounted
three hundred ninety six years. The reason of this difference I understand not.

Answ. Here again the account is Egyptian, because it is taken for granted,
that the month is just thirty days. And the Egyptian year here has its full
extent, that is, the (...) or five adjectious days are added to the thirteen
Egyptian months (which make just three hundred ninety days) so that the whole
is three hundred ninety five days, to which adding the odd day, the sum is
three hundred ninety six Prophetical days, that is to say, years. But the pinch
of the scruple is this, Why should the full Egyptian year be made use of here,
and take in the five adjectitious days, when only the twelve Egyptian months
is the solid year in that place of Arithmetica Apocalyptica here noted, leaving
out the five adjectitious Days? But the reason of this is obvious enough. For
here the Spirit of Prophecy intended to foretell an Event, viz. the taking of
Constantinople to the preciseness of a year, as is plainly insinuated by the
mentioning a single day, and therefore there was a necessity of computing the
time, not by thirteen months and a day, but by a day and a month and a year,
including all the days therein, the five adjectitious days not excepted. But,
as was noted in my Answer to the first Objection, the Eventual measure or Unite
in computing the Time of the Medial Visions being not a year, but an Hexamenon
or Semitime which is equivalent to an hundred eighty years, it was to no
purpose to have any regard to the five adjectitious days in the Egyptian year,
in that case seventeen years being inconsiderable when the Eventual measure or
Unite is an Hexamenon or Hacatonogdoconthemeron. Therefore the comparing of
these two places together does the more confirm what I said in my Answer to the
first Objection: That the eventual Measure of the Medial Visions, or Eventual
Unite, in which, if the Vision be fulfilled, the Prediction is sufficiently
verified, is not a Year, but a Semi-time, or an Hecatonogdoconthemeron, the
space of an hundred eighty years.

CHAP. XXXVI. A fourth Objection from the same hand, against that Conjecture
from Dan. 11.45. of the peril of Rome 's being some time taken by the Turk, as
being inconsistent with the expiration of the three hundred ninety six years of
the Turks Commission to kill the third part of men, which is to expire this
year 1685. the year after this Objection was sent. The Answer thereto.
THIS fourth Objection is this, The four Angels which are loosed ( Chap. 9. v.
15.) An. Dom. 1289. page 91. and prepared (or as it seems to me commissioned)
only for an hour and a day and a month and a year ( viz. for three hundred
ninety six years, page 87.) to slay the third part of men, will have their
Commission expire An. Dom. 1685. and then it is unlikely that the Turk will
plant the Tabernacle of his Palace, etc. in Rome, Dan. 11. v. 45. For it seems
to me, that their being prepared for so long a time implies, that at the
Expiration of that time, the power given them to kill the third part of men,
will expire.

Answ. This Objection looks handsomely and ingeniously on it at the first sight,
and it is a very desirable thing to us Christians that it should be solid and
true. But the grounds thereof I conceive are not firm: For it only supposes,
does not prove that the loosing the four Angels, An. Dom. 1289. is the
precedent year to the Epoch of three hundred ninety six years, at the ending
whereof they shall have slain the third part of men. For first, though three
hundred ninety six added to twelve hundred eighty nine make sixteen hundred
eighty five, yet it is a precarious business to place the Epoch of the three
hundred ninety six years after, and not in the very Year 1289. Moreover, if the
Year 1289. be the Epoch of the three hundred ninety six years, the Turks will
have done their business of slaying the third part of men, that is, of
abolishing the Eastern Roman Empire, quite vanquishing it and possessing it to
themselves, and utterly extinguishing the Succession of the Constantinopolitan
Emperors above two hundred years before the Expiration of these three hundred
ninety six years, wherein they were to do the Feat. Whence there is a necessity
of taking Mr. Mede's Epoch, viz. the year of Togrulbec's Inauguration by
Chaiim Biamrilla into the Turkish Empire. And the word (...) being a Participle
of the Preterperfect tense, and signifying as much as, [having been prepared]
that intimates that the loosing them is after their being prepared, and
respects the time of their being bound in the great River Euphrates, there
forthcoming and in readiness, being once loosed to slay the third part of men
at the time appointed, viz. at the Expiration of the three hundred ninety six
years, which commence from the Inauguration of Togrulbec, and therefore
terminate in the taking of Constantinople, and so extinguishing the Eastern
Roman Empire and Succession of the Constantinopolitan Emperors.

Togrulbec was inaugurated Emperor of the Turks in the Year 1057. and the
Angels let loose in the Year 1289. so that the time of their being bound in the
River Euphrates is two hundred thirty two years. All which time they were (...)
forthcoming or in readiness after they were once loosed, to slay the third
part of men at the Expiration of the three hundred ninety six years, commencing
from their first being bound, or indeed from their first being a Turkish
Kingdom upon the Inauguration of Togrulbec or Tangrolipix, as others call him.
This is the genuine sense of (...) in this place. But there is no Example in
any Greek Author, that I know, where it signifies Commissioned. And if it did,
and this Commission commenced with the loosing of the Angels in the Year 1289.
whenas Constantinople was taken in the Year 1453. they must then have executed
their Commission above two hundred years before they had Commission so to do,
as I noted above. Add unto all this, if (...) could signify Commissioned, viz.
to slay the third part of men for three hundred ninety six years only, it does
not at all thence follow, that when they have slain, that is, quite vanquished
the Eastern Empire, and seized on it, that they may possess it no longer than
so, but on the contrary it seems improbable but that they should enjoy the
possession of it some considerable time.

And I must confess I find no limitation of their time in the Visions but that
it may reach into the seventh Vial, when they with other Nations will be
vanquished by the Army of that Divine Heroes on the white Horse with a Sword
coming out of his mouth. And the Turks, according to the general consent of the
best Interpreters, are concerned in the sixth Vial, which is next to the
seventh. And most certainly the Exitus of the sixth Trumpet, as being past at
the Rising of the Witnesses and partial Fall of Babylon, does not terminate the
Turkish Empire: But the entire Visum of the sixth Trumpet is the Turks
vanquishing and possessing themselves of the Eastern Roman Empire, and the
general Impenitence of the Western thereupon. Which general Impenitence ceased
to be in the Rising of the Witnesses and partial Fall of the great City, which
is the Close of the sixth Trumpet, as is evident Apoc. 11.14. Whence we see,
that the killing of the third part of men was past before that, as appears from
Chap. 9. v. 18, 20. and the supposed Commission executed and expired before the
Reformation. So that the Turks have continued about the matter of an hundred
years from the Exitus of the sixth Trumpet already, and how much longer they
may continue, God alone knows. And therefore for any thing hence appears, the
Turk may some time plant the Tabernacle of his Palace in Rome, according to
what I have declared, but yet only by way of a rational Conjecture upon Dan.
11. v. 45. But whether the Conjecture be really true, Time alone can discover.
A general Repentance of those sins that are charged upon the Western Empire,
Rev. Chap. 9. v. 20, 21. why may it not prevent so great a Judgment? and I wish
the experiment were tried. For surely it must be very acceptable to the God of
Truth and Mercy, that those that profess to worship him, abstain from Idolatry
and the Effusion of innocent Blood.

CHAP. XXXVII. Why the Author of the Apocalypsis Apocalypseos did only take up
as an Hypothesis, but not formally prove [ that when there is any promise or
threatening before the Epiphonema in the Epistles to the seven Churches, it
indicates things Political touching the State on Earth; but if placed after the
Epiphonema, an invisible State or Concerns of the other World] and yet
adventured to argue therefrom.
THIS mentioned, in the Argument, I must confess is taken up as an Hypothesis,
nor did I ever go about to prove it, the fitness of the application of it
proving it self to be a true Hypothesis, that is, not a mere Hypothesis, but a
real Truth. And what way was there to prove it but by Induction, advertising it
was true in every part? Which I will now intimate to make a supply for the
former defect. And first we will consider those promises that come after the
Epiphonema, they being the fewest, and respecting only the three first Epistles.

It is evident, that the Promise after the Epiphonema in the Epistle to the
Ephesine Church [I will give to eat of the Tree of Life which is in the midst
of the Paradise of God] is understood of the state of the other Life, viz. of
Heaven, as is manifest from Luke 23.43. and 2 Cor. 12.4. And so the promise
after the Epiphonema, to the Church in Smyrna [Shall not be hurt by the second
Death] this is plainly a promise of being made partakers of the first
Resurrection, as appears from Apoc. Chap. 20.6. And it is the sense of the
Primitive Church on this place, as you may see in Mr. Mede. And so respects the
state of the other life. And lastly, the promise to the Church in Pergamus
after the Epiphonema, it is plain it is not of a visible and Political nature,
but of things invisible, viz. [to eat of the hidden Manna] and [to receive a
white Stone and a new Name therein written, which no man knows, saving he
that receives it] This is no Political or visible State, but spiritual and
invisible. So that the Induction is full and firm touching the Promises after
the Epiphonema, so far as they go. And these immediately following the
Epiphonema, being of an invisible and spiritual nature, it is a fair hint that
those that immediately precede should be of a visible nature and Political, and
that as well in the rest of the Epistles as the three first. But we shall make
it good in every one of them.

Now therefore for that Threatening to the Church in Ephesus [I will remove thy
Candlestick out of its place] All Interpreters agree that it concerns the
visible State of the Church, as it is manifest that Candlestick signifies the
Church. And it is as easy and natural an Interpretation of [to be removed out
of its place] to be moved from the state and condition it was in, namely, of
peace and rest to that of trouble and persecution. Which Commination was made
good in the very next Interval. The Church in Smyrna being exercised with no
less than ten Persecutions. And so that promise to the Church in Smyrna that
precedes the Epiphonema [I will give thee the Crown of life] Forasmuch as it
corresponds so well with the Crown that is given to the Rider of the white
Horse under the first Seal, which is the Imperial Crown, and this promise was
made good in the very next Interval the Pergamenian when Constantine turned
Christian, and seeing it would imply a needless Tautology, if it were
understood of an Heavenly Crown, that being promised after the Epiphonema in
the promise of partaking of the first Resurrection, or not being hurt by the
second Death, which intimates the same, this may assure any unprejudiced
Reader, that the promise of the Crown of Life here placed before the Epiphonema
signifies Politically. As in the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira the promise
before the Epiphonema is most evidently Political, viz. [Power over the Nations
to rule them with a rod of iron] And [the Morning-star] in the Prophetic Style
signifies also Political Sovereignty. And in the promises to the Church in
Philadelphia before the Epiphonema, they are all along Political and visible.
As that of the Synagogue of Satan worshipping before her feet. The Caution
also, that no man take her Crown, that Political Sovereignty intended for her.
And her being a Pillar in the Temple of God, etc. intimates a permanent visible
State of that Church, and the Name of the City of my God the New Jerusalem; is
a most manifest indication of a Political sense indeed. Wherefore it being so
evident in these four, Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatira and Philadelphia, that the
Threatening and Promises are of a nature Political and visible that precede the
Epiphonema, if the Threatening or Promises in the other three will bear this
sense, we are in all reason to conclude, that such a sense belongs unto them.

Wherefore that Threatening to the Church in Pergamus [I will come unto thee
quickly] according to that most constant tenor of the sense before the
Epiphonema, must fignifie some visible and external dealing with those in the
Church of Pergamus here blamed and threatened severely, but conjoined with a
Commination also against the Enemies of the True Church, or against the False
one the Baalamites. The fighting against whom with the Sword of his mouth
(which is the Word of God convincingly preached) is the attacquing and fetching
off whole Nations by the preaching of the Word (which is that Sword of the
Spirit) from the Baalamitish Church to the pure Faith of Christ, which
accordingly came to pass in the next Interval. In which this fighting with the
Sword of his mouth continued so much in earnest, that in the close it cut off
whole Kingdoms from the Idolatrous Church of Rome. So well is the Political
sense of these Threatenings verified by the Event. See my Exposition on Chap. 2.
v. 16. And now for the Promises to those few Names in Sardis of being [cloathed
in white raiment] That that Phrase signifies prosperous success in affairs in
the Prophetic Style, is a thing undoubted; and so he that overcomes [the not
blotting out his Name out of the Book of Life] is the like indication of the
continuance and increase of those few Names, or pure and unspotted Christians,
till they emerge into the Name of the Philadelphian Church, nay of the New
Jerusalem it self, not extinct, though disguised at the last under the Name of
Laodicea, which lasts even to the very Conflagration. And this I think is a
sufficient completion of this Promise of [not being blotted out of the Book of
Life] in such a sense as the Imperial Crown promised to the Church in Smyrna is
called the Crown of Life, signifying their security from the Persecutions of
the red Dragon, and here the prosperity and security of the Church (whose seed
were those few Names in Sardis) from all their Enemies, even to the end of the
World, Gog and Magog being not able to take the holy City. Such shall be the
success of those few Names in Sardis, for which they are also in a more special
manner recommended to God by Christ, and to the Ministry of his holy Angels.
And from whom but these can the Philadelphian Church and New Jerusalem spring?
So easy and natural is the application of those Promises made to these few
Names in Sardis to an external and Political sense. Whence we may be sure that
that is the sense here as well as in other such like Promises in the other
Epistles before the Epiphonema.

And now lastly, For the Promise to him that overcomes in the Church of
Laodicea, viz. That he shall sit down with Christ in his Throne, etc. That this
Promise is of a nature external and Political, or hugely akin to it, is plain
from hence, that the performance thereof will be at that general visible and
indeed most illustrious Assizes, when there will be the Appearance of all the
dead before the Tribunal of Christ, and the Saints as Co-assessours with Christ
shall in their Thrones judge the lapsed Angels. So that though I have argued
from the abovementioned Hypothesis, as then seeming but an Hypothesis, yet the
obvious Applicability thereof to the explaining these Epistles, and the now
distinct proof that it is a true Hypothesis, or a real Truth, shows that it is
a safe Topic to argue from. Which was the thing aimed at.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Four Objections taken out of a Letter of a learned and
ingenious Friend touching the Kingdom of Christ on Earth, as if all his
suffering Adherents should be rewarded in that Kingdom in the New Jerusalem;
with Answers thereto.
THE first Objection upon Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, page 4. To be Kings and
Priests unto God signifies as much as a Sacerdotal Kingdom, as Exodus 9.6. a
Kingdom, because of the reigning Estate; Sacerdotal, because of their Priestly
Employ; and in some places (as Apoc. 20.6.) because of the unstainedness of
their condition as to Externals. Now it is acknowledged that there is a Kingdom
designed here on Earth for Christ and Christianity, and there are a great many
places that seem to promise all his faithful Adherents, at least his faithful
suffering Adherents, of all times, a share in the glory and felicity of that
Kingdom-Estate, as if the Martyrs of the Primitive Times and of all Times
should have a Recompense for their Sufferings in the New Jerusalem-state of
things, as Apoc. Chap. 2. v. 26. where you acknowledge that the Ruling the
Nations and the Morning Star are matters Political. If these be confined to the
successive Intervals of the Church, the Sardian and Philadelphian Times
suppose, what will they signify in the literal Interpretation? And page 23. of
Apoc. Apocalypseos it is said the bright Morning Star belongs to the
Philadelphian Interval, which is at a great distance from the Thyatirian; how
shall the Martyrs and Confessors in the Thyatirian Interval have any share in
the happy Philadelphian state of things? Or what will such a promised felicity
signify to their encouragement, wherein not they, but their Successors only of
following times are to have an interest? It is needless to mention many other
places that appertain to this matter. But I could never untye this knot of
difficulties in the Apocalypse, that is, I could never conceive it possible
that Christian Sufferers of all Times and Ages should partake of the
Jerusalemstate of things, nor how the Apocalypse can be interpreted so, as not
to assert it. Which is the more probable, because the Kingdom-state, which is
designed for Christ, is a kind of Heavenly Kingdom-state upon Earth.

Answ. The New Jerusalem-state is nothing else but the Triumph of the truly
Apostolic Church emerging into Universal Power above their Enemies into
undisturbed Peace and an Heavenly Holiness of Conversation here upon Earth.
Which at last she will obtain, and it is an encouragement to the present
suffering Martyrs, that the cause they suffer for, will at last appear so
glorious and triumphant here on Earth, while they in the mean time are better
rewarded in Heaven, and it were a bidding them to their loss to have them
exchange their Heavenly felicity for this Earthly, though gloriously
flourishing condition. And lastly, look but on the Apostolic Church, according
as the Prophetic Style represents it, as one continued Body from the beginning
to the end, and all these promises to the Pergamenian and Thyatirian Sufferers
are made good to them, as being still the same Body of the Church in their
Successors. Nor is this Heaventy Kingdom of Christ upon Earth otherwise to be
understood Heavenly, than that the Spirit and Conversation of Christians in the
New Jerusalem-state will be truly Holy and Heavenly. So that I see no
difficulty at all in this Point, if we rightly conceive the matter. And it will
further ease the Reader's mind, if he consider what I have writ Chap. 20. That
though the New Jerusalem be a Prophecy of an excellent State of the Church on
Earth, yet the description of that State is an intended Type also of the State
of the Church Triumphant in Heaven.

Object. 2. Upon page 22, 23. To have power over the Nations seems to signify,
That he shall be of Power over Nations or of Regal Dignity in that
Kingdom-estate upon Earth, which is designed for Christ by his Father, Chap.
2.27. And the promise of the Morning Star confirms such an Interpretation. For
it is the Star of Empire, and the white Raiment promised Chap. 3.5. is an
Ensign of Regal Dignity.

Answ. The ingenious Objector seems to mistake in the propriety of the
Prophetic Style, which as in the Symbol of a Woman, a Man or Beast, does not
intimate one single Individual, but a Body of men and their succession, so by
the single person [He] is not meant this or that single Man, but the whole
successive Body of men that are Overcomers; which according to the Prophetic
Style are signified by this single person [He] Those that stand out through
Faith and Patience to the last in those Countries where the Pagano-Christians
domineered over them, these with their Princes and Rulers will have the
Dominion over the Pagano-Christians, and will become the beginning or
commencement of the great Empire of Christ. So far as the Father of our Lord
Christ has enlarged his Kingdom in the Sardian Succession, so far these
Overcomers partake thereof with him. And this Sardian State of the Kingdom of
Christ is the promised Morning Star, but the Jerusalem state the bright
Morning Star. And lastly, Though white Raiment may be a Regal Ensign, yet it is
most safely interpreted of prosperous Success, and may answer to that in the
next Epistle, v. 8. Behold, I have set before thee an opened door, etc.

Object. 3. Upon page 31, etc. It is observable touching the Church of
Philadelphia, that there are many passages that represent her in a state of
Trial. She is said to have a little strength, and to have kept the word of
Christ's Patience, she is exhorted to hold fast that which she has, that she
lose not the Crown for which she was conflicting, she is exhorted to overcome,
and encouraged to behave her self heroically. Now, Sir, how will this agree
with the New Jerusalem-state of the Church? Besides, it is promised to the
Philadelphians as a thing to come, Chap. 3.12. But it is more observable that
it is promised to the Philadelphians, that their Christian Champions shall be
Citizens of the New Jerusalem, and that Christ will write upon them his new
Name, which I believe you rightly interpret King of Kings, etc. This therefore
seems to countenance what I said before, That all Christ's suffering Adherents
shall have a share of the New Jerusalem-felicity here on Earth, and have
preferments in that Kingdom-Estate. Which may seem to be further countenanced
from the promise to Laodicea, Chap. 3.21. That they shall sit with Christ on
his Throne.

Answ. This Objection is grounded on a mistake, as if the Philadelphian
Interval and New Jerusalem-state did synchronize. Whenas the Philadelphian
Interval begins sooner, and ends sooner than the New Jerusalem-state. Wherefore
those Exhortations belong to that part of the Philadelphian Interval that goes
before the Jerusalem-state. Whence their emerging at last into that state, is
promised to them as a thing to come. Now as for their Christian Champions, etc.
as if it were understood of some select Persons, this difficulty is grounded
upon the old mistake, viz. That [He] signifies a particular person, whenas in
the Prophetic sense and style it here signifies the whole Body of the faithful
Philadelphians, predicting that that sort of men, by their Faith, Patience and
powerful preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, will at last have so glorious and
victorious success, that they with their Successors shall bring in the New
Jerusalem-state or Millennial Empire of Christ; so that all that is predicted
of the New Jerusalem shall be fulfilled in them here on Earth, while all
Christ's suffering Adherents in the mean that are dead, enjoy themselves in
Heaven. As for the Promise to the Laodicean Overcomers, it is not the promise
of an Earthly Throne, but an Heavenly, as to be Assistents of Christ coming to
judge the People, as the Word signifies in the Close of this Interval of the
Laodicean Church: which Interval may be so denominated, as for other reasons,
so happily by way of Allusion to Ptolemy's Laodicea combusta (as I have more than
once noted) the Conflagration closing this Interval.

Object. 4. Notwithstanding the great Learning which you have employed, Sir, in
the Exposition of the seven Churches, it seems a somewhat lubricous business.
But the rest of your Exposition is matter of much greater Certainty. But it is
no disparagement for any man that is thus assured of the truth and meaning of
the Apocalypse, as to the main purport of it, to acknowledge there is great
difficulty in interpreting several particular passages. Touching the New
Jerusalem I cannot but observe, that there are a great many passages in the
Apocalypse which seem to argue the time will come, when God and the Son of God
will hold his Estate and Court here upon Earth. Which how strange soever it may
seem; is not so strange as that the Son of God should be crucified here upon
Earth. And if this Hypothesis might be thought solid and well grounded, all the
passages of this Book aforementioned and many more, would be sufficiently
clear, and the description of the New Jerusalem in the two last Chapters would
be easily intelligible, which I think cannot be well understood without it.
These places, Rev. 21. v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, 13, 15. and Chap. 22. v. 3, 4, 5, 6,
14, 15. sound this way, at such a rate, that they almost force me, whether I
will or no, to believe some such thing. But how far and in what manner these
things may be true, may be troublesome to conceive.

Answ. This business would not seem so lubricous to the learned Objector, if
his Reason and Fancy was but once well inured to that Figure of the Prophetic
Style, which we call Henopoeia, which takes not place only in a Man, Woman or
Beast, made the Symbols of some Society or Body Politic: But the Pronoun [He]
which so often occurs in these Epistles to the Churches, has also in it this
Figure, and signifies not a single Person, but such a Body or Society of men so
or so behaving themselves together with their Successors. This successive Body
by a Prophetic Henopoeia is represented as one single Person by the Pronoun
[He] He that overcomes. This once admitted, all difficulties vanish as to the
seven Churches. And if the Objector did but observe how full of Hylasmus's and
Israelismus's the Apocalyptick Style is, he would easily be reconciled to such
a sense of these places of the twenty first and twenty second of the
Apocalypse, as the Expositor has given of them, though they bear so hard upon
his Fancy for the present, as to drive him to expect a personal Reign of
Christ upon Earth. Consider also here what we intimated above, That the
Description of the New Jerusalem is so drawn, as to be a Type also of the
Church Triumphant in Heaven. But to proceed. We averr moreover, That Christ's
Personal Reign here on Earth would be infinitely more strange than his
Suffering here, because the Reasons of this latter are so palpable. But I see
no reason at all for a Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth; whenas the Spirit
of Christ within us, in that measure and efficacy it will be in those days,
will serve all intents and purposes that his Personal Reign can be supposed to
serve to. And this reigning by his Spirit is a greater perfection in his
Church, than if he should guide them by his personal Presence and Voice here on
Earth. Inward Regeneration by the operation of the Spirit into the living Image
of Christ, is a greater Privilege, I say, than to be guided by the external
Person and Voice of Christ amongst us sounding in our ears. As, if the thing
could be, it were better for an Horse to be turned into a perfect man, than to
be rid by the bravest Heroes that is. And lastly, That Opinion touching all the
suffering Adherents to Christ, that they should become Citizens of this New
Jerusalem on Earth, which is conjoined with the Opinion of Christ's personal
Reign, is not agreeable to Reason, in that it brings down the persecuted Saints
great Reward in Heaven which Christ promises, Matt. 5.12. to a lesser reward
here on Earth.

CHAP. XXXIX. Two Objections more out of the same Letter: The first touching
the Palm-bearing Company, whether they synchronize with the New Jerusalem. The
other touching the Intricateness and Obscurity of the Vision of the two
Witnesses; With Answers to both Objections.
THE first Objection is upon page 67. Mr. Mede's Arguments, says he, for the
Synchronism of the Palm-bearing Company with the New Jerusalem seems not firm.
If they were, and we could be assured, that the Palm-bearing Company were
personally Citizens of the New Jerusalem, it would argue that the New
Jerusalem-state is designed to be premiant to the suffering Christians. And
indeed it seems to be the main scope of the Apocalypse to predict that Divine
state of things. But however the Palm-bearing Company are plainly the
Triumphant Army of Martyrs, and are of great affinity with those Rev. 20.4.
saving only that the latter are the Martyrs under Antichrist, the former seem
to be the Martyrs under Paganism. And since these Martyrs are described as
personally rewarded with their white Robes, etc. it would be strange for us to
think they are rewarded by Proxy in the prosperity of others in the
Jerusalem-state. Besides, that it is too early of the Apocalypse to have a
formal Vision of the New Jerusalem state.

Answ. That the Palm-bearing Company synchronizes in part with the New
Jerusalem, besides what Mr. Mede alleges, the Methodicalness of the Apocalypse
may assure us. For the prefixing of the 144000 sealed ones, with the Residue of
that Vision in that Chapter before the seven Trumpets, is according to
exquisite Method, the seven Trumpets being a more distinct and particular
Representation of the affairs of the same Time. Nor does it follow from the
Palm-bearing Company's being Citizens of the New Jerusalem, that those
individual Martyrs that suffered either under Paganism or Antichrist, that they
live in the New Jerusalem here on Earth, but, by a Prophetic Henopoeia, the
whole successive Body of the pure Apostolic suffering Church under the
Persecution of Antichrist being understood; when this one succeeding Body
emerges out of their Persecutions into a Victory over the Beast, etc. then they
become the Turba palmifera, and that gradually: First, in the Sardian Interval;
after more gloriously and copiously in the Philadelphian, which is coincident
with the New Jerusalem. Nor need they be thought, those that suffered under
Antichrist or the Dragon, to be, in the prosperity of the New Jerusalem state,
rewarded by a Proxy (which is wittily expressed) they, according to the Genius
of the Apocalyptick Style, being looked upon as the same individual Body
Politic still, as it is manifest in the Rising of the two Witnesses. And
lastly, It is not too early of the Apocalypse to have the Jerusalem-state
glanced at in a Vision Synchronal to the seven Trumpets, which reach to the
last Judgment, and therefore include in them the Time of the New Jerusalem, the
ligher glances at which partake of the nature of that fuller description, Chap.
21. and therefore are also Typical of the Martyrs Triumphant State in Heaven.
Consider our twentieth Chapter again of this Treatise.

Object. 2. Upon page 102. The Vision of the two Witnesses has always seemed
to me one of the obscurest parts of the Book-Prophecy. And he that reads what
you have written on that Subject with due consideration, will be apt to think
it is scarce possible to employ more Wit than you have done to void the
difficulties of it. There are several things in the business of this Prophecy
that seem to me of rational Conception. (1) It is rational to think that the
Apocalypse speaks stilo Judaico, as all men observe, quod saepissime (...). (2)
That these two Witnesses are two Judaical Prophetic Reformers, Reforming
Powers (Movers and Mourners for Reformation) mystically understood. (3) That
the Spirit of Prophecy speaks of them and characterizes them stilo Judaico, as
the two Olive Trees, two Candlesticks, of Elias-like zeal and terror, and
Elias-like and Mosaic Wonder-working Power. (4) That the cause of their
mourning is the desolation of Jerusalem, the holy City being trodden under
foot. (5) They are bipartite or of a twofold nature and quality, and therefore
represented by two Witnesses. (6) It is rational to think that the Beast (the
tenhorned Beast the secular Power) should kill them about the commencement of
his Reign to rid the World of such troublesome Fellows.

But then the following Particulars seem to be as rational. (1) The Text sets
down things as they were represented (...), and leaves us to spell out the
things signified corresponding to the Visional Representations or Iconisms; and
though the Rind and Pulp must not be confounded, yet they must be connex,
correspondent and go hand in hand. Wherefore (2) it should seem that the
Witnesses prophesying, upon their death, quite cease, for mortui nihil agunt.
(3) That upon this account the Nations rejoice and send gifts because they are
rid of them and their Testimony. (4) That therefore they had been tormented by
them and their Testimony for a long time before they were rid of them by their
Death. And (5) That the Beast himself was provoked and enraged by their long
continued Testimony before he sets upon them to slaughter them. And (6) That
during the time of their Prophecy they could not be dead in the sense of the
Prophecy, because during that time they were as Olive Trees and Candlesticks
standing before God, and had and exercised all their Wonder-working Power
mentioned Chapter 11.5, 6. And (7) That their death in the Prophecy is represented
as an effect and consequent of their prophetic Testimony, so long continued to
the Prejudice of the World. These, Sir, are the best Objections that I can make
against your Method of interpreting this Prophecy, which surely is desirable it
should be true. But I cannot make all ends meet, which possibly you may do. But
I entreat you consider, Sir, How it is possible that the Witnesses should be as
dead Carcasses, and yet be in Action all the while? For if they be but
Politically dead, they must by the Text be as Politically dead: If I could
solve such Objections, the Rising of the Witnesses sounds so like the
Reformation, that it would go down with me without chewing: but I have tried
several Methods of reconciling things, but none of them will do.

Answ. The six first Particulars represent truly enough the Cortical meaning of
the Prophecy. But as to the latter part of the first of the following seven
Particulars, where it is required that the Rind and the Pulp, though they be
not to be confounded, yet that they be connex, correspondent and go hand in
hand, what the ingenious Objector would have by connex and going hand in hand I
do not so well know, but that there is a parallel correspondency I not only
allow but assert. And I say that their Political Death, that is to say, their
Inability of reforming things amiss in the Church and Religion, this PITH runs
parallel with the RIND, viz. with their lying three days and an half as dead
Carcasses in the street of the City. And those three days and an half ( viz.
three times and an half) the RIND, again run parallel with the years (the PITH)
that they are in this Death Political. And what more exact Correspondency can
be required? But while they are thus dead as to Political power, it does not at
all imply that they are so to power Spiritual and Prophetical, which they may
exercise, though at their peril, and so in Individuals be naturally killed
also, though the Prophetic body or succession continue, upon occasions
prophesying, and thereupon persecuted or suffering Martyrdom, etc. from whence
appears the invalidity of the second Particular. For though the Witnesses be
politically dead, yet they are not so to spiritual Power and Prophecy. And
mortui nihil agunt reaches no further than to what they are dead to. Otherwise
the Souls of men departed would be asleep; who, though they be dead to the
things of this life, yet they are alive to the things of the other. And as for
the third, fourth and fifth Particulars, their invalidity will be discovered,
if we consider the Prophetic Style how Henopoetick it is, representing
frequently repeated Acts, as it were but one single Act, whereby
notwithstanding there is understood as well succession of Acts as succession of
Persons under one single Beast and these two single Witnesses. Wherefore the
Inhabiters of the Earth sending gifts to each other upon the slaughter of the
Witnesses, is the RIND in this part of the Vision, but the PVLP is a successive
or repeated rejoicing of the earthly minded Church and enjoying the World in
keeping down these Witnesses the true Evangelici, and outing them of all
Political Power in Church or State, and sometimes of their Lives and Fortunes,
and in the mean time sharing the World amongst themselves, and rejoicing
therein. Wherefore the third Particular has no force against our Exposition of
the Vision, if we consider the nature of a Prophetic Henopoeia, that
embellishes the RIND of the Prophecy. Which consideration destroys also all the
force of the fourth and fifth Particulars. For there was a successive Political
(and sometimes Natural) death inflicted on the Witnesses in a manner all along
the three days or three times and an half or twelve hundred and sixty
Prophetical days. There was tormenting with their Testimony and suffering a
political Death, at least in a large sense, for their Testimony and rejoicing
at their suffering all along in a manner, nor was the Beast any long time
provoked till he took his revenge in some degree or other. These are intangling
Inferences from the blending or confounding the Pulp with the Rind.

And to the sixth I say, That during the time of their Prophecy they might be
dead according to that (...) the Prophecy intimates them to be so, namely,
politically, as having no power or stroke to reform things amiss in the Church
and God's Worship, and yet in the mean time, though at their own peril, might
prophecy and testify against the miscarriage of things, and might in that
sense which is intended, be Olive Trees, Candlesticks, and in a mystical sense
do such Wonders as relate to Elias and Moses, methinks there is no difficulty
at all in this. And now to the last, Their political Death, and sometimes being
martyred, is an effect of their Prophetic Testimony, but both the Cause and
the Effect is successional through many Ages, and one did not begin
considerably later than the other, their political Death later than their
Testimony, but went on continuedly and repeatedly in a manner hand in hand,
though by a Prophetic Henopoeia in the Rind the Death seems inflicted at the
end only and at once. Wherefore if the Objector consider well what is said
hitherto, he will easily find it possible that the Witnesses should be as dead
Carcasses, as to any political Power or Efficacy, and yet as to another life
(of Spirit and Prophecy) as occasion required, be in action all the while they
were politically dead, and lay as Carcasses in the street: As a man may be dead
as to this World, but alive to the other, according as I noted above. If we but
heed not to confound the Pith and the Rind, these things will appear as clear
as the Sun. Consider the latter part of Chapter the twenty sixth, where we
define what is the fullest and largest sense of the Witnesses political Death.

CHAP. XL. Whether (...) Apoc. Chap. 11. may signify the sacred Revenue of the
City of Babylon. How far the Woman was helped from being (...) by the Spue of
the Dragon, through the Nicene Council. Of the dead dying in the Lord, Apoc.
Chapter 14. and of the Harvest and Vintage. And whether the Prophecy of the
destruction of Babylon, Chap. 17, and 18. imply the ruin of the Material City
of Rome; in Answer to three more Objections from the same hand, in the
abovesaid Letter.
OBjection the first, upon page 108. (...) seems not to bear the Exposition of
Tithe, if we consider the sense of Language, and no more. But Earthquakes shake
Cities and ruin them. Wherefore an Event analogous thereto must come to pass
in this great Earthquake, and another correspondent to the slaying of seven
thousand Names of men consequent thereupon. These things naturally cohere. And
it seems to be upon the account of these Events that those words are
immediately subjoyned, The second woe is past. It seems, Sir, a great force upon
the Text to make seven thousand Names of men signify no more than Estates of
men belonging to the seventh Head of the Beast.

Answ. That (...) as well as (...) may not signify Tithe, and that the sacred
Revenue of the Church, I see no Reason: For the same Tithe may be called (...),
in reference to the Substantive (...) of the Neuter Gender, as well as (...) in
reference either to (...) or (...) of the Feminine. Nay, we may see (...) and
(...) promiscuously used in one and the same Verse, Levit. Chap. 27. v. 32. And
concerning the Tithe [or Tenth] of the Herd of the Flock, even of whatsoever
passes under the Rod, the tenth shall be holy to the Lord. In the first place
it is called (...), and in the latter (...), and in both places by Vatablus
rendered Decima. And (...) the same that (...) or (...) occurs frequently in the
Books of Moses, Numb. Chap. 18. v. 24, 26, 28. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 11. and Chap. 26.
v. 12. Also 2 Chronicles. Chap. 31. v. 6, 12. and elsewhere. So that about (...),
there can be no scruple. But now these Tithes or sacred Revenues could not fall
from the Pontifician Party, but that part of the City where they fell would
fall with them, and the Earthquake requires it should, as the ingenious
Objector well observes, and I will allow, that it chiefly implies the Ruin of
the tenth part of the City it self, or Roman Polity, being an analogous effect
to that of the Earthquake. But this Fall of the City being nothing else but the
dissolution of such a share of the Papal Hierarchy, which was not by killing of
men, but dissolving that Pontifician Power to such an extent, under the seventh
Head of the Beast, nothing can be more natural than the expounding the seven
thousand Names slain, of extinguishing those several Orders and Offices of men,
and nulling their power in such and such Kingdoms or Countries; so that they
were only Politically slain, as the Witnesses mostwhat were before. This is
extremely congruous and natural. Consider what is said on the Text in
Apocalypsis Apocalypseos.

Object. 2. Upon page 120. It ought to be considered how much the Council of
Nice helped the Woman, Rev. 12.16. who was never in so much danger and distress
as after that time, all the World almost turning Arian, and Christendom was
made a Cock pit of fighting, Rage, and all manner of Enormities. What if we
should wave the Council of Nice, with their term of (...) (which may be of good
Interpretation, but it may be also of bad Interpretation) and refer this help
that was afforded the Woman to Julian's defeat by the Persians? Which was a
signal help to the Woman indeed.

Answ. This is a material Objection: But I answer, That the Dragon spuing out
such a Flood of Heresy and Contention that the Woman might be (...) thereby,
that is, might be carried away, drowned and lost, the most proper means to
obviate this Evil was an Ecumenical Council. And though the Council of Nice
did not so far absorb this Flood, as that the Heresy and Contention utterly
ceased, yet it abated it so far as that the Woman was safe from being (...)
thereby. Nay, it was in a manner all drunk up by the Earth (the Clayish Earth
or Ecclesiastic Councils) by that time Theodosius came to be Emperor, which
was a little before the Woman entered into the Wilderness. And the Church had
such Anchorage in this first Council of Nice, that such Arianism [Erat quando
non erat] as was properly condemned by that Council could never hold up its
head again. But the eternal Generation of the Son was acknowledged (begotten of
the Father before all Worlds, as the Nicene Creed has it) and Arius expressing
himself more compliantly with this Creed, was readmitted into the Church by
the favor of Constantine, who, you may be sure, would never have readmitted
him, unless he had come to some such tolerable compliance. And the whole
Controversy after that, seems only to have been, Whether the Son should be
deemed (...) or (...) to his Father; which being difficult to decide, there
were those that would have the word (...), as being too hard for the people,
nor mentioned in Scripture, to be left out of the Creed, giving that deference
to the Nicene decision as not to pronounce it false, but overcurious. So that
there was no peril of the Churches drowning in this Flood when the Nicene
Council was so nearly observed even by those that seemed to oppose it. And for
the Homousians and Homoeusians, there wanted nothing but a dextrous Critic to
show how both their terms are consistent one with another (if you will but
exclude Sabellianism out of the account.) For making the Father and the Son two
real Hypostases, though indiscerpible or indivisible one from another, they are
not only (...) (as it may aim at a (...)) of one and the same Individuous
Substance, but also (...) of like substance, because according to Aristotle
himself there is, (...), a Similitude betwixt Substances. (...), and Identity
of Quality, whether Essential or Accidental, is a sure ground of Similitude.
And the Son being the eternal Image of his Father, how can they but be (...),
unless you run into Sabellianism, and will have nothing to do with (...)
Substance, and acknowledge a Trinity only of words, qualifications or second
Notions. So that we see what a manifest Influence the Council of Nice had to
keep the Woman from being (...), and perishing in the Draconick flood. And that
not only from the benefit of this one Council, which was purely Orthodox, but
even from those Councils which were with a general and promiscuous appellation
called Arian, though not such Arians as were first condemned by the Nicene
Council. So that though these Arian Councils were less Orthodox than they
should be, yet one part of the Christian Populacy adhering to them, and the
other part to the Orthodox Councils, the Woman was so well buoyed up by the
help of these Councils, as young Swimmers are with Bladdders or Bulrushes, that
she was safe from sinking again into Paganism (or giving religious Worship to
any but who was really Creator of the Heavens and of the Earth, Jer. 10.11.)
though that was the malicious project of the Dragon in spuing out that flood of
Heterodoxy and Contention, viz to extinguish Christianity, and make men turn
Pagans. Thus therefore was the Woman helped by that first Ecumenical and other
Councils.

But how Julian's Death can be so properly said to be an help to her in this
case, I must confess I see not. For most certainly the flood out of the Dragons
mouth signifies Heresy or Heterodoxy and Contention. The natural Remedy to
which evil are well regulated Councils, that the minds of the Vulgar, who are
neither studied Theologers, nor Philosophers may be settled and quieted, by the
grave authoritative decision of their Superiors, in things hugely expedient
and necessary in Religion and Divine Worship, and such was the knowledge of the
Divinity of Christ and Triunity of the Godhead, Father, Son and Holy Ghost.
Which Faith was assured to the Christian people by these Ecclesiastic
Councils, and Paganism kept out at arms length, and the Christian Religion
secured. But as for the death of Julian in the Persian War, how little service
it did, may appear in that within a year or two after, Valens coming to the
Imperial Crown, proved an hot Persecutor of the Orthodox.

Object. 3. Upon page 143. a The Text of the dead dying in the Lord seems to
refer to such times when Martyrdom was most frequent. b And p. 146. though
Christ's Harvest may signify the Conversion of Nations and People, yet the
Angels Vintage seems rather to signify execution of Judgments, because that is
the usual Employ of Angels; but those things I cannot so well judge of, till I
have better studied the whole Apocalypse. One thing, Sir, I will a little
discourse of, which concerns the latter part thereof. It is an Antichristian
Polity that is to be destroyed, pretendedly or after a sort Religious. Now it
concerns us to consider after what manner such religious Polities are destroyed
according to the usual Method of Providence. The Judaical Polity was very like
the Roman. c Now their religious Polity was destroyed by the destruction of
their Temple, City, Priesthood, and the like. Wherefore Interpreters have
applied that Prophecy, Genesis 49.10. of the Scepter's departing from Judah, to
the destruction of the Jewish State by the destruction of their City and
Temple. d Cardinal Perron considers the City-Church of Rome as Central to the
whole diffusive Church of Rome. e It seems by the language of the Apocalypse,
that Providence designs the destruction of that Material City of Rome, and its
inhabiting Sacerdotal Polity both together, and not one alone. f Which if it
were destroyed, there could be no such thing in rerum natura as a Church of
Rome or Roman Communion, no more than the Jewish Ecclesiastic State could
exist when their City and Sacerdotal inhabiting Polity was destroyed. g In Rev.
17. v. ult. it is the City of Rome that is spoken of, for that City then
reigned over the Kings of the Earth. After the mention of this City immediately
follows that Cry, Rev. 18.2. Babylon the great is fallen, and that other
monitory Voice, v. 4. Come out of her, my people, etc. After which follows a
large and pompous description of her destruction. h These things bear hard,
Sir, toward that sense of the Prophecy, that the ruin of that Material City
is intended as well as of the Sacerdotal Polity that inhabits it. You see, Sir,
I have done what I can to deserve the name of a Literalist, but in a great
Mundane Polity that is to be destroyed, and Cardinal Pallavicino pleads that
such it ought to be.

Answ. a The Text of the dead dying in the Lord does questionless refer to
times of Martyrdom and Persecution, and that after the Rising of the Witnesses
as well as before; but whether greater or more frequent than those before, that
the Text does not define. b That the Angels Vintage should rather signify
Execution of Judgments, because performed by Angels, I see not any reason for
that, since all performances are imputed to Angels here in the Apocalypse;
though this Vintage also proves a Judgment to the City of Babylon.

c There is not the same reason of the destruction of the Jewish religious
Polity and the Roman. Because the Jewish Religion did essentially respect their
City and Temple, and it was a Topical Religion. But the Roman Religion is the
pretended Catholic Religion, nor confined to one City or Temple. It was as
much the Roman or Papal Religion when the Pope was at Avignion, as when he was
at Rome. If the Papal Hierarchy be kept up, whatever becomes of Rome, that
which is now called the Roman Religion is kept up: as the Peripatetick
Philosophy is the same, and still continues, though Aristotle's Peripatus in
Athens perished many Ages ago. And so, vice versa, the Roman Religion now so
called, the Papal Hierarchy once dissolved, though Rome stood firm, would be
utterly destroyed. d And this may serve for an Answer to Cardinal Perron's
Conceit also which you cited. e Nor does the language of the Apocalypse imply
the destruction of the Material City of Rome, but of the Sacerdotal Polity
denominated from thence. The destruction of Babylon in a literal sense is no
more understood, than the Fabric of the New Jerusalem. How Hylastick the Style
of the Apocalypse is, is exceeding obvious to any one that observes it. f And a
man may as well say, there is no Peripatetick Philosophy remaining, the
Peripatus at Athens being destroyed, as that there would be no Roman Church,
Rome being destroyed. g Nor was it a City of stones that reigned over the Kings
of the Earth, in the times of Paganism, but the Roman Polity, and therefore it
must be the Pontifician Polity under Pagano-Christianism that must be
understood of Babylon, whose lamentable downfall is described Chap. 18. and
which God's people are warned to come out of. For if it was meant of coming out
of that Material City of Rome, what a small pittance of people would that Cry
concern in comparison of the whole extent of the Pontifician Polity. h But I
believe the Objector has rather acted the part of a Literalist, to see what I
would say to it, than seriously urged these Arguments for a Material Ruin of
Rome, of which the Prophecy gives no assurance. And therefore he is the best
Interpreter that declines what is at least uncertain, and contents himself with
what is certainly contained in the Vision.

CHAP. XLI. A brief Account of the thirteonth Chapter of the Apocalypse. An
Answer to six Arguments from a witty hand, whereby he would prove against Mr.
Mede, that that Image of the Beast mentioned Apoc. 13.14. is not the Ten-horned
Beast, but rather an Image of that Ten-horned Beast restored.
BEfore we propound and answer his Arguments, this brief Account of this
thirteenth Chapter is to be considered; viz. That from v. 1. to v. 11. the
State of the Roman Empire Re-paganizing in Idolatry and Blood is set out. Which
Idolatry and Cruelty are the most lively Lineaments of the old Roman Pagan
Empire. From v. 11. to the end there is a description of another Beast that has
the power of a Magician or Conjurer for doing strange Feats, through whose
Agency the former Beast with ten Horns became what he was, so Idolatrous and
persecutive a Beast, hugely resembling the Roman Pagan Empire in Idolatry and
Cruelty. This is the general sum of the Chapter, which is natural and
unforced, and which therefore made that excellent Interpreter Mr. Jos. Mede
make the Image of the Beast to be the Tenhorned Beast, which I doubt not at
all, but that it is true. Now let us hear what this witty Man says to the
contrary. The Image of the Beast, says he, cannot be the Ten-horned Beast for
these Reasons.

Arg. 1. Because the Ten-horned Beast, v. 1. was like a Leopard, and
Re-paganized v. 2. and consequently was an Image of the Pagan Draconick Beast
before the Image, v. 14. was made.

Answ. In this therefore we are both agreed, That the Ten-horned Beast
described in the forepart of the Chapter, is indeed a lively Image of the
Pagan Draconick Beast. But I deny that this Image was before that Image
mentioned v. 14. but it is the very same Image, of which afterward an account
is given how it became such, namely, that the Artificer was the two-horned
Beast, and this the Effect and Object of his Art, so that the Method is easy
and warrantable according to that general Analyze which I did premise. For the
Ten-borned Beast being indeed so living an Image of the old Pagan Draconick
Empire, and here we finding in the second part of the Chapter an Artificer
wonderfully skilful at making of Images, how naturally is it suggested that
this is the Artificer that made that lively Image of the old Pagan Empire
represented in the sore-part of the Chapter, and this the Magician indeed that
raised this dead Beast to life again, conveighing a Spirit into him to the
wonderment of the World.

Arg. 2. In these words [The Beast and his Image] Mr. Mede says by the Beast
is meant the two-horned Beast, and by his Image the Ten-horned Beast, who is
said to be the two-horned Beast his Image, because he created him an Image of
the Draconick Beast. But these words are but the same as to say [The Beast and
the Image of the Beast] Now the word [Beast] in those words. [The Image of the
Beast, Chap. 13.15.] does certainly signify the Ten-horned Beast. (Compare the
14, and 15 Verses) who being the first and of the most noble Extraction, is the
fittest to be called the Beast demonstratively, with an Article prefixed: (...),
The Beast.

Answ. I deny that the Beast and his Image are the same that the Beast and the
Image of the Beast, and that [Beast] in those words [the Image of the Beast,
Chap. 13.15.] does signify the Ten-horned Beast in this thirteenth Chapter. In
those words [The Beast and his Image] Beast there signifies the two-horned
Beast, and his Image the ten-horned Beast restored by him: But [Beast] in those
words [The Image of the Beast, Chap. 13.15.] signifies the red Dragon that had
his deadly wound in his fight with Michael, which wound the two-horned Beast
healed. In [the Image made to the Beast, v. 14. and the Image made of the
Beast, v. 15. there thrice repeated] Beast signifies the old Draconick Beast,
not the Ten-horned Beast restored. And as for (...), v. 14. (in those words
(...)) which occurs so often afterward, it is understood of the old Draconick
Beast which is the Archetypon of which the Ten-horned Beast restored is but the
Image. And (...), as the Hebrew (...) signifies [to] or [for] or [in the behalf
of] (...) in the behalf of that eminent Beast the Dragon. So that the
arguteness of this Argument is perfectly blown away.

Arg. 3. Else the expression would be very uncouth, if sometimes by the Beast
should be meant one thing, and sometimes another, like Dr. Hammond, who
sometimes makes him Domitian, sometimes Diocletian, etc.

Answ. I say there is no shifting in the Interpretation of this Chapter by Mr.
Mede. For by Beast in the words [the Image of the Beast] is always understood
the old Pagan Dragon, so that so harsh a comparison was not here apposite. But
where [the Beast and his Image] occur in one contexture of speech, there indeed
the Beast signifies the two-horned Beast, and his Image the ten-horned Beast.
This has Mr. Mede declared with unexceptionable Judgment and Solidity.

Arg. 4. Mr. Mede says, that where the Beast is present together with the
false Prophet, the Image of the Beast in the same construction of words is not
to be found. 2. But whereas he adds; As if there the Appellation of the Beast
should serve the turn, why should that but serve the turn which is the
Principal? 3. I see not how this concludes, that the Ten-horned Beast is the
Image of the Beast, but rather the contrary. 4. For if it had been said, The
false Prophet and his Image, there might have been something in that; but they
never being mentioned together, it is a sign they are for substance the same,
or of very intimate Relation, as the Pope and his Clergy.

Ans. We have distinguished this Argument into its parts, and we shall answer
accordingly. To the first therefore I say, That Mr. Mede's Observation is true,
and I will add the reason how it comes thus to pass, viz. Because there are but
two Polities in the Pagano-Christian Empire, Sacerdotal and Secular, by Daniel
resembled to the Clay and the Iron, and to the seeing Horn, (which is the
pretended Seer or Prophet) and to the Horns without eyes. Wherefore those two
being all, and the Prophet the seeing Horn, and the Beast, the ten Horns
without eyes, there is no room for any third, which is neither of these, and
therefore the Beast here is the Image of the Beast or Ten-horned Beast
restored, as the false Prophet the two-horned Beast. To the second, Mr. Mede
says, it serves the turn, Beast being a briefer expression than the Image of
the Beast, but they signify the same thing, nor is one more principal than the
other, as is apparent out of what I have answered to the second Argument. To
the third I say, That this does conclude the ten-horned Beast to be the Image
of the Beast, because, as I said before, there be but two Polities or Powers,
Sacerdotal or Secular, and the false Prophet standing for the one, it is plain
the Beast must stand for the other, namely, the restored Ten-horned Beast,
restored, I say, into the similitude of the Idolatry and Cruelty of the old
Pagan Empire. And therefore that Secular Beast that synchronizes with the false
Prophet being the Image, it is superfluous to call him so, the thing inferring
it self. To the fourth and last part, That out of what has been said, I say it
is evident, that in the mentioning together the false Prophet and the Beast,
there is no mention of the Image of the Beast, because the Image of the Beast
and the ten-horned Beast restored, are for substance, nay, are altogether the
same, but not the Prophet and the Image of the Beast the same, as if the Pope
was the Image of that Beast so made by his Clergy.

Arg. 5. The Image is most properly the Image of that Beast to whom it was
made, and whom it did resemble, but the Image did resemble the ten-horned
Beast, as I have showed before, and was made to him, Chap. 13.14. saying that
they should make an Image to the Beast which had the wound by the Sword and did
live. 2. Therefore Mr. Mede is here constrained to make a great Ellipsis before
the last Clause, viz. as if it had been said, And they did so, and he lived. 3.
Lest the Clause should refer to the cure of the wound, which makes against Mr.
Mede, as may appear from my first Argument. 4. But I disprove this: First,
because it is made his Character before v. 12. that his deadly wound was healed
from v. 3. Secondly, because the living of the Image is spoken of in the words
immediately following. Thirdly, if those Copies which read, (...) may be
admitted, the matter is out of doubt.

Answ. To the first part I answer, That the Image was not made to the
Ten-horned restored Beast, but to the Ten-horned Dragon wounded and slain in
his fight with Michael. For so it is plainly said v. 14. that they should make
an Image to the Beast which had the wound with the Sword. Which for certain was
the Dragon, and consequently the Ten-horned restored Beast must be this Image
the Two-horned Beast caused to be made. To the second, That it is no great
Ellipsis, or rather a very little one or none at all, the sense being so
obvious and plain as it is. That they should make an Image to the Beast which
had the wound by the Sword, And he lived. How natural and plain is the sense
(to have interposed, [and they did so] had been a superfluous bungle, at least
it had been a breach in the Artifice of the Cortex, which is so framed, as to
slur the heedless Reader.) And he lived, that is, He revived again in the
living Image of himself. To the third, I say the Clause does refer to the cure
of the wound, for it implies the reviving of the whole Beast. For so much
imports (...). And as for the first Argument, I have answered it above. And to
the fourth part I answer, That none of those Reasons prove that the Ten-horned
Beast was restored before the two-horned Beast restored him in this living
Image he made of the wounded Dragon. Where note by the bye, That there is no
description of the manner nor means of his Restoration, unless this be it. And
it is in the 12. verse, that his Restoration and Conservation in that state is
compendiously, and as it were in the Sum represented. See my Paraphrase on the
Verse. But as for the living of the Image being spoken of in the words
immediately following, if he refers to v. 15. the word there is (...), which we
render Life, but it may be as well rendered Breath in reference to speaking,
which is a further degree and operation of life, and therefore rightly follows
so close to (...). And lastly for (...), if that Reading were admitted, it
would do no prejudice to Mr. Mede; but according to the richness of the
expression, sometimes, of the Scripture, it would illustrate one thing by two
Metaphors at once, and so the Two-horned Beast would seem to do the office of
both a Surgeon and Conjurer at once; of a Surgeon in healing the deadly
wound of the Sword, of a Magician or Conjurer in making the dead Dragon appear
alive in a breathing and speaking Image.

Arg. 6. Lastly, Mr. Mede argues very well, That of the self-same is the Image
of the Beast said to be of whom is the Name and the Number, Chap. 15.2. But I
say the Name and the Number is of the Tenhorned Beast, Chap. 13.18. See the
Context and the following Note. 2. And his Number is 666. The chief meaning
must of necessity be Six in opposition to Twelve, the Apostolical Number,
because of the six Idolatrous Heads, of which the sixth bears the Whore; which
I prove thus: The Empire was not totally destroyed by the Ostrogoths, but only
wounded. Who can doubt but the Monarchical Government of England is the same
now that it was before Cromwell? Or thus, 3. The Head that was cured bears the
Whore, this none will deny; but the Head that was wounded is the same with that
which was cured. For it is unreasonable to give one man a Cut upon the Head,
and lay a plaster on another man's head. Therefore the Head that was wounded,
that is the sixth Head, or that of Emperors bears the Whore. 4. Note, That
144000 is not a square, but a multiplication of 12, and so is 666 of six. And
see Dan. 3.1. where Nebuchadnezzar's Image, which was undoubtedly a Type of
this, was sixty Cubits high, and six broad; And it falls out handsomely, that
the Apostatical Number should be half of the Apostolical, because the Apostates
had about the half of the Apostolical Truth, viz. they spoke half Canaan and
half Ashdod, etc.

Answ. To the first I say, That the Context shows the Number to be the Number
of the two-horned Beast. For it is the Image of the Beast that causes all to
receive, by his coercive power, the mark of the two-horned Beast. For of the
two-horned Beast and the Image he made does all the second part of the Chapter
run. And therefore the Beast must be understood of the Two-horned Beast, not of
the Tenhorned Beast, and the Number to be his and the Image his, as the
Artificer thereof. 2. To the second, that I see no necessity of Six in
opposition to Twelve, it had been rather Seven, (viz. 777.) there being just
seven Idolatrous Heads of the Beast, Chap. 13.1. or seven Idolatrous Kings,
Chap. 17.10. and the Apostolical and Apostatical opposition also appearing
under the seventh Head, the Whore riding the Beast under that same Head, not
under the sixth. Nor is the deadly Wound on the Head of the Beast by the
Ostrogoths, but by Michael in his fight with the red Dragon. He that does not
see that, must be stark blind in Apocalyptick Notions. To bring in the
Ostrogoths here, is as if one stuffing a Pillow with feathers, should so forget
himself, as to stodge in pieces of Brick or Clay. 3. To the third I say, It is
a mere inelegant Quibble. Inelegant, in that it makes the Whore a Pail of Milk
as it were born upon the Head of the Beast. A Quibble, in that he would have it
as if one man's Head were cut, and another man's Head had the plaster applied to
it: whenas it is not one Beast's Head wounded, and another Beast's Head healed,
but the Head of one and the same Beast is both wounded and healed. For it being
one and the same individual Beast in succession, so it is one and the same Head
(or supreme Power) though under a sevenfold Modification, and they are called
seven Heads only in that respect. But one and the same Beast has still one and
the same Head, that is, his own Head, not the Head of another Beast, as this
Quibble phansies two Heads of two several men, one wounded, but the other
plaistered. But the Beast, Chap. 13. being represented with his Head healed,
which ipso facto is the seventh Modification of the Head, and that under which
the Beast bears the Whore (which expression implies it to be for substance the
same Head) agrees well with that of Chap. 17. where the Beast is called the
Beast that was, is not, and yet is: which imports that he is the same Beast, as
the Head the same, but healed from its wound with the Scar of Christianity upon
it, though so grossly grown into Pagan-like Idolatries. Whence it is plain, the
Number 666 has no reference to the Ten-horned Beast restored, else it should
have been 777. Besides, what wisdom would there be in counting this Number?
etc. 4. To the fourth; I grant that 144000 is made by 12 into 12000, and 666 by
6 into 111, but in the mean time it is undeniable but that 144 Chiliarchies or
Regiments, which have the nature of Units in this case, and that 666 propounded
alone, is to be numbered by extracting the square Root thereof, neither 6 nor
111 being given to divide it by, nor both to produce it. And that one should
say that the Image that Nebuchadnezzar set up was undoubtedly a Type of this,
seems a piece of such Levity as hugely misbecomes any serious Interpreter of
the Apocalypse. Nor is there any handsomness in six, the Apostatick Number
being half of twelve the Apostolic Number. For the Apostatick Church, if you
compare the Apostolic Doctrines of it with themselves, it has all of them; but
if with Apostatick or corrupt Doctrines, the Apostolic is not the tenth part
of the Apostatick. But besides the weakness of all these Arguments, it is
impossible the Pope should be the Image of the Tenhorned Beast restored, the
Popes being single Persons, but the Ten-horned Beast, a Body Politic.

CHAP. XLII. Nine Arguments out of Socinians and other Sectaries, whereby they
would prove the first Imperial Council, Anno Dom. 326. to be the Epoch of the
time of the Witnesses till their Rising. With Answers to each Argument.
IN Arithmetica Apocalyptica upon the third Query I have fixed and settled the
Epoch of the Apostasy with all care and circumspection I could, and there, I
hope, upon very good grounds concluded, That the true and precise Epoch of the
Apostasy of the mournful Witnesses, and indeed of all the Medial Visions is to
be pitched in the year of our Lord 393. Wherefore we are concerned to answer
these nine Arguments that would infer it to be in the year 326. which are as
follows.

Arg. 1. The first Imperial Council made the Empire a National Church, and so
most fit to be called a Beast.

Answ. The Jewish Church under their Kings was a National Church, and yet no
Beast. Idolatry and Cruelty make the Beast, not one public National Confession
of Faith. It is against the very Light and Law of Nature that the Supreme Power
in any Kingdom should not look after Religion, and make Laws and Orders
concerning it, so far as consists with the just Liberties of truly
conscientious men, nor are repugnant to the written Law of God, whether in
Scripture or in Humane Souls. This is so consistent with Christianity, that I
do not doubt but the Holy City in the Millennium will be built by a Council
truly Holy, and truly Ecumenical.

Arg. 2. This Imperial Council confessedly added to the Creed.

Answ. What the Council of Nice concluded concerning the Divinity of Christ and
Triunity of the Godhead, was no addition to the Creed or Canonical Scripture,
but only an Explication made for the quieting of the Church, and burying that
Flood of Contention wherewith the Dragon would have overwhelmed the Church. And
therefore no Pride, Fraud, nor Covetousness being underneath, but a sincere
study of preserving the Church in Peace, and of exhibiting such a Form of Faith
as was least obnoxious to the Cavils of the Heathen, as if the Christians
worshipped more Gods than one, or any thing that was not God, we have no reason
to question but Christ assisted and directed that Council in their
determinations according to his promise.

Arg. 3. That this Council has been of greatest Authority, and most dangerous
to be opposed.

Answ. I do not see how this derogates any thing from the worthiness of the
Council, so that it should be made the Epoch of the time of the mournful
Witnesses till their Rising. Certainly it is as dangerous to oppose the
Apostles Creed, and yet I think no man will deem it a fit Epoch for the time
of the mournful Witnesses.

Arg. 4. The Council of Nice set the first Horn on the Ecclesiastic Beast, the
other not by full Authority till Anno 380. or rather 451. A Beast may be a
Beast without one Horn, or with none; but he cannot have an Horn and be no
Beast.

Answ. The Patriarchate of Rome, and that other of Constantinople, that they be
the two Horns of the two-horned Beast, Apoc. 13. I easily admit. But so soon as
they were two Summities or Preeminences Ecclesiastical, that they were
necessarily ipso facto two Horns in that worse sense, that I deny. For neither
embodying into a Polity, or having Superiorities and Preeminences make Beasts
and Horns, but only Idolatry and Cruelty. But the degeneracy of the Church into
Idolatry was a pretty while after the Nicene Council. It commenced with the
Beast that was, is not, and yet is. And he commenced with the breaking of the
Empire into several Kingdoms, which was after the Nicene Council, and the first
Constantinopolitan also.

Arg. 5. The Dragon stood before the Woman that was ready to be delivered, to
devour the Child as soon as it was born, Chap. 12.4. The Child was born in the
Conversion of Constantine. Therefore the Re-paganizing of the Church must be
presently after, and so was the flight of the Woman into the Wilderness.

Answ. The Dragon stood ready to devour the Child so soon as it was born, but
no Text says he did devour it so soon as it was born, but quite contrary, that
it was caught up to the Throne of God, and possessed the Imperial Crown, and
the Woman also escaped by her flight into the Wilderness. An Attempt does not
at all infer an effect. I understand no force at all in this Argument.

Arg. 6. This gives a good account of the universal Woe, Chap. 12.12. which
seems to come in strangely after those words of Triumph preceding. For the
Devils Pagan Worship must quickly have come to an end by the Conversion of
Constantine, if he could not in that short time have turned off Constantine
from the Faith or Re-paganized the Christians. And the greatness of his wrath
shows he was likely to make quick dispatch.

Answ. I answer, (1) That that Woe is not universal; Earth and Sea not
comprehending all the parts of a Political World. There are Heavens besides
that are bid to rejoice at this defeat by the Conversion of Constantine. The
vulgar people are Earth and Sea, and amongst them the Devil was resolved to
bestir himself. (2) The short time he had to turn himself in, is in reference
to the keeping up his old Draconick Religion. He must either do it before the
Woman go into the Wilderness, or else never. And therefore that flood of
Contention was to turn off the Populacy from Christianity, and make them adhere
to the old Pagan Religion. But for Re-paganizing the Empire become Christian,
his time was not short for that; he carrying on and perfecting that project for
many hundred years. (3) And lastly, The greatness of his wrath only shows the
greatness of his straits, not the quickness of his success in those designs of
either upholding the old Paganism, or introducing a new one. In the former
whereof he is quite defeated, and in perfecting the latter his progress was but
slow when once begun, nor begun till about four hundred years after Christ,
when the Empire begun to be broken into many Kingdoms.

Arg. 7. In this way we need not go to the uncertain Conjectures of proportion
betwixt the inner and outer Court from Villalpandus, or arbitrarily fix on such
an Epoch as will best suit with our own Opinions. For the state and times of
the Church before and after Constantine are signally distinguished of
themselves with reference to the Altar, Chap. 11.1. as the Symbol of Martyrdom.

Answ. I say, (1) That the proportion of the inner and outer Court of the
Temple, namely, the Area's of them in Villalpandus, are not uncertain. And it
is the Area's of them by a Metonymia Adjuncti that are conceived to be
measured. The square Area of the whole Temple in the largest sense is conceived
to be cast into nine square Areolae of equal bigness. Two of which are the
Area's of the inner Court, the rest of the outer. Whence the inner to the outer
is as two to seven. And it is Ezekiel's Temple questionless that the Apocalypse
alludes to, and none else: As the description of the Trees and the River, Apoc.
22. is from thence. And the thing is so phrased, according to the Artifice of
the Apocalyptick Style, that both the proportion of the Time of the
Non-Apostasie and Apostasy, and also the Non-Apostate and Apostate Condition
of the Church is insinuated. For his being bid to measure the inner Court,
shows the Symmetricalness of that State of the Church, but the rejecting the
outer Court from being measured, intimates its Incommensurableness or
Asymmetry to the Measure. But the naming the forty two months it was to be
trodden down gives a third Term, whereby we may gather the time the Church was
not yet trodden down by the Gentiles. For as the outer Court is to the inner,
so is forty two months time to the Time sought for, which is twelve months.
Thus, As 7 to 2, so 42 to 12. The time therefore of the Non-Apostate Church is
one entire Time or two Semi-times. (2) And this plainly hinders us from seeking
such an Epoch as will best suit with our own Opinions; this fixing the time to
near about four hundred years after Christ. And Chemnitius who knew nothing of
this, does place the Apostasy of the Church about that time: which is a thing
very considerable. And besides, no man that understands himself in Apocalyptick
Notions, can fix the Apostatick Epoch where he pleases, the Apocalypse it self
having fixed it to the beginning of the healed Beast and of the Beast that was,
is not, and yet is. Which begins with the breaking of the Empire into many
Kingdoms, which breaking begun about the time abovesaid. And then (3) and
lastly, Though there was indeed at Constantine's Conversion a signal Change of
Affairs in the Church, yet that was not the healing of the Beast, but the
mortiferously wounding the Dragon, of which the Witnesses did not complain, but
of his healing again. And the mentioning the Altar does not imply that the
Times of Martyrdom were the only Symmetral Times of the Church, but that the
Symmetral Times of the Church did comprehend those Times also. And though it
was no long time, yet there was a time for the seventh King the (...) to reign,
before the Beast that was, is not, and yet is, was to come upon the Stage.
Therefore these are two signal differences of Time noted in the Apocalypse, the
Non-Apostasie and Apostasy of the Church, from the entrance of the latter of
which the middle Synchronals are to commence, and not from the ceasing of the
Persecutions by the Pagan Dragon.

Arg. 8. The Atrium or (...) or Court without does elegantly express the place
of the Imperial Throne, as the (...) or Temple was the place of God's Throne in
his Church which is his Temple.

Answ. I see no Elegancy in making the outer Court the Imperial Throne,
forasmuch as the Atrium of the Temple was not the place of the Throne of the
Kings of Israel, but a Porch which Solomon built in his own House of the Forest
of Lebanon for the Throne of Judgment, 1 Kings 7.7. And besides, the Church was
not less (...), or the Throne of God less in it for Constantine's being
converted to Christianity, or for his calling a general Council for the Peace
of the Church. Nor was he inferior to any of the Bishops for prudence and
moderation, that the Church should be in a worse condition for his being the
Head thereof.

Arg. 9. The last Argument is the Completion of the Prophecy so exactly, not
only by Semi-times, but likewise by Months, Calvin's improvement of the
Reformation falling out in the two last months, or rather last month, and a
greater light of improvement in the last Decade, or last of the twelve hundred
and sixty days, which end in the Year 1586. when the Poland Reformers were in
their prime, in that last Act opposing the first Act of the Ecclesiastic Beast.

Answ. That the Completion should be to a month or a day, is but a precarious
Supposition. Besides that we have demonstrated to the contrary in Chap. 25.
That not a Prophetical Day nor a Month, but a Semi-time, is the Unite for
computing the Time of the Event in the Medial Visions. And being the Rising of
the Witnesses began with Luther, Anno 1517. and according to this Epoch is
finished Anno 1586. this yet is a demonstration against the Opposer himself,
that a month cannot be the Unite of measuring this Event, the difference
betwixt 1517. and 1586. being more than two Prophetical Months. And therefore
much less can a Decade be the Unite, the difference containing even almost
seven Decads. And now for that which pretends to be the Cream of this ninth
Argument, as if the Event of the Rising of the Witnesses were crowned and
completed exactly in the Poland Reformers, viz. the Socinians, in the last
single year of the 1260, viz. Anno 1586. to me it seems a strong Argument
against this Epoch of 326, when the Nicene Council sat, it being not likely
that Providence would countenance so gross an Heresy with so accurate an Hit
in the Event; An Heresy that runs counter not only to the Universal Profession
of the Church, but to plain Scripture it self. For as for the Divinity of the
Logos, it is manifestly set down in the beginning of S. John's Gospel: In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. Nor
can it be evaded by saying, the Word is God by Union with God. For it is as
senseless as if one should conclude the Body a Spirit, because it is united with
the Soul that is a Spirit. And then for the Trinity, it is plainly declared by
our Savior himself, in his commanding them to preach to all Nations, baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And the first part of the
Doxology, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, was in
use in the Church before the Nicene Council, as you may see in Seth Calvisius.
But this is not a place to insist on these things. The Socinian is a very
strait-laced Gentleman, of a narrow Sphere, and unphilosophical Genius, of a
maimed or depraved perception and inept to conceive any substance that is
immaterial, and their Ringleader Socinus so unfit for Theosophy or Theology,
that contrary to express Scripture, he denied God to be knowable by the Light
of Nature: a fit Generation of men to consummate the Reformation touching the
deep Mysteries of the Divinity of Christ and Triunity of the Godhead, and to
have their Authority opposed to that of the Nicene Council. But (2) besides
this, the Council of Nice was not held Anno 326. but Anno 325. in the twentieth
year of Constantine, Paulinus and Julianus being Consuls. So that this accuracy
to a single year vanishes. (3) Socinus his setting foot in Poland was some
years before 1586. and the prevailing of the Socinians so as to be in their
Acme or Prime there, a lubricous thing to determine to a year. (4) But
Christianus Elector of Saxony reforms his Country just in the year 1586. and in
the Orthodox way of Melancthon, etc. which shows further the weakness of this
last Argument. (5) If the 326. year after Christ were the Epoch of the Rising
of the Witnesses, it making the twelve hundred and sixty days Prophetical reach
but to the year 1586. it will fall short of some Specimina of their Rising, as
that in Bohemia where Mattathias grants liberty of Religion in the year 1608.
And lastly, Whereas, Apoc. 2.28. there is promised to him that overcomes (...),
which respects the Sardian Church and Rising of the Witnesses into Rule and
Honor; for so (...) signifies; but (...), Prematurity and a surprising or
unexpected timeliness of the Event; this Epoch casts the beginning of the
Event after almost two thirds of the last Semi-time or Hexamenon were expired.
So inauspicious an Epoch every way is the 326. year of our Lord for the time
of the Witnesses till their Rising.

CHAP. XLIII. Certain odd Glosses on v. 8, v. 10, and v. 11. of the seventeenth
Chapter of the Apocalypse. Upon v. 8. That was, is not, and yet is, with an
Answer thereto. How Dr. More, according to his Sentiments, disposes of the
Arrian Emperors and of Julian the Apostate. Upon v. 10. And there are seven
Kings. An Answer to the Gloss. Upon v. 11. He is the eighth. The Gloss and the
Answer thereunto.
THE Text and Gloss on v. 8. That was, is not, and yet is. The same Empire was
before Augustulus, was not under the Ostrogothian Kings, and was recovered
again by Justinian. This Exposition does not exclude an Ecclesiastical sense of
Rome, as Pagan, Christian and Re-paganized. But it is not so proper to
substitute a Body mystical or a Quality instead of a Body Politic, as Rome was
under the rest of the Heads. And so for the Ecclesiastical sense or pure
Caesar, the time of the (...) must be short indeed, viz. confined to some part
of Constantine's Reign. Nor do I see how Dr. More, according to his Sentiments,
can well dispose of the Arian Emperors, and Julian the Apostate.

Answ. I say, (1) That the Beast that was, is not, and yet is, is the same that
ascends out of the bottomless Pit, and whom the Inhabitants of the Earth shall
wonder after, whose names are not writ in the Book of life. Which therefore
plainly concerns Religion, not the Civil State. And besides, it is the whole
Roman Empire (as appears by the Ten Horns, of which the Ostrogothian Kings are
one) in a new disguise. (2) We cannot say under the Ostrogothian Kings the
Roman Ten-horned Empire was not, for it was then, as before Augustulus. Nor
after the Recovery by Justinian, that the Empire is not (as then) and yet is,
viz. as to Civil Constitution, which the Glosser aims at. For the Roman Laws
and Magistrates were supported by the Ostrogothian Kings, as you may see in
Carolus Sigonius, De Imperio Occidentali, lib. 15, 16. (3) The true Exposition
does not only not exclude the Ecclesiastical, but shows that it alone is the
right meaning, this other being so exceeding weak and vain. For can it be said
of that Civil Recovery by Justinian, that all the Inhabitants of the Earth,
whose Names were not writ in the Book of life, would wonder after it, or after
that Civil Beast of Justinian's Recovery? (4) The Ecclesiastic sense does not
put a Quality instead of a Body Politic, but shows the Qualifications of the
Body Politic and the Head. And it is further observable. That the Red Dragon,
quatenus wounded in the Head by the Conversion of Constantine, was in the
Glosser's sense a Mystical Body, that is, a Religious Body, Paganly Religious,
and in that sense wounded in his Fight with Michael, and in his Head mystically
also, Constantine turning Christian. Who therefore is that (...) a quite
different King from the seven Kings that answer to the seven Heads of the
Beast. (5) And this (...) his time indeed is short according to the Text. But I
deny that it is confined to some time of Constantine's Reign, but reaches to
the succession of the Head of the Beast that was, is not, and yet is. Which is
the Time of the Empire's Division into ten Kingdoms. For they receive their
Kingdoms at the same hour with this Beast. This is inevitably plain, from which
there is no subterfuge, and is an undeniable Testimony for the Symmetricalness
of the Church for about four hundred years after Christ. (6) Dr. More,
according to his Sentiments, can dispose very dexterously both of the Arians and
of Julian the Apostate. For first for Julian the Apostate, his time was
exceeding short, so that after the deadly wound of the Pagan Head by
Constantine's Conversion, this little short Reign of Julian a Pagan Emperor
was but as it were a short Throb or gasp of the mortally wounded Head, after
which it quite dyed, till it was healed by the Apostasy into a kind of
Pagano-Christianism. (7) And lastly, for the Arian Emperors, they kept this
Head in death sufficiently, in that they were zealous Christians, not Pagans
nor Pagano Christians by worshipping Demons and Images of those Demons or
Saints. And as for that gross Arianism (which when it was at grossest,
worshipped no Object but what they conceived the Maker of Heaven and of Earth)
it was hufft off the Stage betimes. And none of these Arians denied the first
Chapter of S. John's Gospel, where the Deity of the Logos was expressly
signified, only their weakness could not reach the full sense of so deep a
Mystery, as it proved to them. And those more refined Arians, how near they
were to the Truth, or how near they might be understood to have come to the
Truth, and that it might be proved to be rather a frabble of words than a
distinct disagreement of senses, it were too operose a matter to declare here.
How much some Fathers have cried out against the overmuch curiosity of
Definitions by Councils, History will teach us. See what is attempted Chap. 40.

The Text and Gloss on v. 10. And there are seven Kings. This is in effect to
say, The seven Heads are seven Kings, and but seven Kings. That as the first
Head is the first King, so is the seventh Head the seventh King.

Answ. The seven Heads indeed are seven Kings, that is, the seven Heads of the
Beast are so, and also but seven Kings. And as the first Head is the first King
that answers to that first Head of the Beast, so is the seventh Head of the
Beast the seventh King that answers to the seventh Head of the Beast. But there
being a time when the Empire was not Idolatrous, and consequently not a Beast,
but having then also a King (or Head, but not of the Beast) the (...) being a
King, the seventh King of the Roman Empire (though no King or Head of the
Beast) and numbered expressly in the Text in the seventh place, and the
succeeding King called the eighth, it is manifest there are eight Kings, though
but seven Heads of the Beast. What can be more plain?

The Text and Gloss upon v. 11. He is the eighth. He does not say the eighth
King or Sovereign, but by reason of the sixth Head reviving, he is as it were
an eighth King or an eighth Head, but not otherwise. For there were but seven
Heads and seven Kings: and that this Beast redivive was not the eighth King and
seventh Head, as Dr. More says, I have proved before. And it is further proved
by the following words, viz. And is of the seven: which was not proper, if he
was not the seventh.

Answ. You say he does not say the eighth King: (1) What does he say then? He
says five Kings are fallen, one King is, and another is to come, which plainly
is the seventh. And then he says, The Head of the Beast that was and is not, he
is the eighth, (...) in the Masculine gender. If he be not the eighth King,
what eighth is he? Or what can be said more expressly? Nay, the Text has it,
(...). By which plainly is intimated, that he is both the eighth King, and also
one of the seven Kings represented by the seven Heads of the Beast, which are
Idolatrous Heads. So distinct and exquisite is this Prophetical Declaration.
(2) This eighth King is the sixth Head revived together with the Beast, that
is, is the seventh Head of the Beast Re-paganizing. (3) But he is an eighth
King, because (...) is the seventh his immediate Predecessor. A man must be
wilfully blind that does not see this. nor does it follow, because there were
but seven Kings that answer to the seven Heads of the Beast, therefore there
are but seven Kings in all, whenas the Angel expressly reckons eight. (4) Nor
has he proved before that the Head of the Beast redivive is not the eighth King
and seventh Head, as appears from what has been said above. (5) And for his
last proof it is wondrous weak; as if, because he is said to be one of the
seven Kings answering to the seven Heads of the Beast, and the same with them,
he may not be the eighth King in respect of the pure Christian Caesar's, which
were the seventh King of the Empire when it ceased to be a Beast. It is very
Emphatical here to say, [and is one of the seven] it insinuating this sense,
That though the (...) the immediately foregoing King belong not to the number
of the seven Kings represented by the seven Heads of the Beast, yet this eighth
King does belong thereto, and so makes the seventh of those seven.

CHAP. XLIV. An Objection against the placing of the Epoch of the Apostasy in
the year 393. as from other Topics, so from Rome 's not being till some
hundreds of years later than so, guilty of bloodshed. Certain premises set
down in order to an Answer to the Objection. An Answer to the first Part
thereof. An Answer to the second. An Answer to the third about Idolatry. To the
fourth about Bloodshed, showing that Visions touching the Apostasy are not
confined to Rome, but respect the whole Sacerdotal Hierarchy of the Empire, and
that Apostatick Cruelty consists not only in Bloodshed, but in other Injuries
and Violences. Many Examples produced of both, even from the beginning of the
Apostasy to the year 797.
IN the last Chapter but one I answered nine Arguments, whereby some Sectaries
would prove that the Epoch of the Time of the Witnesses till their Rising is
in the year 326. contrary to what we have determined in Arithmetica
Apocalyptica, where from the proportion of the outer Court to the inner, we
conclude the Epoch to be in the year 393. which is sixty seven years later
than the former Epoch. And yet there are those that think it still set much
too high. For the complaint of the Witnesses being touching the Apostasy, and
the Apostasy consisting mainly of these two Parts, Idolatry and Cruelty, the
Intervals of Time do not agree with the truth of the History. For after the 393
years, if the Apostasy began then, it must be now a ended, since it was to
last but 1260 years; neither was there any considerable b mutation either after
the year 393, or the year 1653. which is the year wherein the 1260 days
Prophetical expire. c Besides, Idolatry came not into the Church for near 360
years after this Epoch, not till the beginning of the eighth Century. So what
shall be made of that Interval? d And it was almost 400 years after that, in
the end of the eleventh Century, that the Church of Rome was guilty of shedding
of blood. So to make an Apostasy to begin so early, whose two chief Characters
appeared not till many Ages after, seems not very probable. This will seem a
material Objection at first sight. But we must premise some few things for the
better clearing thereof. As,

First, That though it has pleased the Spirit of Prophecy to intimate to us
from the proportion of the outer Court to the inner the very year wherein
commences the first Semi-time of the seven, yet it does not thence follow, that
a year is the exact Unite in the Eventual measures of the Medial Visions. We
have demonstrated that a Semi-time or Hexamenon is the Unite in the Eventual
measures of those Visions, Chap. 25.

Secondly, That the Medial Visions point not at the final or consummate Ruin
of Antichrist, but at a partial Ruin of him, there is but a partial Fall of
the City Babylon at the Rising of the Witnesses, Apoc. 11.13. See Synopsis
Prophetica, Book 2. c. 7.

Thirdly, The Reader is to remember, That by the two-horned Beast. Apoc. 13.
and by the Whore of Babylon riding the Ten-horned Beast, Chap. 17. I do not
understand the Papal Hierarchy precisely, but the whole Sacerdotal Hierarchy at
large, as well Eastern as Western, once lapsed into the Apostasy. This is
fully expressed by me in my Exposition of the Apocalypse, as any one may see
that will consult it. The Visions indeed at last pinch closest upon the Roman
Hierarchy, but the greatest part concerns the Apostatized Church and Empire, as
well Oriental as Occidental.

Fourthly, That the seventh Head of the Beast with which the Apostasy begins,
is an Hieratico-political or Ecclesiastico-secular Head, and it is hard to find
the Secular acting in matters of Religion without some or other of the
Ecclesiastic countenancing the same. But whether one or both act at once from
Apostatick Principles of Idolatry or Cruelty, it is a fitting Object of the
mournful Testimony of the Witnesses.

Fifthly and lastly, Where Episcopal Government obtains, where Paganism is cast
out, where the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are acknowledged, and
the Divinity of Christ and real Triunity of the Godhead professed, though not
to the utmost accuracy of Orthodoxy, yet so so far, as there is nothing
worshipped with Religious or Divine Worship, but what is justly conceived
capable thereof, even from the very Testimony of Scripture: these men that thus
profess and practice, are really and in truth Christians, and their Church and
Polity Christian.

Having premised thus much, we will consider the Objection in the main
Particulars thereof.

a The first is, That if the Apostasy began in the year 393. it must have
quite been ended in the year 1653. when the 1260 Prophetical days do expire.
But we answer to this out of the second Premiss, That the Medial Visions point
not at the final or consummate Ruin of Antichrist, but partial. The Time of
the Medial Visions is the Time of the entireness of his Kingdom before it was
broken or considerably diminished by the Reformation.

b To the second, That there was no considerable Mutation either after the year
393. or the year 1653. I say, the seeming force of this Objection is built upon
a mistake, as if the Unite in the Eventual measuring of the Medial Visions were
a Prophetic day or single year, whenas it is a Semi-time or Hexamenon,
according to the first Premiss. Wherefore if considerable Changes happened
within the first Semi-time and in the last, it is sufficient; As when the
Eventual measure is by single years, if the thing fall out that denominates the
Epoch of the Period of Time in the first year, and the Event in the last, it
is sufficient, though not in the first day or month, or in the last day or
month of the year. If the Epochal Note should fall out either before the
beginning of the first Semi-time, or the predicted Event after the last, then
indeed it would be a flaw; but if within the first and the last, and that in
handsome proportion, then all is right.

c To the third, That Idolatry came not into the Church till the beginning of
the eighth Century. This seems a very odd Objection, as if there were no
Idolatry but mere Image Worship, whenas certainly the Invocation of any
invisible created Powers, Saints or Angels, and to make them our Mahuzzim to
put confidence in their Succor and Protection, is the Fundamental Idolatry
upon which praying with eyes and hands lifted up to their Images, and other
Superstitious or Idolatrous Rites done to them, are built. But that this kind
of Idolatry began not long after the Epoch of 393. I have abundantly proved
Chap. 28.

d And to the fourth and last, That it was not till the end of the eleventh
Century that the Church of Rome was guilty of shedding of blood; I answer out
of my third Premiss, That my Interpretation of the 13. and 17. Chapters of the
Apocalypse does not precisely and adequately respect the Church of Rome, but
concerns the whole Sacerdotal Hierarchy of the Empire, and the whole Empire
Eastern as well as Western, in which Division I take in the whole Empire; And
the two wings of an Eagle, which were given the Woman to fly into the
Wilderness, spread over all, Apoc. 12.14. Secondly, That that which is an
eminent Character of a Body Politic, though it be not all along the Body
Politic, yet in these Henopoetick Visions, will and may justly be represented
in the Hieroglyphical Type, together with those Characters that continue from
the beginning to the end, especially when the said Character continues for a
considerable time, and according to the Objector's account it will have begun
and continued 4 or 50^ years, but I shall prove that this practice of Rome
began several of hundreds of years sooner. Thirdly, Bloodshed is not the only
Cruelty; outing men of their Preferments, imprisoning, banishing and reducing
men to extreme Poverty and Beggary, are things as harsh in a manner as Death it
self. Fourthly and lastly, Though we were destitute of History what was done
after the Epoch of the Apostasy, 393. yet the carriage of the Arians and
Orthodox one against another before, is so furious and severe, that we may
guess from thence what would be done after the abovesaid Epoch. To
particularize before this Epoch I shall forbear for brevity sake, and because
it is the time I am less concerned in, the Apostasy not beginning till
Idolatry was conjoined thereto. We will content our selves to set down only
such Instances of Cruelty and Persecution as are after that Epoch.

In the first month (the seventh day of the month) of the first Hexamenon or
Semi-time, Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria holds a Synod there, and condemns
Origin, and expels Origen's Followers out of Egypt and Palestine. One of the
first occasions of this Pique against the Origenists was this: He invited to
him four Brothers, Dioscorus, Ammonius, Eusebius and Euthymius, who were
Overseers of the Religious Houses in Egypt, men of singular Piety and Parts,
and Lovers of Origin, from whom they were thoroughly convinced that God was
incorporeal, nor had any parts nor members, as the Anthropomorphite Monks of
Egypt thought he had, and did with zeal and fury profess as much. Theophilus
made Dioscorus Bishop of Hermopolis, and the other three he importuned, and
obtained of them to live with him. But these pious Monks being disgusted at the
ill life of Theophilus, would stay no longer with him, but returned to their
former Monastic Retirement. He smelling out the reason thereof, conceived a
deadly hatred against them, and declared, against his own Conscience, for the
Anthropomorphite Monks, and dissuaded them from obeying Dioscorus, and so set
the Anthropomorphites and Origenists together by the ears. Socrates calls it
Bellum pestiferum. And Theophilus coming with a Band of armed men to Nitria, a
Mountain in Egypt, where there were many Monasteries, was there ready to
assist the Anthropomorphites against the Origenists, and armed the
Anthropomorphite Monks against Dioscorus and his Brethren, that they hardly
escaped the danger of being slain. The business is more at large set down in
Socrates his Ecclesiastic History, lib. 6. cap. 7. We see how timely the
Hieratical Head made use of its power even tantum non to the effusion of blood.
These banished Monks Dioscorus and his Brethren, conscious to themselves of
their own Innocence, betook themselves to Chrysostom at Constantinople for
their redress; The fend of Theophilus follows them, and abusing the simplicity
of Epiphanius, got him to be earnest with Chrysostom to anathematize the Works
of Origin, and send packing Dioscorus and his Brethren from Constantinople. And
his malice wrought so far against Chrysostom, who refused to comply with so
unworthy a motion, that

In the Year 403. or the eleventh day of the first month of the first
Hexamenon, in a Synod of Bishops ad Quercum, near Chalcedon, packt for the
purpose, he got Chrysostom deposed from his Patriarchate and banished; but
there being an Earthquake that very night that the innocent Prelate was hurried
away by the Soldiers, he was immediately by the Emperor's Command recalled to
his Office and Mansion. The Story is at large set down in Spondanus. And in the
twelfth day of this first month there was a Synod called at Constantinople,
that again most unjustly deposed Chrysostom, and he was with that violence
torn from his dear Charge or Flock with Swords and Staves and Clubs, ut and
ipsum Baptisterium cruore repletum fuerit, as Spondanus has it out of
Palladius. Which is no contemptible Specimen of the Cruelty of the
Hieratico-political Head of the Beast thus early after the Epoch of the
Apostasy. And this very year what direful Persecutions they suffered that
would not communicate with Arsacius that succeeded Chrysostom, you may see in
the same Author. In this same year 404. Alstedius tells us, Donatistae in
Africa crudeliter saeviunt in Catholicos: Yet the Donatist Bishops with their
Flocks took themselves to be the true Church, and the rest but persecutive
Schismatics. Wherefore it is not strange that

In the Year 410. or the eighteenth day of the first month of this first
Hexamenon, Honorius sent express word to Heraclianus concerning the Donatists,
that if they met contrary to his Decree, they should be punished poena
proscriptionis and sanguinis. The severity of which Decree of Honorius against
the Donatists, no man of equity can wonder at, that reflects upon what was
observed before out of Alstedius. Nor wherever I produce Instances of the
severity of the Orthodox Power against Heterodox Christians even to sanguinary
Penalties, or what may be equivalent thereto, is it to perstringe their
proceedings any further than that there seems no provision made to secure the
purely conscientious and peaceful Heterodox Christians, nor any difference put
betwixt them, and such as are for Tumult, Violence and Persecution themselves.
For sanguinary severity against such Heterodox Christians that are merely
conscientiously such as they are, and are peaceful and loyal Subjects, cannot
but feel harsh to a truly Christian Spirit.

In the twenty first day of this month, or the year 413. Theodosius Imp. in
Orient, Eunomianos saepe damnatos novo Rescripto exagitavit, simulque
Anabaptistas ultimo supplicio afficiendos decrevit. And Honorius the year after
declares the Donatists, Infames and Intestabiles, and inflicts Banishment on
their Bishops and Clergy, and the same punishment on as many as conceal them.

In the twenty third day of this month this memorable Instance of Hieratical
Cruelty happened. Hypatia, a famous She-Philosopher, Daughter of Theon, and a
wise, grave and discreet Matron, venerated for her Wisdom even by Princes and
great Persons, out of mere suspicion that she hindered Orestes, the Governor of
Alexandria, from being reconciled to Cyrillus the Bishop thereof, after his
Monks from Mount Nitria had broke the Governor's Pate, was by one Peter the
Reader and a number of other Zealots for the Bishop which followed Peter their
Ringleader, pulled out of her Chariot by main force, carried into the Church
called Caesareum, and there stripped of her clothes, had her skin and flesh torn
off with sharp shells till she died; And then quartering of her body, they
carried the members thereof to a place called Cinaron, and there burnt them to
ashes. Socrat. Histor. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 15.

In the Year 428. or the sixth day of the second month of the first Hexamenon,
that grandisonant Speech was uttered by Nestorius upon his being chosen
Patriarch of Constantinople, unto the Emperor: Give me, O Emperor! the Earth
cleared of Heretics, and I will give thee Heaven; do thou assist me in routing
the Heretics, and I will succor thee in vanquishing the Persians. But full
little then did this valiant Man think how easy a thing it is for one that
will be curious in Speculation beyond necessity or usefulness, to fall into
Error, and how far more easy to be thought to do so by others, whether it be
so or no. But why mistakes in unnecessary decisions should be deemed Heresies,
I believe this great Man could hardly give a good Reason. But this persecutive
Zeal against whatsoever has the Luck to be called Heresy, himself tasted at
last of the bitter fruit of that Tree, who lost his Patriarchate, and was
banished for that Heresy he is deemed the Author of, and gave name to, viz.
Nestorianism.

In the Year 436. or the fourteenth day of the second month of the first
hexamenon, Nestorius was by the Command of the Emperor Theodosius banished to
Petrae or Oasis in Egypt, the worst and most infamous place for Exuls.

In the fifteenth day of this month Gensericus King of the Vandals, raised a
sore Persecution in Africa against the Orthodox, he with his Bishops being
Arians. Amongst other Sufferers, four Spanish Noblemen, Arcadius, Probus,
Paschasius and Eutychius first proscribed, then banished, afterward tortured,
and at last cruelly put to death all four of them. Spond. out of Prosper. And
yet it is said of these Vandals, that they so thoroughly reformed Carthage from
Paganism, Vt ne vestigium quidem ibi relictum fuerit Gentilitiae impietatis.
Nor can this Instance of bloody Cruelty be excepted against as not being done
by the Christian Hieratico-political Power. For the Arians cannot be denied to
be part of the Christian Church by Premiss the fifth. For Arius himself soon
relinquished that gross Error of [Erat quando non erat] The Arians therefore
acknowledging the Logos to be ab Aeterno, (...), as the Nicene Creed has it,
must acknowledge him to exist necessarily ab aeterno, and nothing can do so but
what is God. Wherefore they being qualified according to the Conditions set
down in the fifth Premiss, it is manifest they must be allowed to be part of
the Christian Church, though not so Orthodox as they should be. If they that
are called Arians all along in History were in that first gross sense such, the
Apostasy of the Church would have begun with Arius, as the Reformation is
conceived to begin with Luther. And then as one of the Fathers complains, the
whole world might well groan indeed to find it self turned Arian. But this
Supposition, as it ill accords with History, so far as I can discern, so it is
point blank against the Testimony of the Apocalypse, out of which may be
clearly understood from the proportion of the outer Court to the inner, Chap.
11. and from the Rising of the Beast that was, is not, and yet is at the same
time in which the Ten Horns were catching at and obtaining Kingdoms, Chap. 17.
that the Apostasy came not in till about seventy years after that Arius
appeared, and his Opinion was condemned by the Council of Nice. So true a Glass
is the Apocalypse to discover the State of the Church all along.

In the twenty seventh day of this second month, or in the year 449. Dioscorus
Bishop of Alexandria presiding over the second Ephesine Council, Flavianus
Bishop of Constantinople and Eusebius Dorylaeus were violently kicked to compel
them to subscribe, but Flavianus so cruelly beaten and abused, that he died
upon it.

In the fifth day of the third month, or in the year 457. Timotheus Aelurus
getting into the Bishopric of Alexandria, raised all manner of cruel
Persecutions against the Orthodox. And his Myrmidons they were that so
salvagely murdered Proterius the former Bishop even in the very Baptistry,
dragged his Corpse thorough the streets of the City, tore it into parts, and
like greedy Dogs forbore not to taste of his entrails. After they burnt his
body to ashes, which they scattered in the wind.

In the twenty fourth day of the said month, or the year 476. Basiliscus the
Tyrant burnt amongst others Plato Groom of his Chamber, for opposing Timotheus
Aelurus an Eutychian Bishop.

In the first day of the fourth month, or Anno 483. Hunericus King of the
Vandals renews a most direful Persecution against the Orthodox Bishops and
Clergy that would not turn Arians. Banishments, torturings, and cruel treatings
even unto death numbers of them suffered. Spondanus out of Victor.

In the second day of this month it is said, That several of the Orthodox that
refused to communicate with the Arians, had their tongues cut out from the very
root; and it is added, that by a Miracle they spoke notwithstanding, ibid.

In the nineteenth day of the fourth month, or Anno 501. Anastasius the
Emperor, for the better keeping under the Orthodox that were for the Council
of Chalcedon in the Circus at the public Show, caused to be slaughtered to the
number of three thousand of them. Seth Calvis.

In the twenty fifth day of this month, or Anno 507. Clodoveus King of France
slew Alaricus the Arian King, raising War against him upon the account of his
Religion. Spondan.

In the last day of the fourth month, or in the year 512. Anastasius causing
the Quaternity of the Theopaschites to be sung in the Church at Constantinople,
the people tumultuating against it, slew many of them. Whereupon they took
their revenge, and destroyed the Monastic Flatterers of Anastasius with Fire
and Sword, and coming up with the Gospel, and the Cross of our Lord to
Anastasius his Throne sung the Hymn of the Trinity according to the custom of
the Orthodox Christians, and killed a Monk and a Nun that were most dear to the
Emperor, and dragging their Carcasses about, cried out, These be the Friends
of him that is a Foe to the Holy Trinity. Spondan. out of Marcellinus Comes,
and Cedrenus.

In the sixth day of the fifth month, or Anno 518. Justinus in the first year
of his Reign commanded Severus Bishop of Antioch, who had so often
anathematized the Council of Chalcedon to be apprehended, punished, and to have
his Tongue cut out of his mouth. See Evagrius his Histor. Ecclesiast. lib. 3.
cap. 4.

In the fifteenth day of this month, or Anno 527. Justinian published an Edict
wherein he anathematized all Heresies whatever (and made them subject to the
Penal Laws against Heretics) and especially those Heresies that were most
controverted in his Time, Nestorian, Eutychian, and Apollinarian. Spondanus.

In the sixth day of the sixth month, or Anno 548. Laurianus Bishop of Hispalis
had his Head struck off by Totilas the Arian for his zeal for the Truth.

In the twenty first day of this month, or Anno 563. Justinian would compel the
Bishops to profess his Opinion of the Incorruptibility of Christ's Body upon
pain of Banishment, which he threatened to them. Spondan. out of Evagrius.

In the twenty second day, viz. Anno 564. Justinian raises a great Persecution
against the Corrupticolae (for so they were called that would not receive the
Emperor's Opinion, as the Emperor's Party were named Phantasiastae) at what
time Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople was banished for adhering to the Truth.

In the twenty sixth day of this sixth month, or Anno 568. Alboinus King of the
Lombards enters Italy, they were mostwhat Arians, as Spondanus also observes,
whence the Orthodox bore their cruel Persecutions 206 years till the year 774.
as Alstedius tells us: which is the twenty second day of the first month of the
third Hexamenon or Semi-time. See Spondanus, Anno 573.

In the eleventh day of the first month of the second Hexamenon, or Anno 583. a
direful Persecution in Spain is raised against the Orthodox by that Arian King
Lewigildus, many banished, their Goods confiscated, many imprisoned, and killed.

In the sixteenth day of the said month, or Anno 588. Lewigildus raises a
fiercer Persecution, wherein the Abbot Vincentius after stripes, was cruelly
slain by the Arians before the door of his Monastery.

In the last day of this month, or Anno 602. Augustinus Pope Gregory's Legate
by the King's Authority calls together in the West parts of England the British
Bishops and Doctors to get them to submit to the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of Rome: they refusing, he threatened them with War and Slaughter, which
was effected accordingly. The story of the slaughter of the Monks of Bangor is
notorious. See Baleus in the Life of Gregory, and Dr. Heylin.

In the twenty fifth day of the third month, or Anno 657. Maximus an Abbot of
Constantinople with Anastasius his Disciple were most cruelly scourged, after
cast into Prison, and the next day brought forth, had their Tongues cut out for
their stickling against the Emperor Constans his Edict called Typus, whereby
he would have silenced the Monothelite Controversy, whether there were one or
two Wills and Operations in Christ. But this passage is diversely interpretable.

In the twenty fourth day of the fourth month, or Anno 686. Funecius tells us,
that Justinian the Second, instigated thereto by the Pope, compelled the people
of Ravenna by slaughters, by besieging their City, by despoiling them of their
Goods, and by Banishment, and the like, to be subject to the Bishop of Rome,
and banished Felix the Bishop of Ravenna to Pontus, having first deprived him
of his sight, as being guilty of their Revolt. The matter of Fact other
Historians relate, as Nauclerus, Spondanus, and others; but Funecius seems to
have committed a Parachronism of twenty two years, or thereabout. It was
according to Spondanus in the year 708. or the sixteenth day of the fifth month
of the second Hexamenon.

In the fourth day of the sixth month, or Anno 726. or thereabout, in the Reign
of Leo Isaurus, the people in Italy, by the persuasion of the Churchmen, was so
zealous in the Cause of Images, that in Ravenna where the Imperial Authority
most resided, they flew into such open Tumults and Rebellion, that they
murdered Paulus the fourteenth Exarch, in Rome it self they took Petrus the
Duke, and put out his Eyes, and in Campania they beheaded the Duke Exhilaratus
and his Son Adrian, who there took the Emperor's part against the Pope. See
Hen. Foulis his History, lib. 3. cap. 4.

In the fifteenth day of the second month of the third Hexamenon, or Anno 797.
Irene unnaturally ordered her Son Constantine the Emperor his Eyes to be
pulled out, which was acted with such violence upon him, that he died presently
upon it. All Histories ring of this Cruelty.

But I will not tire out my Reader. This is enough to prove that there was
Violence and Cruelty used by the Hieratico-political Power of the Empire
against the Orthodox many hundred years before the end of the eleventh Century.
Nor will the brevity of this present Treatise of mine admit any large
Excursions into History. But we may be sure that the Orthodox were held down by
the hard rigor of Penal Laws against such as should utter any thing against
the Errors, be they what they will, established by Law, all along. Which could
not but be a pressure or oppression, and something akin to actual Persecution,
which was erupturient all the while, and at last broke out in most salvage
manner under the Papacy. The horrid effects whereof have hideously blackened
the History of that Church. These are things so well known, that it is needless
to bestow a single line upon them. I have done already enough, if not more than
enough in Answer to the Objector's fourth and last Allegation.

CHAP. XLV. Some brief strictures upon the Calendar of Prophetic Time touching
the Vision of the 2300 Evening-Mornings. The six Collateral Lines adjusted to
the Principal Line of the 2300 Evening-Mornings, from whence it would follow,
that the Papacy and Turkish Tyranny will be broken so, that the Witnesses
universally will put off their Sackcloth about twelve years hence, and about
eighty eight years hence the glory of the New Jerusalem will appear descended
from Heaven. An Examination of this Hypothesis, That it fails in the placing
the Epoch of the 2300 Evening-Mornings. The first Collateral Line of seventy
five years examined. The Examination of the second Collateral Line or seventy
Weeks of Daniel. Of the third Collateral Line four hundred and four years, and
the mavelous Invention thereof. Of the fourth Line the forty two months Reign
of the Beast, or 1260 days of the Mourning of the Witnesses. The fifth Line or
the thirty days, which added, make Daniel 's 1290 days. Of his sixth Collateral
Line forty five days, which added to his former Number, make Daniel 's 1335
days. The chief ground on which his Hypothesis depends examined and confuted,
which concerns the Epoch of the 2300 Evening-Mornings, drawn from the Text.
The right Epoch of the 2300 Evening-Mornings and of Daniel 's 1290 and 1335
days is to be fixed in Antiochus his Pollution of the Sanctuary. No hopes from
the Compute of Daniel 's 2300 Evening-Mornings, of the Papacy and Turkish
Tyranny being broken within twelve years, etc.
THE ingenious Author of the Calendar of Prophetic Time, when he had carried
on his Principal Line of Compute to the end of the seventy years Captivity,
from which the Jews were delivered by Cyrus ( page 10.) which I am not
concerned to examine, the next generally acknowledged Line of Time that
occurred to his mind was the seventy Weeks of Daniel; but considering with
himself that betwixt the seventy years ending, and seventy weeks beginning,
there must be a middle space of Time that is not to be void, he therefore to
continue the Principal Line of his Calendar thorough that space also, and
supposing Daniel to receive the Vision of the 2300 Evening-Mornings at the
close of the seventy years Captivity, interprets these 2300 Evening-Mornings to
be so many Prophetical Days, viz. 2300 years, and places their Epoch at the
expiration of the seventy years Captivity, namely, from the year wherein Daniel
received the Vision. And this Principal Line of Time he recommends to us upon
several accounts, it reaching so handsomely from the destruction of the Literal
Babylon to the utter destruction of the Mystical, from the rebuilding again of
the Literal Jerusalem to the raising of the New Jerusalem or Jerusalem
Mystical, and for that it is commensurate or equal to seventy five years from
its Epoch to the seventy Weeks; to the four hundred and ninety years of those
Weeks; to four hundred and four years from the Resurrection of Christ to the
Reign of the Beast; to his forty two months or twelve hundred and sixty days
Reign; to the thirty days that make Daniel's twelve hundred and ninety days;
and to forty five days, which added to the former number, make the thirteen
hundred and thirty five days of Daniel; the Principal Line two thousand three
hundred Evening-Mornings is commensurate or equal to all these Collateral Lines
put together. So that the thirteen hundred and thirty five days reach as the
two thousand three hundred Evening-Mornings do to the utter destruction of
Babylon and the glory of the New Jerusalem. This is to fall out in the Year
1772. viz. eighty eight years hence, upon the pouring out of the Vials begun in
the Year 1727. the space of their pouring out being the forty five days added
to the twelve hundred and ninety days in Daniel; the beginning therefore of
their pouring forth is forty three years hence. In the thirty, which added to
the twelve hundred and sixty, make Daniel's twelve hundred and ninety days, are
the seven Ministerial Voices of the unsealed seven Thunders uttered, which
begin with the Sound of the seventh Trumpet ( page 68.) and reach to the
beginning of the Vials. The beginning of these thirty days is thirteen years
hence upon the expiration of the twelve hundred and sixty days, when will be
the complete Rising of the Witnesses, when the Papacy and Turkish Tyranny will
be so broken, that the Witnesses will universally put off their Sackcloth, they
being rid of the oppression of their Persecutors. And lastly, the four hundred
and four years is the time of the Purity of the Church, from the Resurrection
of Christ till the commencing of the forty two months of the Reign of the Beast
or twelve hundred and sixty days mournful condition of the Witnesses. The
contrivance is witty and inventive, as indeed the whole Book must be the effect
of a mind notably much exercised in the study of Scripture and Prophecies, and
eagerly set to find some grounds and hopes therefrom, that in a very short time
the oppression of God's Church will be hugely abated or taken quite off from
their shoulders.

But let us now, and that very briefly, examine the grounds of these so great
hopes, and how firm this frame and contrivance is. And first here he takes for
granted, that the two thousand three hundred Evening-Mornings are so many
years, though the Text says expressly, That the Vision of the Evening and
Morning is true, that is, plain, not Aenigmatical, whence they must signify so
many days literally, not years. But because several intelligent persons have a
propension to think these days may be also Typical of years, Antiochus being so
notable a Type of Antichrist, I will not much gainsay the ingenious Author of
the Calendar in this, but rather suppose that it is said, that the Vision of
the Evening and Morning is true, that is to say, plain, that the literal sense
of the Prophecy may be as well assured as the mystical and symbolical.

But now in the second place let us see how his Account will agree with
approved Chronologers. These two thousand three hundred Evening-Mornings end in
the Year 1772. which is the 6485. year of the Julian Period. Now count back
from this year, the two thousand three hundred Evening-Mornings and their
Epoch will be in the 4186. of the Julian Period; which, according to Helvicus,
is the second year of Cambyses, as also according to Seth Calvisius and
Petavius, we may add also Thomas Lydiat. But the Vision of the Evening-Mornings
was exhibited to Daniel in the third year of Belshazzar, who reigned fourteen
years after that, as you may see in Thomas Lydiat.

Thirdly therefore, The Epoch of the two thousand three hundred
Evening-Mornings not being found in the year when Cyrus took Babylon, nor in
the year after, when he gave the Jews leave to return into their own Country to
rebuild the Temple, etc. but five or six years after, and about twenty years
after Daniel's receiving the Vision, that pretty Congruity of the two thousand
three hundred Evening-Mornings commencing with the destruction of the literal
Babylon, and ending in the final desolation of the Mystical Babylon, (and so of
the rebuilding the literal Jerusalem and the mystical) is quite spoiled.

Fourthly, And as for the seventy five years commencing from the Epoch of the
Evening-Mornings, and reaching to the seventy Weeks, this first Collateral
Line, as he manages the business, is rather the imagination of a Line than a
real Line, as himself seems in a manner to confess ( page 16.) For he derives
it from just so many years as are named of the Persian Monarchy in the
Scriptures. Which is a pretty fancy, but precarious, to leave out the rest of
the years unmentioned, and the whole Reign of Cambyses, and Darius Hystaspis.
Besides, the one and twenty days of Daniel's fasting, Chap. 10.2. are drawn in
to make up the Number, as if they were Prophetic days, whenas it is expressly
said three weeks of days, to distinguish them from Daniel's seventy Weeks of
years, which they signify, the mention of days being not added to them; nor is
it to be thought that Daniel fasted so for twenty one years together. But (
page 17.) he attempts a more real Account of the seventy five years, which he
will have commence with Cyrus his Monarchy, and end with the seventh of
Artaxerxes Longimanus. But he differs in his Compute from Petavius by two
years, from Calvisius by five, from Ptolemy's Canon by six, and from Thomas
Lydiat by three years over: besides that he places the beginning of the seventy
Weeks in the seventh of Artaxerxes, whenas that Epoch is to be placed in the
twentieth of his Reign, as. I hope, I have sufficiently proved in the sixteen
first Chapters of this Book. Besides that, we are to remember that the ending
of the two thousand three hundred Evening Mornings being, according to him, in
the Year of our Lord 1772. that is, Anno Periodi Julianae 6485. reckoning
thence backward the Epoch of the two thousand three hundred Evening-Mornings
will be Anno Periodi Julianae 4186. that is, in the second year of Cambyses:
which quite spoils this placing of the Epoch of this first Collateral Line
seventy five in the beginning of Cyrus his Monarchy. We pass to the second
Collateral Line, the seventy Weeks of Daniel.

Fifthly therefore, There seems to be a palpable flaw in that Line, forasmuch
as the ingenious Computer is fain to lop off four days of the last Week of the
seventy, and make them end (but with that defect) in the Resurrection of
Christ, whenas that whole last Week is dedicated in the Prophecy to the making
of a Covenant with many. And besides, they are not seventy complete weeks,
unless these four days be taken in, which are left out only to make the
Collateral Lines just end with the principal Line of the two thousand three
hundred Evening-Mornings. This therefore I conceive is a flaw in the Compute.

Sixthly, As for the third Colluteral Line, four hundred and four, which begins
in the year of the Resurrection of Christ, and reaches to the commencement of
the Reign of the Beast, the forty two months or twelve hundred and sixty days
Prophetical. The pitching upon this number is admirably pretty and surprising:
I mean the Invention thereof, page 43. of the Calendar, upon Apoc. 6.6. which
is thus; (1) There is, says he, besides the usual Voice, Come and see, an
extraordinary Note of Attention, not by, but to or in the midst of the four
living Creatures. A measure of Wheat, etc. to move extraordinary Enquiry after
the meaning. (2) By Enquiry into History it fits none as Alexander Severus so
just a Prince. (3) By Enquiry into the Time, he died two hundred and two years
after our Lord's Resurrection, which doubled reaches to the Empire torn on all
sides by the Barbarians and the Ten Kings Rising. (4) By compare on our
principal Line, four hundred and four years neither more nor less from the
Resurrection are necessary to adjust the two thousand three hundred
Evening-Mornings to the last of Daniel's thirteen hundred thirty five days.
What then can we conclude but the Balances divide the Time as it were by exact
weight one half against the other, and so exactly define the time of the
Beast's Rising, or of the beginning of his forty two months Reign? And again,
page 83. in his Postscript he says, the purity of the Church was weighed as it
were in the Scales in the two hundred and second year after the Resurrection,
or last year of Alexander Severus, and was found just at that time doublted,
too light, viz. at the four hundred and four years end, or Anno vulgari 437.
And what other account or meaning, says he, can be given of this place ( Apoc.
6.6.) I desire any one to give, I have not found its sense yet attempted by any
Interpreter.

In answer to this I grant, that Alexander Severus died Anno Dom. 235.
according to Petavius, or Anno P. J. 4948. and consequently that he died the
year after the Resurrection 202. But that that Voice in the midst of the four
Beasts, A measure of wheat for a penny, etc. was to raise our attention, and
quicken our search into any such mystical meaning of the Balances, as the
Author would infer, I utterly deny, there being a pertinent sense so plain and
material that belongs to that Cry, and to the Balance in common, that is, of a
just and provident administration of affairs in the Empire under the third
Seal, and the Voice in the midst of the four Beasts, is the Fame of it and Joy
at it amongst the People, who then had so just and careful Emperors over them,
especially Alexander Severus Mammeae F. This therefore only signifies the
special Character of the third Seal, that the Church might compute their
progress toward the sixth, under which they were to have their deliverance from
the Persecutions of the Red Dragon. And to this sense the ingenious Author of
the Calendar might have read in Mr. Mede upon the place. To which we may add,
If the said Author had not violently torn off four days of the last week of the
seventy, but begun this third Collateral Line at the end of the seventieth
week, the two hundred and two years of this third Collateral Line would fall
out four years after Severus his Death, so that this quaint device of dividing
this Line into two equal parts, weighed as it were in a pair of Scales, would
be quite spoiled. But if beginning this third Line four years later, you will
yet make the year of the Death of Severus half the time thereof, viz. an
hundred ninety eight, then will this Collateral Line fall four years short of
such an Epoch of the Reign of the Beast, as from whence Daniel's thirteen
hundred thirty five days may expire with the two thousand three hundred
Evening-Mornings. So that this third Collateral Line, as it is framed, does but
unjustly enjoy the fruit of the violence done to the seventieth week, which is
a sore blemish derived not only upon it, but the residue of the Collateral
Lines. The weighing also of the purity of the Church two hundred and two years
before it could be justly pronounced light upon the Balance and rejectaneous,
has something of harshness in it. Wherefore we see there is no solid Reason to
leave Mr. Mede's way of computing the space of the pure State of the Church
from the proportion of the outer Court to the inner, and betake our selves to
this, though otherwise witty, yet lubricous and groundless device of the
Balance.

Seventhly therefore I conceive, That the Epoch of the Apostasy of the Church
or Reign of the Beast, which is the beginning of this fourth Collateral Line,
is not rightly fixed, the grounds thereof thus failing: There is some forty
four years difference betwixt it and the true Epoch collected by the true
Method of the proportion of the outer Court to the inner, according to which
this fourth Collateral Line, or twelve hundred and sixty days expired above
thirty years ago.

Eighthly, This fifth Collateral Line thirty, which added to the former twelve
hundred and sixty days, makes Daniel's twelve hundred and ninety days, this
also is already expired, without any such seven Ministerial Voices of the seven
unsealed Thunders that any one could discern. Which seven Voices of the
Thunders are connex with the Thunders themselves. And that the Thunders occupy
the space of the whole seventh Trumpet, I have irrefutably demonstrated in more
places than one. See the Answer to S. E. the Remarker on Apoc. Chap. 10.
Wherefore the Voices of the Thunders being stretched from the beginning to the
end of the seventh Trumpet, how can they be compressed into the space of 30
years? Besides that, Calend. page 68, 69. the seven Ministerial Voices there
pitched upon cannot belong to the Collateral Line of thirty after the twelve
hundred and sixty. For that Song of the 144000 is the description of the
Evangelici all along the six Trumpets. The Angel Preacher of the Everlasting
Gospel respects the fifth and sixth Wo-Trumpets, so that his Voice cannot be
the second, as being not come to the seventh Trumpet. And the Voice that
declares the Fall of Babylon, that it is fallen, is also before the seventh
Trumpet, as being coincident with the Rising of the Witnesses. But the Author
of the Calendar makes his Collateral Line of thirty years commence with the
beginning of the seventh Trumpet, and to end before the pouring out of the
Vials. But the four next Voices, as he would have them, do plainly fall into
the time of the Vials, as is sufficiently proved in the Answer to the Remarker
on the Apology. So that this Conceit of the seven Ministerial Voices antecedent
to the seven Vials is, as I conceive, quite out of doors.

And now ninthly and lastly, His sixth and last Collateral Line, which added to
Daniel's 1290 days, makes his 1335 days, which expire with the 2300
Evening-Mornings, this last Collateral Line of forty five days, especially if
the Reign of the Beast were reckoned from the right Epoch, seems too short a
time for the seven Vials to discharge themselves in. For then all those great
things which the Vials portend, would be accomplished within these forty years,
or thereabout, which to cooler and calmer Spirits must seem a thing incredible.
His Interpretation of the four last Vials, page 70, 71. is correspondent enough
to Mr. Mede, and for ought I know credibly true. But the three first Vials
which he conceives yet to come, their fulfilling has been manifestly already.
Nor is the first Vial a Representation of the loathsomness of the marked Slaves
of the Beast, but of their dementative Anger and Rage, of this those angry
Boils are a Symbol, so obvious, that scarce any Interpreters miss of it, and it
plainly answers to, [And the Nations were angry] Chap. 11.18. Which passage (as
is demonstrated in the Answer to the Remarker on the Apology) respects the
times of the Vials. And for the second Vial, it is not the Innavigableness of
the blood of a dead man (for so much blood as to sail upon is a monstrous
Fancy hugely out of the way) but it is the dead fishes there that are
intimated, wherein the stress of the Symbol lies. And Artemidorus tells us,
that dead fishes in the Sea signify disappointment of hope, which came to pass
to the Pontifician Fishermen after the full settlement of the Reformation in
the Kingdoms cut quite off from the Pope, and grown as cold as the Cruor of a
dead man, to her Idolatries and Superstitions. And lastly for the third Vial,
that he interprets Rivers, of Aquaeducts of Doctrine rather than of Emissary
Agents from the Roman See, no man will see Reason who considers what I have
wrote in my Alphabet of Iconisms, in the Iconism [River]. But however the
fulfilling of these three first Vials has been already since the Rising of the
Witnesses in the Reformation, whenas the Author of the Calendar phansies them
yet to come, which is no slight evidence against his Hypothesis.

But now besides all these Allegations against his six Collateral Lines, the
sixing of the Epoch of his principal Line the two thousand three hundred
Evening-Mornings in the year when Daniel received that Vision, viz. in the
third year of Belshazzar (as if because no more than three years is mentioned
of Belshazzar in Scripture, he was slain in that very year, and then Babylon
taken, that so the two thousand three hundred Evening-Mornings might commence
from the taking Literal Babylon to the utter destruction of the Mystical
Babylon, and from Cyrus his Grant for the building the Temple of the Literal
Jerusalem to the appearing of the Mystical or New Jerusalem, or its descending
from Heaven upon the Earth) I say his fixing the Epoch thus, has no ground
from the Text of the Prophecy, Dan. 8.13, 14. How long shall be the Vision
concerning the daily Sacrifice? -- It is answered, Unto two thousand three
hundred Evening-Mornings then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed. Here the Author
of the Calendar glosses thus; The Vision and not so much the things contained
in it is dated hereby, the Vision of the Sacrifice taken away shall be two
thousand three hundred Evening-Mornings (not the taking away the Sacrifice,
etc. but) the Vision shall extend to two thousand three hundred Prophetic
days, page 12. And to the same sense again, page 80. he says, It is not said,
How long shall be the time of the taking away the daily Sacrifice, but how long
the Vision. This Gloss is the main ground of his Epoch of the two thousand
three hundred Evening-Mornings, which he fixes from hence in the third year of
Belshazzar, phansying that the year of the Fall of the Literal Babylon. But by
[Vision] most certainly is understood, not the Prophetical Exhibition of the
things foretold made to Daniel, but the Object of the Vision, the things
foretold; and that not when they would begin, but when once begun, how long
they would hold from some certain Epoch, viz. the time of their beginning. But
as for the mere Visionary Exhibition, it was so far from reaching to the 2300
days, whether vulgar or prophetical, that it is not likely to have taken up one
single hour.

And besides the Object of the Vision which is the taking away the daily
Sacrifice, etc. not commencing before Antiochus his time as the Type, or
Antichrist's time as the Antitype, it is impossible the Epoch of the two
thousand three hundred Evening-Mornings should be placed so high as the Fall of
Babylon by Cyrus. Nor is the time of the Visionary Exhibition inquired into,
but the time of the taking away the daily Sacrifice, the transgression that
makes desolate, and the giving the Sanctuary and the Host to be trodden under
foot. Unto this question of the time of these things it is answered, Unto 2300
days then shall the Sanctuary be cleansed. So plain is it that the Epoch of
the 2300 Evening-Mornings cannot be fixed higher than from the violation of the
Temple by Antiochus: Though there may be a pretense indeed in the Typical sense
of placing it lower, viz. in the beginning of the Reign of Antichrist, the
mystical Antiochus: which, according to my Epoch of his Reign, is the year
393. And therefore if you add the 2300 days Prophetical to 392 years, it will
be the year of our Lord 2692. before the Sanctuary be cleansed, a thousand and
odd years hence. But if you take the Author's Epoch, it will be above forty
years more. So improbable is it that the beginning of the Reign of Antichrist,
of whom Antiochus was a Type, should be the Epoch of the 2300
Evening-Mornings. Wherefore if they be Typical as well as Antiochus; as the
Term of the 2300 days literal, from the first violation of the Temple, shows
when the Sanctuary should be cleansed from Antiochus his Pollutions; so the end
of 2300 Prophetical days from the same Epoch, shows when the Church of Christ
will be quite purged from the Pollutions of Antichrist. And according to this
middle or moderate placing of the Epoch, it will be about four hundred and
fifty years till the universal cleansing of the Church from Antichristian
Pollutions; till which, there being so ample a space of time from the Rising of
the Witnesses or commencement of the seventh Trumpet, it is a plain indication
how much the Author of the Calendar is out, in allotting but forty five years
to the Effusion of the seven Vials.

And as it is thus demonstrable by Reason, that the Epoch of the 2300
Evening-Mornings is to be fixed in the Pollution of the Temple by Antiochus in
the Typical sense of them: So is it expressly declared, Dan. 12.11. that there
likewise is to be fixed the Epoch of the 1290 days and the 1335 days. So that
this quaint and wittily contrived frame of the six Collateral Lines, so
artificially adjusted to the Principal Line of the 2300 Evening-Mornings, is
every way utterly broken in pieces; as also any hopes from hence that the
Papacy and Turkish Tyranny will be brought so low about twelve years hence,
that the Witnesses every where will put off their Sackcloth, and cloth
themselves with the garments of gladness: Or that the New Jerusalem will appear
upon Earth about eighty eight years hence; Not the least glimmerings of hope
shine forth from these Evening-Mornings of any such thing. This I freely
declare as one not interessed in any Party any further than they are in the
Truth, and it is not the Church of England, as the Church of England, but as
she has the Truth on her side, and is the most eminent and noble Specimen of
the Accomplishment of the Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses in the whole
Reformation (and that it is the adequate fulfilling of the Prophecy, I have
with irrefutable Evidence demonstrated elsewhere, so that it is needless to say
any thing thereof in this place) that makes me adhere to so excellently well
constituted a Church.

CHAP. XLVI. Some few strictures more upon several passages of the Calendar of
Prophetic Time. As touching the four Beasts and twenty four Elders. The
meaning of the Doxologie of the twenty four Elders alone, Apoc. 11.18. and of
the Inversion of the Doxological Service, and that they both argue the twenty
four crowned Elders to be Kings or Monarchs. Whether the Interval of Smyrna is
to be restrained to the ten years of Diocletian 's Persecution. His mistake in
making part of the sixth Seal a whole seventh Seal. Whether the Paganish
Barbarians are the flood cast out of the mouth of the Red Dragon. His dating
the taking away the Daily Sacrifice from the first moment of the Apostasy.
That the roaring of the Lion, Apoc. Chap. 10. ceased not of a sudden. The
ground of his making Thyatira, Sardis and Philadelphia run their course
together to the New Jerusalem, confuted. The incongruity of the Position it
self. The difficulties the Calendarist incumbers himself with in his way of
treating on the Vision of the Churches. The true way of solving those
difficulties.
WE shall add some few more strictures upon several passages of the
forementioned Calendar. As upon page 38. That the ingenious Author mislikes
our English Translation's rendering (...), the four Beasts, which bears an ill
sense in all other places of the Apocalypse, as answering to (...), is not to
be found fault withal. Mr. Mede in his Answer to a Friend calls them instead of
[the four Beasts] (the four Wights) a word which our English Translators, I
suppose, did not adventure on, it being worn out of use, otherwise it would
exactly answer to (...), it signifying so much as a living Creature. But the
deserting of Mr. Mede's Interpretation of these four Beasts or living
Creatures, and making them a Representation of the Apostles (as some shallow
Interpreters make them the four Evangelists) posted at the four Angles of the
Throne as an universal Ministry diffusing the Gospel into all parts of the
World; and the pure Israelitish Ministry to be Typed by the twenty four Elders,
this is a slip of his in no wise commendable. For first, it is against the
Genius of the Prophetic Style to understand by (...) or (...) any other than a
Body Politic, not one single or some few persons. This is a general Rule from
which there is no Exception, saving that of the Lamb, which signifies the
Person of Christ, though it may be with a Connotation of his Church, his Body.
And then secondly, it seems wondrous harsh to interpret the four Wights of the
Christian Church, and the twenty four Elders of the Jewish; whenas without all
question, as Mr. Mede has unexceptionably made it out, that Vision is a
Representation (or has a reference thereto) of the Camp of Israel. So that the
four Wights are as well Israelitish as the twenty four Elders. And the twenty
four Elders wearing Crowns, and the four Wights not so, plainly indicates that
the one are the Rulers of the other, and therefore are but one congenerous
Polity. And the Reasons which he produces to the contrary are but slight. For
the four Beasts or Wights are no more employed in the services of the New
Testament time than the twenty four Elders: For whatever any of them are said
to do, respects the New Testament time. And for their being made to say, Come
and see, at the opening the four first Seals, we are to consider that the three
latter of those Seals respect rather the Empire than the Church. And it is not
as an Israelitish Elder that he informs John of the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah's prevailing to open the Seals, but as a crowned Prince, it becoming such
a Personage to instruct John touching the Almighty's deriving Power to Christ
both to foretell, and so to administer the Affairs in the World, as to cause his
own Predictions to be true.

But now for the Doxology of the twenty four Elders alone, Chap. 11.16. without
any of the four Beasts, it is not intended to signify the Christian Church not
to be universally pure, but confinedly to these Elders; But it marvellously
ratifies my sense of things, that these crowned Elders signify Kings or
Monarchs, and that therefore the Doxology of the Elders is here mentioned, and
that of the Beasts left out, to denote the gladsom sense of those Kings and
Princes, that had cast off the Tyranny of Antichrist or Papal yoke in the
Reformation at the Rising of the Witnesses. The People was to be yet subject to
their Kings or Princes, but these Kings themselves to be no longer subject to
the Pope, but to be absolute Sovereigns in their own Dominions. And this is the
occasion of their peculiar Doxology, which, if the Beasts had not been left
out, would not have been discerned. And that one of the four Beasts within the
same Confines of Time delivers the Vials, that is rather an Argument that the
Beasts are pure as well as the Elders, and that Purity is not confined to them.
And it is much, if the Beasts were not pure, that they should give the Vials to
Angels in pure and white Linen, page 69.

And as for the Inversion of this Doxological service ( Apoc. 4.9. and Chap.
5.8. where the Beasts begin first, compared with Apoc. 19.4. where the four and
twenty Elders are named first) these things further confirm my Notion of the
four and twenty crowned Elders that they are Kings or Monarchs. For the usual
custom being, that the Doxology, from the Beasts as the Praecentors should
begin, the Clergy being part of the People in Counterdistinction to their King
or Monarch, though otherwise highly venerable in their Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. this Doxology, Chap. 19.4. which succeeds that copious description of the
utter destruction of Babylon, that Papal Polity that so Tyrannized over Kings,
how naturally does the four and twenty Elders, being placed first in this
Doxology, though together with the Beast or People, denote both that those four
and twenty Elders are the Monarchs of those Times, and that they have a more
peculiar gratification in this destruction of Babylon, though the people also
are greatly gratified thereby, and therefore both join in a Doxological
Thanksgiving for her destruction. But in the first place the four and twenty
crowned Elders.

In page 45. he places the beginning of the Interval of the Church of Smyrna in
the beginning of the ten years Persecution by Diocletian: Because it is said to
her that she should have the Tribulation of ten days, that is, of ten
Prophetical Days or years. Which I will allow to be alluded to also; though
that Persecution was not full ten years. But [Day] not signifying only a
Prophetical Day or Year, but also any particular Season or Time, those ten Days
signify chiefly all the ten Persecutions, so famous in History, of which this
of Diocletian is but one. But there were other swingeing ones before, though
that the greatest. And Spondanus does justly call that first of Nero's raising,
a most direful Persecution, and therefore the fittest Epoch for the Church of
Smyrna, that Interval having its Name from the Bitterness of Persecutions. And
as elsewhere, so especially in this Prophecy of the Churches, Allusion to
Names, as the Author himself somewhere freely confesses, is of no small moment
in Prophetical Interpretations.

In page 47. the last Seal he makes the space reserved for the rallying of
Heathenism and its Forces, that it may be finally destroyed by Theodosius the
Great in the overthrow of Eugenius and Argobastes, and of the Paganish Forces
under them. But this which he would have the last or seventh Seal, no doubt, is
part of the sixth, which describes a Victory over all the Pagan Forces brought
forth in defense of their Idols, that none of them could withstand the wrath of
the Lamb, and this was the Fate of Eugenius and Argobastes (as well as of
others) who were both subdued by Theodosius the Great, An. Dom. 393. or
thereabout, even upon the Epoch of the seven Trumpets. So that, as the whole
space of the Church from the beginning to the end of all, is comprehended under
the seven Seals; so the space from the beginning of the seventh Seal to the end
of all, may be comprehended under the seven Trumpets. This is the natural
disposure of the Apocalyptick Time, as Mr. Mede has solidly made it out. And
the halfhours silence at the time of Incense, is no delay to the Prophetic
Time of the sounding of the seven Trumpets, which brings on the Vengeance on
the bloodguilty Empire; but is only a Type of the Efficacy of the Prayers of
the Church unto God to do them right that had suffered, and to execute Justice
on his own Enemies, which the Thunderings, Lightnings and Earthquake, Chap. 8.
there mentioned signify.

In page 49. he makes as if at the very same time that the Woman had got into
the Wilderness, the Dragon cast the flood of the Paganish Barbarians as it were
out of his mouth to have swallowed up the True Church, but that the Earthly
Church drunk up the flood by proselyting those Barbarians to its
Pseudochristianity, when the Ten Kings gave their strength and Power and
Kingdom to the Beast. But, first, a flood of Contention and Dissension,
according to Scripture Phrase, is more suitably conceived to come out of the
mouth of the Dragon, than vast Armies of men. Secondly, The flood is spued out
to carry her away in her flight toward the Wilderness, before she could get
thither, and by that means to re-establish pure Paganism again in the Empire,
as it seems to me from Chap. 12.15. Which design of his was frustrated by
Daniel's Earth or Clay, by the Ecumenical Council of Ecclesiastics at Nice,
etc. as I have above declared Chap. 40. And thirdly and lastly, How the Earthly
Church helped the Apostolic Church, the Woman, by proselyting the Barbarians
to a Pagano-Christianity I see not. For from hence was the Man of Sin more
strongly armed to fight against the Witnesses, and bring upon the Evangelical
Church all that Misery and Calamity that either History records, or Prophecy
did prefigure.

In page 50. he asserts, that from the first moment of the Time and Times and
half a Time, the daily Sacrifice is to be dated as taken away. But if this be
true, how can we handsomely come off from making this the Epoch also of the
2300 Evening-Mornings Typically or Mystically understood? And so the Sanctuary,
the Christian Church, will not be cleansed from all Antichristian Pollutions
till more than a thousand years hence, as was noted before.

In page 57. here he says, That Apoc. 10. the roaring of the Lion ceased of a
sudden, and the Thunders were sealed up, I suppose he means of a sudden. I only
take notice that this is said without any the least intimation from the Text.
But the roaring of the Lion supplying the place of the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet, this Roaring must be understood to reach from the sixth Trumpet to the
end of all. And the seventh Trumpet comprehending the seven Thunders, as the
seventh Seal the seven Trumpets, these seven Thunders must reach to the end of
all. So that neither the ceasing of the roaring of the Lion, nor sealing up the
Thunders, could be of a sudden.

In page 58, 59. he here affirms, That the three first Churches run out their
just Intervals, and then cease from their being any longer Prophetic Types;
but the three last, Thyatira, Sardis and Philadelphia, run their course
together to the New Jerusalem, and he supposes none of these three to begin
before the last Semi-time, at the end whereof they pass into the New Jerusalem.
And that the seventh of the seven Churches Laodicea comes not into play till
after the thousand years Ligation of Satan or blessed Millennium, page 77. This
to me seems a mavelous Invention, but his chief pretense to this surprising
Innovation is this, page 59. The three first, says he, have their Promises so
general, that they do not imply a Conjunction betwixt their time and the New
Jerusalem. The three last have in their promises such Clauses as do necessarily
suppose their Contact, as I may so speak, with that Jerusalem.

But to this his main or rather only Reason, so far as I can discover, I
briefly answer, That the Promises neither to Thyatira nor to Sardis imply any
Contact with the New Jerusalem. Not Thyatira, for the promise to the Victor is
only this, That he shall have power over the Nations. He does not say over all
Nations. And this was performed in the Rising of the Witnesses at the
Reformation, when the Popish Power in those Principalities and Kingdoms that
were reformed was broken apieces like a Potters vessel: To such a measure is
Power given to the Victor, (...), says Christ. Where [(...)] is an Adverb of
Proportion, and is as much as if he should have said, So far as I have received
of my Father. Which he explains by adding, [And I will give him the
Morning-Star] not the bright Morning Star, as Christ is called in reference to
his Empire in the Millennium, or New Jerusalem-state. So that the very Promise
implies rather a great distance from the Jerusalem-state, than a Contact with
it. And for the promise to the few Names in Sardis, viz. to the Victor there,
it is only that he shall be clothed in white raiment, which signifies their
prosperous success, and that their Name shall not be blotted out of the Book of
life, that is, that their Seed shall continue for ever, Christ will so
effectually recommend them to his Father, and to the Ministry of his Holy
Angels. But he does not say that the state of these few while such shall be
contiguous to the New Jerusalem-state, which is the full and ample Millennial
Empire of Christ: but there being but a few such Names in Sardis, it is an
Evidence rather that Sardis cannot be contiguous to the state of the New
Jerusalem, and therefore there must be a larger increase of these few Names
under the next Interval before they can be contiguous to the New Jerusalem.

And therefore as for the third of these three, Philadelphia, I will allow more
to the ingenious Calendarist than he requires, viz. that Philadelphia in the
forepart thereof is not only contiguous to the New Jerusalem, but continuous
thereto, a due increase of these few Sardian Names emerging into the Appearance
of Philadelphia, and such a door of success being opened to Philadelphia, that
at last she emerges into the New Jerusalem-state, that state being nothing else
but the fullness of the Philadelphian. This is so plain in the Promise to the
Philadelphian Victor, that I wonder that any one can wink so hard as not to see
it, whether he will or no. Note only here by the bye, That if the
Jerusalem-state of the Church be not part of the Philadelphian, it must be a
Church by it self, and so there will be eight Churches, not seven only, which
is contrary to the Vision. See what the Answerer says to S. E. his Remarks on
this place, and it must be full satisfaction. Thus invalid is the Calendarist's
ground for making Thyatira, Sardis and Philadelphia all three of them
contiguous to the commencement of the New Jerusalem.

But now let us briefly consider the Incongruity of the Position it self. For
indeed it seems to me to clash with one of the first Principles of rightly
interpreting the Apocalypse, viz. the right meaning of the Septenary or Number
Seven, into which when any thing is divided, it denotes that all those parts
are there, and no more nor fewer. Wherefore we are necessarily to understand
the succession of the Church in this Prophetic Vision thereof, being cast into
seven parts, that these are adequately the parts of this Succession from the
beginning of the Church to the end of all, and that all the Succession must be
contained in these and no more than these. Whence it is plain, that these seven
Churches are to succeed one another in one Line from the beginning of the
Church to the end, because it is a Line of Succession. But the Calendarist
contrary to this, making Sardis and Philadelphia Synchronal to Thyatira, makes
but five Successions in one Line instead of seven, viz. Ephesus, Smyrna,
Pergamus, Thyatira and Laodicea, leaving a gap betwixt Thyatira and Laodicea of
no less than a thousand years. Which besides the dry Logical Repugnancy in it,
looks as desormedly, as if in a row of teeth in some Animal, two, viz. the
fifth and sixth were struck out, and yet to make it still more unsightly, two
gobber teeth were set in, one on this side, the other on the inner side of the
fourth, answering to Sardis and Philadelphia on this side and that side of
Synchronous Thyatira. But if the New Jerusalem Church should be thrust in here
to stop that great gap betwixt Thyatira and Laodicea, there would yet be but
six Successions, and instead of seven there would be eight Churches, as I noted
above. So hugely incongruous is this present Position.

And though he has showed a pretty inventive Wit in his managing his
Interpretation of the Intervals of the Churches, yet he seems to sit somewhat
uneasily in the matter, raising such scruples and objections, as none but my
Hypothesis, viz. That it is the Apostolic Church that Christ directs his
Epistles to, can free us from. Which Apostolic Churches are, Ephesus, Smyrna,
Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, all five sui juris, having no Apostatized
Church over them. But Pergamus and Thyatira is the Apostolic Church, the
former in the greatest part of its Succession having the Apostatized Church
over them, the latter in its whole Succession. But I cannot insist on these
things.

I will only lightly touch upon them, page 59. I say then that Sardis is more
severely reprehended than Pergamus and Thyatira, because they were the better
sort of people, who could, notwithstanding their being under the Jurisdiction
of the Apostatized Church, keep themselves unpolluted therefrom, and remain
Apostolic: whenas in Sardis, though they be all in the external Apostolic, or
free from the Apostasy, yet the World being got into the Church, it is no
wonder they are so faulty and so sharply rebuked. And for that other
difficulty, that Philadelphia, a much inferior Church in appearance, should be
so far honored above Sardis, I say, that Philadelphia is not inferior, no not
so much as in appearance, when it does appear at all, which is not till the
seventh Vial under the Conduct of that illustrious Heroes on the white Horse,
who has a Sword coming out of his mouth. This is that (...) ( Apoc. 3.8.)
rendered in our English, a little strength, but signifies a little Army, but of
great strength through the Conduct of that Divine Heroes, Apoc. 19.14. whom
these Troops follow on white Horses clothed in fine Linen white and clean,
true Israelites in whom there is no guile, and five of whom shall chase an
hundred, and an hundred shall put ten thousand to flight, Levit. 26.8. But this
Church of Philadelphia is so far from being inferior to Sardis, that it is
absolutely the best and most glorious Church that ever will be on Earth, the
only unspotted and also unpersecuted Church, according to the description
thereof, of all the seven. And there being no more than seven Successions, and
the Church under the New Jerusalem-state being still the Church, it is
demonstratively evident that that New Jerusalem Church is part and the better
part by far of the Succession of Philadelphia; This is thus plain in reason,
but it being said also to Philadelphia, Chap. 3. to this victorious Army of
that Divine Heroes; On him that overcomes I will write the Name of the City of
my God, New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God; it cannot
be blindness so much as wilfulness, if any, when he has considered it, can
still deny that the Time of the New Jerusalem is comprised in, or at least
incident into the Philadelphian Succession. And page 60. That Smyrna should be
commended above Sardis, there is the like reason, as in the first Case; and
besides, their sore sufferings deserved Christ's Encomiums as well as the Crown
of life. And page 61. That scruple why Thyatira should be charged with the
fault of suffering the false Prophetess Jezebel, when she knew not how to help
it, is easily taken away, according to my Interpretation, who make it a
Prediction that this is the Interval wherein the Apostolical Church would have
the opportunity to cast out Jezebel, and therefore they are blamed that it is
not yet done. But this Charge is but (...), small businesses, it being no great
fault that they knew not that the opportunity was so near, and a great virtue
in them, in that in the mean time they would rather suffer than defile
themselves with Papal Pollutions.

And as for Christ's Title in his Epistle to the Church of Sardis, page 63. He
that has the seven Spirits of God and the seven Stars. Here [in his right hand]
is omitted by a mere Apocalyptical Ellipsis, and for no diminution to this
newly begun Succession of his restored Church. But the seven Spirits and seven
Stars do fully imply as serious a purpose of the Restoration of his Church as
he had in the first propagation thereof. This Sardis therefore being as it were
the Ephesus of the Restoration, it is no wonder that Christ resumes his Title
which he uses in his Epistle to Ephesus, and that to the full, if not more in
the seven Spirits, his designs of Providence being more great and glorious in
his Restoration of his Church, than they proved after about three hundred and
sixty years since the first propagation; the Church degenerating apace into the
Kingdom of Antichrist till this Sardian Epoch of the Restoration; which
State, though less perfect than it should be, yet it is to pass into the
Philadelphian state, and to rise into a blessed Millennial Empire of Christ, as
the other degenerated into the Kingdom of Antichrist. So little of diminution
is there in the matter.

And being this Sardian Epoch is the solemn beginning of the Restoration of
the Church, why should Thyatira, a Succession antecedent thereto, be made to
run parallel to that of Sardis; Or Philadelphia, which in the Prophecy plainly
succeeds Sardis, be drawn back to run parallel also thereto? But I have outrun
my design already, and have touched upon more things than I intended. I will
now pass to what I am most of all concerned in, the ingenious Author's
Postscript or Additional View.

CHAP. XLVII. Strictures on the Calendarist 's Postscript, which consists of
Objections against his Calendar, with his Answers thereto. The Reply to his
Answer to the fourth Objection. His Answer to the fifth Objection, and to the
first Argument from Villalpandus his Measures of the Inner and Outer Court of
the Temple, with the Reply thereto. His Answer to the second Argument with the
Reply. His Answer to the seventh and main Objection, with the Reply thereto.
Three Objections raised against his own Answer to the main Objection, with his
Answers which are replied unto. The scope of the Author's diligence in
exhibiting a true and faithful Interpretation of the Vision of the Rising of
the Witnesses, and his Confidence that the ingenious Calendarist will easily be
convinced by what has been writ, that his Calendar stands but upon infirm
grounds.
THough I be more concerned to consider what is in the Postscript of the
Calendar, than the Calendar it self, that Postscript containing Objections
which the witty Inventor of the Calendar has raised against it out of my
Writings, and framed Answers thereto; yet, partly because I have dwelt already
on this Calendar of Prophetic Time longer than I intended, and partly because
I have already noted such things as may satisfy the Reader touching the
Matters betwixt the Calendarist and my self. I shall endeavor to be exceeding
brief in my strictures on this Postscript.

Wherefore, as for his first, second and third Objections and Answers, page 80,
81. I have so fully set down what may satisfy the Reader therein in the
foregoing forty fifth Chapter, that I will omit saying any thing of them here.
We come therefore to his fourth Objection, page 82. which is this: But if the
Line of 2300 Evening-Mornings could be supposed to begin at Cyrus, yet the 1335
days, Dan. 12. cannot be set to any other point of time than Antiochus, for it
is expressly dated from the taking away the daily Sacrifice, and that is enough
to destroy the Calendar. His Answer to this is ample and ingenious, but the
sum and substance is this: That the taking away the daily Sacrifice by
Antiochus being a Type of the Beast, or Antichrist his taking away the pure
Christian Service, which was at the beginning of his Reign, this is to be the
Epoch of the 1335 days, as the taking away the daily Sacrifice is the Epoch
of the 2300 Evening-Mornings literally understood. But here I reply, Why then
is not the taking away the pure Christian Service the Epoch of the 2300 Days
mystically understood, especially I having demonstrated Chap. 45. that the
Epoch of 2300 days mystically understood, cannot be Cyrus his taking of
Babylon, though it would thus be very pretty, the Typical Line reaching from
literal Babylon's falling, to mystical Babylon's falling, and from literal
Jerusalem restored to the mystical or New Jerusalem, as he urges page 80. But
that Epoch I have fully routed in that forty fifth Chapter, and therefore the
Epoch of the Typical 2300 days must either be in the taking away the Christian
pure Service at the commencement of the Reign of the Beast, where he would fix
the Epoch of the 1335 days. (Whence the Church of God will not be cleansed
from the impure Worship of Antichrist till above a thousand years hence) Or
else the Epoch must be from the taking away the daily Sacrifice, which is most
true, but this will again destroy infallibly the ingenious Author's Calendar,
which I think I have hinted above also.

We pass therefore to the fifth Objection. The Beast's time began before 400,
and that spoils the Calendar-Account. In Answer to this he recurs to that witty
Invention of his, whereby he concludes 404 years after the Refurrection to be
the Time of the Purity of the Church, and consequently the 437 of our Lord to
be the Epoch of the Time of the Beast. But this is already refuted in the
foregoing forty fifth Chapter, so that I need say nothing more here.
Furthermore to my Argument drawn from the proportion of the outer Court to the
inner, he answers, First, That let Villalpandus his Measures be never so
punctual, the Text seems not to point at Time, but to the Churches Purity or
agreement with Ezekiel's Measures. Secondly, Villalpandus's Measures are
adjusted to the Temple, but the Vision to the Tabernacle and City to make the
outer Court. Whence Villalpandus his Measures will be unapplicable to the
business. Thirdly, The Church symbolizing with the Eremitical Woman, was
retired into the Temple worshipping before the golden Altar of Incense, the
daily Sacrifice being taken away, viz. at the entrance of the Reign of the
Beast, before which time he supposes the outer Court was commensurable.
Fourthly, Although it be hence, that the first Vision of the Opened Book does
not begin so high as the seven Churches or Seals, yet this is according to the
true Apocalyptick Order; which first compleats the History of the Trumpets
begun to the very end of the Apocalyptick time, and then begins from the very
first in the Woman clothed with the Sun as a new set of Visions.

But to the first I reply, This measuring respects not only the Purity of the
Church, but the Time of the visible Church continuing pure, else why is that
third proportional so seasonably offered in the Vision. To the second, That
Villalpandus his Measures are adjusted to Solomon's Temple in Ezekiel, which is
Typical or Prophetical; but the City being added, it is Iconismorum Metallaxis,
usual with the Prophets, to typifie one thing by more Symbols than one. And by
the Holy City is signified the People of Israel congregated in the outer Court
to worship, and answers to (...), in the inner Court. To the third I say, The
retiring into the Temple can be no fit Symbol of the Woman in the Wilderness
(by Wilderness Paganism being emblematized, as Alcazar has noted, and brought a
Cloud of Witness to confirm it, and the reason thereof is added in my Alphabet
of Iconisms: So little congruity is there betwixt the Woman's retiring into the
Temple, and her being in the Wilderness; which is as wide and vast as the
two-winged Empire Eastern and Western Re-paganizing, and so becoming a
Wilderness or Desert. And for the outer Court's being commensurable before the
entrance of the Reign of the Beast, we were not come to the outer Court then,
and the Vision respects the external and visible state of the Church. To the
fourth and last I reply, That the making the outer and inner Court synchronous,
does most certainly infer the first Vision of the Opened Book not to begin so
high as that of the seven Churches and Seals. Which is an intolerable
absurdity, and as great a piece of violence as can be done to the sacred Method
of the Prophecies. And now for the Calendarist's Apocalyptick Order; so far it
is true, as that it points to the running through the History of the Trumpets
begun to the very end of Apocalyptick Time; which is the thing that is done in
the roaring of the Lion-Angel distributed into seven Thunders, which are equal
put together to the space of the seventh or last Trumpet, which therefore reach
to the very end of Apocalyptick Time. And therefore the Angel having declared
that there was no more time than this seventh Trumpet, which he had in so
general a touch run thorough after his giving the Book to John to be eaten,
John is immediately bid to prophecy. And therefore the Vision of the measured
Temple and Witnesses is as certainly the first Vision of the Opened
Book-Prophecy, as any thing in the World can be certain. And if it be so, the
Calendarist himself cannot but confess it begins as high as the seven Churches
or the Seals. But if he imagine the History of the Trumpets begun to be
completed to the end of Apocalyptick Time in the Vision comprised in the
eleventh Chapter, because of the second Woe's being said to be past, and the
seventh Trumpet sounding to make the Vision of the Woman clothed with the Sun
the first Vision of the Opened Book-Prophecy, as commencing as high as the
seven Churches or Seals; there is he out again. For that Vision in the eleventh
Chapter does not reach to the end of Apocalyptick Time, but to the seventh Vial
only inclusively. So that the Descent of the New Jerusalem, the Millennial
Reign of Christ and the Laodicean Interval are still behind. But the
Apocalyptick Time upon the seventh Thunder abovementioned was quite ended, and
so a fit Regress made to a new set of Prophecies. Which the ingenious
Calendarist cannot deny but that it ought to begin as high as the seven
Churches and the Seals: And then of necessity the Time of the inner Court will
not be synchronous, but antecedent to the Time of the outer. Which is a very
plain Truth, and equally useful.

He makes my second Argument for the forty two months beginning before 400;
That the Invocation of Saints had entered somewhat before it. In Answer to which
he recurs again, page 84. to the device of the Balance. But my Reply to his
Answer to the fifth Objection will serve here. So that I will add nothing
further, but remind the Reader, that not only the Invocation of Saints, but the
reposing Confidence in the Mahuzzim was then, and this exceedingly spread, as
has been proved Chap. 28.

The sixth Objection and the Answer being less material to my purpose, I omit.
We therefore pass to the seventh and last, which is this: The Witnesses are
risen, and out of their Sackcloth, and that some years ago, and therefore the
1260 years are also so long ago expired, which utterly subverts the Calendar,
page 85. This, says he, being the great Objection, requires the most distinct
Answer, I shall therefore briefly explain my full sense, etc. In pursuance of
this, I confess, he is witty, operose and copious; but the substantial sum of
the matter, so far as I can gather, is this, That as the Time of the Medial
Visions is distinguished into parts, A Time and Times and Half a Time, and
three Days and an Half; so there are several Degrees of the Completion of the
Vision. To this sense is that which occurs page 78. By all which it appears,
says he, Time at large has a less full presence of the Event, and admits a
contrary, intimate Time has the full presence of the Event, and admits no
contrary. And page 88. Some (says he, speaking of the Witnesses) are called up
into places of Dignity as into Heaven, but not as they shall be at the end of
the 1260 days. For each first and last part of all the Characters of Time must
have degrees of the Event, else they could not have a foundation to be so
distinguished. Even our Lord's first Night was a beginning to dye in his Agony
being betrayed, etc. And till the Evening of the first day of the week he
appeared not to a Number, as not publicly risen till the end of the third day.
And then giving several instances of the scantness of the Reformation and of
great Objects still remaining of the Witnesses sorrow; to conclude then, says
he, page 89. till after the full Expiration of the Time of the Apostasy, being
in Power as a Throne or Kingdom in all its coextensive Characters, the
Witnesses are not, in full Apocalyptick sense, Risen: as the golden Key of the
Time, the three days and an half also assure us. For till the Emphatical (...),
or, After three days and an half are fully past they rise not, viz.
conspicuously, as our Lord did not. And that that is not yet (beside the credit
of our Calendar) is apparent, in that since the Reformation there have been no
effects like those that are to signalize the end of the 1260 days, etc.

This is the main of his Answer, to which I briefly reply, that it reaches not
the case. For the utmost fulfilling of the Vision of the Rising of the
Witnesses is not that there shall be a Rising of them throughout the Kingdom of
the Beast; but that it shall be only in part of his Kingdom. For it is expressly
said in the Text, that at the very hour of their Rising, (...), the tenth part
of the City fell, not (...), betwixt which there is as much difference as
betwixt ten and one. For as (...) [the third part] which is a Symbol of the
Roman Empire, does not signify the whole Habitable or then inhabited Earth,
but the third part of the Earth only, so the tenth part of the City cannot
signify all the ten parts of the City or the whole City, but the tenth part
only. Besides that, (...) does not here relate to the ten-horned Beast or
Secular Empire, but to the Hieratical Polity the City of Babylon, the tenth of
that only fell, but the Secular Empire where this fall was, stood rather more
strong than ever, was more complete than ever, being rid of the Papal Tyranny
at the Reformation so far forth as it was reformed. And now for the Emphatical
(...), After the three days and an half; Forasmuch as it is said after these
three days and an half the Witnesses rose, and the tenth part of the City fell,
it is as clear as Noonday that no more than a partial Fall of the City and a
proportionated Rising of the Witnesses is the full completion of this Vision or
Prophecy. But whatever other Accessions there are to be made to the Kingdom of
Christ or Ruin of Antichrist, they must be the completion of some other
Visions, but not of this. And as for the Credit of his Calendar, I have again
and again shown how frail it is. And for any Effects to signalize the end of
the 1260 days I have demonstrated elsewhere, that not Days, but Semi-times are
the measuring Unite of the Event of this Vision. And that there was no
signalizing Effect at the expiration of the 1260 days from the right Epoch, it
is a further confirmation that not a Day, but a Semi-time is the Eventual
Measure, and the last Semi-time was signalized with the blessed Reformation.

But yet, as if his Answer to this seventh Objection had been in it self solid
and valid, and that, as he has explained things, the Witnesses were not Risen
in a full Apocalyptick sense; he proposes three Objections out of what he has
read of mine.

The first Objection is this, The latitude of months for the fulfilling Events
in some parts of them, may so disagree with the narrower lines of day, too
narrow for the months ( page 90.) that the Prophecy may be made to contradict
it self, and so speak true and not true as to point of Time and Events
together. True in the months, not in the days. But his Answer is this, As the
height of Events is by the Prophecy determined to the intimate part of the
three days and the three times and an half, so the duration of the Event at
large is by the Prophecy co-extended to the very last day of the 1260, and
cannot end sooner, and therefore the days must overruled the months, as being
more precisely fixed in the point of Time, etc. But to this I reply, That the
Answer is indeed ingenious, saving that he was not aware, that the partial Fall
of the City and the then Rising of the Witnesses was after the three days and
an half, according to his own Emphatical (...), which plainly implies that the
Vision points at no more than a partial Fall of Babylon, and a commensurate
Rising then of the Witnesses, and that there is no such duration of the Event
at large co-extended by the Prophecy to the very last day of the 1260, but that
they signify no more precisely than that Authentic measure of the Time and
Times and half a Time in Daniel, as I have demonstrated Chap. 25. And though
this pretended preciseness to a day will not necessarily argue any improvements
of Omnisciency in S. John's time above what was attained to in Daniel's, yet it
looking as if it did, why may not the Divine Wisdom think good to prevent that
Cavil in Atheistical men, by keeping to Daniel's Authentic measure in these
Medial Visions?

The second Objection is, The greatness of the Events requires a larger scope
than of a Prophetic day or year to be fulfilled in. To which he answers: The
preparations to the Events may be so going on before, that the Events
themselves may, as the Israelites going out of Egypt, be in the self-same day.
And so the Beast's last month may by its greater compass allow room for those
preparations about its latter end, though not fulfilled till the last day. But
when God will work, who can let it? Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. But to this I
briefly reply, There is not a preparation to Rising only, but a long succession
of their actual Rising not confinable to a year, as is apparent in the
Reformation begun by Luther, which I have demonstrated to be the Rising of the
Witnesses, Chap. 23. of this Treatise.

The third Objection is this, The Expectation of the Witnesses yet to rise,
disquiets men's thoughts into Turbulency, and gives them meaner esteems of the
Reformation, and the present Estate of the Church. It would swell this Chapter
into too great a bigness to set down all that he says in Answer to this; I will
therefore confine my self to the three first Particulars.

First therefore, he answers, That the Prophecy anathematizes all such
disorderly motions, whether the Witnesses are risen or not. For it will be
fulfilled by the Princes themselves, Christian Princes and by Instruments in
pure Linen, not as in the Trumpets, not by Mohammedan, much less by Popular
Tumults.

Secondly, The very hopes or desires that Babylon should fall, as every one
knows as yet it is not fallen, may be charged with the same ill consequences.

Thirdly, The Reformation is acknowledged within it self to be the Witnesses
Risen and the Church out of the Wilderness, but not to the full sense of the
Prophecy, the Beast being yet in power (...).

To the first Particular I reply, That it is ingenious and commendable that it
does so expressly declare against popular Turbulency and Tumult. But that the
Witnesses are Risen already I have proved Chap. 23. and that they wear not
Sackcloth after their Rising, Chap. 24. Wherefore what belongs to Princes
themselves and their Instruments in pure Linen, has nothing to do with the
Vision of the Witnesses, but with the Vials which follow the Rising of the
Witnesses. Which may be the Political Event of the fourth Vial.

To the second; I deny that the hopes or desires of Babylon's further falling
may be charged with the same ill consequences that a pretended set time of its
farther Fall, or Rising of the Witnesses, suppose of twelve or thirteen years
hence, is chargeable with. For there being no time set, there is no Watchword
given to attempt, nor any Expectation of people raised.

And to the third I briefly reply, That though the Reformation is acknowledged
within it self to be the Witnesses Risen and the Church out of the Wilderness
by the better sort of knowing men, yet others are of another opinion, and most
of the Sectarians in Protestant Countries are too apt to fancy themselves the
mournful Witnesses in Sackcloth, and therefore if any set a time, as if the
1260 days were not expired as yet, but that they will expire so many years
hence when there will be a complete Rising of the Witnesses, or at least a
putting off their Sackcloth, this must naturally raise the Expectation of the
Sectarians, and hazard Commotions even in Protestant Countries.

For the preventing of which inconvenience, I have been so vigilant and
industrious to represent a true and faithful sense of the Vision of the Rising
of the Witnesses, and to demonstrate to all the World, as I am certain I have
done, that the Completion of that Prophecy is perfectly past, both the Rising
of the Witnesses, and their putting off their Sackcloth at once: And though
the ingenious Calendarist has attempted many witty plausibilities in his
adjusting his six Collateral Lines to his Principal Line of the 2300
Evening-Mornings mystically understood for the inferring that in the year 1697.
that is, about twelve or thirteen years hence the time of the Witnesses
prophesying in Sackcloth will expire, and the Turkish Woe pass away; And upon
the seventh Trumpets sounding, there will ensue a most loud and public
administration of the Gospel beyond any time since the Apostles, described as
seven Voices or the seven Thunders unsealed; And that thirty years after the
beginning of this, viz. in the year 1727. shall begin the final destruction of
the Beast by the Vials accomplished in forty five years more at the year 1772.
in the New Jerusalem: yet the discovering so much of a witty, peaceful and
loyal good nature in this little Essay of his, I am confident, that he has that
perspicacity that he will, from what I have writ, easily discern himself
mistaken in his Account, and that his Calendar of Prophetic Time, though there
be many useful and laudable things noted in the managing it, has no firm ground
to stand upon.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans in the Pergamenian Interval.
How [the third Part] comes to be a Symbol of the Roman Empire. The hair of
Women in the Locusts the Character of the Arabians or Saracens. The full sense
of the Voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride being heard no more in Babylon.
There shall be no more Curse, Rev. 22.3. how to be expounded. Several
Scriptures produced to prove, that in the New Jerusalem- state there will be a
Change in the World Natural, as well as in the World Moral. An Explication of
Isaiah, Chap. 56.20. As also of Romans 8.21. What is meant by (...), Acts 3.21.
which our English Translation renders Times of Restitution. Arguments produced
to prove [That the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together] is to be understood
literally, with Answers thereto. Six Particulars in order to or compliance with
the making the War of the Heroes on the white Horse, Apoc. 19. Literal only or
Carnal; With an Answer to the said Particulars.
IN my Exposition of the Epistle to the Church in Pergamus I interpret the
Nicolaitans to be a people that sat loose enough as to the Romish Church, but
were also unchaste and loose of their bodies. And that there were such within
the Pergamenian Interval, which reaches from An. Dom. 324. to An. Dom. 1242. is
apparent from History. This the Reverend and Learned Dean of Paul's, Dr.
Stillingfleet, has made good to our hands in the Fanaticism of the Roman
Church; where he tells us, that this Nicolaitan Doctrine (which afterward
proved the very Doctrine of Henry Nicolas the Father of the Family of Love) did
obtain amongst them at the beginning of the thirteenth Century, viz. That every
Person of the Holy Trinity had his successive Time of Ruling the World; That
the Law of the Father continued till Christ's Coming, the Law of the Son till
their Time, and then the Time of the Holy Ghost was to begin; In which the use
of Sacraments was to cease, and all external Administrations, etc. And they so
highly extolled Love, that what would have been a sin without it, they thought
to be none with it, as Fornication, Adultery, etc. This is the Primitive
Nicolaitism, which was again renewed by H. N. alias Henry Nicolas, from whence
our modern Familists spring; as also at first the Quakers, who still cast away
the Sacraments, and make nothing of external Administrations. This business is
related in Nauclerus, and that before An. Dom. 1190. so fully is it within the
Pergamenian Interval. It may not be amiss to set down his words concerning the
latter part of their description: Charitatis etiam virtutem sic ampliabant, ut
id, quod alias peccatum esset, si fieret in Charitate, jam illud non esset
peccatum, unde stupra and adulteria and caeteras corporis voluptates nomine
Charitatis perpetrabant, mulieribusque cum quibus peccabant, and simplicibus
quos decipiebant impunitatem promittebant, Deum tantummodo bonum and justum
praedicantes. This is (...) which Christ says he hates and abhors, Apoc. 2.15.
And it is a surprising hit that Henry Nicolas should be so eminent a Reviver of
this Nicolaitan Doctrine. But I have said enough already to confirm our
Exposition of that passage of the Apocalypse.

I will pass hence to Chap. 8. v. 7, 8, etc. where [the third Part] mentioned
at least half a score times, I interpret to be a Symbol of the Roman Empire,
and there is very good reason for it from what occurs Chap. 12.4. where the
great red Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns, which most certainly denotes
the Roman Empire, according to all Interpreters, is said to have drawn down
with his Tail the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and to have cast them to
the Earth, that is, to have brought the third part of the Kingdoms of the World
under his subjection. Which passage is an intended Key to that in the eighth
Chapter, as the seventeenth Chapter is chiefly to the eleventh and thirteenth.

In the ninth Chapter, v. 8. where the Locusts are said to have hair as the
hair of Women, I, as Mr. Mede before me, interpret of the Saracens which are
Arabians, of whom Pliny writes, Not. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 28. N. 30. Arabes
mitrati degunt aut intonso crine. And the Vision describes the Locusts as
having faces of humane shape but that they wear their hair as Women, (as do the
Arabians) as being Mitrati, that is, having Women's Head-tire on. For so Mitra
signifies: Pilea virorum sunt, Mitrae foeminarum. It was the Head-cover also of
the Lydians and Phrygians, but accounted less manly. Whence (...), and (...) is
a reproachful Title given to the soft and effeminate; though the Arabians were
not reputed such. See Martinius. Mr. Mede cites rather the sense than the words
of Pliny. But whether we read [and] or [aut] it is plain these Arabians ordered
their hair as women: which therefore is a fit Character of the Saracens in
these Locusts.

In the eighteenth Chapter, v. 23. I content my self in noting that the voice
of Bridegroom and Bride being no more heard in Babylon, signifies that there
shall be no more propagating of their Pseudo-Catholick Religion, the end of
Marriage being Propagation. And this is a true sense and unexceptionable; But
it might have been fuller, if we had noted also, that there may be an allusion
to that usurped Title of the Pope, who calls himself Sponsus Ecclesiae. For
then the proselyting of Nations and Countries to the Papal Religion and
Jurisdiction, would look ever like a new Marriage. But the Joy of such
Marriages will cease after the final Fall of Babylon, which is described in
this eighteenth Chapter of the Apocalypse. See Gabriel Powel in his De
Antichristo, l. 1. c. 14.

In Chapter 22. v. 3. (...), And there shall be no more curse. This I expound
of the furious Papal Anathema's or Excommunications to depose Kings and
Princes, and to involve the Christian World in blood, which I do not doubt but
is the proper Prophetical meaning of the place, and not the Curse of God for
Sin, which was Diseases, Death, Briars, Thorns, the labor and sweat of
Tillage, and the like. That Curse we shall never be delivered from till we come
to Heaven. And those that fancy such things here on Earth in the New
Jerusalem state; as in this passage, so in all other passages that sound so
high, they are to remember, that the proper fulfilling of them is to be in
Heaven, though in a figurative sense they will be fulfilled here, and that the
description of the New Jerusalem on Earth is so framed, as to be also Typical
of the State of the Church in Heaven, as I have more fully declared in Chapter
20. of these Paralipomena.

But forasmuch as, besides this mistake in S. E. I find a sober and judicious
Writer W. A. in his Treatise of the State of the Church in the latter Ages of
the World to incline to the Opinion, that there will be even a Change of Nature
in the Time of the New Jerusalem-state of the Church: I will a while here
divert into what he says Chap. 10. and produce the most material Reasons he
has for the proving, that in those days there will be a Change of the World
Natural as well as the World Moral, as he phraseth it. Those places of
Scripture that seem to promise plenty of things, and increase of People, I
conceive, imply no such Radical Change in the World Natural. For merely from
the Moral Temperance of men in those Times there will be length of Days and the
Propagation of a sound Offspring, this with Peacefulness will cause
Populousness; And for Plenty, which depends upon the Clouds and timely and
seasonable Showers, they have ever been and will be at the Command of the
invisible Powers in the Air. So that that will be no insititious Change in the
Natural World, but the effects of free Actions in those invisible Agents.

But that indeed of Isaiah, Chap. 65.20. if not fitly interpreted, may seem to
argue a Change of things more than what depends upon what is Free and Moral.
For after God had promised he would create a new Heaven and a new Earth, v. 17.
he adds a little afterward, That there shall be no more thence an Infant of
days, nor an Old man that has not filled his days. For the Child shall dye an
hundred years old, but the Sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.
Here the Child dying an hundred years old, to the heedless may import, that
they shall be more longaevous then, than the Patriarchs before the Flood, an
Hundred being to a Thousand, as Seven the Age of a Child to Seventy, which
would imply a strange Change in the Natural World indeed. But to give W. A. his
due, he has pitched upon the most likely sense of this Verse, viz. That there
shall no Child ordinarily dye by any untimely death, nor an Old man that has
not lived so long as in the course of Nature he might well reach; That the
space from Childhood to old Age shall ordinarily be an hundred years, etc. But
I deny that this argues any more than what depends upon a Divine Morality or
real Regeneration in their Parents, who will transmit a sound and wholesome
constitution to their Posterity. Which if any one of them do not improve to the
like Virtue and Piety, and yet by the Benefit of their Constitution live an
hundred years, content mainly with the things of the Animal life, such a Sinner
as this, notwithstanding his Longaevity, is accursed, both because he for the
present deprives himself of the enjoyments of the Divine life, and must expect
also but a bad Reception (when he dies) into the other State.

The next Text of moment which he urges is Romans 8.21. The Creature it self also
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of
the Children of God: Which he would have to argue, that there will be a Change
of the World Natural in the blessed Millennium as well as in the World Moral,
he supposing that [Creature] there signifies the whole sublunary Creation at
least. And the Apostle, v. 22. says, For we know that the whole Creation
groaneth, and travaileth in pain together until now. Where [the whole Creation]
is the same with [the Creature it self] not Christians quatenus Christians, but
the very Creature or Creature it self groaneth and is in pain. But then it is
to be understood, as Dr. Hammond also will have it, of the whole Humane
Creature, which he makes out rationally and judiciously. And what Creatures but
humane or Men can expect to be delivered into the glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God? This therefore does not respect the Jerusalem-state of the Church here
on Earth, but the State of the Resurrection. For then only will this
deliverance from the bondage of Corruption be, and the attainment of the
freedom of the Sons of God, which is the Title of the Angels. For then in our
incorruptible glorified bodies we shall become (...), equal to the Angels. And
this is the (...) which is mentioned v. 23. which we groan after and wait for,
viz. the redemption of our bodies, that they may be glorified and made
Angelical, such as the (...) have, the Angels or Sons of God, as is declared in
the Answer to S. E.

Something like this Text is that alleged out of the Acts, Chap. 3.21. where
S. Peter speaking of our blessed Savior, says, Whom the Heaven must receive
until the Times of Restitution of all things which God has spoken by the mouth
of all his holy Prophets since the world began. W. A. to give him his due,
manages this Text ingeniously enough to his present purpose, upon supposition
that (...) were to be rendered as our English Translation renders it
[Restitution] implying thereby Restoration or Renovation. But (...) signifies
a completed Circuit or Period, properly relating to Astronomical Revolutions;
It signifies also the effecting of a thing. (...) therefore signifies either
the Periodical Times, that is to say, the Times brought to a Period, or the
Times of effecting of all things which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy
Prophets. Which easy sense implies no such Change in the World Natural in the
Millennium, as our Author would deduce therefrom. And this is not my sense only
on the Text, but Grotius his also, or something in him near akin to it. As for
that Isai. 66.22. For as the Heavens and Earth which I will make shall remain
before me, says the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain. This Heaven
and Earth, as that Chap. 65.17. is a Political Heaven and Earth, that Divine
Polity which will constitute the New Jerusalem-state of the Church, in which
the Jews or Israelites will have a portion as long as that Polity stands, which
is to the end of all.

But I have made so much haste, that I have omitted a prime Text alleged by
this ingenious Author, Isai. Chap. 65. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed
together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock, and dust shall be the
Serpents meat, they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says
the Lord. And a fuller description to the same purpose there is Chap. 11. which
he produces to prove, that there will be a Change in the World Natural in the
Millennium as well as in the Moral World, he urging the literal sense of these
places for these three Reasons following.

First, Because the Wolf and Lamb, the Lion and Bullock are supposed to retain
their Original proper Natures still. For if not, then the Wolf would become a
Lamb, and the Lion a Bullock, and then in the mystical sense, (which he
opposes) it would only be, that the Lamb and the Lamb would feed together, and
the Bullock eat straw like other Bullocks.

The second Reason is, That we cannot well imagine for what other purpose that
saying, [The Lion shall eat straw like an Ox] should be added, but only to give
some account how those Creatures shall live, and how they shall be fed when
they shall cease to prey upon other living Creatures. Which implies that the
sense is literal.

The third is, Because it is further added, That dust shall be the Serpent's
meat, which further confirms the foregoing Reason, as if the Prophet did
persist in instructing us how these Creatures, when their noxious properties
are taken away, shall feed and sustain themselves. Nor did ever any, says he,
so far as I know, essay to accommodate this of the Serpent to a mystical sense,
when they have done so to the other parts of the Prophecy in conjunction with
it. These are his three Arguments which are not without some wit and judgment;
But I shall answer to each.

To the first therefore I say, That there is a Prophetic Asteismus in the
Phrase of the Prophet, when he says, The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together,
which in the Cortex or Literal sense strikes the imagination strongly, as is
the Nature of the Prophetic Style. But that there may be still an opposition
in the Mystical sense as there is betwixt the Wolf and the Lamb, it is to be
understood not in sensu composito, but in sensu diviso, That he that had a
Wolfish nature before shall change his nature to that of a Lamb, and
accordingly converse with him of that nature. This is the obvious sense, if we
study not to be over-subtil and witty. But besides this we may conceive, though
by the power of the Gospel, especially in those Times, these several Bestian
Natures will be wonderfully corrected and subdued, and made obedient to the
Heavenly Man Christ in us, yet they may retain their Natural Character, and
this man may become a thoroughly tamed Wolf, that a thoroughly tamed Lion. And
Physiognomists, we know, refer the natural Temper of men to some resemblance of
such Animals, which Inclinations yet may be perfectly subdued by real Grace and
Virtue, though the Characters of their natural Inclinations remain. Which made
Zopyrus the Physiognomist declare Socrates Venereous, and when Socrates his
Scholars laughed at him for his mistake, he rebuked them, and told them, Zopyrus
spoke true, for such he was by Nature, but Virtue had corrected it. There was
the natural Character of the Goat on him still, though the life was subdued or
extinct.

To the second I answer, That the reason is obvious, why it is said, that the
Lion shall eat straw like the Ox, viz. that it may correspond with the Wolf's
feeding with the Lamb, which is eating grass with the Lamb, and that they both
correspond with the intended mystical sense of the Parable, which the
Conclusion of the Verse is a Key to. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy Mountain. Injury, Violence and Cruelty shall cease. No man to feed his own
humor of Ambition or Covetousness shall pain and oppress his Neighbor. But
those Blood-suckers before, which were like Wolves or Lions, shall be changed
from that Temper, that they shall pain and injure no living Soul in seeking to
sustain themselves in that rank they are, no more than a Wolf or Lion would do
by eating grass or Hay.

And to the third and last, I say, My Answer to the second is further confirmed
by that passage touching the Serpent, That dust shall be the Serpent's meat as
it was before, because his eating dust hurts no other living Creature.
Therefore his food needs not be changed: As thereby is also intimated, that his
Nature is not. And therefore the Serpent is here a Symbol of the Unregenerate
in those days, who though they keep their own ill serpentine Nature still, (for
they are of their Father the Devil) yet they will be exquisitely kept in by the
righteous Laws of the New Jerusalem Polity, that they shall be able to do no
hurt, however willing, but live so in subjection to those Laws, that they shall
acquire their livelihood without violence or injury to their Neighbor. And
according to the richness of the Prophetic Style it insinuates also what
Underlings these sort of men will be in those days. As it is said Psalm. 72.
Thine Enemies shall lick the dust: and Mic. 7. They shall lick the dust like a
Serpent, they shall move out of their holes like Worms of the Earth. These are
those that undergo in those Times perpetual shame and contempt, Dan. 12. This I
conceive to be the mystical meaning of [Dust shall be the Serpents meat] I have
been the more careful in clearing this place, that mistaken Glosses may not
obscure the Prophecies of those Times, and so blind men from seeing they are
fulfilled, when indeed they are. See what is said to S. E. the Remarker on
Apoc. 22. v. 3. and I hope it will fully satisfy.

For I will haste now to another Mistake of this otherwise ingenious Writer,
which is touching the Battle of the Heroes on the white Horse under the seventh
Vial. For he makes it only a literal or carnal Warfare, and the destruction or
killing so to be understood only. Whence (1) whereas the Garments of that Heroes
only, on the white Horse, are said to be distained with blood, his Soldiers
garments continuing white and clean without any spot of blood upon them, he
will have to signify, that this bloody Execution is to be attributed to Christ
alone, rather than to his Followers on white Horses, who being so few, could do
nothing in a manner without Christ's miraculous aid, if they did any thing at
all with it. And to this sense is alleged Isai. 59.19. When he Enemy shall
come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard against
him. (2) And he adds page 137. That besides this, the Armies of the Dragon,
Beast and false Prophet are said to be slain by the Sword proceeding out of the
mouth of him that sat upon the Horse, but not one word of his being slain by
his Soldiers. (3) And this being the effect of the seventh Vial, and the Vials
being Plagues, that the slaughter by the Sword coming out of his mouth cannot
signify Conversion, forasmuch as Conversion is no Plague, but a Blessing. (4)
Nor can I, says he, find any where in Scripture that the word, slaying by the
Sword of God's mouth, or breath of His lips, is used in so favorable a sense
as to signify the Conversion of men from sin, but either the denouncing or
executing evil against them. (5) And in pursuance of this sense of a carnal War
only, he interprets the great City ( Rev. 16.19.) divided into three parts of
the great City spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. (6) And is inclinable to
interpret the great Earthquake and the great Hail, v. 18, 21. literally also.
But to each of these I shall briefly make answer.

To the first, That Christ's Garments only distained with blood, and that
before the Battle, does not signify that a bloody Execution literally taken,
is to be attributed to Christ alone, but it signifies the meritorious Passion
of Christ which belongs alone to him, and yet in virtue of which alone is this
great Victory under this seventh Vial: which is an Argument that the Warfare is
spiritual. To which that of Esaias very well agrees, When the Enemy shall come in
like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard against them The
Standard indeed intimates War, but the Spirit that it is spiritual. The Victory
therefore is to be attributed to the bloody Passion of Christ only and to his
promised Spirit in his Followers on white Horses, powerfully urging the Passion
of Christ in this Conflict, to a wonderful ample Conversion of the Nations. See
my Notes on the place.

To the second I say, That the Armies of the Beast and false Prophet are not
said to be slain by the Sword proceeding out of the mouth of him that sat on
the white Horse, there is not a word of that touching them, but they are said to
be taken alive, and cast alive into the Lake of fire burning with brimstone. So
that they were not slain by that Sword. But it is said, that (...), the rest of
those Armies, those that under the Dragon fought against the Heroes on the white
Horse, that is, the Infidel Party, they were slain by the Sword of him that sat
on the Horse, which proceeded out of his mouth. And that there is not one word
of their being slain by his Soldiers, is because his Passion alone and his
Spirit whereby he speaks and powerfully pleads the Merit of his own Passion,
does all in all. This is that which will so successfully subdue the Nations to
him, as he said of himself when he was in the flesh; When I am lifted up, I
shall draw all men unto me, intimating thereby what death he should dye.

To the third, That though this Conversion is no Plague to the converted, yet
it is so to the Beast and false Prophet. For such a world of people being
converted to the Purity of the Gospel, that Polity unconverted will necessarily
be overrun, melted and dissolved, and the seven Plagues are properly designed
for the destruction of Antichrist or the Beast.

To the fourth, That if by the Phrase [slaying] by the Sword of God's mouth or
breath of his lips, is never understood any thing but the denouncing or
executing evil against men, then the Beast and false Prophet were slain by the
Sword coming out of the mouth of him that sat on the white Horse, (for
certainly nothing is here done without his Command) which is a perfect
contradiction to the Text. For the Beast and false Prophet were cast alive into
the Lake of fire not slain by that Sword: which is a plain demonstration of the
Battle here typified it is being mainly spiritual. And it is a wonder to me,
that any one that takes notice that the very Title of this Heroes is the Word of
God, and that the Word of God is said to be sharper than any two-edged Sword,
and that there is no Weapon appears here either on himself or his Followers to
oppose his Enemies with, but this sharp Sword going out of his mouth, should
doubt but that this War is mainly spiritual, as I have interpreted it. And that
[slaying] by the Sword of God's mouth or the breath of his lips signifies
Conversion, there are several Examples in Scripture thereof, Isai. Chap. 11.4.
And he shall smite the Earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of
his lips shall he slay the wicked. Which Forerius and A Lapide interpret and
Calvin also, of the Victory of the Word of God over wicked men, slaying them as
such, and converting them to a quite contrary state. And thus is Christ said by
the Spirit of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. to consume the man of sin, that is, by the
power of the Word, as Calvin expressly interprets it, and compares it with that
of Esaias. See also 2 Esdr. Chap. 13. v. 4, 10, 38. And undoubtedly that
Prediction, Apoc. 2.16. I will fight against them with the Sword of my mouth,
respects the Conversion and separation of whole Kingdoms and Nations at the end
of the Thyatirian Interval from the Church of Rome, which came to pass in the
Reformation. But we are to remember that this Conversion, which is a Blessing
to the Converted, is a Wound and Cutting to the Body of Antichrist, and
therefore not inconsistent with the state of that War.

To the fifth, I say the great City divided into three parts, cannot be that
City spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, sorasmuch as that City is the same
with Babylon the great. Which as great as it is, is but part of the great City
there said to be divided into three parts, of which the Cities of the Nations
are one, as the Text plainly intimates, which were Thunderstruck by the
Evangelical Boanerges's, and fell, that is, were converted, as the slain by the
Sword in the other Vision. And as the unconverted Beast and false Prophet are
cast into a Lake of fire there, so Babylon here impenitent blasphemes, their
Power and Polity being broken apieces with a storm of Hailstones of a Talent
weight apiece: So easy and natural a congruity is there of things,
interpreting these Visions of a spiritual Warfare. And for the three parts
which the City is divided into, understanding it of one great Ecumenical City
as it were, there is plainly the Evangelical Party, and the Antichristian
Party, and the Infidel Party, the same with the three great Parties of the
Armies in Armageddon. But of any three parts that Babylon is divided into,
there is not the least intimation in the Vision.

To the sixth and last, I say it is very absurd in this Book of the Apocalypse
so thoroughly Symbolical, to interpret Hailstones and Earthquakes, and the
like, Literally. And to give the Author his due, he is not over-confident in
the case. But saving some few such things as these, his Book is excellently
well writ, and of very good use and service to such as have Genius to these
Studies.

CHAP. XLIX. An Answer to several Arguments from an ingenious Hand, that the
Intervals of the Vision of the seven Churches do not reach to the end of the
World, but to the beginning of the Vision in Chap. 4. which according to him
respects the Times of Queen Elizabeth. Two difficulties from the same hand
touching the placing the twenty four Elders and four Beasts about the Throne,
briefly answered.
THough the thing the Author of the following Arguments drives at, is to make
the Vision of the 4. and 5. Chapters of the Apocalypse to concern the Affairs
of England from the Time of Queen Elizabeth to this present Age, yet they
seeming to have some color to prove in general that the Laodicean Interval
does not reach to the end of the World; and it being a thing of moment to wipe
away all pretenses to this mistake, I thought fit to produce them and answer
them, and to insert the Answer into the number of my Paralipomena Prophetica.
His Arguments therefore out of his Papers I had, are these.

1. As often as those words (...) ( Chap. 4.1.) do occur, they never suffer the
Vision they belong to, to be expounded of any Event antecedent to the Event of
the Vision next before. For this I appeal, says he, to your own Exposition of
the Apocalypse in all other places, and why this only should be excepted I see
not. Whence it follows, that the Event of the Vision of Chap. 4. must follow
that of the Church of Laodicea. Wherefore the Church of Laodicea does not
conclude the World.

2. Besides, unless (...) serves to show the order of the Events of Visions, it
serves to no use at all. For as for the order of S. John's receiving of them,
it is well enough known by his order of relating them.

3. To which I may add, That for sureness sake it is not only said (...), but
the Voice tells him withal, that the things which he should see were such
(...). Whereby it seems to me, that we are enjoined of necessity to expound
that Vision of Chap. 4. of something that was to succeed the Vision of
Laodicea. For I hope you will not deny but that (...) has respect to the things
next before spoken, as well here as in all other places.

4. There are also other Considerations to prove the connection and order of the
Visions of the 3. and 4. Chapters. Such as these, Christ promises Philadelphia
an open door which no man shall be able to shut, i. e. he tells her, he has set
this door before her, meaning, as I conceive, that the Church was not yet
arrived to this open door, but in some time she should. In the next Epistle we
have Christ knocking at this door (for what other can it be) to get it open. In
the very entrance of Chap. 4. the door is opened. Are these three doors the
same or no? Surely the Text seems to intimate they are the same.

5. Another Consideration may be this; When Christ promises the Victor that he
should sit with him in his Throne, even as he was set down with his Father in
his; and then immediately after exhibits a most glorious Representation of this
Throne ( viz. the Throne of God and of Christ) does not this seem to look as if
the Throne exhibited to view, were that which were just before promised?

6. That the Laodicean Interval does not reach to the end of the World, may be
evidenced from the placing of the Promise to the Victor before the Parabolical
Epiphonema, which argues it to be a Political promise, when no such can take
place, that time when an end shall of course be put to all worldly Polity. And
therefore if it was not such a promise, but simply a promise of Heaven, it
ought to have been placed after the Parabolical Epiphonema. So that there is no
evasion from the strength of this Argument, allowing the Rule of placing the
Parabolical Epiphonema to be true, on Chap. 2.11.

7. And lastly, Supposing the Throne to be Heavenly in a literal sense, will it
not hence follow, that the Victor shall sit in as high a place in Heaven as the
Father and the Son do? For it is promised to the Victor to sit with Christ in
his Throne, even in like manner as Christ sits with his Father in his, and that
must be one and the same Throne, because Christ and the Father are one.
Wherefore it can be no Heavenly Throne, and therefore it is an Earthly that is
promised, and consequently this Earthly Scene continues after the Interval of
Laodicea. These are his Arguments set off to the utmost advantage, so far as my
skill could reach. But in Answer,

1. To the first, I demand how those words (...), which are but an Adverb of
Order in Time, the same that Postea in Latin, as Beza here translates it,
should have that propriety of sense as never to suffer the Vision they belong
to, to be expounded of any Event antecedent to the Event of the Vision next
before, whenas (...) signifies no more than [Afterwards] or [After this] as our
English Translation has it, which is most easily and naturally understood of
the Vision precedent, as if he should say, After this Vision I looked, and
behold, etc. But if you will have it, After the Event of this Vision I looked;
I demand how could John in Domitian's time be said to look up, etc. after an
Event in Queen Elizabeth's time, which seems a plain Repugnancy, whenas John's
looking up is about fifteen hundred years on this side of that Event. Wherefore
it is not from any force or virtue of the words (...), that the Vision they
belong to, is not expounded of any Event antecedent to the Event of the Vision
next before, but from other clear circumstances, or that the Visions are in the
same order as the Events they prefigure, and no weight of Reason appears to the
contrary. And for his Appeal to my Exposition of the Apocalyse, his ground
fails there also. For Chap. 18. (...), etc. some things there are expounded of
what is antecedent to the Prediction ( Chap. 17. v. 14.) of the Victory of the
Lamb.

But suppose all places where (...) is found, had been so expounded by me, as
the Objector phansies, it does not follow that (...) must be so expounded here,
because there are such notable indications to the contrary. 1. For first there
being seven Intervals from the beginning of the Church Apostolic, it does both
according to the Apocalyptick and Cabbalistick sense of [Seven] imply all the
Intervals of the said Church from that first Term. As the seven Seals beginning
from the same Term, reach to the end of the World; And so the seven Trumpets
from the Term they do commence, reach to the end of the World; And the same I
doubt not of the seven Thunders, that they last to the very last the
Conflagration it self. And the seven Heads of the Beast take in all the Heads
of him that are. Wherefore it is rational, that the seven Intervals of the
Church take in all the Intervals of the Church that are. And therefore I think
I saw reason, that this place, however (...) is to be expounded in others,
should be excepted. 2. But again, How harsh and absonous is it to make the
Epistolar Prophecy to reach but to the Reformation, and the Affairs of the
Church, and the Prophecies thereof to be continued in Visions and Prophecies of
quite another mode and fashion? Does not this look like a strange heterogeneous
patch or botch? And is it not infinitely more smooth and elegant to conceive
the Epistolar Prophecy a complete Prophecy of its own kind and manner of
contexture, reaching from the beginning of the Church to the end of the World;
And that after this begins a new Prophecy of the same extent, but of another
Texture and Nature without any connection to this? Ne Gryphes jungantur equis --
3. Thirdly, If (...) signify, after the Event of the Vision of the Church of
Laodicea, which according to him is the Reformation, then all the whole
Prophecy that follows, at least that of the seven Seals, which take in also the
seven Trumpets, must be after the Reformation, when no less than a dozen
Visions, the first six Seals, and the first six Trumpets are before. Which
plainly shows that (...) cannot signify so, as the Objector would have it; but
that it denotes only the Order of Time in seeing these Visions, not the Order
of Events. 4. Fourthly, Whenas that Vision of the seven Churches, which
commences from the beginning of the Church, is ushered in with a great voice as
of a Trumpet, and a like voice here as of a Trumpet speaks to S. John again,
would not this alarm or awaken any heedful Reader's animadversion, and invite
him to conceive, that surely here begins or is beginning a new Prophecy ab ovo
or from the same Epoch, as before, especially considering what is noted in the
second place, that there is here in this following Prophecy (...), the passing
out of an Epistolar Prophecy to another of an huge different contexture. 5. But
fifthly and lastly, Considering that general Preface to this whole Book of
Prophecies set down stilo tenui, in a simple plain style, Chap. 1.1. That it is
the Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave him, of things to come to pass,
and imparted by an Angel to John; And that the things to come to pass are most
magnificently set out in Prophetic Figures and Symbols, as also Jesus Christ
the Revealer of them in this first Vision of the seven Churches; Which glorious
Representation of him in his Sacerdotal Habit amidst the seven golden
Candlesticks, is a Vision introductory to the Epistolar Prophecy, and Christ
made to dictate those Epistles to John, thereby to insinuate what is said in
more meagre terms, that this Epistolar Prophecy is the Revelation of Jesus
Christ to his Servant John; I say, he that considers this, and after the
finishing the Prophecy lights upon another glorious Vision, Chap. 4. and 5.
which is most easily and naturally expounded to the same sense that the
Introductory Vision of the Epistolar Prophecy is, and something more full, viz.
That the slain Lamb Jesus Christ receives from the Sitter on the Throne God the
Father, the sealed Book of Prophecies with power of opening the Seals, and
exhibiting orderly the Prophetic Visions to his Servant John (for it is the
Lamb that opens the Seals all along) what is this but a more magnificent
expression of what is Chap. 1.1. said in more exile phrase, The Revelation of
Jesus Christ which God gave him of things to come to pass imparted by these
Angelical impressions to his Servant John, and what can be concluded therefrom,
but that this Vision Chap. 4. and 5. is as well as that before the Epistolar
Prophecy an Introductory Vision, viz. to the Prophecy of the sealed Book, and
therefore can be no continuation to the Epistolar Prophecy, notwithstanding
those words (...). This any unprejudiced Eye may easily discern to be the
Truth. But that the glory of the Spiritual or Angelical Kingdom of the God of
Israel there represented, is also prefigurative of the blessed Millennial state
(which it was when it was first seen on the Mount) this does not at all clash
with its Introductory usefulness, and the signification it has, even now
specified. So that though (...) should signify so, as the Objector would have
it in all other places of the Apocalypse, yet there are most manifest and
weighty Reasons why it should not so signify here. And thus I hope the first
Argument is fully satisfied. I shall be briefer in those that follow.

2. To the second I answer, Where (...) does not serve to show the order of the
Events of the Visions as well as of the Visions themselves, whose order of
being seen is sufficiently indicated by their order of place in the Narration,
yet it may serve instead of a form of Transition, such as is used by
Historians, Orators and Philosophers, and indeed all Writers, though the order
of the things they speak of would be discerned without these Transitions by
their mere speaking of them one after another as they first propounded them to
be spoken of. And why should the style of the Apocalypse be more pinching and
hide-bound than any other, that it cannot afford so much as two words that make
but up four Syllables, for a brief Transition from one Prophetic Vision of
large extent to another of equal extent and of quite different kind? For the
full sense of (...), etc. is this, Thus far for the Epistolar Vision; after
this I looked up, and behold, etc. Which therefore is a very brief Transition
from the Epistolar Prophecy to the Prophecy of the sealed Book, and its
Introductory Vision. And therefore, though (...) does not here serve to show
the order of Events, yet it is not true that it serves to no use at all, it
serving so manifestly for a Transition.

3. To the third I say, In these words (...), that (...) is merely an Adverb of
Time, and signifies, as Beza and our English Translation has it, Posthac and
Hereafter; Things that must be in time to come; (which is the general sense of
Expositors) not things that are to succeed the Event of the Vision of Laodicea,
or the Time of the beginning of the Reformation, as the Objector would have it.
For here (...) being set in the front, or proposed in general, it implies that
all the Visions that follow must be of things (...). The sense of which words,
if it were after the Event of the Vision of Laodicea, that is, after the
beginning of the Reformation, according to the Objector's surmise, the
Assertion would be grossly and repeatedly false. For there are above twenty
Visions that follow this general proposed Title (...), whose fulfilling was
before the Reformation. So evident is it from hence, that Beza and our English
Translation is in the right, and that the general sense of Expositors is sound
in this matter. But indeed viewing slightly the outward Cortex of the Visions,
and (...) signifying as well [after these things] as [hereafter] and there
being the Vision of Laodicea immediately precedent, which they seem to respect,
one may, if he be not heedful, fancy unawares that the affairs of the Vision
of Laodicea are the (...), after which the affairs of the succeeding Prophecy
are to be. But this show in the Cortex is but an artificial Blind, that which I
call Lemmatosynechia, intended, as several other Artifices, for the Concealment
of the sense of the Apocalypse, which is as seriously aimed at in the frame
thereof as the certainty of Revealment. And the Objector's mind seems to be
caught and entangled in this snare.

4. To the fourth I answer, That Christ tells Philadelphia in his Epistle to
her (which is supposed to be directed to her in being, as the nature of an
Epistle requires) Behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can
shut it. The vulgar Latin has most faithfully and skilfully translated this
passage out of the Greek, Ecce dedi coram te ostium apertum, etc. Where coram,
as (...) in the Greek, is pointblank against the sense the Objector would put
upon the passage, as if Christ meant, that Philadelphia yet was not arrived to
this opened door, but that the Church at large in some time should be, whenas
the saying is expressly directed to Philadelphia, to that very Interval of the
Church. And it is said, Dedi coram te ostium apertum, That I have given thee
Philadelphia, an open door in thy very presence, not at a distance. For Coram
fignifies proximity always, though Ante may be sometimes used of that which is
more distant. So plain is it, that the Objector's Exposition is a false Gloss
on the Text. And whereas, he says, we have in the next Epistle Christ knocking
at this door (for what other can it be?) to get it open; I answer, it is
impossible it should be this door. For this door is an open door which no man
could shut, unless Christ himself, and when he had once set it open to
Philadelphia, it is not likely he would shut it again to make himself needless
work. Besides, that this door in the Epistle to Laodicea is a door that others
are to open to him, not the door he opens to others. Which also argues it
cannot be the door in the entrance of Chap. 4. For no man opens that door in
Heaven. But the door that Christ knocks at in his Epistle to Laodicea, is a
door that men are to open to him, that he may come and sup with them, etc. And
therefore surely the Text does not intimate these three doors to be the same.
But the first door, in the Epistle to Philadelphia, is a Political door, a door
of sure success set open to them of Philadelphia in their administration of the
affairs of the Kingdom of Christ. The door in the Epistle to Laodicea is an
Ethical door, the Hearts or Wills of the Laodiceans, which Christ solicits that
they would open to him, and so receive him in the Communion of his Spirit,
which is extremely well agreeing with all those Moral Exhortations and
Increpations preceding this passage. And lastly, That door opened in the
entrance of Chap. 4. is a Prophetical door, thorough which John passing, is
admitted to behold Divine Visions, and be a Witness of Christ's receiving from
his Father, and revealing the following Prophecies touching the affairs of his
Church to the end of the World. This is the easy and natural sense of these
three doors from the very Text of each place to him that will not Nodum in
scirpo quaerere.

5. To the fifth I say, That if the Throne exhibited Chap. 4. be intended for
Christ's Throne, which be promises the Victor at the end of the foregoing
Chapter, the Scene seems to be very ill contrived. For he that sits upon the
Throne is not Christ, but God the Father, nor does Christ or the slain Lamb so
much as sit with him on that Throne, but stands Chap. 5. v. 6. betwixt the
Throne (with Him that sits on it) and the four Beasts and Elders. And v. 7.
being in this standing posture, he is said to go and take the Book out of the
right hand of Him that sat upon the Throne. And so not so much as Christ
himself is enthronized on this Throne, much less any Laodicean Victor, which
should have been expressed in this Scene, if there were any such real Connection
betwixt this Vision and that of the Vision of Laodicea, which the Objector is
so solicitous for. There seems so great a dissimilitude in the very Cortex,
that it will not so much as afford a Lemmatosynechia, that Artificial Blind, as
I may so call it, at which I observed above, how incident the Objector is to
stumble.

6. This sixth Argument seems the most considerable of any, but I hope I shall
offer that which is abundantly satisfactory in answer thereto, to any
unprejudiced Reader. And because the main ground of the strength thereof is the
Rule I have noted on Apoc. 2. v. 11. we will here produce the Rule, which is
this, That the promise to the Victor preceding the Parabolical Epiphonema, is
of things External and Political; but those promises that follow the said
Epiphonema, are of things spiritual and invisible. Upon which I will only
advertise, that the main Antithesis I intended lies betwixt Visibility and
Invisibility to us men of the performance of the things promised; though the
things are ordinarily such as may be also called Political.

From whence I answer first, That this promise of an Heavenly Throne being to
be performed at that visible and conspicuous, nay glorious and illustrious
general Assizes at the last Day, when the Lord himself shall descend from
Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel and with the Trump of God,
and when the Believers that remain alive shall be caught up in the Clouds to
meet the Lord in the Air; when he shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and
all Nations shall be gathered before him, whom he shall distinguish into sheep
and goats, and give the sheep the Kingdom prepared for them, but condemn the
Goats to everlasting Fire: Is not this a performance, visible in the highest
measure, of that promise of Christ to him that overcomes, that he will grant to
him to sit with him in his Throne, even as he also overcame, and was set down
with his Father in his? According to that in our Church Hymn; When thou had
overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all
Believers. Into which questionless all true Believers enter at their death, but
in a way invisible, and therefore the promise of Paradise to him that overcame
in the Epistle to the Ephesine Church, is set after the Epiphomena. But this
Heavenly Throne here promised to the Laodicean Victor being to be performed so
visibly in that great and general Assizes at the last Day, is placed according
to the Rule before the Epiphonema, thereby to advertise us, that this promise
is to be performed at that great and solemn Day (which closes the Laodicean
Interval) in the sight of all the World by Christ sitting on his Throne of
Glory with all Nations gathered before him.

But now in the second place, if you be so curious as not to be content that
the reward and performance be visible, but that it must needs be Political too,
does not Christ say to the sheep, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you? And is
not a Kingdom Political, and therefore the promise thereof Political? Besides
what I intimated on this very Text, Chap. 3.21. in these words. Nay you shall
sit with me on my Throne, and judge the Apostate Angels at the last Day. Nor
them alone, but as Co-assessors with Christ on this Laodicean Throne, they
shall judge all the guilty people gathered before the Throne of Christ at the
Day of Judgment: And is not this then manifestly a promise of what is not only
visible, but also Political, and withal clear that there was all the reason in
the World, that this promise should be, as it is, placed before the Epiphonema,
and not after it? And this, I think, is a full and satisfactory Answer to this
sixth Argument, that from the placing of the promise of a Throne to the
Laodicean Victor before the Epiphonema, would infer, that it is an Earthly
Throne, because the placing thereof thus implies it visible and Political,
whenas this Heavenly Throne is manifestly so likewise.

And that it is an Heavenly Throne, and not an Earthly (as we have plainly
shown this sixth Argument to prove nothing to the contrary, so) there are many
Arguments for it, and such as no man unbiassed with prejudice but will thereby
be readily assured of the truth thereof. As (1) The general consent of
Expositors. (2) The state of the Laodiceans, who are described under no such
circumstances, as the Smyrnean, Pergamenian, Thyatirian and Philadelphian
Churches, who living under other Polities, were subject to Martyrdoms,
Persecutions, and great Hardships, and therefore those and the few Names in
Sardis, having for this very cause an Earthly Political promise made to them,
there being no such ground for them of Laodicea to have so, as being in a
contrary condition, in peace, plenty and ease, insomuch that they themselves
conceive they have need of nothing, this is a plain indication that no such
earthly Political promise is made to them, they enjoying it already. (3) All
those Moral or Spiritual Exhortations and Increpations which tend to the
fitting them for Heaven, and which show them that only true and necessary way
thither, these are another intimation that the promise to the Laodicean Victor
is that of an Heavenly Throne, not an earthly, which they enjoyed already,
wanting nothing. But the great solicitude of Christ seems here, to be to fit
them for that state. Whence he says after all these sharp reproofs, As many as
I love I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and repent. Behold, I stand
at the door and knock, etc. This is all an urgency for the preparing themselves
for that Heavenly Throne, the Day of Doom being so near at hand. (4) And
lastly, The very words of the promise imply it is an Heavenly Throne, as the
Method he so earnestly commends to them, tends thereto: To him that overcomes
will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame and am set
down with my Father in his Throne: i. e. As Christ, when he had overcome the
sharpness of Death, was advanced to the right hand of God in Heaven by the gift
of his Father, so he having thus opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all true
Believers, he that overcomes in that Moral sense, shall have an Heavenly Throne
of Christ's giving, all judgment, as it is said, being committed to the Son.
And it is very harsh that Christ's Throne after his overcoming should be
Heavenly, and the Laodicean Victors Earthly, and not of the same kind, though
of a less degree. This is certainly the genuine sense of the promise of this
Throne, to any one that is not blinded or biassed with some strange prejudice.
And this would have been the sense, if the promise had been placed after the
Epiphonema, and not at all repugnant with our Hypothesis, that the Laodicean
Interval is the last Interval reaching to the end of the World, which is
sufficiently proved from other Arguments. But the promise being placed before
the Epiphonema, it is not only not repugnant to, but confirms our Hypothesis,
that Laodicea is that Interval that takes in the last Judgment, when in a
visible manner all people are to be judged, as the word implies. The judgment
and rewards shall be visible in the sight of all the World. So fittingly do all
things fall in with the truth of our Hypothesis. But I may seem to have dwelt
too long upon my Answer to this sixth Argument. We proceed to the seventh and
last.

7. To this seventh and last therefore I say, That unless we suffer our Fancy
to stick to the mere Cortex of the figurative Letter which puts Throne for a
Kingdom here, and the power of Judicature, which is the real and genuine sense,
this Argument will appear to have small strength in it. For then supposing what
I take to be true, that it is the promise of an Heavenly Kingdom; to sit with
Christ in his Throne is to partake of Christ's Kingdom given to him by his
Father, when he had overcome the sharpness of Death; which Kingdom is plainly
Heavenly, he being thereupon exalted to the right hand of God in Heaven, from
whence he is to come visibly at the last Day to judge the quick and the dead.
For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, as I
noted above. And therefore Matt. 25. he says to the sheep on his right hand,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc. Which Kingdom is so
large, that Myriads may partake thereof without sitting in Christ's lap, as the
Objector's Argument insinuates Christ to sit in his Father's lap: and so all
that partake of this Heavenly Kingdom, to be as high in Heaven as God the
Father and his Son Christ are, whenas they are not of equal Sovereignty, though
the Throne were supposed Earthly. So that this Sophistry would exclude the
Victor from having any Throne at all.

But that one and the same Throne in this gross sense is not meant, appears
from the expression of the same thing, or one part or Specimen thereof the
power of Judicature, Matt. 19. where Christ tells his Apostles, that at the
Resurrection they shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel, viz. at that time when all Nations shall be gathered together before
Christ's Throne of Glory, Matt. 25. and yet all these thirteen Thrones are but
one Throne in the abovesaid signification of Throne, that is, the power of
Judicature. Which in a measure as it is there promised to the Apostles, so here
to the Laodicean Victor, whose Privilege it will be to judge also the Apostate
Angels at the last Day, as the Apostle tells us 1 Cor. 6.2. And I little
question but that this Privilege is included in a particular manner in this
promise of an Heavenly Throne to the Laodicean Victor, the placing the promise
before the Epiphonema intimating it to be visible, which cannot be but at the
last Day. From whence, as from other Arguments, it is plain, that the Laodicean
Interval is the last time of the Church upon Earth, else why should such a
promise be made to the Laodicean Victor, rather than to any other Victor in the
seven Churches?

And now I hope by this time it is plain, that though there be a pretty
speciousness of Wit and quickness of Invention in the seven Arguments of the
ingenious Objector, yet there is no real strength in any of them, to prove that
the Intervals of the seven Churches do not reach to the End of the World.

I will only add from the same ingenious Hand what is objected against our
Interpretation of Apoc. 4. v. 6. in the Notes (In the midst of the Throne, and
round about the Throne, etc.) and briefly answer thereto, and then conclude. We
suppose the Perimeter of the Throne to be square. Let the square Area be
divided into four equal Squares by two Lines cutting themselves ad angulos
rectos in the Center of the said large square Area on which the Throne stands,
and let each Line at both ends be produced something beyond the Perimeter of
this Area. Now according to the order of the Narration of the Text as well as
the order of the Camp of Israel, let these twenty four crowned Elders, six on a
side, three on one fide of the decussant Line, and three on the other side, on
each side of the Perimeter be so equidistantly placed, that every six Elders
will take up a whole side, thus plainly environing the whole Perimeter of the
Throne, and so properly to be said to be round about it. This answers to what
is declared Chap. 4.4. And round about the Throne were four and twenty Seats,
etc.

But now let us conceive the four Beasts, which in the Vision are but single
Beasts placed on those produced decussant Lines which divide each side of the
Perimeter in the midst, a little more removed from the Perimeter than the Seats
of the Elders. Here it cannot be said so roundly (because there is but a single
Beast on each side of the Perimeter of the Throne) that they were round about
it in the same sense the Elders are said to be. But they standing on these
Lines that divide each side of the Perimeter of the Throne in the midst, they
are said to be in the midst of the Throne, and round about the Throne. In the
Midst for the reason abovesaid, and round about it, because every side of the
Perimeter has a Beast just against the midst thereof. This is the clear and
liquid reason why Mr. Mede interprets (...), by an (...), it signifying no more
than that they were (...), that they were in the midst of each side of the
Perimeter round about, no side excepted.

But this Explication, says the ingenious Objector, is encumbred with these two
difficulties. One is, that by this account the Elders will be in the midst of
the Throne too, whose place is only said to have been round about the Throne.
The other is, that it will not be easily granted that any thing can be said to
be in the midst of the circumference of any figure, which is neither in it, nor
within it. But to the first I answer, That none of the equidistant Seats of the
Elders can be said to be in the midst of the Perimeter of the Throne in that
exact sense that the Beasts may be said so to be. And besides, they so
perfectly surrounding the Throne, there was no occasion touching them to use
any such expression of being in the midst of any thing. And to the second I
briefly answer, That as the Elders are easily conceived to sit round about the
exterior Perimeter of the Throne, so the four Beasts to stand at the midst of
each side of the said Perimeter. For (...) need signify no more than so. The
Prepositions (...) and (...) signify not only [In] but [Propter] or [Prope] as
our learned Objector cannot but know very well. And thus, I hope, this
something perplexing passage of the Apocalypse is fully cleared, and the right
of Precedence in the crowned Elders before the four Beasts, the Body of the
People, justly retrieved and confirmed.

CHAP. L. A brief Method of demonstrating how there may be three and no more
than three real Hypostases or Persons in the One Divine Substance or Essence.
FOR the more clearly proceeding in this Argument, we are first to define the
Terms thereof, viz. what is meant by Hypostasis or Person, what by the Divine
Substance or Essence, what by being One.

As touching the first we are to observe, That Individuum, Suppositum,
Hypostasis or Persona taken in the Abstract, are mere Logical Notions
applicable, the first to any singular Being, whether Substance or Accident; The
second to any complete Substance at least; The third, viz. Hypostasis or
Persona to any intelligent Essence or Substance. And therefore where these
Logical Notions are applied, there is some singular Thing, Accident, Substance,
or intelligent Substance to which they are applied, or else they remain no more
than mere Logical Notions, such as they were before the Application.

Now for the Divine Essence or Substance; Whatever Substance exists eternally,
necessarily and independently of the Will of another, and is infinitely wise,
good and powerful, and from whom the whole Creation does exist, and by whom it
does continue and subsist, this is assuredly an Essence or Substance truly
Divine, and such as deserves all Religious Worship and Adoration from the whole
Creation that are capable of rendering it.

And now thirdly and lastly for the Unity of the Divine Essence or Substance;
Whatever Substance, whether Divine or not Divine, is Ens unum per se, and non
per aliud, is as much one Substance (as to Substance) as any Substance can be.
For such a Substance has no composition at all of integrant parts, and can no
more be discerped and dissevered one part from another than a mere Physical or
Metaphysical Monad, if there be any such, but is one inseparably and
indivisibly. And such an Unity or Oneness as this we affirm to be in that
Singular Divine Essence or Substance, of whom the whole Creation of things
visible and invisible does depend.

We proceed from the Definition of Terms to the proposing of some few Axioms,
such as no unprejudiced Understanding will easily deny.

The first, That there is but one God, and that the same is a Substance or
Essence infinitely, or most absolutely perfect.

The second, That this Oneness of the Deity, and absolute Perfection thereof
does forbid, The former, that any Multiplicity should be admitted that did not
consist with, or were not in order to the discovery of the most absolute
Perfection in the Deity; The latter forbids that any Multiplicity be rejected
that makes for that absolute and consummate Perfection in the Deity, provided
that it does consist with that Unity of the Divine Substance or Essence
described in the third Definition.

The third, That God cannot be infinitely or absolutely perfect without the
perception of himself, and that Joy and Love that results therefrom in finding
himself that full, free, and absolute unself-interessed Good, such as he is in
his eternal and immutable Nature.

The fourth, That any Perception of himself, or Love and Joy in himself, is not
enough to complete his most absolute Perfection, but it must be a Perception
and Love of the most perfect kind.

The fifth, That Essential Perception and Essential Love is a far more
excellent Perception and Love, than that which is Modal, such as Creatures are
capable of. But it is the Privilege of the Deity to perceive by an Essential
Perception, and to love by an Essential Love; Per (...), and not per speciem,
as Julius Scaliger speaks. God's eternal Perception of himself is not by a
Modal Image of himself, but by a Substantial Representation of himself within
himself more substantial than his Conceptus ad extra, which yet the whole
Creation of things visible and invisible really is, viz. one substantial
Thought issuing from the Divinity. We may experience in our selves how
imperfect our Perception is of our own selves; Forasmuch as we perceive not the
very Essence or Substance of our Souls at all, but merely Phantasms and
Operations which are not the Soul it self, which is a permanent Being, but
these pass away perpetually in succession. We seem to perceive the Body more
perfectly, it being a Substance our Soul is nearly united to and steadily
present with us, and that so lively and feelingly, that the Vulgar take their
Body to be themselves.

The sixth, The power of creating argues a vast Perfection in the Deity, and to
be a Creature as vast an imperfection, in respect of God.

The seventh, The exterior Creation is incapable of being ab aeterno, nor is
it any defect in the Deity, but in the nature of the Creature, that it cannot
exist from all Eternity.

The eighth, In the Fountain of the Deity, whom we call, the Father, there is
not only himself, but the whole exterior Creation, Eminently, Causally, and
Ideally.

The ninth, Though the exterior Creation could not be ab aeterno, yet there
not only could be, but necessarily and unavoidably was an Eternal Generation of
the Son, who is the Eradiation of the glorious Richness and Fullness of his
Father, and the express Image of his Person, God of God, Light of Light, very
God of very God, which plainly imports no empty Logical Notion, but a real
second Hypostasis distinct from the first.

The tenth, The Father containing in himself the whole exterior Creation, and
the Son being the express Image of his Person, does ipso facto contain in
himself also the Ideal or Archetypal World ab aeterno. So that although there
could be no exterior Creation ab aeterno yet this interior Generation of the
Son does more than compensate that Defect, and takes away the Imputation of an
Eternal solitude and sterility from the Deity. Which therefore argues the
greater perfection thereof in this regard also, Axiom 6.

The eleventh, Moreover, this second Hypostasis being the express Image of his
Father's Fullness, God of God, or a Divine Hypostasis from a Divine Hypostasis,
here is another Argument of the Perfection of the Divinity, viz. the most
perfect kind of Perception of himself; That it is not per speciem, but per
(...), per ipsam rei praesentiam, according to the fifth Axiom.

The twelfth, And so for the same reason, that the Love whereby God loves
himself or joys in himself, may be of the most perfect kind, it is not to be
per operationem or speciem, but per (...), to be essential, or per ipsam rei
praesentiam. Which therefore requires a third Hypostasis, whose essential
Character is Divine Love or Joy, and issues eternally from the grateful
Perception that the Father and Son have of one another. This Hypostasis
proceeding, whether from the Father, as the Greek Church would have it, or from
the Father and the Son, as the Latin, (which to me seems the more rational and
agreeable to Scripture) his joyous Loveflame, as I may so speak, is the more
highly kindled by the Perception of that exulting Complacency the first and
second Hypostases have in one another, as both also in him. For whatever is
felt in one Hypostasis is felt in all three, by reason of their thorough and
solid Union, and that with the most perfect kind of Perception, the Hypostases
themselves feeling, as I may so say, and intimately perceiving how it is with
themselves in feeling how it is with one another. Wherefore we see manifest
reason why there should be three Hypostases in the Deity, because they tend to
the perfection thereof, that it may have the most perfect Perception of it
self, and the most perfect Love of and Joy in it self, viz., that they be not
merely per Speciem or Operationem, but Essential, as is plainly deducible out
of the third, fourth and fifth Axioms, to say nothing of the sixth, seventh,
eighth, ninth and tenth. Out of which we understand that the Eternal Generation
of the Son comprizeth also in it the Archetypal World ab aeterno, though the
exterior Creation was incapable of that Privilege, and that the Spirit, the
immediate Mover in the exterior Creation, was eternally impregnated from the
Son as he actuated from his Father, whence proceeded the Spirit, and nothing
but the incapacity of the Creature was a let from its existing from all
Eternity. Wherefore the acknowledging a Trinity in the Divine Essence, speaks
Perfection therein upon this account also, and takes the imputation, as I
hinted before, of an Eternal sterility and solitude in the Deity. And therefore
this Trinity of Persons or Hypostases in the Deity is not to be rejected by the
second part of Axiom the second.

But now that there are no more than three Hypostases in the Deity, may appear
from the first part of the second Axiom that advertiseth us, that the Oneness
and Simplicity of the Deity is so sacred and universally acknowledged by the
Principles of humane Reason, that no more multiplicity is to be admitted
therein than consists with and tends to the Divine Perfection; which being
completed in every regard by these supposed three Hypostases, there is a
necessary stop given in our Reason from admitting any more, no not so much as a
fourth, there being no reason to be given for the admittance of a fourth but
what will with like validity infer four thousand, nay four millions of
Hypostases, or rather an Infinity of them. Which is so gross and wild a
Conceit, that there is no wise and sober man but will explode it at first
sight. Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora, is a Maxim of
universal Truth. And the perfect Symmetry, as I may so speak, Beauty and
Congruity of the Divine Nature or Essence is such, that it cannot admit of any
such uncouth superfluities. It is the Privilege of the absolute Perfection of
the Divine Nature to be thus unexceptionably constituted, as having no other
Author or Cause of it self but it self, i. e. the reason of its Existence and
Essence, such as it is, is resolvible only into the transcendent Excellency of
its own Nature or Idea.

This plausible Plea humane Reason, if need were, might offer in behalf of
three Hypostases, and no more than three in the Divine Essence. But the
Triunity of the Godhead being an ancient solemn and Divine Tradition, embraced
not only by the Church of God, but by the best and divinest Philosophers of
old, whether we have rendered punctually and particularly the very reasons of
three Hypostases and no more, or not; yet it is indubitable but that in the
general we have not erred, viz. that the Godhead was most absolutely completed
in these three, though we cannot give the account so particularly and
precisely, and that therefore there was no more. And Ingenuity and Modesty may
well acquiesce in this general Hypothesis touching so profound and unsearchable
a Mystery. And scarce any, I think, would have hesitated touching this Divine
Tradition, if they could have reconciled these three real Hypostases, not
Logical Notions (according to the first Definition) with the Unity of the
Godhead, that is, if they could have made out, that there is no Repugnancy in
affirming, That there are three real Hypostases in one singular or individual
and indivisible Divine Essence or Substance; which one singular and indivisible
Divine Substance is that one God (according as it is described in the second
Definition) of whom the whole Creation depends.

But now that there is no repugnancy in this, I think I may say is
demonstrable; and that in a few words and from Principles acknowledged by all,
viz. That the Generation of the Son is not arbitrariously or precariously
dependent on the Father, but that it is the very Privilege of his Nature to be
necessarily, unavoidably and eternally generated of him by an Emanative
Generation, as he is called by the Apostle (...), the Eradiation of his
Father's Glory. And so none will question but that the Holy Ghost proceeds
either from the Father, or from the Father and the Son, by an Emanative
Procession: Nor can any Wit of man imagine why the production of one should be
emanative, and not the other. Now the nature of what is emanative from another
is this, (whether it be Mode or Substance) That as it is not that adequately
from which it does emane, but something some way distinct therefrom, else
nothing did emane, and there would be no Emanation; so that which does emane
thus necessarily is as inseparably one and indivisibly with that from whence it
does emane, as the parts, if I may so speak, of any Substance incorporeal,
which is Ens unum per se and non per aliud. So that if that which does emane is
Substance from Substance, they are both as much one Substance, as to Substance,
as any one Substance can be, according to our third Definition. Insomuch that
according to this account of the three Hypostases, the second and third issuing
from the first by an eternal, necessary and unavoidable Emanation, not
arbitrariously or precariously (which is the proper Character of Creation, the
Creature having but a precarious Existence) all these three real Hypostases are
as much one singular Divine Essence or Substance by definition the second, as
any Substance can be. From whence it plainly follows, that though there be
three Hypostases, in the Divine Substance so described in the second
Definition, yet that Divine Substance being as perfectly one as any Substance
can be, that yet there is but one God, which is the thing that was to be
demonstrated.

Which plain account is a Key that will unlock the hardest difficulties in the
Athanasian Creed touching the Trinity and Unity of the Godhead. I will give one
Instance for all; where it is said, The Father is God, the Son is God, and the
Holy Ghost is God, yet there are not three Gods, but one God. If any one should
here object that nothing can be God but what is Divine Substance, and that if
the Divine Substance of the Father be the sole adequate Substance for the whole
Trinity of the Hypostases, the second and the third Hypostases will be empty
Logical Notions according to Definition the first: but if they be real
Hypostases, there will be three Divine Substances, whatever is said truly to be
God, being a Divine Substance: I say according to this account, we may safely
and intelligibly pronounce, that the Father is a Divine Substance, the Son a
Divine Substance, and the Holy Ghost a Divine Substance, yet there are not
three Divine Substances, but one absolute Divine Substance, according to
Definition the third, and so plainly but one God, though three Hypostases.
Whose Union is such, accordingly as has been described, that they make one
singular or individual and indivisible Divine Essence or Substance, nor admit
of any singular Divine Nature or Substance, excluding therefrom (or not
including) themselves. Forasmuch as that fourth being a singular Divine Nature,
would ipso facto be an Hypostasis by Definition the first, unless we can
imagine a singular Divine Substance devoid of Intelligence. Whence it is
manifest, that the above proposed account is the most unexceptionable and
intelligible that is, and the true account indeed how three real Hypostases are
consistent with one singular Divine Substance, that is, with one God.

If any one be curious in these things, he may read the Scholia at the end of
the last Chapter of my Enchiridium Metaphysicum, as also the six last Sections
of the third of the Divine Dialogues and the Scholia thereon. But this brief
account from thence I thought fit to insert into my Paralipomena Prophetica,
because the truth of some Passages in my Exposition of the Apocalypse depends
upon the truth of the Mystery of the Trinity. As Apoc. Chap. 9. v. 11. and
Chap. 11. v. 2. For our Compute of the Symmetral Times of the Church implies
the Truth of the Mystery of the Holy Trinity, which if it were not true, would
argue our Computation false, and that we are out in our Interpretation.

CHAP. LI. Fourteen Queries raised out of a Letter written in favor of some
Passages of S. E. his Remarks, with Answers subjoined to each Query.
I Thought to have concluded my Paralipomena Prophetica with the immediately
foregoing Chapter touching the Triunity of the Godhead. But having a Letter
sent unto me written in favor of some passages in S. E. his Remarks before my
Paralipomena were printed off, I thought it not amiss to raise some Queries out
of the same Letter, and answer to them, and so conclude all with these.

Query 1. Whether in those words Rev. 10.6. [That there should be time no
longer] [Time] there signifies the Political Order and Government of the World,
and implies that in the Millennial state all Humane Laws and Polities shall
cease, and the Government be carried on merely by the guidance of the Spirit;
and whether that Voice, Rev. 16.17. from the Throne [It is done] and the same
Voice, Rev. 21.6. do not answer to, Time should be no longer, etc. Rev. 10.6.

Answ. The true sense out of the Original of that latter Clause of Rev. Chap.
10. v. 6. and of the following Verse, is this, That there shall be no longer
time saving in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel when he shall sound,
etc. This is made good in my Notes upon my Exposition of that Chapter, and
still further confirmed by the Answer to the Remarker on the place: So that no
man of any competency of Judgment can possibly deny the truth of that
Exposition. Wherefore if [Time] signify the Political Order and Government of
the World, we are assured by the Oath of the Angel that such Government will
continue all along the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, which reaches to the
end of the World. For his swearing there will be no longer time, saving what
the seventh Trumpet comprizeth, implies that [Time] which S. E. would have
signify Political Government, will continue all that Trumpet long. But now for
the Voice [It is done] in those places mentioned, how it can answer to this
place, let any man of sense consider, unless it be such an impertinent Answer
as is perstringed in that Proverb. Which the way to London? A poke full of
Plums. The mentioned Voice [It is done] though Time here signified Political
Order and Government, were nothing to the confirming that Notion. For Rev.
16.17. it signifies nothing but assurance of success to the Ministers of
Christ's Kingdom under the seventh Vial. And Rev. 21.6. the assurance of the
truth of the Prediction of the glorious appearance of the New Jerusalem on
Earth. That the thing is as sure as if it were done already, and therefore he
presently adds, I am Alpha and Omega, etc. as intimating his ability certainly
to effect it.

Query 2. Whether the Plagues inflicted by the Witnesses were not inflicted
during their 1260 days prophesying, Chap. 11.6. and therefore the same with the
six first Plagues, there being no other actually inflicted Plagues prefigured
but they. This is taken out of the Answer to the Remarks, page 119.

Answ. This is made a Query, because the abovementioned Letter pretends
Allegations against the truth of the Affirmative thereof; As that most of the
first six Plagues were expired before the Witnesses began to prophecy, and
that also those Plagues belong to the Sealed Book-Prophecy, which the
prophesying of the Witnesses does not, and are inflicted by barbarous Nations,
etc. To which I answer, That the prophesying of the Witnesses and the six first
Plagues or Trumpets are Synchronal according to Mr. Mede and the Truth it self,
and therefore none of the Plagues could expire before the Witnesses began to
prophecy. And although the prophesying Witnesses belong not to the Sealed
Book-Prophecy, yet being Synchronal to the first six Trumpets of the Sealed
Book-Prophecy, they are so to the first six Plagues, and therefore falling in
to the same time, bid fair for proving the Inflicters of the said Plagues, and
those six to be the Plagues the Witnesses are said to inflict during the 1260
days of their prophesying, in which they must inflict them or never. For the
Scene of the Witnesses goes off at the close of the sixth Trumpet. Nor do these
first six Plagues, being executed by the barbarous Nations, hinder but that
they may be inflicted by the Witnesses in that way they inflict any Plagues,
which, if positively, is only by denouncing them; as Jeremy is said to do the
things he denounces, Jer. 1.10. The Objector also seems not to distinguish
betwixt the Witnesses prophesying it self, and the Plagues attending their
prophesying, nor betwixt their Power of inflicting Plagues and their actually
inflicting them. The thing therefore I say is this, That there is no other
positively and actually inflicted Plagues prefigured, but those contained under
the first six Trumpets, to the close of the sixth whereof the Fall of the City
and Rising of the Witnesses is referrible. Upon which it is said the second Woe
is past, Chap. 11.14. And the Fall of the City or Conversion of so considerable
a part of the Western Empire to the pure Gospel, is referrible to the effect of
the fire proceeding out of the Witnesses mouths, Chap. 11.5. according to my
Interpretation.

Query 3. Whether the opening the Temple, Rev. 11.19. is just before the first
Vial, but the time of the seeing the Ark there not till the sixth Vial, whenas
yet the opening the Temple was for the immediate showing the Ark, and the sight
thereof the first thing related upon the opening the Temple.

Answ. Whoever reads considerately and unprejudicedly the 23. Chapter of these
Paralipomena, cannot but be fully assured that what follows the Doxologie of
the Elders, Rev. 11. and the joyful Annunciation of the Fall of Babylon, Rev.
14. falls into the times of the Vials, and is a more broken and defectuous
Representation of them. Wherefore whereas after the Song of Moses and the Lamb,
Rev. 15. (which answers to the Doxologie of the Elders and joyful Annunciation
of the Fall of Babylon) the Opening of the Temple there v. 5. is in order to
the going forth of the Vial-Angels, and there being no pouring forth of the
Vials but by the Vial-Angels, nor they doing their work before they come out of
the opened Temple, it is plain that the Temple was open or stood open before
the first Vial, Rev. 11. though the mention of its standing open is not before
the sixth Vial, the opening of the Temple being not simply for the showing the
Ark, but for the going forth of the Vial-Angels. But the Temple standing all
this time open, the Ark is not said to be seen till some time after, it
denoting the time of the Calling of the Jews with whom God has made an
everlasting Covenant, as this Ark is the Ark of the Covenant. Nor is it said
that John saw this Ark, but it is said indefinitely to be seen, the eyes of all
at that time being to be cast upon that Holy Covenant which God made to Abraham
and his Seed for ever, expecting that God himself will have an eye to it then,
and make good his glorious Promises to that long exercised and afflicted
people. Nor is the sight of the Ark the first thing related upon the opening
the Temple, but, though the Temple stood open before, yet it is not mentioned
till now, the more to set off the richness of this discovery of God's Mercy
toward the Jews, which the Apocalypse every where sets such an excessive value
upon, as if this were such a weighty Arcanum or Mystery (as S. Paul also calls
it) that it were worth the opening the Temple, though it were but for the
discovery of that Mystery alone.

Query 4. Whether what happens in the allotted times of the Trumpet-Angels and
Vial-Angels, may be attributed to the Angel to whom the Time is allotted,
whether the Angel contribute any thing to it or no.

Answ. If we were sure he did contribute nothing, and that such a thing fell
out, in his allotted time, as was plainly indicated in the Prophecy: Then by a
Prophetic Metalepsis the thing so happening might be attributed to him, as the
taking Peace from the Earth, is attributed to the Rider of the red Horse under
the second Seal, because in his time there was such killing and slaying one
another. But if the Angel can be conceived to act positively, I confess it is
more than needs to recur to that Figure. But to avoid all Cavil in reference to
the first Vial-Angel, I allow a real Activity in him for the inflicting that
angry Egyptian Boil. So that as an evil Spirit from the Lord haunted Saul when
his Melancholy fits came upon him; so this first Vial-Angel may commissionate
some Spirits upon the envy and the anger the Bestians had conceived against the
Risen Witnesses to actuate them with more than ordinary Rage and Madness
against them, and so infatuate their Counsels by this distemper, as is answered
to the Remarks on the place. The Objector would fain pinch somewhere, if he
could find what to lay hold on. But effundit junctura ungues. The work is too
close wrought for him to find any entrance any where.

Query 5. In those words, Rev. 16.8. The fourth Angel poured out his Vial on
the Sun, and Power was given him to scorch men with fire, etc. Whether [him]
relate to the Sun, or not rather to the Angel, the Sun being no Person to whom
[Him] can relate, and besides it being senseless to refer it to any other than
the Angel who inflicts the Plague.

Answ. That [Him] should be referred to the Sun, not to the Angel, there is all
the Reason in the World, nor is there any Reason against it. For the calling
the Sun [Him] makes him no person, no more in English than (...) does in Greek.
For Judge. Chap. 5. v. 31. there it is said, Let them that love the Lord be as
the Sun when he goes forth in his strength; and so he or his is in so many
other places said of the Sun, as it is needless to recite. But why [Him] is to
be referred to the Sun, there are plain and obvious Reasons. First, Because
[Him] does immediately follow the mention of the Sun. Secondly, The Reference
is so natural, the Sun being such a Fountain of Heat, and the heat thereof so
invigorated by the effusion of the fourth Vial on it. And lastly, The Suffrage
of all Interpreters I could ever meet with or hear of, concurs in this
reference of [Him] to the Sun, and not to the Angel. So that it is most
undubitably true, that [him] is to be referred not to the Angel, but to the
Sun, and that it is a mere affected swaggering in the behalf of S. E. to say it
is senseless to refer [him] to any other than the Angel. Whence it is
unavoidably evident, that the Remarker is out in his ill-natured Gloss on the
fourth Vial, as if the scorched with that fiery heat, were those that were
zealously incensed, and sharply inveighed against the Antichristian Powers,
which is a perfect contradiction to the Text, as if these Zelots scorched the
Sun, whenas the Text plainly says the Sun scorched them, [him] being certainly
referred to the Sun. And then suppose [him] to be referred to the Angel, and
that he scorches the Zelots, and incenses them against the Antichristian
Powers, this is still a perfect contradiction to the Text. For the Text says,
those scorched ones blasphemed the Name of God, which the Remarker will not
admit of his godly Zelots.

Query 6. Whether the Tripartite Forces gathered together in Armageddon under
the Dragon, under the Beast and false Prophet, and under the Rider of the white
Horse that has the Sword coming out of his mouth, viz. the Infidel,
Antichristian and Evangelical Forces or Parties, Rev. 16. v. 13, 16. may be
represented also by the great City divided into three parts, v. 19. For how is
it possible that three such opposite Parties as the Infidel, Christian and
Antichristian should be represented by a City, which is a Body Politic, united
by Laws and Rulers to govern the same; whenas those three Parties are incapable
of being so united, etc.

Answ. That those Tripartite Forces are the Forces of the whole World, or a
Conflux of the people of the whole World, may appear from v. 14. And why the
Inhabitants of the whole Orb of the Earth may not be looked upon as one great
City, I see not. For as different as they are, yet they are all united in one
common Law, which is the Law of Nature, and as to that common Law have one
common Lawgiver and Judge, which is God. And this is so palpable a Truth, and
the fitness of looking upon this inhabited Earth as one great City so obvious,
that those itinerant Sophists of old, or those more modern that cared not to be
tied to any one particular Political Body, yet have been looked upon by
themselves to be, and so vulgarly styled by others, viz. Cosmopolitae, Citizens
of the World. And Philo Judaeus expressly says, (...), That this World is that
great City, as it here is called (...), v. 19. And that it is an Aggregate as
it were of all the Cities of the World, appears from the same place, where the
Cities of the Nations are mentioned together with Babylon the great. And
lastly, it is to be noted, That that Tripartite Conflux in Armageddon is not
resembled in this Commutation of Iconisms simply to a City, much less to a City
that is in unity with it self, but to a City divided into three parts, which
therefore most exquisitely answers to those three opposite Parties congregated
in Armageddon. So that this Commutation of Iconisms here, is so far from being
impossible, as the Objector would have it, that nothing can be more easy and
natural. Unto all which you may add, that though two of these three parts of
this great City are Rebels for the present, yet Christ the Son of God is their
rightful Prince and Sovereign, and this Battle under the seventh Vial is to
reduce them to obedience.

Query 7. Whether the leaving out the Article (...) before (...) at the end of
the sixth verse of Rev. 20. whenas (...) is prefixed before (...) immediately
twice before and after, intimates any such Mystery as that (...) there has a
different signification from (...) in the other places, and denotes
Symbolically an endless steady Eternity; there being (...) without (...), v. 2.
not having any such Mystery in it, so that it may seem a trifling with the Text.

Answ. That (...) without (...) has no such mystical meaning of it self, is
readily acknowledged. For it signifies a finite determinate time ( v. 2. of
this Chapter) in which Satan is bound, and let loose afterward: which time is
there called (...), and presently after, v. 3. the said (...) are called (...)
there having the force of a Pronoun demonstrative, as if one should say, Till
those thousand years were fulfilled; And so those thousand years are all along
referred to, by this demonstrative Article (...): As in the close of v. 4. They
lived and reigned with Christ (...), those thousand years when Satan was bound.
And v. 5. But the rest lived not again till (...), those thousand years were
finished. Thus constantly you have (...) relating to the years Satan was bound,
till you come to v. 6. that describes the condition of them that partake of the
first Resurrection, on whom the second Death has no power, and there it is
said, that they shall reign with Christ, not (...), those thousand years Satan
was bound, but (...), a thousand years Symbolically understood, which is a fit
Symbol of steady and immutable Eternity. For to what end is (...) omitted in
this place, if it did not intimate some such Mystery, of which it both is very
significant, and the Reign of these with Christ being not confined to those
thousand years, but stretching out to Eternity, the thing it self requires that
signification. But then immediately after, the case being altered, v. 7. and
returning to the thousand years numerically taken, not Symbolically, there he
has it again (...). So that it is the circumstances that (...) is placed in v.
6. that assures us that it has such a Symbolical meaning. This therefore is no
trifling Observation. But he must be very dull and sleepy or thick-sighted,
that does not clearly discern the difference.

Query 8. Whether, All Nations shall come and worship before thee, Rev. 15.4.
be to be understood of Nations to be converted to the Christian Faith, or of
foreign Nations unconverted doing Homage to the New Jerusalem, answering to
their coming up to keep the Feast of Tabernacles, Zach. 14.

Answ. This Song of Moses and the Lamb being sung upon the Rising of the
Witnesses, or Christ's partial or speciminal taking again possession of his
Kingdom out of the hands of Antichrist, it is most natural to conceive that [
All Nations shall come and worship before thee] relates to that more full and
universal enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, which will be effected by the
effusion of the Vials before which this Song is prefixed; And under the seventh
when all the Kings of the Earth are gathered together under the Dragon, Beast
and false Prophet, to fight against the Lord and against his Anointed, and are
all routed and vanquished, what can this import less than what is here
predicted in this Song, All Nations shall come and worship before thee, that
is, be obedient Subjects of the Kingdom of Christ? And as for the celebrating
the Feast of Tabernacles, who can be thought to do that but the Jews or
Gentiles proselyted to their Religion, and therefore who can they be but the
converted Nations that shall do Homage to Christ in his New Jerusalem Kingdom?

Query 9. Whether (...), Comedendo comedes, Genesis 2.16. be an Injunction or full
Commission to Adam to eat, or such an Invitation to eat of every Tree of the
Garden, that if he will eat he may, and if he will not he may choose, forasmuch
as it is said, Thou may freely eat, which implies a liberty.

Answ. The Text no question but has a mystical as well as a literal sense. In
the literal sense, Comedendo comedes intimates a full Commission to eat of
every Tree of the Garden, saving the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. And
whereas our English Translation has it, Thou may eat freely, nothing else is
meant thereby but this full Commission to eat freely and plentifully of all the
Trees of the Garden, saving: that one excepted. But now in the Moral sense,
Comedendo comedes seems to be a Command, as the Text has it. And God commanded
the Man, saying, Eating thou shall eat, viz. of every Tree, saving that one,
that is, that he should nourish his Soul with all sorts of Virtues, none
excepted (for Virtutes sunt connexae) which make up the fullness of the Paradise
of God.

Query 10. Whether Tire, Isa. 23.15. typifie Rome, the former state of Tire not
answering to the former state of Rome, nor the middle to the middle, but the
former state of Tire is made to answer to all the three states of Rome.

Answ. This is a gross mistake in the Objector: For in that Prophecy of Isaiah
there are three distinct Times supposed, the first of her Harlotry, the second
of her being forgotten for the space of one King, and so the ceasing of her
Harlotry with the Kings of the Earth, and then of her Harlotry again, and of
committing. Fornication with all the Kingdoms of the World upon the face of the
Earth. And now in perfect Analogy to this, (as is answered to the Remarker)
Rome was Idolatrous before it was Christian, and turned Idolatrous again when
it became Pagano-Christian, and Whoredom is the true Symbol of Idolatry known
to all. Wherefore the Harlot, though she was silent a while in the time of the
pure Christian Caesar's, which were the seventh King (as Tyre's silence is for
seventy years) yet when that time expired, she might sing again like an Harlot.
Nor does this at all hinder, but that this Vision is Typical of Rome
Antichristian, this stroke touching the return of Pagan Harlotry, setting out
more exquisitely the Pagano-Christianity of their Idolatry, that they Paganize
again, and again play the Harlot by a new mode of Idolatry, which yet is the
living Image of the Idolatry of old Paganism. What Analogy can be more
exquisite and complete?

Query 11. Whether there can be any assurance that the Vision of Tire, Ezekiel.
28. is Typical of Rome; forasmuch as if the expressions be such, that they are
incompetent to Tire, and the Prince thereof (from whence yet it is inferred,
they must respect Rome) the Vision cannot belong to Tire, and consequently Tire
can be no Type of Rome; but if the expressions be competible to Tire, there is
no ground to stretch them any further than so.

Answ. The Horns of this Dilemma are very weak both of them. For the first
supposes what is apparently false, that a Prophecy of double completion may
not have such strokes in it, that may more properly relate to the second
completion than the first; As in th^^ of a Virgin bearing a Son. And though
some expressions may be elevated above the condition of the Prince of Tire, and
less properly be spoke of him, yet the generality of the Vision is applicable
to him properly, and the Text says expressly, the Vision does belong to Tire,
and consequently Tire may be a Type of Rome. But then as to the latter Horn of
the Dilemma, though all the expressions were competible to Tire (which they are
not, and therefore do more certainly assure us that the Vision has a further
completion in the concerns of Rome) yet there is a very good ground for
stretching the sense of the Vision to a further completion than in Tire it
self; from that intimation in the beginning of Ezekiel's Book of Prophecies, of
which the Roll written within and without is a Symbol or Figure. This hint is
sufficient, you may collect a more full Answer out of Chap. 22. of these
Paralipomena toward the end of the Chapter.

Query 12. Whether the joyful Annunciation of the Fall of Babylon, Rev. 14.8.
be not before the beginning of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, because the
Fall it self was at the close of the sixth Trumpet, and a Prophetical
Annunciation can respect no time but at which the Fall happens.

Answ. A prophetical Annunciation of an Event respects the Time of the
Annunciation of the Event. For what can it respect else? But the Event that it
annunciates is the Fall of Babylon or of the City at the Rising of the
Witnesses at the Close of the sixth Trumpet. So that it is plain there is
nothing hinders, but that though the Fall of Babylon be at the Close of the
sixth Trumpet, the joyful Annunciation thereof may be just at the entrance of
the seventh. Because the mention of the Annunciation of the Event is a
Prediction or Prophecy of the Annunciation, not simply of the Event it self,
but implies only that the Event has lately happened.

Query 13. Whether the second Vial, Rev. 16.3. may not be a Vision or
Prediction of the Reformation it self as well as of the Settlement of it in the
respective places where it was, the Reformation being not too great a change to
be typified thereby, because the Settlement seems a perfecting thereof, and so
as great or greater a thing than the Reformation it self.

Answ. It is impossible the second Vial should predict the Reformation, because
all the Vials follow the Rising of the Witnesses, and therefore if the second
Vial were a Type of the fresh appearance of the Reformation, there would be no
Event answering to the preceding Rising of the Witnesses, which would be
infinitely absurd. And though it be true that the Settlement of the Reformation
is a further Perfection added thereto, yet that is but a modificative Addition
to it, but that which is the main, the form and substance of the Reformation
was before; And was like the taking of a City of huge consequence, upon which
would follow loud shouts and signs of Joy, but the repairing and further
fortifying this great City taken by storm, that would be carried on in a more
silent or less Triumphant way.

Query 14. Whether the two Witnesses their 1260 days prophesying does not
plainly imply that they could not at all be slain till the 1260 days were
expired, especially it being supposed that their being slain puts an absolute
end to the tormenting the World by their prophesying, and there is solemn
rejoicing and sending gifts one to another at their being slain, as if the
business then were quite dispatched at once.

Answ. It is gross Rudeness and Ignorance for any one to imagine thus; And he
that so does, he sets his teeth only in the Cortex, but reaches not the Pith of
this Parabolical Vision of the two Witnesses. This Conceit is a perfect
Contradiction to the Truth of History, which amply relates to us the slaying of
the Witnesses in more senses than one, long before the Expiration of the 1260
days. Wherefore this Cortical sense is utterly impossible. But that assured
Prophetic figure which we call Henopoeia, (which as it represents a succession
of men under the Type of one single Man, single Woman, or single Beast, so it
does likewise the successional Actions, Sufferings, or Occurrences appertaining
to the said single Typical Man, Woman, or Beast under one single Action,
Suffering, or Occurrence) this is the only true and genuine Key to unlock this
Mystery by, which I having done to the Reader's hand already in my Answer to a
learned and ingenious Friend touching the difficulties of the Vision of the
Witnesses in Chap. 39. of this present Treatise, I will send him thither to
receive the same satisfaction with that learned and pious Person, and so
conclude my Paralipomena Prophetica.

(...)
FINIS.

