MORE WORK FOR THE Popish Implements, NOT. THOMPSON and the OBSERVATOR. SHOWING
How contradictory they are to themselves from that they were when the one
published, and the other allowed this following Narrative of Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey's Murder; which for the Satisfaction of all People we have here
Verbatim Reprinted.
THose impudent Letters inverted by some of the Jesuitical Crew, and directed
to Mr. Prance, published by Not. Thompson, and in some part justified by the
Observator two Torical Hirelings, have been several answered to the great
satisfaction of the People, who are not now easily deluded with Shams, yet
since Not. Thompson has with a Brazen Eront published to the world in his
Intelligence, that every Tittle or Iota of what was writ, shall be made good
before the Council. We have in the mean time printed this following Narrative,
called by Thompson, who printed and published it with Allowance of L' Estrange.
A true and perfect Relation of the horrid and bloody Murder committed upon the
Body of Sir E. etc.

A True and Perfect Narrative of the late Ternible and Bloody Murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey; who was found murdered on Thursday the 27th. of this
Instant October, in a Field near Primrose Hill. With a full Account of the
monner of his being Murdered, and in what manner he was found. Also the full
Proceedings of the Coroner, who sat upon the Inquest, etc. With Allowance.

SIR Edmondbury Godfrey's Death being the sad Occasion of this Narrative, and
the Subject of most Peoples Discourse; I shall (to prevent any false or
surreptitious Stories that are usually carried abroad about things of this
Nature) give the Reader this true and impartial Account thereof.

On the 12th. of this instant October, being Saturday, about Nine of the Clock
in the Morning, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey went out of his own House in Greens Lane
in the (...) about his Occasions; and was seen not long after near Marybone,
but then supposed to be going home, and was at one of the Church Wardens of the
Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, about some business at twelve of the Clock
the same day: But so it was that he came not to his House that Night, according
to his usual custom, nor gave any notice to his Servants of any business that
he had to hinder his returning that night. And from that time, till Tuesday the
17th of the same Month, about Six a Clock at Night, no tideings could be heard
of him (although all earnest and diligent Enquiries and Searches were made for
him.) At which time his Body was found dead in a Ditch, upon the South side of
Primrose Hill Hampstead. The occasion of his being found was this; One Bromly a
Baker, and Waters a Farrier, both of the Parish of St. Giles's in the Fields,
having an occasion to go to the House, commonly called the White-House near
Primrose Hill; and going over the Field where the Body of Sir Edmondbury lay,
saw, as they thought, a Sword and Belt, and a Stick and a pair of Gloves lying
together hard by the Hedge Side: but they went not near to meddle with them,
supposing her had belonged to some person that was gone into the Ditch to ease
himself. And when they came to the White-house, they told John Rawson (the man
of the said House) that they had seen a Sword and Belt, and a pair of Gloves
and Stick lie in that place: Whereupon John Rawson asked them, why they did not
bring them thither? They told him, they did not know but there might be
somebody hard by to own them. Rawson told them that there had been several
Soldiers thereabout this Week a Hedghog hunting, and and it may be (said he)
some of them may have left them behind them.

After some farther Discourse, Rawson agreed to go with the two men to the
place, and if they found the things there, then Rawson was to give them a
Shilling to drink, and was to take the things to his own House, till some body
came thither to own them; and thereupon they went together to the place: When
they came there they found only a Belt, and a Scabbard, and a pair of Gloves,
but no Sword: which as Rawson was stooping to take up, he thought he saw
something like a man in the Ditch hard by; and so going to the Ditch, there
they saw a Man lying as they supposed upon his Belly, with a Sword run through
him, and the point appearing about seven or eight Inches above his Back. Upon
this they went immediately to the Churchwarden of the Parish, to give him an
account of it; but he being sick, sent them to Mr. Brown's the Constable, who
presently taking with him several Neighbors and Housekeepers, went to the
place where the Body lay; which was in a dry Ditch upon the South side of
Primrose-Hill, about two Fields distant from the White-house: The Posture in
which he lay was this, he had a Sword run into him, just under his left Pap,
which came out upon the right side of his Back, about seven Inches, one of his
hands being doubled under, on which he seemed to lean, the other hand lying
upon the Bank; his Hair Camlet Coat being turned up over his head, his Hat and
Periwig being among the Bushes over his head; but no Band nor Cravta could be
found about him, although when he went from home, he he had a large Laced Band
on.

The Constable and the rest that were with him, being about a dozen, having
taken notice of the manner of his lying, caused him to be removed, and the
Sword drawn out of his Body: concerning which Sword it is observable, that the
point of it which came out at his Back was covered all over with Blood, and
that part which was in his body was black, without any Blood upon it.

The Constable having caused the Body to be removed to the White House, and
knowing it to be the Body of Sir Edmondberry Godfrey, he caused his Pockets to
be searched, and found in one of them in one Paper Six Guineys, and in another
Paper four broad Pieces of Gold, and a half Crown; and in the other Pockets two
Rings, whereof one was a Diamond, one Guiney, and four pound in Silver, and two
small Pieces of Gold, and one Ring he had upon one of his fingers: His Pocket
book (in which he used to take noets of Examination) being only missing.

On Friday the 18th. of this instant, Mr. Coopet the Coroner of Middlesex,
impannell'd a Jury at the White-Horse to inquire about the occasion of the
Death of the said Sir Edmondberry Godfrey: and two Chorurgions (having been
first Sworn) viewed the Body in the presence of the Coroner and the Jary and
found two wounds about it, which one of the Chyrurgions searched with his
Probe, and found one of them not above an inch deep, the Probe going against
one of his (...); but the other being a little below the left Pap, went quite
through the Body: His face was of a flesh color, though in his lifetime very
pale, some what swelled, and a green circle about his Neck, as if he had been
strengled, his blood being se^d about his Neck, Throat, and the upper part of
his Breast. The Chyrurgions having viewed the Body, delivered their Judgments,
That the Wounds they found about him, were not the cause of his Death, but that
he was suffocated before the Wound were made. And that which may fully persuade
any person of the truth (...) is, That there was not one drop of blood to be
found in the place where he lay, not the least appearance of any such thing:
though the Ditch was dry, and it might have been easily seen if there had been
any. Another thing was, That the very bottoms of the soles of his Shoes were
as clean as if he had but just come out of his own C^ which was an evident sign
that he was carried thither.

A third thing very remarkable; is, That one of the Jury ass(...), That a
Servant of his Mothers (who is owner of the ground where the Body lay) with a
Butcher and two Boys, made a very strict and narrow search in all parts of that
ground for a Calf that was missing, upon Monday and Tuesday last, and a^ that
the there lay no dead Body, Belt, Gloves, Stick, or other things there.

Now because several false Reports have gone abroad, ^ding to the Dishonor of
this Worthy Deceased Knight, as though he had been discontented about some
Moneys owing by him to the Parish, and upon that account should make himself
(...). The Relator thinks good to testify to the World, That to his own
knowledge Sir Edmondberry lent the Parish above 300 l. without Interest, a good
part of which is yet unpaid; so palpable an untruth it is, that some wicked
persons have spread abroad about him. But it is no wonder that those inhumane
VVretches that have taken away his life, should go also about to blessed his
Reputation.

One thing more I cannot omit to mention, having received it from the mouth of
one of the late Church Wardens of the Parish where he lived, which is, That
Sir Edmondberry not long ago gave him an Hundred Pounds to bestow upon such
poor People in the Parish as he knew were in want: Neither was that the first
time that Sir Edmondberry had employed him in works of that nature, having
often made him the distributer of his Charity, because he did not desire the
Applause of Men for it. This without all doubt proceeded from so remarkable and
so sincere a piety, That though it may be commended, I am afraid it will scarce
be imitated.

Now we shall only make these Remarks on the same, that in his Preamble Not.
Tomson tells you, That he had here Printed the true Relation, to prevent false
and surreptitious Stories that are usually carried abroad about things of this
nature. If you believe him now, and what he impudently avers, he then was an
egregious Liar before, when he Printed and Published this Narrative.

But besides that Sir Edmondberry Godfreys Death was then the sad occasion of
his Narrative, and is now become his Ridicule. The whole Relation under his
hand confounds and contradicts his Letters to Prance, which he has impudently
promised to justify; [auri sacra fames!] what will not wretches do for
Guineys? But observe farther, in his Impartial and True Narrative, as he calls
it himself, he tells you, that his Face was fresh colored, and somewhat
swelled, and a green Circle about his Neck, as if he had been strangled, and
the blood settled about his Neck and Throat, and the upper part of his Breast;
and that it was the Judgment of the Chyrurgions that he wa suffocated, and that
the VVounds were not the cause of his Death. All which was Truth; and as he
then himself said, that as an Evidence of that Truth, there was not one drop of
blood found in the Ditch, though the Ditch were dry, page 7. and might easily
have been seen if there had been any: yet this very same Person now gives
himself the Lie, and tells you of lots of blood found about him and in the
Ditch, as you may see in his Letter to Mr. Prance. Sure he had forgot what he
had before Published concerning this thing, or he thought every body else had.

In the next place concerning his Shoes which he says in the Letter to France
were full of Grass Seeds, which proved he had gone thither himself, the vanity
and al Contrivance of which has already been observed, and that it could not be
at that time of the Year; but Mr. Thompson tells you Page 7. sure you will
believe himself, That it was an evident sign that he was carried thither,
because the bottom of his Soles were as clean as if he had but just come out of
his own Chamber.

Then that he should have lain here from the time he was missing, as this
Thompson would prove, in saying, the corners of his Eyes and Mouth were
fly-blown, which was a palpable Lie and ill contrived, considering the time of
the Year; he contradicts that himself in this Narrative, and tells you Page 7.
That the Ground was narrowly searched on Tuesday for a Calf, and that then to
dead body lay in the Ditch, nor any Belt, Gloves, Stick, or the like to be seen.

Lastly, I observe how zealous he then was to vindicate this Knights Honor,
and Reputation, which he would now take away, for he says, that some false
Reports have gone abroad tending to the dishonor of the Deceased Knight, as if
being disconttented, he should have made himself away, and Page 8. so palpable
an untruth it is that these wicked wretches have spread abroad about him; but
it is no wonder that those inhumane wretches that have taken away his Life (mark
that) should go also about to blast his Reputation. Yet such a Wretch is this
Thompson now become, to contradict himself, and give himself the Lie under his
own hand, and impudently go about to justify it.

FINIS.
London, Printed for J. B. 1682.


