A More full and exact ACCOUNT Of that most dreadful Fire, Which happened at
WAPPING On Sunday Night the nineteenth of this instant November. between 10 and
11 a clock
Also a True and full Account of the damages sustained by that dreadful fire
whilst it continued burning all day on Monday.

With a true Account as near as can yet be given, of the manner of its first
beginning, the number of houses burnt down, and of the number of persons that
have perished in the raging Flames.

LAst Night being the 19th of November, a dreadful Fire happened at the house
of one Captain, Allen, a Sea-Captain, Living in Cinamon-Lane near Whapping,
through the negliligence of an idle Fellow, by Profession a Sawyer, who Lodged
in a Garret of the said House, he coming home drunk, being careless of his
Candle, it fell amongst some Shavings, and immediately fastened upon the Boards
and consumed that House, and although it was immediately discovered and help
coming in, yet the wind being at South-West and blowing so violently the
Engines could not Play with any success; but the Engineers we^e not wanting in
their Industry, but had taken so much pains, that seven or eight were broke in
the Service. The Fire growing Vigorous, it fastened upon a new Ship upon the
Stocks, in Sir William Warrens Yard. The Laboring men not knowing how to
suppress the fury of the Flames, bored holes through her, and it being then
high water, sunk her; by which means she was preserved.

His Grace, the Duke of Albermarle and the Earl of Craven came thither this
morning about two of the Clock, and ordered the blowing up of several Houses to
prevent its further Progress, but all that they could do though assisted by a
number of people, proved very ineffectual, the Fire flaming with that
impetuosity, that no Art could stop it, in the several Attempts to blow up
Houses, several poor Creatures perished in the Ruins, many say nine, but most
say seven perished altogether in one House.

It is reported that the Lady Ivye living in Gravel-Lane is emdamaged some
hundreds of pounds Per Annum, Sir William Warnem owned the most part of
Cinamon-Lane, but thanks to the insuring Office he is like to redeem
satisfaction for 500 l Per Annum. It is ^elieved that there are at least six or
seven hundred houses burned to the Ground, it being a Mile in Compass, and it
is to be seared it will do more considerable damage, it being not it
Extinguished at 12 a Clock, but flaming then with an unresisted force. This is
as full an Account as can at present be given.

The damage done by water was very inconsiderable, a Pink of a small value
being only consumed, but the loss by houses and housholdstuff in a small time
cannot be computed. Thus we see what vast Treasures may be devoured in a
Moment of time, through the Negligence of one careless man. One would think
the many Fires that have been, might put every man upon a more then ordinary
Watchfulness. But alas! how scon are those avvakenning Judgments forgotten; a
Month hence possibly this Fire will be so little in the thoughts of some as if
it had never been, those that are the least sufferers will be sconest apt to
forget it. But the Lord knovvs how suddenly those that are now safe may be
smitten with the same Rod. All are concerned to be very Circumspect and
careful, least the same or such like unhappy Judgment surprises them in their
security. Now the Inhabitants of Wapping are visited by a severe affliction,
who knovvs in how little time; others that think themselves secure, may be
involved in the same disease, which the Lord of his infinite mercy, preserve
our flourishing City, not only from the Malice, Envy, and Subtilty of the
Papist, but from a supine Negligence and Security.

This is the True Account as near as can be given, of the damages sustained by
this most dreadful Fire, whilst it continued burning all day on Monday the 20th
of this Istant till Night.
Tuesday November the 22d. A more fully Relation of the Dreadful Fire at
Wapping, viz. On Monday Night, between Eight and Nine of the Clock it was
something abated and about twelve wholly Extinguished; the number of Houses, as
near as can be Computed to be Consumed are 2000 amongst which were two or three
hundred blown up and we here in the Execution thereof about 40 Persons were
killed, besides others very much bruised and wounded to the number of 60 or
upward. But at present, we cannot hear, but that only an old woman perished in
the flames; who through her Age and weakness was incapable of shifting for her
self. Great was the care and diligence of Sir John Wetwang in this unhappy
Accident, who being owner of the Ship that is building in Sir William Warrens
Yard, she being of seven hundred Tuns burden, and if consumed the loss thereof
would have been 6 or 7000 l But by his diligence, in entering the Ship first
himself, and distributing twenty Guinies to some Seamen and others, they by
their industrious labor and Sir. John's heartning them up preserved her, which
if had been fired would have done very considerable damage to several houses
adjacent; amongst the houses that were consumed, the chiefest were Sir William
Warrens, one Mr. Hoopers, Mr. Wilsons Mr. Haines, and Mr. Jacksons, who all
kept considerable Deal-Yards. And one Mr. Grinbals having a Mast-Yard sustained
great loss thereby, to the value of several hundreds of pounds. Also one Mr.
Bond a Brewer his house was burnt and lost several hundred pounds being then a
Brewing, besides vast quantities of Buts of Beer were destroyed in several
Alehouses.

Besides these persons of note, were diverse Shopkeepers of all Trades, whose
goods and wares were all consumed; only some sew goods which some saved in
Shadwel Church; others being in great consternation delivered their goods to
several persons whom they know not, amongst whom some were so honest as to
deliver the same and others never to return what they received.

Several persons who were burnt out, were forced to lie in the neighboring
Field all night, who two nights before had good Habitations to Reside in.

The Fire ended near Shadivel-Dock, having burnt a mile in length and a quarter
in breadth.

We cannot understand any farther damage was done by water, only a Fly-Boat
took Fire, but by the industry of the men belonging to her she was saved,
having received some small damage.

We further hear, that a distiller had several pieces of Brandy staved for sear
if they should have taken fire, it might have done considerable damage.

My Lord Mayor and the two Sheriffs were not wanting to aid and assist what
they could, there was likewise a Company or two of the Train'd-Bands, and
several Barrels of Gunpowder was brought from the Tower, and other places, in
Order to blowing up of houses, and there were some base Villains that were so
Impudent atto steal and carry away two Barrels of the Powder, But being taken
in the Fact, were committed, and must answer for the same.

And this is the truest Account that has been hither to published

LONDON Printed, by D. Mallet, 1682.


