SOME Collections of Scripture, WITH Private Meditations, As an help in PRAYER,
WITH Some Hymns and Psalms of DAVID.

2 Chro: 6. 19. Have respect therefore to the Prayer of thy Servant, and to his
Supplication, etc. Jer. 29. 12, 13. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go
and Pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you. And ye shall seek me, etc.
Collos. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, etc.
Cum Humilitatis Reverentia.

By G. M.

London, Printed for the Author, 1695.

A Form of Prayer in Scripture Phrase.
O GOD! the God of the Spirits of all Flesh; who has Created the Heavens, and
stretched them out; and the Earth, with the Fruits thereof, and Breath and
Spirit to them that walk herein; who art clothed with Honor and Majesty; who
coverest thy self with Light, as with a Garment; Look down from Heaven, ^hy
holy Habitation, and have respect unto the Prayers of thy Servants, and let our
Prayers ^ome before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of our hands as the
Morning Sacrifice: We ^onfess, O Lord, thou did Create our first Parents in
thy own Image, and beathedst into them the Breath of Life, but they have eaten
of the forbidden Fruit; all mankind from their Loins have sinned, and come
short of the Glory of God: And yet; O Lord, to fill up the Measure of our
Condemnation, we have ^dded actual Sins; for who can say, he has made his
Heart clean? We have sinned in thought; opur Souls, which should have been
seasoned with the sweet Meditations of thy Goodness, Mercy and Grace, have been
prostrated, and assailed with black and hollish thoughts of Atheism, and
Despair, Blasphemy and all manner of Soul-vexing fears. O! what a world of
Ignorance, Vanity of M^ and disesteem of thy mercy, and unb^^ have seated
themselves in our Hearts: confess, O Lord, we have sinned in our wo^ o^r
Tongues, that should have been as Tr^pets to sound thy praise, have been
de^guilty of Blasphemy, Swearing, Lying, S^dering, Reviling, Railing, Brawling,
Scos^ Boasting, Sowing Seeds of Discord amo^ our Neighbors: The Tongue is a
Fir^ World of Iniquity, and has defiled whole Bodies, and is set on Fire of
Hell: confess, Lord, we have sinned indeed, wit^ our worldliness, covetousness,
pride, lust, ^^ lice, lukewarmness, impatiency, vain glory self love. O the
wrongs we have done, the Goods we have ill-gotten, and the time have misspent,
and O the Sabbath we have p^phaned: Oh! the pollutions, the distemp^ and
estrangedness from God in our Sou^ Oh, the Villainies and the Vanities of ^^
whole Life: O Lord, we may as well num^ the Stars, as our sins: But, dear
Father, thou pleased to translate us from darkness light, and from the Power of
Satan, into ^^ Kingdom of thy dear Son: Let us no lon^ abuse the good gifts of
our God, and turn Grace into wantonntss: And let us not gri^ the Holy Spirit of
God, whereby we are sea^ unto the day of Redemption. O help a keep us, that we
do not wrong the bles^ Name of God, his Word, Religiopn and P^^fession of
Godliness. We confess, Lord, have sinned against thy Law, and have (...) all
thy Commandments: O Lord! we confess we have sinned against the Gospel, we are
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, tho it be the power of God unto Salvation to
every one that believes. We have not thirsted after Christ, our Souls have not
panted after him, as the Heart pants after the waterbrooks; We have not loved
the Lord Jesus in Sincerity, nor considered him as the Life of our Souls: We
have not counted all things loss and dung, for the knowledge of Christ Jesus our
Lord: we take no pains to know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the
Fellowship of his Sufferings: we hide, as it were, our Faces from him, and will
not have him to Reign over us: we have not relied upon Christ for
Justification, Sanctification and Salvation: O Christ, there is not one of us
that stireth up himself to take hold on thee; And yet Lord, thou have given us
space to repent of all our Abominations which we have committed; yet we have
not repented; but have made our faces harder than a Rock, and have refused to
return: But above all, Oh the insolences and accesses and tyrannies of our
bosom sins, our darling delights which we cannot part withal And for all these
sins, thou, O God, have Punished us less than our Iniquities have deserved: It
is of the Lord's Mercy, we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not:
If thou should lay Judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plume^,
thou might make thy Jealousy to smoke against us, and the Curses that are
written in thy book, the might lay upon us, and blot out our Nam^ from under
Heaven: Thou might ma^thine Arrows Drunk with Blood, and t^^ Sword devour
Flesh from the beginning of r^venges; and give us our Portion with t^^ wicked
that are turned into Hell, and all t^^ Nations that forget God: But thou, O
Lord have said, If we confess our Sins, thou art fait^ful and just to forgive
us our sins, and cleanse u^ from all our unrighteousness. Thou have pro^mised,
That he that covers his sins, shall no^ prosper; but he that confesses his
sins, an^ forsakes them shall have Mercy: Thou ha^ proclaimed, Return thou
backsliding Israel says the Lord, and I will not cause mine an^ger to fall
upon thee, for I am Merciful, says the Lord; only acknowledge thy Iniquity that
thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God: Thou have threatened, I will
return to^ my place till they acknowledge their Offenses in their Afflictions,
they will seek me early: Thou have sweetly encouraged us, if any man say, I
have sinned, and p^rverted that which was right, and it profitted me not, thou will deliver his Soul from the Pit, and his Life shall see the Light: And, O
Lord, in reference to these thy sayings, promises and proclamations, threats
and encouragments, we do embolden our selves to come before thee, to acknowledge
our Wickedness and our iniquities: O Lord, we lie down in our shame, and ^ur
confusion covers us: We cannot but say, we have sinned against the Lord our
God, we and our Fathers from our youth have not o^eyed the voice of the Lord
our God: And ^oh that we could seek the Lord as the Children of Israel and
Judah together, going and weep^ng, asking the way to Zion, with our Faces
thither-ward. This is a time of Mourning, our sins have given us an occasion of
sorrow; Oh, that we were on the Mountains, like the Doves of the Valleys, every
one of us mourning for our Iniquities: Why, Lord, it is thy own promise, A new
Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take
away thy stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh.
Oh, let us take to us words, and say to the Lord, take away all iniquity from
us, and receive us graciously. O Lord, we have Idolized the Creature, and
abused the Creator: we have many a time crucified Christ, and trod underfoot
the Blood of the Lamb: O, that Christ would look on us, as he did on Peter,
then should we look on Christ, whom we have so often Pierced, and mourn for
him, as one that mourns for his only son, and be in bitterness for him, as
one that is in bitterness for his first Born: And good Lord, help us to mourn
for our sins, cast us down, and humble us to purpose and then be pleased to
lift us up again; surely thou art nigh to them that are of a contrite heart,
and who tremble at thy word, and wilt save the humble person; and to this
purpose thou have promised, that the that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy: He
t^^ goes forth, and weeneth, bearing preci^ seed, shall doubtless come again
rejoyci^ bringing his sheaves with him; And is it ^^ thy own saying, I dwell in
the high and h^^ place with him also that is of a contrite a^ humble Spirit, to
revive the Heart of the co^trite ones, and to revive the Spirit of t^^ humble:
O! for one Dram of this revivi^ for our poor drooping Souls.

O! that we might have our requests, a^^ that God would grant us the thing that
w^ long for, even that it would please him ^^ cover our Iniquities, and cause
our sins to b^ blotted out from before him: Dear Farthe^ we are sure nothing
can hinder Mercy from ^^ but our sins: O! pardon our sins for thy nam^ sake, O!
pardon our Iniquity, for it ^^ great.

And to this end, Oh! look on Christ the Lamb, that takes away the sins of the
Worl^ It is he that bears our Iniquities; it is he tha^ by himself purged our
sins; it is he bears ou^ sins on the Tree in his own body; it is he tha^ loved
us, and washed us from our sins in hi^ own Blood; it is he that is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole
world; it was he that was wounded for our Transgressions, that was bruised for
our Iniquities, the chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his
stripes are we healed: Oh! then for his sake, and in his Blood, wash us
thoroughly from our iniquities, and cleanse us from our sins: And to this end,
dear Father, remember thy promises, wherein thou have said, I will cleanse you
from all your iniquities whereby you have sinned against me, and whereby ye
have Transgressed against me: Thou have said, I, even I, am he that blotteth
out thy Transgressions, for my own names sake, and will not remember thy sins:
Thou have said, I have blotted out as a thick Cloud, thy Transgressions, and as
a Cloud thy sins: Thou have said, I will forgive their Iniquity, and will
remember their sins no more: Thou have said, Come now and let us reason
together, tho your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow, tho they
be red as Crimson, they shall be as Wool. And thy Prophets have said, who is a
God like unto thee? That pardonest Iniquity, and passes by the transgressions
of thy Heritage, and retains not thy Anger for ever, because thou delightest
in mercy: We press thee, O Lord, with thy own precious Promises; we have
nothing of our own to bring thee but sin: But dear Father, thou have a Son that
thou look upon, whom thou have set forth for our propitiation; would we have
a pledge of thy undeserved favor? Why thou have given thy only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes on him should not Perish, but have everlasting Life:
Dear Father, thou have made large Promises, and entered into Covenant with us,
that shall never fail on thy part: Dear Father, thou have waited long for our
retu^^ when we went astray, and will thou n^ much more have mercy upon us now
we pr^^ unto thee: When we excused our disobedien^ and charged our faults on
thee, yet then tho^ set thy Love upon us, but how much mo^ now, Oh Lord,
when we accuse our selv^ and Pray for thy Mercy: Good Lord, Mise^ is the object
of Mercy, the greater our distre^ is, the more glorious will be the Grace of
Go^ in our Deliverance. If thou will be mercifu^ to our sins, then shall thy
Glory appear, an^ our Hearts shall be e^^amed with thy love then shall we walk
in thy fear, and ou^ Tongues shall sing of thy goodness: Yea, ou^ Tongues shall
sing aloud of thy Righteou^ness; and for a^^^rance hereof to our poo^ Souls,
Oh! show, us the Salvation of Go^ seal up the assurance of Pardon in our Heart
and Consciences, by the gracious Testimony o^ thy Holy Spirit: Oh! let thy
Spirit testify i^ to us, and persuade us hereof, and confirm i^ unto us by his
Seal, and earnest; it is thy Spirit bears witness with our Spirits, that we ar^
the Children of God: O! give us the Testimony of a renewed Conscience
enlightened b^ thy Spirit, and directed by thy word, whereb^ we may come to
know what God hat^ wrought in us: O! give us the Spirit of A^doption, whereby
we may with confidence an^ comfort, cry, Abba Father: O! give us Jo^ in the
Holy Ghost, and the Answer of a goo^ Conscience toward God: O! give us tha^
^ift of God, a soul-saving and justifying ^aith: O! that we could ^oul our
selves upon the Lord Jesus, and stick fast unto his ^ercy: We have found a rich
treasure of pro^ises in thy word, for the pardon of our sins, ^nly create in us
that hand of Faith, that we ^ay effectually receive what in mercy thou ^eachest
forth unto us: Oh! we are of little ^aith, increase it Lord, tho it be as a
grain of ^ustard-seed: Work in us not a dead Faith, ^ut that which may be rich
in good works, ^ollowing after peace with all men and holy^ess, without which
none shall see God: Oh! ^leanse us from our impure Righteousness and
^nenstruous Rags, and Cloth us with the ^obes of Christ's Righteousness, that
we may ^e found in him, not having our own Righte^usness, which is of the Law,
but that which ^^ through the Faith of Christ, the Righteous^ess which is of
God by Faith: Oh! give us true ^epentance; it is thy own word, that unto us ^ath
God raised up his Son Jesus, and sent him ^o bless us, in turning away every
one of us from our Iniquities: O! that we could draw ^ertue from Christ: O!
that our heads were waters and our Eyes Fountains of Tears, that we might weep
day and night for our sins: Oh! that all the night we could make our Beds to
swim, that we could water our Couch^es with our Tears: Oh! that there were such
Hearts in us, that we might Repent and Re^over our selves out of the s^are of
the Devil: Oh! that we could lay our sins to our Hearts, that we could Repent
us of all our wicke^ness, saying, What have we done? O! that ^^ could bemoan
our selves, as Ephraim, thou h^^ chastised us, and we were chastised, turn the
us, and we shall be turned, thou art the Lo^^ our God: O! that remembering our
ways, ar^ all our doings wherein we have been defile^ we could loath our selves
in our own sigh^ for our iniquities and for our abominations.

O! give us saving knowledge, give us t^^ spirit of Truth, who will guide us
into ^ truth; incline our Ears to wisdom, and o^ Hearts to understanding, that
we may cry after knowledge, and lift up our Voice for u^derstanding, that we may
understand the fe^^ of the Lord, and find the knowledge of o^ God, that we may
be able to cry unto thee, ^ our God we know thee, have thou not prom^ed,
saying, I will put my law into their Hear^ and write it in their inward parts,
and I w^ be their God, and they shall be my Peop^^ O! that thou would give
us this Knowled^ that thou would fill our Hearts with t^^ knowledge, as the
Waters cover the Sea: ^ give us the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelati^^ in the
Knowledge of Christ, that the Eyes ^ our Understandings being enlightened, we m^
know what is the hope of his Calling, a^^ what is the riches of the Glory of
his Inher^tance in the Saints. Dear FAther, is not the secret with the
Righteous? is not the secret the Lord Revealed to them that fear him? ^ give us
a love of God, and of Christ, and all things that belong to him: Thou have
said, I will Circumcise their Hearts, and the Hearts of our seed to love the
Lord our God with all our Hearts and with all our Souls, that we may live and
not die: Oh, set us on fire, burn us, make us new, and Transform us, that
nothing besides thee may live in us: O! wound very deeply our Hearts with the
Dart of thy Love, and that because of our sins, which are many, are forgiven
us, we may love thee not a little, but much: Oh! that we were sick of Love,
that our understandings, will and affections were all overcome and amazed, and
that our faintings were enflamed toward thee, and even ^melted into thee: O,
sweet Jesu, touch our Souls with thy Spirit, that Virtue may come out of thee,
into us, draw us unto thy self; Oh, let the savors of thy Ointments, whose very
Breath is love, be ever in our Nostrils: O give us the Flagons of the New Wine
of thy Kingdom, which may lift up our Souls above our selves in our Loves, that
we may forget the low and base Loves of this World, and by an Heavenly access
may be Transported into an Heavenly Love, and Embrace Jesus Christ, who is the
Lord from Heaven, with a love like himself: Oh! let us desire Union with thee,
and help us to bring forth fruit unto thee: O, give us the fruit of the Spirit,
that may resemble thee, and be pledges to us of thy Union with us: O burn and
consume whatsoever would grow one with our Souls besides thee: O, let the fire
of thy Spirit so turn our Souls into a Spiritual Fire, that the dross of the
Flesh and the World being wholly consumed, we may be Spiritua^ and so bring
forth Fruits only to the Spirit: O sweet Savior, look upon us in mercy; or^
look of thine will awaken our loves, and mak^ us to weep bitterly, that we
loved thee so little whom to love sufficiently our best and might^est Loves are
most insufficient: Prevent ou^ seeking with thy seeking, be thou present wit^
us in thy Providence and Power, when tho^ seem to be far off us in the taste
of thy sweetness and fruition of thy Loves; and then when we have regained thy
Love we will hold more hardly, and keep more Fastly, and love thee more
vehemently, and provide a Stock of Loves in the Summer against the Winter, if
it return any more O help us to love one another as Christ has loved us, and
make Our Love to abound more and more toward all men, especially to them that
ar^ of the household of Faith: And good Lord, cause us to love our Enemies, to
bless them that curse us, and to pray for them that despightfully use us, and
persecute us. O give us a zeal after God and his Truth, good Causes and good
men. O let us not rest concented with a lukewarm Profession, being neither cold
nor hot, but make Our Souls to break for the Longings they have for thy
Judgments at all times. O that we were Fervent in the Spirit, zealous always in
every good thing. O that the zeal of thy house might even eat us up; And that
Our zeal might provoke Others unto thee. O that thy Word were in Our Hearts
like a burning fire; that we were weary with forbearing, and that we could not
stay. O give us the Grace of Patience. Thou have told us, in the world we shall
have Tribulation; and through much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of
God. O make us to run with patience the Race that is ses before us, looking
unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, despised the shame, and is set down at the right
hand of the Throne of God. O help us to consider him that endured such
contradictions of sinners against himself, lest we be wearied and Faint in Our
Minds. Let us not think it strange concerning the fiery Trial, but rather
rejoi^e, in as much as we are made par^akers of Christ's Sufferings, that when
his glory shall be revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding joy. O teach us
to reckon with our selves, that the sufferings of this present life are not
worthy to be compared to that glory which shall be revealed in us. Have thou
not said, that if we be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are we. O
therefore that it may be given to us in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. O help us to deny our selves,
and to take up our Cross daily, and follow our Savior. Give us perseverance,
and to this end make us to build on thy promises. Thou have said, that the
steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord; tho he fall, he shall not be
utterly cast down; for the Lord upholdeth him with his right hand. Thou have
said to your Old Age, I am he, and even to hoary hairs, will I carry you, and I
will deliver you; for this God is our God for ever, and he will be our Guide
even unto death. O give us One Way, and One Heart, that we may Fear thee for
ever; And make thou an evetlasting covenant with us, That th^n wilt not turn
away from us to do us good. O put thy Fear into our hearts, that we may not
depart from thee. And dear Lord help us to hold fast the profession of our
Faith without wavering; confirm us unto the end, that we may be blameless unto
the coming, and day of our Lord Jesus Christ. And dear Father, give us all
other Graces, a lively hope that may save us; yea, in those times let us with
Abraham, against hope, believe in hope, and give us joy in the Holy Ghost. Thou
have said, Joy is sown for the Righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart. O give us a filial Fear, because thou take pleasure in those that fear
thee: For in that day that thou make up ^^y Jewels, they shall be thine, and
thou will spare them as a man spares his own Son that serves him. O give it is
humility, and lowliness of Spirit, casting down imaginations, and every thing,
that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God. O give us meekness of mind,
that the Wolf may dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard may lie down with the
Kid, the Calf and young Lion, and the Fatling together, whilst a little Child
may lead them. O give us peace of conscience, and the peaco of God, that may
guide, guard and garrison our whole souls. And for our further assurance, o give
an increase and growth to all these Graces, and do thou guide us continually,
and satisfy our souls in drought. O make Fat Our Bones, that we may be like a
watered Garden, and like a Spring of water, whose waters fail not. O let the
Sun of Righteousness arise, with healing under his wings, that we may go forth,
and grow up as the Calves of the Stall. O that thopu would be pleased to
make our path as the path of the just, even as the shining light that shines
more and more unto the perfect day. O that thou would be unto us as dew unto
Israel, that we might grow as the Lilly, and cast forth our Root as Lebanon,
that our branches might spread, and our beauty be as the Olive Tree, and our
smell as Lebanon. O Lord, have not thou said, I will pour water upon him that
is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; and I will pour my Spirit upon thy
Seed, and my blessing upon thy Offspring? O put into our hearts their ways who
go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appearing before God.

Nor pray we only for Remission, but for cleansing; not only for Pardon, but
for purifying and power against sin, and deliverance from sin. Holy God, thou
have promised, That he that is left in Zion, and he that is left in Jerusalem,
shall be called holy, when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the
Daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst
thereof, by the Spirit of Judgment, and by the Spirit of burning. Holy God,
thou have said, thou will put thy law in our hearts, and write it in our inward
parts. Holy God, it is thy promise, the first promise, and the Foundation of
all other promises, that the Seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head;
that Christ should break the Power and Dominion of Satan O that having those
Promises, we could live by Faith; that we could rest upon God, and believe that
God of his Free Grace in Christ will purge us from the filthy Remainders of
sin, and renew us more and more after his Own Image in Righteousness and true
holiness. Surely, Lord, tho^ have said it, and therefore no Presumption, bu^
true Obedience, to assure our selves of whatsoever thou have promised, and
entered into bond and covenant Freely to give us: He that believes on thee, as
the Scripture says, Out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living waters.
Christ is a Fountain of Grace, ever flowing and ever Full, and of his fullness
we all receive grace for grace. There is no grace but from Christ, nor no
communion with Christ but by Faith, O therefore that we could embtace him by
Faith for our sanctification, that so we might be filled with the gifts of his
grace in our measure. It Is Christ that is our Wisdom and Sanctification as well
as Righteousness and Redemption. O that our Jesus would justify our Persons
and sanctify our Natures, and enable us to those duties of holiness that he
requires; and that he would make us unto himself a Kingdom of Priests, an holy
Nation. O Lord, we have many potent Enemies that daily war against us, the
World, the Flesh and the Devil; and Our strength is too weak to vanquish the
Allurements of this World, and to repress the Lusts of our rebellious hearts,
or to defeat the Polices of Satan, much more to cleanse our own hearts. But, O
Lord, thou have promised, O help us to believe that God, who is rich in mercy,
will aid and assist, and bless our Endeavors, yea and do the whole work for us
and in us, according to his good pleasure. O grant we may not love the world,
nor the things of the world, that our hearts be not overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, to neglect ^u^ immortal
souls. O do thou be pleased to rouse us and lift us up from the death of sin
unto a life of righteousness. And, good Lord, grant that we may not suffer sin
to reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the lust ^hereof;
Neither suffer us to yield our Members as ^nstruments of unrighteousness unto
sin, but unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, that being made free
from sin, and become the Servants of God, we may have our fruit unto holiness,
and the end everlasting life. And, dear Father, grant that we may be sober and
vigilant, because our Advetsary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour. O make us strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might, that we may be able to stand against all the wilds of Satan. Why,
Lord, we wrestle not against flesh and blood only, but against principalities
and powers, against thr Rulers of the darkness of this world, and against
spiritual wickedness in high places. O therefore strengthen us, that we may
stand, having the girdle of truth about our Loins, the Breastplate of
Righteousness, and the shield of Faith, wherewith we may be able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked. We confess and acknowledge, O Lord, to thy glory,
that all our strength is in thee, and in the power of thy might. And dear
Father, we humbly beg, that thou will be pleased to stand and stay by us, by
thy blessed Spirit of Grace, the remaining part of our days, that we may live
righteously and godly in this present world; so that we may be able to stand
when the secrets of all hearts shall be laid open; and may hear that joyful
call thy blessed Son shall then pronounce, Come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you. That then we may enter into those Joys that the Living God
has provided for such, as Fear and Love, and delight in him; and for ever
enjoy that glory our blessed Savior speaks of, that he had with thee before
the Foundation of the world. O help us to draw near unto thee in full assurance
of Faith, having our consciences sprinkled with clean water, and our souls
purged and rinsed in the blood of the Lamb, that we may be as Vessels fitted
for the Masters use. O that we could but seriously think of that abundant Love
wherewith the Lord Jesus loved us, in that he took upon himself our Nature, and
to leave the bosom of his Father for the redeeming of our lost souls; and yet
we cannot leave our bosom sins, our darling delights, which have put him to
those grievous Pains and Sufferings. O when shall it Once be, that the Love of
Christ might constrain us, and bring us into an holy Admiration of liking, and
loving, and delighting in him. O that we had but hearts to remember those
Passion-crys our dear Savior uttered on the Cross, saying, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? that so we might forsake our daily sins that made him
thus cry out. And dear Father, do thou enable us to clear up our Evidences for
another world; for this is transitory and passing away. O let us think often of
that great Account we must One Day make before the Just Judge of all the Eaoth.
O let it make us weep when our Hourglass is standing by us, to see how ^ast one
sand follows each other. And who knows whether this day may not be the
Sunset of our Lives: But O and alas! who would defer to be upon his (...),
that knows not how soon he may be called ^o judgment? Why should we be such
enemies to our own souls, as not to be prepared to welcome Death? The best
Counsel, and the surest and safest care we can take, is to be still in a
readiness, with our Lamps trimmed, that we may be Furnished with those Graces,
and fitted and prepared to enter into those Joys with the Bridegroom at his
coming; and seriously to think with our selves, that every day we rise to be
the day of our death, and every night we go to our beds, that we are laid down
in our Graves. Who can Forget his Grave, that lays himself down in his Bed? And
who would not so provide for himself as every night to think he went to his
Grave. Our days are but Few; and the night will come e're long that we must die
indeed, howsoever we piece and patch up this poor Cottage of the flesh, it will
at the last fall into the Lords hand; and as time leaves us, so will Judgment
and Eternity certainly find us. It was David's saying, and oh that it might be
our practice every night to wash our Beds, and to water our Couches with our
Tears. O let us not slip over one night without repentance, nor go to our beds
but beat upon our breasts, and say with the Publican, from our very hearts,
Lord, be merciful unto me a sinner. How sweet a rest will that night bring
forth whose sleep is prevented with the consideration of sin! O therefore do
thou help us, and teach and instruct us to order our Conversation aright, that
so we may see the salvation of our God. O do thou keep up in our memories a
serious remembrance of those storms that have already gone over our heads, as
Wars, Sores, Sicknesses, Plagues and Burnings, as we have seen with our Eyes,
and many seasons unseasonable, because we could find no season to repent, and
weep, and mourn for our sins, and for that precious time we have so often
misspent. Our Springs have rather been our Graves than our Cradles; our Summers
have not shoot up but withered our Grass, our Autumns have took away our flocks
of sheep, and for our late Harvests, the Heavens themselves have not ceased
weeping for us that could never yet find time to weep for our selves. O the
miserable miseries that have fallen upon us! were not our houses infected, and
our City depopulated, and many Graves made a bed whe^ein to lodge a whole
Family, O, and alas! what a hideous noise was heard about us! In every Church
Bells tolling, in every Ward some dying, in every street men watching, in every
place, even every where, wringing of hands, wailing and weeping, groaning and
dying: These are the evils that have been; and how should we forget them that
have seen them with our eyes? And what better Rule have we to square our Lives
by than the remembrance of those evils our Lives have suffered. Let us look
back with good Old Jacoh, and see the great reason we have to redeem the time
past, and that to come, because our days are evil. It is mere presumption to
boast of the time to come: Can any man say he will live till to morrow: Look
back, you that trust in the staff of Egypt; there is no man can assure you of
one day; as near as it is to night some of us may be dead before the evening,
and stiff with cold, more fit to lodge in our graves under Earth than in our
beds above it. Nay let us assure our selves our Life is of no long continuance.
What speak we of to morrow, or this day, when we are not sure of the least part
of times division, a very hour; nay less. Watch therefore, says our Savior,
for ye neither know the day nor the hour when the Son of Man will come. What is
our Life but a Few hours! and in one of them death must on necessity come; For
it is appointed for all men once to die, and after that the Judgment. O let us
watch then, for the hour is at hand, and we do not know how soon it will seize
upon us; this very hour the breath we draw may be our infection, this very hour
the bread we eat may be our poison, this very hour the cup we drink of may be
that bitter cup that may never pass from us; this very night may our souls be
required of us. But thou, O Lord, give us a gracious visitation, that we may
highly prize this moment of time with most serious watchfulness. O let those
Considerations of Death and Judgment work effectually on our Hearts and
Consciences, that they might make our very hearts to bleed within us, nay to
break and fall asunder in our breasts, like drops of water. O with what
enflamed attention should we hear and pray! with what insatiable graspings
should we lay hold on the Lord Jesus Christ. O that streams of tears might run
down our cheeks for this precious time we have lost; a day will come, we know
not how soon, that we shall be past it, and cannot recover it, no not so much
as one hour, if we could give a thousand, nay ten thousand worlds for it. But O
the Losses of Losses! the Loss of our immortal souls, the Spouse of our
well-beloved Christ: How many tears did he shed to save it! what groans, cries,
prayers and his dearest Hearts Blood did he pour out before God to redeem our
poor souls from the Jaws of Satan! O sweet Jesus what a Loss is this! call to
mind this, O my soul, and tremble; sleep not in sin, lest the sleep of death
surprise thee; the hour is certain in nothing but uncertainties; For sure thou
must die, yet thou know not on what day, nor in what place, nor how thou
shall be disposed when death must be entertained. O Lord, how many thousand
Bills of Mortality have passed over our heads, and we little or nothing regard
them; who knows but some of us may fill up the next weeks account, and be
forced to render up our accounts before the Just Judge of all the Earth, of all
our deeds done in the flesh, whether they be good or evil. He that once thought
to begin to take his ease, was fain that very night, whether he would or no, to
make his end: would you have thought this? He but now flourished like a green
bay tree, his thoughts full of mirth, his soul of ease; but I passed by, and lo
he was goue. Gone! whither? his body to the grave, his soul to hell; whose turn
may be next, God only knows, who knows all. But whosoever we be that go on in
a course of sin, in the name of God let us seriously bethink our selves of
Mortality; how many have we heard of that went well to bed over night, for
ought any man could tell, and yet have been found dead the next mo^ning. O help
us to repent of all our sins by crying, and sighing, and sorrowing for sin; It
may be this night, and that is not long to come, but we may sleep our last in
this world. O keep us that we go not to bed with a conscience laden with sin. O
how should we take any rest or sleep with the brother of death, when we lie
down in danger of eternal death. O there is no more but a breath, one breath
and no more; no more but a step, one step and no more. Oh were not this
lamentable, that some One of us, who are standing or sitting here, should this
night sleep his last, and to morrow have his body carried to his Grave; yea,
and before to morrow morning, which the good Lord in mercy forbid, have his
soul cast from a bed of Feathers into a bed of Fire. And yet alas! alas? if any
of us should die this night in our sins, or in an unregenerated state, thus
will it be with whomsoever we be. To morrow may our bodies be cold under earth,
and our souls frying in the flames of hell. It Is good for us all to expect
death every day; and by this means death foreseen cannot possibly be sudden;
No, it is he dies suddenly that dies unpreparedly: Watch therefore, says our
Savior; be ever in a readiness, and as we tender the everlasting welfare of
our poor souls, let us learn that Lesson of our blessed Savior, not to lay up
for our selves treasures on earth, where Moth and Rust does corrupt, and where
Thieves break through and steal; but lay up for our selves treasure in heaven,
where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through
and steal; it is those treasures, those stocks of grace that will last us for
ever, which is a circumspect walking, that Fervency of spirit, that Zeal of
good works, that purity of conscience St. John speaks of, which is the
property of every true hearted profe^sor; It is the work, the life, the power
of that prayer, that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy. O
that we could lay up such heavenly provision against the day of caamity; if
while it is called to day we could make our peace with our peace with our
heavenly Father, by an humble exercise of repentance. If in this time of grace
we could purchase Gods Favor, and those rarest Jewels of Faith and a good
conscience; if now before we come to appear at that dreadful Tribunal, that we
could be so happy as to make God and Christ our Friends in the Court of Heaven,
O how wellcom and how blessed then would our death be unto us, come it never so
suddenly, still should death find us ready, and if ready, no matter how
suddenly, yea tho it were this night. Oh help us seriously to consider what
Jesus Christ did and suffered for us and for our sins: O how was he sorrowful
even unto death, with exceeding sorrow, which made him pray, that the cup might
pass from him; yet with submission to his Fathers will; and all to save our
poor lost and undone souls: O the riches and love, and the free grace of Jesus
Christ to us: Oh the earnestness of his prayers, and the agony he was in; not
drops of water only, but his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling
down to the ground. O how was he buffeted, spit on, reviled, mocked and
scourged sor our sins: Oh how was the chastisement of our sins laid upon him,
and by his stripes are we healed. And dear Father, do thou be graciously
pleased to keep up in us an humble remembrance of this abundant love wherewith
the Lord Jesus Christ has bound us: he was crowned with Thorns for our sins,
that we through his merits might be crowned with glory in the Kingdom of
Heaven. O unspeakable love! how were his tender hands and feet nailed to the
Cross! his holy unspotted breast peirced with a spear, and his dearest hearts
blood let forth, and all to save our poor souls from the pit of eternal
destruction. O let us consider the great necessity we are in, in not looking
unto this Jesus: we have need of Christ; we have need that he pray in us, and
need that he pray for us unto our heavenly Father: we have need that he work in
us, and need that he work for us of his plessed will and pleasure. We have need
that he present us and ours blameless before his Fathers presence in life and
death, and at the Judgment day. O Lord, there is not a moment in our lives
wherein we stand not in continual need of Jesus Christ. O then let our
necessities drive us to Christ, and mind us of Christ. And as it has been our
great misery in departing from God, dear Father, we beseech thee to cause us
now to lay out all our strength by the blessed assistance of thy holy spirit of
grace to the uttermost of our power, to gain a reconciliation with God, and to
close with him on his own terms propounded to us in the Gospel. And dear
Father, be pleased to raise up in us a love and a delight in the keeping holy
thy Sabbaths here on earth, that so we may be fitted and prepared to keep an
ever lasting Sabbath with thee in Heaven. Dear Lord, pardon, cleanse, purge, O
purify and make new our inward man by thine Almighty power; subdue our
corruptions and renew our Natures, and bring us near unto thy self by the
gracious workings of thy blessed spirit. O forget not thy loving kindnesses of
old, but reach, O reach our souls by the blessed spirit of thy grace; O let us
feel the power of thy spiritual and Gospel meltings upon our souls; O cause us
to feel the warming and the reviving blood of the everlasting covenant working
effectually upon our poor dead hearts and consciences. And dear Father, do thou
be pleased to rescue us from our selves; deliver us, we humbly pray th^^, from
a vain trisling spirit in the things of Eternity. O make us captives of thy
love, and then shall we follow hard and close after thee, the Captain of our
salvation. The Lord in much mercy waits on us continually to be gracious unto
us; and shall not we wait on him to be made glorious for ever. Dear Father, we
humbly pray thee to be pleased to soften our rebellious hard hearts by the
gracious meltings of thy holy spirit, that so we may be fitted to receive thy
truths, and bring forth the fruits of them in a most holy and a most heavenly
conversation. O for Christ Jesus sake, make bare thy own arm, and deliver our
poor distressed souls from that bottomless pit of eternal destruction. O
strengthen our Memories, increase our faith, kindle our zeal, renew our
Natures, and make us such as thou would have us to be, best at heart, and
best at last for Christ's sake. O rectify our wills, enlighten our
understandings, and subdue every lust within us, and cause us to run the ways
of thy commandments. Dear Father, we beseech thee, we humbly beseech thee to
make us more serious, and more sincere ^n the things of Eternity, that we may
not trifle ^n those things of so high a nature, wherein our ^oor immortal souls
are so nearly concerned. Good Lord, in much mercy be graciously pleased ^o
carry on thy own work in us and for us, to he honor and glory of thy name, and
for the eternal welfare of our poor distressed souls. O for Christ Jesus sake,
open blind eyes, soften our hard hearts, unstop our deaf ears, subdue our
rebellious wills, and renew our corrupt natures, and bring us into a
conformity, and an humble subjection unto thy blessed self. O when shall it
once be, that we may with our blessed Lord and Savior count it our Meat and
our Drink to do thy will, O God. O for Christ's sake cast an eye of pity and
compassion upon ns; show us the favor of thy chosen, make us glad with thy
inheritance and visit us with thy salvation. Good Lord, we beseech thee to
enable us to lay fast and sure hold on him on whom thou have been graciously
pleased to lay help. And dear Father we humbly pray thee to be pleased to raise
us up from the death of sin to a life of righteousness. And we humbly beseech
thee to let us feel the power of Christ's Death killing sin in our mortal
bodies, that we may no longer obey it in the lust thereof. Dear Father we
beseech thee to be graciously pleased in mercy to blot out all our sins by the
precious blood of thy dearly beloved Son, that so our names may not be blotted
out of the book of life, and we for ever thrust out from thy presence, and out
of the holy City of our God. And for Christ Jesus sake make us faithful to the
death, and then give unto us a Crown of Life. And dear Father, do thou be
pleased to rouse up our drowsy, dull consciences, and help us, we beseech
thee, seriously to look into our inward man, knowing that it is high time to
awake out of sleep: the time is far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light; le^ us
walk honestly as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering
and wantonness, not in strife and envying; but put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lust thereof. O Lord our
God, thou have promised to keep him in perfect peace. whose mind is staid on
thee. O help us, we beseech thee, help us to trust in thee, and sincerely to
wait on thee, that so we may be brought into the possession of this peace that
lasts for ever. O help us seriously to look up unto thee, for thou art the Lord
our God, and there is none else, so shall we be saved with an everlasting
salvat^on. And dear Father, we humbly entreat thee to make us to be zealously
affected for the honor of thy great name: and then seal unto us thy
everlasting covenant of life and peace. Then shall we greatly rejoice in the
Lord, and our souls shall be joyful in our God; for he will cloth us with the
garments of salvation, and will cover us with his robes of righteousness; then
shall we be drawn with his loving kindness and mercy, and loved by our dear
Lord with an everlasting love. And we humbly entreat thee to prepare us for
that great day of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he shall come to shake terribly
the Earth. O blessed and happy a^e they who put their whole ttust and
confidence in him; and sincerely hope in his mercy. O Lord, we are upon the
very brink of an endless eternity, and it will not be long e're we shall be in
another world, as certainly as we are now in this. O help us now, help us, dear
Lord, that whatsoever our hands find to do, to do it with all our might; for
there is no wisdom, nor knowledge, nor work nor device in the grave, whither we
are all a going. Dear Lord, we humbly beg thy pardon; we have none to fly unto
but unto thee; thou have the words of Eternal Life: O! for Christ Jesus sake
forgive all our Transgressions, and in Mercy heal all our Backslidings; and
dear Father, as ever thou intendest mercy unto our poor souls, work a thorough
change upon our hearts and consciences, and save us by believing. O for ever
blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us, who are kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation. O make us more heavenly and more holy, that we
may be blessed in the first resurrection, that the second death may have no
power over us, that we may live and reign with our God, and our dear Redeemer
for ever and ever, Amen.

Psalm 4
HEar me when I do call,
O God my Righteousness:
Thou have enlarged me when I
Was bound in sore distress.
Have mercy upon me,
And now my Prayer hear:
O Sons of men, how long will ye
My Name refuse to fear?
My Glory into shame
You turn; and Vanity
You love to see: How long will ye?
My Truth you plain deny.
But know, the Lord will set
The godly man apart,
Even for himself: for he will hear
When he calls with his heart.
Be still, and stand in awe,
O sin not on your bed;
In heart commune with God; You shall
With his delights be fed.
Offer the sacrifice
Of Righteousness always,
And cast our care upon the Lord,
To be our only stay.
Many there be that say,
Who will show us a Glance?
But thou, O Lord, lift up the Light
Of thy Kind Countenance.
Thou have put in my heart
More gladness in my time,
Than they had from their great incro^se
Of all their Corn and Wine.
I will now lay me down
In peace to take my sleep;
For thou, O Lord, assuredly,
Wilt me in safety keep.
Psalm 18.
I Will love thee, O Lord, my strength:
He is my Rock in all distress,
My God, my stay, on whom I trust:
He Is my Buckler, and my Fortress.
The Lord he is my high Tower,
And the Horn of my salvation:
On him I Will trust all times for aid;
For he is a sure Foundation.
Upon the Lord God I will call:
His Name is worthy of all praise;
He saves us from our Enemies,
And preserves us in all his ways
Sorrows of death beset me round
With Armies of Ungodly Men;
A fear of death encompassed me,
With snares of death, prevented then.
In my distress I called on God,
My Cry came even into his Ear.
O Lord, be pleased to hear my voice,
For the sake of my Savior dear:
On him alone still I will trust
For succor at all times in need;
For he alone is my Relief,
And he will plentifully feed
All those that truly on him wait,
In Faithfulness to do his will.
He will preserve them to the Last,
And bring them to his holy hill:
Where we with joy for ever shall
Behold the glory of his Face
To all Eternity, and sit
With him within his heavenly place.
Psalm. 23.
THe living Lord my Shepherd is,
For me he does take care;
To Pastures green he leads me
Where his still Waters are.
It Is he restores my poor Soul,
His Right Hand does me take
Into the Paths of Righteousness
Even for his own name sake.
When through the Vale of Death's cold Shade
I walk and nothing fear,
Thy Rod and Staff do comfort me,
For thou art with me there.
Thou have prepared my Table Lord,
In presence of my Foes;
My head with oil thou do anoint,
My cup still overflows.
Surely the goodness of the Lord
Shall crown my future days,
And I will dwell within thy house
Ever to sing thy praise.
Psalm 27.
first part.
THE Lord he is my salvation,
My light, my strength and aid:
Whom shall I fear? the Lords my Life;
I will not be afraid.
The wicked men like Troops encamp,
And up against me rise,
Coming on me to eat my flesh,
As Foes and Enemies.
In this I will be confident,
My Enemies shall fall
Before the presence of thy Face
They fell, and stumbled all.
One thing have I desired of God,
And after that will seek,
To dwell within thy house, O Lord,
And in thy presence keep.
For to behold thy beauty, Lord,
All the days of my Life,
And in his Temple to enquire,
Where to be Free from strife.
For in the time of trouble, thou
Shall be my hiding place.
O set me up upon that Rock,
Where I may see thy Face.
Then shall my head be lifted up
Above mine Enemies;
Therefore will I offer to thee
A Joyful Sacrifice.
O Lord, to thee I will sing praise,
Yea to thee I will sing;
For in thy mercy thou will keep
My soul from perishing.
The second part.
HEar me, O Lord, when I
Cry with my voice to thee;
Some succor send to my poor soul;
In mercy answer me.
When thou say, seek my Face,
My heart shall ^hen reply,
Thy Face, O Lord, still I will seek,
And on thy Grace rely.
Hide not thy Face from me,
O God, forsake me not;
For thou have been my help always,
When Parents me forgot.
Teach m^ thy way, O Lord,
In a plain path lead me;
In anger cast me not away,
But take me up to thee.
Deliver me, O Lord,
From all mine Enemies,
And such as breathe out Cruelty,
Which falsely they devise.
I had fainted, unless
I had believed on thee;
Lord, in the land of the living
Thy goodness let me see.
O wait upon the Lord,
Wait on the Lord, I say;
With Courage strong he will support
Thy drooping soul always.
Psalm 42.
AS the pursued Heart does pant
After the water-brook,
So pants my soul for thee, O God,
For a most gracious look.
My soul still thirsts for my God;
O when shall I appear
Before the living God, who is
My loving Father dear.
My Tears have been my meat by day,
And sighings in the night,
While they continually do say,
Where is thy God of might?
I had gone with the multitude,
But I remembered thee,
And went unto thy house, O God,
In true sincerity.
I poured out my soul with them
That kept holy thy day,
Rejoicing with that multitude
Which do praise thee always.
Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
O do not thus repine:
Trust still on God, his countenance
On me shall ever shine.
Within me, Lord, my soul is low,
Therefore remember me,
From the Hill of the Hermonites,
And Jordan let me see,
Deep calls unto deep, O Lord,
Thy water spouts aloud,
Thy Waves, and all thy Billows have
Wrapped me in as a Shroud.
G Lord, by day and night I call
With prayers unto thee;
Command thy loving kindness, Lord,
And then my song shall be
Unto my God; who is my Rock;
Thou have forgotten me;
And I go mourning all the day,
Oppressed with misery.
As with a sword within my bone^
Mine Enemies prevail;
While they say daily unto me,
What does thy God avail?
Cheer up my countenance, O God;
Support my drooping mind;
Hoping in God for him to praise,
Who gracious is and kind.
Psalm. 56.
BE merciful to me, O Lord,
For Man would me Devour,
He fighting daily, pressing on
To swallow me each Hour.
But, O! thou high and mighty God,
In thee I trust for aid,
And on thy word will I depend,
What time I am afraid.
I will not fear what flesh can do,
In thee I put my trust,
Tho every day they wrest my words,
And turn them to the worst.
They gather themselves together;
They mark my steps, and hide
Themselves, to catch my soul, O God;
But thou art on my side.
O God, in thy anger east down
All those that in wait lie:
Let not that people so escape
By their iniquity.
Psalm 59.
DEliver me, O God,
From all my Enemies;
Defend me from the hands of them,
That up against me rise.
Deliver me from them
That work deceitfully;
O save my soul from bloody m^n,
For lo in wait they lie.
Not for my sins, O God,
Can the mighty combine
Against me, for my Transgressions,
No Error can they find.
Yet they run and prepare
Themselves without my Fault.
A wake to help me, and behold
How they against me talk.
O God of my mercies,
Scatter them by thy power,
And bring them down, O Lord, our shield,
That seek for to devour,
I will sing of thy power;
Yea, I aloud will sing;
For thou my Refuge and Defense
From time to time have been.
Unto thee, O my strength,
And God of my mercy,
Defend me by thy power, Lord;
For on thee I rely.
Psalm 63.
O God, thou art my God only,
Will I seek after thee;
My soul does thirst, my flesh does long
Thy salvation to see.
Where in a dry and thirsty Land
No waters can be had;
O show to me thy glory, Lord;
With power make me glad.
Thus will I bless thee while I live;
My Lips shall still praise thee,
Because thy Loving Kindness is
Better than Life to me.
And in thy Name I will lift up
My Hands, and give thee praise;
As with Marrow and Fatness I
Am satisfied always.
When on my bed I remember
To meditate on thee,
My Tongue shall sing with joyful Lips
Of thy Kindness to me.
In the Night-watches, Lord, will I
To thee lift up my Voice;
Under the shadow of thy wings
I ever shall rejoice.
Psalm 70.
O Lord do thou make haste
For to deliver me;
Make haste to help me, O my God,
I humbly pray to thee.
Let them confounded be,
that after my Soul seek,
Let them be turned back with shame,
And in confusion weep:
Let them be turned back
With a reward of shame
That desire my hurt, and say,
Aha, reproach his Name.
Let all that seek thee
Gladly in thee rejoice,
Let such as love thy Salvation,
Sing with a chereful voice.
Let God be magnified,
Continually, and say,
Thou art my Help in all distress,
On thee I Will trust always.
Make haste to me, O God,
I am needy and poor;
Thou art my help and deliverer,
Lord make no stay therefore.
Psalm 71.
O Lord in thee I put my trust,
O let me not confusion see,
Incline thine Ear and save my Soul,
In Righteousness deliver me.
Be thou my Habitation strong,
Where I Will continually resort,
In subjection to thy commands,
O save me, for thou art my fort.
From the hands of unrighteous men,
In mercy Lord, deliver me
Out of the reach of wicked men,
Who cruel are, Lord keep me free.
For thou, O Lord God, art my hope,
Even from my Youth thou art my stay,
By thee have I been holden up,
Even from the Womb unto this day.
Out of my Mothers Bowels thou
Have taken thence, and set me free,
Therefore will I continually
My Praises offer up to thee.
To many I a wonder am,
But thou art still my refuge strong;
O let my Mouth be filled with praise
Of thy Honor all the day long.
The Second Part.
O Cast me not off in old Age,
Forsake me not when strength does fail,
Mine Enemies watch and observe
How over me they may prevail.
God has forsaken him they say,
And there is none that can him save,
Take him and Persecute his Soul,
And bring him down into the Grave.
But thou, O Lord, make haste to help,
Be not far from me in distress;
In mercy save me, O my God,
Then I Will rejoice with thankfulness.
Confounded and consumed be
Those Enemies of my poor Soul;
Let them be clothed with reproach,
That seek my Heart without control.
But I continually will hope,
And yet will praise thee more and more
My mouth shall show thy Righteousness,
And thy Salvation the World over.
I will go in thy strength, O God,
And even of thine only, will I
Make mention of thy Righteousness,
And wondrous Works declare on high.
O God, do thou instruct me still,
As in my youth did undertake,
Now when my Head is Old and Gray,
O do not my poor Soul forsake.
Psalm 86.
First Part.
BOW down thy Ear, O Lord,
And hear, for I am poor;
Preserve my needy soul, O God,
I humbly thee implore.
O save thy servant, Lord,
I daily cry to thee;
Be merciful to me, O God,
On thee my trust shall be.
O make thy servant, Lord,
In soul for to rejoice;
For unto thee do I, O God,
In heart lift up my Voice.
For thou, O Lord, art God,
And ready to forgive;
Plenteous in mercy to all them
Which on thee do believe.
Unto my prayer, Lord,
Give Ear, and me attend,
Unto my supplications,
Which up to thee I send.
In my trouble I call
Both day and night to thee:
O let my Cry acceptance find;
In mercy answer me.
O Lord, amongst the Gods,
There is none like to thee;
Neither is any of their Works
Like thine performed to me.
O Lord, all Nations shall,
Which thou did make and frame,
They shall bow down, and worship thee,
And glorify thy Name.
For thou art God alone:
Thy Wonders far excel
The Greatness of the Sons of Men,
Which on the Earth do dwell.
The second part.
TEach me, O Lord, I humbly pray.
To walk thy ways aright,
Unite my heart to love and fear
Thy Name with true delight.
Then I will praise thee, O my God,
With all my heart, and say,
I Will glorify thy Name, O Lord,
By Night, and eke by day.
For thy great mercy showed to me,
Thy promises I will tell.
Deliver thou, my Soul, O Lord,
Even from the lowest Hell.
O bring me near to thee, O God,
By thy mercy so sweet,
Let thy Compassion and Grace
Most plentifully meet
In my poor soul, which In distress,
For want of Grace does faint;
O turn unto me, give me strength,
Now I do make complaint.
O show to me a Token Good,
That I may plainly see,
No Cause of Shame; for thou, O Lord,
Do always comfort me.
Psalm 95.
O Come, let us sing unto the Lord;
Let Us make a joyful Noise:
To the Rock of our salvation
Ever will we sing praise.
With Psalms of Thanksgiving let us
Before his Presence sing,
And make a joyful Noise unto
The Living God, our King.
For the Lord, he is a great God,
Above all other Gods:
In his hands are the deep places
On Earth, and in the Roads.
The strength of all the Hills are his;
They were made by his hand:
The Sea is his, he did create.
And formed the dry Land.
O come let us worship, and bow down;
And kneel before the Lord:
For he is our God, and we are his,
Made by his own accord.
We are the sheep of his Pasture,
The Flock of his Right Hand:
To day, if ye will hear his Voice,
And in Obedience stand;
Then harden not your hearts, as they
In the provocation,
And as they in the Wilderness,
And day of Temptation.
Forty Years long was I grieved,
Your Fathers tempted me,
A Generation stiff and proud,
My Works they would not see.
A people that in heart do err;
They have not known my ways:
Into my Rest they never shall
Enter, to sing my praise.
Psalm 100.
O Come before the Lord ye Lands,
And make a joyful noise;
O serve the Lord with gladness, and
Before him come with praise.
O know ye that the Lord is God,
And we his Pasture Sheep;
He has us made, not we our selves,
Therefore he will us keep.
Enter his gates with thanksgiving,
And in his Courts with praise,
Be thankful to him and rejoice,
And bless his name always.
For thou, O Lord, art great and good,
Thy mercies ever sure,
Thy truth to Generations does
Eternally endure.
Psalm 116.
I Will love thee O Lord my God,
Incline thy Ear to me;
Therefore as long as I do live,
I will call upon thee.
O Let my Voice and my Request, Lord,
Always accepted be,
From pains of Hell and sorrow,
For ever keep me free:
O Lord, I will call on thy Name,
Lord I beseech thee hear,
Thou gracious art and merciful,
And righteous every where:
O Lord preserve my drooping Soul,
O help, for I am low,
O bring my Soul unto thy rest,
That I thy love may know.
Deal bountifully with my Soul,
Deliver me from fears;
O keep my Feet from sliding Lord,
My mouruing Eyes from Tears:
Then I shall walk before the Lord,
Within the living Land;
I did believe, theref^re I spoke
By thy afflicting hand.
I said in my passion, and haste,
That all men Liars be.
What shall I render to the Lord
For all his Love to me?
The Joyful Cup of Salvation
I thankfully will take,
And call upon the Name of God,
For his great mercy sake.
And pay my Vows unto the Lord.
Right precious in his sight
Is the Death of his people all,
As are the Saints in Light.
Truly I am thy Servant, Lord,
Thy Servant still will be:
O let those hands that thou have loosed,
Tie me faster to thee.
Psalm 119. v. 105.
THY Word's a Lamp unto my Feet,
And a Light to my way:
Thy Righteous Judgments I will keep,
By Night and eke by Day.
I am afflicted very much,
In mercy quicken me:
O Lord, according to thy word,
Accept, I beseech thee,
The Free will Offerings of my Lips;
And thy Judgments teach for me.
My Soul is ever in my Hand,
Yet I forget uot thee.
The wicked have laid Snares for me,
Yet I erred not from thee.
Thy Testimonies and Precepts
My Heritage shall be.
For they are the Joy of my heart;
I am inclined always
For to perform thy Statutes, Lord,
Unto the end, I say.
Psalm 147.
O Praise the Lord, for it is good
Unto our God to sing;
His Praise his comely in his Saints;
For it is a pleasant thing.
The Lord does build Jerusalem,
And gathers the Outcast
Of Israel together, that
None of them shall lie waste.
He heals the broken in heart,
And binds up Wounds and Scars:
The Hosts of Heaven he calls by Name,
And numbereth the Stars,
Great is our God, and of great Power,
His Understanding deep:
He casts the wicked to the ground,
But raises up the meek.
Sing to the Lord with Thanksgiving,
Sing praise to God on high;
He makes Grass on Mountains grow
By showers when they are dry.
He gives to the Beast his Food,
And the Young Ravens, which cry:
In them that fear him, he delights,
Who hope in his mercy.
O praise the Lord, Jerusalem,
O Zion, thy God praise.
He does make strong thy Bars and Gates,
And in thee Children Raise.
He makes peace in thy Borders,
And Keeps all safe and sure:
He Feeds thee with the finest Wheat,
And Oil that is most pure.
To Persons Three in Trinity,
Adoration and Praise;
As has been done since Time begun;
And so shall be always.
Isaiah 35. 10.
COme to Zion with Songs:
In heart with one accord,
Return with Everlasting Joy,
^e Ransomed of the Lord.
True Gladness to obtain,
With Faces Full of Joy.
Sorrow and Trouble then shall cease,
And signing fly away:
All Tears then from our Eyes,
Which down our Cheeks distill,
For offending our Savior dear,
His Mercy and Good Will;
Shall then be wiped away
From all our Faces sad;
For his inheritance shall we
For evermore be glad.
Hymn 1.
BEhold, now, says the Lord of Hosts,
You Proud, that wickedly do boast,
The day is coming that shall burn
You up as stubble in an Oven,
As Ashes under Foot are trod,
The wicked shall fall by thy Rod;
And meet with no deliverance,
But be destroyed both Root and Branch.
But upon you that fear my Name,
The Sun of Righteousness shall rise
With healing underneath his VVings,
And with great Joy our souls surprise.
O make us Captives of thy Love,
In true obedience to stand,
Humbly submitting unto thee,
In Faithfulness to thy Command.
Then Joyfully in thy presence,
Our Ransomed souls shall ever sing
Triumphant Hymns of Thankfulness,
To our Jehovah, Lord and King.
Hymn 2.
LOrd pardon my Feigned Requests,
O make me more sincere,
In love for to admire him,
Who is my Savior dear:
And with a full purpose of heart,
Now to cleave unto thee,
Taking delight to do thy will
In true sincerity.
O Lord help me now to draw near,
In truth of heart to thee,
In full assurance of thy Love
And Kindness unto me.
For in thy Righteousness thou have
Proclaimed thy self to be.
O God that hears the prayers which
In Faith are made to thee,
Raise my Affections to thy house,
O God, where I may find
Supporting grace for to revive
My dead and darkened mind.
Rouse up my drowsy Soul, O Lord,
And make me stand upright;
My God shall be my Glory then,
And everlasting Light.
I will greatly rejoice in God,
My Soul shall joyful be:
With the Garments of Salvation,
O Lord, do thou cloathe me.
Then in thy Robes of Righteousness
Shall I with Joy appear
Before the Judgment Seat of him
Who is my Savior dear.
Hymn 3.
DEar Lord, without thy special Grace,
Our souls cannot appear,
Nor stand before thy Judgment seat,
Who art just and severe.
But in thy mercy give us, Lord,
An heart for to express
Thy Loving Kindness to us shown,
With humble Thankfulness.
O help us to rely on thee,
Intercession to make;
And plead our Cause as Advocate,
Even for thy own Name sake.
For herein lies our happiness,
When we were at a loss,
Full satisfaction he has made
In dying on the Cross.
O let this precious blood of thine,
Which was shed on that Tree,
Procure for us a lasting Peace,
And by it make us free.
O let it mollify our hearts,
Which are grown hard by sin;
O make them soft, so we shall be
Pure and clean within.
O melt and make us new, O Lord,
By thy Spirit of Grace:
Transform us by thy mighty power,
That we may see thy Face:
And joyfully in thy Presence
For ever sit and sing
Hallelujahs unto our God,
Which does salvation bring.
Hymn 4.
O Hear, and help me, Lord,
For on thee I depend:
Enable me to do thy will,
And seriously to spend
My days; for they are short,
My Glass is almost run:
Without thy special grace, O God,
I am utterly undone.
Make haste, and be my aid;
Give strength, for I am poor:
Let not thy mercy come too late,
I humbly thee implore.
At thy Throne of Grace
A Beggar I will lie:
My Poverty is great, O God.
O do not me deny.
It Is for my Savior's sake
That I thus boldly crave
Supporting Grace for to uphold
My fainting Soul to save.
Then humbly I Will rejoice,
And of thy Goodness sing:
For thou my Refuge and Defense
From time to time have been.
Hymn 5.
O Let thy Glory, Lord,
From day to day increase
Within our Land, and give to us
A firm and lasting peace.
And still maintain to us
Thy Gospel pure and bright:
O let not Antichrist prevail,
For to obscure our light.
Bring down their Pride, O Lord,
That are so high and strong,
And make them know that unto thee
Issues of War belong.
In their own Snares, O Lord,
Let them be taken fast,
Who labor to subvert thy Truth,
And work to lay it waste.
In deep designs they plot
Against thy sacred Name,
To bring on them that honor thee
Utter Rep^oach and Shame.
Arise, O Lord, and help,
By thine Almighty Power;
Defend and keep us by thy strength
from such as would devour.
Lord save our gracious King,
And grant him long to Reign;
Make him an Instrument on Earth,
True Justice to maintain.
Hymn 6.
O Lord, thou love Righteousness;
O help us to endeavor
For the Effects of Quietness,
And assurance for ever.
Still trusting on thy Word; for thou Will be our sure defense:
Therefore will we humbly depend
On thee with confidence:
For thou, O Lord, have always been
To us in all our need,
Ready when we upon thee call,
To answer us with speed.
Lord, let that Promise be made good
To us before we call,
That thou will answer us in peace,
And give us Grace withal,
Resolvedly on thee to trust,
So long as we have hreath:
For thou have said I Will be your God,
And Guide, even unto Death.
O Lord, now let our Joy in thee
For evermore increase;
And in the end do thou Crown us
With everlasting Peace.
In holy Triumphs then shall we
Thy Hallelujahs sing,
Who by thy gracious Favor have
Kept us from perishing.
Hymn 7.
O Seek the Lord, and seek his strength,
Seek him continually.
Let Us join our selves in covenant,
With him perpetually.
Thy Face, O Lord, still I will seek,
And praise thee with my Voice.
Let all those that seek thee in heart
For evermore rejoice.
Thou love them that do love thee,
And are sincere in mind,
Who early after thee do seek;
They shall thy Favor find,
And joyfully in thee Repose
Our fainting Souls always:
For on thy Providence are we
Resolvedly to stay.
O come, and let us seek the Lord;
In humbleness and fear;
While he is to be found, let us
Call on him while he is near.
For it is time to seek the Lord:
Arise therefore and seek
The living God to be our Guide,
And us in safety Keep.
Let all that love the Lord rejoice,
And Hallelujahs sing
Unto the God of our Mercies,
Which does salvation bring.
Hymn 8.
BE pleased, oh Lord, to look upon our Sion,
And send thy Lamb to chase away the Lion
Oh how unblest is that declining Nation,
Where Faith's quite lost, Religion out of fashion,
When Faction thrives, Religion starves at nurse,
Who sins with Egypt, must have Egypts curse.
But let us consider e're our time be spent,
How soon we sin, and yet how late repent.
He that delays Repentance makes great haste,
To his own ruin, and commits a waste
Upon his Soul, for every hour we spend,
And not repent, we wilfully befriend
Our Adversary Hell, whose Gins are set,
He lies and watches when to draw his Net:
The Net being drawn, well may we run about
And make our selves more fast attempting out,
Then our betrayed Souls may sadly say,
Had we repented, when 'twas said to day,
This Net had not ensnared us, but we must cry
We that did ever sin, must ever dye.
Hymn 9.
GRace is a virtue, by which we may attain
The lasting joy that does above remain,
Where Souls above for ever live to sing
The Halleluia's of their Glorious King
Who in great triumph did ascend on high,
Freeing poor Souls from their captivity,
And bringing us into his perfect Bliss,
For by his purchase surely we are his;
For by his Blood our Souls have free access,
Into the place of perfect happiness,
There to enjoy the true Felicity,
That is prepared to all Eternity,
For those that Love, and in him do delight,
Shall never cease to see his Glory bright.
Lord fit us for our latter end,
Then Death will be to us a friend,
To let us free from all distress,
And bring os into Happiness,
For to enjoy thy dearest Love
Which is prepared for us above,
Where we for ever shall delight,
There to behold thy Glory bright.
Hymn 10.
LOrd save me for thy Mercies sake,
And hear when I do Pray,
For thou alone art my defense,
My Rock, my Hope, my stay.
O hearken Lord to my desire,
And then be pleased to hear,
Prepare my Heart humbly to Pray,
And then incline thy Ear,
To the requests which I do make,
My wants thou well do see:
O give an Ear when I do Pray,
With longing after thee:
O give relief to my poor Soul,
Which languishing does lie,
Support me by thy mighty Power,
Until I come to die;
So that at last I may attain
To that Felicity
Which is prepared in Heaven above
To all Eternity:
For such as in thy Law delight,
And therein spend their time,
They shall enjoy that lasting Light,
That in the Heavens does shine.
On Isaiah 12.
O Lord I will praise thee, and say,
In the same day thou angry w^it,
Yet still thou comforts me always,
For now thy Anger's gone and Past.
Behold God is my Salvation
On him I Will trust all times for aid:
The Lord Jehovah is my strength,
Then why should I once be afraid.
He is become my Song my Joy.
For my Salvation in him lies,
Therefore shall we draw from those wells,
Those riches we so highly prise.
And in that day then shall we say,
Praise ye the Lord, call on his Name,
Declare his doings all abroad,
And still exalt his mighty fame.
Sing to the Lord, for he has done
Things excellent; it is known full well:
Rejoice and shout all you that shall
Within his Holy City dwell.
Hymn 11.
DIrect me Lord in this thy day
Which I have lived to see,
O guide me by the Saving Grace,
Never to swerve from thee:
So that the Thoughts and eke the words
Which from my Mouth proceed,
May be according to thy word
Upright in truth and deed.
O help me faithfully to spend
The time thou do afford,
In seeking still to do thy will
According to thy word.
O let thy word be my delight
My chiefest time to spend,
To know thy ttuths declared therein,
And understand the end
Of thy great kindness showed to us
By thy mercy so sweet.
When we were lost, thou did provide
For us a Savior meet.
Who for our sins laid down his Life,
And shed his blood so dear,
For to Redeem our wretched Souls,
And free us from that fear,
Which we upon our selves had brought
By departing from thee;
O cleanse us by that blood of his
And therewith set us free
From Satan's Bonds wherein we lie
In thraldom bound in Chains;
Release our captive Souls, for thou
Only can ease our pains;
That so our Hearts and Souls in thee
May ever more rejoice,
In singing praises to thy name,
With a delightful Voice:
Hymn 12.
WHen as the Lord his People does
Bring back from Thraldom sad,
Then Jacob shall rejoice and sing,
And Israel shall be glad.
The Lord is merciful and kind,
And gracious also,
In mercy plentious and free,
But in his anger slow.
Thy anger Lord's but a moment,
And for a nights weeping;
In thy favor is Life and Peace,
And Joy in the morning.
O show to me the Path of Life,
Thy Treasure and thy Store,
At thy right hand fullness of Joy,
And pleasure ever more.
Surely the goodness of the Lord
Shall crown my future days,
For I shall dwell within thy House,
And ever give thee praise.
Hymn 13.
O Lord how long will thou
Thy presence from me hide
Let not thy wrath for ever b^rn,
And I therein betide.
Remember Lord how short
My days are to remain,
O keep me close unto thy self,
And not be made in vain.
What man is he that lives,
But once he must see Death,
My Soul deliver from the Grave,
When I give up my Breath.
Hymn 14.
O Sing unto the Lord, ye Saints,
Give praise unto his Name,
Remembering of his Holiness,
And thank him for the same.
O That the Lord would be to us,
As dew unto Zion,
Then shall we grow like to those Flocks,
That feed on Mount Hermon.
Rejoicing still in God our strength,
And trusting in his aid,
In his goud time he will provide,
We need not be afraid.
For in his everlasting Arms,
We shall be safe and sure
The Covenant which he has made
For ever does endure.
In faithfulness to them that do
On him truly depend,
He will preserve us to the last,
In happiness to end.
Our days, which through a vale of Tears
Are spent, as we may say,
At last shall reap most plentiful
An Harvest Crowned with Joy.
Hymn 15.
UPon thy precious promises,
Lord, help us to rely,
Depending on thy Word; for thou Will us nothing deny.
When we sincerely on thee wait,
According to thy will,
O then make good thy Word to us,
And our desires fulfill.
For the sake of our Savior dear,
Bring us more close to thee,
That so we may enjoy thy love,
And thy salvation see.
Within thy New Jerusalem
Art sat in splendour bright,
Triumphing on thy Glorious Throne,
In Majesty and Might:
Where thy Redeemed ones shall sing
Hallelujahs to thee,
Who are the purchase of thy Blood,
And with the same made free
Of the great City, where our God
For evermore does Reign,
Rejoicing with his Saints that were
In Tribulation slain.
Where we, before the Throne of God,
Shall serve him Day and Night,
Where we with Joy shall ever dwell
Within his Temple bright.
Hymn 16.
O Lord, make us to understand
The shortness of our Days,
And walk according to thy Word
Upright in all thy ways.
For who does know how soon he may
Unto Account be brought,
For all the Deeds done in the flesh,
Which we our selves have wrought.
For every day before our eyes
Such Objects Fresh appear,
Which show to us most certainly
We shall not long stay here.
O help us now for to prepare
For that approaching hour,
Trusting in Christ, that he alone
Will Raise us by his Power:
With him to live and Reign in Joy,
Hallelujahs to sing,
Triumphing in his Victories,
Which does salvation bring
Unto all those that sincerely
For his Redemption pray,
And patiently lay down our Lives,
Because he led the way,
Through Death to happiness and bliss,
The true Felicity,
Which is prepared in Heaven above,
To all Eternity.
Hymn 17.
GReat Joy have they who on the Lord
Do trust for their Defense,
Always depending on his Love
With humble confidence.
He faithful is, and will preserve
All those that truly seek
For to behold his Face with Joy,
Unfeignedly and meek.
He will make glad their souls, when they
Sincerely on him stay,
And Keep them close unto himself,
That they'^go not astray.
Hymn 18.
O God for thy Name sake,
Let me thy mercy find;
Into thy Favor take my soul,
For I am poor and blind.
My Soul, is wounded sore,
My heart is weak and faint;
O Lord support me by thy Grace
Now I do make complaint.
Help me, O Lord, my God,
O save me, I desire;
That I may Know it is thy Hand,
And evermore admire.
Thy loving Kindness, Lord,
Help me for to express,
And never to forget thy Love,
Thy Mercy, and Goodness,
Which thou to me have shown,
From time to time so free.
Continue still thy mercies, Lord,
And bring me close to thee.
O help me to depend
In faith upon thy grace,
That when this mortal Life shall end
I may enjoy thy Face,
In Glory, which thou have
Prepared for me above,
Which is the purchase of the Blood
Of my dear Savior's love.
Which on the Cross was shed
By my dear Savior Kind,
To purge away my sins, that I
May sure Redemption find.
Hymn 19.
O Thou Eternal God of Life,
Prepare us for our End.
O help us on our Savior dear
Sincerely to depend.
O let our Meditations, Lord,
Be fixed on that Day,
Trusting on Christ, that he alone
Will be our strength and stay.
So that approaching Death may not
Our drooping Souls annoy,
When our Redemption draws nigh,
Lift up our Heads with Joy,
For to behold our dearest Lord.
In Glory to appear,
To take unto himself his Saints,
Who are his purchase dear.
So that with zealous Paul we may
In holy Triumph sing,
O Grave, where is thy Victory?
O Death, where is thy sting?
But thanks be to our God, who has
Given us this Victory,
Through Jesus Christ, our Lord; and saves
Our Souls from misery.
Therefore, beloved Brethren,
In stedfastness remain,
Kno^ing your labor in the Lord,
Shall never be in vain.
Hymn 20.
LOrd, Keep me in thy ways
That thou would have me walk,
That so I may rejoice therein,
And of thy Goodness talk.
Direct me in thy Truth,
O God, be thou my Guide;
O Keep my Heart upright to thee,
So that I never slide:
Then I shall sing thy praise
Most cheerfully and say,
That thou, O God, art my delight,
My only hope and stay.
On thee I Will ever Trust,
As on a Rock, most sure:
Thy Faithfulness remains still,
And ever shall endure.
O happy sure are they,
Who on his Grace rely,
For he will save us to the last,
And Crown us when we die
With Everlastiug Joy,
Within his heavenly place,
Where we fot ever shall behold
The Glory of his Face.
Hymn 22.
O Lord, for thy pardon I beg;
Unto thee I appeal:
Forgive my Transgressions, O God,
And my backslidings heal.
Through thy abundant Grace, O Lord,
Let me find fresh supply,
For to support my fainting soul,
Which languishing does lie.
O God, let thy Almighty Power
My wicked thoughts subdue?
O let thy holy spirit, Lord,
My inward man renew.
O teach me to obey thy Voice,
And guide me in thy ways,
For by thy strength my life's upheld,
And the length of my Days.
By thee is the fountain of life
Contin^ed unto me;
O le^t^y lo^ing Kindness, Lord,
Appear, that I may see.
That fullness which is hid in thee:
O lead me to the brink
Of the Rivers of thy Pleasures,
Where I may freely drink.
And with delight be satisfied
With fat and pleasant things,
Resting securely under
The shadow of thy VVings.
Now will I end as I began,
Begging pardon from thee;
O let the Blood of my dear Lord
For ever set me free.
Hymn 22.
O Lord, in mercy speak the word,
And my poor soul shall live;
For in thy loving Kindness thou
VVilt Grace and Glory give.
O Lord of Hosts, thou art my strength,
Do thou my prayer hear;
O God of Jacob, be my shield,
And in mercy give Ear.
O God of my Salvation,
Turn thy fierce wrath from me,
And cause thy Anger for to cease,
And draw me close to thee;
That in thy blood my Soul may find
A strong support from ^^ee^
O let the life of Grace increase
From day to day in me.
H^lp me with humble confidence
Still to rely on thee;
Fulfill thy p^omises, O Lord,
Which thou have made to me.
O Lamb of God help me to live,
And daily on thee feed,
Being made free by thy dear Blood,
I shall be free indeed.
Now unto him that loved us,
And washed us from our Sin,
In his own Blood Shed on the Cross,
To make us clean within.
O Let us ever sing his Praise,
Who is our sure defense,
And sincerely depend on him,
With humble Confidence.
Hymn 23.
O Lord incline our Hearts to seek.
After that rest above,
O wean our Hearts from things below,
And fix them on thy Love;
For thou in Mercy have prepared
For us a Resting Place,
Help us sincerely to prepare
For to enjoy thy Face.
O Let thy Gracious Presence Lord
Convey us to thy rest,
We finding favor in thy Sight,
May happy be and blessed.
Stand in the way, and see the Paths,
Ask for the good old way,
And walk therein, so shall we find
Rest for our Souls I say.
O Let us not through unbelief
From thy Presence be cast;
But in thy Mercy bring us Lord
Unto thy rest at last
Then Hallelujahs we shall sing,
And ever give thee Praise,
Great are thy Works, O King of Saints,
Just and true are thy Ways.
Hymn 24.
O Lord I am undone,
Without thy special Grace,
I humbly beg thy Favor Lord,
That I may see thy Face,
And joyfully in thee,
For evermore rejoice,
And sing thy Praises sincerely
With a melodious Voice;
For thou have always been
To me a sure defense,
Therefore will I humbly depend
On thee with Confidence.
And on thy Word rely,
As on an Anchor sure
Thy Word in Faithfulness and Truth
For ever does endure,
Therefore in Heart will I
Thy Hallelujahs sing.
Who by thy sufferings on Earth,
Did^^ ^^y S^^vation bring.
Blessed be th^^ Day that thou
Did for me undertake
To Plead my Cu^se as advocate
And (...) ^^ke
T^^^ (...) might come
In^^ (...) ^bove,
V(...) Ete^^^^
Shall (...) po^sess thy Love,
My shaking Hand, and trembling Heart
To me do plainly tell,
That in this Tabernacle here,
I have not long to dwell.
O Lord do thou look down on me
Even for thy Mercy sake,
And draw me close unto thy self,
And into Favor take.
O God help me with serious Thoughts
And longings after thee,
Prepare to meet my Savior dear,
His Salvation to see.
To thee O Lord I make my moan,
To thee I humbly pray,
O let thy Mercy me support
And be my Strength always.
O give to me a taste of thine
Eternity so sweet,
Then humbly I will lay my self
At my dear Savior's Feet.
O when shall I come and appear
Before my Lord and King,
With Joy to all Eternity,
And Hallelujahs sing.
Hymn 26.
O Lord watch over me for good,
This Night while I do sleep,
O Let thy Holy Spirit Lord,
My Soul in Safety keep.
Then in the Morning when I wake,
I will rejoice in thee.
And sing thy Praises all the Day
For thy Kindness to me.
For thou O Lord art my defense,
The Strength whereby I stand,
O still support me by thy Grace,
And guide me with thy Hand,
Into those ways which lead to life,
O Lord do thou Direct
My Feet into those Paths where thou Will safely me protect.
Then Cheerfully in thee, O Lord
Will I lift up my Voice,
For by thy loving Kindness thou
Have made me to rejoice.
In humble Thankfullness will I
My Praises offer thee,
When Face to Face my ravished Eye,
Thy Salvation shall see.
Hymn 27.
O Lord if I in Faith dare let
My Anchor on thee fall,
I have no need of earthly Trash,
For thou art all in all.
Mount up my Soul, and in thy Thoughts
Shake off those VVorldly Toys,
And fix thy Eye on the Mansions
Of Heavens Eternal Joys.
Lord raise, and rouse my sluggish heart
Sincerely for to mind.
The swift approaching Shadows show,
Death is not far behind.
Lord let thy Gracious Bounty fill
My empty Soul with Praise,
And then in humble Thankfullness
Let Peace conclude my days.
Then shall my Soul greatly rejoice
In possessing thy Treasure,
To all Eternity, and swim
In never fading Pleasure.
Triumphantly there shall I sing
Hallelujahs to thee;
For by thy Blood shed on the Cross
My Captive Soul's made Free.
Hymn 28.
O Lord how shall my Guilty Soul
Before thy strict Tribunal stand,
For I have broken all thy Laws,
And disobeyed thy just Command.
But thou Oh Lord art Merciful,
And of thy Goodness gives me Breath,
And swearest by thy self that thou
Delights not in the Sinner's Death.
Upon thy Invitation Lord
To thee I come in my Distress,
Some Pity take on my poor Soul,
And Seal to me a free Release:
O cleanse me Lord from all my Sins,
By thy dear Blood, which on the Cross,
Was poured out for to redeem
My Captive Soul when at a loss.
O let it not be shed in vain,
And I to have no share therein,
O let some drops upon me fall,
To purge me from the stains of Sin.
O purify my Heart and Mind;
And thy Free Pardon let me see,
Then Hallelujahs I shall sing
To all Eternity with thee.
Hymn 29.
O VVhither shall I^fly, O Lord,
Or what path shall I seek,
For to escape thy flaming wrath,
And punishment so deep?
Where shall I hide my self until
Thy angry Thunder's past?
What silent Desert can me Keep,
When I by thee am cast?
O Lord, in mercy cast an Eye
Of Pity upon me;
For on thy Grace will I r^lie,
And still depend on thee.
Lord, I am vile, and in my self
Before thee trembling stand;
O Give Relief to my poor soul,
The work of thine own hand.
Nothing but mercy, Lord, I beg;
For that I only crave,
Redemption by thy precious Blood
My guilty soul to save.
Therefore will I humbly admire
Thy boundless love to me,
In redeeming my life with thine,
My Captive soul to free.
Now Lord, in humble Thankfulness
Will I give praise to thee,
And ^^ll of all thy wondrous works
Which thou have done for me.
Hymn 30.
O Lord, I am upon the brink
Of an E^dless Eternity;
Fn^ it, cannot be lon^ ^^efore
I must lay down my head, and die.
O Lord, fit me for that great change
That hastes on, wherein I must
Resign my murmuring breath, and be
Turned into Rottenness and Dust.
But in the Lord I put my trust,
And in all humble subjection
Depending on thy mighty power
For a joyful Resurrection
At that great Day when thou will sit
In triumph on thy holy Hill,
Where we in Everlasting Joy
With thine Elect shall drink our fill
Of that New Wine in thy Kingdom;
Where we in Peace and Joy shall sing
Eternal Hymns of Thanks and Praise
To our Redeemer, Lord and King.
Hymn 31.
Cheer up, my soul, in this dark night,
Which seems to me so long.
My God will cause his Ear to hear,
If I can find a Tongue,
Sincerely upon him to call
When I am in distress.
O then make bare thy Arm, to save,
And give a free Release
To my poor Soul, which bound does lie
A Prisoner fast in Chains.
Dear Lord, set free my captive Soul,
And ease me of my pains.
By thy dear Blood give my poor soul
Refreshing hopes in thee,
Then cheer fully shall I rejoice
Thy Redemption to see.
O Lord help me to strive till death;
Support my feeble strife,
That at the last I may obtain
From thee a Crown of Life
Within thy New Jernsalem,
Where I shall gladly sing
Eternal Praises to my God,
Which does salvation bring.
Hymn 32.
O Lord, unfeignedly I beg
Supporting Grace from thee:
O let me not be overcome
By wicked Thoughts in me.
Into subjection bring my will,
Humbly for to admire
That boundless Love of thine to me,
I nothing more desire.
O that I could sincerely prize
Thot bleeding Breast of thine,
Which pierced was for to redeem
This sinful soul of mine.
Well may my empty Soul bewail
The greatness of my loss,
When I cannot in Faith behold
My Savior on the Cross,
Bleeding out his hearts Blood for me
Upon that cursed Tree,
With Arms stretched out, and Feet fast nailed
Poor captive Souls to free.
O that I could by Faith embrace,
And fast about him cling,
Then cheerfully shall I rejoice,
And Hallelujahs sing.
Hymn 33.
DEar Lord in mercy help
This wretched Soul of mine:
Make bare thy Arm, and send Relief
By thy Spirit Divine.
Consider my Distress,
How poor and low am I;
Refresh me with thy saving grace,
For on thee I rely.
It Is pardon, Lord, I beg,
For that I only crave,
With free Redemption by thy Blood
My guilty Soul to save.
O cleanse me from my sins,
Then I will spend my days,
In setting forth thy boundless Love,
And celebrate thy Praise.
With thankful Lips will I
My Praises offer thee,
Still thirsting for the living God,
His salvation to see.
Bring me to that Fountoin,
And Spring of Life so clear,
Where streams of mercy overflow
From my sweet Savior dear.
There shall my fainting Soul
For evermore be blessed,
Sweetly Reposing in thy Arms,
In everlasting Rest.
Psalm 51.
O God have mercy upon me,
According to thy Love;
O blot out my Transgressions,
And let thy Kindness move.
Through tender mercies to my Soul,
O cleanse me from my sin.
O wash me thoroughly, O Lord,
From all my stains within.
My Transgressions, which are so great,
I acknowledge to thee;
O Lord be pleased, in mercy kind,
To set thy Servant free.
Against thee only have I sinned,
In presence of thy sight,
I am condemned, thou justified,
Because thou Judge Right.
Behold, I shapen was in sin,
And in iniquity
Was I conceived, and so brought forth
To death and misery,
But thou desire Truth, O Lord,
Within the inward part.
Help me to keep true Wisdom there,
Tho in a broken Heart.
Purge me with Hysop, then O Lord,
I shall be clean I know,
Wash my poor soul, and I shall be,
More whiter than the Snow.
Lord, make me to hear with Joy,
And Gladness, that my Bones,
Which thou have broken may rejoice,
With Penitential Groans.
O hide thy Face from all my Sins,
Iniquities blot out,
Create in me a heart O God,
That may be clean throughout.
Cast me not from thy Sense,
But let thy Spirit free,
Restore to me thy Salvation
That I may joyful be.
Let thy holy Spirit Lord
From day to day renew,
My inward Man, that I may know,
Thy Precepts which are true.
Then I will teach Sinners thy ways,
And bring Converts to thee,
Transgressors shall walk in thy Paths
In perfect Liberty.
O Lord God of my Salvation,
From bloody Guiltiness
Deliver me, my Tongue shall sing,
Aloud thy Righteousness.
O Lord do thou open my Lips,
And I will fing thy Praise,
My Mouth shall never cease to tell
Of thy Goodness alwavs.
No Sacrifice do thou desire,
Else would I give it thee,
Burnt-offerings thou delight'st not in,
But true Sincerity.
O God thy Sacrifices are
A contrife Heart for Sin,
Which thou will not despise, O Lord,
But take delight therein.
O Lord in thy good Pleasure do,
Unto thy Sion good,
Build thou the Walls again O God,
Where thy Jerusalem stood.
With righteous Sacrifices Lord,
Thou will be pleased always,
When we our offerings sincerely,
Unto thy Altar pay.
December 25. 1694.
This is a joyful day indeed,
Which God himself has wrought,
Our Admiration let it raise
What he to pass has brought.
O let us give Glory to God,
Who gave to us his Son,
For to redeem our Captive Souls
When utterly undone.
A Gift so high beyond compare,
None but a God could give,
In offering up his only Son,
That our poor Souls might live.
O let us with the Heavenly Host,
To God our Prayers sing,
For sending us a Savior dear,
Which does Salvation bring.
For unto us a Child is born,
A Counselor most Wise,
A Prince of Peace who will defend
Us from our Enemies.
So that our Souls shall never want,
Who trust on his Mercy,
For he will guide us to those Springs
Which run continually.
O bring us that Fountain pure,
And bathe our Souls therein,
Take off our Leprosy oh Lord,
And cleanse us from from our Sin.
That so unspottedly we may
Before thy Presence stand,
And hear that joyful Sentence given
To them on thy right Hand.
Grace before Meat.
GRacious Lord God, Thou art the Fountain of Grace and Goodness, that is ever
flowing, and ever full; thou providest for us in this Life, and for a better:
Thou have spread our Table before us at this Time: We humbly Pray thee let it
not become a Snare unto us, but let us eat and drink as in thy Presence, and
let those Mercies we are now about to receive from thee, engage our Hearts to
love thee more, and serve thee better: And this we beg for Christ Jesus Sake.
Amen.

After Meat.
GRacious Lord God, it is of thy great Mercy we are not consumed, because thy
Compassions fail not: Thou have fed our Bodies with thy Good Creatures at this
time; we humbly pray Thee do thou take Care for the feeding of our poor Souls,
and let us take heed now we have Eaten, and are full, lest we forget thee our
God; continue thy Favors to us, make us glad with thy Inheritance, and visit
us with thy Salvation, and all for the Sake of dear our Savior and Redeemer.
Amen.

FINIS.
WAit and expect, but fear not Death,
And always have a due regard
Unto that promised recompense.
That brings with it a sure reward.
When as my face grows pale and wan;
And feeble knees together smite,
When loins are pained and heart does melt,
And eyes begin to loose their sight.
O my dear God, I humbly beg,
From thee alone supporting Grace;
Whereby I may enabled be,
To look grim death into the Face,
When fainting sweat bedews my Face,
And whispering thoughts come in my Head,
When breath grows short and speech does fail,
And friends stand weeping round my bed.
Then my dear Lord I humbly pray,
From thee alone assisting Grace;
Whereby I may with courage strong,
Look Ghastly Death into the Face,
Assuredly believing that
My Savior dear will set me free;
Then Cheerfully shall I rejoice,
In singing praises unto thee.
Upon the Languishing Decay,
Of my dear friend Nicholas Day,
With serions thoughts I made this hymn,
September twenty one, G. M.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 24. for prostrate. r. prestered. p. 13. l. 33. for then. r. thou.
p. 24. l. 30. for bound. r. Loved. p. 37. l. 9. for only r. early. p. 38. l.
13. r. those. p. 40. l. 25. for God. r. Good. p. 41. l. 26. for promises. r.
praises. p. 43. l. 3. r. they did. p. 44. l. 3. r. Lord. p. 47. l. 11. r. in
his. p. 73. l. 23. for over. r. ever. p. 74. l. 3. r. Lord. ditto. l. 28. r. O
Lord. p. 75. l. 5 r. O cast. ditto. l. 9. r. O let. p. 75. l. 5. r. presence.
p. 77. for the r. that. p. 78. for dear r. our dear.


