HERALDRY Epitomized: And its REASON Essayed.
By Silvanus Morgan, Arms-Painter, at the Sign of the Camden's H^^d near the
Royal Exchange.

ARMORY, or Coats of Arms, says Monsieur Ulson, is no other than the Seal or
visible Character of Nobility, which is the most glorious recompense that
either our own Virtues, or that of our Predecessors could acquire us. And as a
Christian ought not to be ignorant of his Christian name, seeing it is the mark
of his Adoption; so should it be shameful for a Gentleman to be ignorant of his
own Coat of Arms, being the visible sign of his Nobility and shortened Symbols
of his Heroical Actions, or those of his Predecessors: And in the general
signification, as Ensigns of Honor among Military men, have been as anciently
used in this Realm, as in any other; for necessity bred the use of them in
Military affairs, for Order and distinction both of Political Bodies, Military
and Civil, and for particular persons, as notes of Honor; as may be gathered
from the Sacred Scriptures on the party colored Coat of Joseph, who had that
honorable distinction, and from thence was called the Trophy-bearer, and the
Absconditorum repertor, The Blazoner of Symbolical matter; as also that from
Numb. 2. wherein every Tribe was commanded to pitch his Tent under their
Standard, and under the Arms of his Father's House. And not only the Armilogie
of this Heroic Science was preserved, but the Gamilogie and preservations of
their Families by Genealogies, as may be gathered from the second Chapter of
Ezra, where those that sought out their Genealogies, among those that were
reckoned by Genealogy, but being not found were as polluted, cast from the
Priesthood. For though they were in Captivity, Fortuna non mutat Genus. And it
has been the care of all Nations, namely, the Carians, Lacedaemonians,
Messonians, Romans, etc. So let me desire my Countrymen (that seeing the
Learned Camden has with some other given the first Honor of the Invention of
Armory in this Part of the World to the Picts and Britains, who distinguished
their several particular Families, by Colors, adorning their Bodies by Figure
and Blazon) that they will accept this Introduction to the knowledge of
Heraldry in the use of Arms, which in strict signification, the Learned Spelman
has defined thus, Sunt Insignia decora Symbola ad Notitiam and honorem latoris
a Legitimo Judice Militibus ascripta, which is handled in all its parts by Dr.
Waterhouse, in his Defense of Arms. And our Learned Clarenceulx Camden does
define Arms, in the Military and Civil use.

Is quem Grammatici, Ptolomae; qu^m venerantur, Quem Feciales simul and
Historici Colunt. Camdeni Insignia. portrait of William Camden incorporating
coat of arms Willi^ Camden. Clarenceux King of Arms (...)

Camd: Britania.

Debes natales Terrae Camdene Britannae?
Nonne magis debet Terra Britanna tibi?
Quis tanto dignus reperitur Heraldus Heraldo?
Quis Britonum hunc pingat, pinxit ut hic Britonas?
Camdeni Insignia.

ARMS (says he) are Ensigns of Honor, born in Banners, Shields, and Coats for
notice and distinctions of Families one from the other, and descendable as
Hereditable to Posterity, which has been very Ancient; their Estimation
beginning in the Holy Land, becoming by little and little Hereditary, their
Posterity accounting it most honorable to carry the Arms that had been
displayed in that most holy Service: The English Nation displaying a Red Cross
on a White Field. The French and Portugal a white Cross in a blew Field. The
Irish a red Cross in a yellow Field. The Spanish, etc. a Salter cross trunked
in a white Field. The Scots, St. Andrew's Cross, white in a blew Field. And the
more particular bearing in the Holy Land was the Cross, Crouched and Crossed,
of infinite Varieties, as may be seen in all Military Orders of Chevalry and
Knighthood; So also those particular Families that did signal Service there,
had their Shields adorned therewith, or with Escalop-shells, Pilgrims, or
Palmers Scrips or Staves, Saracens Heads, whose wreaths as they were usually
born by them, so now as a Triumph of the Cross, are worn on the Helmets of all
Christian Soldiers; and in which Service, some Arms were altered upon several
Occasions; other Gentlemen beginning to bear Arms from their Lords, or whom
they held in Fee, or to whom they were devoted, and for the granting of Arms
from some great Earls, and passing of Coats from one private Person to another,
there wants not some Precedents, which were all before the reduction of the
Heralds under one Regulation, and as now, settled under three Kings of Arms.
Viz. Garter, Clarenceulx, and Norroy; The first being for all Patents of
Honor, and Princely Ceremonies of Coronations, Marriages, and Interments of
Nobility. Clarenceulx being a Provincial King of Arms, of the East, West and
South Parts of England, from the River of Trent Southwards, having the granting
of Arms, and ordering of Funerals, from a Knight downwards, as has Norroy also
in his own Province under the Earl Marshal, to whom Gentlemen in former time
would repair, and by his Authority would take Arms, which were registered by the
Officers of Arms, in the Rolls of Arms made at every Service, wherein there was
also a distinction between a Gentleman of Blood, and a Gentleman of Coat
Armor, and the third from him who first had Coat Armor, was a Gentleman of
Coat Armor, and the fifth from the first Bearer, is a Gentleman of Blood and
Coat Armor: Nobility being agreeable to Religion, Almighty God vouchsafeing to
be called the Lord of Hosts, affecting the Military man's Ensigns of the Sword
and Shield: and the Church Military has the Shield of Faith, the Breast plate
of Righteousness, the Sword of the Spirit, and the Helmet of Salvation, etc.

nine sample coats of arms

EVery Coat of Arms, ought to consist of both Metal and Color, having some
Analogy of the Body and Spirit of the Bearers represented by the Field and
Charge; Therefore it is necessary to know how to speak in the proper Language
of Heralds, which is called Blazon. I have here in the first place presented
you with the two Metals, and five Colors, and two Furs, most commonly used in
Arms, every one expressed by several hatching of Lines, Viz. The Or, by Pricks
or Points; The Argent, Plain; The Gules, by upright Lines; The Azure by
Horizontal; The Sable, by cross Lines; The Vert, by Lines bending to the right,
and the Purpure to the left; The Ermin being in its Natural color, and the
Vary being always Argent and Azure; though they also are varied, as the Colors
are variously mixed, having other Names, if differing in Color from the two
last mentioned: All which are the common Fields in Heraldry, and are subject to
Division and Charge; only the Vary being perfect Armory of it self: And if the
Shield be divided, it is called Parted; representing the blows or the Cuts
proceeding from the hands of Warriors, who having given or received the like in
Combats, and made a show Peraid to their Comrades, causing them to be painted
upon their Escocheons in the same manner; it being a beauty to receive wounds
in those Combats from whence flows more Glory, than Blood. And now with Causin,
let me cry,

nine sample coats of arms

THe First, is the representation of the Church Militant, called a Cross; being
the most worthy of all bearings, denoting all Divine and Moral Virtues. The
second is a Chief, which though it consist but of one Line, yet is the emblem
of Fame, who bears her head in the Clouds, representing a Head, a Chief, a
Commander. The third is a Fess, signifying Resolution and readiness to Action;
and is a Military Girole going out to conquer. Whereas the fourth represents
the Baltheum Triumphalis, worn by those that have conquered, and is called a
Bend; it signifies an old Soldier. The fifth is the Pale, representing a
Military man in a standing Posture, and is called a Pale, denoting Vigilance
and Diligence; and is as a Column or Pillar erected to the memory of deserving
Men. The sixth is a Cheveron, and denotes an Established House, one that does
enjoy the Spolia Opima, the spoils of Arms gained in Wars: Honor being a Spur
to Virtue, having attained to Opimum, which is all one with Amplum, and has
now set up the top Rafters of his House. The seventh is the Salter, which is an
Engine of Manhood to assault or gain per Saltum, fitting Quadrata front; and
denotes a Politic Soldier. The eighth is the In Escocheon, representing the
Property of a good Man, who labors to keep a quiet Conscience in his Breast.
The ninth, Ordinary; that is, ordinary is the Bar which is never single, and
are of the nature of the Scarf, worn about the Neck, or Arm, or Middle;
denoting such as either with Arms or Council defend their Nation: two Bars
representing Love and Honor.

nine sample coats of arms

O Nobility, deceive not your selves in the acknowledgment of the Badge of your
Profession, nor flatter your selves under a false mark of Valor. Military
Virtue is in your own Atchievments; what your Progenitors did, vix ea nostra
voco. The several Divisions on your Shields, ought to show the wounds and cuts
you have received, or the several Accomplishments you have made in the steps of
your Progenitors. The first is said to be parted per Cross (or quarterly) Or,
and Sable; representing by those Colors, Wisdom, Riches, and Elevation of
Mind. The second is parted per Chief indented, Argent and Sable; representing
Constancy and Divine Doctrine. The third is parted per Pale Argent and Gules;
and signifies Bold in all honest Enterprises. The fourth is parted per Bend,
Azure and Or; which represents in Moral Virtues, a Soldier of the Holy Court,
given to divine Contemplation, and vigilant in Service. The fifth is parted per
Fess, Argent and Azure; Courteous and Discreet. The sixth is parted per
Cheveron, Or and Vert; representing Splendour and Felicity. The seventh is
parted per Salter, Or and Gules; signifying a desire to conquer. The eighth is
parted per Gyron, Argent and Purpure; signifying Majesty and Dignity. The last
is parted per Pyle, Or and Sable; signifying ancient Riches. Now when a Field
is charged by these Lines drawn strait, or thwart, They do constitute certain
Honorable Ordinaries, as being ordinarily used, or as they were called
ORDINARII, that in a Battle led on the Battalia, and being charged, are like
those Augustales, that by Augustus were joined to the Ordinary.

nine sample coats of arms

I Have caused the differences of the several Brothers to be placed on the
several Escocheons, for the Information of the Ignorant: And come now to the
Charges of the Shield with living Creatures. And because Man consists of
something of the Beast, we will consider him in the most Heroical, and King of
Beasts, the Lion; whose several postures does denote as follows, First,
Couchant, Vigilance and the Illustrious Hero. Second, Rampant; Magnanimous,
Noble. Third, Passant; Resolute. Fourth, Passant-Gardant; Prudent. Fifth,
Saliant; Valiant. Sixth, Sejant; Advised. Seventh, Regardant; Circumspect.
Eighth, Dubble headed; Politic. Ninth, Dubble Qu^ive; Strenuous. And because
Man, as he is the Head of the whole Creation, so to bear the Head of any Thing,
is accounted the most Honorable; and what is gained with more Labor and Sweat
to be preferred. As the Erased Head is more of Military Power than the Couped;
the one being Torn off, and the other Cut off: So now to speak of Heraldry, it
is no other than that part of History that consists of Succession in States,
Countries, or Families, and Professions, as the Lives of famous Men in any
Faculty; For as the Emperor says, We do not count that they only war, for our
Empire, which do labor with the Sword and Shield; but also our Advocates: For
though Counselors are not actual Warriors, yet they are representative
Warriors. And this noble Science is the same of History, which is a
commemoration of Things past, with the Circumstances of Time and Place in
distinct distances by small Descents to revive the Dead, and to the
Encouragement of the Surviving. Cantons have place among Augmentations, as in
the Institution of Baronets each wearing an Escocheon or Canton, charged with a
Sinister hand Gules, and when one Escocheon is born on another, it signifies
the Husband has Married an Heiress general, and having Issue by her, it is
Quartered by the Son, to show the right of her Inheritance is transmitted from
her to him; But if she be not an Heir, he may but impale the Coat on the
Sinister side, which is called Baron and Fem; as for the outward Ornaments of
Mantles, Helmets and Crests, with which the Coats were called altogether
Atchievments, they were of Military and Civil use; The Mantles as the Tent,
Cloak, or Surcoat over all.

nine sample helmets

THe Helmet, as the defensive part of the Head, representing Council; And so
the Armed Virgin was the Issue of Jupiter's Brain. The Crests on the eminent
tops of the Helmets, which the French call Timbres, were anciently to terrify
by Monstrous and Terrible shapes, and many years was arbitrarily taken up at
pleasure, but began to be Hereditary with us, about the time of King Edward the
Second. More might be said of the outward Ornaments, of Coronets and
Supporters, as distinctions of the Degrees of Nobility, as is here described:
The first, that of an Esquire or Gentlemen; The second, that of a Knight; The
third, that of a Baron, Guard visure, placed in that Circulus Aur^us, which the
King has conferred on Barons of the Realm, with six Pearls only; The fourth,
that of a Viscount, consisting of the whole Circle of Pearls; The fifth, that
of an Earl; The sixth, that of a Marquess; The seventh, that of a Duke; The
eighth that of a Prince; And the ninth that of a Sovereign: And beyond the
number Nine, none could ever go; so that if you desire more of this Art, in my
Sphere of Gentry, in four times nine Chapters, you shall see the Harmony of
Heraldry, from the beginning of the world; and that Nobility ^s ancient Riches.
And whosoever will note the manner of our Progenitors in that Age, when they
wore their Coat Armor over their Armor, and bearing their Arms on their
Shield, in their Banners, Pennons, and in what formal manner they were made
Bannerets, and had License to bear their Banners of Arms which they present
enrolled to their Prince, who unfolded and redelivered with happy wishes; I
doubt not but he will j^dge that our Ancestors were as Valiant and Gallant, as
they have been since they left off their Arms, and used the Colors and
Curtains of their Mistresses Beds instead of them. And though the Characters of
Mechan^cs cannot be read, yet Arms are silent Names, and the Science thereof is
Heroical. And forasmuch as the Skill of Armory consists of Rules of Blazoning
and Marshalling; (The first being an Explanation thereof in apt Terms either by
Colors, Planets, or Precious Stones) which ought to be with brevity,
plainness, and without repetition of these words, of, or, and on, or such like;
and the other being an ordinary disposing of Coats. as they may of right be
joined together. The premised well understood, will be infinitely sufficient to
Both.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by William Bromwich, at the Sign of the
Three Bibles in Ludgate street MDCLXXIX.


