A LETTER FROM Doctor More, WITH Passages out of several Letters from Persons
of good Credit.

Relating to the State and Improvement of the Province of PENNSILVANIA.

Published to prevent false Reports.

Printed in the Year 1687.

THE PREFACE.
Diverse false Reports going about Town and Country, to the Injury of the
Province of PENNSILVANIA, I was prevailed with by some concerned in that
Province, and others that desire the truth of things, to Publish such of the
last Letters as made mention of the State of the Country; to serve for answer
to the Idle and Unjust Stories that the Malice of some invent, and the
Credulity of others prepare them to receive against it; which is all the part I
take in this present Publication.

William Penn.

A Letter from Dr More.
Honored Governor,
I Have seen a Letter from your hand, directed to me, among many in this
Province, which came by Captain Richard Dimond: It was in all respect welcome
to me, and more particularly, for that you make mention of your coming to us
again, with your Family; a thing so much desired by all in these parts, and
more particularly by my self. But I fear that Madam Penn should give too much
credit to the evil Reports that I do understand are given out by many Enemies
to this new Colony, As if we were ready to Famish, and that the Land is so
barren, the Climet so hot, that English Grain, Roots and Herbs do not come to
Maturity; and what grows, to be little worth. How untrue all these things are
you well know; but we that have seen our handy Work, accompanied with Gods
blessing upon it, since your departure from us, are able to say something more
to encourage you to return to us again. You know, that when you went for
England, there was an indifferent plenty of most things, and that many hundred
Families were clearing of Land to Sow and Plant, as I was also doing; since
that, our Lands have been grateful to us, and have begun to reward our Labors
by abounding Crops of Corn this Year. But to give you to understand the full of
our Condition, with respect to Provision in this Province; we had last Fall,
and the Winter, abundance of good fresh Pork in our Market at two Pence
halfpenny per Pound, of this Country Money, which is an English two Pence;
Beef at the same rate; the like is this Year; and Butter for six Pence per
Pound; Wheat for four Shillings per Bushel; Rye three Shillings; and now all
this Summer Wheat is at three Shillings, and three Shillings 6 Pence; Rye at
eight Groats, and half a Crown; Indian-Corn seven Groats, and two Shillings
this Country Money still; so that there is now some Corn Transported from this
River. Doctor Butler has bought two hundred Bushels of Wheat at three Shillings
six Pence, to Transport, and several others, so that some Thousands of Bushels
are Transported this Season, and when this Crop that now is gathered is
Threshed, it is supposed that it will be abundantly cheaper then now it is, for
there has been abundance of Corn this Year in every Plantation.

The last Year I did plant about twelve Acres of Indian Corn, and when it came
off the Ground, I did only cause the Ground to be Harrowed, and upon that I did
sow both Wheat and Rye, at which many Laughed, saying, That I could not expect
any Corn from what I had sowed, the Land wanting more Labor: yet I had this
Year as good Wheat and Rye upon it, as was to be found in any other place, and
that very bright Corn. I have had a good Crop of Barley and Oats; and whereas
my People did not use my Barley well, so that much was shed upon the Ground, I
caused it immediately to be Plowed in, and is now growing, keeping a good
Color, and I am in hope of another Crop of Barley, having good Ears tho the
Straw be shorter. I did plant an Hopp-Garden this Spring, which is now
exceeding full of Hopps, at which all English People admire. Richard Colles and
Samuel Carpenter, etc. having had some Fields of Rye the last Summer, and
plowed the Stuble in order to sow other Corn, by some Casualty could not sow
their Fields, yet have they had considerable Crops of Rye, in the said Fields,
by what had been shed on the Ground in Harvest time. I have had seventy Ears of
Rye upon one single Root, proceeding from one single Corn; forty five of Wheat;
eighty of Oats; (...), twelve and fourteen of Barley out of one Corn: I took the
Curiosity to tell one of the twelve Ears from one Grain, and there was in it
forty five Grains on that Ear; above three Thousand of Oats from one single
Corn, and some I had, that had much more, but it would seem a Romance rather
then a Truth, if I should speak what I have seen in these things.

Arnoldus de la Grange has above a Thousand Bushels of English Grain this
Year, there is indeed a great increase every where. I had the last Year as good
Turnops, Carrots and Parsnops as could be expected, and in no wise inferior to
those in London, the Parsnops better, and of a great bigness; my Children have
sound out a way of Rosting them in the Embers, and are as good as Barbados
Potatoes, insomuch that it is now become a Dish with us. We have had admirable
English Pease this Summer; every one here is now persuaded of the fertility of
the Ground, and goodness of the Climate, here being nothing wanting, with
industry, that grows in England, and many delicious things, not attainable
there; and we have this common advantage above England, that all things grow
better, and with less Labor. I have planted this Spring a Quickset, of above
sixscore Foot long, which grows to admiration; we find as good Thorns as any in
the World.

We have had so great abundance of Pigeons this Summer, that we have fed all
our Servants with them. A Gentlewoman near the City, which is come into this
Province since you went for England, (Mrs Jeffs from Ireland) Cured Sturgion
the last Year, and I have eaten some this Summer at her House, as good as you
can get in London: some Barbados Merchants are treating with her for several
Barrels for the Barbados, and will give her any thing for them. We are wanting
of some more good Neighbors to fill up the Country. There is a French
Gentleman who made the last Year some Wine of the wild Grapes, which proved
admirable good, and far above the best Maderas that you ever tasted, a little
higher colored. And one thing I must take notice of, that we strove to make
Vinegar of it, but it is so full of Spirit that it will not easily turn to
Vinegar; a certain evidence of its long keeping. Your Vigneron had made a
Barrel of the same Wine, resolving to keep it for your Entertainment: I being
one day there, and speaking of what I had tasted at Monsieur Pelison's, he
showed me a Barrel, which he said was of the same sort that he had taken a
great deal of care to secure from being meddled with, he tauhing the head, it
sounded empty, at which the man was so amazed, that he was ready to Faint;
afterward looking about, it had leaked underneath, to about two Quarts; I
tasted it, and it was yet very good Wine, so I left the poor man much afflicted
for his loss. But I must acquaint you with one thing, that he having planted
some French Vines, the twenty fourth of March, the last Year, the same Vines
have brought forth some Grapes this Year, and some of them were presented to
President Lloyd the 28th of July, fully Black and Ripe, which is a thing
unheard of, or very extraordinary. I thought that this short account of our
present State and Condition, and Improvement would not be ill News to you,
considering that you know me not forward to put my hand to Paper slightly;
wherefore I hope that your Lady will not despise what I do here report, as
being the very truth of things; and if I could contribute thereby to her full
Satisfaction, I should have my end, as being willing to see you and her in this
place, where I shall not fear being rebuked for mis-representing things, I
shall conclude,

Governor, Your truly affectionate Friend and Servant. Nicholas More.
Green-Spring the 13th of September, 1686. Madam Farmer has found out as good
Limestone, on the School-kill, as any in the World, and is building with it;
she offers to sell ten Thousand Bushels at six Pence the Bushel, upon her
Plantation, where there is several considerable Hills, and near to your manner
of Springfield.

N. M.



In a Letter from the Governors Steward, October. 3. 1686.
THe Gardener is brisk at Work. The Peach-Trees are much broken down with the
weight of Fruit this Year. All or most of the Plants that came from England
grow, (being about four Thousand.) Cherries are sprung four and five Foot.
Pears, Codlings and Plumbs three or four Foot. Pears and Apple Grafts, in
Country Stocks, and in Thorns, are sprung three and four Foot. Rasberries,
Goosberries, Currants, Quinces, Roses, Walnuts and Figs grow well. Apricocks
from the Stone fourteen or sixteen Inches sprung, since the Month called April.
Our Barn, Porch and Shed, are full of Corn this Year.

In a Letter from the Governers Gardener, dated the 14th of the Month call'dMay
1686.
AS for those things I brought with me, it is much for People in England to
believe me of the growth of them; some of the Trees and Bushes are shot in five
weeks time, some one Inch, some two, three, four, five, six, seven, yea some a
eleven Inches; some of them not ten days set in the Ground before they put out
Buds. And Seeds do come on apace; for those Seeds that in England take fourteen
days to rise, are up here in six or seven days. Pray make agreement with the
Bishop of London's Gardener, or any other that will furnish us with Trees,
Shrubs, Flowers and Seeds, and we will furnish them from these places; for we
have excellent Trees, Shurbs and Flowers, and Herbs here, which I do not know I
ever saw in any Gardens in England --

In a Letter from Robert Turner a Merchant in Philadelphia, and one of the
Council, the 5th of October 1686.
I Also advise, that, blessed be God, Corn is very cheap this Season; English
Wheat sold here, to carry for New England, at three Shillings six Pence per
Bushel, and much Wheat Flour and Biscuit for Barbados. Things prosper very
well, and the Earth brings forth its increase; God grant we may walk worthy of
his Mercies. Of other Grains, plenty. As to the Town, Building goes on. John
Readman is building one Brick House for Richard Whitpain, of sixty Foot long,
and fifty six Foot wide. For the Widow Farmer, another Brick House. For Thomas
Barker and Samuel Jobson two Brick Cellers, and Chimnies for back Kitchings.
Thomas Ducket is Building a Brick House at the Skulkil, forty eight Foot long
and three Stories high; there are two other Brick Houses to be built this
Summer --

In a Letter, of the 2d of October, from David Lloyd, Clerk of the Peace, of
the County of Philadelphia.
I Shall only add, that five Ships are come in since our arrival, one from
Bristol, with 100 Passengers; one from Hull, with 160 Passengers; one from
New England for Corn, and two from Barbados; all of them, and ours (of above
300 Tun) had their loading here, ours for New England, and the rest for
Barbados; and for all this, Wheat (as good, I think, as any in England) is
sold at three Shillings six pence per Bushel, this Country Money, and for three
Shillings ready Money (which makes two Shillings five pence English Starling)
and if God continues his blessing to us, this Province will certainly be the
Grainary of America. The Governors Vineyard goes on very well, the Grapes I
have tasted of; which in fifteen Months are come to maturity --

In a Letter, of October last, from Thomas Holmes Surveyor General.
WE have made three Purchases of the Indians, which, added unto the six former
Sales they made us, will, I believe, be Land enough for Planters for this Age;
they were at first High, and upon their Distances; but when we told them of the
Kindness our Governor had always shown them; that the Price we offered far
exceeded former Rates, and that they offered us the Land before we sought them,
they agreed to our last Offer, which is something under three hundred Pounds
sterling. The Kings salute our Governor; they hardly ever see any of us, but
they ask, with much affection, when he will come to them again; we are upon
very good terms with them. I intend to send the Draughts for a Map by the first
--

In a Letter from James Claypole Merchant in Philadelphia, and one of the
Council.
I Have never seen brighter and better Corn then in these parts, especially in
the County of Chester. Provisions very cheap; Pork at two Pence, and good fat
fresh Beef at three halfpence the Pound, in our Market. Fish is plentiful;
Corn cheap; Wheat three and six pence a Bushel; Rye half a Crown; Indian Corn
two Shillings, of this Money: And it is without doubt that we shall have as
good Wine as any France produces. Here is great appearance of a Trade, and if
we had small Money for Exchange, we should not want Returns The Whale-Fishery
is considerable; several Companies out to ketch them: There is one caught, that
its thought will make several hundred Barrels of Oil. This, besides Tobacco
and Skins, and Furs, we have for Commerce --

FINIS.

