Imprimatur.

Sam. Parker.

ERRATA.
In the Pref. to the Exposit. page 4. l. 2. Interims, read, in terms.

In the Exposit. p. 11. l. 1. r. the Church in Thyatira. p. 53. l. 21. r. in
Thyatira. p. 107. l. 26. r. event.

In the Antidote. p. 11. l. ult. for at, r. all. p. 27. l. 17. r. impossible,
or. p. 91. l. 24. r. (...).

AN EXPOSITION OF THE SEVEN EPISTLES TO THE SEVEN CHURCHES; Together with A
Brief Discourse of IDOLATRY; with Application to the Church of ROME.

By HENRY MORE D. D.

PROVE. 12. 19. The lying tongue is but for a moment: but the lip of Truth shall
be established for ever.

London, Printed by James Flesher. 1669.

To the Right Honorable, John Lord Robarts, Baron of Truro, Lord Privy Seal,
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
COUNCIL.
My Lord,
WHat things single are usually thought sufficient to determine ones choice of
a Patron to any public Writing, whether it be private Obligation from
particular Favors, or the Desire of leaving to Posterity a just and honorable
Testimony to the Parts and Virtues of some excellent Person, or the design of
obtaining the Patronage and countenance of such a Person, to what we adventure
to make public, as is able by his Learning, Judgment and public Repute to
protect it from Injury; all these do so happily conspire in your Lordship, that
I should have thought it an Omission unpardonable if I had not taken this
opportunity of paying your Lordship this due respect, and of doing that right
to the Truth I here profess as to put it under the wings of so fit and able a
Patron.

Which still ought to be done with the greater alacrity, there being that
Providentiall Coincidence of things, that I should have a Book ready in the
Press at that very time that our Gracious Sovereign did think good to confer
upon your Lordship that great Honor and Trust of being Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland. Which conjuncture of Circumstances could not but excite me with
greater readiness to make your Lordship this congratulatory Present upon your
new Honor. Which all good Christians that know the inflexible uprightness of
your spirit, and cordial adherence to the Apostolic Faith and just Interest
of Reformed Christendom, cannot but congratulate.

For this it is indeed, My Lord, that has begot in me a more special esteem of
your Lordship, that in this instable and uncertain Age you have with that
steadiness of mind and clearness of Judgment stuck to the Truth and Purity
of the Protestant Religion, as discerning the vast difference betwixt it and
Popery, which yet too many now-adays, either because they are removed too great
a distance from all Religion, or else because their sight is extremely dim in
matters of this nature, can not, or will not, discern. But this is spoke with a
more particular regard to the second part of this small Volume I present your
Lordship withal.

But the first also has its special sutablenesse to the Circumstances your
Lordship is placed in. For by how much more power any one is entrusted with by
any Protestant Prince, by so much the more he is concerned to understand how
sacred a Province he undertakes, and how expressly that Religion and Profession
is owned in the Holy Prophecies Christ has delivered to his Church, above and
against the barbarous and idolatrous Tyranny of the Church of Rome. Which
things are set out with that plainness, evidence and easiness in this
Exposition of the Epistles to the Seven Churches that I hope no impartial
Reader can fail of being made exceeding sensible of the Sacredness of the
Protestant Religion and Interest by the perusal thereof. Besides, that there
are some notable Hints in these Oracles for the more happy and secure
management of the Affairs of Reformed Christendom.

I shall only name that passage to the Sardian Church, Remember how thou have
received, and heard, and hold fast, etc. The Verse runs out into a dreadful
Commination of heavy Judgments to the Angel of the Church of Sardis for his
looseness and slipperinesse in those points of Apostolic Doctrine which the
Reformers had recovered into the knowledge of so great a part of the world. And
amongst the things that they had heard, that voice of the Angel, Apoc. 18. Come
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, etc. was not the
least articulate. Whereby the Church of Rome was openly declared to be that
Babylong the Great, the Mother of Fornications and the Abominations of the
Earth; as also the Pope with his Clergy to be that notorious Antichrist.

This the Sardian Church had received from their Evangelicall Predecessors.
And it had been their everlasting establishment never to have for got it, never
to have let it die, or smothered it. But what mischief the halting betwixt two
Opinions is apt to do, and the not taking notice how sacred a thing the
Protestant Religion is in the sight of God, and how rejectaneous that of the
Church of Rome, I believe neither your Lordship nor any one else that has his
eyes opened either into History or the Affairs of the world can be ignorant of,
or, if he be a good Christian, make the observation without regrett and sorrow.

But the Prospect of what is to come is more pleasing and comfortable; which is
the state of the Church of Philadelphia, into which the Sardian Church, that is
to say, Reformed Christendom or the Protestant Churches, are to pass, as
being the next successive Intervall. Which therefore cannot but be a Note of
main importance for all Reformed States and Kingdoms to stear their Affairs
by, namely, to bend their course thitherward whither they are pointed to by the
Finger of God himself in his Holy Oracles. For they sail as it were with wind
and tide whose carriage of Affairs approaches the nearest to the purpose of
Divine Fate. Which is lively portrayed all along in this stupendous Book of
Prophecies written by S. John.

The most pleasing and enravishing part whereof is that which is typify'd or
prefigured by the Church of Philadelphia, the Church of Brotherly love. Which
is the next Scene Divine Providence has designed to introduce. And which all
those do most grossly oppose who for difference in matters not revealed in holy
Scripture, nor necessary to Salvation, think they have pretense enough with all
unchristian keenness and bitterness of spirit to reproach and inveigh one
against another, to nourish the highest Animosities, and to watch all
opportunities of persecuting, ruining, and trampling one another into the Dirt.

As this is extremely unchristian in it self, so is it also diametrically
opposite to that Dispensation that God intends to introduce into his Church as
the chiefest Blessing he has in store for her, and is as it were knocking at
the door to enter, if the lovd noise of hot and quarrelsome Brawls about
matters of smaller moment (as indeed all things are exceeding small, unless of
Apostolical Institution, if they stand in competition with that Royal Law of
Love,) did not drown the voice thereof, that it cannot so easily be heard.

But assuredly, my Lord, the letting this Philadelphian Dispensation in, or the
approaching as near unto it as we can, will prove the most effectual healing
and consolidating the Interest of Reformed Christendom, as well in the whole
as in the parts thereof, as we can desire or expect. Which therefore I humbly
conceive, that all persons the more Power they are entrusted with in any of the
Protestant Dominions, are the more obliged to consider by how much more they
are obliged to endeavor to promote the Interest of their Prince and Country
whose Affairs they administer. And therefore the right understanding of the
Vision of the Seven Churches so manifestly giving this aim for the prosperous
steering of Affairs, I thought this my Exposition of the said Churches no
unsuitable Present in these Circumstances to be made unto your Lordship. Of the
Usefulness whereof I having spoken more particularly in my Preface, I leave
the whole to your Lordship's judicious and favorable perusal, and wishing you
all good Success in the great Charge his Majesty has entrusted you with, I
cease to give you any farther trouble then in subscribing my self,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble and affectionate Servant, HENRY MORE.

The PREFACE to the Reader, declaring the Occasion, Solidity and Usefulness of
the ensuing Exposition.
Reader,
HOW unexpected this of mine may prove to thee I know not, but sure I am, it
cannot be more then to my self, who, as I have never yet affected to bestow my
pains on these kind of Subjects, so I thought my self secure, since the edition
of the late Dialogues touching the Kingdom of God, from ever being engaged in
them any more. For I made account that what was contained in Mr. Mede's
Writings, and in Synopsis Prophetica, and the abovesaid Dialogues, might
afford all useful satisfaction to any sober Enquirer into these Mysteries* And
I find neither my will nor my abilities to reach to the service of men in
needless Curiosities. And therefore thou may be sure I did not deem the
Prophetical Exposition of these Seven Epistles to the Seven Churches in Asia
to be such, but rather that there was no such Exposition that belonged unto
them, and therefore rested in the Literal sense, and an useful Moral
Application of them as they might suit any particular Church in any Age of the
world placed in like Circumstances with any of these Seven Churches. And these
things methought were so obvious, that it would have been a needless labor to
have attempted any thing in so facil a matter, where others have done
sufficiently well before.

2. But having sent the abovesaid Dialogues to a Gentleman in the Country, to
whom they were not unacceptable, as being curious of Subjects of this nature;
after his civil acknowledgements for my sending him the Book, and some
pertinent Reflections on the main matter, at last he falls upon this business of
the Seven Churches in these words: I find not, says he, any late Writer apply
the Seven Churches mystically, Revel. 2. and 3. Chapters; Mr. BRIGHTMAN having
failed in his Application. But I suppose the farther enquiry into that point
may be worth your pains. I shall now only hint, that the Seven Churches may
represent the State of the whole visible Church from Christ's time to the Day
of Judgment: viz. Ephesus, till Anno Christi 110; Smyrna, till 306; Pergamus,
declining toward Popery, till the WALDENSIAN Separation, about Anno 1160;
Thyatira, emerging from Popery, till the Pacification at Passaw in Germany
1552. and King EDWARD the Sixth's Reformation in England; Sardis, the state of
Reformed Christendom, (the Kingdom of God,) since whole Nations fell from
Rome, and until Rome shall be totally subdued; Philadelphia, when Truth, Peace
and Holiness shall universally prevail, and the name of the New Jerusalem
shall be written upon the Church, as is expressly promised Chap. 3. 12. Interims
too august for such a poor Church as that was literally taken. And this may be
a Key for all the rest. And lastly, Laodicea, when toward the end of the
Thousand years Satan shall be again let loose a little space, and Gog and Magog
shall trouble the Church, then lukewarm as in the days of Noah. This was the
whole (verbatim) of what that Gentleman writ touching this matter.

And this, Reader, was the Occasion of my undertaking, and the advantage I had
for the more easily performing this Task of expounding these Seven Epistles to
the Seven Churches. For the Intervalls here suggested, though they are
most-what different from what upon due deliberation with my self I thought
fittest to pitch upon, yet it is manifest that they could not but give aim
toward a more speedy hitting the intended Mark, and a more quick dispatch of
this Exposition which I present thee with.

Indeed, upon my endeavoring to frame out the same, and my searching into
Commentatours, I found that P. Galatinus interprets these Seven Churches of
seven Intervalls of the Church from the beginning to the end thereof. This
Cornelius a Lapide notes, but not a word of the Limits of these Intervalls. And
since my completing this Exposition, a learned Friend of mine showed me a
passage in Mr. Mede, Lib. 5. c. 10. where he argues for a mystical sense of
these Seven Churches, and seems to insinuate that they should Prophetically
sample unto us a sevenfold successive Temper and Condition of the whole visible
Church, according to the several Ages thereof, answering to the Pattern of the
Seven Churches here, and that a principio ad finem, and takes notice of the
fitly placing of PHILADELPHIA partly about the time the Beast is falling, and
partly after his Destruction, accordingly as we had already set down in our
Exposition. But the bounds of these successive Intervalls he has not attempted
to define. That Advantage therefore I had only from the party I above
mentioned, as well as the first Invitation to undertake this present Design.

3. But now as to the Solidity of the Performance, although I must confess the
clearness of the matter appeared so great to me at last, as that it infinitely
exceeded my first expectations of it, and proved satisfactory to my self beyond
what I thought possible; yet I will not here pre-ingage thy judgment or
belief, but freely remit thee to the Exposition it self, the Preparations to it
in the first and second Chapters, and the brief Recapitulation of the strength
of it in the last. Only, that thou may have nothing to stumble at, I will
endeavor to prevent thee in some Exceptions, the greatest I am aware of, and
yet in my own judgment not considerable.

4. As first, I would not have thee, according to the manner of some, let thy
mind dwell upon any thing that may seem less strong alone. As that Chap. 2.
Sect. 11. where I intimate, that because, in the Apoc. 1. 20.
interpreting the Seven golden Candlesticks, they are not applied nominatim to
the seven particular Churches in Asia that are said to be writ to, it is an
Invitation to the thinking of a more released sense, and that some other seven
Churches in another kind of meaning (as well as they, if not rather then
they,) may be aimed at; this ought to be no prejudice to the other Arguments in
the same Chapter that are so cogent, but rather those other to afford strength
to this, which is added as an easy Probability, not a convictive Demonstration,
and therefore is not considerable but in conjunction with the rest, as is
intimated in the very place. And I will only add here, That if there were no
other sense then the Literal to be looked after, that in all likelihood, for
sureness to keep men from Error, and from doing wrong to any Church by a false
Interpretation, the Spirit of God would have expressly said, that the seven
Candlesticks were the seven Churches of Asia that were there writ to, and that
the seven Stars were the seven Bishops of those very Churches.

I must confess, in my own judgment, I think there is some such thing hinted
at as I have declared, which made me not omit it. But I am also as sensible
that it can signify little to those that are averse, and are given to cavil,
who are prone to dwell on what seems weak, that they may ease their minds of
what is more strong and stringent. Which is a fault that is punishment enough
to him that commits it, he usually losing Truth by thus indulging to his own
ill humor.

5. I know not whether thou may mistake me also in the Allusion I memtion of
Ephesus to (...), as if it sounded like Aphesus, which I would warrant from
(...) (one of the Matres lectionis before the use of Points) standing for both
A and E; whence I would argue the affinity of those two sounds: when as thou
may object, that Martinius expressly speaking of these three Matres lectionis,
(...), says, that the first stands for A, the second for E and I, and the
third for O and U. But in Hebrew Writings without Points there is nothing more
familiar then (...) standing for E, as in (...), and the like. And in the Greek
tongue (...) and (...) and (...) and (...) are frequently changed into one
another, according to diversity of Dialect: so that there can be no difficulty
touching this thing.

6. Thirdly, It may happily be objected against our interpreting the Ten days of
Affliction predicted to the Church in Smyrna, of the Ten famous Persecutions,
that some reckon more then ten, adding an eleventh under Constantius the Arian,
a twelfth under Julian the Apostate, and a thirteenth under the Arian Emperor
Valens. But Prophecy being an anticipatorie History, it is sufficient that it
speak according to the usual language of Historians, whose reports run up on
these Ten so famously and distinctly taken notice of. And there are no more
then ten in the Intervall we set for the Church of Smyrna. After which
conspicuously comes in the Scene of Pergamus, Christianity having got the
conquest over the old persecuting Paganism. And Julian reigned not two years,
and his Attempts were most-what of another kind, and none considerable so as
to break this number. Besides that it happened in an Intervall notoriously of
another nature and denomination, and therefore is not to be taken notice of, it
bearing no proportion at all to the contrary Affairs of that Period.

Indeed the Arrian Persecutions are very considerable, but they are of another
nature from these Ten. The Church being (...) became proud, as well as exalted
out of the dust, and contentious, as well as proud, according to that of the
wise man, Prove. 13. 10. Only by pride comes contention, but with the
well-advised is wisdom. Christ was therefore faithful in his promise to the
Church in Smyrna, and procured them the Crown of life, and Safety from the
Pagan Cruelty and Persecution. But that the Church afterward in Pergamus fell
out amongst themselves, was their own fault, none of his, that taught them
expressly, That by this shall all men know ye are my Disciples, if ye love John
13, 35.
one another.

7. Fourthly, It may perhaps seem hard to thee, that I interpret the eating of
things offered to Idols of communicating with the Church of Rome in Apoc. 2.
14, 20.
their Idolatrous Mass. For how can that consecrated Bread be said to be
offered to an Idol?

It is true, he that they pretend to offer it to is no Idol, but the true God.
But by their Idolatrous practices, communicating Divine Worship to what is not
God, they debase the nature of the true God so far, as that they seem to lose
the true Notion of him, and in stead of him to worship an Idol of their own
brain.

For the true God is not so mean a Being that any others can partake in his
Worship. And therefore, according to the cutting and searching strain of the
Prophetic style, those that mingle Idolatry with the Worship of the true God
are represented as having no true Knowledge of him; and therefore whatever
religious Worship they do, they being devoid of the knowledge of the true God,
they must necessarily be conceived to do it to some Idol. According to which
sense is that of Amos, O ye house of Israel, have ye offered Chap. 5. 25.
to me victimes and sacrifices by the space of forty years in the wilderness?
yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, etc. Where the true God, by reason of
their Idolatry in worshipping other Objects, denies they at any time worshipped
him, though questionless they thought they did offer Victimes and Sacrifices
unto him. This is express and direct to the Scruple propounded.

But in our Exposition it is only insinuated, that there is a Prophetical
Diorism, or a Synecdoche, whereby Idolatry in the general is signified by that
particular species thereof, the eating things offered unto Idols. Which is used
here with the greater fitness and elegancy, because that the Idolatry is
committed in that part of their Religion that is performed in the eating of
what is consecrated. And if we do but consider that the Lord's Supper is a
Feast upon a Sacrifice, according to that of S. Paul, Christ our Passover is
sacrificed for 1 Cor. 5. 7.
us; therefore let us keep the Feast, (which Notion is made out with abundant
evidence by a late learned and judicious See Dr. Cudworth's Discourse of the
Lord's Supper.
Writer on that Subject,) we once supposing the eating of this Sacrifice
contaminated with Idolatry, what can be a more natural and apposite reproach to
it, then to parallel it to the Feasts upon the Pagan Idolothyta, the eating of
things offered unto Idols? Wherefore there is not the least harshnesse
imaginable in this Interpretation.

8. Fifthly, That it may be no prejudice to thy judgment touching the
Interpretation of Antipas, and its signifying as much as one against the Pope,
because that learned and reverend Expositour Dr. Hammond has styled it a wanton
and vain fancy in Mr. Brightman, who presumed so to interpret it, thou art to
consider, that this Censure of that Passage was not so much built upon any
weakness in the Passage it self, as that it was found in a farrago of Conceits
that were not so well managed as to support and countenance one another. And
therefore for the general Mr. Brightman's Exposition of these Seven Epistles
being not so convictive, that judicious Doctor was the more bold to speak so
slightly of this passage thereof. Which if it had been accompanied with other
parts of his Exposition of these Epistles that had had the like
unexceptionablenesse, it would never have been found fault with by so judicious
a Writer, as indeed there is no reason it should.

For no name can be so fit and significant for this purpose as this of (...).
For (...) and (...), or (...), signify one and the same thing, as Eustathius
and others from him usually do affirm. And it is most certainly true that they
are both (...), as Hesychius speaks. And therefore (...) and (...), or (...),
have exquisitely the same signification. But to have found (...) for (...) in
this supposed Prophecy had been quite against the laws of the Apocalyptick
style, that is as regardfull of due Concealment as of certainty of Revealment.
So that so plain a Passage would have stood out very coursly and harshly above
the rest of that smooth and delicate Contexture of these Visions, and
occasioned a tooearly intelligence of the meaning of these Prophecies. Besides
that Antipapas is no proper name of any man, and that the very literal Story
requires it should be Antipas. Wherefore the Indication both for sense and for
sound in this word Antipas is as exquisite as, considering the nature of the
Apocalyptick style, it either could or ought to have been. So that he that
would cavil at this interpretation must of necessity deny the Hypothesis, and
say there is no Prophetical sense at all of these Seven Epistles.

9. Nor need thou scruple at my applying that Passage of the Martyr Antipas
to the Albigenses and Waldenses, that were slain in the field, as if they were
not rightly termed Martyrs. For he that can save his Life by renouncing the
Truth, and yet parts with it, (though it be in the field,) is rightly deemed a
Martyr. Which was the case of these men. And that is remarkable for this
purpose which Mr. Mede takes notice of, That when Simon, Earl of Monfort, had
routed them, and made a great slaughter of them, and that the Bishop of Tolouse
there present took thereupon the opportunity of exhorting them to return to the
Roman Church, they seeing so plainly that the wrath of God was kindled against
them for their Separation from the Church; they answered in plain terms, that
they were the people of God overcome by the Beast, (Apoc. 13. 7.) and knowing
this to be their fate, yet would not flinch from the Truth: and therefore the
Army returning upon them, they had all their throats cut in the field. Whence
it is manifest that they were Martyrs properly so called, according to our
Definition thereof: As there were also several Antipas's in this Intervall
that suffered Martyrdom in that way that thou can not except against, that
is to say, such as were merely passive, and made no resistance. Some of them
are named by Mr. Brightman, who if he had done as well on the other five
Churches as he has on this of Pergamus and that of Thyatira, his Exposition of
the Seven Churches had been considerable.

10. And lastly, to arm thee against the authority of the abovenamed Venerable
person touching the reason of the name of Thyatira, as if it were as much as
Thygatira, a young Daughter; for which he perstringes Mr. Brightman, condemning
the Conceit for a mere groundless Fancy; I say, it is not evident that he so
much reprehends him for the Notation of the word, as for the application of it
to such a sense as he there expresses: which is much different from that sense
we have proposed, and far more dilute.

But as for my self, I must confess I could not but conceit that the Notation
of the word Thyatira was alluded to, after I had read that Passage in Cornelius
a Lapide on the Text: which, for thy fuller satisfaction, I shall transcribe.
Verum Strabo, lib. 13. Plinius, lib. 5. cap. 9. and alii, passim tradunt eam
(that is, the City Thyatira) primitus nuncupatam a Seleuco, filio Nicanoris,
(...), ob laetum nuncium natae sibi filiae, unde nomen Thyatirae. Thyatira ergo
Graece significat filiam; quod apt competit Jezebeli illici, quae hic
arguitur. This of Cornelius made me secure of the Authentickness of this
Notation, he so precisely quoting Strabo and Pliny for the same. And therefore
I could not but persuade my self that the Church of Rome was here called
Thyatira with some Allusion to (...). Had it not been for this, I should have
contented my self with the Allusion to (...) only.

But these Authorities made me search into the State of the Church of Rome in
this Intervall: and I found many things abundantly answerable to the Title in
the sense of this Notation. Amongst which if thou chance to think my Reflection
upon the multitude of Monks or Friars in those days to bear the least strength
with it, consider but what Polydore Virgil writes of that one Order of
Franciscans, who, as some De rerum Invent. lib. 17. cap. 4.
others, were the peculiarly-devoted to the blessed Virgin: Totum terrarum
orbem, says he, una haec implevit Familia, ut vulgus jam tum stupefactum
suspicaretur non tam Pietatem, quam Otium and Ignaviam interdum multis cordi
esse. And to have such swarms of men that had renounced their Virility, and led
an idle life, and went gadding and gossipping up and down, telling odd Stories
to the people, as old Wives and Nurses do to Children, having most of them
Chins as smooth as Women's, and their Faces mob'd in Hoods, and long Coats like
Petticoats, as if they had a greater ambition to appear the Pedissequae or
Handmaids of the Virgin Mary, (whom the Doctors of that Church love to call
the Daughter of God,) then the Menservants and Soldiers of Jesus Christ, who
in this Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, on purpose, one would think to
reproach the Roman Church for this Idolatrous Corrivalry, or rather Prelation,
of the Virgin in religious Worship before Christ, expressly calls himself the
Son of God; This, I say, Ap^c. 2. 18.
must assuredly be a consider able accession to the Womanishnesse or
Daughterlinesse, if I may so speak, of the Church of Rome, which is here
perstringed in this Period by an Allusion to Thygatira, which signifies a
Daughter.

11. And although upon search after those places cited out of Strabo and Pliny
I could not find what I sought for, yet I found no reason to recede from this
part of my Interpretation. First, Because this passage Cornelius cites may
happily be found in some other place in those Authors, though it be not in
these. Secondly, because there need be no such account of the Notation of the
word, since paronomasticall Allusion is sufficient, and Thyatira of it self
sounds near enough to Thygatira, as must be generally allowed by all those that
give their suffrage for the derivation therefrom. And it is not hard to prove
it from the easy Elision is made of the letter G out of sundry words. Those in
the English Tongue are obvious. It is more pertinent to instance in the Greek,
where (...) amongst the Poets is srequently for (...). And also in the middle
of words, the Boeotians pronouncing (...) and (...) for (...). Andfrom the
Latin magis is the French word mais, and from Magister Master. And Caninius
in general pronounces, Alia sunt innumerabilia quae deperdunt G: which implies
it to be but a weak melting Consonant, and such as easily degenerates into Y,
and, as it may be placed, is easily quite lost. Which argues that the sound of
(...) and (...) are near enough for paronomasticall Allusion in any indifferent
man's judgment whatsoever.

And that (...) is the same that (...), besides that common Analogy of making
nomina parasyllaba (as they are called) from the fifth Declension, as from
(...), there is an example exquisitely answering this of (...) from (...),
namely, (...) from (...). So that the word is unexceptionable.

And lastly, though we should give it for granted that neither Pliny nor Strabo
has any such Passage as Cornelius pretends, yet Stephanus Byzantius expressly
has in his (...), whose very words I will transcribe for thy better
satisfaction. (...) that is to say, THYATIRA, a City of LYDIA, was first called
PELOPEA and SEMIRAMIS; but SELEUCUS the son of Nicanor waging war with
Lysimachus, and hearing that he had a Daughter born to him, called the City
THYGATIRA. And it ought to be spoken in the feminine gender, though now they
make it of the neuter. All this surely will abundantly warrant and secure a
paronomasticall Allusion in Thygatira, which signifies a Daughter.

12. And this may suffice for the making good the Solidity of our Exposition.
And I say Solidity, rather then Perfection, affirming only all to be right so
far as we have gone, but not denying but that others better versed in History
may more fully verify what we have attempted. Nor did all things occurr that
my self had read, and should have noted if they had come to my mind. As those
notorious ten years of the most bloody Persecution of all under Diocletian,
which, I think, may in special be alluded to by the ten days mentioned in the
Church of Smyrna, as well as the ten Persecutions in general, by a Prophetical
Henopoeia.

The Notation also of the names of Balaam and Balac are very accommodate to
Pergamus; Pergamus signifying what is high, and Balaam the Lord of the People.
Which Balaam being also the false Prophet, and set here for the Pope and his
Clergy, agrees excellently well with the Lordlinesse of him in this Pergamenian
Period, wherein he trod upon the Necks of Emperors, and kicked their Crowns
off with his feet. And Balac, which is here the Secular Sovereignty, whether it
signify Destruction or Emptiness, suits very well with the state of that
time, when the power of the Pope had so overmastered all, that the Secular
Magistrate was either but the bloody Executioner of his Edicts, or else stood
for a mere Cipher, the Temporal Power being quite in a manner evacuated by the
Rampancy of the Spiritual.

And seeing all the names in this Prophecy are so significant, I leave to the
enquiry of the learned whether there may not be some proper significancy in the
name of Jezebel also; for it seems not incapable of a fitting Etymology, and
that according to the Pattern of a severe Critic in the Hebrew Tongue; Greg^r.
^ranc. ^xic. ^anct. t^t. 07.
who in his account of the name (...) (which is just such another Composition
as (...),) says, that it may be compounded of either (...) ubi, or (...) vae,
or (...) non, and (...) gloria. So therefore say I may (...) be compounded of
either (...) or (...) and (...), which signifies Habitaculum; or else of (...)
and (...), which in the Chaldee (which is but a Dialect of the Hebrew)
signifies Stercus; or of (...) Insula, and (...) Stercus. Which last is less
accommodate to our purpose, unless Insula here signify symbolically, as Mr.
Mede sometimes interprets it of a Church as a place separate, as Islands are by
the Sea, and holy, in that it is separate. And then the Reproach will be upon
the holy Church of Rome in this Thyatirian Intervall, as if it had become an
Island of Filth and Dung. Which was too true of them, for all their outward
Gildings and Paintings.

But the other Notations methinks are more simple and easy, and fitly accord
with both the History of Jezebel and the Fate of the Roman Church at the end of
the Thyatirian Intervall. For if we derive (...) from (...) ubi, or (...) non,
and (...) habitaculum, it will plainly glance at Jezebel's being slung out at
the window from her habitation; but most fitly prefigure the dispossession of
the Roman Priests and Friars at the beginning of the Reformation, that they
would be cast out of their Habitations, and that their places should know them
no more. So that the very Name of Jezebel bears in it the Fate of that Church
at the close of that time.

But if we derive (...) from (...) vae or heu, and (...) stercus, both the
Fault and the Punishment of the Roman Church will be found written in this
Name; her Filth and Corruptions being compared to Dung, and her Punishment
intimated not unlike that of Jezebel's, as it is written, And the carcass 2
Kings 9. 37.
of Jezebel shall be as the dung on the face of the earth. So that the Notation
of the name denotes with what foul Reproach the Papal Power and Superstition
would be put down in those places out of which it was to be exterminated; that
it should be trodden down into the very Dirt. So that upon him that was in the
Pergamenian Intervall (...) the Lord of the People, (the Papal Hierarchy
domineering over all,) at the close of this Thyatirian Intervall this insulting
Lamentation might be taken up with a paronomasticall Allusion, not much unlike
the foregoing Etymology in the sense thereof, and near enough to the sound of
(...), namely, (...), Alas the Dung or Dirt of the Papal Lordlinesse! How is it
trodden down as the Mire in the streets! Which was notoriously performed in the
actings of Martin Luther against the Pope and Roman Clergy.

But whether this or what else may be alluded to by the sound of the Name, I am
not very solicitous, the Story of the Person being sufficient to warrant the
meaning I have given of the Text, as any one may see by perusing the
Expolition. And our Performance; I hope, will appear solid enough without
descending to such curious Niceties. We will therefore now only add something
briefly touching the Usesulnesse thereof, and so conclude.

13. And certainly our Exposition of these seven Epistles to the seven Churches
has an equal Usefulness with any other Exposition of the Apocalyptick Visions,
and the more considerable, in that it is a more compendious comprehension of
the main drift of them all.

First then, it serves for the confirmation of our faith in the particular
Providence and Watchfulness of Christ over his Church, it being so manifest
from this Exposition with what care and steddiness he has carried on things
hitherto in the first five Intervalls, and that they have been no otherwise
then He himself has predicted in these Prophetical Epistles.

But then again, in the second place, here is an ample and timely Testimony in
the behalf of the Protestants, I mean such as have declared against and
forsaken the Communion of the Church of Rome, from the time of the Waldenses to
the first Reformers usually so called; the Waldenses being acknowledged the
faithful Martyrs of Christ, and those other that lived within the Intervall of
the Church in Thyatira carrying away no less Encomium, as being thus described
in the Epistle to that Church; I know thy works, and charity, and service, and
faith, and thy patience, Apoc. 2. 19.
and thy works, and the last to be more then the first. So that they approved
themselves more and more, even till they broke out at last into a National
Reformation. And shall not our first Reformers then be thought worthy of having
the Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses applied to them, who have so Apoc.
11. 11, 12.
ample a testimony from Christ himself, whom the Father has constituted the
Judge of the whole World? And shall not they rightly be said to have ascended
into Heaven in a Political sense, to whom was made good that Promise to the
Church in Thyatira, To him Apoc. 2. 26.
that overcomes will I give power over the Nations, etc? This therefore of the
Church in Thyatira does farther ratify what we have Synops. Prophet. Book 2.
C. 22. sect. 12.
elsewhere delivered touching the Rising of the Witnesses, that the Completion
of that Prophecy was in that wonderful Reformation God unexpectedly brought
about by Luther and others.

Whence it will follow, that the sound of the sixth Trumpet is over, and that
the Forty two months, the One thousand two hundred and sixty days, or the Time
and Times and Half a time, are expired as to the fulfilling of Prophecy; and
consequently, that it is in vain for any to compute any Futurities upon the
supposall of their Expiration to come; and that those that do so will find
themselves confuted by the unsutablenesse of Events, and thereby expose the
endeavor of interpreting Prophecies to reproach and scorn, and weaken men's
belief even of those Expositions that are true, and give great advantage to the
common Adversary.

But as it is most true in it self, so it is most for the Interest of Reformed
Christendom, to take notice, that the Protestant Reformation is the fulfilling
of the Vision of the Rising of the Witnesses, and of their Ascending into
Heaven; that men may have that value for the Reformation that is due thereto,
(it having thereby so plain a Ratification from Divine Testimony of the
rightfulnesse thereof against the Tyrannies and Idolatries of the Church of
Rome,) and that both Magistrate and People may everywhere be the better
sodered together upon this consideration, and that all Sects that keep the
Foundation may have the better esteem for one another, and not vilify and hate
one another in such sort as usually they do, but be in a readiness for
Christian Unity and Love. For it is this Dispensation of Spirit that must give
Antichrist that most deadly Blow that is to come, and not a flaming Sword out
of the mouth of the Rider of the white Horse literally understood, or large
streams of fire spouted out of Heaven upon him, or any such miraculous
assistence, as some ignorantly expect at the finishing of the 1260 days. Which
groundless Supposition is fit for nothing but to engender vain Heats and
presumptuous Conceits, to which no answer will be given but Shame and
Frustration.

But the plain Truth understood as it is, naturally tends to the begetting in
all Reformed Christendom a mutual esteem of one another, and the suppressing
that vain Presumption in Parties, as if they were the sole people that the
Vision of the Witnesses belonged to, and so ought to expect mavelous things
for themselves conjoined with the destruction or suppression of all the rest
that are not of their own Party. Which fond, or rather unchristian, Conceits
are quite expunged by the true and faithful Interpretation I have published to
the world of the Rising of the Witnesses; which puts them in a way rather of
duly prizing one another, and of jointly endeavoring in the spirit of Sobriety
to advance the common Interest of whole Reformed Christendom, then for any one
Party so vainly to presume of themselves above all the rest.

And finally, this groundless expectation of any such wonderful events upon
the expiration of the 1260 days being thus wiped away, that time as to any
fulfilling of Prophecies being already expired, and no set time being defined
for the future, but only the order of things in the Vision of the Vials, it is
left for the Protestants to compute the approach of the final Ruin of
Antichrist and the blessed Millennium according to their own progress in the
Mystery of real Regeneration and indispensable Duties of Christianity. By how
much more holy, by how much more harmless, by how much more humble, by how
much more Heavenly-affected they find one another, by how much more discreet,
by how much more faithful and obedient to the public Magistrate, by how much
more kind and loving to one another, and by how much more seriously affected
for the advancing the public good and the endeavoring the common welfare of
all mankind, (which will introduce the Philadelphian Intervall,) by so much
more near they may reckon the approach of the downfall of Antichrist, and the
glorious Reign of Christ in his Saints at the happy Millennium. But what other
Indications there be besides these in the Visions of the Prophets, whereby we
may compute the nearness of those Times, I must ingenuously confess I know
not. But this was a sudden Excursion. We will return again into the way.

14. But thirdly, In that it is said, Notwithstanding, I have a few things
Apoc. 2. 20.
against thee, because thou suffer that Woman Jezebel, which calls her
self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants to commit Fornication, and
to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, etc. this is a perfect clearing of the
Protestant Reformers from that heinous Crime of Schism that the Church of Rome
so magisterially lays to their charge, it plainly implying that their
Separation from the Church of Rome was not only no Fault, but a Virtue, and an
indispensable point of Obedience to the command of Christ, and that it had been
Disobedience and Rebellion against Christ not to have separated, and therefore
was impossible to be any Schism. Which is a thing worthy of our notice and
consideration.

As is also this, (contrary to the opinion of some, otherwise learned,) That to
depart from the Church of Rome upon the very account of Idolatry is not Schism
before God, but only in the sight of men, and those, it is to be feared, of
none of the purest minds, but rather such as have a greater sense of the carnal
Interest of the Church then of the Glory of God, and the purity of his Worship.
For Christ, who is God blessed for ever, does here blame the Church in
Thyatira, that she suffers the Woman Jezebel any longer, and does not cast her
off, (as the Eunuchs cast her out of the window in the Type,) and that for this
very cause, because she is a Teacher of Idolatry, and an Abettour and
Countenancer of spiritual Fornication; as is manifest in the Text. So that
before God, or in the sight of God, both the Church of Rome stands guilty of
Idolatry, and also the Protestants leaving her Communion upon that account are
acquitted from any the least taint or suspicion of Schism. And that the Spirit
of God does but witness with our spirits in the truth of this matter, if thou
have not lost the free use of thy Reason, that brief Treatise of Idolatry added
to this present Exposition will, I hope, abundantly satisfy thee: which
therefore I have adjoined as a suitable Appendage thereunto.

15. Fourthly, In that Reformed Christendom (especially after their Remissness
in Life and Manners, and Contentionsnesse about Trifles,) is represented (under
the Type of the Church in Sardis) to be in such an imperfect Condition, though
emerged out of the grossnesse of the Popish Idolatry, (for there is no farther
complaint of either the Doctrine of Balaam or of Jezebel here,) this should
teach us to be humble, and not over-fierce and confident in our Opinions and
Doctrines, but meekly to bear one with another, and be ready to be instructed
by one another for the clearing up the Truth.

But in the mean time things being no better then they are, since they are no
worse then they were predicted, we are hence to learn, that it is our Duty
never to suffer our minds to relapse toward the Fleshpots of Egypt, or
think we had as good go back again to Rome, as to be no better then we are.
For this Sardian state is like the wandering in the Wilderness betwixt Egypt
and the promised Land, which is the Philadelphian state, into which there is no
entrance till after the seven Vials, that is, till the last of them be poured
out, or at least a-pouring. As it is said in the fifteenth of the Apocalypse;
And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power;
and no man was able to enter into the Temple till the seven plagues of the
seven Angels were fulfilled. Where no man, according to the Apocalyptick style,
signifies, that that company of men that were to enter into, and make up, that
state of the Church which is here styled (...), the living Temple of God, would
not appear in that eminent condition till after the Vials, the last either
current or complete. Which agrees admirably with that passage in the Epistle to
Philadelphia, Him that overcomes will I make a Apoc. 3. 12.
Pillar in the Temple of my God. So that these Philadelphians shall not only
enter into the Temple after the smoke of the Vials, but never go out of it
again, according to the sense we have explained it in.

Wherefore because we are in a kind of Wildernesse-condition, we ought with
Faith and Meekness and Patience to abide till God shall bring us into that
good Land, and not to murmur against him, and reproach his Providence, who has
thought fit to carry on things with such leisurely steps, nor peevishly and
falsely to say that we had as good return to Rome again, and that it is a
question whether the Reformation has done more good or hurt. For such thoughts
or speeches are false, injudicious, and ungrateful Reproaches against the
sacred Providence of God, whose ways these bitter, shallow and unsanctify'd
spirits understand not, because the spirit of the world has blinded their eyes.

And forasmuch as there is no complaint of Idolatry in the Epistle to this
Sardian Church, nor the least hint to make any Separation, as before, all the
Churches of Reformed Christendom, and all the particular Sects and Members
thereof, ought to have a tender regard how they divide from one another or
break Communion for difference of Ceremony or Opinion; but holding all the
indispensable Foundation, and bearing joint Testimony against the gross
Idolatries and wild Enormities of the Church of Rome, to study Peace and
mutual Compliance, that the Body of Reformed Christendom may be more strong
and compact to stand against the common Enemy.

But above all, we are with might and main to endeavor to perfect Holiness in
the fear of God, and to purge our selves from all pollution of flesh and
spirit, that we may prevent the extremity of that Judgment which is threatened
as suddenly and unexpectedly to come upon the Church of Sardis. And these, I
think, are main Apoc. 3. 3.
Usefulnesses discoverable in the Interpretation of the Epistle to the Sardian
Church.

16. And fifthly, As for the Exposition of the Church of Philadelphia, it is of
main Importance for the making of the world good. For it is the ordinary excuse
for the reigning of Impiety and Immorality in the world, that men will be men
as long as the world lasts, and that things are more likely ever to grow worse
and worse then better: and therefore very few there are that will either
attempt the amending of their own Lives, or the encouraging others so to do.
When notwithstanding it is plain, according to the Prophetical sense of the
Epistle to the Church of Philadelphia, that there will be a time when
Righteousness and true Holiness will have a most glorious reign upon earth.

But those that are averse from this belief are usually averse also from
believing any certitude in the Expositions of Prophecies. They will not,
forsooth, be so presumptuous as to pretend they can understand them, especially
such as either chastise the abominable Wickednesses of the Roman Church, or
such as promise Times transcendently better. Which is a piece of Hypocrisy
much like that of Ahaz, when the Prophet bid him ask a Sign of the Lord his
God; but he, good modest Hypocrite, would not ask a Sign, neither would he
tempt the Isa. 7. 12.
Lord. The meaning whereof was, that he would not amuze nor distract his
thoughts, nor render himself more obnoxious by taking notice of a supernatural
Evidence against the natural Sentiments and persuasions of his own carnal
mind, under whose Government he was resolved to be, and not be dissettled by
the Inlets of any higher Light. The application is very easy and obvious.

17. And lastly, Admitting the Prophetical meaning of the Epistle to the
Church of Laodicea, it is of great use for the establishing our Faith in that
grand Point, That this Terrestrial Scene will have an end, and that at the
close of all Christ will visibly come in Judgment to reward all men according
to their works; That he will judge both the quick and the dead according to the
Orthodox sense of the Apostolic Doctrine.

To all which we may add, that as the Expositions of these Seven Epistles to
the Seven Churches in Asia are in a manner as convincing as any other Visions
in the whole Apocalypse, so they are far more easy, and reach the main Design
in a less compass of words, and have not that operosenesse of Synchronisms
necessarily hanging on them as the other have for the clearing of the sense;
but are only seven Intervalls manifestly succeeding one another, whose Bounds
so far as things are past are easily determinable. And we know that the
Intervall of Sardis ends where that of Philadelphia begins, and Laodicea is the
close of all. Which Facility and Comprehensiblenesse must needs improve the
Usefulness of these Expositions very considerably.

And there wanting nothing but the Significations of the Names to be added for
the easy Applicability of the Events to each Intervall, I will, for the
satisfaction of the Reader, briefly furnish them that have no skill in the
original Languages with the sense and meaning of the Names of all the Seven
Churches aforehand.

18. Ephesus therefore, with an Allusion to the Greek word Ephesis, signifies
Desire, the first moving Principle that drives on an Activity for the attaining
the main Scope we aim at. But with an Allusion to Aphesis, it signisies
Remissness, for which this Church of Ephesus is Apoc. 2. 4.
blamed: or else, alluding again to Aphesis, it signifies the starting or
letting loose the Racers at the beginning of the Race. Which agrees very fitly
with this Ephesine Intervall, which is the beginning of the Church, and of the
whole course of Providence concerning the same to the end of the world.

Smyrna signifies Myrrh, intimating the bitter Affliction of the Primitive
Church under the Ten Pagan Persecutions.

Pergamus signifies Sublimity or Exaltation, intimating the raising of the
Church out of her former dejected and afflicted condition under the aforesaid
Persecutions into a glorious Triumph over Paganism; as it fell out upon the
Conquest of Constantine the great. It signifies also, or prefigures, the
enormous Haughtiness of the Church of Rome in that Intervall.

Thyatira, in Allusion to Thygatira a Daughter, intimates the
more-then-ordinary Womanishness of the Church of Rome in that Intervall: But in
Allusion to Thyateria, Altars of Incense or sweet Odours, it signifies the
more-then-ordinary frequentness of burning the blessed Protestant Martyrs with
fire and faggot in this Period. Which Cruelty though it was abominable in
respect of that bloody and barbarous Church that committed it; yet the
suffering of those holy Martyrs in this manner out of Fidelity to Christ and
his Truth was a Sacrifice of sweet Odours to him, and very gratefully accepted
of him.

Sardis, in Allusion to Sarda or lapis Sardius, (the same that Carnalina,)
signifies the imperfect and carnal Condition of that Intervall of the Reformed
Church that is called Sardian.

Philadelphia, which signifies Charity in general, and particularly a more
special love to them of the true Household of Faith, intimates the Reign of the
Spirit, which is the Spirit of Love. For God is 1 John 4. 16.
Love, and he that abides in Love abides in God, and God in him. This is that
illustrious Reign of Christ in his Millenniall Empire of Love, when the
Christian life shall take place, and Opinions and Persecutions shall be done
away.

And lastly, Laodicea signifies a popular Political or externally-Legal
Righteousness, the outward form of the former Philadelphian state, but, as in
old age, the spirit much decayed, though the outward figure of the body
much-what the same. It signifies also the arraigning and judgeing of the
people, that is, the Nations of the world, when Christ shall come to judge both
the quick and the dead; because this is to be performed at the close of this
Laodicean Intervall.

19. The significancy of the Names of these Seven Churches reckoned always in
such an order, as that seven Intervalls of the Church, from the beginning to
the end of all, answer exactly in the Affairs of the Church both to these Names
in this order they are reckoned, and to the Conditions of the Seven Churches as
they are orderly described in the Seven Epistles to them, is a plain
Demonstration to them that are not extremely refractory, (especially if you
add the Certainty that there must be a Prophetical meaning of these Epistles,
as is made good in the first and second Chapters of the ensuing Book,) I say,
it is a plain Demonstration, that our Exposition is true, as well as so easy
and comprehensible, and therefore of an universal Usefulness as well to the
Illiterate as the Learned. Which I hope, Reader, will be a sufficient Excuse
for the Author, that he has either invited thee to the pains of reading, or
given himself the trouble of compiling, this present Treatise. Farewell.

A Prophetical EXPOSITION OF THE SEVEN EPISTLES Sent to THE SEVEN CHURCHES IN
ASIA, From Him THAT IS, AND WAS, AND IS TO COME.

SIRACIDES. Chapter 59. He that gives his mind to the Law of the most High, and
is occupied in the meditation thereof, will seek out the wisdom of all the
Ancient, and be occupied in Prophecies.

A Prophetical EXPOSITION OF THE SEVEN EPISTLES Sent to THE SEVEN CHURCHES in
Asia.
CHAP. I.
A Preparation toward the Mystical or Prophetical Interpretation of the Seven
Epistles to the Seven Churches of Asia.

1. WE shall first premise, That as those two following Prophecies of the Seven
Seals, and of the opened Book, reach from the beginning to the end of the
Church; so this of the Seven Churches reaches also from the beginning of the
Church to the end of all. Which seems congruous both from the nature of the
Vision it self, and from the following Examples of the Prophecies of the Seven
Seals and the opened Book.

We shall premise in the second place, That as it is conspicuous that four of
the names of these seven Churches are directly significant of some State and
Condition they are in, viz. Smyrna, Pergamus, Philadelphia and Laodicea; so it
is exceeding credible that the other three names may allude to some thing that
may set out their Nature and Condition also, viz. Ephesus, Thyatira and Sardis;
as we shall take more express notice in the process of our Exposition.

Lastly, which might as well (if not better) have been noted at first, This
more mystical sense, which we are now a-rendring of the Seven Churches, does
not at all clash with the Literal sense of the same, nor exclude that useful
Applicability of them for the Reproof or Praise of any Churches particular in
any time or Age of the Christian world, that are for the like things obnoxious
or commendable. But the distinct Providence of God, and his watchfulness and
foresight of the Affairs of his Church, may happily be more illustrated and
displayed by this mystical way of Exposition then by that Literal or Moral.

2. We will therefore distinguish the whole Duration of the Church of Christ,
(especially so far forth as it is within the limits of the Roman Empire, which
also the other Prophecies in the Apocalypse seem chiefly to regard) into Seven
Intervalls, and will suppose the first Intervall to end where the second
begins, viz. in the tenth year of Nero, or Anno Christi 63.

3. Which Period therefore of the Ephesine Church ending so early, even about
thirty years before St. John's writing the Apocalypse, agrees excellently well
with that passage Chapter 1. v. 18, 19. where, after Christ's declaring himself the
first and the last; (as before in the same Chapter he is called He that was,
and is, and is to come) and his mentioning his own Death and Resurrection, and
how that he will be alive to the end of the world to carry on the Affairs of
his Church; he presently inferrs, Write therefore what things thou have seen,
what things are, and what things shall be hereafter, (which he expressly and
immediately calls the Mystery of the seven Stars and the seven golden
Candlesticks, ver. 20. which is worth the noting.) What things thou have seen
already, in the times of thy life past, namely, the state of the Ephesine
Church: what things are now present, viz. the Smyrnian state of the Church in
which thou art, and tastest of the bitterness of it in this thy Exile here in
Patmos (for the Ten Persecutions were then already begun, and John was in the
Second of them:) and what things shall be hereafter, namely, to the end of the
world, in the residue of the period of the Smyrnian Church, and in the periods
of the Remainder of the Seven Churches succeeding. And questionless the Vision
of the Rider of the Apoc. 6. ^^
white Horse respects what was then past, namely, Christ's first Warfare upon
his conquest of Death, and his being mounted into his glorified Body; who after
from on high sent down Succors to his Apostles and Disciples, and assisted and
and managed that illustrious Battle in the beginning of the Apostolic Times so
successfully and gloriously, that infinite numbers of men were brought under
the obedience of the Gospel, even within the space of the Ephesine Period.

4. So that there can be no scruple of the Church of Ephesus representing a
State of the Church past; but only that it seems improper to direct an Epistle
to a Church then out of being. But this can be no argument with them that hold
the Seven Churches to be seven successive Conditions of the Church to the
worlds end. For make the Exitus of the Ephesine Church reach beyond S. John's
time, suppose to Anno Christi 100, or thereabout; the rest of the Epistles will
be writ to Churches not yet in being, and some many hundreds, nay thousands of
years ere they shall be: which yet they must not count absurd.

5. The briefest account therefore of this matter is this, That the Spirit of
God seems to drive on two main designs in the Vision of these Seven Churches at
once. The one, most effectually to animate and encourage the Church to do
well, to stick to Truth and Holiness through all the Trials and Calamities of
this present life; as also to deter them from all kind of Sin and wickedness
of what nature soever, whether Apostasy from the Faith, Idolatry, Sensuality,
or whatever Remissness in Manners: For which design this Epistolar way is
exceeding accommodate, it bearing the form of personally speaking to people,
and so the more forcibly makes them take notice, in a manner whether they will
or no, of what is said unto them. The other design, and that so laid as not to
foregoe the former advantage, is to instruct the Church in the Providence of
God and his Foresight, to show how all things lie bare before his eyes in such
order and succession as they are in time to come to pass. In the Literal sense
of these Epistles to the Seven Churches, that former design is plainly pursued
and attained, understanding them directed to these Seven Churches in Asia then
in being; and in a very great measure in the Moral sense. These Epistles, I
say, being so applicable to any part of the Catholic Church in any Age
thereof, placed in the same or like circumstances of Condition with these
Asiatick Churches, this Epistolar way will have a considerable efficacy and
influence upon them, for either Animation or Reproof.

6. But now the great Question is, Why the Prophetical design discoverable in
the mystical Interpretation should have been couched in this Epistolar way,
especially the Epistle to Ephesus, being writ after the Ephesine Period was
expired. To which I answer, that this Prophetical design was not intended for
the Ephesine Church in this mystical sense, but for future Ages; and
therefore, it is taken in only to make up the entireness of the whole
Succession of the Church in its several distinct states from the beginning to
the end of all. But this Epistolar way is still retained in this mystical
sense, for the same usefulness it had in the Literal to the Seven Churches in
Asia then really in being. For so soon as any of these Letters by this
mystical sense is understood to be directed to any successive part of the
Church, as now, for example, (as will appear anon) the Epistle to the Church of
Sardis is directed to the Protestant Church or Reformed Christendom, this
Succession of the Church ought to be as much concerned, as that particular
Church of Sardis was in Asia minor.

And this intention of the Holy Ghost being once understood, it will be of the
like usefulness to the Philadelphian Church especially, and also to the
Laodicean.

Wherefore the Objections were but small, considering the Usefulness of this
Epistolar way, though there were no other sense of these seven Epistles and the
seven Churches but the mystical. For as in an entire Vision, where the
beginning is touching something past or present, all goes under the Title of
Prophetical, though that part that respects things past is but Historical
Representation: so in this entire Epistolar Vision, though the first part be
Epistolar, yet it is but Historical Representation, exhibiting times and
persons past (as if they were present to be writ to) and that for uniformity
sake in the form of an Epistle, as what is past in History under the form of
Prophetical Vision, as the Rider of the white Horse, which is the first in the
Vision of the Seals; though the Representation was of what was partly past, and
partly present. But what is to come is the proper object of all Vision
Prophetical.

But now besides all this, in the Literal sense there being then a Church in
Ephesus when that Epistle was wrote to it, and in a Moral sense it being
applicable to any Church that does Ephesize in any part of Christendom and at
any time; the Objection, in my judgment has melted into less then nothing. And
therefore, notwithstanding this exception, we will not stick to place the end
of the Interval of the Ephesine Succession in the tenth of Nero's Reign, and in
the year of Christ 63.

Till then let the Church of Christ be represented under the Title of Ephesus;
from that time, till about three hundred and odd years after Christ, under the
name of Smyrna: from thence, to the latter end of the Persecution of the
Albigenses and Waldenses, let her be the Church dwelling in Pergamus: from that
time, till whole Nations fell off from the Pope, let the same Church bear the
name of Thyatira: from that time Protestantisme became the Religion of Nations,
till the last Vial, let this Church bear the Title of the Church in Sardis:
from that time till the fourth Thunder, let it wear the name of Philadelphia:
See Divine Dialogues, Dialogue 5. sect. 38.
from the fourth Thunder till Christ come visibly to Judgment in the clouds,
let the Church bear the name of Laodicea. These are the seven Intervals, which
how well they will fit with the Titles of these distinct successive States of
the Church and the things spoken of them in the Vision, I will anon endeavor
to unfold.

CHAP. II.
A farther Preparation out of the first Chapter of the Apocalypse, whereby this
Prophetical meaning of the Vision of the Seven Churches is more clearly
assured.

BUT in the mean time, for the greater assurance of this Prophetical or
Mystical sense, we will first make some farther Remarks upon the first Chapter
of the Apocalypso. Where we will make only this one modest Supposition; that
the Spirit of God sets down nothing immethodically nor in vain, or at least
nothing vainly immethodicall. Wherefore upon the very first Verse, which bears
the Title of the whole Book; The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave
unto him, to show unto Apoc. 1. 1.
his servants things which must shortly come to pass, that is, things to come
to pass; some shortly, and other some in succession of time, as all
Interpreters agree; I cannot but note this, That if the Spirit of God do but
respicere Titulum, (as most certainly he will) he will set down no entire
Visions, as this of the Seven Churches is, but they must in the main be of
things to come to pass, not of things present merely, and not hid, but obvious
to the eyes of men, as the State of the Churches here mentioned was to the
world at that time. And therefore something farther must be meant by them then
can be contained in the Literal sense; which is not of things to come, as the
Title requires, but only of things present, or some Promises or Threatenings
that do not properly amount to the nature of Prophetical prediction, no more
then the Law of Moses to which they are annexed.

2. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the word of this Prophecy,
for Verse 3.
the time is at hand. This again plainly shows that this Book is all of it, I
mean all the entire Visions thereof, a Book of Prophecies; which, as I
intimated before, mere Promises and Threatenings cannot make it no more then
they do those Laws of Moses to which they are adjoined. And though the several
States of the Seven Churches may be applicable to several states of particular
Churches of after-Ages in Christendom l yet it cannot properly be in this
Literal sense by way of Prediction, but of Example of Virtue or Vice, of pious
or impious Actions, which repeatedly happen in all History. Whence if there be
no more in it then thus, these Epistles to the Seven Churches cannot be deemed
any Prophecy, and therefore are heterogeneous to the Scope and Title of the
Book.

3. But upon the so expressly calling Verse 4.
this a Book of Prophecies for John to salute the Seven Churches in Asia with
this Salutation, Grace be unto you, and peace, from him which is, and which
was, and which is to come; methinks it does even forcibly drive a man to
conceive that the Vision of the Seven Churches which he so immediately falls
upon, is a Prophecy, according to the title immediately mentioned in the
foregoing Verse. Besides that the description of the party in whose name he
salutes them, which is, and which was, and which is to come, does very
naturally insinuate that he is treating of what reaches from the beginning of
the Church to the latest Ages thereof. Which he insists more upon in the
seventh Verse; (after he has spoken of the person of Christ) Behold, he comes
Verse 7.
with the clouds, (this reaches the last Period of Laodicea, when God will
judge all people,) and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced
him; and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him, (for the Earth
shall then be burnt up with the works thereof:) Even so, Amen. This will
certainly come to pass about the seventh Thunder, (in that dark hollow Dungeon,
where there shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth,) let the sons
of Infidelity or Unbelief conceit what they will to the contrary. Wherefore the
mind and scope of the spirit of Prophecy seems here to be carried out even to
the utmost Ages of the world.

4. According as he declares in the next Verse, I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending, says the Verse 8.
Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. That
Wisdom and Power that reaches from one end to another mightily and sweetly
orders all things. This methinks strongly insinuates that the Vision of the
Seven Churches (as well as the Vision of the Seven Seals and of the opened
Book) reaches from the beginning of the Church to the end of all things. Which
consideration is so repeated to us, that certainly it must not stand for
naught, but is to give infallible aim at a higher meaning of the Seven Churches
then we are at first aware of. For the summary of the Vision, before he
descends to the particular Churches, begins and ends with this, v. 11. and 18.
I am the First and the Last, and have the keys of Hell and of Death. Which
undoubtedly respects the execution of the final Sentence under the seventh
Thunder.

5. But there is first this not able to be observed in the Tenth verse: I was
in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and Verse 10.
heard behind me a great voice as of a Trumpet. This pompous entrance with the
sound of the Trumpet into this Vision of the Seven Churches, and the glorious
appearance of the Son of man walking in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks with seven Stars in his right hand, comes up so near to that
splendid Preamble to the Vision of the Seven Seals, that any sagacious man
cannot but suspect that both the Visions be of like extent and importance, and
not of such private concern as merely to respect those Seven Churches in Asia.
For at the beginning of both these Visions there is the glorious appearance of
Christ in the midst of the Church: in the first, standing or walking in the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks; in the latter, sitting in the midst of
the four Beasts and four and twenty Elders: and both these Preambles to the
future Visions ushered in with the sound of the Trumpet. Wherefore the Pomp
being equal, the concern of each Vision in all likelihood is equal. Nor can it
be pretended that the Pomp before the Vision of the seven Churches was designed
as a fair Frontispice to the whole Book of Prophecies, because at least as
splendid a Frontispice is again erected before the Vision of the Seven Seals.
Wherefore that former was entirely intended for the Visions of the Seven
Churches, and therefore portends some mighty concerning Mystery therein, and
such as the present Affairs of those seven particular Churches in Asia could
not reach nor exhaust. But we proceed.

6. Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and what thou Verse
11.
see write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches which be in Asia.
Here again, immediately before his sending to the seven Churches of Asia, he
displays those Titles of himself that least of all suit with the small
continuance of those particular Churches. But the holy Catholic Church endures
from the beginning to the end of all. Upon which therefore I cannot doubt but
the Spirit of Prophecy had his eye at this time, and in the Mystery understood
by the seven Churches in Asia the holy Catholic Church divided into seven
successive Intervalls, according to the opinion of Petrus Galatinus. For indeed
in all reason, (if there was not some grand Mystery underneath,) why should
only seven Churches in Asia be writ to, when there were others, many others,
either there, or at least in other parts of the Empire, in all likelihood as
notorious for either the Faults, the Virtues, or the Sufferings that are noted
in these?

7. You Will say happily, that Asia minor was the special Diocese as it were of S.
John. But they that answer thus forget that John was merely passive in these
Visions, and wrote no otherwise then he was moved by the Holy Ghost, which is
no respecter of persons. Besides that there were certainly other Churches in
Asia besides these seven. Why therefore just Seven? and why these? But that
seven signifies Universality, is obvious in the Prophetic style. Therefore to
the seven Churches in Asia is as much as to all the Churches in Asia. But it is
much that all the Churches in Asia minor should be thus carefully saluted by
the Holy Ghost, and the rest of the Churches in the Christian world be taken no
notice of: As if it were according to the Proverb, that kissing goes by favor;
whenas yet it is expressly said in the Scripture, that God is no respecter of
persons, as I intimated before.

8. But you will farther urge, that we cannot possibly make it any more then
all the Churches in Asia, unless Asia were turned into an Appellative. Which
consideration will put a bar to all attempts for any Mystical Interpretation,
so that we must necessarily rest in the Literal. But Hugo Grotius, who
interprets all the Churches also Mystically from the reason of their Names,
yet takes no notice of any Allusive signification in the word Asia. So that in
this learned man's judgment that sequel is not so firm.

But besides, though I do not love to play with words more then needs must, I
think it not hard to find out an Allusive signification apposite enough in the
name of Asia to the Mystical sense intended. For both (...) and (...) (the
former signifying Fundamentum, the latter Actio or Effectio) as to their
paronomasticall sound are as near Asia as the nicest critical ear can require
in these cases. And for the sense of them both, it is extremely accommodate to
the present purpose. For then will this Superscription, To the Seven Churches
in Asia, either signify, To all the Churches in the foundation, that is, that
keep to the Apostolic Foundation in matter of Doctrine and Profession; or
else, To all the Churches in Action, that is to say, these Epistles are writ to
them with an intended censure of their Actions. And it is said expressly by the
Logician touching the Topic of Effects and Actions, Hujus loci sunt Lauds and
Vituperationes: upon which all these Pet. Ram. lib. 1. c. 9.
Epistles altogether run. And, I know thy works, begins every Epistle. Besides
that they are directed to none but such as profess the Fundamentals of the
Christian Faith, and nothing repugnant thereunto; as will appear in our
Interpretation of them. Nor is it strange that S. John, though writing in
Greek, should (himself being a Jew) make an Allusion to Hebrew words; nor is it
without example. For the Son of Sirach does plainly in that passage in the
Greek Text, (...), allude to the Hebrew Eccles. 6. 22.
word (...) to hide, as if (...) were as much as (...).

9. These verbal Allusions are so frequent in the Prophetic Style, that there
is no need farther to take notice thereof: nor any doubt, I think, but the
Spirit of God would not in this Book of Prophecies, where all things are so
comprehensive and majestic, salute only seven particular Churches of all the
Churches of the World, and that with such pompous Circumstances; nor when he
had begun so magnificently a Book of Prophecies, and so expressly entitled it
so, that he would immediately afterward, as if he had forgot what he was
about, bring in a large Vision consisting of seven parts, wherein there is
nothing at all Prophetical, but only the Reproof or Praises, the Comminations
or Promises to a few particular Churches. This is not according to the steady
order and method of Divine Wisdom, especially in this Book, then which there
never was nor ever will be any thing more accurately written.

10. And he had in his right hand Verse 16.
seven Stars. Methinks it is extremely harsh to conceit that these seven Stars
are merely the seven Bishops of any seven particular Churches of Asia, as if
the rest were not supported nor guided by the hand of Christ, or as if there
were but seven in his right hand, but all the rest in his left. Such high
Representations cannot be appropriated to any seven particular Churches
whatsoever. But seven must signify all in both Coexistence and in Succession
to the end of the world. Which is a sense worthy so sublime a Book as this of
the Apocalypse, and correspondent to the meaning of the rest of the Septenaries
that occur in this Book of Prophecy, they signifying an entire Succession of
some seven things or other which they are brought in to represent.

11. The seven Stars are the Angels Verse 20.
of the seven Churches, and the seven Candlesticks which thou samest are the
seven Churches. Though according to the Literal sense these seven Churches and
the seven Angels are easily applicable to those particular seven Churches of
Asia above specified; yet I cannot but conceive, that he not calling them here
the seven Churches of Asia, but seven Churches in general, it is an invitation
to the searching out some more large Prophetical sense, such as we drive at;
as also, in that he says the Angels of the seven Churches at large, and not of
Asia, nor names the Churches by name; but especially in that he calls them
Angels, in stead of Bishops or Pastors. For he continuing so in the
Prophetical style proper to this Book, that ascribes all to the Ministry of
Angels, it is a sign that the Letters to the seven Angels of the Churches have
also a Prophetical sense as well as a Literal, or rather that that is the
sense that is most chiefly of all intended.

12. All these Intimations put togegether out of this first Chapter toward the
Assurance of a Prophetical meaning of the Seven Churches of Asia have that
force with me, that though I could not my self produce such a continued
Mystical or Prophetical sense which would be all along easy and natural, yet
I could not but vehemently suspect that there is some such sense, though it
were not in my power to reach it. But if I have through the Divine Assistence
light on such a sense as is both continually coherent, important, and according
to the Analogy of the Prophetical style, I hope this Preparation will even
extort the belief thereof from the Reader. But such as it is I shall now
present to his view.

CHAP. III.
The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Ephesine Church.

1. IT was intimated out of the last verse of the foregoing Chapter, that the
Omission of the appropriating the seven Churches to Asia by name was a fair
invitation to us to suspect a more large and released sense of this Vision of
the Seven Churches. And indeed this Releasement is more free in the Greek Copy
then in our English Translation. For the Original runs thus; (...), And the
seven Candlesticks Chap. 1. v. 20.
which thou saw are seven Churches: not the seven Churches which in the
Literal sense one might be prone to imagine to be none other then those situate
in Asia minor; but this Division of the Churches into Seven in the Mystical
sense is rather distributio ex adjunctis then e subjectis, the whole Catholic
Church in its Succession from the beginning to the end being cast into seven
Intervalls, according to seven notorious Qualifications or Conditions thereof.
For so we say, the Primitive Church, the Apostatized Church, the Reformed
Church, etc. denoting not their Place, but rather their Time and Quality; which
the Genius of the Prophetic style, if it were to express them, would exhibit
as so many Churches distinctly situate.

2. But besides this, it is farther to be noted, that the omission of the
appropriating these Seven Churches to Asia does also fairly quit the Mystical
Interpreter of giving any account of the signification of that name, it being
omitted in the Interpretation of the seven golden Candlesticks. Which I thought
worth the noting, t^^^ all pretense of Cavil might be taken from them that may
happily prove less satisfied with our giving an account of that Greek name from
an Hebrew Allusion, though their Cavil to the more judicious I hope will seem
altogether groundless.

3. Nor, lastly, does the returning of the Spirit of Prophecy to the Seven
Churches by name, in these Epistles written to them, determine the Vision
solely and adequately to those seven Churches of Asia topically understood;
forasmuch as the names of all those Churches at least by an easy Allusion have
an Appellative signification, and manifestly denote their Quality and
Condition; as we shall see in the process of our Exposition.

4. First therefore of the Church of Ephesus, which Christ salutes after this
manner: Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write; These things says he
that holds the seven Stars in Apoc. 2. 1.
his right hand, and who walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks.
That by Angels, according to the Apocalyptick style, all the Agents under their
Presidency are represented or insinuated, I have already noted: and it is so
frequent and obvious in the Apocalypse, that none that is versed therein can
any ways doubt of it. Wherefore Christ his writing to the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus in this Mystical sense, is his writing to all Bishops, Pastors and
Christians in this first Apostolical Intervall of the Church.

And that particularly in this Epistle to this Church (I mean, in the Mystical
sense thereof) he recommends himself to them under the character of him that
holds the seven Stars in his right hand, and who walks in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks, the sense, stripped of this Prophetical Pomp, is,
that I am he that supports all my Bishops and Pastors, and all that labor for
the Interest of my Kingdom, from this time for ever: I am present with them,
and uphold them. As he said at the first founding of the Church, Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.
And, lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. He is in the
midst of his Church wherever two or three are gathered together in his Name:
He walks through, in the midst of the Successions of the seven Intervalls of
the Church, the seven golden Candlesticks, till the end of all. This is to
encourage the beginning of his Church, and is methodically put in the first
place, as being general, and running through all the Intervalls thereof till
the end of the world.

But that the Frontispice, as I before called it, to this Vision of the Seven
Churches, which was the glorious Character of our blessed Savior, is made use
of by piecemeal for an entrance into the parts of this Vision, as it is in
them all; I cannot but take notice how fitly it answers to the Vision of the
Seals, where the parts of the Frontispice are also made use of to usher in four
of the Seals; for the four Beasts one after another (and that with apposite
significancy, as here,) at the opening of the four first Seals are introduced
uttering this voice, Come and see. Wherefore there being the like contrivance
Apoc. 6.
in both Visions, it is a shrewd intimation that they are Visions of like
importance, that is, very reachingly and comprehensively Prophetical; as I
endeavored to evince out of the first Chapter.

5. And how accommodate that part of the Character of our blessed Savior is to
this part of the Vision that concerns the Ephesine Church, is already declared.
We shall now confider the fitness of the paronomasticall Allusion in the Name.
For that the Prophetical style does affect such Allusions, both Grotius and
Mr. Mede, and all Interpreters that I know, are agreed upon. And Grotius does
particularly give the reason of the names of all these Churches in his
Commentary on the Apocalypse. So that there is nothing of Levity or
Indiscretion in the attempting of the same. In Ephesus therefore, for ought I
know, there may be a double Allusion, both to (...) and (...). For that (...),
being one of the three matres Lectionis, as they are called, contained in it
both E and A, it does plainly intimate, that the sound of E and A are not so
extremely different one from another. But as for the sense of (...), it is
hugely well and peculiarly accommodate to this Church, it being the first
Intervall of the Seven, as it were the (...), (and (...) signifies the same,)
the Careeres or Lists from whence the Race begins of the Succession of all the
Seven Churches, which ends in the end of the world. And S. Paul compares the
calling of Christians to a Race.

6. But as for the other word, (...), which Grotius also expressly takes notice
of, and pitches upon, the Allusion thereto is unexceptionable both as to sound
and signification. For it denotes that great servour and zealous desire the
Church in those first Primitive and Apostolic Times had to the Affairs of
Christ, and to the Interest of his Kingdom; that they did sincerely and
earnestly, under the conduct of that Heroes on the white Horse, with his bow and
arrow in his right hand, aim at and press toward the mark of the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus; they were inflamed with the desire of
enlarging the Kingdom of Christ here, and of obtaining that immarcescible
Crown hereafter, and of eating the fruit of eternal life in the celestial
Paradise of God. This was the first love of this Church, this was their (...),
their vehement and sincere desire, and only scope of their Actions, that they
might serve Christ here, and enjoy him afterward in his heavenly Kingdom. And
therefore out of this fervent love to Christ, and sense of their own
happiness, they did at first easily devour all Difficulties.

7. As it is noted in the two following verses: I know thy works, and Verse 2,
3.
thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear with such as are
evil. For those that are sincerely and fervently good, it cannot but make them
have an Antipathy against what is evil, and discern them that bear themselves
never so Apostolically, and yet are not right at the bottom, to be but
Hypocrites and Liers.

And thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not. That there
were false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, in the Apostles time, (within which the Period of this
Church is,) the Apostle Paul takes notice 2 Cor. 11. 13. which therefore is
very agreeable to the Intervall of this first Church. For when should any
pretend to be Apostles sent from God, but in that Age there were Apostles sent
into the world by him?

And have born, and have patience, and for my Name's sake have labored, and
have not fainted. What is here is much-what the same sense and words as were in
the foregoing verse: but it is not repeated in vain. For these words I suppose,
(...), have a special correspondence to the reward promised in the 7. verse. He
that will not labor shall not eat: but he that labors very much, and breaks
not off by reason of any lazy fainting or culpable lassitude, is worthy to be
fed with the bread of life. But besides, this labor and patience in the
highest circumstances is here repeated, the better to set off the present
remissness of some in this Ephesine Church, as it is in the next Verse.

8. Nevertheless, I have something Verse 4.
against thee, because thou have left thy first love, (...). Grotius and Dr.
Hammond expound it, because thou have remitted of thy first love, and so allow
(...) to signify relaxation and remission in a contrary sense to intension of
degrees: whence there may be another ground of Allusion in Ephesus to (...),
and in counter distinction to (...) so that this Ephesine Church may have its
name from its first intense Love and its after Remission thereof, by this
double Allusion. But as the Allusion to (...) is more perfect then that to
(...), so questionless this first Intervall of the Church was more famous for
their sincere and real Love to Christ, then for their Remissness therein.
Which serves something for the countenancing of the term of this Intervall.

Because thou have left thy first love: that is to say, because thou have
ceased to be so fervent in spirit as at the first. Which first Love, being
according to the measure of Christ's own Prescript, was certainly such as made
the Ephesine Church love Christ more then Father, or Mother, or Wife, or
Children, or any worldly Interest whatsoever, accordingly as he requires. But
toward the end of the Intervall of this first Succession of the Church this
Love and Courage it seems began to abate, and too many began to Gnosticize, as
it is called, in that point, and think it a small thing to deny the Faith in
the time of Persecution, even those that yet professed themselves of the
Church, and were Believers. That this was within the Intervall of the Ephesine
Church (in our sense) several Reproofs and Exhortations in the Epistles of the
Apostles do plainly evince. See Dr. Hammond's Notes on this Church, which fully
reach our design. And the Epistles of Paul, and the first of Peter, and that to
the Hebrews, were all writ within that Intervall we have set for the Ephesine
Church, and their Faults committed before. Which Defaults this Vision rebukes
and threatens them for, by way of instruction for future Ages, as it is in the
following Verse.

9. Remember therefore from whence Verse 5.
thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works. He bids them return to
their first Love, which was more strong then death. And it was fit to give this
command and encouragement to the Church, because of greater Trials to come in
her Smyrnian Condition. For before the Ten Persecutions Martyrdom was more
rare.

Or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of
his place, except thou repent. That is, by an Hypallage, I will remove thee
from thy Candlestick: which therefore is directed more especially to the
Bishops or Pastors of the Church at that time, as threatening them for falling
into such a remiss degree of Love themselves, or suffering their Charges so to
fall. For the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches, Chapter 1. v. 20. and the
seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches, that is to say, the Bishops
and Pastors of the Church. Wherefore this Commination to them may by an
Hypallage signify their being removed from the Church by some Judgment or
other, that is, as many of them as were thus careless and remiss. But to any
Members of the Church the removing of the Candlestick from them may be their
amission of their Church Membership; as eripere alicui, or adimere alicui
Civitatem, is to make him cease to be a Citizen any longer. Which sense is also
competible to the Bishops or Pastors; Christ may cut them off in foro Divino
from being any longer Members of his Church, and consequently from Salvation.
But there is yet another sense which pleases me best of all, in which
Victorinus, Andreas, Lyranus and Alcazar do all agree, who interpret the
removing of the Candlestick out of its place, of the commination of some
Commotion or Storm that should overtake this Church; not that this Church
should be carried quite away, but moved or agitated as in a Storm or
Earthquake. This they understand of the Ephesine Church in Asia literally:
which is an argument that the Interpretation seemed very easy and genuine unto
them. And it is as easily applicable to our Mystical sense. But I would raise
the Storm a little higher, and make it signify the storm of that dreadful
Persecution that was to befall the Church in the Smyrnian Intervall thereof.
For it is looked upon still as the Apostolic Church from the beginning to the
end, though distinguished into these several Intervalls. And it is observable,
that there is in every Epistle to the respective Church some Prediction to be
fulfilled in the Intervall of the following Church. Which I thought fit here to
note at once, and shall particularly, as we proceed, take notice thereof in
their proper places. The sense therefore seems to be this; That unless the
Church in this Ephesine Intervall would be raised to an higher pitch of Zeal,
and Love, and Activity for the propagating of his Kingdom, Christ would excite
their Courage, and exercise it with such hot Persecutions (sanguis Martyrum
semen Ecclesiae) as would be more effectual for the bringing to pass his
design. And it sell out accordingly in the Ten Persecutions within the Smyrnian
Period of the Church.

10. But this thou have, that thou hate Verse 6.
the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. The Church by this time had
grown so soft and remiss, that there was not that zealous painfulnesse as
heretofore in several of them, nor that resolved Courage in suffering all
things for Christ's sake: yet they were not grown so corrupt and beastly as to
be given up to the impurity of the Nicolaitans, which in aftertimes some
exercised from a mistake of an indiscreet act of one Nicolas a Deacon in these
very times of the Apostles. And from him were these beastly fellows called
Nicolaitans. But little or nothing of this Impurity appeared within the Period
of this Ephesine Church, which yet the Spirit of God foresaw would become
detestably frequent and notorious in such Wretches as, though they called
themselves Christians, the Apostolic Church would not own. This is allowed the
Ephesine Church for their comfort and credit, that they are free from
Nicolaitism: and that they may add to their Purity invincible Patience and
Fortitude, he adds,

To him that overcomes will I give Verse 7.
to eat of the tree of Life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. For
their works and labor and pains-taking here is eating and refreshing promised
them; for their Patience and hardship, a Paradise of Pleasure; for their laying
down their lives for the Gospel, the enjoyment of eternal Life in the Kingdom
of Christ. Lord, remember me when thou come Luke 23. 42, 43.
into thy Kingdom. Verily I say unto thee, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

But we had almost forgot the former part of the seventh Verse: He that has an
ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. Which being a common
Epiphonema to all these seven Epistles, repeated in them from the first to the
last, certainly must bear no small importance with it. Two things therefore I
conceive driven at by the affixing this Epiphonema to each Epistle. The one, to
give us notice, that though there be a Literal sense of these Epistles, yet
that they are every one of them also a Parable; which is intimated from this
repeated form of speech which Christ in his lifetime usually added at the end
of Parables, He that has ears to hear, let him hear. Besides that the very
sense of the Epiphonema implies so much; which is, He that has an understanding
to reach the depth of the meaning of these Epistles, let him reach it. For it
is not within the reach of every man's wit to find out the drift of them. The
other thing driven at is, to intimate to us that there is a meaning lodged
under these seven Parabolicall Epistles of exceeding great moment and
concernment to the Church. From whence I would infer, that that
Interpretation of them that is of the greatest consequence is the most likely
to prove true. And such I conceive this will approve it self to the judicious
which we are now aframing.

And thus much of the first Succession of the Church, under the Title of
Ephesus.

CHAP. IV.
The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Smyrna.

1. AND unto the Angel of the Apoc. chapter 2. v. 8.
Church in Smyrna write. We come now to the second Succession of the state of
the Church, whose Title is, the Church in Smyrna, and whose Intervall is from
the tenth of Nero, or Anno Christi 63. till Anno Christi 324. when Constantine
the Great, a zealous Professor of Christianity, had subdued the most potent
enemies of it and himself. For then the Church was raised out of the dust, or
rather out of the mire and blood that she was trodden down into by the Ten cruel
Persecutions, and began to be the Church (...), the Church in sublimity and
exaltation, according to the signification of that word. But in this Intervall
of their Afflictions and Martyrdom she was the Church in Smyrna.

Now (...) and (...) are all one, and signify Myrrh; which whether you respect
the Plant it self, which grows in sandy, dry and uncultivated places, and is it
self rough and thorny with sharp pricking leaves, or else the gum of the
Tree, which is biting and bitter to the taste, and has its very name from
thence in the Syriack, (...) quia amara, as Martinius notes, it is very
significative of this Intervall of the Church that succeeds, wherein those
horrible Pagan Persecutions raised against the Christians are comprehended. So
that Smyrna signifies the bitter Affliction and Persecution of the Church, as
that Lamp named Wormwood does the sad Calamity of the Western Caesareate.

2. To which you may add that Smyrna, that is to say, Myrrh, was a main
Ingredient in the embalming of the bodies of the dead: which again reflects
upon the many Funerals, or rather Deaths and Martyrdoms, of the Members of the
Church which would be caused by the Persecutions of those times. Besides that,
as Myrrh keeps the body from Corruption, it may be a Symbol of the eternizing
of the memory of the Martyrs to all Posterities. Not to take notice of their
conserving of their very Bodies themselves, which they call Relics; though
this Allusion can be no countenance to the abuses in those things. And lastly,
this Allusion to Myrrh is still the more emphaticall, in that the body of our
Savior, that faithful Witness, as he styles himself, after his martyrdom on
the Cross is said to be embalmed with Myrrh, John 19.

3. These things says the First and the Last, who was dead, and is alive. The
Titles that Christ adorns himself with when he speaks to the Church of Ephesus
are, He that holds the seven Stars in his right hand, and who walks in the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, namely, through all the Successions of
them; like that Promise, Behold, I am with you to the end of the World;
intimating thereby the presence of his Spirit, through which he would in all
Difficulties sustain the Bishops and Pastors of his Church. Which general
signification seems well enough proportioned or fitted to the Condition of the
Church of Ephesus, he expressly requiring of them no more then Zeal and Courage
in the general: But now he speaks to the Church in Smyrna, and there enters a
more bloody Scene and terrible, he seems to encourage them with higher and more
palpable and particular Animations in the very entrance of his discourse; These
things says the First and the Last, the same that began the War for this
Kingdom we strive for, and will be the last in the field to assist my friends
and discomfit mine enemies, as well as I was the first. And be not afraid of
dying for the Truth; for though I was crucified my self, yet, behold, I am now
alive. And I tell you it for a pledge unto you of the same Happiness, if you
lay down your lives (as the Times will shortly require it) for me and for my
Gospel. This is very particular and apposite to the Condition of the Church in
this Smyrnian Intervall, wherein there were to be so many and so bloody
Persecutions.

4. I know thy works and tribulation and poverty: that is to say, I know Verse
9.
the great Affliction and misery thou art oppressed withal, being destitute of
all the Comforts of this present life, and in danger of death every moment.
Which is a right Smyrnian Condition indeed, according to the Title of the
Church in Smyrna.

But thou art rich: namely, with those spiritual Graces of Meekness, of
Patience, of Christian Courage and Fortitude, and of sincere and invincible
Love of the Lord Jesus even to the death it self.

And I know the Blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are not, but are
the Synagogue of Satan. That is, I take notice of the reproach that those men
cast upon Christianity, who call themselves Christians, and yet make nothing of
dissembling and denying the Faith upon the arising of any Persecutions for my
Name's sake; as if a Christian could be such a vile, false and abject
Hypocrite. This is to blaspheme them that are called by my Name. The right
Christian is the true Jew, whose heart is circumcised, and therefore he will
not lie with his tongue; and whose Faith is so strong in me, and hopes so firm
of a better life, that he can, if the cause of my Gospel so require, willingly
part with this for the Love of me and for the Interest of my Kingdom. These
are the true Members of my Church who are for suffering, the other the
Synagogue of Satan; as I told Peter, when he would have dissuaded me from
undergoing the death of the Cross, Get thee behind me, Satan, for Matt. 16. 23.
thou savourest not the things of God. That the Jews signify the Christian
Church, there is nothing more frequent in the Apocalyptick style then that. And
this mention of these false Christians in opposition to these Smyrnian
Sufferers does plainly insinuate that sense which I have given.

5. Fear none of those things which Verse 10.
thou shall suffer. Do not imitate the base Cowardice of this Synagogue of
Satan, these Hypocrites and Dissemblers. After that sharp reprehension of
Flinchers from the Faith, he returns to encourage and corroborate the Church in
Smyrna: Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be
tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days. The red Dragon, that old
Serpent, in his fight with Michael, (for the things of that Vision are
co-incident with this Smyrnian Intervall of the Church,) I say, the Pagans
incensed by the old Serpent, will cast several of you into prison, that your
Faith may be tried, and God may receive the glory of your Fortitude and
Constancy. This you shall have for ten days, that is, till the time of
consummation that Victory and Redemption be wrought for you, or that you die.

Or rather thus, You shall have tribulation for ten days: There will be ten
Seasons of bloody Persecutions which you must run through; those ten
Persecutions so famous in Church History, and so frequent in the mouths of all
men. Which consideration, among others, does not a little ratify this our
Exposition of the Church of Smyrna, and consequently gives strength to the
whole Hypothesis of the seven successive Intervalls.

Be ye faithful unto death, and I will give you the Crown of Life. That is to
say, Stand out till the consummation of the Ten Persecutions wherewith ye will
be tried, and ye shall have the Crown of Life: I will crown you with the
Imperial Crown, which shall prove a Crown of Life unto you. Christianity shall
become at length the Religion of the Empire, which will save you for the future
from the deadly Persecutions of the red Dragon. You shall be no longer subject
to the Cruelty of Roman Paganism for the profession of your Religion. This
therefore will be a Crown of Life unto you. This is according to that Apoc. 21.
4. And there shall be no more death; that is, there shall be no more
Persecution and killing for Conscience sake: Which was the sad case of this
Smyrnian Church under the Pagan Cruelty in an eminent manner. Wherefore when
they had wone their Freedom, it was a Crown of Life to them, by the Law of
Contraries. That this is the genuine sense will farther appear from what
follows.

6. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto Verse
11.
the Churches. This being an usual Epiphonema to Parables plainly intimates,
that what hitherto has been said is a parabolicall Prophecy. And the nature of
a Prophecy is, to foretell such things as are to be transacted here on earth.
And therefore where the Promise is not Divine, or concerning the state after
this life, the Epiphonema follows: as is very conspicuous in the Promise to the
Church of Thyatira, which is the first example of the Epiphonema coming last of
all; which is a sign that the whole Epistle there is Prophetical: Verse 26.
And he that overcomes and keeps my words unto the end, to him will I give
power over the Nations, etc. Which therefore concerns the stage of this Earth.
And therefore this Promise here of the Crown of Life before the Epiphonema, I
would interpret of a Reward in this life on this earth, according as I have
expounded the passage. But now that which follows this Epiphonema is a Promise
of another sort, viz. He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death:
for it is the securing of a blessed Immortality after this life; and seems
farther to correspond with that passage in the Apocalypse, Chapter 20. v. 6.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection: on such the
second death has no power. Wherefore though not according to the inference of
rigid Syllogism, yet according to those nice and delicate hints in Prophetical
Intimations, I would conclude that the promise of their Portion in the first
Resurrection is here proposed to those afflicted Smyrnians, which was the
proper Portion of Martyrs and Confessors, according to the opinion of the
Primitive Church, as Mr. Mede has learnedly and judiciously observed. Which
granted does hugely corroborate this Application of the Epistle to the Church
in Smyrna to this Intervall which contains the times of all the Sufferings in a
manner of the primitive Martyrs. The promise of a blessed Immortality had been
very proper and accommodate to this Smyrnian state of the Church, that were so
frequently to lose their lives for profession of the Gospel: but for it to be
intimated to them that these shall have their portion in the first
Resurrection, which is proper to Martyrs, as appears by the place above quoted,
is so characteristicall of this Intervall, wherein all the primitive Martyrs
suffered, viz. in those Ten Persecutions, that it does marvellously confirm the
truth of the Exposition of this present Epistle in this Mystical way we have
gone. And thus much of the Church in Smyrna, that is in (...), in the
bitterness of Oppression and Affliction, as the Allusion to that Syriack word
imports. We proceed to the Church in Pergamus.

CHAP. V.
The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Pergamus.

1. AND to the Angel of the Church Apoc. chapter 2. v. 12.
in Pergamus write. The Intervall of this Church is from the year of Christ
324, when Constantine utterly defeated the Army of Licinius, not above thirty
thousand of one hundred and thirty thousand escaping, and so with his own
Victories made the Church also triumphant out of her long and unsupportable
Miseries, raising her aloft from her sad Oppressions and Persecutions. From
this year, I say, to the year 1242, when the Pope's Legate Amelin made an end
of the Albigensian War with Trancavel Bastard of the Earl of Beziers, let this
be the Intervall of the Church in Pergamus.

2. Of the beginning of this Intervall there can be no doubt. And for the
termination of it, there are these two Considerations to countenance it. The
first, in that the latter of those numbers in the last of Daniel, viz. the
number 1335, does point to the beginning of the Affairs of the Waldenses and
Albigenses, who are both one Sect and from one Author, Waldo of Lions, an holy
and good man, whose Preaching, and his own and his Followers Sufferings, were
about the term of that Number whose Epoche is the Profanation of the Temple by
Antiochus Epiphanes. So considerable a passage of Providence is the appearing
of the Waldenses in those times betwixt the year of Christ 1160 and 1170. For
they were condemned for Heretics by Pope Alexander in the Laterane Council in
the year 1162, upon which you may be sure Persecutions would immediately
follow. And Mr. Mede with great judgment will have this latter Number in
Daniel to Dan. 12. 12.
point at these Times. Nor does that expression of Daniel at all weaken his
Opinion, in that he says, Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the
thousand three hundred and five and thirty days, because it is said in the
Apocalypse also, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, that is, that die
for the cause of our Lord Jesus. And of the Church of Smyrna it is said, I know
thy tribulation and poverty, but thou art rich. The judgment of the Spirit of
God and the judgment of carnal men are quite opposite in these things. What
they call Poverty, the Spirit calls Riches; what they Misery, the Spirit
Blessedness. Wherefore the Affairs of the Waldenses or Albigenses is a
notable, distinct and conspicuous joint of time, even according to the
judgment of the Spirit of Prophecy.

But then, in the second place, I terminate the Intervall of this Church in
Pergamus, not in the beginning, but the conclusion, of these Waldensian or
Albigensian Affairs, because they being all in a manner one, and so plainly
concluded in the year I have mentioned, their Sufferings may the more
punctually answer to the Sufferings of that one Martyr Antipas, who is here
said to be slain in Pergamus. But the Concinnity of these things we shall
better understand after we have descanted upon the name Pergamus.

3. That by Pergamus is intimated a state of Exaltation or Sublimity, I
intimated before. Sublimia omnia dicta Asiaticis (...) notat Hesychius, Suidas,
and Servius, says Grotius upon Apoc. 1. 11. whence he would have the Church in
Pergamus to re-mind us of high and heavenly things. But this is a Moral, not a
Prophetical sense. But with him howsoever I acknowledge that the signification
of Sublimity is alluded to in the general, but here most elegantly and
seasonably in reference to the precedent state of the Church in Smyrna, which
was a state of Humiliation and bitter Affliction. But at the very beginning of
this present Intervall she so conspicuously emerging out of this low, sad,
affictive state into the state of glory, peace and prosperity, what can be more
significant then to salute her with the Title of the Church in Pergamus,
accordingly as she is here saluted; which is a kind of Congratulation to her
fresh emergency out of her late Miseries. And this sense will hold good for a
time in this Intervall, namely, till tho days of her Apostasy: but then the
Apostolic Church will be the Church in Pergamus still, but in another kind of
meaning.

4. According therefore to the richness of the Prophetic style, Pergamus has
also another sense, such as the City Babylon and the City Tyrus, which are put
for the City of Rome. But then not in such a sense as to mean the Walls or
Stones of the Roman City, but the Roman Church, and her Power and Jurisdiction.
And in such a sense is Pergamus also here put for Rome. So that this Epistle
written to the Church of Christ in Pergamus, the truly Catholic and Apostolic
Church, is directed to this Church dwelling under the Roman Church, or within
the Roman Church's Jurisdiction, understanding old Rome especially; as all
such Apocalyptick Visions perstringe her most. Now that Rome in this sense is
perstringed by this Pergamus, is very evident, First, in the easy Allusion of
Pergamus to Rome from the signification of the words. For as Pergamus signifies
Sublimity, so (as Martinius notes) Rome is from the Hebrew (...) exaltari.
Besides that her Situation is high, and Buildings lofty, according to that of
the Poet, Collibus e septem totum circumspicit orbem.
And the highest of all is the Bishop of Rome himself, who exalts himself above
all that is called God, or is worshipped. Is not this therefore a fit Bishop of
Pergamus, that perks thus above all Kings and Emperors and Princes of the
earth? And our Intervall of the Church of Pergamus reaches the highest times of
her Exaltation, it taking in both Gregory the seventh, who first excommunicated
the Emperor, and took upon him the power of making Emperors himself, and
Alexander the third, who trod upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick; as also
Caelestine the third, that crowned Henry the sixth and his Empress with his
feet, and in scorn kicked the Emperor's Crown off with his foot when he had
crowned him. Certainly the Popes of Rome were then the Bishops of Pergamus with
a witness. Nor after this Intervall could they ever hold their Crests so high.
Boniface the eighth indeed was a Blusterer, and excommunicated Philip the Fair
of France; but he called him fool for his pains, and handled him in such sort,
that, surprised at Anagnia, he was disgracefully mounted on a poor Jade, and so
carried prisoner to Rome, where Pride and Regret broke his heart, and so he
there died ingloriously. But secondly, It is said of this Pergamus, that it was
the most given to Idolatry of all the Cities of Asia, (so Andreas Cesariensis
reports of it;) which is the notorious Character of Rome above all Cities, and
therefore elsewhere in the Apocalypse she is called the Whore of Babylon for
her insatiable spiritual Fornications.

Thirdly, These Pergamenians were very fierce and diligent Accusers of the
Apostolic Christians, to bring them to Martyrdom, as Dr. Hammond upon the
place notes out of ancient History. For which also Rome is taxed elsewhere in
the Apocalypse, who is said to be drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with
the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

Fourthly, It is recorded of the Prefect of this City Pergamus, that he would
persuade the Christians to forsake the Apostolic Faith, and return to
Heathenism, (...), because the elder Religion was the more precious and to be
preferred: As Antiquity is the great Pretense of the Papal Church. That Prefect
said of Christianity, that it was but (...), that it began but the other day:
And so you may be sure the Church of Rome said of the Religion of the Waldenses
and Albigenses. See Dr. Hammond upon the place.

And lastly, That it should be the Martyr Antipas that was slain in Pergamus,
can any name more directly and assuredly point at the Church of Rome or the
Papal Church then this? For (...) is Father, and (...), which is Papa, ^^ but a
Reduplication of (...), as Eustathius has noted: and (...) signifies as much as
against. And therefore who can be so blind as not to discern how fit a Type
this Antipas is of them that within this Intervall of the Church should suffer
for being against that holy Father the Pope, as he is called. Nothing can sound
more congruously or harmoniously, whatever any man by way of cavil can say
against it. The main Interpretation therefore of this present Epistle to the
Church in Pergamus will respect the pure Apostolic Church abiding within the
Jurisdiction of the Roman, as this sense plainly implies; the Woman in the
wilderness, as the Holy Ghost elsewhere expresses it.

These things says he that has the sharp sword with two edges. Christ is set
out thus in this Epistle to the Church in Pergamns, because this Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God, understood and rellished by the Divine Spirit
in us, was the main Weapon whereby the Church in Pergamus defended her self
from the Pergamenian Corruptions, and so kept her self pure from the false
Glosses and unsound Traditions of either Superstitious men or crafty Deceivers.

5. I know thy works, and where thou Verse 13.
dwell, even where Satan's seat is; and thou hold fast my Name, and have
not denied my Faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful
Martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwells. That is to say, I know
thou do well for the main, and to thy greater commendation I consider where
thou dwell, even where the firstborn of Lucifer has his throne, he that
exalts himself above all that is called God or that is worshipped. (So Christ
compares Satan to Lucifer or the King of Babylon, (of whom the Prophet says,
How art thou fallen, Lucifer, thou son of the Morning!) Luke 10. 18. I beheld
Satan as lightning fall from Heaven.) And yet neither the awe nor glory of that
Church could cause thee to forsake my Name, and, in stead of being a true
Christian, to become a Member of Antichrist, and so relinquish the pure
Apostolic Faith, no not in those days that my faithful Martyr Antipas, that
is, those plain-hearted and openly-professed enemies of the Pope and his
adulterate and idolatrous Religion, the Waldenses and Albigenses, were so
cruelly persecuted and murdered, who were slain among you who stood out and
yet escaped, though in the very Synagogue of Satan, that is to say, in that
Church which is a treacherous Adversary to all my true Members, and a very
bitter Censurer and Accuser of them for their not complying with the Laws of
Wickedness which she has established, and a worse Adversary then the Pagan
Dragon before, whom therefore my Church overcame in a few Ages. This Satan, I
say, is a more mischievous Enemy then that red Dragon, by reason of his Cunning
and Hypocrisy, and his pretenses that he is for me, when indeed he is against
me, and by reason of the abuse of my Authority in pretense, against the Members
of my true Church. Wherefore I cannot but take notice where thou dwell, and
how in that regard thou art in a worse condition then the Smyrnian Church her
self, who were only to grapple with a professed Enemy, but thou with both a
malicious Enemy, and a false and hypocritical Friend. It is therefore well done
of thee that thou hold out in such hard and difficult Circumstances.

6. This for the sense of that Verse in general. But now particularly, why the
Waldenses and Albigenses, that were persecuted in this Intervall of the Church,
should be called Antipas, why Martyr, why faithful, and why slain, rather then
burnt, we shall briefly give this account. And that a Company or successive
Body of men is represented in the Prophetic style under one single person, is
so trivial that I need not note it. Alcazar makes Jezebel, mentioned in the
next Epistle, to be the Church of the Jews; Aretas, the Sect of the
Nicolaitans; Dr. Hammond, the Gnostics. But now that this one person should be
called Antipas, there is nothing more congruous to the Doctrine of the
Waldenses and Albigenses, who boldly preached that the Pope was Antichrist, the
Mass an Abomination, the Host an Idol, and Purgatory a Fable. And Waldo, the
chief beginner of this Sect, was of the same mind, denying the Pope to be the
Head of the Church, or that he had any Authority over the Kings and Princes of
the earth, who depend immediately upon God alone. Was not this an Antipas
indeed then, and exactly opposing the sovereign Paternity of his Holiness of
Rome? But they were faithful, because they did so plainly declare to the World
such concerning Truths; and Martyrs, because they suffered death for so doing,
it being for the Cause of God, and for the Interest of the Kingdom of Christ.
And they are said to be slain, (suppose with the Sword or any weapon of War,)
not burnt, because Burning was more rare within this Intervall of the Church;
but they were slain in the field many hundred thousands of them. A great number
of the Waldenses that took Arms in Germany were cut in pieces in the year 1220,
(as Matthew Paris writes;) they being in such a disadvantageous place, betwixt
marish ground and the Sea, that they could make no escape. And Mr. Mede, out of
Petrus Perionius in his book of this Albigensian War, intimates that near ten
hundred thousand of them were slain in battle at times, and that in France
alone. Wherefore slaying with the Sword is very Characteristically spoken here
in this Epistle of the faithful Martyr Antipas; Burning as yet being in it
self not so frequent, and bearing no proportion at all to this vast number
slain in the Field. Whence this is a considerable note of distinction betwixt
this present Intervall of the Church in Pergamus from that of her abode in
Thyatira, as we shall see in its due place.

7. But I have a few things against Verse 14.
thee, because thou have there them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who
taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat
things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit Fornication. This is spoken to the
whole Body of those that in their judgments did condemn both the Doctrine and
Practices of the Church of Rome. But these may be cast into three sorts: such
as notwithstanding this Judgment still held Communion with her, and pretended
they did well in so doing; those that separated from her Communion; and those
that not only separated, but suffered death for so doing. These last were the
Martyr Antipas above named; the first the Balaamites here reproved, that were
of a more Gnostick-like temper, too much leaning toward the Flesh, thinking
themselves wiser then the other in not exposing themselves for their judgment
in Religion. Ye do well indeed, says he, in declaring against the Enormities
of the Papal Church, and in condemning them in your own thoughts and
Consciences: but this I take ill of you, that ye permit (some of you) the
Doctrine of Balaam to take effect, that is, by communicating with this Church
of Rome in her idolatrous Eucharist, and by eating her Deus Panaceus, ye commit
spiritual Fornication, and become guilty of Idolatry. (To eat things sacrificed
to Idols is one mode of Idolatry, but by a Prophetical Diorism it signifies
Idolatry in general.) That ye indulge this liberty to your selves or others, is
to cast a Stumbling Block before the Children of Israel, and to occasion and
encourage many to adhere to the Roman Communion, when they ought to separate
from her, that there be no prejudice done to my true Church, nor Dis-interest
to my Kingdom.

8. So have thou also them that hold Verse 15.
the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate. That also is a fault
amongst some of you, that you do not possess your Vessels in that holiness
and sanctity ye ought to do: and though you can discover the spiritual
Fornications of Pergamus and their Luciferian Pride, yet ye are not so pure and
clean as ye ought to be, and free from the Lusts of the flesh, (which Vice is
here noted by Nicolaitism dioristically, as Idolatry in general before by
eating things sacrificed to Idols.) Flesh and blood is over-prone to think
little ill of such things, because they are so natural and pleasing: but I
declare a pertly unto you, that it is a thing that I hate. Be ye holy even as I
am holy.

Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them
Verse 16.
with the Sword of my mouth. Amend these faults, left I come to you suddenly in
Judgment. Happily by the more sedulous activity of the Lords of the Inquisition,
whose reign was most chiefly in the following Intervall, as also of other
Judicatures; the Pragmaticalnesse of whose Agents will be more then ordinarily
ready to discover every one that dissembles his Religion; and the frequent
terror of being burnt alive at the Stake will more effectually suppress the
flames of all Wantonness and Lust. And as I will come to you thus in Judgment
unless ye repent; so I am resolved also farther to fight against your
Adversaries, the Pergamenians or Romanists, with the Sword of my mouth, till I
cut off great branches from the body of that far-spreading Tree, and dismember
whole Nations from the Community of that idolatrous Church by the power of the
Word and the preaching of the Gospel. This is that which is predictory of some
Events to happen in the following Intervall, according to the Genius of these
Epistles.

9. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna. The Verse 17.
Promise here following the Epiphonema, (He that has an ear to hear, let him
hear,) must, according to the Rule, signify Theologically or Spiritually, not
Physically or Politically. Wherefore the sense is, Those of Pergamus indeed
pretend, that when they give that white and sweet Consecrated Wafer into the
mouths of their Communicants, they give them the true Manna, my very Body and
Blood which was shed on the Cross, and my very Flesh that was there crucified
and broken for them; whenas notwithstanding they order their Eucharist so, that
they turn my Supper into a Feast of Idolothyta, and make the partakers thereof
guilty of Idolatry or spiritual Fornication, forasmuch as they give Divine
Worship to that which is not God. So that as, in the case of Balaam, the
Israelites were to eat things sacrificed to Idols in order to carnal
Fornication, so they that partake of this perverted Eucharist are necessarily
ipso facto (especially since the fourth Laterane Council) drawn into spiritual
Fornication or Idolatry. But he that is courageous and abstains from this
illicit Communion, and through Faith overcomes all Difficulties, for the
quitting that outward white visible Wafer, I will give him to eat of the hidden
Manna, of that true spiritual Manna mentioned John 6. For my flesh is meat
indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. But the words I there speak they are
spirit, and they are life. Or if he die in the Cause, I will give him the
hidden Manna, even the invisible food of Angels, and his Soul shall pass into
the society of the blessed Genii and Holy Souls of Saints departed this life.

10. And I will give him a white Stone, and in the Stone a new Name written,
which no man knows saving he that receives it. That is to say, Though he be
accused and reproached for an Heretic and Schismatic in the Church of
Pergamus, where Satan the Accuser dwells, yet I will give him a white Stone,
and quit him in judgment, and establish the joy and peace of a good Conscience
unto him. Or thus; I will give him a white Stone, in which there is a new Name
written; that is, his Old man shall be thoroughly crucified, and he shall attain
to the state of the New man in the purity thereof, and enjoy that inestimable
Jewel of the Divine Nature pure and permanent, which no man knows the
excellency of till he be made partaker thereof. I will consummate Regeneration
to him either in this life, or upon his passage into the other state, if he be
snatched away by a sudden Martyrdom. And this will more then countervail all
the Injuries the lofty Church of Pergamus can do to him in life, goods, or
good name.

CHAP. VI.
The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira.

1. AND to the Angel of the Church in Thyatira write. The true Apoc. 2. 18.
Church of Christ is still in the power and within the Jurisdiction of the
Church of Rome: and therefore as Rome has been set out by the City of Babylon,
Tire, and Pergamus, so is it here in this Intervall necessarily to be
understood by the City of Thyatira, I mean in such a sense as it was by the
City of Pergamus. That (...) (from whence both Strabo and Pliny, and others
that are Critics, fetch the reason of the name Thyatira) is alluded to, I am
inclinable to think from those Authorities; and that the Womanishnesse of the
Church of Rome in this Period is perstringed. That her Softness and Luxury was
more then ordinarily increased in this Intervall is not to be doubted, as
certainly her Covetousness, as also her prankings and adornings in the
splendor of their Altars, and Churches, and Copes, and the like. Which could
not be so continuedly and so high in the former Intervall. But here all along
she may well be looked upon as (...), Filia delicatula, a delicate Damosel
indeed, sitting like a Queen, and knowing no sorrow, when a little before she
was like to be overrun by the Waldenses and Albigenses, and was fain to enter
the Field, and fight manfully for her own safety. A little after the beginning
of this Intervall did Innocent the fourth appoint in the Council at Lions, that
the Cardinals should go in their Rosie-coloured Hats and Robes, and ride upon
Horses with Furniture and Trappings suitable to the greatness of their Order,
and delicacy of their Condition. And the Mitre of Paul the second is taken
special notice of for the exceeding preciousnesse of the Jewels therein. And
no doubt there was the like increase of the Ecclesiastic Bravery everywhere.
A little before the beginning of this Intervall did Honorius the third appoint
the Carmelites to go in white, that they might look more Maidenlike, and
decreed that they should be called the Family of the Virgin. And the
Franciscans and Dominicans are notorious all along this Intervall, who had the
Virgin Mary for their peculiar Patroness. And indeed within this Intervall the
Roman Church ran so much in the seminine strain, that they generally professed
themselves more under the Government and Providence of our Lady then of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Gregory the ninth, a little before the beginning of this
present Intervall, ordained that Salve Regina, an Hymn to the blessed Virgin,
should be sung in all Churches. Boniface the eighth, in the year 1293, composed
that Oraison, Ave, Virgo gloriosa: and in the year 1470, the Mary Psalter and
her Rosarie were composed by See if there was not a Marie's Psalter before,
Antidote against Idolat. chap. 6. sect. 8.
Alanus de Rupe.

2. And how feminine this Church was in this Intervall, the observations of
that excellent Person Sr. Edwyn Sandys (though after the expiration thereof,
when one would think they should in Policy have been more castigate in their
Religion) will give us fully to understand. The honor, faith he, which they
do to the Virgin Mary is double for the most part unto that which they do
unto our Savior. Where one professes himself a Devoto or peculiar Servant of
our Lord, whole Towns are the Devoti of our Lady. The stateliest Churches are
hers lightly, and in Churches hers the fairest Altars. Where one prays before
the Crucifix, two before her Image: where one voweth to Christ, ten vow to her:
and for one Miracle reported to be wrought by the Crucifix, not so sew perhaps
as an hundred are voiced upon the Images of the Virgin. Their Devils in
Exorcism are also taught to endure the name of God or the Trinity without
trouble; but at the naming of our Lady, to toss and seem much tormented. Where
one fasts on Friday upon the account of the Passion of our Lord, many fast on
Saturday upon the account of his Mother. And to their Beads they string up ten
Salutations of our Lady to one of our Lord's Prayers. The This was the
Institute of Pope John 22. and within the forepart of the Intervall of
Thyatira. See Polydore Virgil. de Rerum invent. lib. 6. c. 12.
Bell also which is rung at Sunrise, at Noon and Sunset, is called the
Ave-Mary Bell, whereby all men everywhere at those set times might be engaged
to do their Devotions to the Virgin Mary. And, lastly, their chief Preachers
do teach in Pulpit, whatsoever is found in Scripture spoken of Christ the Son
of God, to apply it to our Lady also, as being the Daughter of God. Is not
therefore the Church of Rome rightly called Thyatira, as alluding to (...),
which both Strabo and Pliny would have to be the reason of the name of that
City?

3. I will only add one thing more. Alsledius calls this Intervall of time
which we attribute to the Church of Thyatira Regnum Locustarum, because of the
variety of the Orders of Monks that started up within this time. Therefore when
the Church of Rome swarmed so with Monks and Friars, that had abjured their
Virility by an irrevocable Vow of Caelibate, and went in sculking Hoods and
long Coats like Women, and so became Petticoat-men at the best, was it not very
congruous for the Spirit of Prophecy, by way of just reproach to this
Womanishness, so to characterize the Church of Rome at this time, by calling
her Thyatira, as if they had become rather the Daughters of men then the Sons
of men by this so general Effeminacy in more then those Monkish garbs which I
now mention? Besides that these Petticoat-men, the Dominicans especially,
managed their opposition against the true Church in a right feminine manner,
not manly, as before, by meeting their enemy in the Field, but sneakingly, by
Perfidiousness and Treachery, to bring them into the Inquisition, and then
cruelly and insultingly in the upshot; as it is easy to understand by reading
the History of the Holy Inquisition, as they call it. Therefore there being all
these symptoms of Feminity in the Church of Rome in this Intervall, it is not
unreasonable to conceive that this corruption of hers is perstringed by calling
her the City of Thyatira, alluding to Thygatira, which signifies not a son of
Adam, but a daughter.

4. But were it not for the Authority of Strabo and Pliny, there is another
paronomastical Allusion which I should prefer before this. Wherefore, according
to the richness of the Prophetic style, I should also conceive Thyatira to
allude to (...), which is, to break or bruise Aromatic Spices, which makes
them give the sweeter savor: or else to (...) or (...), Altars for the burning
of sweet Odours. Any of which methinks is less forced then either Grotius his
(...), or Strabo's (...). And as to the sense, the Paronomasia is very
expressive of the Persecutions of the true Members of Christ within this
Intervall, and agrees exactly with History, wherein there is little talk of
flaying with the Sword, as is intimated in that expression in the foregoing
Intervall, where the Martyr Antipas is said to be slain; (which agrees
admirably well with that great Slaughter of the Waldenses and the Albigenses,
which were martyred in the Field by the Pontifician Forces, as the word (...)
or (...) signifies properly to slay, suppose with the Sword or any such weapon
of War; (...).)
But the Persecutions in the Thyatirian Intervall were usually Burnings, or
Rackings, and wasting away their lives in miserable Imprisonments. But that
which was most frequent and most famous in this Period was the burning of men
alive with Fire and faggot. This filled Thyatira with so many (...). Where
though the Cruelty of the Persecutors was most execrable; yet the Faith,
Constancy and devout Sincerity of our blessed Protestant Martyrs went up with
the flames and globes of Smoke, sweeter then any Odours or Incense, from the
Altar, into the presence of Heaven, and were there accepted for his sake who
gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweetsmelling
favor.

5. The frequency of these Burntofferings in those times is noted by Sanderus a
Papist; Infinitos Lolhardos and Sacramentarios in tota Europa Downham de
Antichrist. lib. 6. cap. 5.
nuper ignibus traditos fuisse. But nothing can be so significative of the
change of the Scene of the Persecution of the Church in Pergamus, where Antipas
was slain, to this in Thyatira, whereby these (...) are alluded to, as that
passage in the History of the Albigenses, lib. 2. c. 9. which gave me occasion
to terminate the Pergamenian Intervall in that year, viz. 1242. Here you see,
says he, the last Attempt which we find the Albigenses to have made, and the
last Expedition of Pilgrims levied against them. All the pursuit against them
afterward was by the Monks the Inquisitours, (the Dominicans he means, of
whose Father, Dominicus, his Mother when she went with child with him dreamed
she was big of a Dog that vomited fire out of his throat,) which Monks, says
he, now kindled their Fires more then ever. And taking these poor people
disarmed, and singling them out by retail, it was impossible for them any
longer to subsist. And so this suffering Church of Christ passed out of that
state where Antipas was slain with the Sword, to that of Thyatira, where the
holy Martyrs of our Reformed Religion were burnt at the Stake. And this, I
think, will suffice to make us understand why the Power and Jurisdiction of the
Roman Church in this Intervall bears the Title of Thyatira.

6. These things says the Son of God, who has his eyes like to a flame of
fire, and his feet are like fine brass. The Son of God is here Christ, either
personally, or mystically understood for his Body the Church. Understanding it
personally of Christ, his flaming Eyes denote his piercing and discerning
Foresight and Providence; it portends also his Wrath and Vengeance against the
Persecutors of his Church with Fire and faggot: but his Feet like fine brass,
the peremptory Constancy amd Purity of his ways. But if we understand these
Feet like fine brass of Christ's mystical Body, we are to make a supply of
the Description out of the former Chapter, ver. 15. And his feet like fine
brass, as if they burned in a furnace; whereby is insinuated the fiery Trial of
his Church in this Intervall of Thyatira even in the grossest sense, so many of
his Servants standing at the Stake with their legs in the midst of flaming
Fire, kindled by their barbarous Persecutors. That the Son of God described in
the foregoing Chapter is also representative of his Body mystical, the
description of his Voice seems plainly to intimate. His Voice being compared to
the sound of many Waters, that insinuates that this Description respects also
his Body Mystical, which are a multitude.

7. I know thy works, and charity, Verse 19.
and service, and faith. The true Church then in Thyatira being in Oppression
and Affliction stood close to one another, and encouraged and comforted one
another, and supported one another as well as they could, and endeavored after
an Exemplarity of Godliness and due proficiency in the Power of Religion, as
being Candidates for that Deliverance which they by Faith saw was not far off.

And thy patience, and thy works, and the last to be more then the first. That
is, I see the works of thy Patience in suffering Imprisonment, Tortures and
Death, and particularly in giving up your selves, as an Oblation of Incense, to
the Fire and faggot in such numbers for the testimony of my Truth. Which being
toward the latter end of this Intervall, it is fitly said, and the last to be
more then the first. This is according to what is found in History.

8. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer
Verse 20.
that Woman Jezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess, etc. viz. the Papal
Hierarchy, that pretends to be infallible, and under color of this brings in
Idolatry, which is spiritual Fornication, and detains men in the Communion of
their idolatrous Mass, which the Spirit of God here parallels to the eating of
things sacrificed unto Idols. The Prophetess Jezebel here therefore answers to
the false Prophet after mentioned in the Revelations; Apoc. 19. 20.
and this exprobration to the Church in Thyatira, of permitting Jezebel thus to
practice her deceits, to that voice of the Angel, Come out of Apoc. 18. 4.
her, my people, lest ye be partakers of her sins and of her plagues. It is a
kind of solicitation of the Princes and people in Christendom, such as
discerned the Frauds and Idolatries of the Roman Church, to make a Defection
from her, and suffer her Trumperies no longer. For the time of that Defection
now drew near, and things were ripe for it, and it was in the power of them
that disliked the condition of Affairs to amend it: and therefore he says,
Because thou suffer that Woman Jezebel. For it is no fault in us to suffer
those things which it is not in our power to help or redress.

9. This Jezebel is very expressive of the Roman Hierarchy, if we recurr to the
story of the book of the Kings: not only for her painting of her self, (which
is notorious in the Roman Church, (and especially in this Intervall,) and such
as the Homilies of our Church in England take especial notice of, comparing all
those rich and gorgeous Adornings of the Church of Rome to the painting of the
wrinkled face of an Harlot,) but also for her Whoredoms and Witchcraft, as it
is noted 1 Kings 9. 22. What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy Mother
Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many? Which is exactly parallel to the
Description of the Whore of Babylon, who is said to be the mother of
Fornications and Abominations Apoc. 17.
of the earth; described also by that Cup of Sorcery in her hand, whereby she
intoxicates the Kings of the Earth, and makes them drunk with the Wine of her
Fornication. And whereas she is said to be drunk with the blood of the Saints,
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Jezebel also in her History is
famous for murdering the Prophets 1 Kings 18. 4.
of God.

10. And those gross Wickednesses committed by Ahab, who did very abominably
in following Idols, and in persecuting the Servants of the true God, who is
said to have sold himself to work Wickedness, are imputed to this subtle
murtherous Whore and Witch, as the Text plainly declares. But there was none
like unto Ahab, who did sell himself to work 1 King. 21. 25.
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up. That
is to say, the Roman Hierarchy (according as both the Vision of the Whore of
Babylon and of the twohorned Beast do plainly signify,) was the Author,
Contriver and Instigatour unto all those murtherous and idolatrous practices
that the Secular Magistrate has been guilty of, during their Force and Tyranny
over the true Servants of Christ. The Beast with two Horns exercised all this
Apoc. 13.
Power before the Beast with ten Horns, or rather made use of the Secular Power
to effect all their devilish Designs against the Children of God; as Jezebel
wrote Letters in Ahab's name, and sealed them with his 1 Kings 21. 8.
seal. The Church got the stamp of the Imperial Authority upon all the wicked
Dogmata of their Religion and Idolatrous practices, which they contrived for
their own carnal advantages: and then if any Naboth would not part with the
Inheritance of his Fathers, the possession of an holy, righteous and rational
Conscience, nor profess nor act against the (...), against those native Truths
and Notions which God of his infinite mercy and faithfulness has implanted in
the minds of all men that have not done violence to that innate Light, the
Candle of the Lord searching all the parts of the belly, he Prove. 20. 27.
was through the murtherous contrivances of this Strumpet Jezebel falsely
accused as a Blasphemer of God 1 Kings 21. 10.
and the King, as an enemy to both the Catholic Faith and secular Magistrate,
and so was sentenced to death. And death came by these wicked Accusations in
this Intervall, as in the former Intervall, wherein Antipas was slain, by
openly fighting in the Field. Thus apposite is the Allusion to the History of
Jezebel, for the setting out the state of this Intervall of the Church under
the Tyranny of the Church of Rome.

11. Nor is it all harsh, thus to interpret a Vineyard to so spiritual a sense
as to make it something within us, whenas both Philo and other ancient
Interpreters have interpreted Paradise to that sense, or the Garden of Eden.
And others also cannot but acknowledge that that Law of Moses; Deuteronomy. 22. 9.
Thou shall not sow thy Vineyard with diverse seeds, has also a Moral or
Mystical meaning, and is a Precept of Simplicity or Sincerity of heart.
Wherefore the Vineyard of Naboth may very well signify the Humane Will and
Understanding that is sown only or planted with such Notions or notices of
things as are from God, whether they be those innate Idea's of the Soul, or
what is communicated farther by the Spirit of God in the Holy Writings of
inspired men, or are more immediately inspired into us by the abode of that
Spirit in us. All these Plants are of our Heavenly Father's own planting, and
no other seed is to be sown among them repugnant thereunto. And this Vineyard
is the Inheritance of all true Christians, descending upon them from the
Apostles times to this very day. But the Roman Empire being perverted by the
doctrines of the whore or twohorned Beast, or by the eorruptions also of their
own nature, had a mind to invade this ancient right as Ahab had to get into his
possession Naboth's Vineyard, under pretense that men giving up their will and
understanding to the supreme Power, Government might be the more secure. And
all that wondered after the Beast Apoc. 13.
gave up their Vineyards into the hand of the secular Power, and professed no
otherwise then according to the faith of the Empire, and so had their Vineyards
sown with diverse seeds, nay indeed with what was repugnant to the Apostolic
Plantation. Their minds were filled with gross lies, foul-Idolatries of all
sorts, and murderous enmities against the true Children of God.

12. But as for the Vineyard of Naboth, that is the Vineyard of the true
Prophets or Prophetesses, as the word Naboth seems to intimate; they were not
given up, that is, those that were not Christians for fashion-sake, and
believed new invented lies and Apostolic truth alike, but with a true and
living faith acknowledged Jesus to be the Christ, these would rather lose their
lives then quit their Vineyards that yielded them that noble Wine, that
perpetual feast of a good Conscience, and of peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.
Whence it was that this Whore and Sorceresse Jezebel contrived their death, or
persecution and oppression, as the two Prophets are said to both mourn in
sackcloath, and also to be slain. The Apoc. 11.
Vineyard therefore of Naboth is that sense, and knowledge, and conscience and
life of the Spirit in the new birth, whereby a man discerning plainly and
livingly betwixt the ways of Christ and of Antichrist, does as necessarily
loath the one, as adhere to the other.

13. For the true and firm belief in Christ is from the new birth, as S. John
also witnesses, Every one that 1 John 5. 1.
believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. And therefore this Spirit
of life must needs have an Antipathy against what is contrary to it self: And
is also the Spirit of Prophecy in the most concerning sense: As John likewise
intimates in his general Epistle where upon his mentioning many false Prophets
gone out into the World, he presently adds, In this ye know the 1 John 4. 12.
Spirit of God, Every spirit that confesses that Jesus is the Christ come in
the flesh, is of God. Which agrees exactly with that in the Apocalypse, where
the Angel says to John, I am Apoc. 19. 10.
thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus, that
is to say, of such as whose hearts do witness to them firmly and lively that
Jesus is the Christ, and accordingly profess it; which none can do unless he
be born of God, and so have the Spirit of God. Which is employed in the
following words: For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy: that is
to say, the being able in such sort to witness that Jesus is the Christ, is
from the spirit and life of God in us which inspireth all holy truth. From
whence the Angel argues a kind of Parity betwixt John and himself, and indeed
all such as have the testimony of Jesus according to the sense declared, and
therefore would not be worshipped by them.

14. But this is something a Digression, saving that it may illustrate that
passage in the Apocalypse, where the Apoc. 11. 3, 10.
two Witnesses are also called the two Prophets, (not so much from predicting
things to come, as from witnessing to the Truth from the spirit of life in the
new birth, and being so firm in this faith as to suffer for it even to the
death) and may also facilitate the belief of this Mystical sense of the story
of Naboths Vineyard, or this Vineyard of Prophecy: it not implying any
miraculous predictions, but the being inspired with a right Sentiment of things
from the Spirit of Life, and having the confidence to speak the truth as it is
in Jesus. This is all that need to be understood thereby.

15. To teach and to seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed unto Idols. This Woman of Thyatira, (whether the wife of the
Bishop of Thyatira, or some other Person of quality, for Interpreters of the
letter vary in that) according to the Literal sense, is described from her
acts, as only guilty of pretending her self to be a Prophetess, and that
thereby she seduced the servants of Christ to commit fornication and to eat
things sacrificed to Idols, which is a chief point of that which was called
Gnosticisme. And the truth of the supposed History here we do in no wise deny.
But we also add, that it is hugely improbable, that the spirit of Prophecy
would take notice so particularly of any one Woman in so majestic a Writing
(which Alcazar also very seriously and vehemently urges) if there were not some
greater matter aimed at. Wherefore I say, the Spirit of God taking the
advantage of the significancy of the miscarriages of this Woman in Thyatira;
which would set out part of the enormities of the Church of Rome here
perstringed, added there to the name of Jezebel, that the Prophetic
Prefiguration might be the more complete, the Church of Rome in this Intervall
being lively adumbrated by this Allusion to Jezebel, joined to what is reported
of this woman in Thyatira, viz. That she pretends to be a Prophetess as the
Church of Rome to be infallible, that she drew the servants of Christ to
Idolatry and uncleanness, as the Church of Rome does by engaging them in the
Mass and other superficial modes of serving God, that leave the mind sensual,
and besides necessarily entangle them in Idolatrous practices. Thus much from
the practice of this Woman.

16. Now in that she has this name given her of Jezebel, assuredly the spirit
of God points us to her story to make up this Parallel betwixt this woman and
Rome, viz. as she is also a murderer of the Prophets and servants of 1 Kings
18. 4. 1 Kings 21. 10.
God, and a contriver of false Accusations against them, as if by the keeping
of the Inheritance of their Fathers, a pure conscience according to the ancient
and Apostolic faith and innate notions of Truth that God has implanted in the
minds of all men, they were blasphemers of God and the King, and obnoxious to
both the Civil and Spiritual Magistrate. And lastly, (which is to be taken
special notice of) the Church of Rome in this Intervall of the Succession of
the Church of Christ is called Jezebel, because for all her paintings and fine
meretricious pranking her self up, she was to be thrown out at the window, and
her flesh to be devoured by dogs: which the just wrath of God and the zeal of
Jehu, (the noble Reformers) stirred up by the Spirit of God brought to pass at
the end of this Intervall of the Church, as it is threatened also in the
following parts of this Epistle.

17. And I gave her space to repent her of her fornication, and she repented
Verse 21.
not. She had a fair time to consider of her gross Apostasies from the purity
of my worship since the witness of the Waldenses and Albigenses against her,
and yet she remains still obdurate and impenitent, and continues her old trade
of whoring still.

Behold, I will cast her into a bed, Verse 22.
and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they
repent of their deeds. Unless she repent I will certainly cast her into a bed
of sickness and languishment, for that bed of Adultery wherein she has
entertained the Kings of the earth. Her strength and glory shall be much
diminished, and her Paramours shall bewail the Calamity I shall bring upon her:
For there shall be of the Kings that shall hate the Whore, shall make her
desolate in their dominions, and naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn her
with fire. As it fell out in the late defection of whole Nations from her.

And I will kill her children with Verse 23.
death. That is, either slay them with the sword of the Spirit, and so make
them dead as to her by their conversion to the truth, or else kill them with a
natural death, such I mean as come against my true Church, whether whole Armies
or seditious Emissaries, as has often happened since the Reformation.

And all the Churches shall know that I am he that searches the reins and
hearts, and will give unto every one of you according to his works. That is, it
will be notoriously taken notice of in all Christendom how just my judgments
are, and that I deal not with Jezebel according to her fair pretenses and
Titles, who calls her self Holy Church, and pretends all her cruelties, and
imposturous and Idolatrous Trumperies to be for my glory, whenas they have run
into all this degeneracy for their worldly Interest. But mine eyes which are a
flaming fire searching into the hearts and reins, clearly see their abominable
Hypocrisy, and my feet like fine brass, that never go out of the way of
purity and justice, will be sure to overtake them and do due vengeance upon
them. I will reward every one according to his works.

18. But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira as many as have not
Verse 24.
this doctrine. To you Pastors of my true Church in Thyatira, and the rest
which are your charge, that hold not the Idolatrous doctrine or faith of the
Thyatirian, that is, of the Roman Church.

And which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak, that is, which
have not approved the deep mysteries (as they speak) of reason of State, or of
the Roman Religion, (such as murdering innocent men for the Interest of Holy
Church; Infallibility, Transubstantiation and the like) but I who search the
heart and reins do apertly declare to be the depths of Satan, they tending to
nothing but to Luciferian Pride, barbarous Persecutions and Murders, and gross
imposture and Idolatry.

I will put upon you no other burden, Verse 25.
but that which ye have already, hold fast until I come: I have already showed
you my approbation of your ways, ver. 19. and in that ye do not communicate
with the Idolatrous Jezebel, keep to where you are, and stand out to the last:
let no Persecutions dismay you till I come in judgment against this Jezebel,
the same with the little Horn in Daniel, which in the expiring of the time, and
times, and half a time, will certainly be judged.

19. And he that overcomes and Verse 26.
keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations. That
company of men, those people that keep my works to the end, to the last
semi-time of the Seven, they shall have power over the Pagan Christians, they
shall get them under and be no more domineered over by them.

And he shall rule them with a rod of Verse 27.
Iron: that is, with sufficient power and strictness to keep them in
subjection.

As the vessels of a Potter shall they be broken to shivers. The stone shall
smite the Image on the feet and break them to pieces. That shall be at the
long-run.

Even as I received of my father. I in you, and you in me; you in me by virtue
of the Power of my Spirit shall thus reign; and I in you, according as it is
written, I shall give thee the Heathen Psalm 2.
for thine inheritance, the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession;
Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces as a
Potters vessel. But this is something further off.

20. And I will give him the morning Verse 28.
star. In the mean time, and which is next to succeed, I will give them the
morning star; that is, a considerable dawning toward that greater Day of the
illustrious reign of Christ upon earth, in his Saints by his Spirit. The
Phosphorus to the glorious Sunrise of the happy Millennium properly so called.
This intervall will be the same with that of the Vials which are accompanied
with such a smoke; As here the Promise, which is to be performed in the next
Succession of the Church, and there continued, is not expressed with that
vigor as elsewhere, where Christ in reference to his Kingdom is said to be
the bright morning star, here only the morning star without the ornament of
that Epithet: The Kingdom of Christ therefore under the first Thunder may be
said to be the morning star, but under the second, the bright morning star. And
it is observable, that whereas in that other place he is called (...), in this
Apoc. 22. 10.
he is called (...), which may also have the signification of more early then
was expected, which exquisitely answers to the evert, it falling out toward the
forepart of the last semi-time. But these things are only by the by.

He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Verse
29.
Churches. There is nothing new remarkable in this Epiphonema, but the placing
of it here after the whole Epistle, which is a sign that all the Epistle is a
Parable, and is not only meant of the Church in Thyatira in the Literal sense
(but that the condition and affairs of some other Church, the truly Catholic
and Apostolic Church in the Intervall defined, are here prefigured and
described Prophetically.) And that therefore the Promises are to be performed
on this stage of the Earth, as of their own nature they appear to be such that
have a Political sense. Which therefore therewithal assures us, that such a
tenor of Interpretation belongs to the three following Epistles, because the
Epiphonema is the close of every one of them. And therefore we shall steer the
course of our Interpretation accordingly.

CHAP. VII.
The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Sardis.

1. AND unto the Angel in the Apoc. 3. 1.
Church of Sardis write. That Sardis was a City in Asia is manifest Chapter 1. And
considered no otherwise then so, does not at all illustrate the condition of
this fifth Succession of the state of the Church. But acknowledging here again
a Paronomastical Allusion to Sarda the precious Stone, as Grotius does: or,
taking notice with Pliny, that that Stone is so called for its first being
found about Sardis, it may prove very significative of the condition of
Reformed Christendom within that Intervall, beginning from the rising of the
Witnesses, and ending in the last Vial, in part of it I mean. After which the
Intervall of Phyladelphia comes in, and takes up also the second and third
Thunder. Some special qualities therefore of the Church of Sardis are to be
read in this Stone Sarda, and some to her praise, others to her diminution. The
virtue of this Stone is, that carried about one it makes a man cheerful and
courageous, and drives away Witchcraft and Enchantment, and expells poison
rightly administered, which adumbrate some peculiar Privileges in this Sardian
Church. Their cheerful security in justification by faith in Christ's blood,
and their being rid of the poisonous idolatrous doctrines, and bewitching
Enchantments of the Cup of the Whore. Here Is nothing of Jezebel in this Church,
nor any mention of the eating of things offered to Idols, nor in the two
following Epistles, which is no small ratification of the truth of these
Successions. Both they and she are well and sound touching these points.

2. But this Stone Sarda, which is also called Carnalina, and in the Hebrew
(...), Odem, as representing humane flesh and blood so lively, seems also to
insinuate something to the Derogation of the Sardian Church, as if they were
flesh, and not spirit; which is the special Dispensation of the Church of
Philadelphia. And whereas Christ's Conquest over Edom is, by letting out or
squeezing out the corrupt blood of old Adam, this Odem or Carnalina is said to
be of that virtue as to stanch blood and stop it from running out, and
therefore seems to be significative of whatever Doctrines in the Sardian Church
that hinder the due and requisite Mortification of the old man, as loath to
weaken him too much, and let too much of his blood and life run out.

3. The meaning therefore is, that though the Sardian Church be well rid of the
foul Idolatries and gross Trumperies of the Papal Church, yet her state as yet
is but carnal mostwhat. It is not the Dispensation of the spirit of life, but
the main stir is about external Opinion and Ceremony: they seem to know Christ
only according to the flesh, not according to the power of his Spirit, whereby
he is able to subdue all things under him.

Whereas Christ after he had said that his flesh was meat indeed, and John. 6.
55.
his blood was drink indeed, clearly explains himself, in declaring expressly,
that the flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life; yet a great John 6. 63.
part of this Sardian Church, I mean the Lutherans, rack their own Wits, and
disturb the rest of Reformed Christendom, to maintain that odd Paradox of
Consubstantiation, that so men may eat and drink that gross Flesh and Blood of
Christ that was crucified upon the Cross in the Celebration of their
Eucharists. What can be more Carnaline-like then this? Besides that there are
over-many that do as grossly and carnally err touching the nature of the
Resurrection-Body, they phansying it as terrestrially modified (though it be
called a celestial or spiritual Body in the Scriptures,) as that Body is that
we put into the Grave, or is capable of the embraces of the Nuptial Bed. To say
nothing of other such like gross carnal Conceits that this Sardian Church has
not yet expunged out of her mind.

But as mischievous a mark as any of her Carnality is her Dissension and
Schismaticalnesse even to mutual Persecution, as also the unnatural and
unchristian Wars of one part of Reformed Christendom against the other. These
things rankly savor of the Flesh, and are infinitely contrary to the due
Dispensation of the Spirit; which when it shall appear will bring in the Church
of Philadelphia, the Church of unfeigned Love and Charity, wherein, according
to the prediction of the Prophets, there shall not be the noise of this
unchristian War any more. These Touches may suffice to show why the Spirit of
God has denoted this Succession of his Church by the Title of the Church in
Sardis.

4. These things says he that has the seven Spirits of God. The number Seven
signifies Universality sometimes; whence the Pythagoreans call it (...). The
sense therefore is, that has in readiness to bestow all the spiritual or
Divine Graces to make the man of God perfect to every good word and work.

And the seven Stars. That is to say, that holds the seven Stars in his right
hand: so it is in the Description before his speech to the Ephesine Church,
which is repeated here for encouragement; Christ hereby declaring his Power,
and promising his Assistence to the renewing of Christendom through the
Reformation, as well as he did to the forming of it at first, and rooting out
Paganism in the first beginning of the Church, which is the Ephesine Intervall.

I know thy works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead. I
discern plainly thy state and condition. Thou have indeed a semblance of life,
because thou have a great deal of Heat and Zeal, and do with an external
fervor do many performances that may raise a fame of thee of being more then
ordinarily religious. And many hot disputes there may be for this or that
Ceremony, for this or that Opinion, and against them, much and very vehement
discourse about Faith and Justification, and the like. Which Heat and activity
bears a semblance of Life in thee. But assure thy self, unless thou have that
Faith that works by Love, all this stir is but the noise of tinkling Brass
or of sounding Cymbals. And being thus alive, thou art notwithstanding in my
sight little better then dead. And although thou do thus imitate warm flesh
and blood, yet thou art but a cold Sardius Stone to my touch and discernment.
As she that lives wantonly is dead while she lives, though she thinks she is
then most of all alive: so it is with him that, devoid of Christian Love and
Charity, is enlivened with an hot, bitter, ignorant and preposterous Zeal: This
is not the life of God, but of mere Nature and Carnality.

5. Be watchful, and strengthen the Verse 2.
things that remain that are ready to die. Take heed that want of Love and Life
hazard not Faith too, and Remissness in Manners bring not in Atheism and
Infidelity over all.

For I have not found thy works perfect before me. Those things that have Life
in them go on to Perfection. Wherefore if they stop before, and make no
progress, it is a sign there is some deadly distemper at the very heart or
root, and such a Plant must wither and die. Thy Works are neither perfect, nor
do thou easily admit of such Doctrines as lead most effectually to Perfection.

Remember therefore how thou have Verse 3.
received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. That is to say, You that are my
true Apostolic Church, remember what ye have received from me my self, or my
Apostles; stand fast to the infallible Word, which will impartially instruct
and excite you to all the due measures of Godliness. And believe not the
rotten and corrupt Glosses ofdeceitful men, that would sew Pillows under men's
Arm-holes, and frame Opinions and Precepts to favor the Lusts of the flesh. To
dote upon men is a piece of Carnality; but to dote on them for their carnal
Opinions and fleshfavouring Documents, is Sardian or Carnaline of a double Dye.
Repent therefore, for the Kingdom of God is at hand; and he that has the seven
Spirits of God stands ready to assist and succor with his Divine Graces all
that sincerely endeavor after Righteousness. So that the fault lies at your
own doors.

If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and thou
shall not know what hour I come upon thee. If thou will not return to true
Sobriety and Sincerity of Manners, I shall bring some signal mischief upon thee
before thou be aware; I shall suddenly come in Judgment against thee when
thou least dreamest thereof. God of his infinite mercy avert the ill Omen, and
change our hearts, that we may amend our lives, and he may be reconciled to us.

6. Thou have a few names even in Verse 4.
Sardis, which have not defiled their garments. Notwithstanding the
Dispensation of the Sardian Church be so generally carnal, in the very hew of
that Carnaline-stone that looks so like mere flesh and blood, yet there are
some few that have not defiled their garments with that color, but are as it
were the Primitiae of the Dispensation of the Spirit, whose inward Man is
renewed day by day into the Image of my self, and are made partakers of the
Divine Nature, and are the Children of Light.

And they shall walk with me in white. These shall not only enjoy glorious
Converses with me, and I communicate my spiritual Graces abundantly to them,
but they shall be very successful and prosperous in their Affairs. For to be
clothed in white signifies so in the Onirocriticks, accordingly as you may see
in Achmetes.

For they are worthy. For I do to every one according to his work.

7. He that overcomes, the same Verse 5.
shall be clothed in white raiment. He that overcomes all the Lusts of this
terrestrial Body, to him will I communicate the Celestial or Divine. This is a
more Theological sense. But the Political is most proper, the Epiphonema
concluding the whole Epistle. Wherefore to be clothed in white Raiment, it
being here the promise to him that overcomes, signifies (and that rather then
in the foregoing Verse) Success and Prosperity in external affairs, and
exemption from Grief and Affliction, as the Onirocriticks do expressly interpret
it. See Achmetes.

And I will not blot his name out of the book of Life. The more proper and
Political sense may be, that when the Church by overcoming has emerged into
the Philadelphian condition, it shall never change, at least as to the
external frame, but keep up to the end; and God will avowedly acknowledge it
to be his even to the last, even then when it is passed into the Laodicean
state, and the state of Persecution shall never overwhelm it any more. So the
Book of life may signify here as the Crown of life before in the Epistle to
the Church of Smyrna.

But I will confess his name before my Father and before his Angels. That is to
say, I will acknowledge his nature to have become in a manner Divine and
Angelical, and therefore to be a meet Associate for their companies in my
Heavenly Kingdom for ever. This may be a Moral or Theological sense. But the
Political is chiefly aimed at, as is intimated by the placing of the
Epiphonema last of all. The confessing therefore of the Names of these few in
Sardis that are right as they should be, and as many as make up to the measure
of their Sanctity, (which therefore are the seed of the Philadelphian Church,)
Christ his confessing of their Names before his Father and before his holy
Angels, is the mentioning of their Names as of a People more peculiarly his,
and extraordinarily dear unto him; that by thus owning them in such an
endearing manner before God and his holy Angels, they may be in a more special
manner recommended to the favor and Protection of God, and to the faithful
and watchful Ministry of his holy Angels: which will be the efficient causes
of their being clothed in white, and of their Name never being blotted out of
the Book of Life; that is to say, of the Permanency of their outward Prosperity
and security from Misery and Oppression; that thus Innocence and outward
Felicity may go hand in hand in the blessed Millennium, which is in a manner
the same with the Philadelphian Intervall of the Church. These few Names in
Sardis will amount to this at last. For Salvation is to spring out of Sardis,
not out of Babylon. Nor is it any wonder that the Ministry of the holy Angels
will be so extraordinarily exercised about a Church which will then have become
so Angelical, as is more fully noted in the Divine Dialogues.

8. These are the rousing Motives which Christ uses to excite the carnal
Church of Sardis to more hearty endeavors after the Dispensation of the
Spirit, that they may bring on the beginning of those most happy Times; the
conduct of which Affair is represented by that illustrious Heroes on his white
Horse, Chap. 19. where his Armies follow him on white Horses clothed in fine
Linen, white and clean. Which appertains to the last end of the Intervall of
this Church of Sardis, a great part of whom by this time it is likely may have
turned their Carnaline-colour into pure white, and be ready to march with him
there to that spiritual Warfare, as some are said here to walk with him in
white, and that with mavelous success and prosperity, as their white
Clothing does intimate.

He that has an ear to hear, let him Verse 6.
hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. Reformed Christendom
especially, she is so much concerned therein. For she, as I said at first, is
this Sardian Church; the beginning of whose Intervall, being adorned with more
true Holiness and sincerity of Zeal, the better deserved the Title of the
Rising of the Witnesses: And though they be here much reproved for their
Faults, yet they are acknowledged to be one of the Seven Churches in Asia,
Chap. 1. 11. that is to say, (...) in Fundamento, and are the true and
Apostolical Church still, and justly witness against the Idolatries and gross
Antichristian practices of the Church of Rome, such, I mean, as with them have
become a Law, and thereby are properly Antichristian.

This I thought fit to add, to stop the preposterous pronenesse of some toward
the Roman Church from the Consideration that all things are not so perfect in
the Reformed Churches as might be desired. For though they be not so well as
they should be, yet they must needs appear to any but an Humorist exceeding
much better then in the Church of Rome.

And thus much of the Sardian Church.

CHAP. VIII.
An Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church in Philadelphia.

1. AND to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia write. The Apoc 3. ver. 7.
meaning of Philadelphia is plain, and is no Riddle. The word signifies
Brotherly love: which rightly understood is the fulfilling of the Law. So that
I understand by (...) the same that (...), universal Love, (for we are all
brothers in Adam;) but especially the love of those of the household of Faith;
that is to say, of Christian Believers. In the Sardian Church, the greatest
noise and stir there is about Faith, but her Works were not found perfect
before God. But the Inscription of this Church is Love, which is the fulfilling
of the Law, as I hinted before. And Cant. 2. 4.
his banner over me was Love. This is the Ensign of the Church of Philadelphia,
who elsewhere is said to be beautiful and terrible as an Army with Banners;
Who is she that looks Cant. 6. 10.
forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an
Army with Banners? Why? who can it be but this Church of Philadelphia, as
famous for feats of Arms as for Love, as we shall see in the process? For the
Intervall of this Church begins in the last Vial, and reaches to the fourth
Thunder.

These things says he that is Holy. And speaks to that Church that loves to
hear those Instructions: Be ye holy, for I am holy; and, Be ye perfect, as your
Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

He that is true. He that will make good all his Promises and glorious
Predictions touching his Church in this state thereof which is figured out by
the Church of Philadelphia, and writes to those that believe it, and have a
firm Faith in the Power and Spirit of Christ and of God.

He that has the Key of David, he that opens and no man shuts, and
shuts and no man opens. What Eliakim was to Hezekias, who was of the stock
of David, the same is Christ to God the Father, whom S. John calls Love, (...).
He is chief Minister of State under God, and carries all as he pleases by the
Authority committed to him; of which a Key is the Symbol. (See Grotius upon the
place.) There is nothing so hard and impervious but he can make way through it,
and open a door to Success, and again shut it against his Enemies.

2. I know thy works. And that so Verse 8.
as to approve of them, because they are the fruits of the Divine Love, then
which there is nothing to me more precious. Thou actest not out of bitter zeal
and strife, or vain ostentation, or any secular respect, but merely out of love
to me and my Righteousness, and out of love to mankind, whose both present
and future Happiness thou do sincerely endeavor to promote.

Behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it. Behold; I
have brought things about so by my Providence, and will so effectually second
what I have begun by my special assistence, that, maugre all the machinations
of men and Devils, thou shall find opportunities of most gloriously and
successfully carrying on the Interest of my Kingdom. This is performed in the
last Vial, in that great battle of God almighty, when Apoc. 16. and 19.
also the Beast and the false Prophet are said to be taken. See the Divine
Dialogues.

For thou have a little strength. Grotius himself interprets it, a little Army:
and so indeed (...) will signify, and appositely to the present scope, and
answerably to the Battle I named before. The sense is; Because, though ye be
but a few in comparison of the rest of my Church and Kingdom, (for the Sardian
Church is his Kingdom and Church too, out of which the Philadelphian Church is
emerging) and especially in respect of the Infidel and Antichristian party,
those under the Dragon and the Beast and the false Prophet, yet ye Apoc. 16.
have kept my Word, and not denied my Name, that is, have both kept to what is
holy and true in your hearts, and professed it in your words and works:
therefore I will be with you in this glorious manner, and make you so
successful in the promoting of the Interest of my Kingdom. Of this Church
therefore of Philadelphia are those Armies seen in Heaven, Apoc. 19. following
Christ upon white Horses clothed in fine linen, white and clean; which implies
both the justness of their cause, and the certainty of their success. As also
those Boanergesses in the last Vial, (synchronal to that other Vision) Apoc.
16. 18, 19.
that thunder and lighten over the City divided into three parts, whereby the
Cities of the Nations fell, and Babylon and her daughters were utterly
overthrown.

3. Behold, I will make them of the Verse 9.
Synagogue of Satan (which say they are Jews, but do lie.) Jews, as I noted
before, according to the style of the Apocalypse, are Christians; and the Jews
which profess themselves such, and are not, but do lie, are pseudo-Christians,
or the Antichristian party; but are judged here to be of the Synagogue of
Satan, because of their abominable lies and bloody murders. For the Devil was a
murderer from Joh. 8. 44.
the beginning; and he is also in the same place by our Savior termed a Liar.
Besides the Luciferian Pride of that Church, like Satan's, the Prince of the
Devils.

Behold, I will make them come and worship before thy feet. Even those that
before kissed the feet of the Pope, that lofty Prelate. This answers very patly
to that passage in the forenamed Vision; where the Beast and false Prophet are
taken, and put alive into a lake of fire: that Apoc. 19. 20.
is to say, the Bestian and Pseudoprophetical power, as such, is burnt and
destroyed and abolished, and the Philadelphian power then appears above all, or
rather the Lord alone will be exalted in that day; for to this time especially
belongs that saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the
Lord of Hosts.

For, indeed, the struggling of the Sardian Church hitherto against the City
that is called Sodom and Egypt, though it has been in its kind laudable, yet
it has been in a manner Edom against Edom, a part something more refined
against that which is more impure, I mean as to Life and Godliness; and the
weapons of their warfare have not been so spiritual as they ought, they have
not rid upon white Horses, nor have been clothed in fine linen, white and
clean; they have not endeavored to be that Church which is without spot and
wrinkle, or any such thing, but the Sardian tincture has too much distained
them.

But as it is true in the natural sense, that flesh and blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God; so it is also in the political, that those glorious times
of the Kingdom of God cannot appear till the Church emerge out of the Sardian
or Carnaline state into the Philadelphian. Against which Church Christ exhibits
no complaint at all, but loves her, and likes her entirely, even as he is
cordially loved of her. And without question the state of that Church is so
lovely, that she will charm even her enemies to a liking of her, and unto a
submission to her, all things being so irreprehensible in her. But commonly
wicked men are very domineering and ferocient against good men that have any
blot or infirmity on them, unless they be of their own faction.

And therefore this Philadelphian Church, if any, must be the Church that can
mollify the hearts of the Papists, and bring over as many as God pleases to
the belief of the Truth. But for the Cities of the Nations, their Conquests
will be unspeakable amongst them. For these are those powerful Thunderers, by
whose thundering and lightening the Cities of the Nations are to fall, as I
intimated before.

And to know that I have loved thee. The Papists themselves shall discern, by
the stupendous success of the Philadelphian Church, what a value Christ puts
upon her, and how far he prefers her Integrity, Simplicity,
Brotherly-kindnesse, Humility, Meekness and Purity of Worship, before the
Roman Frauds and Impostures, their barbarous Persecutions and Cruelties, their
Luciferian Pride, and superstitious and Idolatrous practices.

4. Because thou have kept the word Verse 10.
of my patience; that is, Because thou art both meek-hearted, and have been
faithful and not flitting in the time of trial, but endurest all things for my
names sake;

I will keep thee from the hour of temptation that shall come upon all the
world. Namely, at what time all the world will be in an hurly-burly, and cast
into manifold streights and calamities. Which is in the last Vial, when the
three unclean spirits go forth unto the Kings of the earth and of the whole
world, to gather them to the battle of that great Day of God Almighty; and when
there shall be so great an Earthquake as has not been since men were upon
earth, so mighty an Earthquake and so great. In this mighty tempest and hurry
of things will I preserve thee from danger, and thou shall carry it safe
through all. Thou shall escape better then any party of men, by reason of thy
conspicuous Innocence, sincerity, and exemplarity of life, and unexceptionable
Apostolicalnesse of doctrine, and singular love to me and all mankind. Because
thou art mild and courteous and benign and beneficent to all; because thou art
a lover of unity, un-self-interessed, a foe to no body, and only an enemy to
the vices and miseries of men: This, with my singular favor to thee, shall
protect thee in that great confusion and high fermentation of men's spirits
under the last Vial. Who is he that 1 Pet. 3. v. 13.
will harm you, if you be followers of that which is good?

5. Behold, I come quickly. Thou Verse 11.
art already in that Period of time wherein this great Judgment will come upon
the earth, namely, under the first Thunder. Or rather, because the
Philadelphian Church is not supposed to be in distinct being or appearance till
the last Vial, the last Vial must be this Period. And then this coming in
respect of that time will be quickly indeed.

Hold thou fast what thou have, that no man take thy Crown. Thou art a Church
after my own heart, O Philadelphia, and I blame thee for nothing, thou walk
uprightly with me and art perfect: Wherefore hold that ground which thou have
got in truth and integrity, that thou may not be deprived of that Crown I
intend thee; for in thee will I accomplish all the glorious Promises touching
my Kingdom upon earth.

6. Him that overcomes will I make Verse 12.
a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out. 'O (...), He
that overcomes, that is, in the Apocalyptick style, All, or the whole Company
that overcomes, which is here meant of the Philadelphians. They shall be as a
pillar in the Temple of God; that is, they shall be a steady and standing Holy
people, a true holy Catholic Church that shall never fail, but shall last till
I come in the clouds to Judgment in the last Day. All other forms and
denominations shall fail, but this shall keep the sovereignty to the last.

And I will write upon him the name of my God. This is in pursuance of the
former Metaphor of a Pillar, with a farther Allusion to the (...) of the
Ancients. These Philadelphians shall have the name of God written upon them;
that is, their Conversation and manners will be so holy and divine, that it
will be as conspicuous to all, as if it were writ upon their foreheads that
they are the holy Church and chosen people of God. Or more briefly and in a
more Political sense; The name of my God may allude to Jehovah Shammah,
intimating, that these Philadelphians shall be that Church which is represented
by the City Jerusalem described by Ezekiel, which is called Jehovah Shammah. Of
which the following words seem to be a more express signification.

And the name of the City of my God, which is, New Jerusalem, which comes down
out of Heaven from my God. The name of the City, the new Jerusalem, as well as
Jehovah Shammah, will be written upon them, The City where God dwells and
rules by his Spirit; that is to say, they will be that City of Jerusalem
formally and actually under the second Thunder. For to be called, and to be,
are all one in the Hebrew Idiom.

And his name is called the Word of God, Apo. 19. 3. is as much as, He is the
Word of God. Wherefore this Philadelphia under the second Thunder passes into
the same with the new Jerusalem; but the Title of Philadelphia begins sooner,
and reaches farther to the fourth Thunder.

This Inscription of the Philadelphians, that they are called the new
Jerusalem, etc. in the very words in which it is described afterward Apoc. 21.
is a notable Indication that by the Church of Philadelphia is meant that
Succession of the Church that is under the second and third Thunder, but was
emerging in the last Vial. For it is the new Jerusalem which comes out of
Heaven from God. Which therefore having this manifest Political sense, would be
very hardly attributed to that City of Philadelphia in Asia literally
understood, but with an eye to this successive Intervall of the Church which we
here speak of. And the Promise was not performed to the Literal Church of
Philadelphia, which has perished; that was no such lasting Pillar. And
therefore there is a necessity of a farther sense, Mystical or Prophetical.

7. And I will write upon him my new name. It is expressly said, Apoc. 10. 16.
that Christ has a name written upon his Vesture and upon his Thigh, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. This name Grotius would have understood here. And
there is no small reason for it, that name being so particularly and pompously
set out for a special name of his. And though he has ever had a right unto it;
yet because the getting into possession of this right will be new and fresh in
this Philadelphian Intervall after the battle of the Heroes on the white Horse,
it is rightly termed a new Name, and very fittingly writ upon these
Philadelphians, because they are so instrumental in his Achievements. These
are the Boanergesses, (thundering over the great City divided into three parts)
and also those Horsemen on white Horses, as I intimated before. Christ
therefore through these becomes King of Kings and Lord of Lords; or rather, he
has made them the greatest Kingdom upon earth. The mountain of the Lord's
house is exalted upon the top of the mountains, and all Nations flow unto it;
as it is to come to pass under the third Thunder. Through which third and
second Thunder, and seventh Vial, is drawn the Intervall of the Succession of
the Church of Philadelphia, as I have hinted above.

He that has an ear to hear, let him Verse 13.
hear, etc. We need not here urge the intimation of this Political sense of
things from the putting of the Epiphonema last, the very nature of the
expressions calling for it, though we had no such guide. But we may rather
argue, that the things themselves being of so manifest Political sense, not
moral or spiritual, that it confirms our Rule touching the position of this
Epiphonema. But this by the bye. We proceed to the Church of Laodicea.

CHAP. IX.
The Interpretation of the Epistle to the Church of Laodicea.

1. AND to the Angel of the Church Apoc. 3. 14.
of the Laodiceans write. The Intervall of the Succession of the Church of
Laodicea is the fourth and fifth Thunders, that is, from the loosing of Satan
to the appearing of Christ coming to Judgment under the sixth Thunder. In this
Intervall the Scene of Philadelphia is past, and Laodicea takes place: which is
acknowledged a true Church as to Worship and Doctrine, but is represented as a
lazy, lethargical Church; in which that former Philadelphian zeal is
extinguished as to the generality of the Church, though it is likely this
degeneracy comes on by degrees in this Intervall.

2. Thus therefore it is foreseen in the series of Divine Providence, that
after that glorious estate of the Church which is synchronal to the second and
third Thunder (during which space and a little before the Scene of Philadelphia
adorned the Stage) had well purged the Christian World from all foolish
opinions and superstitions, and of that accursed custom of persecuting one
another for them, and that the truth of the Gospel had clearly shined in the
simplicity thereof, and so convictively against all the follies and impostures
of the former Ages, that the Church had no great hazard of being again cheated
with them; and that they had seen all Prophecies in a manner fulfilled before
their eyes, so that there could be no doubt to them, but that the Philadelphian
Church was the true Church, nor be in any capacity of any change in faith or
worship: after this, I say, as all things are in some sort or other variable
under the Sun, so it seems this Philadelphian Church was at last to degenerate
into this Laodicean state; and that which was before the Reign of the Spirit
and the living Righteousness of God, would now become the Church of Laodicea;
which signifies a more popular or external Political righteousness, or the
righteousness of the people. An external profession and performance of that
Mode that was used by the Philadelphians in a living way, and with the power of
the Spirit, the same will this Church of Laodicea hold on spiritlesly and
lazily, with little life or zeal, and yet applaud themselves by reason of the
abundance of knowledge she has, because of the completion of the Prophecies,
and by reason of the purity of the external Worship she still retains, as if
all was still well with her, and as if she wanted nothing.

3. This in brief is the condition of this Church, as it is significantly
intimated in the very name. For (...) signifies as much as the righteousness
of the people. And the people are any multitude of mankind gathered into a body
politic; as is manifest in that notation of (...), as if it were from (...)
and (...) and then again in Homer, (...) --
And therefore the people, being a body politic, are ruled by such and such
laws, which if they observe, it is not regarded quo animo, or out of what
Principle, they observe them. The new nature, Regeneration and the Spirit, are
quite out of this rode. And a National or Ecumenical Religion, Doctrine or
Worship, as they are ab extra, are but as a political law, and the
Righteousness therein but a Laodicean Righteousness, as has been abundantly
inculcated already. But besides this meaning of the name Laodicea, which I
doubt not but is particularly intended, there may, according to the
multifarious Allusivenesse of the Prophetical style, another notable meaning
be also intimated, and that very appropriate to this Church. For the ratio
nominis in Laodicea may be likewise (...), because in the Intervall of this
Church God will in that most notorious and terrible manner come to judge the
people. Because the Closure of this Church brings in the last Judgment
properly so called, therefore this last Intervall of the Church is called
Laodicea, The judging of the people, all the Nations of the world, at the last
Day. And there is nothing more frequent in the Scripture, then the giving of
names from some notable external Accident, that respects the thing or person
so named.

4. These things says the Amen, the faithful and true witness. Paul, in his
second Epistle to the Corinthians, says, That all the promises of God in Christ
are Yea and Amen; that is to say, they are so sure and certain, that no man
need doubt but they will be performed. Wherefore this Attribute of Christ is
seasonably brought in, as respecting both the completion of the Promises
already performed, in bringing his Church to that admirable glorious condition
in the Succession of Philadelphia, as also the performance of that material
Promise at the end of this Epistle, touching eternal Life or a blessed
Immortality in Christ's Heavenly Kingdom; which these Laodiceans, or
degenerated Philadelphians, like our modern Familists, that pretend to the
Philadelphian Dispensation, may some of them, it is likely, be prone to distrust.

But Christ is here also called the faithful and true witness, because he
does so impartially witness concerning the truth of the condition of the
Laodiceans, and so faithfully discover to them the danger thereof. And the
declaration seeming so paradoxicall to them, it was the more requisite to
inculcate into them his own truth and faithfulness, that he might gain belief
of them against their own false sense and opinion of themselves.

The beginning of the Creation of God. This has a more high meaning, like that
in the beginning of S. John's Gospel, and respects the Divinity of Christ, by
whom all things were made, and in whom all things are. But I believe also that
is more particularly insinuated here which is expressly declared of him
(according to the Seventy) by the Prophet Esaias; (...), Isa. 9. 6.
The beginner of that world or Age under the Messiah; wherein he having, as I
intimated before, carried on all things so completely according to promise and
prediction, this seems an advantageous repetition of what was intimated before
in that Attribute of Amen: As if he should say, I was the beginner of this
mavelous Scene of things from the time of my living on this Earth in the
flesh to this very day, and you see how steddily all things have been carried
on, according to Predictions and Prophecies: wherefore believe me in the rest
(whether Comminations or Promises) which I shall now declare unto you. This
seems to be the genuine sense of this Preface to the Epistle.

5. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot. I see thee to be
Verse 15.
in a tepid, formal, remiss Dispensation: Thou hold still the outside of
the Philadelphian Church for Doctrine and Worship: But thou art destitute of
that Spirit of life in the new Birth which was the proper Character of thy
deceased Sister of Philadelphia.

I would thou were cold or hot. Though it be not better in it self, yet it were
better for thee thou were not so externally good as thou art, that thou
might the sooner be convinced of thine own wants, and get into the state of
Repentance, of Mortification, and finally of Regeneration, that so thou
might partake of my Spirit. But now thou art but an external Image of warm
flesh out of which life and soul did lately depart, even then when thy Sister
Philadelphia departed out of this world. Thou art the external frame of that
Philadelphia, but the spirit has left thee.

6. So then, because thou art lukewarm, Verse 16.
and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. That is, I will
declare in a torrent of words against thee, how nauseous and distasteful thou
art to me, and how my stomach rises against thee. Which is done in the
following verse, where he pours out those just Reproaches against her, that she
is wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Or, it may be,
there may be a more profound, and yet not less solid, meaning in this
Commination, and that it may be predictive of her utter Extermination; that the
continuance of the Church of Christ upon Earth shall cease in her. For the
immenseness of Christ's Divinity incompassing all things that are, he can vomit
nothing out from him but it must therewith be cast into Nonentity. And the
Laodicean Church is the last Scene of Providence, and this Church, and indeed
the whole Scene of affairs on this Earth for her sake, is shortly to have an
end. For in the next Thunder to this Laodicean Intervall Christ comes to
Judgment, and presently after is the Conflagration. And Satan is to be let
loose but a little time; so that the time of the Laodicean Church cannot be
long. Wherefore the Commination, I will spew thee out of my mouth, may well be
a prediction of the utter Extermination of the Church out of being, that is, as
to the state of a Church upon Earth. For as before the coming of the Flood God
is said to repent Genesis 6. 6.
him that he had made man upon the earth, and that it grieved him at his heart:
so Christ here expresses how nauseous and stomack-sick he is against his
Church under this Intervall and Title of Laodicea, how his choler and
indignation rises against her Luke-warmnesse; and that therefore he will vomit
her out in a flood of Fire, and overwhelm her in a deluge of hot scalding
sulphurous flames: which will come to pass at the Conflagration. The state of
the Church now in its old age naturally growing worse, Christ will think fit to
put an end to the Scene of things, and carry his to his Celestial Kingdom.

7. Because thou say, I am rich, Verse 17.
and increased with goods, and have need of nothing. And this is one reason of
the Spiritlesnesse and Inactivity of the Laodicean Church, that she thinks she
has all things desirable already, Peace, Plenty, Power and Dominion, Security
from enemies, Profession of the Truth, Purity in external Worship, rid of
Superstition and Idolatry, abundance of Knowledge as well Natural as
Theological, the understanding of all Prophecies, by reason of their clear
Completion, and the faithful and judicious Interpretations of her
Predecessors; no Oppression, no Persecution for Conscience sake; every man
lives at quiet, and injoys himself under his own Vine and under his own
Fig Tree: What want we therefore? are we not still the true Philadelphian
Church, and the new Jerusalem descended from Heaven, in all the riches and
glories thereof? One would think so indeed, according to the judgment of any
carnal eye. But let us hear what the Amen says, the true and faithful Witness.

And know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
and naked. Christ says to the Church in Smyrna, I know thy works, and
tribulation, and poverty; but thou art rich. The Primitive Church, while the
Spirit of life was in them, though in the midst of the want of all external
Comforts, and under most dreadful Persecutions, in the judgment of Christ are
accounted rich: but the Laodiceans, in the affluence of all external Blessings,
because they want that Spirit of life, are deemed poor, and miserable, and
naked, as if they had not a rag to hang on their backs; nay, blind also, for
all their abundance of Knowledge, because they are devoid of the knowledge and
experience of the Mysteries of the Spirit of life in the new Birth, and the
Renovation of the Soul into inward living Righteousness, but take up with the
external Laodicean state or condition.

8. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may est be
Verse 18.
rich. I advise thee, sincerely to endeavor (for that is the price thou must
pay for this Gold) after the Recovery of thy self into the state of the new
Jerusalem descended from Heaven; which City was of pure Gold, so purified in
the fire, that it was as clear as transparent Glass. This is the new Creature
in thee, the Transformation of thy nature into the Image of the Heavenly Adam.
This is solid and durable Riches indeed, and such as will go along with thee
into the highest Heavens, when this Earth and the metalls therein shall melt
with fire. Labor therefore after such a solid Treasure as will abide those
fatal flames, and will not perish with thee in the general Conflagration. And
the Symbol of this Treasure is this purified Gold.

And white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy
nakedness do not appear. Groan then earnestly in this, O thou spiritlesse
Laodicea, desiring to be clothed upon with that spiritual house which is from
Heaven; that, being so clothed, thou may not be found naked. For while thou
art in this earthly Tabernacle, thou ought to account it a burden, and not
to set up thy staff in the enjoyments of this life, because all things are
peaceful and prosperous with thee. Not that I would advise thee to shorten thy
days here; but that, being thus clothed by this spiritual Vestment, Mortality
might be swallowed up of life. And it is the Spirit of life and the Divine Love
that works in thee this one great thing that thou so greatly want, and yet
art insensible thereof.

And anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou may see. That is, Cleanse thy
self with such a due measure of Mortification, and Purification of the inward
man from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, that thou may attain to the
Divinely-moral Prudence which will enable thee to have a right judgment and
discerning in all things. This therefore is the Collyrion which I would advise
thee to anoint thine eyesight with, even the purgation of thy self from all
the Animal Corruptions, that thou may perfect the inward Righteousness in my
fear: For the outward alone carries none to Heaven. The Ointment I prescribe
will indeed smart; but without it thou will still continue blind, and never
find the way to everlasting Salvation.

9. As many as I love, I rebuke. I 9.
deal plainly, truly and faithfully with thee; and not out of any ill will is
it that I thus rebuke thee: But it is ex amore benevolentiae, though not ex
amore complacentiae. For, as thou art, thou art but a nauseous and irksome
spectacle to me. And therefore I thus rebuke thee and instruct thee, that thou
may amend.

And chasten, (...). Which signifies to chastise and scourge, as well as to
instruct. Which therefore may seem to be the commination of some external
Calamity and Affliction that Christ would bring upon the Laodiceans, if they
did not repent them of their remissness; and in such a way as themselves may
happily be the causes of, through their Remissness and Luke-warmnesse. For that
former Philadelphian Zeal and Activity ceasing, which that Church exercised in
the behalf of the Interest of the Kingdom of God, their enemies may more then
ordinarily increase upon them, especially the Devil being let loose, and being
very active to deceive the Nations; whom they should counter-plot, by being as
active to convert them to the Truth. And this may be the time wherein the
Prediction of Gog and Magog is to be fulfilled, who are said to be gathered
together to battle, and to encompasse the Camp of the Saints and the beloved
City, which in this state is termed the Church of Laodicea; but in that Vision,
the Camp of the Saints, because there were not only many Saints amongst them
of the old Philadelphian strain, but that they were still in their external
frame an holy people and an holy City, not profaned by the Gentiles, that is
to say, not polluted by Heathenish Superstition, and Idolatry, and Imposture,
and Cruelty; nor brought under their power and dominion that were. Which yet
was once the condition of the Holy City for a time and times and half a time,
or forty two months, Apoc. 11. 2.

10. And it is still called the beloved City also for the same reason: but not
the new Jerusalem descended from Heaven, because so generally that new and
Heavenly nature was lost amongst them. But this Church of Laodicea is still
beloved of Christ, partly for her own sake, and partly for her deceased
Sister's sake, the lovely Philadelphia, whom she so much resembles in all her
external features, that dearest Spouse of Christ.

And therefore the Title of the beloved City agrees very well with this passage
in the present Text, Whom I love, I rebuke, yea and scourge too. For these
streights that the Laodiceans are to be cast into by the Siege of Gog and Magog
seems the most probable way to rowze them out of their Lukewarmnesse and lazy
Formality. But that things may not run the hazard of growing worse and worse,
nor there be an infinite repetition of the vicissitude of Scenes on the Stage
of this Earth, Providence will knock off at such a time as that the wicked and
profane Rabble of the world shall not again get the dominion over his true
Church, but he will put a period to the Contest by a deluge of Fire from
Heaven, as it is intimated in that Vision. But this is more then falls to the
share of this present verse.

Be zealous therefore, and repent. That is, Amend thy dead Formality and
Lukewarmnesse, by attaining to the Spirit of life through Mortification and
Regeneration, that so thou may recover the old Philadelphian Zeal and Love:
For this is the only thing thou want.

11. Behold, I stand at the door and Verse 20.
knock. Do not pretend Difficulties: I am ready not only to assist thee, but
do also importune thee: I suggest good Motions to thee; do thou but pursue them
and improve them.

If any man hear my voioe, and open the door; that is, If any man obey those
dictates of Conscience and overtures of Light and Grace that Christ ever and
anon offers him, and so becomes sincere in all things, and not willingly
offends him in any thing, great or small, (which will not fail to be done where
the desire is sincere; and this sincere desire is the Door that lets in Christ,
for he passes into us through an unfeigned hunger and thirst after
Righteousness;) then, says he,

I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. That is, I will
communicate my Nature and Spirit unto him, and he shall eat my flesh, which is
meat indeed, and drink my blood, which is drink indeed: that is to say, He
shall partake of my body and blood, not in Symbols only, (which ye do well to
keep up till I come,) but in a true and living way; whereby that shall be
accomplished, I in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you. If John 14. 20.
any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him; and we
ver. 23.
will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Wherefore, being thus
replenished with the God of life and the Father of lights, thou can not fail
of being full of the Spirit, and of all alacrity and readiness to every good
work: Thy Luke-warmnesse and Dullness will go away.

12. To him that overcomes will I Verse 21.
grant to sit with me in my Throne; even as I also overcame, and am set down
with my Father in his throne. And that thou may be the more effectually
rowzed up out of this Tepidity and Lethargicalnesse, thou shall not only enjoy
me and my Father on this Earthly stage, but, if thou strivest so as to get the
victory in the way I have instructed thee, I will translate thee to that
Heavenly Kingdom most naturally and properly so called; where thou shall sit
down, and drink of the fruit of the Vine in the Kingdom of my Father. As I,
Matt. 26. 29.
after I had overcome, ascended up to Heaven into those glorious mansions, and
there sat down at the right hand of God: so him that overcomes the
Temptations and Encumbrances, the Pleasures and Enticements of this lower
world, will I cause to sit down with me in the Heavenly places at the last Day.
Which Monition is the more seasonable, by how much more near the approach of
that great Day is. For I shall come visibly to Judgment in the very next
Thunder to the Siege of Gog and Magog, when I will transform your vile bodies
into the similitude of my glorious body, that ye may be fit companions for me
in Heaven for ever. Behold, I show 1 Cor. 15, 51, 54.
you a mystery: Ye shall not all sleep, yet ye shall all be changed; that
mortality may be swallowed up of life. This is a great and stupendous Promise;
but thou art to consider that it is spoken by him that is the Amen, the true
and faithful witness, and the beginning of the Creation of God, and therefore
both will and can carry on all his design to the very end, Amen.

13. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto Verse
22.
the Churches. From the Epiphonema coming here last, as in all these four last
Epistles, one may happily raise this Objection, as if this sense of the Promise
immediately preceding it were not Political or Prophetical enough, but merely
Theological, the Promise being to be performed in the other world, and
therefore not the proper object of Prophecy, which concerns the affairs of the
stage of this Earth: And that this therefore is against our professed Rule.

But I answer, that though the Promise of obtaining Heaven after this life upon
the death of the body be merely a Theogicall Promise, and of a thing more
spiritual and invisible, and not to be seen upon the face of this Earth; yet
this promise of obtaining Heaven at the Resurrection and general Day of
Judgment, it being the day of that great and visible Assizes wherein the Souls
of the Saints shall appear in glorified bodies, may well be ranged in the same
order with the rest of the Promises immediately preceding the Epiphonemata of
each Epistle, and to be accomplished visibly in this life. For the sense of the
Promise in brief is this; That as Christ, after his Sufferings, his Death and
Passion, ascended visibly into Heaven, (for Heaven is said to be the throne of
God in the Scripture,) and so Heaven became also Christ's throne; so those of
Laodicea, who upon the Mortification of their Lusts should attain to the state
of life in the New birth, should ascend visibly into Christ's throne, that is,
into Heaven, in the open view of them that should be left here on the Earth and
in the inferior Regions of the Air, sentenced to that everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

This is a plain and obvious sense of this Promise, and such as the placing of
the Epiphonema requires, and is, in my judgment, no mean Ratification of the
true and Literal sense of that Article of our Faith, touching the visible
Resurrection and Glorification of our bodies, and their ascension into the
Heavenly Regions, against such as would whiffle away all these Truths by
resolving them into a mere moral Allegory.

Thus consonant every way are the Interpretations of these Epistles both to
themselves, and to the Apostolic Truth.

CHAP. X.
A Recapitulation of the main Evidences of the truth of this Mystical or
Prophetical Exposition of the Seven Epistles to the Seven Churches of Asia, by
way of Solution of Difficulties touching the said Epistles and their
Circumstances, otherwise hardly or not at all to be solved.

1. AS in natural Hypotheses those are accounted truest that solve the
Phenomenon of Nature the most naturally and easily, and especially if such as
are no otherwise solvible then upon the proposed Hypothesis: so that meaning of
Scripture, I mean especially of any considerable portion thereof, ought to be
esteemed truest that can solve the most Difficulties that may be raised
concerning the same, or the Contexts precedent or subsequent thereto; and if
all, still the more certain; and if unsolvible otherwise, there is still the
more assurance of undeniable Demonstration. Now how near this Mystical or
Prophetical Exposition of these Epistles approches to the clearness of this
case, I will leave to the Reader to judge, after he has considered the
Solutions of the Questions easily raised out of the Epistles themselves, or the
precedent Chapter, and not easily answered, nor at all satisfactorily, at least
most of them, but upon the Hypothesis we have gone.

2. As first, If a man enquire why the Spirit of Prophecy, after he has so
expressly given notice that this Book of the Apocalypse is to show unto his
servants things that are to come, and called it plainly a Book of Prophecies,
Apoc. 1. 1, 3.
should start so unexpectedly from the Title and intended subject, as to write
no less then seven Epistles to certain Churches, that have nothing
considerable of Prophecy in them, before he deliver any Prophecies properly so
called, but only Promises and Comminations; and that he should do this with
as great Pomp and as high a Preamble as he does when he begins so famous
Prophecies as those of the seven Seals, and the opened Book. But according to
our Hypothesis the Answer is easy; viz. That though these seven Epistles to
the seven Churches of Asia have a Literal sense, yet they are also a Parable or
Prophecy, and of as high concern for both matter and extent of time (they
reaching from the beginning of the Church to the end of the world) as the
Prophecy of the Seals and opened Book; and that they are ushered in with this
great Pomp on purpose to give us notice thereof.

Secondly, A man would be prone to enquire why the Spirit dictates Letters unto
the Churches in Asia, and not rather to the Churches in Europe, Asia and
Africa. For certainly the Church had disspred it self into all these Quarters
of the world by that time. As if the Spirit of Truth were a respecter of
persons. For these are not the Letters of John, but of the Holy Ghost. But our
Answer is ready at hand, That for the significancy of the word Asia to comport
also with the significancy of the names of the Seven Churches, Asia alone was
pitched upon. But, according to the Prophetical sense, the true Catholic
Church is writ unto under such distinct Conditions as she was to vary into unto
the end of the world. So that there is no Partiality nor Acception of Persons
in this.

Thirdly, If a man demand touching the order or precedence of these Seven
Churches that are writ unto: What a plain and manifest account is there to him
that compares the Epistles in their Prophetical sense with the Intervalls of
the Church Catholic lying in that order that these Churches are ranged? This
is a satisfactory reason, and worthy the Spirit that wrote these Epistles. But
whether they are ranged in this order, because that a Letter-carrier going from
Patmos, his first journey will be to Ephesus, and then to Smyrna, and so in
order till he come to Laodicea; whether the holy Spirit of Prophecy regarded
that in the dictating of his Letters, (though Alcazar the Jesuit be for it,) I
cannot but suspend my judgment, and that not without a smile. But of this
Ataxie more particularly anon.

3. Fourthly, If it be demanded why just Seven Churches in Asia are writ to,
neither more nor less, (especially that in Thyatira, according to the
acknowledgement of Epiphanius, being then not founded, but after the writing of
these Epistles,) it is hard to give a satisfactory answer in the Literal sense.
For to say this Book of the Apocalypse affects the number Seven, and that,
because it runs upon the number Seven altogether in the ensuing part of the
book, which is Prophetical, it therefore, for Conformity sake, chooses this
number in writing to the Churches though literally understood, seems but a
meagre, mean and trifling account, a design unworthy the Holy Spirit that
dictated this Book. But the using this number Seven all over is rather an
intimation that the Book is Prophetical all over, and that these Epistles are
also a Prophecy, accordingly as we have explained them. And taking them so, the
Answer is plain and obvious, viz. The number Seven is here chosen out as
Symbolicall, it being the note of Universality; whence the Pythagoreans, as I
above noted, call it (...).

Wherefore Seven (and no more then Seven) Churches are writ unto, as standing
for the seven Intervalls of the Church from the beginning to the end of all.

Fifthly, If it be demanded why these seven Churches rather then any others,
which in all likelihood may have the same Virtues and Vices that these are
commended and taxed for: The reason of this is writ in the very Notation of
their Names, every Name being significative of the Condition of the Church
Catholic in that successive Intervall of time that this or that Church so
named stands for, and in such order as they are repeated.

Sixthly, If one require a Reason why Christ is described by holding the seven
Stars in his right hand in the Epistles to the Churches of Ephesus and of
Sardis, why the same description in both, or why in either: In the Literal
sense it will be hard to find any peculiar Reason; but in the Prophetical
sense already declared it is obvious. For the seven Stars signify all the
Pastors, whether in present existence, or succession. And Ephesus is the
beginning-state of the Church; and therefore it is both very seasonable and
methodicall to represent the first Founder, Sustainer and Continuer thereof by
this Emblem; Lo, I am with you to the end of the world. And that this again is
hinted at in the Epistle to the Church of Sardis, is with evident Proportion
and Analogy to the Affairs of the Church there represented. For the Church of
Sardis is as it were the beginning again or the emerging of the true Church or
Kingdom of Christ out of the Power and Kingdom of Antichrist.

4. Seventhly, Why the Church of Ephesus, of all other Churches, should be
commended for their trying false Apostles. Why might not other Churches be
attaqued by them, and also discover them, as well as the Church of Ephesus? The
Solution of which Problem is easy in this Mystical sense of the Epistles,
that places the Ephesine Intervall within the Apostles times, but the rest on
this side of them.

Eighthly, If any one demand why it is said to the Church of Smyrna, more then
to any other Church, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will Apoc. 2. 10, 11.
give thee the Crown of life; and again, He that overcomes shall not be hurt
by the second death: In the Literal sense it will be very hard to find any
peculiar Reason why this might not as well be said to the Church in Pergamus,
where there was killing for Religion, it seems, by the mention of the Martyr
Antipas. I, but there was no obtaining the Crown of life there in any peculiar
sense; but the Crown of life, that is, the Imperial Crown, was given to the
Sufferings of the Primitive Martyrs under the Ten Persecutions: to whom also,
according to the opinion of the ancient Church, the Promise of the first
Resurrection belonged. Which is here obliquely glanced at, (according to the
mode of the Apocalyptick style, that loves to hint things by Ellipses,) in that
Promise, He that overcomes shall not be hurt by Apoc. 20. 6.
the second death; implying thereby, that he shall be made partaker of the
first Resurrection.

Ninthly, If any one will again object more particularly against the Ataxie of
the Churches, that they are ranged neither according to the merit nor
congeneracy of their Conditions, pretending that it had been far better to have
joined the two irreprehensible Churches together, Smyrna and Philadelphia,
against whom there is no complaint at all; and then Ephesus, Sardis and
Laodicea, against whom there is no complaint of eating things offered unto
Idols; and afterward Pergamus and Thyatira, in which Churches alone there is:
If any one, I say, contend that this method had been more exact; truly, in the
Literal sense it will be hard to frame an handsome and satisfactory answer;
especially if he urge that God is the Author of Method, as well as the God of
Order. But in this Mystical or Prophetical sense the Answer is solid and
exquisite, and much-what the same that was given to the like Difficulty more
generally propounded before, namely, That the Churches of Asia are named in
that order the successive Intervalls of the Church Catholic were to proceed
in, of which these Asiatick Churches are but the Symbols or Hieroglyphics. And
therefore those two Intervalls of time which take in the Reign of the Beast and
the False prophet, viz. the Intervalls of the Church of Pergamus and of
Thyatira, must come after Ephesus and Smyrna, because till the expiration of
those two Intervalls Idolatry had not again reentred the Apostatizing Church.
And the three following Intervalls of Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea, are
the Intervalls of the true Church elapsed out of the hands of domineering
Idolatry; and therefore we hear no more in them of things sacrificed unto
Idols, nor of any Jezabel. And Philadelphia, which is the most holy and the
most glorious Intervall of the Church that is to appear on the face of the
earth, is not to be named according to her Dignity, but according to her
Succession in time, toward the latter end of the world, as she is here ranged.
But of this more then enough, because we had touched of it in the general
before.

5. Tenthly, Why is Christ in his Description before the Epistle to the Church
in Pergamus set out by a two-edged sword, coming, suppose, Apoc. 2. 12.
out of his mouth, (according to the Ellipticalnesse of the Apocalyptick
style?) what reason in the letter can be given of that? for (especially if this
Supplement be made) it cannot respect the slaying of Antipas with the sword.
What peculiar thing then in this Church of Pergamus is there to require this
Description? Truly nothing at all appears in the Letter. But in the
Prophetical sense it is very proper, The Waldenses and Albigenses in this
Intervall assaulting the Church of Rome, or at least defending themselves and
their pure Faith, so signally by this weapon, I mean, by the sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God; though themselves died so many thousands of
them in the field by the sword for the Faith they thus defended.

And in the eleventh place, The Description of Christ before the Epistle to the
Church in Thyatira, And his feet like fine brass, (as if they burned Apoc. 2.
18.
in a furnace;) (for that Supplement is to be understood out of his Description
in the first Chapter, as before:) But now what peculiar significancy has this
Description, or what congruity to any thing in the Church of Thyatira Literally
understood? surely none. But in the Prophetical sense it is very expressive of
those lower members of Christ's body, his Church here on earth, of their
invincible Zeal, and Patience, and Sincerity of Affection, such as did abide
the most fiery Trialls that could be put upon them, and made them stand at the
Stake amongst burning Faggots with the flames about their ears, and never
flinch for it: As has been noted in the interpretation of that Epistle. This
was the state of that Intervall of the Church.

Twelfthly, In a Book that is so full of AEnigmaticall Involutions, and
Coverings upon Coverings, where he calls the Churches Golden Candle-sticks, and
the Bishops or Pastors Stars and Angels, even then when he interprets and
offers to be more plain; that the same Author should so openly and plainly
mention any one by name as he does the Martyr Antipas, if there were not some
farther Mystery in it, would be a great difficulty, and hardly to be digested
by the more sagacious and curious. I must confess I have often wondered at this
naming Antipas by name, till I understood a farther sense thereof, such as we
have rendered in the exposition of that Epistle.

6. In the thirteenth place, One might well demand why Christ expresses a
greater disgust against the Church of Laodicea then that of Sardis. For though
the former is said to be lukewarm; yet the other, making a great show of life,
is notwithstanding declared to be dead. That Christ should be more enraged
against Luke warmness then Hypocrisy, and threaten it more deeply then the
other, I will spew thee out of my mouth, (which is quite to cast a thing away,
never to be resumed again,) must seem mavelous to the considerate. Certainly,
if there were not some greater matter in it, the Spirit of Christ would not
speak so severely only to follow a Metaphor. But in the Prophetical sense the
Solution is easy, that passage being predictive of the Extermination of the
Church from the face of the earth at the close of the world, as I have
expounded it.

In the fourteenth place, It may be demanded, why so affectedly and repeatedly
in every Epistle that phrase is used, I know thy works, without any variation
or omission. Which seems a thing but of small importance in the Literal sense
of these Epistles: but in the Prophetical it seems on purpose so repeated, to
intimate an Allusion in Asia to the Hebrew word (...), (as if (...) was
intended on purpose to answer to (...)) that Asia may also be significant as
well as the names of the Seven Churches: which they all being, it is a shrewd
presumption this repetition was for some such design as has been declared.
Whereas the Literal sense can give no account thereof.

Fifteenthly, Alcazar himself is much stumbled, that the Spirit of God should
be thought to take notice of any one particular Woman in the Church of
Thyatira, and so call her by the name of Jezabel, as is ordinarily supposed.
And indeed these things are too little for the majesty of this writing of the
Apocalypse. But how can we help it in the Literal sense, if we will interpret
with constancy and coherency? But in the Prophetical sense there is no such
incongruity. The Object is worth the Spirit's taking notice of in this kind;
this Jezabel being that painted Woman of Rome, intoxicating the Kings of the
earth with the Cup of her spiritual Fornications, as has been shown upon the
Text.

7. Sixteenthly, It seems very strange that that Promise of ruling over the
Nations, and receiving the Morning Star, (which doubtless are Political
Promises,) should be made to the Church in Thyatira, more then to that in
Pergamus, or Ephesus, and others. What Victories or Dominion did the Church in
Thyatira in Asia get over the Nations more then other Churches? This is an hard
knot in the Literal sense. But in the Prophetical it is loosned at the first
sight. For the Closure of the Intervall of the Church of Thyatira brings in the
time wherein whole Nations revolted from the Pope and his idolatrous Church,
and professed the Reformed Religion, and so in these parts got the Pontifician
party under them.

Seventeenthly, In the Epistle to the Church in Philadelphia there is mention
made of a mighty Temptation that is to come upon all the world, to try them
that dwell upon the earth, touching which he says, Behold, I come quickly. Why
should this be said to the Church of Philadelphia more then to any other of the
Churches here specified? There are not the least footsteps of reason to be
found in the Literal sense. But in the Prophetical sense the thing is plain.
For the Intervall of Philadelphia beginning in the last Vial, wherein that
mighty and terrible Earthquake is to happen, the great Temptation, what it is,
is plainly thence understood, and how in respect of this Philadelphian Church
it will come quickly, she commencing but in the very same Vial that this is to
happen under.

Eighteenthly, Why upon this Philadelphia, a private Asiatick Church, should
the name of the City of God, the new Jerusalem which comes down out of Heaven
from God, (the very same that is expressed Apoc. 21.) be said to be written?
This title were too big and turgent for any private Church, were it not a Type
or Symbol of some greater matter. But by the Prophetical interpretation this
difficulty is quite removed. For the Intervall of the Philadelphian Church is
co-incident with the times of the new Jerusalem, (mentioned at the end of the
Apocalypse,) and of the Millenniall Empire of Christ upon earth.

8. Nineteenthly, The Curious may be prone to enquire, why the Church of
Laodicea in those times should account her self so hugely and extraordinarily
rich, increased in goods, and to have no want of any thing. And truly why this
should be her estate rather then any of the Churches specified, from the
Literal ground we can fetch no reason. But admitting the Prophetical sense,
and that this is the last Intervall of the Church of Christ, it will naturally
so come to pass: For this Laodicea will be left Heir to all the Riches of her
Sister Philadelphia, to Peace, Prosperity, Purity in Worship, abundance of
natural Knowledge, universal skill in the Interpretations of the Prophecies,
and whatever good thing there is belonging to the Church, saving the Life and
Spirit which Philadelphia carried along with her into the other world. How
easily then and naturally, or rather necessarily, does this Description of the
Church of Laodicea fall upon the last Intervall?

And, lastly, It is a Question extremely obvious to demand, Why that phrase, He
that has an ear to hear, let him hear, which our Savior so often is found to
add at the end of his Parables to the people, should be used here so
repeatedly in every Epistle, they being no Parables, but Epistles sent to each
of those Seven Churches in Asia respectively: And then, why this Epiphonema is
sometimes the last close of the Epistle, sometimes not. To which Problem there
is no tolerable Solution in the Literal sense of these Epistles. But supposing
a Mystical or Prophetical sense, there was a necessity of affixing this
Epiphonema, to show there was a farther sense intended then that of the Letter:
and also, that sometimes this Epiphonema should come last of all, (as in the
four last Epistles,) that the Promise to the Conqueror, to him that overcomes,
might be more certainly understood to be of a proper Prophetical or Political
sense, not merely Theological, Moral or Spiritual; as has been abundantly
declared in the Exposition.

9. We might have drawn many more Questions and Solutions from the
consideration of the Letter, and of this Hypothesis we go upon, to show its
solidity and fitness, but that we hold it needless, having produced so many
already: which jointly considered, with the perpetual easiness and
naturalnesse of the whole Exposition of all the Epistles, and the exact
Correspondency of the Names of the Churches to the Events of the successive
Intervalls of the true Catholic Church which they represent, one would think
they should not fail fully to satisfy any unprejudiced Peruser of our
Exposition of these Epistles, touching the truth thereof. But I am abundantly
taught by Experience, that both the finding out, and receiving of Divine Truths
found out by others, is a special gift of God. And therefore to him alone be
the Glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
THE END.
AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST IDOLATRY: OR, A brief Discourse containing sundry
Considerations or Conclusions tending to the Discovery of what is or ought to
be held to be IDOLATRY amongst Christians.

With Application to the Doctrine of the Council of TRENT, and for the putting
a stop to the Romish Infection.

MATTHEW. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve.

To the Reader.
Reader,

1. I Suppose thou will expect something should be said of this ensuing
Discourse also, though it needs not be much. The occasion of writing it, and
the fitness of joining it to the foregoing Exposition of the Seven Churches,
will discover themselves to thee in the perusing of the Treatise it self.

I must confess I have treated of this Argument elsewhere, namely, in my Part
1. Book 1. Chapter 5. to the 17. Chap.
Mystery of Iniquity. But it is a Subject of that great Importance, that it
deserves an entire Treatise apart by it self, and that girt up in the most
close and convictive method that may be: that those that are sanable or
preservable from this dreadful sin of Idolatry may find the efficacy of our
Antidote; and those whose minds it cannot alter may (however) be found without
excuse. And there is this considerable here above what I have done already on
this Subject, that here is such an express Application made of the Theorie to
the gross Errors in this point and foul Mispractices of the Church of Rome.

2. Those of ours that speak the most favorably of that Church cannot but
declare them guilty of Material Idolatry, as they call it. And questionless
there must be something among them very like that great Sin, if there be any
truth or sense in the Visions of that Divine Volume of the Apocalypse. For the
order of things and demonstration of the Synchronisms do necessarily cast those
Visions that represent the concerned as Idolatrous (Chap. 13. and 17.) upon the
Church of Rome, (as also Chapter 2. v. 14 -- 20;) and they can belong to none else
in the Prophetical scope of the Visions, Time and Place and the Order of
things having so unavoidably fixed them upon her. Wherefore even according to
Divine suffrage they are guilty of Idolatry in one sense or other, or come so
nigh it, that the Spirit of God in a jealousy, to exaggerate their Wantonness,
speaks to them as such, to deter them from those suspected ways, and
dangerous approches to so horrible a Crime.

And grant it were but thus, yet both in the Vision of the Apoc. 2. 20.
Seven Churches, and in that of the Apoc. 18. 4.
Whore of Babylon, the people of God are expressly called unto and encouraged
and commissioned to forsake the Church of Rome's Communion. So that the
Protestants have not the least guilt of Schism upon them for leaving her, no
not upon this more favorable Supposition.

3. But, alas! alas! this smooth Hypothesis is but a pleasing Dream arising
from the softness and sleepiness of the carnal mind, and the love of those
things that must pass away as a Dream or Phantasm of the night. Let God be
Romans 3. 4.
true, and every man a liar, as the Apostle speaks. And truly the Spirit of God
would scarce speak true, if what is spoken of Idolatry so broadly and so
expressly in those Visions (insomuch that they have been understood of the
Heathen Idolatry even for this very reason by learned and able Interpreters)
should, now we are necessitated to understand them of Rome Christian in her
apostatized condition, not amount to the Charge of any proper and formal
Idolatry at all.

4. But the desperateness of their case is, that if they were not represented
by these Visions as Idolatrous, that is to say, if these Visions had never been
writ, or now they are writ, though they were to be understood of some others,
and not of the Church of Rome; yet appealing to the nature of the thing, to the
true Notion of Idolatry properly and formally so called, and to the
acknowledged Doctrine of their Church expressed in the Council of Trent, and
their universal Practices abetted by public Authority, this alone is
sufficient to demonstrate them to be Idolaters properly so called. Which is the
scope of this present Treatise.

5. Which therefore does confirm and corroborate, and place beyond all
exception, the Orthodox Protestant Interpretations of those Visions that
concern the Church of Rome: which in this last Age have been made so clear, and
every way so natural and congruous, that this one thing granted of their
Idolatry, there cannot be the least scruple of the truth and congruity of the
rest of the Applications.

6. And I cannot but adore the faithfulness of Divine Providence, that has
furnished his Church with these Oracles to be the Guide of the Faithful in
these latter Ages, which are as it were the dregs of those times which the
Spirit of Prophecy has set no good character upon; wherein there is such an
Inundation of Wickedness and Profaneness, that there is scarce any Faith to
be found upon earth. But that Church which has deluded the world with so many
Fictions could never forge those Prophecies that are so punctually true, and so
cuttingly set out all her gross Miscarriages, and as expressly foretell her
Ruin, unless she will humble her self, and pluck in her horns, lay aside her
bold boasts of Infallibility, and be content to be taught to cast away her
Idols, and be cured of her Dropsy and unnatural thirst after the blood of the
Saints and the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

7. Nor can I on the other side sufficiently admire the stupidity of some of
our own, and their gross ingratitude to Divine Providence, that have so slight
a regard to a Book of that mighty weight and moment as the Apocalypse is, and
think it such a subject, as that any good Wit must needs mis-place his time if
he meddle with it: which is more then a Pagan irreverence to so holy and so
important Oracles. The Romans of old had another esteem for the Verses of the
Sibylls: Nihil enim ita custodiebant neque sanctum neque sacrum quemadmodum
Sibyllina Oracula, as Dionysius Halicarnasseus testifies. And it was an high
honor to be the Keepers, much more the right Expounders, of them. But that
which God of his mercy offers to all, such is either the idleness,
frivolousness or profaneness of the spirits of men, that it is scarce accepted
of any.

8. The truth is, most men are loath to be (...), to be messengers of ill news
to the greatest, that is to say, to the corruptest, part of Christendom; but
rather affect the glory and security of being accounted of so humane, of so
sweet and ingratiating a temper, as that they can surmize well of all men's
Religions; and so think to conciliate to themselves the fame of either civil
and good Natures, or of highly-raised and released Wits, (though it be indeed
but a spice of the old abhorred Gnosticism,) that can comply with any Religion,
and make a fair tolerable sense of all.

9. But these are such high strains of pretense to Wit or Knowledge and
Gentility as I must confess I could never yet arrive to, nor I hope ever shall:
though I am not in the mean time so stupid in my way, as to think I can write
thus freely without offense. And yet on the contrary, I can deem my self no
more uncivil then I do him that wrings his friend by the nose to fetch him out
of a Swound.

10. I am not insensible how harsh this charge of Idolatry against the Church
of Rome will sound in some ears, especially it being seconded with that other
of Murder, and that the most cruel and barbarous imaginable, and finally so
severely rewarded with an impossibility of Salvation to any now, so long as
they continue in Communion with that Church. But, I believed, therefore I 2
Cor. 4. 13.
spoke, and have no reason to recall my words, or to have concealed the truth,
that their fishing may become less successful in these parts; and that it may
be with my Contrymen according to that in Solomon, Surely in vain the Prove.
1. 17.
net is spread in the sight of any bird. And therefore this is to open their
eyes, that they may see what snares of destruction are laid for them; and how
those that promise others liberty are themselves 2 Pet. 2. 19.
the servants of corruption; and how they that take upon them to be the only
Absolvers from sin are themselves held fast in the snares of eternal death,
and do as necessarily illaqueate all others therein whom they proselyte to
their Religion: so far are they from giving them any effectual Absolution.

11. I doubt not but many will be prone to cry out, This is a very rude piece
of Uncharitableness to all Romanists. But I say, it were a most perfidious
kind of Civility, even to them themselves, (to say nothing of the Injury to
our Church and Country,) to declare otherwise. But if this be the main Odium
that sticks upon so true and useful a Conclusion, that it is so far estranged
from the spirit of Charity, hear but this brief Parable, Reader, and then I
will leave it to thy self to judge, and conclude.

There was a certain Knight bravely mounted, as it might seem, and in goodly
equippage, in bright armor, a rich scarf about his shoulders, and a large
plume of feathers in his Helmet, who was bound for the Castle of Health, seated
on an high Hill, not unlike to the Domicilium Salutis in Cebes his Table, which
therefore he easily kept in his eye. But the way he was in being something
stony and rough, and leading not so directly as he thought to the desired
Castle, he diverted out of the way, and descended into a green Plain; but not
knowing whether it was all passable to the Castle, called to some Loyterers
there in the field, to enquire of them; who came right willingly to the Knight,
scraping many legs to him, and desiring him to tell his demands.

12. There was an old Shepherd likewise not far off, who, by that time this
idle people had got to the Knight, had come down to him also. Friends, said he,
to those men he called, Is the way passable and safe through this green Plain
to yonder Castle? pointing to the Castle of Health with his Warder. Very safe,
may it please your Worship, said they; and, shrugging their shoulders, and
scraping many legs, asked a Largess of the Knight, pretending they had been at
common work not far off. Whereupon the Knight put his hand into his pocket, and
gave them liberally. But are there no Bogs, said he, nor Lakes betwixt this and
the Castle? Some small inconsiderable Sloughs it may be, said they; but you
will meet with the Holy Society of the Wipers everywhere, who will be ready to
wipe you as clean as a Clock before you come at the Castle. And being so
excellently well mounted as we see you are, namely, upon that famous Steed
renowned over all the world, the infallible-footed Aplanedo, so good an Horse
as that he never stumbles, your Worship need fear no disaster at all: Besides,
the Beast, God bless him, has a Nose like any Hound, and by a miraculous
sagacity, without any Reason or humane Literature, with an un-erring certainty
he can smell out the right way, and so secure you from all danger. To say
nothing how excellent he is at the swimming any water, and how he can tread the
very air, he is so highmetall'd and light-footed. Only be sure to keep fast in
the Saddle.

And then, Sir Knight, said the Shepherd, if the wind blow fair, the plumes in
your Helmet may help to support you both; but if not, some Angel from Heaven
may take you by the Crest of your Helmet, as he did the Prophet Habakuk by the
hair of his head, when he carried him through the air from Judea into Babylon.

13. The Knight looking back, (for he was not aware of the Shepherd at this
time,) What con^e^^ed (...) man is this, said he, that talks this phancifully?
May it please your Worship, he is a Shepherd, said they, and has a Flock on
yonder little Hill hard by; but he is one of the most self-conceited old fools
that ever your Worship met with in all your days: he thinks that all skill and
knowledge lies within the compass of his baldpate and wrinkled forehead,
though few or none are of the same opinions with himself. Sir Knight, said the
Shepherd, I pretend to no skill nor knowledge but what is certainly within mine
own ken; but what I know, I love to speak freely. And I tell you, Sir Knight,
unless you be stark staring mad you will never follow these men's counsels, nor
venture over this Moor to that Castle: for you will be swallowed up horse and
man into a fathomlesse Lake of ill-sented mire, for all the nice nostrills of
Aplanedo. You was in a more hopeful way before, though something rough; but it
is so straight before you come at the Castle, that you could never have got
through, unless you had left Aplanedo behind you. He Is an old choleric
Dotard, said those other fellows; be but sure to keep the Saddle, and we dare
warrant your Worship, (our lives for yours) that Aplanedo will carry you safe
through all dangers.

Wherefore upon the renewall of the high conceit the Knight had before of his
Steed, and those confident Animations of his mercenary Counselors, he set on
in a direct line toward the Castle over this Moor; the Shepherd looking after
him to see the event. But the Knight had not rid two or three bowshots from the
place, but the Shepherd saw them suddenly sink horse and man into the ground,
so that they were both buried alive in the mire.

14. Whereupon fetching a deep sigh after so Tragical a spectacle, he returned
with a sad heart and slow pace toward his Sheep on the top of the Hill,
drailing his Sheephook behind him, as they do their Spears at the Funeral of a
Soldier: whom his Dog followed with a like soft pace, hanging down his head,
and letting his tail flag, as if he had a mind to conform to both the sorrows
and postures of his Master. But those other false Companions had somewhat
before this got to a lone Alehouse not far off, to spend the Knight's Largess
merrily with a bonny young Hostess, and in plenty of good Ale and Cakes to
celebrate his Funeral.

15. Now, Reader, I dare appeal to thy judgment which of these parties, the
old free-spoken Shepherd, or those mercenary Flatterers, had the greater share
of Charity; and to determine with thy self in what a sad condition those of the
Church of Rome are, who, having the opportunity of being better instructed, as
the Knight had, are yet led away captive by such cunning Deceivers. Which is
the main State of the Controversy. If I had not come and spoken unto them,
they John 15. 22.
had not had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin, says our blessed
Savior, in the Gospel. The rest of the Riddle, Reader, I leave to thine own
unravelling, and bid thee Farewell.

AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST IDOLATRY.
CHAP. I.
What is Idolatry according to Divine Declaration.

1. THere are two ways in general of discovering what is or ought to be held to
be Idolatry amongst Christians; the one, Divine Declaration, the other, clear
and perspicuous Reason: Which though they may happily reach the one no farther
then the other, that is to say, that whatsoever may be concluded to be Idolatry
by Divine Declaration, the same may also by unprejudiced Reason, and vice
versed; yet their joint concurrence of Testimony is a greater assurance to us
of the truth; and two cords twisted together are stronger then either single.
Wherefore we will make use of both, and begin with Divine Declaration first.

2. The first Conclusion therefore shall be, That as in civil Governments it is
the Right of the Supreme power to define and declare what shall be or be held
to be Treason, and punishable as such: so it is most manifestly the Right of
God Almighty, who is also infinitely good and wise, to define and declare to
his people what shall be or be held to be Idolatry, which is a kind of Treason
against God, or crimen laesae majestatis Divinae. And what is thus declared
Idolatry by God is to be held by us to be such, though the Ludicrousnesse and
Fugitivenesse of our wanton Reason might otherwise find out many starting-holes
and fine pretenses to excuse this thing or that action from so foul an
Imputation.

But as in civil affairs the declaring such and such things to be Treason does
in a Political sense make them so ipso facto: so God's declaring such and such
things to be Idolatry, they do to us ipso facto become Idolatry thereby: though
to an ordinary apprehension, perhaps, neither this would have seemed Treason,
nor that Idolatry, without these antecedent Declarations. But where the
Lawgiver is infallible, there is all the reason in the world we should submit
not only to his Power, but to his Judgment in the Definitions of things, and
rest sure that that is Idolatry which he has thought fit to declare so to be.

3. The second Conclusion; That what is declared Idolatry by God to the Jews
ought to be acknowledged Idolatry by us Christians. The ground of this
Conclusion is fixed in the nature of the Christian Religion. For Christianity
being a far more spiritual Religion then that of Judaism, and therefore
abhorring from all Superstition, there cannot be the least Relaxation to the
most rancid of all Superstitions, Idolatry it self. Wherefore whatsoever was
accounted Idolatry amongst the Jews, and so defined by a Divine Law, must be
reckoned much more such under Christianity, there being not the least pretense
for any Relaxation.

Besides, there was nothing under the Jews (or can by any people be) rightly
deemed Idolatry, but it is carefully enough cautioned against and plainly
forbid in the first and second Commandments of the Decalogue. But the whole
Decalogue is Moral, and so declared by God, in that it is said to be writ by
his own Exodus 31. 18.
finger on the Tables of stone, (which are Symbols of the permanent substance
of our Souls, on which all the general Precepts of Morality are engraven as
innate Notions of our Duty.) And therefore it is hereby intimated that the
Precepts of the Decalogue are just and fitting, not only (...), but (...), not
only by an external Law, but engraffed in our very Nature and Reason; and
that the root and ground of them will easily be fetched from thence.

To which you may add, That it were a very immethodicall and heterogeneous
Botch, unworthy of the Wisdom of God and of his Servant Moses, whenas all the
rest of the Decalogue is Moral, to phansy one or two of the Commandments of
another nature. This is so rash and gross a Reproach to the Divine Wisdom as
truly, in my judgment, seems unexcusable.

But besides this, The Morality of the Decalogue is also acknowledged by the
Church, it making part of their Liturgy everywhere, and we begging an ability
of obeying the Second Commandment as well as the rest: and Christ also referrs
to the Decalogue Mark 10. 18, 19.
for eternal life.

And lastly, It seems as it were singled from all the rest of Moses Laws, as a
lasting and permanent Law to the Church of God, (whence it is entered into our
very Catechisms,) never to be abolished, or rather vigorously to be kept in
force, for the Second Commandment's sake particularly, that it might strongly
bear against those Invitations to Idolatry that may seem to offer themselves in
the nature of our Religion, or reclaim the Church from it when they were fallen
into it, as well as it was to keep back the Jews from joining in Worship with
their Idolatrous neighbors round about them. Wherefore all manner of Idolatry
being cautioned against by the Moral Decalogue given to the Jews, there are no
kinds thereof that ought to be entertained or allowed of by any Christians.

4. The third Conclusion; That whatever was Idolatry in the Heathen, the same
is Idolatry in us, if we commit it. The reason of which Assertion is this,
Because the Heathen had not so express a Declaration from God against all
manner of Idolatry as the Jews and Christians have: and therefore wherever
they are guilty of Idolatry, the Jew and Christian, if they do the like
things, are much more.

The fourth Conclusion; The Idolatry of the Pagans consisted in this, viz. in
that they either took something to be the supreme God that was not, and
worshipped it for such; or else worshipped the supreme God in an Image; or gave
religious Worship, that is to say, erected Altars, Temples and Images, offered
Sacrifice, made Vows to, and invoked, such as they themselves knew not to be
the supreme God, but either the Souls of men departed, or other Demons, or
else particular Appearances or Powers of Nature.

The fifth; That both Divine Daeclaration and the common Consent of
Christendom do avouch to us, that all the aforesaid Pagan Modes of Idolatry
practiced by them were in those Pagans practices of Idolatry. And therefore, by
the third Conclusion, they must be much more so in either the Jew or Christian.

5. The sixth; That giving religious Worship, that is to say, erecting Temples,
building Altars, Invoking, making Vows, and the like, to what is not the
supreme God, though not as to him, but as to some inferior helpful Being, is
manifest Idolatry. This is plain out of the precedent Conclusion; and may be
farther confirmed from this Consideration, That Idolatry was very rare amongst
the Nations, especially the Romans, if this Mode of Idolatry be not truly
Idolatry. And scarce any thing will be found Idolatry amongst them, but taking
that to be the supreme God which is not, and worshipping it for such. But if
any Being on this side the supreme God may be worshipped with religious Worship
void of Idolatry, all things may, though some more non-sensically and
ridiculously then others. Wherefore to use any of the abovesaid Modes of
Worship to what is inferior to the supreme Being, though not as to the supreme
Being, must be Idolatry; or else the Roman Paganism it self is very rarely, if
at all, chargeable therewith, they having a Notion accurate enough of the
supreme God, and distinct enough from their other Deities; so that unless they
chance to worship him in an Image, they will seldom be found Idolaters, or
rather never, according to the opinion of some, who say, none that have the
knowledge of the one true God can be capable of Idolatry.

6. The seventh; That to sacrifice, burn Incense, or make any religious
Obeisance or Incurvation to an Image in any wise, as to an Object of this
Worship, is Idolatry by Divine Declaration. This is manifest out of the second
Conclusion and the first, as may appear at first sight. For it is plainly
declared in the second Precept of the Decalogue touching Images, Thou shall not
bow to them, nor worship them: Of which undoubtedly the sense is, They shall
not be in any wise the Object of that Worship which thou performest in a
religious way, whether by Bowing down to them, or by what other way soever. For
the second Commandment certainly is a Declaration of the mind of God touching
religious Worship, let the Ceremonies be what they will.

The eighth; That to erect Temples, Altars, Images, or to burn Incense, to
Saints or Angels, to invoke them, or make Vows to them, and the like, is plain
Idolatry. This is apparent chiefly out of the third, fourth, fifth and sixth
Conclusions of this Chapter. For the Pagans Demons exquisitely answer to the
Christians Saints and Angels in this point; saving that this spiritual
Fornication is a Rape upon our Saints and Angels, but simple Fornication in the
Heathen with their impure Demons.

The ninth; Religious Incurvation toward a Crucifix, or the Host, or any
Image, as to an Object, and not a mere unconsidered accidental Circumstance, is
Idolatry. This is manifest out of the seventh and eighth Conclusions. But the
Worship of Latria exhibited to the Host upon the opinion of Transubstantiation
is Idolatry by the third and fourth.

7. Conclusion the tenth; To use on set purpose in religious Worship any Figure
or Image only circumstantially, not objectively, but so as to bow toward it,
or to be upon a man's knees before it with Eyes and Hands devoutly lifted up
toward it, but with an intention of making it in no sense any Object of this
religious Worship, yet if this were in a Country where men usually and
professedly do, it were notwithstanding for all this intention a gross piece
of Idolatry.

But if the whole Country should conspire to make this more plausible sense of
those Incurvations and Postures; admit we might hope it were not Idolatry, yet
it would be certainly a most impious and wicked Mocking of God, and eluding his
mind in the second Commandment, (that naturally implies the forbidding any
Worship or Incurvation toward Images in a way of Religion,) and a crime as
scandalous and near to Idolatry as the going into bed to another man's Wife,
with chaste pretensions, would be to gross Adultery.

Nay, indeed, it is very questionable, if he knowingly and deliberately put
himself into these postures before an Image, whether the Image will not be the
Object of those Postures and Incurvations whether he will or no. Or rather it
seems plain, beyond all questioning, that it will be so. For there is a
corporeal Action significative of Honor and Respect corporeally (though not
mentally) directed toward and received by the Image, and this at the choice of
the Religionist, which intitles him to the fact.

But we need not labor much touching this last Conclusion, the two former
abundantly convincing the Church of Rome of multifarious Idolatries, if they
will stand to Divine Definitions, or the Declarations of Holy Scripture
touching this Point.

CHAP. II.
What is Idolatry according to the Determination of clear and free Reason.

1. WE will now try how obnoxious the Romanists are out of the plain
Definitions and Determinations of free and clear Reason. In which Method let us
set down for

The first Conclusion, That Idolatry is a kind of Injustice against God. That
this is true, may appear from that Definition of Religion in Tully, who defines
it Justitiam adversus Deum. Which is not the sense of Tully only, but the very
voice of Reason and Nature. And therefore Idolatry being one kind of
Irreligion or Impiety, it must needs include in it a kind of Injustice against
God.

2. The second Conclusion; That Idolatry is a very sore and grievous Disease of
the Soul, vilely debasing her and sinking her into Sensuality and Materiality,
keeping her at a distance from the true sense and right knowledge of God, and
leaving her more liable to bodily Lusts: That the natural tendency of Idolatry
is this, and yet the Souls of men, in this Lapsed state, are naturally prone to
so mischievous a Disease, as both History and daily Experience do abundantly
witness. See the Mischiefs of Idolatry in my Mystery of Iniquity, Part 1. Lib.
1. Chapter 16.

Nor can it infringe the truth of this Conclusion, that a man, retaining still
the true Notion of God according to his Divine Attributes, may, according to a
sense of his own, bow down toward a corporeal Object of worship. For he must
retain it by force against such a Practice as would and does naturally debauch
the users of it. And besides, if he had really the Life of God in him as well
as the Notion of him, he would feel such Actions grate against his heart, and
perceive how they would invade and attempt the abating and extinguishing the
more true and pure sense of God and of his Worship, and seduce the Soul to
external Vanity.

But suppose a man or two could keep their minds from sinking down from a right
Notion of the Deity; yet they are as guilty of Idolatry, if they give religious
Worship to corporeal Objects, as he is of Adultery and Fornication that yet
uses them so cautiously as neither to impair his bodily Health, nor besott his
natural Parts thereby. And therefore, though there may be some few such, yet
the Laws against Fornication and Adultery ought notwithstanding to be very
sacred to every one, even to those discreeter Transgressors of them, and ever
to be obeyed by them, because the Observation of them is of such infinite
importance to the Public.

And what we have said of the Worship of God is analogically true of honoring
of the Saints, who are best honored by the remembrance and imitation of their
Virtues, not by scraping Legs to or clinging about their Images, which are no
more like them then an Apple is to an Oister.

3. The third Conclusion; That those high expressions of the Jealousy of God
and his severe Displeasure against Idolatry are very becoming the nature of the
thing, and his Paternal care of the Souls of men. This appears from the
foregoing Conclusions. For both the Prerogatives and Rights of the Divine
Majesty himself are concerned, and also the Perfection, Nobilitation and
Salvation of the Souls of men. This we discover by Reason, and our Reason is
again more strongly ratified by Divine Suffrage.

The fourth; That Idolatry, though it be so heinous a Sin, yet where it is
committed most in good earnest does necessarily involve in it Ignorance or
Mistake, in the Act of Worship or in the Object; they either taking the Object
to be God when it is not, or to have some Attribute of God when it has not, or
to enjoy some Prerogative of God which yet it does not, or else the Worship not
to be Divine when it is; or, lastly, they mistake in the Application of the
Worship, thinking they do not apply Divine Worship to an Object when they do.

The fifth; That to be mistaken in the Object of Worship, or in the Kind of
Worship, or in the Application, cannot excuse anything from being downright
Idolatry; forasmuch as none are in good earnest Idolaters without some of these
Mistakes.

The sixth; That the peculiar Honor or Worship which is given to God is given
to him not so much as his Honor and Worship, as his Due and Right: insomuch
that he that does not give it to God, or communicates it to another, does an
injury to the Divine Majesty. This is plain, and consonant to what was said on
the first Conclusion, That Religion is a kind of Justice toward God. And
indeed if Divine Honor was not given to God as his Due and Right, it were no
Honor at all, but rather a Benevolence.

4. The seventh; The Right of that peculiar Honor or Worship we do to God is
grounded either in the nature of his incommunicable Excellencies, or in his
Excellencies so far as we know incommunicated to any Creature, or, lastly, in
Divine Declaration or Prescription of the ways or Modes of thus or thus
worshipping him, which himself has some-time set down.

The eighth; That any Actions, Gestures or Words directed to any Creature as to
an Object, which naturally imply or signify either the incommunicable or
incommunicated Eminencies of God, is the giving that Worship that is the Right
and Due of God alone to that Creature, and that Injury against the Divine
Majesty which is termed Idolatry. The evidence of this Conclusion may appear
from hence, because there is no other way of Application of external Worship
then by directing such significant Actions, Gestures, or Words, toward such a
Being as to an Object.

The ninth; That the using any of those Actions or Gestures, or doing any of
those things that the true and supreme God did choose and challenge in the
setting out the Mode of his own Worship, toward or in reference to any
Creature as to an Object, this also is that Injury against God which we term
Idolatry.

The Reason is this, Because such a mode of Worship does thus manifestly appear
to be the peculiar Right of God, which none can transferr to another but God
himself. Wherefore this Right having not been communicated by him to any other,
whenever such a kind of Worship is used, it must be used to him, and to none
else.

Nor can his dereliction of any such Mode of being worshipped warrant the use
of it to any Creature afterward, because no Creature can be God in those
circumstances as he thought fit to institute such a Worship for himself in: For
no Creature can be God at all, and therefore never capable of any of those
Modes of Divine Worship which God ever at any time instituted for himself.
Besides, if this dereliction and disuse of any Mode of Worship might make it
competible to a Creature, then might we sacrifice Beeves and Sheep (besides
other Services of the Temple) to any Saint or Demon.

5. The tenth; An omnipercipient Omnipresence, which does hear and see
whatever is said or transacted in the World, whether considered in the whole,
or as distributed into terrestrial, celestial, and supercelestiall, not only
all these Omnipercipiencies but any one of them is a certain Excellency in God,
and, for ought we know, incommunicated to any Creature.

The eleventh; That this Omnipresence or Omnipercipience terrestrial is one
main ground of that religious Worship due to God which we call Invocation. This
is plain, that upon this very ground that God hears and sees (though himself be
invisible) whatever is said or done upon earth, he has the honor of being
invoked any-where or everywhere, and of having Temples built to him; because
he that is omnipresent cannot be absent from his Temple, but is always there to
be invoked.

The twelfth; That if Omnipresence or Omnipercipience, at least terrestrial,
(if not celestial,) be not communicated to Saints and Angels by God, the
Invocation of either is palpable Idolatry. This is manifest from the eighth
Conclusion. For Invocation implies an incommunicated Excellency in the Saints
or Angels, and so communicates that Right to them that appertains only to God,
and is that Injury against God that is called Idolatry.

So that it is a vain Evasion that pretends that we honor God the more in
making him so good to the Saints and Angels, as to bestow this Excellency on
them; whenas yet his Wisdom has not thought fit so to do. For we are so far
from honoring him hereby, that we injure him in giving his Right to another;
and we dishonor him in presuming he had done wiselier or better in doing what
he has not done. Whenas indeed, if he were so lavish in imparting his proper
Excellencies to Creatures as some would make us believe he is, to palliate
their own Idolatries, it were the next way to make men forget all Applications
to God, and to cast him out of their memory, and take up with the more
particular Patronages of Saints and Angels.

6. The thirteenth; That our thinking such a Saint or Angel can hear us
wherever we invoke him, is no excuse for our Invocation of him, nor saves us
from Idolatry, since all Idolatry committed in good earnest implies some
Mistake, as has been noted in the fourth Conclusion.

The fourteenth; That all the Modes or ways of the Communication of this
Omnipercipiency to Saints or Angels are either very incredible, if not
impossible, or extremely ridiculous as to any excuse for their Invocation. For
the usual Residence of Saints and Angels being in sede Beatorum, as the Roman
Church holds, and that place on the Coelum Empyreum above all the Stars, That
the Angels and Saints should upon the account of the Exaltednesse of their
natures see and hear from thence what is done or said from one side of the
Earth to the other, is extremely incredible, if not impossible; yea,
sufficiently incredible, or rather impossible, though they had their abode on
this side of the Moon.

And that they should see all things and transactions, hear all Prayers and
Orations, in Speculo Divinitatis, is alike incredible; a thing which the
Humanity of Christ himself, though hypostatically united to the Divinity, did
not pretend to. But that God should either in this Speculum or any otherwise
advertise them that such a one prays to them that they would pray to him for
that party, is it not at first sight above all measure ridiculous?

And alike ridiculous it is to pray to Saint or Angel, as if they were present
and heard our Prayers, when indeed they are absent, and cannot tell that we did
pray, unless by some Intelligencers. This Devotion is an improper and
unnatural act, and shows that we do that to an invisible Creature which is
only proper to be done to the invisible God; and that therefore it is
Idolatry, as giving that right of Worship to others which is only congruous to
him.

7. The fifteenth; That though there were communicated by God to Saints and
Angels at least a terrestrial Omnipercipiency, yet if he have not communicated
the knowledge thereof to us, as most certainly he has not, the Invocation of
them is notwithstanding a very presumptuous invasion of the indubitable Rights
of God, and the intrenching upon his Prerogatives, and therefore as to the
internal Act no less then the Sin of Idolatry.

The Reasons of this Conclusion are, First, That God concealing from us the
knowledge of the communication of this Excellency, does naturally thereby
intimate that he would not have them invoked, but reserves the Honor of our
Invocation of an invisible Power unto himself only.

Secondly, That whatsoever is not of says is sin: and therefore the ground of
Invocation of Saints or Angels being at least dubitable, their Invocation is
sin; and it being about the Rights of God in his Worship, what can it be better
esteemed then Idolatry?

Thirdly, This Principle of feigning or groundlesly coneeiting, without any
Revelation from God, that any Creatures are capable of such Honors as are
God's indubitable Right and Prerogative, is the Forge and Shop, the Palliation
and Pretense, for infinite sorts and odly-excogitated varieties of Idolatrous
Objects: and therefore so presumptuous and so abominable a Principle, which is
the Mother and Nurse of such infinite ways of Idolatry and Injustice against
God, even according to humane Reason ought to be declared against as
Idolatrous; and, consequently, all the practices thereupon are also to be
declared Idolatry, because they spring from a Principle taken up which is such
a fundamental piece of Idolatry and Injustice against God, and exposes him to
all manner of Idolatrous Injuries.

Fourthly, To dare to do an act we know not whether it may be Idolatry or no,
and this needlessly, our Conscience not at all compelling us thereto, this is to
dare to commit Idolatry; and the daring to commit Idolatry, and so to do
defiance to the Majesty of God, what is it less then to be an Idolater? For
according to his inward man and the main Morality of the action he is so: As he
is morally a Murderer that, doubting or not knowing but that it is his own
Friend, by luck killed his intended Enemy: For the sense is, that rather then
not be revenged of his Enemy, he will not stick to kill his dearest Friend.

And finally, This Idolatry is the more discernible and aggravable in the
Invocation of Saints or Angels, their Omnipercipiency being so extremely
incredible, if not impossible or ridiculous, upon any ground, as appears by the
foregoing Conclusion.

8. The sixteenth; That the erecting of a symbolicall Presence with
Incurvations thitherward, the consecrating of Temples and Altars, the making of
Oblations, the burning of Incense, and the like, were declared by the supreme
God, the God of Israel, the manner of Worship due to him, and therefore,
without his Concession, this Mode of Worship is not to be given to any else; as
appears by Conclusion the ninth.

The seventeenth; That the Pagans worshipping their Demons, though not as the
supreme God, by symbolicall Presences, Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, and the
like, become ipso facto Idolaters. This is manifest from the ninth, the
fifteenth, and the foregoing Conclusion.

The eighteenth; Though it were admitted that there is communicated to Saints
and Angels at least a terrestrial Omnipercipiency, and that we had the
knowledge of this Communication, and so might speak to them in a civil way,
though unseen; yet to invoke them in such Circumstances as at an Altar and in a
Temple dedicated to them, or at their symbolicall presence, this were palpable
Idolatry. The truth is manifest agian from the ninth and sixteenth Conclusions.

9. The nineteenth; Incurvation in way of Religion toward any open or bare
symbolicall Presence, be it whatever Figure or Image, as to an Object, is flat
Idolatry: in the Worship of Saints, Angels and Demons, double Idolatry; in the
Worship of the true God, single. The reason hereof is resolved partly into the
ninth and sixteenth Conclusions, and partly into the nature of Application of
Worship. For external Worship is not any otherwise to be conceived to be
applied to a symbolicall Presence, but by being directed toward it as toward
an Object. Wherefore if religious Incurvation be directed toward any Figure or
Image as to an Object, this Figure or Image necessarily receives this religious
Incurvation, and partakes with God (if the Image be to him,) in it; which is
manifest Idolatry. For the direction of our Intention here is but a Jesuiticall
Juggle. And therefore I will set down for Conclusion

The twentieth, That religious Incurvation toward a bare symbolicall Presence,
wittingly and conscienciously directed thither, though with a mental reserve,
that they intend to use it merely as a Circumstance of Worship, is
notwithstanding real Idolatry.

The Reason is, because an external Action toward such a thing as is looked
upon as receptive of such an Action, (and has frequently received it,) if it be
thus or thus directed, will naturally conciliate the notions or respects of
Action and Object betwixt these two, whether we intend it or no. And it is as
ridiculous to pretend that their motions or actions toward or about such a
symbolicall Presence are not directed to it or conversant about it as an
Object, as it were for an Archer to contend that the Butt he shoots at is not
the Scope or Object, but a Circumstance, of his Shooting; and he that embraces
his Friend, that his Friend is not an Object, but a Circumstance, of his
Embracing. Which are Conceits quite out of the rode of all Logic. See the last
Conclusion of the foregoing Chapter.

10. The twenty-first; That the Adoration of any Object which we, out of
mistake, conceive to be the true God made visible by hypostatical union
therewith, is manifest Idolatry. The Reason is, because Mistake does not excuse
from Idolatry, by Conclusion the fourth and the fifth. And in this Supposition
we miss of one part of the Object, and the only part that single is capable
of Divine Honor. For God to be disunited from this adored Object is in this
case all one as to be absent: For God is not considered nor intended in this
act of Adoration but as united with this visible Object. Which respect of Union
if it fail, that consideration or Intention also fails, and the Worship falls
upon a mere Creature.

In brief, If out of mistake I salute some lively Statue or dead body for such
or such a living man, though this Man or his Soul were present, and saw and
heard the Salutation, yet I play the fool, and make my self ridiculous, and am
conceived not to have saluted him I would: So if I do Adoration to any Object,
suppose the Sun or some Magical Statue, for the true Deity visible, whenas
neither of them are so, I play the Idolater, and make my self impious, and have
missed of the due Object of my Adoration.

11. The twenty-second; That the Adoration of the Host upon the presumption
that it is transubstantiated into the living Body of Christ is rank Idolatry.
This appears from the precedent Conclusion. To which you may add, that the
Romanists, making Transubstantiation the true ground of their Adoration of the
Host, do themselves imply, that without it were so their Adoration thereof
would be Idolatry. But that it is not so, and that their Ground is false, any
body may be as well assured of as he can of any thing in the world: and no
less assured that they are Idolaters according to their own Supposition and
Implication, as Costerus indeed does most emphatically and expressly acknowledge
it, if they be mistaken in their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; as we shall
hear anon.

The twenty-third Conclusion; That Adoration given to the Host by Protestants
or any else that hold not Transubstantiation is manifest Idolatry. The Reason
is to be fetched from the nineteenth and twentieth Conclusions. For it is
religious Veneration toward a bare corporeal Symbol of the Divine Presence,
and, to make the Action more aggravable, toward a Symbol that has Imagery upon
it, and that of the person that is pretended to be worshipped thereby. What can
be Idolatry if this be not?

The twenty-fourth; That the Invocation of Saints and Angels, though attended
with these considerations, that both that Excellency we suppose in them, and
which makes them capable of that Honor, is deemed finite, and also (be it as
great as it will) wholly derived to them from God, yet it cannot for all this
be excused from gross Idolatry. This is clear from the seventh, eighth, tenth,
and so on till the sixteenth Conclusion. For though this Excellency be supposed
finite, yet if it be so great as that it is nowhere to be found but in God, it
is his Right only to have such Honors as suppose it. And though it be deemed
or conceived to be derived from God, yet if it be not, we give an uncommunicate
Excellency to the Creature, and rob God of his Right and Honor. And, lastly,
though this Excellency were communicated, but yet the Communication of it
unreveal'd to us, it were a treasonable Presumption against the Majesty of God,
thus of our own head to divulge such things as may violate the peculiar Rights
of his Godhead, and (for ought we know) fill the world with infinite bold
examples of the grossest Idolatry: and therefore all our practices upon this
Principle must be Idolatrous, and Treasonable against the Divine Majesty.
Consider well the fifteenth Conclusion.

12. The last Conclusion; That this pretended Consideration, that where Christ
is corporeally present, Divine Worship is not done to his Humanity, but to his
Divinity, and that therefore, though the Bread should not prove
transubstantiated, the Divine Worship will still be done to the same Object as
before, viz. to the Divinity, which is everywhere, and therefore in the Bread;
this will not excuse the Adoration of the Host from palpable Idolatry.

For first, That part of the Pretense that supposes Divine Worship in no sense
due or to be done to Christ's Humanity is false. For it is no greater
presumption to say, that in some sense Divine Worship is communicable to the
Humanity of Christ, then, that the Divinity is communicated thereto. In such
sense then as the Divinity is communicated to the Humanity, which are one by
hypostaticall Union, may Divine Worship also be communicated to it; namely, as
an acknowledgement that the Divinity with all its adorable Attributes is
hypostatically, vitally and transplendently residing in this Humanity of
Christ. Which is a kind of Divine Worship of Christ's Humanity, and peculiar
to him alone, and due to him, I mean, to his Humanity, though it be not God
essentially, but only hypostatically united with him that is; and does as
naturally partake of Religious or Divine Worship in our Addresses to the
Divinity, as the body of an eminently-vertuous, holy and wise man does of that
great Reverence and civil Honor done to him for those Excellencies that are
more immediately lodged in his Soul.

Which Honor indistinctly passes upon the whole man: And as the very bodily
Presence of this virtuous person receives the civil Honor, so in an easy
Analogy does the Humanity of Christ receive the Divine; but both as partial
Objects of what they do receive, and with signification of the state of the
whole case, viz. that they are united, the one with the Divinity, the other
with so virtuous a Soul. Hence they both become due Objects of that entire
external Worship done toward them, to the one civil, to the other Divine.

And therefore, in the second place, it is plain, that there is not one and the
same due Object capable of Religious Worship in either Supposition, as well in
that which supposes the Bread transubstantiated, as in that which supposes it
not transubstantiated. For in the former it is the true and living corporeal
Presence of Christ, whose whole Suppositum is, as has been declared, capable of
Divine Honor; but in the latter there is only, at the most, but his
symbolicall Presence, whose Adoration is Idolatry, by the nineteenth, twentieth
and twenty-first Conclusions.

And lastly, The pretending that though the Bread be not transubstantiated, yet
the Divinity of Christ is there, and so we do not miss of the due Object of
our Worship; this is so laxe an Excuse, that it will plead for the
warrantableness of the Laplanders worshipping their Red cloth, or the Americans
the Devil, let them but pretend they worship God in them. For God is also in
that Red cloth and in the Devil in that Notion that he is said to be
everywhere. Nay, there is not any Object in which the ancient Pagans were
mistaken, in taking the Divine Attributes to be lodged there, whether Sun,
Heaven, or any other Creature, but by this Sophistry the worshipping thereof
may be excused from Idolatry. For the Divine Attributes, as God himself, are
everywhere.

To direct our Adoration toward a supernatural and unimitable Transplendency of
the Divine Presence, or to any visible corporeal nature that is hypostatically
united with the Divinity, most assuredly is not that sunk and sottish, that
dull and dotardly sin of Idolatry. For, as touching this latter, to whatever
the Divinity is hypostatically united, or (to avoid all cavil about terms) so
specially and mysteriously communicated as it is to Christ, the Right of Divine
Worship is proportionably communicated therewith, as I have already intimated.
And as for the former, That through which the Divine Transplendency appears is
no more the Object of our Adoration, then the diaphanous Air is through which
the visible Humanity of Christ appears when he is worshipped.

But the Eucharistick Bread being neither hypostatically united with the
Divinity, nor being the Medium through which any such supernatural
Transplendency of the Divine Presence appears to us, Adoration directed toward
it cannot fail of being palpable Idolatry. For the Eucharistick Bread will
receive this Adoration as the Object thereof, by Conclusion the nineteenth and
twentieth. But the Adoration or any Divine Worship of an Object in which the
Divine Attributes do not personally reside, (in such a sense as is intimated in
those words of S. John, And Joh. 1. 14.
the Word was made flesh,) but only locally, as I may so speak, this,
according to sound reason and the sense of the Christian Church, must be
downright Idolatry.

CHAP. III.
That the Romanists worship the Host with the highest kind of Worship, even
that of Latria, according to the Injunction of the Council of Trent; and that
it is most gross Idolatry so to do.

1. AND having thus clearly and distinctly evinced and declared what is or
ought to be held Idolatry amongst Christians; let us at length take more full
notice of some Particulars wherein, according to these Determinations, the
Church of Rome will be manifestly found guilty of Idolatry, and that according
to the very Definitions of their own Council of Trent. As first, in the Point
of the Adoration of the Host, touching which the very words of the Council are,
Latriae cultum, qui vero Deo debetur, huic sanctissimo Sacramento in Council.
Trident. Sess. 3. cap. 5. Ca^. 6.
veneratione esse adhibendum: and again, Siquis dixerit, in sancto Eucharistiae
Sacramento Christum non esse cultu Latriae etiam externo adorandum, and
sole^^iter circumgestandum popul^que proponendum public ut adoretur, Anathema
sit.

2. This confident Injunction of gross Idolatry, as it is certainly such, is
built upon their confidence of the truth of their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. For the Chapter of the Adoration of the Host succeeds that
of Transubstantiation, as a natural, or rather necessary, Inference therefrom.
Nullus itaque dubitandi locus relinquitur, etc. That is to say, The Doctrine of
Transubstantiation being established, there is no Scruple left touching the
Adoration of the Host, or giving Divine Worship to the Sacrament (or Christ, as
it is there called,) when it is carried about, and exposed publicly in
Processions to the view of the people.

But the Doctrine of Transubstantiation being false, it must needs follow, that
the giving of Divine Worship to the Host is as gross a piece of Idolatry as
ever was committed by any of the Heathens. For then their Divine Worship, even
their Cultus Latriae, which is only due to the onely-true God, is exhibited to
a mere Creature, and that a very sorry one too; and therefore must be gross
Idolatry, by the twenty-first and twenty-second Conclusions of the second
Chapter.

3. But now, that their Doctrine of Transubstantiation is false, after we have
proposed it in the very words of the Council, we shall evince by undeniable
Demonstration. Per consecrationem Council. Trident. Sess. 3. cap. 4.
Panis and Vini conversionem fieri totius substantiae Panis in substantiam
Corporis Christi, and totius substantiae Vini in substantiam Sanguinis ejus;
quae conversio convenienter and proprie a Sancta Catholica Ecclesia
Transubstantiatio est appellata. And a little before, cap. 3. Si quis negaverit
cap. 3. can. 3.
in venerabili Sacramento Eucharistiae sub unaquaque specie, and sub singulis
cujusque speciei partibus, separatione facta, totum Christum contineri,
Anathema sit. In which passages it is plainly affirmed, that not only the
Bread is turned into the whole Body of Christ, and the Wine into his Blood, but
that each of them are turned into the whole Body of Christ, and every part of
each, as often as division or separation is made, is also turned into his whole
Body. Which is such a contradictious Figment, that there is nothing so
repugnant to the Faculties of the humane Soul.

4. For thus the Body of Christ will be in God knows how many thousand places
at once, and how many thousand miles distant one from another. Whenas Amphitruo
rightly expostulates with his Servant Sosia, and rates him for a Madman or
Impostour, that he would go about to make him believe that he was at home,
though but a little way off, while yet he was with him at that distance from
home. Quo id (malum!) pacto potest fieri nunc uti tu hic sis, and domi? And a
little before, in the same Colloquie with his Servant, Nemo unquam homo vidit,
says he, nec potest fieri, tempore uno homo idem duobus locis ut simul sit.
Wherein Amphitruo speaks but according to the common sense and apprehension of
all men, even of the meanest Idiots.

5. But now let us examine it according to the Principles of the learned, and
of all their Arts and Sciences, Physics, Metaphysics, Mathematics and
Logic. It is a Principle in Physics, That that internal space that a Body
occupies at one time is equal to the Body that occupies it. Now let us suppose
one and the same body occupy two such internal places or spaces at once; This
Body is therefore equal to those two spaces, which are double to one single
space; wherefore the body is double to that body in one single space, and
therefore one and the same body double to it self. Which is an enormous
Contradiction.

Again, in Metaphysics; The Body of Christ is acknowledged one, and that as
much as any one body else in the world. Now the Metaphysicall Notion of one is,
to be indivisum a se, (both quo ad parts and quo ad totum,) as well as divisum
a quolibet alio. But the Body of Christ being both in Heaven, and, without any
continuance of that body, here upon Earth also, the whole body is divided from
the whole body, and therefore is entirely both unum and multa: which is a
perfect Contradiction.

6. Thirdly, in Mathematics; The Council saying that in the separation of the
parts of the Species, (that which bears the outward show of Bread or Wine,)
that from this Division there is a parting of the whole, divided into so many
entire Bodies of Christ, the Body of Christ being always at the same time equal
to it self, it follows, that a part of the Division is equal to the whole,
against that common Notion in Euclide, That the Whole is bigger then the Part.

And, lastly, in Logic it is a Maxim, That the Parts agree indeed with the
Whole, but disagree one with another. But in the abovesaid Division of the Host
or Sacrament the Parts do so well agree, that they are entirely the very same
individual thing. And whereas any Division, whether Logical or Physical, is
the Division of some one into many; this is but the Division of one into one
and itself, like him that for brevity sake divided his Text into one Part.

To all which you may add, that, unless we will admit of two Sosia's and two
Amphitruo's in that sense that the mirth is made with it in Plautus his Comedy,
neither the Bread nor the Wine can be transubstantiated into the entire Body of
Christ. For this implies that the same thing is, and is not, at the same time.
For that individual thing that can be, and is to be made of any thing, is not.
Now the individual Body of Christ is to be made of the Wafer consecrated, for
it is turned into his individual Body. But his individual Body was before this
Consecration. Wherefore it was, and it was not, at the same time. Which is
against that fundamental Principle in Logic and Metaphysics, That both parts
of a Contradiction cannot be true; or, That the same thing cannot both be, and
not be, at once.

Thus fully and entirely contradictious and repugnant to all Sense and Reason,
to all indubitable Principles of all Art and Science, is this Figment of
Transubstantiation; and therefore most certainly false. Read the ten first
Conclusions of the brief Discourse of the true Grounds of Faith, added to the
Divine Dialogues.

7. And from Scripture it has not the least support. All is, Hoc est corpus
meum, when Christ held the Bread in his hand, and after put part into his See
Paul. Fag. upon Deuteronomy. 8. 10.
own mouth, (as well as distributed it to his Disciples:) in doing whereof he
swallowed his whole Body down his throat at once, according to the Doctrine of
this Council, or at least might have done so, if he would. And so all the Body
of Christ, Flesh, Bones, Mouth, Teeth, Hair, Head, Heels, Thighs, Arms,
Shoulders, Belly, Back, and all, went through his Mouth into his Stomach; and
thus all were in his Stomach, though all his Body entirely, his Stomach
excepted, was still without it. Which let any one judge whether it be more
likely, then that this saying of Christ, This is my Body, is to be understood
figuratively; the using the Verb substantive in this sense being not unusual in
Scripture; as in, I am the Vine; The seven lean Kine are the John 15. 5. Genesis
41. 27.
seven years of Famine; and the like: and more particularly, since our Savior,
speaking elsewhere of eating his flesh and drinking his blood, says plainly,
that the words he spoke, they Joh. 6. 63.
were spirit, and they were truth, that is to say, a spiritual or aenigmaticall
truth, not carnally and literally to be understood.

And for the trusting of the judgment of the Roman Church herein that makes it
self so sacrosanct and infallible, the Pride, Worldliness, Policy and
multifarious Impostures of that Church, so often and so shamelesly repeated and
practiced, must needs make their Authority seem nothing in a Point that is so
much for their own Interest, especially set against the undeniable Principles
of common Sense and Reason, and of all the Arts and Sciences God has
illuminated the Mind of man withal. Consider the twelfth Conclusion of the
abovenamed Treatise, together with the other ten before cited. Wherefore any
one that is not a mere Bigott may be as assured that Transubstantiation is a
mere Figment or enormous Falsehood, as of any thing else in the whole world.

8. From whence it will unavoidably follow, and themselves cannot deny it, that
they are most gross and palpable Idolaters, and consequently most barbarous
Murderers, in killing the innocent Servants of God for not submitting to the
same Idolatries with themselves. Costerus the Jesuit speaks expressly to this
Point, (and consonantly, I think, to the Suppositions of the Council;) viz.
That if their Church be mistaken in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, they
ipso facto stand guilty of such a piece of Idolatry as never was before seen or
known of in the world.

For the errors of those, says he, were more tolerable who worship some
Francise. Coster. Enchirid. Controvers. cap. 12.
golden or silver Statue, or some Image of any other Materials, for their God,
as the Heathen worshipped their Gods; or a red Cloth hung upon the top of a
Spear, as is reported of the Laplanders; or some live Animal, as of old the
Egyptians did; then of these that worship a bit of Bread, as hitherto the
Christians have done all over the world for so many hundred years, if the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation be not true.

What can be a more full and express acknowledgement of the gross Idolatry of
the Church of Rome then this, if Transubstantiation prove an Error? Then which
notwithstanding there is nothing in the world more certain to all the Faculties
of a man; as is manifest out of what has been here said. And therefore the
Romanists must be gross Idolaters, from the second, third, fourth, seventh and
ninth Conclusions of the first Chapter, and from the fourth, fifth, eighth,
ninth, twenty-first, twenty-second and twenty-fifth of the second Chapter. All
these Conclusions will give evidence against them, that they are very notorious
Idolaters.

9. And therefore this being so high and so palpable a strain of Idolatry in
them touching the Eucharist, or the eating the Body and drinking the Blood of
Christ, wherein Christ is offered by the Priest as an Oblation, and the People
feed upon him as in a Feast upon a Sacrifice, which is not done without Divine
Adoration done to the Host, according to the precept of their Church; This does
hugely confirm our sense of the eating of things offered unto Idols in the
Epistles to the Churches in Pergamus and in Thyatira, this worshipping of the
Host being so expressly acknowledged by the Pope and his Clergy, and in that
high sense of Cultus Latriae, which is due to God alone. And therefore it is
very choicely and judiciously perstringed by the Spirit of Prophecy above any
other Modes of their Idolatry, it being such a gross and confessed Specimen
thereof, and such as there is no Evasion for or Excuse. Hoc teneas vultus
mutantem Protea ^odo.


CHAP. IV.
The gross Idolatry of the Romanists in the Invocation of the Saints, even
according to the allowance of the Council of Trent, and the authorized practice
of that Church.

1. BUT we will fall also upon those Modes of Idolatry wherein the Church of
Rome may seem less bold; though indeed this one, that is so gross, is so often
and so universally repeated everywhere in the Roman Church, that by this
alone, though we should take notice of nothing farther, Idolatry may seem quite
to have overspred her like a noisome Leprosy. But, how-ever, we shall proceed;
and first to their Invocation of Saints. Touching which the Council of Trent
declares this Doctrine expressly: Sanctos utique una cum Christo regnantes
Orationes Council. Trident. Sess. 9.
suas pro hominibus offerre, bonumque atque utile esse suppliciter eos
invocare; and ob beneficia impetranda a Deo per Filium ejus Jesum Christum, ad
eorum orationes, operam auxiliumque confugere. Where Invocation of Saints is
plainly allowed and recommended: and besides their praying for us, or offering
up our Prayers to God, it is plainly implied that there are other Aids and
Succors they can afford, if they be supplicated, that is, invoked with most
humble and prostrate Devotion. And the pretending that this is all but the way
of procuring those good things we want from God, the first Fountain, and that
through his Son Christ; that makes the Saints the more exactly like the Pagans
Dii medioxumi, and the Demons that negotiated the affairs of men with the
highest Deity.

2. I say then that, though they went no farther then thus, even this is
downright Idolatry which the Council of Trent thus openly owns, (and
consequently the whole Church of Rome,) as appears from the third, fourth,
fifth, sixth and eighth Conclusions of the first Chapter; as also by the fifth,
seventh, eighth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth
and twenty-fourth of the second. But if we examine those Prayers that are put
up to the Saints, their Invocation is still the more unexcusable.

3. Wherefore looking to the public Practice of the Church of Rome, authorized
by the Popes themselves, the Invocation of a Saint does not consist in a mere
Ora pro nobis, as people are too forward to phansy that the state of the
Question, (though the mere invoking of them to pray for us would be Idolatry,
as is already proved:) but, which is insinuated in the Council it self, there
are other more particular Aids and Succors that they implore of them, and some
such as it is proper for none but God or Christ to give: Such as Protection
from the Devil, Divine Graces, and the Joys of Paradise. But as the things they
ask of the Saints are too big for them to be the Disposers of; so the
Compellations, of the Virgin Mary especially, are above the nature of any
Creature. Whence this Invocation of Saints will appear a most gross and
palpable Mode of Idolatry in that Church. As I shall make manifest out of the
following Examples, taken out of such pieces of Devotion as are not muttered in
the corners of their Closets, but are publicly read or sung with Stentorian
Voices in their very Churches. I will only give the Reader a taste of this
kind of their Idolatry; for it were infinite to produce all we might.

4. And first, to begin with the smaller Saints, (as indeed they are all to be
reckoned in comparison of the blessed Virgin, to whom therefore they give that
Worship which they call Hyperdulia, as they give Dulia to the rest of the
Saints, and Latria to God alone, and to Christ as being God:) That Prayer to S.
Cosmas and S. Damian is plainly a Petition to them to keep us from all
Diseases, as well of Soul as of Body, that we may attain to the life of the
Spirit, and live in Grace here, and be made partakers of Heaven hereafter. O
Medici piissimi,
Qui Meritis clarissimi
In Coelis refulgetis,
A peste, clade corporum
Praeservetis, and operum,
Moribus ne langueamus:
Nec moriamur spiritu,
Sed Animae ab obitu
Velociter surgamus;
Et vivamus in Gratia,
Sacra Coeli palatia
Donec regrediamur.


5. Such a piece of Devotion as this is that to S. Francis: Sancte Francisce,
propere veni; Pater, accelera ad populum, qui premitur and teritur sub o^ere,
palea, luto, latere, and sepultos AEgyptio sub sabulo nos libera, carnis
extincto vitio. Which is plainly a Prayer to this Saint that he would deliver
us from the bondage and drudgery of Sin, which is only in the power of our
great Savior and Redeemer Christ for to do.

That Invocation of S. Andrew is also for that spiritual Grace of duly Bearing
the Cross here, that we may obtain Heaven afterward. Jam nas foveto languidos,
Curamque nostri suscipe,
Quo per Crucis victoriam
Coeli petamus gratiam.
But that to S. Nicolas is against the Assaults of the Devil: Ergo pie nos
exaudi
Assistentes tuae laudi,
Ne subdamur Hostis sraudi,
Nobis fer auxilia.
Nos ab omni malo ducas,
Vita recta nos conducas,
Post hanc vitam nos inducas
Ad aeterna gaudia.
The like Devotion is done to S. Martin, S. Andrew, S. James, S. Bartholomew,
and others, though not in the same words.

6. When I have given an example or two of their Prayers put up to their
She-Saints, I shall a little more copiously insist on those to the blessed
Virgin. They beg of S. Agnes the greatest Grace that God is able to impart to
the Soul of man, that is to say, to serve God in perfect Love. And this Gift
this one poor single She-Saint is solicited to bestow on all men. Ave, Agnes
gloriosa,
Me in fide serves recta,
Dulcis Virgo and dilecta,
Te exoro precibus:
Charitate da perfecta
Deum, per quem es electa,
Colere pie omnibus.
That Devotion put up to S. Brigitt is, that she would play the skillful Pilot,
and lead us through all the tempests and hazzards of this World so safely, that
at last, by her good Conduct, we may attain to everlasting Life. The Rhyme runs
thus: O Bregitta, matter bona,
Dulcis Ductrix and Matrona,
Nobis fer suffragia;
Naufragantes in hoc Mari
Tuo ductu salutari
Duc ad vitae bravia.


7. But that to S. Catharine is a piece of Devotion something of an higher
strain, or rather more copious and express: But so great a Boon they beg of
her as is in the power of none to give but God alone. Ave, Virgo Dei digna,
Christo prece me consigna,
Audi Preces, praesta Votum;
Cor in bono fac immotum.
Confer mibi Cor contritum;
Rege Visum and Auditum;
Rege Gustum and Olfactum,
Virgo sancta, rege Tactum.
Ut in cunctis te regente,
Vivam Deo pura mente.
Christum pro me interpella,
Salva Mortis de procella.
Superare fac me Mundum,
Ne demergar in profundum.
Ne me sinas naufragari
Per Peccata in hoc Mari.
Visita tu me infirmum,
Et in bonis fac me firmum.
Agonista Dei fortis,
Praesto sis in hora mortis.
Decumbentem fove* leva,
Et de morte solve saeva;
Ut resurgam novus homo
Civis in coelesti dome.


8. Now it is observable in this devotionall Rhyme to S. Catharine, that
whereas the Council of Trent advises men, ad Sanctorum orationes, opem
auxiliumque confugere, that in these many. Verses there are not passing two or
three that are an entreating of the Saint to pray for us, but to aid and
succor us in such a way as the Story of the Saint and the Allusion to her Name
most naturally leads the fancy of the Devotionist to think suitable for her: As
if she were the giver of Courage, of Patience, and of Purity of mind, and was
to comfort and support us in the very Agony of death by her presence, Which
Petition is very frequent to other Saints also. So plain a thing is it, that
this Invocation of the Saints is not a mere desiring of them to pray for us.

But here the Devotionist commits the whole Regimen of both his Soul and Body
unto this Saint, to rule all his Faculties and Senses, and begs so high Virtues
and Graces, as that none but God can supply us with them; as I intimated at
first. Whence the Invocation upon that very account also must appear most
grossly Idolatrous, as Grotius, who yet is no such foe to the Papists, does
expressly acknowledge and declare.

CHAP. V.
Forms of Invocation of the blessed Virgin used by the Church of Rome
egregiously Idolatrous.

1. AND if they can contain themselves no better in their Devotions toward
these lesser Saints, to whom their Churchmen will allow only the Worship they
call Dulia, how wild and extravagant will they show themselves in their
Addresses to the Virgin Marie, the Mother of God, to whom they allow the
Worship they call Hyperdulia? And that is the thing I will now take notice of,
though not according to the copiousnesse of the Subject; for it would even fill
a Volume. But some Instances I will produce, and those such as are public and
authentic, as I intimated at first. In the Rosarie of the blessed Virgin she
is saluted thus: Reparatrix and Salvatrix desperantis Animae,
Irroratrix and largitrix spiritualis Gratiae,
Quod requiro, quod suspiro, mea sana Vulnera,
Et da menti te poscenti Gratiarum munera;
Ut sim castus, and modestus, dulcis, fortis, sobrius,
Pius, rectus, circumspectus, simultatis nescius,
Eruditus, and munitus Divinis eloquiis,
Constans, gravis, and suavis, benignus, amabilis,
Cord prudens, ore studens veritatem dicere,
Malum nolens, Deum volens pio semper opere.
A very excellent Prayer, if it had been directed to a due Object. But such
things are asked as are in the power of none but of Jesus Christ himself, as he
is God, to give.

2. For the Virgin Mary is here made no less then a Savior and giver of all
spiritual Graces; as she is also a giver of eternal Life in what follows in
Prose. Peccatorum causolatrix, infirmorum curatrix, errantium revocatrix,
justorum confirmatrix, desolatorum spes and auxiliatrix, atque mea promptissima
adjutrix, tibi, Domina gloriosa, commendo body and quotidie Animam meam; ut me
in custodiam tuam commendatum ab omnibus malis and sraudibus Diaboli custodias,
atque in hora mortis constanter mihi assistas, ac Animam ad aeterna gaudia
perducas. Here is the commending of the Soul of the Devotionist into the
Protection of the Virgin, that he may be kept from all Evil, and from the
Frauds of the Devil, and that she would assist at the hour of death to convey
his Soul to the eternal Joys of Heaven.

3. Like that at the end of the Rosarie; Cor meum illumina, fulgens Stella
Maris, Et ab hostis machina semper tuearis. O gloriosa Virgo Maria, matter Regis
aeterni, Libera nos ab omni malo, and a poenis Inferni. Which is a Petition for
Illumination of heart, for Security from the Devil and from eternal Death:
which is only the Privilege of the Son of God, the eternal Wisdom of the
Father, to grant, who is said also to have the Keys Apoc. 1. 18.
of Hell and of Death.

4. But the thing which is very observable, and which I mainly drive at, is
this, That the Roman Church toward the latter end, before the Reformation broke
out, had run so mad after the Patronage of the Virgin, that they had almost
forgot the Son of God, and spent all their Devotions on her, whom they do at
least equallize to Christ, and so really make her, as well as some love to call
her, the Daughter of God, in as high a sense as Christ is his Son: as will
farther appear in the process of our Quotations. As in that Prayer to the
blessed Virgin that follows in Chemnitius: Te, matter illuminationis cordis mei,
te, nutrix salutis meae mentis, te obsecrant quantum possunt cuncta praecordia
mea. Exaudi, Domina, adesto propitia, adjuva potentissima, ut mundentur sordes
mentis meae, ut illuminentur tenebrae meae. O gloriosa Domina, Porta vitae,
Janua salutis, Via reconciliationis, Aditus recuperationis, obsecro te per
salvatricem tuam foecunditatem, fac ut peccatorum meorum venia and vivendi
gratia concedatur, and usque in finem hic servus tuus sub tua protectione
custodiatur. Which Petition and Compellations, saving what belongs to the Sex,
are most proper and natural to be used toward Christ. But the Virgin is here
made our Savior and Mediator in the feminine gender.

5. As she is again most expressly in that Prayer to her in her Feast of
Visitation:

Veni, praecelsa Domina Maria; tu nos visita: AEgras mentes illumina Per sacrae
vitae munera.

Veni, Salvatrix seculi; Sordes aufer piaculi; In visitando populum Poenae
tollas periculum.

Veni, Regina gentium; Dele flammas reatuum; Dele quodcunque devium; Da vitam
innocentium.

In which Invocation the Virgin Mary is plainly called the Savior of the
World, and prayed unto for spiritual Illumination of the Soul, and for the
purgation thereof from the filth both of Sin and Guilt: whereby she is plainly
equallized to the Son of God, and made as it were a She-Christ, or Daughter of
God.

To this sense also are those Prayers put up to her in her Feast of the
Conception and of the Annunciation: But it were infinite to produce all. Read
that Prayer in Chemnitius sung to her by the Council of Constance: It is a
perfect Imitation of the ancient Prayer of the Church to the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. VI.
More Forms of Invocation of the blessed Virgin out of the Mary-Psalter, so
called, extremely Idolatrous and Blasphemous.

1. WE will now only note some passages in the Mary-Psalter, as it is called,
wherein how much at that time the Church of Rome had thrust themselves under
the Protection and Patronage of the Virgin, and made her the Daughter of God,
in stead of approving themselves faithful touching the Rights and Prerogatives
of the Son and his Worship, will be most notoriously evident. I will begin with
the thirtieth Psalm: In te, Domina, speravi; non confundar in aeternum. In
gratiam tuam suscipe me; inclina ad me aurem tuam, and in moerore meolaetifica
me. Tu es fortitudo mea and refugium meum, consolatio mea and protectio mea: ad
te clamavi cum tribularetur cor meum, and exaudisti de vertice collium
aeternorum. In manus tuas, Domina, commendo spiritum meum, meam totam vitam,
diem ultimum. This is that whole Psalm to the Virgin: jusr in such a form and
with such a repose of spirit as David prays in to God himself.

2. But we will content our selves with transcribing only some select pieces.
As Psalm 71. Resperge, Domina, cor meum dulcedine tua. Fac me oblivisci
miserias hujus vitae: Concupiscentias aeternas excita in anima mea, and de
gaudio Paradiss inebria mentem meam. And again, Psalm 104. Salus sempiterna in
manu tua est, Domina; qui te digne honoraverint suscipient illam. Clementia tua
non deficiet a seculis aeternis, and misericordia tua a generatione in
generationem. And Psalm 117. Dispositione tua mundus perseverat, quem tu,
Domina, cum Deo fundasti ab initio. Tuus totus ego sum, Domina; salvum me fac,
quoniam desiderabiles sunt lauds tuae in tempore peregrinationis meae. No man
can say more to, or expect more from, the eternal God himself.

Whence they make the eternal Godhead as hypostatically united with the Virgin
as with Christ himself, and carry themselves to her as if she were as properly
the Daughter of God as he the Son. For else how could she be said to have
everlasting Salvation in her power, and to have laid the Foundations of the
world from the beginning with the eternal Deity?

3. There are also other passages in this Psalter whereby they make the Virgin
Mary a She-Christ, the Daughter of God, as he is the Son of God; and that is by
the applying of the very Phrases spoken of him in the Scripture, unto her. As
in Psalm 2. Venite ad eam omnes qui laboratis and tribulati estis, and
refrigerium and solatium dabit animabus vestris. And Psalm 81. Terge foeditatem
me am, Domina, quae semper rutilas puritate. Fons vitae, influe in os meum, ex
quo viventes aquae profluunt and emanant. Omnes sitientes venite ad illam, and
de font suo gratanter vos potabit. This is the gift of the Spirit, belonging
only to Christ to give to them that believe on him. And he is also said to be
the John 7. 37, 38. Matthew. 11. 28.
ease and rest of all them that are weary and heavy laden.

And again, Psalm 46. Omnes gentes, plaudite manibus, psallite in jubilo
Virgini gloriosae. Quoniam ipsa est porta vitae, janua salutis, and via nostrae
reconciliationis, spes poenitentium, solamen lugentium, pax beata cordium atque
salus. This is attributed to the Virgin, whenas it is Christ alone that is the
way of Salvation and Reconciliation with God.

4. This is a foul and tedious Subject, and therefore to make an end at length,
let us consider the Blasphemy of the 41. Psalm. Quemadmodum desiderat cervus ad
fontes aquarum, ita ad amorem tuum anhelat anima mea, Virgo sancta. Quia tu es
genitrix vitae meae, and altrix reparationis carnis meae: Quia tu lactatrix
Salvationis animae meae, initium and finis totius salutis meae. Here is that
attributed to the Virgin which is said of Christ, that he is the Author and
Finisher of our Faith and Salvation. Nay, the Creation or Generation of our
life and flesh, as well as our Salvation, is here ascribed to the Virgin. Which
can have no sense or truth, unless she were (...), God-woman, in that sense
that Christ is (...) or (...), God-man, and, as I said, were as properly the
Daughter of God as he is the Son of God.

5. As she is expressly called in her Litanie, Filia Dei, the Daughter of God.
Which, considering what high Titles they give her both in that Litanie and
elsewhere, as, Illuminatrix cordium, Fons misericordiae, Flumen sapientiae,
Matter Dei, Regina coeli, Domina mundi, Domina coeli and terrae, would be but a
dwindling Title, (it belonging to all women that are believers,) if there was
not some such raised and sublime sense of it as I have intimated.

And therefore their Addresses to her being as if she were, as I said, a
She-Christ, and the Daughter of God in as high a sense at least as Christ is
the Son of God, and she being called the Daughter of God in the Litania Mariae,
in her Litanie or public Supplication to her, it is plain, that in that
Intervall of the Church wherein this most conspicuously and notoriously
happened, the Church of Rome, by reason also of the abundance of their
Devotions then to the Virgin, might be said to be rather the Worshippers of the
Daughter of God then of the Son of God. And that therefore the Spirit of
Prophecy foreseeing these times, whenas for such a space he called Rome
Pergamus, this succeeding Scene coming on, he might very well change the title
of Pergamus into that of Thyatira, with a derisorious Allusion to the occasion
of the name of that City, from the news of a Daughter being born to Nicanor. As
if God Almighty had the like occasion of changing the name of Pergamus into
Thyatira, from the Romanists turning the Virgin Mary into the Daughter of God.

6. For a stop to which Insolency Christ seems on purpose in the Epistle to the
Church in Thyatira to resume to himself the Title of the Son Apoc. 2. 18.
of God, notwithstanding that he is called the Son of man in the Vision in
Apoc. 1. 13.
the foregoing Chapter, out of which he ever draws a description of himself for
an Entrance before each Epistle to the Churches. Which, in my judgment, is a
thing specially well worth the marking; and that this making the Virgin Mary
the Daughter of God in this Intervall, might alone be a sufficient occasion of
changing the name of the Church of Rome from Pergamus to Thyatira. But other
things that are apposite are also comprehended by a Prophetical Henopoeia.

7. But this is an Overplus to our present purpose, which was mainly to
discover the gross Idolatry of the Church of Rome in the Invocation of their
Saints, and especially of the Virgin Mary; and how both the Definition of the
Council of Trent is Idolatrous in this Point, and much more the Practice of the
Church countenanced by public Authority.

8. For this Mary-Psalter it self, that has the most enormous and blasphemous
Forms of Idolatrous Invocation of any, is not the private Contrivance of some
single, obscure, superstitious Monk, but bears the Title of that Seraphick
Doctor S. Bonaventure, once Cardinal of Rome: Which is no small public
countenance thereto. And that nothing might be wanting to the grace and
furtherance of so devotionall a piece of Idolatry, there was instituted a
peculiar Society, entitled the Fraternity of the Many-Psalter, confirmed
afterward by Sixtus the fourth, many Indulgences being added Anno 1470. And
Innocent the eighth added to these Indulgences plenarie Remission a poena and
culpa once in their life, and once in articulo mortis, to as many as entered
into that Fraternity.

9. And in such case stands the Church of Rome at this very day, that is to
say, she is still Thyatira, notorious for her Idolatrous Worship of the Virgin
Mary. But the Intervall of the true Church in Thyatira ceased upon the
Reformation, when we cast off the Pope, or suffered Jezebel to delude the
Servants of God no longer, nor to debauch them with Idolatrous Modes of
Worship. But this is only by the bye.

In the mean time it is abundantly manifest, that the Invocation of Saints in
the Roman Church is not only the praying to them that they would pray to God
for us, but the asking Aids of them, and such frequently as are in the power of
none but of God, and of Christ as he is God, for to give; and therefore is
still the grosser Idolatry.

CHAP. VII.
That the Doctrine of the Council of Trent touching the Worshipping of Images
is Idolatrous, and the Reason of the Doctrine weak and unsound.

1. AND thus much for their Idolatry in the Invocation of Saints. Let us now
consider what the sense of the Council of Trent is touching the worshipping of
Images. Imagines porro Christi, Deiparae Virginis, and aliorum Sanctorum, in
templis Council. Trid. Sess. 9.
praesertim, habendas and retinendas esse, eisque debitum honorem and
reverentiam impertiendam. Quoniam honos qui eis exhibetur refertur ad
Prototypa, quae illae repraesentant; ita ut per Imagines quas osculamur, and
coram quibus caput aperimus and procumbimus, Christum adoremus, and Sanctos,
quorum illae similitudinem gerunt, veneremur. Id quod Conciliorum, praesertim
vero secundae Nicaenae Synodi, Decretis contra Imaginum oppugnatores est
sancitum.

The meaning of which in brief is this, That the Images of Christ, of the
blessed Virgin and other Saints, are to be had and retained in Churches, and
that due honor and reverence is to be done to them. For which are produced two
Reasons. The first, In that the Honor that is done to the Images is referred
to the Prototypes. The second, In that this Injunction is but what the second
Nicene Council had of old decreed.

2. To which I answer, That thus much as the Council of Trent has declared
touching Images is plain and open Idolatry by the seventh Conclusion of the
first Chapter, and expressly against the Commandment of God, who forbids us to
make any graven Image to bow down to or worship. But the Council of Trent says,
Yes, ye may make graven Images of the Saints, and set them up in their Temples,
and give them their due Honor and Worship; nay, ye ought to do so; and
instances in the very act of Bowing or Kneeling and prostrating our selves
before them. This Definition of the Council is so palpably against the
Commandment of God, that they are fain to leave the second Commandment out of
the Decalogue, that the people may not discern how grossly they go against the
express Precepts of God in their so frequent practices of Idolatry. See the
first, ninth and tenth Conclusions of the first Chapter; as also the third,
fourth, fifth, eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth of the second.

3. Nor can all their Tricks and Tergiversations and subtle Elusions serve
their turn. For undoubtedly the Decalogue was writ to the easy capacity of the
people, and therefore their hearts and consciences are the best Interpreters.
Not the foolish Evasions and Subterfuges of perfidious Sophisters, who, to the
betraying of weak Souls to Idolatry and Damnation, and for the opening their
Purses, would make them believe that the Council of Trent's enjoining of Images
in Churches, and the honoring them or worshipping them and bowing down before
them, can consist with God's forbidding to make any graven Image, and to bow
down to it and worship it. So that I say, the Council it self does appoint flat
Idolatry to the Christian world to be practiced. And it being so monstrous a
thing, I pray you now let us consider the Reasons why they do so.

4. The first is, Because the Honor done to the Image is referred to the
Prototype. But I answer, that this Reference is either in virtue of that
Similitude the Images have with those persons they represent, which the words
of the Council seem to imply, at least touching the Saints, quorum illae
similitudinem gerunt; as when we praise a Picture of such or such a person,
that it is a very comely and lovely Picture, this praise naturally has a
reference to the Person whose Picture it is, in virtue of the similitude
betwixt the Picture and the Party.

Or else this Reference, without any regard to personal Similitude, is from the
Direction of the Intention of the Devotionist, that he intends upon the seeing
and bowing, suppose, to the Image of Christ, the blessed Virgin, or any Saint,
to take this occasion to worship Christ, the blessed Virgin or the Saint
thereby, the Image being but at large a symbolicall Presence of them, it being
not regarded whether the Symbol or Image have any personal Similitude with the
party it represents or no.

5. But now as for the former it is evident, that it is infinitely uncertain
whether any Image of Christ, the blessed Virgin, or of this or that Saint, be
like the carnal figure of these persons while they were alive upon earth, or
no. Nay, it is in a manner certain to the contrary, none of these holy Souls
being given to such follies as to have their Pictures drawn while they were
alive. See my Part 1. Book 1. chap. 14.
Mystery of Iniquity.

But being it is extremely improbable but an Image should be like some or
other, that are either now alive, or have lived on the earth since the
beginning of the world, according to this first supposition, this Honor or
religious Worship intended to Christ, the blessed Virgin, or any other Saint,
will not only miss them, but certainly fall on some other who, in stead of
being Saints, happily are or have been very vile and wicked persons.

6. But besides, no Saints are worshipped before they be in Heaven, nor indeed
are properly Saints till then; and the Glories in their Pictures that are about
their Heads show plainly that they intend to represent the Saints in their
present condition of Glory in Heaven. Whence it is plain that the Images are
nothing like them they are made for. For how can these Images of brass or
stone or wood, or any other materials, bear the Image of a separate Soul, which
all the Saints are for the present? And what likeness can there be betwixt the
glorious body of Christ Heavenly and spiritual, and an Image of any
terrestrial matter? No more then betwixt a piece of Dirt or Soot and the Sun
or bright Morning Star.

And, which is most of all to be considered, what terrestrial Image can
possibly represent him that is truly (...), God-man, and is not the Object of
our Adoration but as he is this Divine Complexum as well of the Divinity as the
Humanity? But what Statuarie can carve out the Effigies of the Deity? So that
the pretense of this Reference of the Honor to the Prototype in this first
sense thereof is very weak and vain. Nor, though there were this natural
Reference, would it follow that we are to honor them this way, it being so
plainly forbid, and there being better ways then this, viz. the commemorating
and imitating their Virtues.

7. And for that second sense, it is indeed disinvolved of those former
Difficulties; but greater here occurr. For as touching our Savior Christ,
forasmuch as his pretended Image is but his symbolicall Presence, the doing of
Divine Worship toward it is again plain Idolatry, as appears by that Example
of the Israelites, who worshipped the golden Calf in reference to Jehovah, as
appears plainly Exodus 32. 4, 5.
in the Story. And for the blessed Virgin and the rest of the Saints, that
Incurvation toward their symbolicall Presences is flat Idolatry, is manifest
from the eighth, ninth and tenth Conclusions of the first Chapter, and the
fifth, nineteenth and twentieth of the second of this Treatise.

And indeed thus to make the Images of the Saints so called only their
symbolicall Presences, and so to worship them before these Images, is an
attributing Divine Honor to them. For this naturally does declare that they
have at least a terrestrial Omnipresency, which no invisible Power which we
know has but only God. But to make a low Obeisance to an absent person God
knows how many millions of miles off, is still a more forced and ridiculous
thing. And therefore the saluting of the Saints thus at their symbolicall
Presences or Images, and in the mean time acknowledging them to be in sede
Beatorum, (which they do, and must do, unless they exclude them Heaven,) is to
acknowledge one Soul to fill Heaven and Earth with its presence, which is that
vast Privilege of God Almighty only; and therefore this Worship to them is
gross Idolatry, as supposing such a Perfection in them as is nowhere but in
God.

Besides what was intimated before, that let this Reference be what it will,
there being an Incurvation or Prostration before Images, whether they be mere
Symbols or exact Representations, it must be ipso facto Idolatry by the seventh
Conclusion of the first Chapter. From whence it follows, that the Saints are
not honored by this worshipping of their Images, but hideously reproched, it
supposing them to be pleased and gratified with that which is an abomination to
the Lord, and a grofs transgression of his express Commands. It implies, I say,
that they are ambitious, vainglorious and rebellious against God. And
therefore they that the most vehemently oppose this way of honoring of them by
Images and Invocation are the most true and faithful Honourers of them, they
so zealously vindicating them from the great Reproaches these others cast upon
them. So far are they from being guilty herein of any Rudeness or
Clownishnesse against the Saints of God.

CHAP. VIII.
The Doctrine of the second Council of Nice touching the Worship of Images, (to
which the Council of Trent refers,) that it is grossly Idolatrous also.

1. BUT now as for the other Reason of these Tridentine Fathers, whereby they
would support their Determination in this Point, viz. the Authority of the
second Council of Nice held about the year 780, (to omit, that long before this
time the Church had become asymmetral, which yet is a very substantial
Consideration) I shall only return this brief answer. The God of Israel, which
is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has given this express command to his
Church for ever, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, thou shall
not bow down to it, nor worship it. But the second Council of Nice says, Thou
may and shall bow down to the Image of Christ, of the blessed Virgin, and of
the rest of the Saints. Now whether it be fit to believe and obey God, or men,
judge ye: I might add farther, men so silly and frivolous in the defense of
their Opinion, so false and fabulous in the Allegation of their Authorities and
the recital of miraculous Stories, as Chemnitius has proved at large in his
Examen of the Council of Trent.

2. I will give an Instance or two. No man lights a candle, and puts it
Mat. 5. 15.
under a bushel; therefore the Images of the Saints are to be placed on the
Altars, and Wax-candles lighted up before them, in due honor to them. Again,
Psalm 16. But to the Saints that are on the Earth: But the Saints are in
Heaven, say they, therefore their Images ought to be on the Earth, etc. As for
the Miracles done by Images, as their Speaking, the Healing of the sick, the
Revenging of the wrong done to them, the Distilling of rorid drops of balsame
to heal the wounded, sick or lame, their Recovering water into a dry Well, and
the like, it were too tedious to recite these Figments.

But that of the Image of the Virgin, to whom her Devotionist spoke when he
took leave of her, and was to take a long Journey, entreating her to look to
her Candle, which he had lighted up for her, till his return, I cannot conceal.
For the Story says, the same Candle was burning six months after, at the return
of her Devoto. An example of the most miraculous Prolonger that ever I met
withal before in all my days. Such an Image of the Virgin would save poor
Students a great deal in the expense of Candles, if the thing were but lawful
and feasible.

3. From these small hints a man may easily discover of what Authority this
second Council of Nice ought to be, though they had not concluded so
point blank against the Word of God. But because that Clause in this Paragraph
of the Council I have recited, Id quod Conciliorum, praesertim vero secundae
Nicaenae Synodi, etc. may as well aim at the determination of what these
Fathers mean by that debitus honor and reverentia which they declare to be due
to the Images of Christ and the Saints, as confirm their own Conclusion by the
Authority of that Nicene Council, we will take notice also what a kind of
Honor and Reverence to Images the Nicene Council did declare for, and in short
it is this;

That they are to be worshipped and adored and to be honored with Wax-candles,
and by the smoking of Incense or Perfumes, and the like. Which smells rankly
enough in all conscience of Idolatry, as Grotius himself upon the Decalogue
cannot but acknowledge. But this is not all. The Invocation of Saints, their
Mediation and propitiating God for us for adoring their Images, healing of
Diseases, and other Aids and Helps, besides Ora pro nobis, are manifestly
involved in the Worship of these Images, according to that Nicene Council.

4. And truly, according to the Collections of Photius in Justellus, one would
think that they meant the Cultus Latriae to the Image of Christ, they using the
word (...), as if that Worship which was done to the Image passed through to
Christ himself, which would not be suitable to him, if it were not Divine
Worship. And where that word is not used, yet the sense makes hugely for it. As
in this Paragraph touching the second Council of Nice according to Photius;
(...).

This seventh Synod, says he, (that is to say, the second of Nice) with joint
suffrages has established and ratified the worshipping of the Image of Christ,
for the honor and reverence of him that is expressed by it; this Worship and
Honor being done in such manner as when we approach the holy Symbols or Types
of our most holy and Divine Worship: (for the word is (...).) For we do not
stop at them, nor restrain our Worship and Devotion to them, nor are we divided
toward heterogeneous and different Scopes or Objects; but by that Service and
Worship of them that appears divided are we carried up devoutly and undividedly
unto the one and indivisible Deity. Whereby it is plainly declared, that that
very Worship which passes to the Deity is done toward the Image of Christ
first or jointly, as being one and the same undivided Worship in truth and
reality; as also that this Worship is that Worship which is called Latria, and
is due to the highest God only.

5. But that religious Worship is done to the Images of all the Saints seems
implied in what comes afterward, where it is said, that this second Council of
Nice, (which Photius calls (...). That this Council has not only established
and appointed that the Image of Christ should be honored and worshipped, but
the holy Images of the Virgin Mary and of all the Saints, according to the
excellency and venerability of their Prototypes. For even by these are we
carried up into a certain unitive and conjunctive vision, and thereby are
vouchsafed that divine and supernatural conjunction or contact with the highest
of all desirables, that is, God himself.

6. Can any thing more inflame the Souls of men with that mystical lust after
Idols then the Doctrines of this Nicene Synod? For as for the Image of Christ,
the same Devotion and Worship is done to that which is done to God himself. And
for the Images of the Virgin Mary and the rest of the Saints, though that
Worship is allotted them only that is proportionable to their Prototypes, yet
they are worshipped such a way as that thereby, while we adhere to their Images
or Statues, we are declared to be made fit for and to be vouchsafed a tactual
Union with God himself. What Philtrum more effectual to raise up that
Idolomania, that being mad and lovesick after Images and Idols, then this? What
can inrage their Affections more toward Idolatry, then to fancy that while
they worship Idols, and cling about dead Statues, that very individual act (and
therefore it cannot be too intense) is that wherewith they are united to, and
lie in the very Embraces of, the ever-living and true God?

7. The sense of the Synod is, according to the representation of Photius, that
we worship and unite our selves with God as well in the worshipping the Images
of the Virgin and of other Saints, as in the worshipping of the Image of
Christ. So that all is religious Worship, and consequently gross Idolatry, it
being done to Stocks and Stones and such like senseless Objects. For the drift
of all Idolatry is, when it is questioned, and craftily defended, that through
the Worship of Demons and Images they reach at the Worship of, and the joining
their Devotion to, the first and highest Godhead. Wherefore the Council of
Trent declaring with the second Council of Nice, that is to say, the blind
leading the blind, they have both fallen into this dreadful Pit of Idolatry.

CHAP. IX.
The meaning of the Doctrine of the Council of Trent touching the Worship of
Images more determinately illustrated from the general Practice of the Roman
Church and Suffrage of their Popes, whereby it is deprehended to be still more
coursly and Paganically Idolatrous.

1. BUT it may be it may give more satisfaction to some, to know what is the
Church of Rome's own sense of this Honor debitus she declares ought to be done
to the Images of Christ and the Saints. Putting off a man's Hat, and lying
prostrate before them, the Council does not stick to instance in by the bye.
But because the Council calls this neither Dulia, nor Hyperdulia, nor Latria,
some will, it may be, be ready to shuffle it off with the interpretation of but
a civil Complement to these Images or their Prototypes.

But since the Council of Trent has declared nothing farther, what can be a
more certain Interpreter of their meaning then the continued Custom of their
Church, and the sense of such Doctors as have been even sainted for their
Eminency, as Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure, who both of them have declared
that the Image of Christ is to be worshipped with the Worship of Latria, the
same that Christ is worshipped with?

2. And Azorius the Jesuit affirms that it is the constant Opinion of the
Theologers, (their own, he means, you may be sure,) that the Image is to be
honored and worshipped with the same Honor and Worship that he is whose Image
it is. Which is not unlike that in the Council of Nice, (...), in the foregoing
Citation. But that they are all capable of religious Worship, the Council of
Trent it self (as well as Bellarmine and others, if not all the Theologers of
that Church,) does plainly acknowledge, in that it determines for their
Invocation, which is competible to no invisible Power but the Godhead it self.
Wherefore it is manifest that their Images are worshipped with religious
Worship also.

3. But we shall make still the clearer judgment thereof, if we consider the
Consecration of these Images which the Council of Trent declares are to be
worshipped. For the Consecration and Worshipping of them makes them perfectly
as the Idol-Gods of the Heathen, as Octavius jearingly speaks of the Heathen
Gods, that is, their Idols, in Minucius Felix: Ecce funditur, fabricatur,
scalpitur; nondum Deus est. Ecce plumbatur, construitur, erigitur; nec adhuc
Deus est. Ecce ornatur, consecratur, oratur; tunc postremo Deus est. Behold it
is clothed or adorned, it is consecrated and prayed unto; then at length it
becomes a God. And if this will do it, the Church of Rome's Images will prove
as good Idol-Gods as any of them all.

4. Chemnitius recites some forms of Consecration: I will cull out only those
of the Images of the blessed Virgin and of S. John. That of the Virgin is this:
Sanctify, O God, this Image of the blessed Virgin, that it may aid and keep
safe thy faithful people; that Thundrings and Lightnings, if they grow too
terrible and dangerous, may be quickly expelled thereby; and that the
Inundations of Rain, the Commotions of civil War, and Devastations by Pagans,
may be suppressed by the presence thereof. Which is most effectual to make all
men come and hurcle under the protection of the Virgin's Image in such dangers,
as under the Wings of the great Jehovah. This is hugely like the consecrated
Telesms of the Pagans.

But let us hear the form of the Consecration of the Image of S. John also:
Grant, O God, that all those that behold this Image with Reverence, and pray
before it, may be heard in whatsoever Streights they are. Let this Image be the
holy Expulsion of Devils, the conciliating the presence and assistence of
Angels, the protection of the faithful; and that the Intercession of this
Saint may be very powerful and effectual in this place. What a mighty Charm
is this to make the Souls of the feeble to hang about these Images as if their
Presence were the Divine Protection it self?

5. These Chemnitius recites out of the Pontifical he perused. But the Rituale
Romanum, published first by the command of Paulus Quintus, and again authorized
by Pope Urban the eighth, will do our business sufficiently, they being both
since the Council of Trent; and therefore by the Exposition of these Popes we
may know what that debitus Honor is which the Tridentine Fathers mention as
that which ought to be done to the Images of Christ, the blessed Virgin, or any
other Saint. For the Consecration of their Images runs thus:

Grant, O God, that whosoever before this Image shall diligently and humbly
upon his knees worship and honor thy onely-begotten Son, or the blessed
Virgin, (according as the Image is that is a-consecrating, or this glorious
Apostle, or Martyr, or Confessor, or Virgin, that he may obtain by his or her
Merits and Intercession Grace in this present life, and eternal Glory
hereafter.

So that the Virgin and other Saints are fellow-distributers of Grace and Glory
with Christ himself to their Supplicants before their Images, and that upon
their own Merits, and for this Service done to them in kneeling and pouring out
their Prayers before their Statues or symbolicall Presences. What greater
Blasphemy and Idolatry can be imagined? Ornatur, consecratur, oratur, tunc
postremo fit Deus: that is to say, The Image is prayed before, but the Demon
prayed unto. There is no more in Paganism it self. And yet by the Pope's own
Exposition this is the debitus Honor that is owing to the Images of the Saints.
Consider the latter end of the last Conclusion of the first Chapter, and the
forms of Invocation in the fourth and fifth, as also the eighteenth Conclusion
of the second Chapter.

6. This is all plain and express according to the Authority of their Church.
And that, besides their Adoration and Praying before th^se Images, (which,
considering the Postures of the Supplicant and the Image, is as much praying to
them as the Heathens will acknowledge done to theirs,) there are also
Wax-candles burning before them, and the Oblation of Incense or perfuming them,
Feasts likewise, Temples and Altars to the same Saints, and the carrying them
in Procession, (which was the guize of ancient Paganism,) is so well known,
that I need not quote any Authors. And that this is the practice of the Roman
Church jointly and coherently with their Worship of Images, is manifest to all
the world; and that therefore it is as arrant Idolatry as Paganism it self, and
consequently real Idolatry by the third Conclusion of the first Chapter. And
lastly, it is to be noted that the Council of Trent, naming the debitus Honor
of Images, and not excepting these in known practice then amongst them, must of
all reason be conceived to mean these very Circumstances, as Paganicall as they
are, of the Worshipping of them.

7. And the rather, because they do pretend to rectify some Miscarriages in the
business of Images, as any unlawful or dishonest Gain by them, all lascivious
Dresses of the Images, all Drunkenness and disorderly Riot at their Feasts, and
the like. Which methinks is done with as grave caution against Idolatry, as if
they had decreed that all the Whores in Rome should forbear to go in so garish
apparel, that they should be sure to wear clean linen, to be favorable to
poor younger Brothers in the price of a night's Lodging, that they keep
themselves wholesome and clean from the Pox, and the like; which were not the
putting down, but the establishing, of Whores and Whoredom in the Papacy. And
so are these Cautions touching Images. Exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis.
Wherefore these Circumstances of Idolatry being not named by the Tridentine
Fathers in their Exception, they are thereby ratified. Which yet are so like
the old Pagan Idolatry, that Ludovicus Vives, one of their own Church, could
not abstain from professing, non posse aliquid discrimen ostendi, nisi quod
nomina tantum and titulos mutaverint; That only the Names and Objects were
changed, not the Modes, of the ancient Idolatry of the Heathen.

8. If the Council of Trent would have really and in good earnest rectified
their Church in the point of Images, they should have followed the Example of
that skillful and famous Physician Dr. Butler, they should have imitated his
Prescript touching the safe eating of a Pear, viz. That we should first pare it
very carefully, and then be sure to cut out or scoup out all the Coar of it,
and after that fill the hollow with Salt, and when this is done, cast it
forthwith into the Kennell. This is the safest way of dealing with those things
that have any intrinsic Poison or Danger in them. See those most wholesome and
judicious Homilies of our Church of England against the Peril of Idolatry.

9. And thus much shall serve for the setting out the Idolatry of the Church of
Rome so far as it seems to be allowed by the Church it self. But for those more
gross Extravagancies, which, though they have connived at, yet they would be
loath to own upon public Authority, I will neither weary my self nor my Reader
by meddling with them. Such as the making the Images to sweat, their Eyes to
move, the making them to smile, or lour and look sad, to feel heavy or light,
or the like. Which does necessarily tend to the engaging of the people to
believe and have ^^fiance in the very Images themselves, as those Consecrations
also imply which I cited out of Chemnitius, and which that Rhyme seems to
acknowledge which they say to that Face of Christ which they call the Veronica.
Which Rhyme runs thus: Nos perduc ad patriam, felix o Figura,
Ad videndam Faciem quae est Christi pura.
Nos ab omni macula purga Vitiorum,
Et tandem consortio junge Beatorum.
And with such like blind Devotion do they likewise speak to the Cross: O
Crux, spes unica,
Hoc Passionis tempore
Auge piis Justitiam,
Reisque dona Veniam.
This must sound very wildly and extravagantly to any sensible ear. And yet the
invoking any Saint before his Image for Aid and Succor, (the Image bearing the
name and representation of the Saint,) with Eyes and Hands lift up to it, is as
arrant talking with a senseless Stock or a Stone as this, and as gross a piece
of See Chapter 1. Conclus. 10.
Idolatry, though approved of by the Authority of the Roman Church. But I
intended to break off before.

CHAP. X.
Several important Consectaries from this clear Discovery of the gross
Idolatry of the Church of Rome; with an hearty and vehement Exhortation to all
men, that have any serious regard to their Salvation, to beware how they be
drawn into the Communion of that Church.

1. THus have we abundantly demonstrated that the Church of Rome stands guilty
of gross Idolatry according to the Concessions and Definitions of their own
Council of Trent; that is to say, though we charge them with no more then with
what the Council it self does own, touching the Adoration of the Host, the
Invocation of Saints, and the Worshipping of Images. But we must not forget, in
the mean time, that the Crime grows still more course and palpable looking upon
the particular forms of their Invocation of the Saints, and the Circumstances
of their worshipping their Images, and yet ratified by the Popes, and
corroborated by the uncontrolled practice of their whole Church: Which
therefore must in all reason be the Interpreter of the mind of the Council. So
that there is no evasion left for them, but that they are guilty of as gross
and palpable Idolatry as ever was committed by the sons of men, no less gross
then Roman Paganism it self.

2. From whence, in the next place, it necessarily follows, that they are the
most barbarous Murderers of the Servants of God that ever appeared on the face
of the Earth. For indeed if they had had Truth on their side so far, as that
the things they required at the hands of the Dissenters had been lawful,
(though not at all necessary;) yet considering the express voice of Scripture,
which must be so exceeding effectual to raise conscientious Scruples, and
indeed to fix a man in the contrary Opinions, besides the irrefragable Votes of
common Sense and Reason, and the Principles of all Arts and Sciences that can
pretend any usefulness to Religion in any of its Theoreticall Disquisitions; I
say, when it is so easy from hence, if not necessary, for some men to be born
into a contrary conscientious Persuasion, it had undoubtedly even in this case
been notorious Murder in the Pontifician Party, to have killed men for
dissenting from the Doctrine and Practice of their Church.

But now the Murderers themselves being in so palpable an Error, and
requiring of the Dissenters to profess Blasphemies and commit gross Idolatries
with them, which is openly to rebel against God under pretense of obeying Holy
Church, as they love to be called, they murdering so many hundred thousands of
them for this Fidelity to their Maker, and their indispensable Obedience to the
Lord Jesus Christ, this is Murder of a double dye, and not to be paralleled by
all the barbarous Persecutions under the red Dragon, the Pagan Emperors
themselves.

3. From which two main Considerations it follows in the third place, that,
considering the fit and easy congruity of the names of the Seven Churches and
of the Events of the seven Intervalls (denoted by them) to the Prefigurations
in the Visions, there can be no doubt but that by Balaam mentioned in the
Epistle to the Church in Pergamus, wherein Antipas, that is, the Opposers of
the Pope, are murdered, the Papal Hierarchy is understood; as it is also by
the Prophetess Jezebel in the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, who was also
a Murtheresse of the Prophets of God, and both of them expressly Patrons of
Idolatry, as is manifest in the very Text.

Nor is it at all wonderful that Balaam and Jezebel, the one a man, the other
a woman, should signify the same thing. For the false Prophet and the Whore of
Babylon in the following Visions of the Apocalypse signify both one and the
same thing, viz. The Hierarchy of Rome, from the Pope to the rest of their
Ecclesiastic Body.

4. And what I have said of the Vision of those Seven Churches, the same I say
of all those Expositions of the thirteenth and seventeenth Chapters of the
Apocalypse, and that of the little Horn in Daniel; namely, The words of the
Prophecies being so naturally applicable to the Affairs of that Church, besides
the demonstration of Synchronism, that the weight of those two foregoing
Conclusions being added thereto, there cannot be the least doubt or scruple
left, but that those Interpretations are true; and that the Church of Rome is
that Body of Antichrist, that Mother of Fornications and Abominations of the
Earth, that is, of multifarious Modes of gross Idolatries, or that scarlet
Whore on the seven Hills, that is also drunk with the blood of the Saints, and
with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

5. And that therefore, in the fourth place, in the Church of Rome the Poison
exceeding the Antidote, there can be no reason that Salvation should be hoped
for there. It is a sad and lamentable Truth, but being a Truth, and of such
huge moment, it is by no means to be concealed. What God may do in his more
hidden ways of Providence, he alone knows. And therefore we cannot say that
every Idolatrous Heathen must perish eternally: But to speak no farther then we
have commission, and according to the easy tenor of the Holy Scriptures, we
must pronounce, though with great sadness of heart, that we have no warrant
therefrom to think or declare any of the Popish Religion, so long as they
continue so, to be in the state of Salvation; and especially, since that voice
of the Angel which sounded in the Intervall of Thyatira, saying expressly, Come
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of
her plagues; and the Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, Be not
deceived, neither Chap. 6. 9.
Fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom
of God. And those of the Church of Rome are bound to continue Idolaters as long
as they live, or else to renounce their Church; and therefore they are bound to
be damned by adhering to the Roman Church, unless they could live in it for
ever. For he that dies in such a capital sin as Idolatry without Repentance,
nay, in a blind, obstinate perseverance in it, how can he escape eternal
Damnation?

6. But though we had kept our selves to the Apocalypse, the thing is clear in
that Book alone, chapter 22. ver. 14, 15. where all Idolaters are expressly excluded
from the Tree of Life: Blessed are they that do his Commandments, (and one of
them, though expunged by Rome, is, Thou shall not worship any graven Image,)
that they may have right to the tree of life, etc. For without are dogs, and
Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves
and makes a Lie. All these are excluded the Heavenly Jerusalem, and from
eating the Tree of Life. Of which who eats not is most assuredly detained in
eternal death. As it is written in the foregoing Chapter, that Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Apoc. 21. 8.
Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone; which is the second Death. What sentence
can be more express then this?

7. But besides this Divine sentence against them, they are also (...), they
are self-condemned, or at least give sentence against themselves, while they so
freely pronounce that no Idolaters are to be saved; which they frequently do,
to save their own Church from the reproach of Idolatry. For, because some
Protestants have declared for the Possibility of Salvation in the Romish
Church, they farther improve the favor to the quitting themselves of the
guilt, from others hopeful presages that by an hearty implicit Repentance of
all their sins (even of those that are the proper Crimes of that Church,) they
may, through God's mercy in Christ, be delivered from the punishment.

This piece of Charity in some of our Party they turn to the fencing off all
imputation of Idolatry from themselves, arguing thus; That no Idolaters can be
saved: But those in the Romish Church may be saved, according to those
Protestants opinion: Therefore those in the Romish Church are no Idolaters.

But most assuredly while they thus abuse the Charity of some, even by their
own Proposition they must bring the sentence of Condemnation from all the rest
upon their own heads, as they have herein given it against themselves, in
saying that all Idolaters are damned, or that no Idolater can be saved. For it
is demonstrated as clear as the Noon-light, in this present Discourse, that the
Church of Rome are Idolaters.

8. And in that of those of our Church that say they may be saved upon a
sincere and hearty implicit Repentance of all their sins, (wherein they include
the Idolatries and all other Miscarriages which they know not themselves guilty
of, by reason of the blind Mis-instructions of their Church,) no more is given
them by this then thus, viz. That they are saved by disowning of and
dismembring themselves from the Roman Church, as much as it is in their power
so to do, and by bitterly repenting them that they were ever of that Church as
such, and by being so minded, that if they did know what a corrupt Church it
is, they would forthwith separate from it. So that in effect those of the Roman
Church that some of ours conceit may be saved, are no otherwise saved, if at
all, then by an implicit renouncing Communion with it, which in Foro Divino
must go for an actual and formal Separation from it.

In which Position if there were any Truth, it will reach the honest-minded
Pagans as well; but it can shelter neither, unless in such Circumstances, that
they had not the opportunity to learn the Truth, which since the Reformation,
and especially this last Age, by the mercy of God, is abundantly revealed to
the world. So that all men, especially those that live in Protestant Nations or
Kingdoms, are without all excuse; and therefore become obnoxious to God's
eternal wrath and Damnation, if they relinquish not that false Prophetess
Jezebel, as she is called in the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, who by her
corrupt Doctrines deceives the people, and inveigles them into gross Idolatrous
Practices.

9. Thus little is conceded by those of our Reformed Churches that speak most
favorably of those in the Church of Rome. And yet this little must be
retracted, unless we can make it out, that any of that Church are capable of
sincere and unfeigned Repentance while they are of it. For to repent as a
Thief, because he is afraid to be hanged, is not that saving Repentance. But to
repent as a true Christian none can do, unless he has the Spirit of God, and
be in the state of Regeneration.

For true Repentance arises out of the detestation of the ugliness of Sin it
self, and out of the love to the pulchritude and amiablenesse of the Divine
Life and of true Virtue, which none can be touched with but those that are
Regenerate or born of God. Now those holy and Divine Sentiments of the new
Birth are so contrary to the Frauds and Impostures, to the gross Idolatries
and bloody Murders of the Church of Rome, which they from time to time have
perpetrated upon the dear Servants of Christ, that it is impossible for any one
that has this holy sense, but that he should incontinently fly from that Church
with as much horror and affrightment as any Countryman would from some evil
Spectre, or at the approach of the Devil.

10. He that is born of God sins not, says S. John: How then can they 1
John 5. 18.
be so born whose very Religion is a Trade of sin, and that of the highest
nature, they ever and anon exercising gross acts of Idolatry? besides that
they are consenting (by giving up their belief and suffrage to the murtherous
Conclusions of that Church) to all the barbarous and bloody Persecutions of the
Saints that either have happened or may happen in their own times, or ever
shall happen, by that Church; they become, I say, guilty thereof by adjoining
themselves to this bloodthirsty Body of men, with whom the Murder of those
that will not commit Idolatry with them, and so rebel against God, is become
an holy Papal Law and Statute.

And therefore, I say, how can any man conceive that those men are born of God
who are thus deeply defiled with Murtherous and Idolatrous Impurities, but
rather that they are in a mere blind carnal condition, and incapable, while
they are thus, of any true and sincere Repentance, and consequently of
repenting of their daily Idolatries which they commit, and ordinarily (to make
all sure) in ipso articulo mortis, and therefore are out of all capacity of
Salvation while they are members of that Church? As plainly appears both by
this present Reason fetched from the nature of Regeneration, as also from the
judgment of the Romanists themselves touching the state of Idolaters after
this life, and chiefly from the express sentence of the Spirit of God in
Scripture, as I intimated before.

11. And therefore, in the fifth and last place, it is exceeding manifest how
stupid and regardless those Souls are of their own Salvation, that continue in
the Communion of the Church of Rome; and how desperately wild and extravagant
they are who, never having been of it, but having had the advantage of better
Principles, yet can find in their hearts to be reconciled to it. This must be
a sign of some great defect in Judgment, or else in their Sincerity, that they
ever can be allured to a Religion that is so far removed from God and Heaven.

12. But this Church, as the woman in the Proverbs, is, I must confess, both
very fair of speech and subtle of heart, and knows how to tamper with the
simple ones right skilfully. She knows how to overcome all their carnal senses
by her luxurious Enticements. She has decked her bed with coverings of Prove. 7.
16, 17.
Tapestry, with carved works, with fine linens of Egypt. She has perfumed her
bed with Myrrh, Aloes and Cinnamon. She entertains her Paramours with the most
delicious strains of Music, and chants out the most sweet and pleasing Rhymes,
to lull them secure in her lap: Such as those Idolatrous forms of the
Invocation of the Virgin Marie, and of other Saints, which I have produced, of
which she has a numerous store. Unto which I conceive the Prophet Isay to
allude in that passage touching the City of Tire, representing there mystically
the relapsing Church of Rome: Take Isa. 23. 16.
an harp, go about the City, thou harlot that have been forgotten, make sweet
Melody, sing many Songs, that thou may be remembered. See Synopsis Prophetica,
Book 2. chapter 16.

13. She gilds her self over also with the goodly and specious Titles of Unity,
Antiquity, Universality, the power of working Miracles, of Sanctity likewise,
and of Infallibility; and boasts highly of her self, that she has the power of
the Keys, and can give safe conduct to Heaven by Sacerdotal Absolution; and, if
need be, out of the Treasury of the Merits of Holy men of their Church, which
she has the keeping and disposing of, can add Oil to the Lamps of the
unprovided Virgins, and so piece out their Deficiency in the works of
Righteousness. Such fair speeches and fine glozing words she has to befool the
judgments of the simple.

14. But as to the first, it is plain that that Unity that is by Force is no
fruit of the Spirit, and therefore no Sign of the true Church: nor that which
is from free Agreement, if it be not to good Ends. For Solomon describes an
Agreement of Thieves or Robbers, heartening one another to spoil and bloodshed,
and to enter so strict a society as to have but Prove. 1. 14.
one purse. And therefore for a company of men, under the pretense of
Spirituality, to agree in the inventing or upholding such Doctrines or Fictions
as are most serviceable for a worldly design, and for the more easily riding
and abusing the credulous and carnal-minded, thereby to be masters of their
Persons and Wealth, this is no holy Unity, but an horrid and unrighteous
Conspiracy against the deluded sons of Adam.

15. And for Antiquity and Universality, they are both plainly on the
Protestants side, who make no Fundamentals of Faith but such as are manifestly
contained in the Scripture; which is much more ancient, and more universally
received, then any of those things upon whose account we separate from the
Church of Rome, which are but the fruits of that Apostasy which, Synops.
Prophet. lib. 2. c. 5.
after four Hundred years or thereabout, the Church was to fall into according
to Divine Prediction. So that we are as ancient and universal as the Apostolic
Church it self, nor do we desire to appear to be the members of any Church that
is not Apostolical.

And for their boast of Miracles, which are produced to ratify their crafty
Figments, they are but Fictions themselves framed by their Priests, or
Delusions of the Devil, according as is foretold concerning the coming of
Antichrist, that Man of Sin, (which the Pope and his Clergy most assuredly is,)
namely, that his coming is after the working of Satan, with all 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
power, and signs, and lying wonders. So that they glory in their own shame,
and boast themselves in the known Character of Antichrist, and would prove
themselves to be Holy Church by pretending to the Privileges of that Man of
Sin, and by appealing to the palpable signs of the Assistence of the Devil. For
from thence are all Miracles that are produced in favor of Practices that are
plainly repugnant to the Doctrines of the Holy Scriptures.

16. But now, as for their Sanctity, what an holy Church they are, any one may
judge upon the reading of the Lives of their Popes and History of their
Cardinals, and other Religious Orders of that Church of Rome; how rankly all
things smell of Fraud and Imposture, of Pride and Covetousness, of Ostentation
and Hypocrisy; what monstrous examples of Sensuality their Holinesses
themselves have ordinarily been, of Fornication and Adultery, of Incest and
Sodomie; to say nothing of Simonie, and that infernal sin of Necromancy. But
for Murder and Idolatry, those horrid Crimes are not only made familiar to
them, but have passed into a Law with them, and are interwoven into the very
Essence of their Religion. Judge then how holy that Church must be, whose
Religion is the establishment of Idolatry and Murder. Of the latter of which
Crimes the holy Inquisition is an Instance with a witness. And yet that Den of
Murderers, whose Office it is to kill men for not committing Idolatry, with
the Church of Rome must needs bear the title of Holy.

17. And for their pretense of Infallibility, it is expressly predicted in the
Apocalypse of S. John, as well as their laying claim to Miracles. For as the
two-horned Beast is said to do great Apoc. 13. 13.
Wonders, and to bring fire from Heaven, which two-horned Beast is the Pope and
his Clergy; so Jezebel, which is the same Hierarchy, is called the Woman that
gives to her self the title of a Prophetess, whose Oracles Apoc. 2. 20.
you know must be infallible. For she does not mean that she is a false
Prophetess, though indeed and in truth she is so. And the Pope with his Clergy
is judged to be so by the Spirit of God, in that he is called the false
Prophet, as well as the two-horned Apoc. 16. 13.
Beast, in those Visions of S. John.

And while he pretends himself to be a Prophet, even without Divine Revelation,
one may plainly demonstrate that he is a false one from this one notorious.
Instance of Transubstantiation; which is a Doctrine repugnant to common Sense
and Reason, and all the Faculties of the Mind of man, and bears a contradiction
to the most plain and indubitable Principles of all Arts and Sciences, as I
have proved above. So that we may be more sure that this is false, then that we
feel our own bodies, or can tell our toes and fingers on our hands and feet.
Judge then therefore whether is more likely, that the Church of Rome should be
infallible, or Transubstantiation a mere Figment, especially it being so
serviceable for their worldly Advantages, and they being taken tardy in so many
Impostures and Deceits. So that Infallibility is a mere Boast.

18. And now for their Sacerdotal Absolution, that they can so safely dismiss
men to Heaven or secure them from Hell thereby, this power of their Priest is
such another vain Boast as that of Transubstantiation. Except a man be born
again, he cannot enter into John 3. 3.
the kingdom of God. And the form of words upon one's Deathbed can no more
regenerate any one, then their Quinqueverbiall Charm can transubstantiate the
Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ. Where the form of Absolution
has any effect, it must be on such persons as are already really regenerate and
unfeignedly and sincerely penitent: which I have shown to be incompetible to
any one so long and so far forth as he adheres to the Roman Church. So that in
this case one Ethiopian does but wash another, which is labor spent in vain.

There must be a change of Nature, or no external Ceremony nor words can do
any thing. For the form of Absolution is not a Charm, as I said, to change the
nature of things, but only a Ticket to pass Guards and Scouts, and to procure
safe Conduct to the Heavenly Regions. But if by Regeneration and due Repentance
one has not contracted an alliance and affinity with the Saints and Angels, but
is really still involved in the impure and Hellish nature, the grim Officers of
that dark Kingdom will most certainly challenge their own, and they will be
sure to carry that Soul captive into a suitable place, let the flattering Priest
have dismissed her hence with the fairest and most hopeful circumstances he
could. This is the most hideous, the most dangerous and the most perfidious
Cheat of that Church of Rome that ever she could light on for the damning of
poor credulous Souls, that thus superstitiously depend on the vain breath of
their Priest for the security of their Salvation.

19. And yet they are not content with this Device alone to lull men secure in
wickedness, but besides their pretense of singing them out of Purgatory by
mercenary Masses, and pecuniarie Redemptions by Pardons and Indulgences, and I
know not what Trumperies, they allure men to come into their Church as having
that great Store and Treasury of the Merits of Holy men and women, their works
of Supererogation, which they pretend to have the keeping and disposing of. So
that a poor Soul that is bankrupt of her self, and has no stock of Good works
of her own, may sufficiently be furnished for love or money by the Merchants of
this Storehouse. Which, besides that it is a blasphemous Derogation to the
Merits of Christ, is the grossest Falsehood that ever was uttered.

For these Holy men, as they are called, and Virgins, were, God wot, themselves
most miserable Sinners, and died in most horrid Idolatries, as dying in the
Practices of that Church; and he that comes to that Church does necessarily
become a gross Idolater himself; besides that he sets to his seal and makes
himself accessory to all that innocent blood, the blood of those many hundred
thousands of Martyrs for the Protestant Truth, which that Woman of blood that
sits on the Seven Hills has with the most execrable Circumstances imaginable so
frequently murdered. So that a Soul otherwise passable of her self would be
necessarily drowned in this one foul Deluge of Guilt: so far is she from having
any relief or advantage by reconciling her self to the Church of Rome.

20. Wherefore who-ever thou art that have any sense or solicitude for thy
future state and Salvation, believe not this Woman of subtle lips and a
deceitful heart, and give no credit to her Fictions and high Pretensions; but
the more she goes about to magnify her self, do thou humble her the more, by
showing her her ugly hue in the glass of the Holy Scriptures.

If she boast that she is that holy Jerusalem, a City at Unity within it Psalm.
122. 3.
self, whenas the rest of the World are so full of Sects and Factions; tell her
that she is that carnal Jerusalem, wherein Christ in his true Members has been
so barbarously persecuted and murdered, and that the Stones of her buildings
are no living stones, but held together by a mere iron violence, and the Cement
of her walls tempered with the large effusion of innocent blood; forasmuch as
she is that two-horned Beast that gave life Apoc. 13.
to the Image of the Beast, and caused him to decree that as many as would not
obey his Idolatrous Edicts should be slain. This is the power of your Unity,
which is not from the Spirit of God, but from the spirit of the Devil, who was
a Murderer from the beginning. But the Division of us Protestants is both a
sign of our sincere search after the Truth, and a more strong Testimony against
you of Rome, in that we being so divided amongst our selves, yet we so
unanimously give sentence against you: your Miscarriages and Crimes being so
exceeding gross, that no free eye but must needs discern them.

21. If she vaunts of her Antiquity; give her enough of it, and tell her she
derives her pedigree from that great Dragon, the old Serpent, that Apoc. 12. 9.
is called the Devil and Satan, that Murderer of mankind. Ye are of John 8. 44
your father the Devil, says our Savior, and the works of your father will ye
do. We grant that the Visage and Lineage of your Church reaches even beyond
the times of the Apostles, the two-horned Beast reviving the Image of the Pagan
Beast, the great red Dragon, by bringing up again his old bloody Persecutions
and Idolatries. It suffices us, that our Church began with the Apostles.

If she glories in her Universality, and in her large Territories; tell her,
she is that GREAT City which spiritually Apoc. 11.
is called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was crucified: And that she is
Babylon the GREAT, the mother of Fornications and the Abominations of the Earth.

If she boast of the power of the Keys, and of Sacerdotal Absolution; tell her
that he that is holy, he that is Apoc. 3.
true, he that has the Key of David, he that opens and no man shuts, and
shuts and no man opens, that is to say, our Lord Jesus Christ, will never
part with these Keys to his inveterate Enemy, that notorious Man of Sin, or
Antichrist.

If she spread before thee her goodly wares of mercenary Masses, of Pardons and
Indulgences, of the mutuatitious Good works of their pretended Holy men and
women; or the Wealth and external Glories of their Church, and varieties of
rich Preferments and Dignities; say unto her; that she is that City of Trade of
whom it is written, that no man buieth A^^c. 18.
her merchandise any more; and again, Alas, alas! that great City that was
clothed in fine linen and purple and scarlet, and decked with gold and
precious stones and pearls: For in one hour so great riches are come to naught.
For her Merchants were the great men of the Earth, and by her Sorceries were
all Nations deceived. And in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth.

22. If she would amaze thee with the stories of the wonderful Miracles done
by her; tell her that she is that two-horned Beast that does great wonders,
Apoc. 13. 13, 14.
and that deceives them that dwell on the Earth by means of those Miracles
which he had power to do in the sight of the ten-horn'd Beast; or that false
Prophet working Miracles, and deceiving Apoc. 19. 20.
them that receive the mark of the Beast, and worship his Image, who together
with the Beast is to be taken, and cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone; or lastly, that Man of Sin and Son of perdition, whose coming is
after the working 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders.

If she would inveagle thee with her pretenses of Infallibility; tell her that
she is that Woman Jezebel, that Apoc. ^. 20.
calls her self a Prophetess; or the Prophet Balaam, that ensnared the Apoc.
2. 14.
Israelites in Idolatry; and that very false Prophet that together with the
Apoc. 19. 20.
Beast is to be cast alive into the lake of burning brimstone.

23. And lastly, if she would gull thee with that specious and muchaffected
Title of Holy Church; tell her that the Spirit of Truth in the Divine Oracles,
let her commend her self as much as she pleases, gives no such Character of
her, but quite contrary, declaring the Sea of Rome to be the Apoc. 2. 13.
Seat of Satan, and their Church Apoc. 3. 9.
his Synagogue; the Pope and his Clergy to be Apoc. 2. 13, 14.
Balaam the son of Bozor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, and who was
the Murderer of Christ's faithful Martyr Antipas; to be that Apoc. 2. 20.
Woman Jezebel who calls her self a Prophetess, but was indeed a Sorceresse,
and a murderer of the true Prophets of the Lord; to be also that Apoc. 19. 20.
false Prophet, that is to be taken alive, and cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone; to be that Apoc. 11. 8.
great City that spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was
crucified; to be Apoc. 13. 11.
the Beast that has the horns of a Lamb, but the voice of the Dragon, decreeing
Idolatries and cruel Persecutions against God's people; to be that Apoc. 17.
Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth; the
Woman on the seven Hills, that is drunk with the blood of the Saints and with
the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and, lastly, to be that 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Man of Sin, that notorious Antichrist, that opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God or is worshipped, whose coming is with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they receive
not the love of the truth that they may be saved. For which cause God sends
them strong delusion, that they believe a lie. That they all might be damned
that believe not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness. As well
(...), as (...), as well all they that love the Romish Lies and Impostures, as
all they that invent them, are here plainly declared in the state of Damnation.

With this Nosegay of Rue and Wormwood antidote thy self against the Idolatrous
infection of that strange Woman's breath, whose lips yet drop as an honeycomb,
and her mouth is Prove. 5. 3.
more smooth then oil. And be assured that that cannot be the true Holy Church
wherein Salvation is to be expected, which the Spirit of God has marked with
such unholy and hellish Characters, let her boast of her own Holiness as much
as she will.

24. And if she return this Answer to thee, That this is not to argue, but to
rail in phrases of Scripture; do thou make this short Reply, That whiles she
accuses thee of railing against sinful and obnoxious men, she must take heed
that she be not found guilty of blaspheming the holy Spirit of God. I confess
these Prophetical Passages applied to such persons as to whom they do not
belong were an high and rude strain of Railing indeed, and quite out of the
road of Christianity and common Humanity: But to call them Railings when they
are applied to that very Party to whom they are really meant by that Spirit
that dictated them, is indeed to pretend to a sense of Civility toward men,
but in the mean time to become a downright Blasphemer against the Holy Ghost
that dictated these Oracles.

And that they are not mis-apply'd, any impartial man of but an ordinary
patience and comprehension of wit may have all assurance desirable from that
demonstration of the truth comprised in the eight last Chapters of the first
Book of Synopsis Prophetica; to say nothing of the present Exposition of the
Seven Epistles to the Seven Churches in Asia.

25. Wherefore, O serious Soul, whoever thou art, be not complemented out of
the Truth and an earnest pursuance of thine own Salvation from a vain sense of
the Applauses or Reproaches of men, or from any consideration what they may
think of thee for attesting or standing to such Verities as are so unwelcome to
many ears, but of such huge importance to all to hear. For no less a Game is
at stake in our choice of what Church we adhere to, that of Rome or the
Reformed, then the Possession of Heaven and eternal Life.

Wherefore stand stoutly upon thy guard, and whenever thou art accosted by
the fair words and sugared speeches of that cunning Woman, (who will make
semblance of great solicitude for thy future Happiness, most passionately
inviting thee to return into the bosom of Holy Church,) be sure to remember
what an Holy Church she is according to Divine description; and that if thou
assentest to her smooth Persuasions and crafty Importunities, thou do ipso
facto (pardon the vehemence of expression) adventure thy self into the jaws of
Hell, and cast thy self into Matthew. 23. 15.
the arms of the Devil.

God of his mercy give us all Grace to consider what has been spoken, that we
may evermore escape these Snares of Death.

Amen.
THE END.

