THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL, So far forth as it is demonstrable from the
Knowledge of NATURE and the Light of REASON.

By HENRY MORE Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge.

(...). Pythag. Quid jucundius quam scire quid simus, quid fuerimus, quid
erimus; atque cum his etiam divina atque suprema illa post obitum Mundique
vicissitudines? Cardanus. LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher, for William Morden
Bookseller in Cambridge. 1659.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD Lord Viscount CONWAY and KILULTA.
My Lord,
THough I be not ignorant of your Lordships aversness from all addresses of
this kind, (whether it be that your Lordship has taken notice of that usual
vanity of those that dedicate Books, in endeavoring to oblige their Patrons by
over-lavish praises, such as much exceed the worth of the party they thus
unmeasurably commend; or whether it be from a natural modesty that cannot bear,
no not so much as a just representation of your own virtues and abilities; or
lastly, from a most true observation, that there are very few Treatises writ
which are any thing more then mere Transcriptions or Collections out of other
Authors, whose Writings have already been consecrated to the Name and Memory of
some other worthy Persons long since deceased; so that they do but after a
manner rob the dead, to furnish themselves with Presents to offer to the
living) Yet notwithstanding this averseness of your Lordship, or whatever
grounds there may be surmised thereof, I could not abstain from making this
present Dedication. Not so much I confess to gratify your Lordship (though it
be none of the best Complements) as for mine own satisfaction and content. For
I do not take so great pleasure in any thing as in the sense and conscience of
the fitness and sutableness of mine own actions; amongst which I can find none
more exactly just and befitting then this; there being many considerations that
give you a peculiar right and title to the Patronage of this present Discourse.
For besides your Lordships skill in Philosophy and real sense of Piety, two
such endowments as are rarely to be found together (especially in Persons of
high quality) and yet without which matters of this nature can neither be read
with any relish nor easily understood; there are also other things still more
peculiar, and which naturally do direct and determine me to the choice I have
made. For whether I consider the many civilities from your self and nearest
Relations, especially from your noble and virtuous Lady, whom I can never think
on but with admiration, nor mention without the highest respect: or whether I
recollect with my self the first occasion of busying my thoughts upon this
Subject, which was then when I had the honor and pleasure of reading
Descartes his Passions with your Lordship in the Garden of Luxenburg to pass
away the time, (In which Treatise though there be nothing but what is handsome
and witty, yet all did not seem so perfectly solid and satisfactory to me but
that I was forced in some principal things to seek satisfaction from my self:)
or lastly, call to mind that pleasant retirement I enjoyed at Ragley during my
abode with your Lordship; my civil treatment there, from that perfect and
unexceptionable pattern of a truly Noble and Christian Matron, the Right
Honorable your Mother; the solemness of the Place, those shady Walks, those
Hills and Woods, wherein often having lost the sight of the rest of the World,
and the World of me, I found out in that hidden solitude the choicest Theories
in the following Discourse: I say, whether I considered all these
circumstances, or any of them, I could not but judge them more then enough to
determine my choice to so worthy a Patron.

Nor could the abovementioned surmises beat me from my design, as not at all
reaching the present case. For as for my part, I am so great a Lover of the
Truth, and so small an Admirer of vulgar Eloquence, that neither the presage of
any gross Advantage could ever make me stoop so low as to expose my self to the
vile infamy or suspicion of turning Flatterer, nor yet the tickling sense of
applause and vainglory, to affect the puffy name and title of an Orator. So
that your Lordp might be secure as touching the first surmise.

And verily for the second, though I confess I might not be at all averse from
making a just and true representation of your Lordships Virtues and
Accomplishments, yet considering the greatness of them, and the meanness of
mine own Rhetoric, I found it not so much as within my power, if I would, to
entrench upon your Lordships modesty; and therefore I must leave it to some
more able Pen to do you and the World that right whether you will or no.

And lastly, for that scruple concerning the theft or petty sacrilege of
several Plagiaries, who, as it were, rob the Monuments of the dead to adorn the
living; it is the only thing that I can without vanity profess, that what I
offer to your Lp is properly my own, that is to say, that the invention,
application and management of the Reasons and Arguments comprised in this Book,
whether for confutation or confirmation, is the genuine result of my own
anxious and thoughtful mind, no old stuff purloined or borrowed from other
Writers. What truth and solidity there is in my Principles and Reasonings were
too great a piece of arrogance for me to predetermine. This must be left to the
judgments of such free and discerning spirits as your Lordship: With whom if
what I have writ may find acceptance or a favorable censure, it will be the
greater obligation and encouragement to,

My Lord, Your Honors humbly devoted servant Henry More.

The Contents of the Preface.
1. The Title of the Discourse how it is to be understood. 2. The Authors
submission of his whole Treatise to the infallible Rule of Sacred Writ. 3. A
plain and compendious Demonstration that Matter consists of parts
indiscerpible. 4. An answer to an Objection touching his Demonstration against
the Suns superintendency over the affairs of the Earth. 5. A confirmation of
Mr. Hobbs his Opinion, that Perception is really one with Corporeal Motion and
Reaction, if there be nothing but Matter in the World. 6. An Apology for the
Vehicles of Demons and Souls separate. 7. As also for his so punctually
describing the state of the other life, and so curiously defining the nature of
a particular Spirit. 8. That his Elysiums he describes are not at all Sensual,
but Divine. 9. That he has not made the state of the wicked too easy for them
in the other world. 10. That it is not one Universal Soul that hears, sees and
reasons in every man, demonstrated from the Acts of Memory. 11. Of the Spirit
of Nature; that it is no obscure Principle, nor unseasonably introduced. 12.
That he has absolutely demonstrated the Existence thereof. 13. That the
admission of that Principle need be no hinderance to the progress of Mechanic
Philosophy. 14. The great pleasure of that study to pious and rational persons.
15. Of what concernment it would be if Descartes were generally read in all
the Universities of Christendom. 16. An excuse of the prolixity of his Preface
from his earnest desire of gratifying the public, without the least offense to
any rational or ingenuous Spirit.

THat the present Treatise may pass more freely and smoothly through the hands
of men, without any offense or scruple to the good and pious, or any real
exception or probable cavil from those whose Pretensions are greater to Reason
then Religion, I shall endeavor in this Preface to prevent them, by bringing
here into view, and more fully explaining and clearing whatever I conceive
obnoxious to their mistakes and obloquies.

1. And indeed I cannot be well assured but that the very Title of my Discourse
may seem liable to both their dislikes. To the dislike of the one, as being
confident of the contrary conclusion, and therefore secure That that cannot be
demonstrated to be true, which they have long since judged not worthy to be
reckoned in the rank of things probable; it may be not so much as of things
possible. To the dislike of the other, as being already persuaded of the truth
of our conclusion upon other and better grounds: which would not be better, if
the natural light of Reason could afford Demonstration in this matter. And
therefore they may happily pretend, that so ambitious a Title seems to justle
with the high Prerogative of Christianity, which has brought life and
immortality to light.

But of the former I demand, by what faculty they are made so secure of their
being wholly mortal. For unless they will ridiculously conceit themselves
inspired, when as they almost as little believe there is either God or Spirit,
as that they have in them an Immortal Soul, they must either pretend to the
experience of Sense, or the clearness of Reason. The former whereof is
impossible; because these bold denyers of the Immortality of the Soul have not
yet experienced whether we subsist after Death or no. But if they would have us
believe they have thus concluded upon rational grounds; I dare appeal unto
them, if they can produce any stronger reasons for their Cause then what I have
set down (Lib. 3. Cap. 14.) and if I have not fully and fundamentally answered
them. If they will say their confidence proceeds from the weak arguings of the
adverse party; I answer, it is weakly done of them, (their own Arguments being
as unconcluding as they can fancy their adversaries) to be so secure, that
Truth is on their own part rather then on theirs. But this can touch only such
managements of this Cause as they have seen already and censured. But that is
nothing to me, who could never think I stood safe but upon my own legs.
Wherefore I shall require them only to peruse what I have written, before they
venture to judge thereof; and after they have read, if they will declare that I
have not demonstrated the Cause I have undertook, I think it reasonable and
just, that they punctually show in what part or joint of my Demonstration they
discern so weak a coherence as should embolden them still to dissent from the
Conclusion.

But to the other I answer with more modesty and submission, That the Title of
my Book does not necessarily imply any promise of so full and perfect a
Demonstration, that nothing can be added for the firmer assurance of the Truth;
but only that there may be expected as clear a Proof as Natural Reason will
afford us. From which they should rather infer, that I do acknowledge a
further and a more palpable evidence comprehended in Christian Religion, and
more intelligible and convictive to the generality of the World, who have
neither leisure nor inclination to deal with the spinosities and anxieties of
humane Reason and Philosophy. But I declined the making use of that Argument at
this time; partly because I have a design to speak more fully thereof in my
Treatise Of the Mystery of Christian Religion, if God so permit; and partly
because it was unsuitable to the present Title, which pretends to handle the
matter only within the bounds of natural Light, unassisted and unguided by any
miraculous Revelation.

2. Which will be a pleasant spectacle to such as have a Genius to these kind
of Contemplations, and wholly without danger; they still remembering that it is
the voice of Reason and Nature (which being too subject to corruption may very
well be defectuous or erroneous in some things) and therefore never trusting
their dictates and suggestions, where they clash with the Divine Oracles, they
must needs be safe from all seduction: though, I profess, I do not know any
thing which I assert in this Treatise that does disagree with them. But if any
quicker-sighted then my self do discover any thing not according to that Rule,
it may be an occasion of humble thankfulness to God for that great privilege
of our being born under an higher and exacter light: whereby those that are the
most perfectly exercised therein, are enabled as well to rectify what is
perverse, as to supply what is defectuous in the light of Nature; and they have
my free leave aforehand to do both thoroughly all along the ensuing Discourse.

And this may serve by way of a more general Defense. But that nothing may be
wanting, I shall descend to the making good also of certain particulars, as
many as it is of any consequence further to clear and confirm.

3. In the First Book there occur only these two that I am aware of. The one
concerning the Center of a particular Spirit, whose Idea I have described, and
demonstrated possible. The other concerns my Demonstration of the Impossibility
of the Suns seeing any thing upon Earth, supposing him merely corporeal. In the
making good the former, I have taken the boldness to assert, That Matter
consists of parts indiscerpible, understanding by indiscerpible parts,
particles that have indeed real extension, but so little, that they cannot have
less and be any thing at all, and therefore cannot be actually divided. Which
minute extension, if you will, you may call Essential (as being such that
without that measure of it, the very Being of Matter cannot be conserved) as
the extension of any Matter compounded of these you may, if you please, term
Integral; these parts of this compounded Matter being actually and really
separable one from another. The Assertion, I confess, cannot but seem
paradoxical at first sight, even to the ingenious and judicious. But that there
are such indiscerpible particles into which Matter is divisible, viz. such as
have essential extension, and yet have parts utterly inseparable, I shall
plainly and compendiously here demonstrate (besides what I have said in the
Treatise it self) by this short Syllogism.

That which is actually divisible so far as actual division any way can be
made, is divisible into parts indiscerpible.

But Matter (I mean that Integral or compound Matter) is actually divisible as
far as actual division any way can be made.

It were a folly to go to prove either my Proposition or Assumption, they
being both so clear, that no common notion in Euclide is more clear, into which
all Mathematical Demonstrations are resolved.

It cannot but be confessed therefore, That Matter consists of indiscerpible
particles, and that Physically and really it is not divisible in infinitum,
though the parts that constitute an indiscerpible particle are real, but
divisible only intellectually; it being of the very essence of whatsoever is,
to have parts or extension in some measure or other. For, to take away all
Extension, is to reduce a thing only to a Mathematical point, which is nothing
else but pure Negation or Nonentity; and there being no medium betwixt
extended and not-extended, no more then there is betwixt Entity and Nonentity,
it is plain that if a thing be at all, it must be extended. And therefore there
is an Essential Extension belonging to these indiscerpible particles of Matter;
which was the other property which was to be demonstrated.

I know unruly Fancy will make mad work here, and clamor against the
Conclusion as impossible. For finite Extension (will she say) must needs have
Figure, and Figure extuberancy of parts at such a distance, that we cannot but
conceive them still actually divisible. But we answer, that when Matter is once
actually divided as far as possibly it can, it is a perfect contradiction it
should be divided any further; as it is also that it cannot be divided actually
as far as it can actually be divided. And no stronger Demonstration then this
against them can be brought against us by either Fancy or Reason: and therefore
supposing we were but equal in our reasoning, this is enough to give me the
day, who only contend for the possibility of the thing. For if I bring but
fully as good Demonstration that it is, as the other that it is not, none can
deny me but that the thing is possible on my side.

But to answer the above-recited Argument, though they can never answer ours, I
say, those indiscerpible particles of Matter have no Figure at all: As infinite
Greatness has no Figure, so infinite Littleness has none also. And a Cube
infinitely little in the exactest sense, is as perfect a contradiction as a
Cube infinitely great in the same sense of Infinity: for the angles would be
equal in magnitude to the Hedrae thereof. Besides, wise men are assured of many
things that their Fancy cannot but play tricks with them in; as in the Infinity
of Duration and of Matter, or at least of Space. Of the truth whereof though
they are never so certain, yet if they consider this infinite Matter, Space, or
Duration, as divided, suppose, into three equal parts (all which must needs be
infinite, or else the whole will not be so) the middle part of each will seem
both finite and infinite; for it is bounded at both ends. But every thing has
two handles, as Epictetus notes; and he is a fool that will burn his fingers
with the hot handle, when he may hold safe by the other that is more tractable
and cool.

4. Concerning my Demonstration of the Impossibility of the Suns being a
Spectator of our particular affairs upon Earth, there is only this one
Objection, viz. That though the Sun indeed, by reason of his great distance,
cannot see any particular thing upon Earth, if he kept always in that ordinary
shape in which we should suppose that, if he were devoid of sense, he would
do; yet he having life and perception, he may change some part of his Body (as
we do our Eye in contracting or dilating the pupil thereof) into so
advantageous a Figure, that the Earth may be made to appear to him as big as
he pleases. Though some would be more ready to laugh at, then answer to, so
odd a surmise, which supposes the Sun blinking and peering so curiously into
our affairs, as through a Telescope; yet because it comes in the way of
reasoning, I shall have the patience seriously to return this reply. First,
that this Objection can pretend to no strength at all, unless the body of the
Sun were Organical, as ours is; when as he is nothing but fluid Light: so that
unless he has a spiritual Being in him, to which this Light should be but the
Vehicle, this arbitrarious figuring of his fluid Matter cannot be effected. But
to grant that there is any such incorporeal Substance in the Sun, is to yield
me what I contend for, viz. That there are Immaterial Substances in the World.
But that there is no such Divine Principle in him, whereby he can either see
us, or aim at the producing any apparition on the Earth in reference to any one
of us, by the activity of that Spirit in him, it is apparent from the scum and
spots that lie on him. Which is as great an Argument that there is no such
Divinity in him as some would attribute to him, (such as Pomponatius, Cardan,
Vaninus and others) as the dung of Owls and Sparrows, that is found on the
faces and shoulders of Idols in Temples, are clear evidences that they are but
dead Images, no true Deities. Lastly, though we should suppose he had a
particular sentient and intelligent Spirit in him, yet the consideration of the
vast distance of the Earth from him, and the thickness of her Atmosphere, with
other disadvantages I have already mentioned in my Treatise, makes it
incredible that he should be able to frame his Body into any Figure so
exquisite as will compensate these insuperable difficulties.

5. In my Second Book the first Exception is concerning the 20. Axiom, which,
say they, I have not proved, but only brought in the testimony of Mr. Hobbs
for the support thereof; which therefore only enables me to argue with him
upon his own Principles, wherein others will hold themselves unconcerned. But I
answer, first, that it will concern all his followers as well as himself, so
that it is no contemptible victory to demonstrate against all those so
confident Exploders of Immaterial Substances, that their own acknowledged
Principles will necessarily infer the Existence of them in the World. But in
the next place, it will not be hard to produce undeniable Reasons to evince the
truth of the abovenamed Axiom, viz. That Sense and Perception in Matter,
supposing nothing but Matter in the World, is really the same with Corporeal
Motion and Reaction.

For it is plain in Sensation, there being always external motion from Objects
when our Senses are affected. And that inward Cogitation is thus performed,
appears from the heat that Thinking casts a man into: Wherefore generally all
Cogitation is accompanied with motion corporeal. And if there be nothing but
Body or Matter in the World, Cogitation it self is really the same thing with
Corporeal Motion. Moreover as in Sensation the Corporeal Motion is first, and
Perception follows, so it is necessary that universally in all internal
Cogitations also certain Corporeal Motions immediately precede those
Perceptions, though we did admit that Matter moved it self: For no Sense would
thence arise without resistance of something it his against. Insomuch that the
subtilest Matter unresisted or not impressed upon, would be no more capable of
Cogitation then a Wedge of Gold, or Pig of Lead. And therefore if we will but
confess (what none but mad men will venture to deny) that a Pig of Lead or
Wedge of Gold has not any Thought or Perception at all without some knock or
allision proportionable to their bigness and solidity, the subtilest Matter
must likewise have none without some proportionable impression or resistance.
Whence it is plain that always corporeal Reaction or collision precedes
Perception, and that every Perception is a kind of feeling, which lasts so long
as this resistance or impress of motion lasts, but that ceasing is
extinguished, the matter being then as stupid as in a Pig of Lead. And that
therefore as in general there is always corporeal motion where there is
Cogitation, so the diversification of this motion and collision causes the
diversification of cogitations, and so they run hand in hand perpetually, the
one never being introduced without the fore-leading of the other, nor lasting
longer then the other lasts. But as heat is lost (which implies a
considerable motion or agitation of some very subtle Matter,) so our
Understanding and Imagination decays, and our Senses themselves fail, as not
being able to be moved by the impression of outward Objects, or as not being in
a due degree of liquidity and agility, and therefore in death our bodies become
as senseless as a lump of clay.

All Sensation therefore and Perception is really the same with Motion and
Reaction of Matter, if there be nothing but Matter in the world.

And that every piece of Matter must perceive according as it self is moved,
whether by it self (if it were possible) or by corporeal impress from other
parts, is plain, in that Matter has no subtle rays, or any power or efflux
streaming beyond it self, like that which the Schools call species
intentionales, nor yet any union more mysterious then the mere Juxta-position
of parts.

For hence it is manifest that there can be no communication of any impress
that one part of the Matter receives or is affected with from another at a
distance, but it must be by jogging or crouding the parts interjacent. So that
in every regard corporeal Motion or Reaction, with sufficient tenuity of parts
and due duration, will be the adaequate cause of all perception, if there be
nothing but Matter in the world. This I think may suffice to assure any
indifferent man of the truth of this part of Mr. Hobbs his Assertion, if
himself could make the other part true, That there is nothing existent in
Nature but what is purely corporeal. But out of the former part, which is his
own acknowledged Principle, I have undeniably demonstrated that there is.

6. The other Exception is against that Opinion I seem to embrace touching the
Vehicles of Demons and Souls separate, as having herein offended against the
authority of the Schools. And I profess this is all the reason I can imagine
that they can have against my Assertion. But they may, if they please, remember
that the Schools trespass against a more ancient authority then themselves,
that is to say, the Pythagoreans, Platonists, Jewish Doctors, and the Fathers
of the Church, who all hold that even the purest Angels have corporeal
Vehicles. But it will be hard for the Schools to allege any ancient Authority
for their Opinion. For Aristotle their great Oracle is utterly silent in this
matter, as not so much as believing the existence of Demons in the world (as
Pomponatius and Vaninus his sworn disciples have to their great contentment
taken notice of.) And therefore being left to their own dry subtilties, they
have made all Intellectual Beings that are not grossly terrestrial, as Man is,
purely immaterial. Whereby they make a very hideous Chasme or gaping breach in
the order of things, such as no moderate judgment will ever allow of, and have
become very obnoxious to be foiled by Atheistical wits, who are forward and
skilful enough to draw forth the absurd consequences that lie hid in false
suppositions, as Vaninus does in this. For he does not foolishly collect from
the supposed pure Immateriality of Demons, that they have no knowledge of
particular things upon Earth; such purely Incorporeal Essences being incapable
of impression from Corporeal Objects, and therefore have not the Species of any
particular thing that is corporeal in their mind. Whence he infers that all
Apparitions, Prophecies, Prodigies, and whatsoever miraculous is recorded in
ancient History, is not to be attributed to these, but to the influence of the
Stars, and so concludes that there are indeed no such things as Demons in the
Universe.

By which kind of reasoning also it is easy for the Psychopannychites to
support their opinion of the Sleep of the Soul. For the Soul being utterly
rescinded from all that is corporeal, and having no vital union therewith at
all, they will be very prone to infer, that it is impossible she should know
any thing ad extra, if she can so much as dream. For even that power also may
seem incompetible to her in such a state, she having such an essential aptitude
for vital union with Matter. Of so great consequence is it sometimes to desert
the opinion of the Schools, when something more rational and more safe and
useful offers it self unto us.

7. These are the main Objections my first and second Book seem liable unto. My
last I cannot but suspect to be more obnoxious. But the most common Exception I
foresee that will be against it, is, That I have taken upon me to describe the
state of the other World so punctually and particularly, as if I had been
lately in it. For over-exquisiteness may seem to smell of art and fraud. And as
there is a diffidency many times in us* when we hear something that is
extremely suitable to our desire, being then most ready to think it too good to
be true; so also in Notions that seem over-accurately fitted to our
Intellectual faculties, and agree the most naturally therewith, we are prone
many times to suspect them to be too easy to be true; especially in things that
seemed at first to us very obscure and intricate. For which cause also it is
very likely that the notion of a particular Spirit, which I have so accurately
described in my First Book, Cap. 5, 6, 7. may seem the less credible to some,
because it is now made so clearly intelligible, they thinking it utterly
improbable that these things, that have been held always such inextricable
perplexities, should be thus of a sudden made manifest and familiar to any
that has but a competency of Patience and Reason to peruse the Theory.

But for my own part, I shall not assume so much to my self, as peremptorily to
affirm that the Indiscerpibility of a Spirit arises that way that I have set
down, that is to say, that God has made a particular Spirit just in that manner
that I have delineated. For his Wisdom is infinite, and therefore it were an
impious piece of boldness to confine him to one certain way of framing the
nature of a Being, that is, of endowing it with such attributes as are
essential to it, as Indiscerpibility is to the Soul of Man. But only to have
said in general, it is possible there may be a particular Essence of its
immediate nature penetrable and indiscerpible, and not particularly to have
described the manner how it may be so, might have seemed to many more slight
and unsatisfactory, Deceit lurking in Universals, as the Proverb has it. And
therefore for the more fully convincing of the adverse party, I thought fit to
pitch upon a punctual description of some one way, how the Soul of Man or of a
Demon may be conceived necessarily indiscerpible, though dilatable; not being
very sollicitous whether it be just that way or no, but yet well assured that
it is either that way or some better. But this one way shows the thing
possible at large: (As that mean contrivance of an Indian Canoa might prove the
possibility of Navigation.) And that is all that I was to aim at in that place.

So in my description of the state of the other world, I am not very
sollicitous whether things be just so as I have set them down, but because some
men utterly misbelieve the thing, because they can frame no particular conceit
what the Receptions and Entertains of those AErial Inhabitants may be, or how
they pass away their time, with many other intricacies which use to entangle
this Theory; I thought it of main concernment to take away this objection
against the Life to come (viz. That no man can conceive what it is, and
therefore it is not at all, which is the ordinary Exception also against the
Existence of all Incorporeal Substances) by a punctual and rational Description
of this future state. Which I exhibit to the world as an intelligible
Hypothesis, and such as may very well be, even according to the dictates of our
own Faculties, being in the mean time fully assured, that things are either
thus, or after a better or more exact order. But, as I said, to propound some
particular probable way, I thought it of no small service to those who totally
distrust all these things for that reason mainly, as being such as we can make
no rational representation of to the understandings of men.

8. But there are also particular Objections. The first whereof is against our
AErial and Ethereal Elysiums, which forsooth, to make their reproach more
witty, they will parallel with the Mohammedan Paradise. But besides that I do
in the very place where I treat of these things suspend my assent after the
description of them, there is nothing there offered in their description, but,
if it were assented to, might become the most refined spirit in the World. For
there is nothing more certain then that the love of God and our Neighbor is
the greatest happiness that we can arrive unto either in this life or that
which is to come. And whatever things are there described, are either the
Causes, Effects, or Concomitants of that noble and divine Passion. Neither are
the External incitements thereto, which I there mention, rightly to be deemed
Sensual, but Intellectual: For even such is also sensible Beauty, whether it
show it self in Feature, Music, or whatever graceful Deportments and comely
Actions, as Plotinus has well defined. And those things that are not properly
Intellectual, suppose Odours and Sapours, yet such a Spirit may be transfused
into the Vehicles of these AErial Inhabitants thereby, that may more then
ordinarily raise into act their Intellectual Faculties. Which he that observes
how our Thoughts and Inclinations depend immediately on a certain subtle
Matter in our Bodies, will not at all stick to acknowledge to be true. And
therefore whatever our Elysiums seem to the rash and injudicious, they are
really no other thing then pure Paradises of intellectual pleasure, divine Love
and blameless Friendship being the only delight of those places.

9. The next Objection is concerning the state of the Wicked, as if I had made
their condition too easy for them. But this methinks any man might be kept off
from, if he would but consider, that I make the rack of Conscience worse then a
perpetually-repeated death. Which is too too credible to come to pass there,
when as we find what execution Passions will do upon us even in this life;
the Sicilian Tyrants having not found out a more exquisite torture then they.
And as for those Souls that have lost the sense of Conscience, if any can do
so, I have allotted other punishments that are more corporeal, and little
inferior to the fire of that great Hell that is prophesied of, as the portion
of the Devils and the damned at the last Day. By which neither then nor before
could they be tortured (if we appeal to humane Reason, whom alone we appeal to,
as judge, in this Treatise) if they were not vitally united with corporeal
Vehicles.

10. The two last Exceptions are, the one touching the Soul of the World, the
other the Spirit of Nature. The first is against our over-favourable
representation of their Opinion, that make but one Soul in the whole Universe,
induing her with Sense, Reason, and Understanding: which Soul they will have to
act in all Animals, Demons themselves not excepted. In all which, say they, it
is one and the same Universal Soul that Hears, Sees, Reasons, Understands, etc.
This Opinion I think I have confuted Lib. 3. Cap. 16. as sufficiently as any
one Error can be confuted in all Natural Philosophy. And that favorable
representation I have made there of it, Sect. 4. has that in it, whereby,
unless a man be very remiss and mindless, he may easily demonstrate the
falsness of the Supposition. For though we may well enough imagine how, the
Body being unchanged, and this Soul of the Universe exquisitely the same every
where, that though the party change place, and shift into another part of the
Soul of the World, he may retain the same Opinions, Imaginations and
Reasonings, so far forth as they depend not on Memory (this Universal Soul
raising her self into the same Thoughts upon the same Occasions;) yet Memory is
incompetible unto that part which has not had the perception before of what is
remembered. For there is necessarily comprehended in Memory a Sense or
Perception that we have had a Perception or Sense before of the thing which we
conceive our selves to remember.

To be short therefore, and to strike this Opinion dead at one stroke; They
that say there is but one Soul of the World, whose perceptive Power is every
where, they must assert, that what one part thereof perceives, all the rest
perceives; or else that perceptions in Demons, Men and Brutes are confined to
that part of this Soul that is in them, while they perceive this or that. If
the former, they are confutable by Sense and Experience. For though all Animals
lie steeped, as it were, in that subtle Matter which runs through all things,
and is the immediate Instrument of Sense and Perception; yet we are not
conscious of one another thoughts, nor feel one another pains, nor the pains
and pleasures of Brutes, when they are in them at the highest. Nor yet do the
Demons feel one another affections, or necessarily assent to one another
opinions, though their Vehicles be exceeding pervious; else they would be all
Avenroists, as well as those that appeared to Facius Cardanus, supposing any
were. Wherefore we may generally conclude, that if there were such an Universal
Soul, yet the particular perceptions thereof are restrained to this or that
part in which they are made: which is contrary to the Unity of a Soul, as I
have already said in its due place.

But let us grant the thing (for indeed we have demonstrated it to be so, if
there be such an Universal Soul and none but it) then the grand absurdity
comes in, which I was intimating before, to wit, That that part of the Soul of
the world that never perceived a thing, shall notwithstanding remember it, that
is to say, that it shall perceive it has perceived that which it never
perceived: And yet one at Japan may remember a countrieman arrived thither that
he had not seen nor thought of for twenty years before. Nay, which is more to
the purpose, supposing the Earth move, what I write now, the Earth being in the
beginning of Aries, I shall remember that I have written when she is in the
beginning of Libra, though that part of the Soul of the World that possesses
my Body then will be twice as distant from what does guide my hand to write
now, as the Earth is from the Sun. Wherefore it is plain that such an Universal
Soul will not salve all Phenomenon, but there must be a particular Soul in
every man. And yet I dare say, this wild opinion is more tenable then theirs
that make nothing but mere Matter in the world. But I thought it worth the
while with all diligence to confute them both, the better of them being but a
more refined kind of Atheism, tending to the subversion of all the
Fundamentals of Religion and Piety amongst men.

11. As for the Spirit of Nature, the greatest exceptions are, that I have
introduced an obscure Principle for Ignorance and Sloth to take sanctuary in,
and so to enervate or foreslack the useful endeavors of curious Wits, and
hinder that expected progress that may be made in the Mechanic Philosophy; and
this, to aggravate the crime, before a competent search be made what the
Mechanical powers of Matter can do. For what Mechanical solutions the present
or foregoing Ages could not light upon, the succeeding may; and therefore it is
as yet unseasonable to bring in any such principle into Natural Philosophy.

To which I answer, That the principle we speak of is neither obscure nor
unseasonable; nor so much introduced by me, as forced upon me by in vitable
evidence of Reason. That it is no obscure Principle, the clear Description I
have given of it, Lib. 3. Cap. 12. will make good. Those that pretend that the
introduction thereof is unseasonable, I demand of them when they will think it
to be seasonable. For this simple surmise, That although all the Mechanical
solutions of some Phenomenon which have been hitherto offered to the world be
demonstrably false, yet future Ages may light upon what is true, can be held
nothing else by the judicious, but a pitiful subterfuge of fearful Souls, that
are very loath to let in any such affrightful Notion as an Immaterial or
Spiritual Substance into the world, for fear the next step must be the
acknowledgment also of a God; from whom they would fain hide themselves by this
poor and precarious pretense. But I say, if the introduction of this Principle
be not seasonable now, it will never be seasonable. For that admirable Master
of Mechanics Descartes has improved this way to the highest, I dare say, that
the wit of man can reach to in such Phenomenon as he has attempted to render
the causes of. But how in sundry passages he falls short in his account, I have
both in the forenamed and following Chapter, as also elsewhere, taken notice. I
will instance here only in the Phenomenon of Gravity, wherein I think I have
perfectly demonstrated that both he and Mr. Hobbs are quite out of the story,
and that the causes they assign are plainly false. And that I have not
mentioned the opinions of others in this way, it was only because I looked upon
them as less considerable.

12. But you will say that though these be all mistaken, yet it does not follow
but that there may arise some happy Wit that will give a true Mechanical
solution of this Problem. But I answer, that I have not only confuted their
Reasons, but also from Mechanical principles granted on all sides and confirmed
by experience, demonstrated that the descent suppose of a Stone or Bullet or
any such like heavy Body is enormously contrary to the Laws of Mechanics, and
that according to them they would necessarily, if they lie loose, recede from
the Earth, and be carried away out of our sight into the farthest parts of the
Air, if some power more then Mechanical did not curb that Motion, and force
them downwards toward the Earth. So that it is plain that we have not
arbitrariously introduced a Principle, but that it is forced upon us by the
undeniable evidence of Demonstration. From which to suspend our assent till
future Ages have improved this Mechanical Philosophy to greater height, is as
ridiculous, as to doubt of the truth of any one plain and easy Demonstration in
the first Book of Euclide, till we have traveled through the whole field of
that immense study of Mathematics.

13. Nor lastly needs the acknowledgment of this Principle to damp our
endeavors in the search of the Mechanical causes of the Phenomenon of Nature,
but rather make us more circumspect to distinguish what is the result of the
mere Mechanical powers of Matter and Motion, and what of an higher Principle.
For questionless this secure presumption in some, that there is nothing but
Matter in the world, has emboldned them too rashly to venture on Mechanical
solutions where they would not hold, because they were confident there were no
other solutions to be had but those of this kind.

14. Besides that to the rational and religious there is a double pleasure to
carry them on in this way of Philosophy: The one from the observation how far
in every thing the concatenation of Mechanical causes will reach, which will
wonderfuly gratify their Reason; The other from a distinct deprehension where
they must needs break off, as not being able alone to reach the Effect, which
necessarily leads them to a more confirmed discovery of the Principle we
contend for, namely the Spirit of Nature, which is the vicarious power of God
upon the Matter, and the first step to the abstrusest mysteries in Natural
Theology; which must needs highly gratify them in point of Religion.

15. And truly for this very cause, I think it is the most sober and faithful
advice that can be offered to the Christian World, that they would encourage
the reading of Descartes' in all public Schools or Universities. That the
Students of Philosophy may be thoroughly exercised in the just extent of the
mechanical powers of Matter, how far they will reach, and where they fall
short. Which will be the best assistance to Religion that Reason and the
knowledge of Nature can afford. For by this means such as are intended to serve
the Church will be armed betimes with sufficient strength to grapple with their
proudest Deriders or Opposers. Whenas for want of this, we see how liable they
are to be contemned and born down by every bold though weak pretender to the
Mechanic Philosophy.

16. These are the main passages I could any way conceive might be excepted
against in the ensuing Discourse: which yet are so innocent and firm in
themselves, and so advantageously circumstantiated in the places where they are
found, that I fear the Reader may suspect my judgment and discretion in
putting my self to the trouble of writing, and him of reading, so long and
needless a Preface. Which oversight though it be an argument of no great wit,
yet it may be of much Humanity, and of an earnest desire of doing a public
good without the least offense or dis-satisfaction to any that are but
tolerable Retainers to Reason and Ingenuity. But for those that have bid adieu
to both, and measure all Truths by their own humoursome fancy, making every
thing ridiculous that is not suitable to their own ignorant conceptions; I think
no serious man will hold himself bound to take notice of their perverse
constructions and mis-representations of things, more then a religious Eremite
or devout Pilgrim to heed the ugly mows and grimaces of Apes and Monkies he may
happily meet with in his passage through the Wilderness.

THE IMMORTALITY of the SOUL.
CHAP. I.
1. The usefulness of the present Speculation for the understanding of
Providence, and the management of our lives for our greatest happiness; 2. For
the moderate bearing the death and disasters of our Friends; 3. For the
begetting true Magnanimity in us, 4. and Peace and Tranquillity of mind. 5.
That so weighty a Theory is not to be handled perfunctorily.

1. OF all the Speculations the Soul of man can entertain her self withal,
there is none of greater moment, or of closer concernment to her, then this of
her own Immortality, and Independence on this terrestrial body. For hereby not
only the intricacies and perplexities of Providence are made more easy and
smooth to her, and she becomes able, by unravelling this clue from end to end,
to pass and repass safe through this Labyrinth, wherein many both anxious and
careless Spirits have lost themselves; but also (which touches her own interest
more particularly) being once raised into the knowledge and belief of so
weighty a Conclusion, she may view from this Prospect the most certain and most
compendious way to her own Happiness; which is, the bearing a very moderate
affection to what ever tempts her, during the time of this her Pilgrimage, and
a careful preparing of her self for her future condition, by such Noble
actions and Heroical qualifications of mind, as shall render her most welcome
to her own Country.

2. Which Belief and Purpose of hers will put her in an utter incapacity of
either envying the life or successes of her most imbittered Enemies, or of
over-lamenting the death or misfortunes of her dearest Friends; she having no
friends but such as are friends to God and Virtue, and whose afflictions will
prove advantages for their future Felicity, and their departure hence a
passage to present possession thereof.

3. Wherefore, being fully grounded and rooted in this so concerning a
Persuasion, she is freed from all poor and abject thoughts and designs; and
as little admires him that gets the most of this World, be it by Industry,
Fortune or Policy, as a discreet and serious man does the spoils of
Schoolboyes, it being very inconsiderable to him, who got the victory at Cocks
or Cob-nut, or whose bag returned home the fullest stuffed with Counters or
Cherry-stones.

4. She has therefore no aemulation, unless it be of doing good, and of
out-stripping, if it were possible, the noblest examples of either the present
or past Ages; nor any contest, unless it be with her self, that she has made no
greater proficiency toward the scope she aims at: and aiming at nothing but
what is not in the power of men to confer upon her, with courage she sets upon
the main work; and being still more faithful to her self, and to that Light
that assists her, at last tastes the first fruits of her future Harvest, and
does more then presage that great Happiness that is accrewing to her. And so
quit from the troubles and anxieties of this present world, stays in it with
Tranquillity and Content, and at last leaves it with Joy.

5. The Knowledge therefore and belief of the Immortality of the Soul being
of so grand Importance, we are engaged more carefully and punctually to handle
this so weighty a Theory: which will not be performed by multiplying of words,
but by a more frugall use of them, letting nothing fall from our pen, but what
makes closely to the matter, nor omitting any thing material for the evincing
the truth thereof.

CHAP. II.
1. That the Souls Immortality is demonstrable, by the Authors method, to all
but mee^ Scepticks. 2. An Illustration of his First Axiom. 3. A confirmation
and example o^ the Second. 4. An explication of the Third. 5. An explication
and proof of the Fourth. 6. A proof of the Fifth. 7. Of the Sixth. 8. An
example of the seventh. 9. A confirmation of the truth of the Eighth. 10. A
demonstration and example of the Ninth. 11. Penetrability the immediate
proper^^ of Incorporeall substance. 12. As also Indiscerpibility. 13. A proof
and illustration of the tenth Axiom.

1. ANd to stop all Creep-holes, and leave no place for the subterfuges and
evasions of confused and cavilling spirits, I shall prefix some few Axioms, of
tha^ plainness and evidence, that no man in his wits but will be ashamed to
deny them, if he will admit any thing at all to be true. But as for perfect
Scepticisme, it is a disease incurable, and a thing rather to be pitied or
laughed at, then seriously opposed. For when a man is so fugitive and unsettled,
that he will not stand to the verdict of his own faculties, one can no more
fasten any thing upon him, then he can write in the water, or tie knots of the
wind. But for those that are not in such a strange despondency, but that they
think they know something already and may learn more, I do not doubt, but by a
seasonable recourse to these few. Rules, with others I shall set down in their
due place, that they will be persuaded, if not forced, to reckon this Truth, of
the Immortality of the Soul, amongst such as must needs appear undeniable to
those that have parts and leisure enough accurately to examine, and thoroughly
to understand what I have here written for the demonstration thereof.

AXIOM I.
What ever things are in themselves, they are nothing to us, but so far forth
as they become known to our Faculties or Cognitive powers.

2. THis Axiom is plain of it self, at the very first proposal. For as
nothing, for example, can concern the Visive faculty, but so far forth as it is
visible; so there is nothing that can challenge any stroke to so much as a
touching, much less determining our Cognitive powers in general, but so far
forth as it is cognoscible.

AXIOM II.
Whatsoever is unknown to us, or is known but as merely possible, is not to
move us, or determine us any way, or make us undetermined; but we are to rest
in the present light and plain determination of our own Faculties.

3. THis is an evident Consectary from the foregoing Axiom. For the Existence
of that that is merely possible is utterly unknown to us to be, and therefore
is to have no weight against any Conclusion, unless we will condemn our selves
to eternal Scepticisme. As for example, if after a man has argued for a God
and Providence, from the wise contrivance in the frame of all the bodies of
Animals upon earth, one should reply, That there may be, for all this, Animals
in Saturn, Jupiter, or some other of the Planets, of very inept fabrics;
Horses, suppose, and other Creatures, with only one eye, and one ear, and
that both on a side, the eye placed also where the ear should be, and with
only three legs; Bulls and Rams with horns on their backs, and the like: Such
allegations as these, according to this Axiom, are to be held of no force at
all for the enervating the Conclusion. See my Antidote against Atheism, lib.
1. cap. 2. and 9.

AXIOM III.
All our Faculties have not a right of suffrage for determining of Truth, but
only Common Notions, External Sense, and evident and undeniable Deductions of
Reason.

4. BY Common Notions I understand what ever is Noematically true, that is to
say, true at first sight to all men in their wits, upon a clear perception of
the Terms, without any further discourse or reasoning. From External Sense I
exclude not Memory, as it is a faithful Register thereof. And by undeniable
Deduction of Reason, I mean such a collection of one Truth from another, that
no man can discover any looseness or disjoyntedness in the cohaesion of the
Argument.

AXIOM IV.
What is not consonant to all or some of these, is mere Fancy, and is of no
moment for the evincing of Truth or Falsehood, by either it is Vigor or
Perplexiveness.

5. I Say mere Fancy, in Counter-distinction to such Representations as,
although they be not the pure impresses of some real Object, yet are made by
Rational deduction from them, or from Common Notions, or from both. Those
Representations that are not framed upon such grounds, I call mere Fancies;
which are of no value at all in determining of Truth. For if Vigor of Fancy
will argue a thing true, then all the dreams of madmen must go for Oracles:
and if the Perplexiveness of Imagination may hinder assent, we must not believe
Mathematical demonstration, and the 16. Proposition of the 3d Book of Euclide
will be confidently concluded to contain a contradiction. See my Antidote lib.
1 cap. 4.

AXIOM V.
Whatever is clear to any one of these Three Faculties, is to be held
undoubtedly true, the other having nothing to evidence to the contrary.

6. OR else a man shall not be assured of any sensible object that he meets
with, nor can give firm assent to such Truths as these, It is impossble the
same thing should be, and not be, at once; Whatever is, is either finite, or
infinite; and the like.

AXIOM VI.
What is rejected by one, none of the other Faculties giving evidence for it,
ought to go for a Falsehood.

7. OR else a man may let pass such Impossibilities as these for Truth, or
doubt whether they be not true or no, viz. The part is greater then the whole;
There is something that is neither finite nor infinite. Socrates is invisible;
and the like.

AXIOM VII.
What is plainly and manifestly concluded, ought to be held undeniable, when no
difficulties are alleged against it, but such as are acknowledged to be found
in other Conclusions held by all men undeniably true.

8. AS for example, suppose one should conclude, That there may be Infinite
Matter, or, That there is Infinite Space, by very rational arguments; and that
it were objected only, That then the Tenth part of that Matter would be
infinite; it being most certain That there is Infinite Duration of something or
other in the world, and that the Tenth part of this Duration is infinite; it is
no enervating at all of the former Conclusion, it being encumbered with no
greater incongruitie then is acknowledged to consist with an undeniable Truth.

AXIOM VIII.
The Subject, or naked Essence or Substance of a thing, is utterly
unconceivable to any of our Faculties.

9. FOr the evidencing of this Truth, there needs nothing more then a silent
appeal to a man's own mind, if he do not find it so; and that if he take away
all Aptitudes, Operations, Properties and Modifications from a Subject, that
his conception thereof vanishes into nothing, but into the Idea of a mere
Undiversificated Substance; so that one Substance is not then distinguishable
from another, but only from Accidents or Modes, to which properly belongs no
subsistence.

AXIOM IX
There are some Properties, Powers and Operations, immediately appertaining to
a thing, of which no reasons can be given, nor ought to be demanded, nor the
Way or Manner of the cohaesion of the Attribute with the Subject can by any
means be fancyed or imagined.

10. THE evidence of this Axiom appears from the former. For if the naked
substance of a Thing be so utterly unconceiveable, there can be nothing
deprehended there to be a connection betwixt it and it is first Properties. Such
is Actual Divisibility and Impenetrability in Matter. By Actual Divisibility
I understand Discerpibility, gross tearing or cutting one part from another.
These are immediate properties of Matter, but why they should be there, rather
then in any other Subject, no man can pretend to give, or with any credit ask
the reason. For Immediate Attributes are indemonstrable, otherwise they would
not be Immediate.

11. So the Immediate Properties of a Spirit or Immateriall Substance are
Penetrability and Indiscerpibility. The necessary cohaesion of which Attributes
with the Subject is as little demonstrable as the former. For supposing that,
which I cannot but assert, to be evidently true, That there is no Substance but
it has in some sort or other the Three dimensions; This Substance, which we
call Matter, might as well have been penetrable as impenetrable, and yet have
been Substance: But now that it does so certainly and irresistibly keep one
part of it self from penetrating another, it is so, we know not why. For there
is no necessary connection discernible betwixt Substance with three dimensions,
and Impenetrability. For what some allege, that it implies a contradiction,
That extended substance should run one part into another; for so part of the
Extension, and consequently of the Substance, would be lost; this, I say, (if
nearly looked into) is of no force. For the Substance is no more lost in this
case, then when a string is doubled and redoubled, or a piece of wax reduced
from a long figure to a round: The dimension of Longitude is in some part lost,
but without detriment to the Substance of the wax. In like manner when one part
of an extended Substance runs into another, something both of Longitude,
Latitude and Profundity may be lost, and yet all the Substance there still; as
well as Longitude lost in the other case without any loss* of the Substance.
And as what was lost in Longitude was gotten in Latitude or Profundity before,
so what is lost here in all or any two of the dimensions, is kept safe in
Essential Spissitude. For so I will call this Mode or Property of a Substance,
that is able to receive one part of it self into another. Which fourth Mode is
as easy and familiar to my Understanding, as that of the Three dimensions to my
Sense or Fancy* For I mean nothing else by Spissitude, but the redoubling or
contracting of Substance into less space then it does sometimes occupy. And
Analogous to this is the lying of two Substances of several kinds in the same
place at once. To both these may be applied the terms of Reduplication and
Saturation: The former when Essence or Substance is but once redoubled into it
self or into another; the latter when so often, that it will not easily admit any
thing more. And that more extensions then one may be commensurate, at the same
time, to the same Place, is plain, in that Motion is coextended with the
Subject wherein it is, and both with Space. And Motion is not nothing;
wherefore two things may be commensurate to one space at once.

12. Now then Extended Substance (and all Substances are extended) being of it
self indifferent to Penetrability or Impenetrability, and we finding one kind
of Substance so impenetrable, that one part will not enter at all into another
(which with as much reason we might expect to find so irresistibly united one
part with another that nothing in the world could dissever them. For this
Indiscerpibility has as good a connection with Substance as Impenetrability has,
they neither falling under the cognoscence of Reason or Demonstration, but
being immediate Attributes of such a Subject. For a man can no more argue from
the Extension of Substance, that it is Discerpible, then that it is Penetrable;
there being as good a capacity in Extension for Penetration as Discerption) I
conceive, I say, from hence we may as easily admit that some Substance may be
of it self Indiscerpible, as well as others Impenetrable; and that as there is
one kind of Substance, which of it is own nature is Impenetrable and
Discerpible, so there may be another Indiscerpible and Penetrable. Neither of
which a man can give any other account of, then that they have the immediate
Properties of such a Subject.

AXIOM X.
The discovery of some Power, Property, or Operation, incompetible to one
Subject, is an infallible argument of the existence of some other, to which it
must be competible.

13. AS when Pythagoras was spoken unto by the River Nessus, when he passed
over it, and a Tree by the command of Thespesion the chief of the Gymnosophists
saluted Apollonius in a distinct and articulate voice, but small as a woman's;
it is evident, I say, That there was something there that was neither River nor
Tree, to which these salutations must be attributed, no Tree nor River having
any Faculty of Reason nor Speech.

CHAP. III.
1. The general notions of Body and Spirit. 2. That the notion of Spirit is
altogether as intelligible as that of Body. 3. Whether there be any Substance
of a mixed nature, betwixt Body and Spirit.

1. THE greatest and grossest obstacle to the belief of the Immortality of the
Soul, is that confident opinion in some, as if the very notion of a Spirit were
a piece of Nonsense and perfect Incongruity in the conception thereof.
Wherefore to proceed by degrees to our maine design, and to lay our foundation
low and sure, we will in the first place expose to view the genuine notion of a
Spirit, in the general acception thereof; and afterward of several kinds of
Spirits: that it may appear to all, how unjust that cavil is against
Incorporeall substances, as if they were mere Impossibilities and
contradictious Inconsistencies. I will define therefore a Spirit in general
thus, A substance penetrable and indiscerpible. The fitness of which definition
will be the better understood, if we divide Substance in general into these
first kinds, viz. Body and Spirit, and then define Body to be A Substance
impenetrable and discerpible. Whence the contrary kind to this is fitly
defined, A Substance penetrable and indiscerpible.

2. Now I appeal to any man that can set aside prejudice, and has the free use
of his Faculties, whether every term in the definition of a Spirit be not as
intelligible and congruous to reason, as in that of a Body. For the precise
notion of Substance is the same in both, in which, I conceive, is comprised
Extension and Activity either connate or communicated. For matter it self once
moved can move other matter. And it is as easy to understand what Penetrable
is, as Impenetrable, and what Indiscerpible as Discerpible; and Penetrability
and Indiscerpibility being as immediate to Spirit, as Impenetrability and
Discerpibility to Body, there is as much reason to be given for the attributes
of the one as of the other, by Axiom 9. And Substance in its precise notion
including no more of Impenetrability then Indiscerpibility, we may as well
wonder how one kind of Substance can so firmly and irresistibly keep out
another Substance (as Matter for example does the parts of Matter) as that the
parts of another Substance hold so fast together, that they are by no means
Discerpible, as we have already intimated: And therefore this holding out in
one being as difficult a business to conceive as the holding together in the
other, this can be no prejudice to the notion of a Spirit. For there may be
very fast union where we cannot at all imagine the cause thereof, as in such
Bodies which are exceeding hard, where no man can fancy what holds the parts
together so strongly; and there being no greater difficulty here, then that a
man cannot imagine what holds the parts of a Spirit together, it will follow by
Axiom 7. that the notion of a Spirit is not to be excepted against as an
incongruous notion, but is to be admitted for the notion of a thing that may
really exist.

3. It may be doubted, whether there may not be Essences of a middle condition
betwixt these Corporeal and Incorporeal Substances we have described, and that
of two sorts, The one Impenetrable and Indiscerpible, the other Penetrable and
Discerpible. But concerning the first, if Impenetrability be understood in
reference to Matter, it is plain there can be no such Essence in the world;
and if in reference to its own parts, though it may then look like a possible
Idea in it self, yet there is no footsteps of the existence thereof in Nature,
the Souls of men and Demons implying contraction and dilatation in them. As
for the latter, it has no privilege for any thing more then Matter it self
has, or some Mode of Matter. For it being Discerpible, it is plain it is union
is by Juxtaposition of parts, and the more penetrable, the less likely to
conveigh sense and motion to any distance. Besides the ridiculous sequel of
this supposition, that will fill the Universe with an infinite number of shreds
and rags of Souls and Spirits, never to be reduced again to any use or order.
And lastly, the proper notion of a Substance Incorporeal fully counter-distinct
to a Corporeal Substance, necessarily including in it so strong and
indissoluble union of parts, that it is utterly Indiscerpible, whenas yet for
all that in this general notion thereof neither sense nor cogitation is
employed, it is most rational to conceive, that that Substance wherein they are
must assuredly be Incorporeal in the strictest signification; the nature of
cogitation and communion of sense arguing a more perfect degree of union then
is in mere Indiscerpibility of parts. But all this Scrupulositie might have
been saved; For I confidently promise my self, that there are none so perversely
given to tergiversations and subterfuges, but that they will acknowledge,
wherever I can prove that there is a Substance distinct from Body or Matter,
that it is in the most full and proper sense Incorporeal.

CHAP. IV.
1. That the notions of the several kinds of Immateriall Beings have no
Inconsistencie nor Incongruitie in them. 2. That the nature of God is as
intelligible as the nature of any Being whatsoever. 3. The true notion of his
Ubiquity, and how intelligible it is. 4. Of the union of the Divine Essence. 5.
Of his power of Creation.

1. WE have shown, that the notion of a Spirit in general is not at all
incongruous nor impossible: And it is as congruous, consistent and intelligible
in the sundry kinds thereof; as for example that of God, of Angels, of the
Souls of Men and Brutes, and of the (...) or Seminal Forms of things.

2. The notion of God, though the knowledge thereof be much prejudiced by the
confoundedness and stupidity of either superstitious or profane men, that
please themselves in their large Rhetorications, concerning the
unconceiveableness and utter incomprehensibleness of the Deity; the one by way
of a devotional exaltation of the transcendency of his nature, the other to
make the belief of his exsistence ridiculous, and craftily and perversely to
intimate that there is no God at all, the very conception of him being made to
appear nothing else but a bundle of inconsistencies and impossibilities;
Nevertheless I shall not at all stick to affirm, that His Idea or Notion is as
easy as any Notion else whatsoever, and that we may know as much of him as of
any thing else in the world. For the very Essence or naked Substance of nothing
can possibly be known by Axiom 8. But for His Attributes, they are as
conspicuous as the attributes of any Subject or Substance whatever; From which
a man may easily define him thus; God is a Spirit eternal, infinite in essence
and goodness, omniscient, omnipotent, and of himself necessarily existent. I
appeal to any man, if every term in this Definition be not sufficiently
intelligible. For as for Spirit, that has been already defined and explained.
By Eternal I understand nothing here but Duration without end or beginning: by
Infiniteness of essence, that his Essence or Substance has no bounds, no more
then his Duration: by Infinite in goodness, such a benign will in God as is
carried out to boundless and innumerable benefactions: by Omnisciency and
Omnipotency, the ability of knowing or doing any thing that can be conceived
without a plain contradiction: by Self-existency, that he has his Being from
none other: and by necessary Existence, that he cannot fail to be. What terms
of any Definition are more plain then these of this? or what Subject can be
more accurately defined then this is? For the naked Subject or Substance of any
thing is no otherwise to be known then thus. And they that gape after any other
Speculative knowledge of God then what is from his Attributes and Operations,
they may have their heads and mouths filled with many hot scalding fancies and
words, and run mad with the boysterousness of their own Imagination, but they
will never hit upon any sober Truth.

3. Thus have I delivered a very explicit and intelligible notion of the
nature of God; which I might also more compendiously define, An Essence
absolutely perfect, in which all the terms of the former Definition are
comprehended, and more then I have named, or thought needful to name, much less
to insist upon; as his power of Creation, and his Omnipresence or Ubiquity,
which are necessarily included in the Idea of absolute perfection. The latter
whereof some ancient Philosophers endeavoring to set out, have defined God to
be a Circle whose Center is every where and Circumference no where. By which
description certainly nothing else can be meant, but that the Divine Essence is
every where present with all those adorable Attributes of Infinite and
absolutely perfect Goodness, Knowledge and Power, according to that sense in
which I have explained them. Which Ubiquity or Omnipresence of God is every
whit as intelligible as the overspreading of Matter into all places.

4. But if here any one demand, How the parts, as I may so call them, of the
Divine Amplitude hold together, that of Matter being so discerpible; it might
be sufficient to remind him of what we have already spoken of the general
notion of a Spirit. But besides that, here may be also a peculiar rational
account given thereof, it implying a contradiction, that an Essence absolutely
perfect should be either limited in presence, or change place in part or whole,
they being both notorious Effects or Symptoms of Imperfection, which is
inconsistent with the nature of God. And no better nor more cogent reason can
be given of any thing, then that it implies a contradiction to be otherwise.

5. That power also of creating things of nothing, there is a very close
connection betwixt it and the Idea of God, or of a Being absolutely perfect. For
this Being would not be what it is conceived to be, if it were destitute of the
power of Creation, and therefore this Attribute has no less cohaerence with the
Subject, then that it is a contradiction it should not be in it, as was
observed of the foregoing Attribute of Indiscerpibilitie in God. But to allege
that a man cannot imagine how God should create something of nothing, or how
the Divine Essence holds so closely and invincibly together, is to transgress
against the 3. 4. and 5. Axioms, and to appeal to a Faculty that has no right
to determine the case.

CHAP. V.
1. The Definition belonging to all Finite and Created Spirits. 2. Of
Indiscerpibility, a symbolical representation thereof. 3. An Objection answered
against that representation.

1. WE have done with the notion of that Infinite and Uncreated Spirit we
usually call God; we come now to those that are Created and Finite, as the
Spirits of Angels, Men and Brutes, we will cast in the Seminal Forms also, or
Archei, as the Chemists call them, though happily the world stands in no need of
them. The Properties of a Spirit, as it is a notion common to all these, I have
already enumerated in my Antidote, Lib. 1. cap. 4. Self-motion,
Self-penetration, Self-contraction and dilatation, and Indivisibility, by which
I mean Indiscerpibility: to which I added Penetrating, Moving, and Altering the
matter. We may therefore define this kind of Spirit we speak of, to be A
substance Indiscerpible, that can move it self, that can penetrate, contract,
and dilate it self, and can also penetrate, move, and alter the matter. We will
now examine every term of this Definition, from whence it shall appear, that it
is as congruous and intelligible, as those Definitions that are made of such
things as all men without any scruple acknowledge to exist.

2. Of the Indiscerpibility of a Spirit we have already given rational grounds
to evince it not impossible, it being an Immediate attribute thereof, as
Impenetrability is of a Body, and as conceivable or imaginable, that one
Substance of it is own nature may invincibly hold its parts together, so that
they cannot be disunited nor dissevered, as that another may keep out so
stoutly and irresistibly another Substance from entering into the same space or
place with it self. For this (...) or Impenetrability is not at all contained
in the precise conception of a Substance as Substance, as I have already
signified. But besides that Reason may thus easily apprehend that it may be so,
I shall a little gratify Imagination, and it may be Reason too, in offering
the manner how it is so, in this kind of Spirit we now speak of. That ancient
notion of Light and Intentional species is so far from a plain impossibility,
that it has been heretofore generally, and is still by very many persons,
looked upon as a Truth, that is, That Light and Color do ray in such sort as
they are described in the Peripatetical Philosophy. Now it is observable in
Light, that it is most vigorous toward its fountain, and fainter by degrees.
But we will reduce the matter to one lucid point, which, according to the
acknowledged Principles of Optics, will fill a distance of space with its rays
of light: Which rays may indeed be reverberated back toward their center by
interposing some opake body, and so this Orb of light contracted; but,
according to the Aristotelean Hypothesis, it was always accounted impossible
that they should be clipped off, or cut from this lucid point, and be kept apart
by themselves. Those whom dry Reason will not satisfy, may, if they please,
entertain their Fancy with such a representation as this, which may a little
ease the anxious importunity of their mind, when it too eagerly would
comprehend the manner how this Spirit we speak of may be said to be
Indiscerpible. For think of any ray of this orb of light, it does sufficiently
set out to the imagination how Extension and Indiscerpibility may consist
together. See further in my Antidote, Lib. 1. cap. 4. as also the Appendix cap.
3. and 10.

3. But if any object, That the lucid Center of this orb, or the Primary
substance, as I call it, in the forecited places, is either divisible or
absolutely indivisible, and if it be divisible, that as concerning that Inmost
of a Spirit, this representation is not at all serviceable to set off the
nature thereof, by showing how the parts there may hold together so
indiscerpibly, but if absolutely indivisible, that it seems to be nothing; To
this I answer, what Scaliger somewhere has noted, That what is infinitely great
or infinitely small, the imagination of man is at a loss to conceive it. Which
certainly is the ground of the perplexedness of that Problem concerning
Matter, whether it consists of points, or only of particles divisible in
infinitum. But to come more closely to the business; I say that though we
should acknowledge the Inmost Center of life, or the very first point, as I may
so call it, of the primary Substance (for this primary Substance is in some
sort gradual) to be purely indivisible, it does not at all follow, no not
according to Imagination it self, that it must be nothing. For let us imagine a
Perfect Plain, and on this Plain a perfect Globe, we cannot conceive but this
Globe touches the Plain, and that in what we ordinarily call a point, else the
one would not be a Globe, or the other not a Plain. Now it is impossible that
one body should touch another, and yet touch one another in nothing. Wherefore
this inmost Center of life is something, and something so full of essential
vigor and virtue, that though gradually it diminish, yet can fill a certain
Sphere of Space with its own presence and activity, as a spark of light
illuminates the duskish air. Wherefore there being no greater perplexity nor
subtilty in the consideration of this Center of life or Inmost of a Spirit,
then there is in the Atoms of Matter, we may by Axiom 7. rightly conclude,
That Indiscerpibility has nothing in the notion thereof, but what may well
consist with the possibility of the existence of the Subject whereunto it
belongs.

CHAP. VI.
1. Axioms that tend to the demonstrating how the Center or First point of the
Primary Substance of a Spirit may be Indiscerpible. 2. Several others that
demonstrate how the Secondary Substance of a Spirit may be Indiscerpible. 3. An
application of these Principles. 4. Of the union of the Secondary Substance
considered transversly. 5. That the notion of a Spirit has less difficulty then
that of Matter. 6. An answer to an Objection from the Rational faculty. 7.
Answers to Objections suggested from Fancy. 8. A more compendious satisfaction
concerning the notion of a Spirit.

1. AND thus we have fairly well gratified the Fancy of the Curious concerning
the Extension and Indiscerpibility of a Spirit; but we shall advance yet
higher, and demonstrate the possibility of this notion to the severest Reason,
out of these following Principles.

AXIOM XI.
A Globe touches a Plain in something, though in the least that is conceivable
to be real.



AXIOM XII.
The least that is conceivable is so little, that it cannot be conceived to be
discerpible into less.



AXIOM XIII.
As little as this is, the repetition of it will amount to considerable
magnitudes.

AS for example, if this Globe be drawn upon a Plain, it constitutes a Line,
and a Cylinder drawn upon a Plain, or this same Line described by the Globe
multiplied into it self, constitutes a superficies, etc. This a man cannot
deny, but the more he thinks of it, the more certainly true he will find it.

AXIOM XIV.
Magnitude cannot arise out of mere Non-Magnitudes.

FOR multiply Nothing ten thousand millions of times into nothing* the Product
will be still nothing. Besides, if that wherein the Globe touches a Plain were
more then Indiscerpible, that is, purely Indivisible, it is manifest that a
Line will consist of Points Mathematically so called, that is, purely
Indivisible, which is the grandest absurdity that can be admitted in
Philosophy, and the most contradictions thing imaginable.

AXIOM XV.
The same thing by reason of its extreme littleness may be utterly
Indiscerpible, though intellectually Divisible.

THis plainly arises out of the foregoing Principles: For every Quantity is
intellectually divisible; but something Indiscerpible was before demonstrated to
be Quantity, and consequently divisible, otherwise Magnitude would consist of
Mathematical points. Thus have I found a possibility for the Notion of the
Center of a Spirit, which is not a Mathematical point, but Substance, in
Magnitude so little, that it is Indiscerpible; but in virtue so great, that it
can send forth out of it self so large a Sphere of Secondary Substance, as I
may so call it, that it is able to actuate grand Proportions of Matter, this
whole Sphere of life and activity being in the mean time utterly Indiscerpible.

2. This I have said, and shall now prove it by adding a few more Principles of
that evidence, as the most rigorous Reason shall not be able to deny them.

AXIOM XVI
An Emanative Cause is the notion of a thing possible.

BY an Emanative Cause is understood such a Cause as merely by Being, no other
activity or causality interposed, produces an Effect. That this is possible is
manifest, it being demonstrable that there is de facto some such Cause in the
world; because something must move it self. Now if there be no Spirit, Matter
must of necessity move it self, where you cannot imagine any activity or
causality, but the bare essence of the Matter from whence this motion comes.
For if you would suppose some former motion that might be the cause of this,
then we might with as good reason suppose some former to be the cause of that,
and so in infinitum.

AXIOM XVII.
An Emanative Effect is coexistent with the very substance of that which is
said to be the Cause thereof.

THis must needs be true, because that very Substance which is said to be the
Cause, is the adaequate and immediate Cause, and wants nothing to be adjoined
to its bare essence for the production of the Effect; and therefore by the same
reason the Effect is at any time, it must be at all times, or so long as that
Substance does exist.

AXIOM XVIII.
No Emanative Effect, that exceeds not the virtues and powers of a Cause, can
be said to be impossible to be produced by it.

THis is so plain, that nothing need be added for either explanation or proof.

AXIOM XIX.
There may be a Substance of that high Virtue and Excellency, that it may
produce another Substance by Emanative causality, provided that Substance
produced be in due graduall proportions inferior to that which causes it.

THis is plain out of the foregoing Principle. For there is no contradiction
nor impossibility of a Cause producing an Effect less noble then it self, for
thereby we are the better assured that it does not exceed the capacity of its
own powers: Nor is there any incongruity, that one Substance should cause
something else which we may in some sense call Substance, though but Secondary
or Emanatory; acknowledging the Primary Substance to be the more adequate
Object of divine Creation, but the Secondary to be referrible also to the
Primary or Centrall Substance by way of causall relation. For suppose God
created the Matter with an immediate power of moving it self, God indeed is the
Prime cause as well of the Motion as of the Matter, and yet nevertheless the
Matter is rightly said to move it self. Finally, this Secondary or Emanatory
Substance may be rightly called Substance, because it is a Subject endued with
certain powers and activities, and that it does not inhaere as an Accident in
any other Substance or Matter, but could maintain its place, though all Matter
or what other Substance soever were removed out of that space it is extended
through, provided its Primary Substance be but safe.

3. From these four Principles I have here added, we may have not an
imaginative but rational apprehension of that part of a Spirit which we call
the Secondary Substance thereof. Whose Extension arising by graduall Emanation
from the First and primest Essence, which we call the Center of the Spirit
(which is no impossible supposition by the 16. 18. and 19. Axioms) we are led
from hence to a necessary acknowledgment of perfect Indiscerpibility of parts,
though not intellectual Indivisibility, by Axiom 17. for it implies a
contradiction that an Emanative effect should be disjoined from its original.

4. Thus have I demonstrated how a Spirit, considering the lineaments of it (as
I may so call them) from the Center to the Circumference, is utterly
indiscerpible. But now if any be so curious as to ask how the parts thereof
hold together in a line drawn cross to these from the Center (for Imagination,
it may be, will suggest they lie all loose) I answer that the conjecture of
Imagination is here partly true and partly false, or is true or false as she
shall be interpreted. For if she mean by loose, actually disunited, it is false
and ridiculous: but if only so discerpible, that one part may be disunited from
another, that is not only true, but necessary; otherwise a Spirit could not
contract one part and extend another, which is yet an Hypothesis necessary to
be admitted. Wherefore this Objection is so far from weakening the possibility
of this notion, that it gives occasion more fully to declare the exact
concinnity thereof. To be brief therefore, a Spirit from the Center to the
Circumference is utterly indiscerpible, but in lines cross to this it is
closely cohaerent, but not indiscerpibly; which cohaesion may consist in an
immediate union of these parts, and transverse penetration and transcursion of
secondary substance thorough this whole Sphere of life which we call a Spirit.
Nor need we wonder that so full an Orb should swell out from so subtle and
small a point as the Center of this Spirit is supposed. (...) (...), as
Aristotle somewhere says of the mind of man. And besides it is but what is
seen in some sort to the very eye in light, how large a sphere of air a
little spark will illuminate.

5. This is the pure Idea of a created Spirit in general, concerning which if
there be yet any cavil to be made, it can be none other then what is perfectly
common to it and to Matter, that is, the unimaginableness of Points and
smallest Particles, and how what is discerpible cannot at all hang together;
but this not hindering Matter from actual existence, there is no reason that
it should any way pretend to the inferring of the impossibility of the
existence of a Spirit by Axiom 7. But the most lubricous supposition that we
go upon here, is not altogether so intricate as those difficulties in Matter.
For if that be but granted, in which I find no absurdity, That a Particle of
Matter may be so little that it is utterly incapable of being made less, it is
plain that one and the same thing, though intellectually divisible, may yet be
really indiscerpible. And indeed it is not only possible, but it seems
necessary that this should be true: For though we should acknowledge that Matter
were discerpible in infinitum, yet supposing a Cause of Infinite distinct
perception and as Infinite power, (and God is such) this Cause can reduce this
capacity of infinite discerpibleness of Matter into act, that is to say,
actually and at once discerp it or disjoyn it into so many particles as it is
discerpible into. From whence it will follow, that one of these particles
reduced to this perfect Parvitude, is then utterly indiscerpible, and yet
intellectually divisible, otherwise magnitude would consist of mere points,
which would imply a contradiction. We have therefore plainly demonstrated by
reason, that Matter consists of parts indiscerpible; and therefore there being
no other Faculty to give suffrage against it, for neither sense nor any common
notion can contradict it, it remains by Axiom 5. that the Conclusion is true.

6. What some would object from Reason, that these perfect Parvitudes being
acknowledged still intellectually divisible, must still have parts into which
they are divisible, and therefore be still discerpible* to this it is answered,
That division into parts does not imply any discerpibility, because the parts
conceived in one of these Minima Corporalia (as I may so call them) are rather
essential or formal parts then integrall, and can no more actually be
dissevered, then Sense and Reason from the Soul of a man. For it is of the very
Essence of Matter to be divisible, but it is not at all included in the essence
thereof to be discerpible; and therefore where discerpibility fails there is no
necessity that divisibility should fail also. See the Preface, Sect. 3.

7. As for the trouble of spurious suggestions or representations from the
Fancy, as if these perfect Parvitudes were round Bodies, and that therefore
there would be Triangular intervals betwixt, void of Matter, they are of no
moment in this case, she always representing a Discerpible magnitude instead
of an Indiscerpible one. Wherefore she bringing in a false evidence, her
testimony is to be rejected; nay if she could perplex the cause far worse, she
was not to be heard, by Axiom the 4. Wherefore Fancy being unable to exhibit
the object we consider, in its due advantages, for ought we know these perfect
Parvitudes may lie so close together, that they have no intervals betwixt: nay
it seems necessary to be so; For if there were any such intervalls, they were
capable of particles less then these least of all, which is a contradiction in
Reason, and a thing utterly impossible. But if we should gratify Fancy so far
as to admit of these intervals, the greatest absurdity would be, that we must
admit an insensible Vacuum, which no Faculty will be able ever to confute. But
it is most rational to admit none, and more consonant to our determination
concerning these Minima Corporalia, as I call them, whose largeness is to be
limited to the least real touch of either a Globe on a Plain, or a Cone on a
Plain, or a Globe on a Globe; if you conceive any real touch less then
another, let that be the measure of these Minute Realities in Matter. From
whence it will follow, they must touch a whole side at once, and therefore can
never leave any empty intervals. Nor can we imagine any Angulosities or round
protuberancies in a quantity infinitely little, more then we can in one
infinitely great, as I have already declared in my Preface. I must confess, a
man's Reason in this speculation is mounted far beyond his Imagination; but
there being worse intricacies in Theories acknowledged constantly to be true,
it can be no prejudice to the present Conclusion, by the 4. and 7. Axioms.

8. Thus have we cleared up a full and distinct notion of a Spirit, with so
unexceptionable accuracy, that no Reason can pretend to assert it impossible,
nor unintelligible. But if the Theory thereof may seem more operose and tedious
to impatient wits, and the punctuality of the description the more hazardous
and incredible, as if it were beyond our Faculties to make so precise a
Conclusion in a subject so obscure, they may ease their understanding, by
contenting themselves with what we have set down Cap. 2. Sect. 11, 12. and
remember that that Wisdom and Power that created all things, can make them of
what nature He pleases, and that if God will that there shall be a Creature
that is penetrable and indiscerpible, that it is as easy a thing for him to
make one so of its own nature, as one impenetrable and discerpible, and indue
it with what other properties he pleases, according to his own will and
purpose: which induments being immediately united with the Subject they are in,
Reason can make no further demand how they are there, by the 9. Axiom.

CHAP. VII.
1. Of the Self-motion of a Spirit. 2. Of Self-penetration. 3. Of
Self-contraction and dilatation. 4. The power of penetrating of Matter. 5. The
power of moving, 6. And of altering the Matter.

1. WE have proved the Indiscerpibility of a Spirit as well in Center as
Circumference, as well in the Primary as Secondary Substance thereof, to be a
very consistent and congruous Notion. The next property is Self-motion, which
must of necessity be an Attribute of something or other; For by Self-motion I
understand nothing else but Self-activity, which must appertain to a Subject
active of it self. Now what is simply active of it self, can no more cease to
be active then to Be; which is a sign that Matter is not active of it self,
because it is reducible to Rest: Which is an Argument not only that
Self-activity belongs to a Spirit, but that there is such a thing as a Spirit
in the world, from which activity is communicated to Matter. And indeed if
Matter as Matter had motion, nothing would hold together but Flints, Adamant,
Brass, Iron; yea this whole Earth would suddenly melt into a thinner Substance
then the subtle Air, or rather it never had been condensated together to this
consistency we find it. But this is to anticipate my future purpose of proving
That there are Spirits existing in the world: It had been sufficient here to
have asserted, That Self-motion or Self-activity is as conceivable to appertain
to Spirit as Body, which is plain at first sight to any man that appeals to
his own Faculties. Nor is it at all to be scrupled at, that any thing should be
allowed to move it self, because our adversaries that say there is nothing but
Matter in the world, must of necessity (as I have intimated already) confess
that this Matter moves it self, though it be very incongruous so to affirm.

2. The congruity and possibility of Self-penetration in a created Spirit is to
be conceived, partly from the limitableness of the Subject, and partly from the
foregoing attributes of Indiscerpibility and Self-motion. For Self-penetration
cannot belong to God, because it is impossible any thing should belong to him
that implies imperfection, and Self-penetration cannot be without the lessening
of the presence of that which does penetrate it self, or the implication that
some parts of that essence are not so well as they may be, which is a
contradiction in a Being which is absolutely perfect. From the Attributes of
Indiscerpibility and Self-motion (to which you may add Penetrability from the
general notion of a Spirit) it is plain that such a Spirit as we define,
having the power of Motion upon the whole extent of its essence, may also
determine this Motion according to the Property of its own nature: and
therefore if it determine the motion of the exterior parts inward, they will
return inward toward the center of essential power; which they may easily do
without resistance, the whole Subject being penetrable, and without damage, it
being also indiscerpible.

3. From this Self-penetration we do not only easily, but necessarily,
understand Self-contraction and dilatation to arise. For this self-moving
Substance, which we call a Spirit, cannot penetrate it self, but it must needs
therewith contract it self; nor restore it self again to it is former state, but
it does thereby dilate it self; so that we need not at all insist upon these
terms.

4. That power which a Spirit has to penetrate Matter we may easily understand
if we consider a Spirit only as a Substance, whose immediate property is
Activity. For then it is not harder to imagine this Active Substance to pervade
this or the other part of Matter, then it is to conceive the pervading or
disspreading of motion it self therein.

5. The greatest difficulty is to fancy how this Spirit, being so incorporeall,
can be able to move the matter, though it be in it. For it seems so subtle,
that it will pass through, leaving no more footsteps of it is being there, then
the Lightening does in the Scabbard, though it may happily melt the sword,
because it there finds resistance. But a Spirit can find no resistance any
where, the closest matter being easily penetrable and pervious to an
Incorporeall substance. The ground of this difficulty is founded upon the
unconceivableness of any Union that can be betwixt the matter, and a Substance
that can so easily pass through it. For if we could but once imagine an Union
betwixt Matter and a Spirit, the activity then of the Spirit would certainly
have influence upon Matter, either for begetting, or increasing, or directing
the motion thereof. But notwithstanding the Penetrability and easy passage of a
Spirit through matter, there is yet for all that a capacity of a strong union
betwixt them, and every whit as conceivable as betwixt the parts of Matter
themselves. For what glue or Cement holds the parts of hard matter in stones
and metalls together, or, if you will, of what is absolutely hard, that has no
pores or particles, but is one continued and perfectly homogeneous body, not
only to sense, but according to the exact Idea of Reason? what Cement holds
together the parts of such a body as this? Certainly nothing but immediate
Union and Rest. Now for Union, there is no comparison betwixt that of Matter
with Matter, and this of Spirit with Matter. For the first is only
superficial; in this latter the very inward parts are united point to point
throughout. Nor is there any fear it will not take hold, because it has a
capacity of passing through. For in this absolutely solid hard Body, which let
be A, in which let us conceive some inward superficies, suppose E. A. C, this
superficies is so smooth as nothing can be conceived smoother: why does not
therefore the upper E. D. C. slide upon the nether part E. F. C. upon the
least motion imaginable, especially E. F. C. being supposed to be held fast
whilst the other is thrust against? This facility therefore of one Body passing
upon another without any sticking, seeming as necessary to our fancy as a
Spirits passing through all Bodies without taking hold of them, it is plain by
Axiom 7. That a firm union of Spirit and Matter is very possible, though we
cannot conceive the manner thereof. And as for Rest, it is competible also to
this conjunction of Matter with Spirit, as well as of Matter with Matter. For
suppose the whole body A. moved with like swiftness in every part, the parts of
A. then are according to that sense of Rest, by which they would explain the
adhaesion of the parts of Matter one with another, truly quiescent. So say I
that in the Union of Matter and Spirit, the parts of the Matter receiving from
the Spirit just such a velocity of motion as the Spirit exerts, and no more,
they both rest in firm Union one with another. That which comes to pass even
then when there is far less immediate Union then we speak of. For if we do but
lay a Book on our hand* provided our hand be not moved with a swister motion
then it communicates to the Book, nor the Book be pusht on faster then the
swiftness of our hand; the Book and our Hand will most certainly retain their
Union and go together. So natural and easy is it to conceive how a Spirit may
move a Body without any more perplexity or contradiction then is found in the
Union and motion of the parts of Matter it self. See the Appendix to my
Antidote, Cap. 3.

6. The last Term I put in the Definition of a Spirit, is the power of
altering the Matter; which will necessarily follow from it is power of moving it
or directing its motion. For Alteration is nothing else but the varying of
either the Figures, or postures, or the degrees of motion in the particles; all
which are nothing else but the results of local motion. Thus have we cleared
the intelligibility and possibility of all the Terms that belong to the Notion
of a created Spirit in general, at least of such as may be rationally
conceived to be the causes of any visible Phenomenon in the world: We will now
descend to the defining of the chief Species thereof.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Four main Species of Spirits. 2. How they are to be defined. 3. The
definition of a Seminall Form; 4. Of the Soul of a Brute; 5. Of the Soul of
a Man. 6. The difference betwixt the Soul of an Angel and an humane Soul. 7.
The definition of an Angelical Soul. 8. Of the Platonicall (...) and (...). 9.
That Des Carts his Demonstration of the Existence of the Humane Soul does at
least conclude the possibility of a Spirit.

1. WE have enumerated four kinds of Spirits, viz. The (...) or Seminall
Forms, the Souls of Brutes, the Humane Soul, and that Soul or Spirit which
actuates or informs the vehicles of Angels: For I look upon Angels to be as
truly a compound Being, consisting of Soul and Body, as that of Men and
Brutes. Their Existence we shall not now go about to prove, for that belongs
to another place. My present design is only to expound or define the notion of
these things, so far forth as is needful for the evincing that they are the
Ideas or Notions of things which imply no contradiction or impossibility in
their conception; which will be very easy for us to perform: the chief
difficulty lying in that more General notion of a Spirit, which we have so
fully explained in the foregoing chapters.

2. Now this General notion can be contracted into Kinds, by no other
Differences then such as may be called peculiar powers or properties belonging
to one Spirit and excluded from another, by the 8. Axiom. From whence it will
follow, that if we describe these several kinds of Spirits by immediate and
intrinsecall properties, we have given as good Definitions of them as any one
can give of any thing in the world.

3. We will begin with what is most simple, the Seminal Forms of things which,
for the present, deciding nothing of their existence, according to their (...)
possibilis, we define thus; A Seminal Form is a created Spirit organizing
duly prepared matter into life and vegetation proper to this or the other kind
of plant. It is beyond my imagination what can be excepted against this
description, it containing nothing but what is very cohaerent and intelligible.
For in that it is a Spirit, it can move Matter intrinsecally, or at least
direct the motion thereof, But in that it is not an Omnipotent Spirit, but
Finite and Created, it is power may well be restrained to duly prepared Matter
both for vital union and motion. He that has made these particular Spirits,
varying their Faculties of Vital union according to the diversity of the
preparation of Matter, and so limiting the whole comprehension of them all,
that none of them may be able to be vitally joined with any matter whatever,
and the same first Cause of all things, that gives them a power of uniting with
and moving of matter duly prepared; may also set such laws to this motion,
that when it lights on matter fit for it, it will produce such and such a
Plant, that is to say, it will shape the matter into such Figure, Color and
other properties, as we discover in them by our Senses.

4. This is the first degree of Particular Life in the world, if there be any
purely of this degree particular. But now, as Aristotle has somewhere noted,
the Essences of things are like Numbers, whose Species are changed by adding or
taking away an Unite; add therefore another Intrinsecall power to this of
Vegetation, viz. Sensation, and it becomes the Soul of a Beast. For in truth
the bare Substance it self is not to be computed in explicit knowledge, it
being utterly in it self unconceivable, and therefore we will only reckon upon
the Powers. A Subject therefore from whence is both Vegetation and Sensation is
the general notion of the Soul of a Brute. Which is distributed into a number
of kinds, the effect of every Intrinsecal power being discernible in the
constant shape and properties of every distinct kind of Brute Creatures.

5. If we add to Vegetation and Sensation Reason properly so called, we have
then a settled notion of the Soul of Man; which we may more completely describe
thus: A created Spirit endued with Sense and Reason, and a power of organizing
terrestrial matter into humane shape by vital union therewith.

6. And herein alone, I conceive, does the Spirit or Soul of an Angel (for I
take the boldness to call that Soul, what ever it is, that has a power of
vitally actuating the Matter) differ from the Soul of a Man, in that the Soul
of an Angel may vitally actuate an aereal or ethereal body, but cannot be born
into this world in a terrestrial one.

7. To make an end therefore of our Definitions: an Angelical Soul is very
intelligibly described thus; A created Spirit endued with Reason, Sensation,
and a power of being vitally united with and actuating of a Body of air or
ether only. Which power over an aereal or ethereal Body is very easily to be
understood out of that general notion of a Spirit in the foregoing Chapters.
For it being there made good, that union with Matter is not incompetible to a
Spirit, and consequently nor moving of it, nor that kind of motion in a Spirit
which we call Contraction and Dilatation; these powers, if carefully
considered, will necessarily infer the possibility of the Actuation and Union
of an Angelical Soul with an ethereal or aerie Body.

8. The Platonists write of other orders of Spirits or Immaterial Substances,
as the (...) and (...). But there being more Subtilty then either usefulness or
assurance in such like Speculations, I shall pass them over at this time;
having already, I think, irrefutably made good, That there is no incongruity
nor incompossibility comprised in the Notion of Spirit or Incorporeal Substance.

9. But there is yet another way of inferring the same, and it is the Argument
of Descartes, whereby he would conclude that there is de facto a Substance in
us distinct from Matter, viz. our own Mind. For every Real affection or
Property being the Mode of some Substance or other, and real Modes being
unconceivable without their Subject, he inferres that, seeing we can doubt
whether there be any such thing as Body in the world (by which doubting we
seclude Cogitation from Body) there must be some other Substance distinct from
the Body, to which Cogitation belongs. But I must confess this Argument will
not reach home to Descartes his purpose, who would prove in Man a substance
distinct from his body. For being there may be modes common to more Subjects
then one, and this of Cogitation may be pretended to be such as is competible
as well to substance Corporeal as Incorporeal, it may be conceived apart from
either, though not from both. And therefore his argument does not prove that
That in us which does think or perceive is a Substance distinct from our Body,
but only That there may be such a Substance, which has the power of thinking
or perceiving, which yet is not a Body. For it being impossible that there
should be any real mode which is in no Subject, and we clearly conceiving
Cogitation independent for existence on Corporeal Substance; it is necessary,
That there may be some other Substance on which it may depend; which must needs
be a Substance Incorporeal.

CHAP. IX.
1. That it is of no small consequence to have proved the Possibility of the
Existence of a Spirit. 2. The necessity of examining of Mr. Hobbs his Reasons
to the contrary. 3. The first Excerption out of Mr. Hobbs. 4. The second
Excerption. 5. The third. 6. The fourth. 7. The fifth. 8. The sixth. 9. The
seventh. 10. The eighth and last Excerption.

1. I Have been, I believe, to admiration curious and sollicitous to make good,
that the Existence of a Spirit or Incorporeal Substance is possible. But there
is no reason any one should wonder that I have spent so much pains to make so
small and inconsiderable a progress, as to bring the thing only to a bare
possibility. For though I may seem to have gained little to my self, yet I have
thereby given a very signal overthrow to the adverse party, whose strongest
hold seems to be an unshaken confidence, That the very notion of a Spirit or
Substance Immaterial is a perfect Incompossibility and pure Nonsense. From
whence are insinuated no better Consequences then these: That it is impossible
that there should be any God, or Soul, or Angel, Good or Bad; or any
Immortality or Life to come. That there is no Religion, no Piety nor Impiety,
no Virtue nor Vice, Justice nor Injustice, but what it pleases him that has the
longest Sword to call so. That there is no Freedom of Will, nor consequently
any Rational remorse of Conscience in any Being whatsoever, but that all that
is, is nothing but Matter and corporeal Motion; and that therefore every trace
of man's life is as necessary as the tracts of Lightning, and the fallings of
Thunder; the blind impetus of the Matter breaking through or being stopped every
where, with as certain and determinate necessity, as the course of a Torrent
after mighty storms and showers of Rain.

2. And verily considering of what exceeding great consequence it is to root
out this sullen conceit that some have taken up concerning Incorporeal
Substance, as if it bore a contradiction in the very terms, I think I shall be
wanting to so weighty a Cause, if I shall content my self with a bare
recitation of the Reasons whereby I prove it possible, and not produce their
Arguments that seem most able to maintain the contrary. And truly I do not
remember that I ever met with any one yet that may justly be suspected to be
more able to make good this Province then our Countreyman Mr. Hobbs, whose
inexuperable confidence of the truth of the Conclusion, may well assure any man
that duly considers the excellency of his natural Wit and Parts, that he has
made choice of the most Demonstrative Arguments that humane Invention can
search out for the eviction thereof.

3. And that I may not incur the suspicion of mistaking his Assertion, or of
misrepresenting the force of his Reasons, I shall here punctually set them down
in the same words I find them in his own Writings, that any man may judge if I
do him any wrong. The first place I shall take notice of is in his Leviathan,
Chap. 34. The word Body in the most general acceptance signifies that which
fills or occupies some certain room, or imagined place; and depends not on
the Imagination, but is a real part of that we call the Universe. For the
Universe being the Aggregate of all Bodies, there is no real part thereof that
is not also Body; nor any thing properly a Body, that is not also part of (that
Aggregate of all Bodies) the Universe. The same also, because Bodies are
subject to change, that is to say, to variety of appearance to the sense of
living Creatures, is called Substance, that is to say, subject to various
Accidents; as sometimes to be moved, sometimes to stand still, and to seem to
our senses sometimes Hot, sometimes Cold, sometimes of one Color, Smell, Taste,
or Sound, sometimes of another. And this diversity of seeming, (produced by the
diversity of the operation of Bodies on the Organs of our Sense) we attribute
to alterations of the Bodies that operate, and call them Accidents of those
Bodies. And according to this acception of the word, Substance and Body
signify the same thing; and therefore Substance incorporeal are words which
when they are joined together destroy one another, as if a man should say an
Incorporeal Body.

4. The second place is in his Physics, Part 4. Chap. 25. Article 9. But it is
here to be observed that certain Dreams, especially such as some men have when
they are betwixt sleeping and waking, and such as happen to those that have no
knowledge of the nature of Dreams, and are withal superstitious, were not
heretofore nor are now accounted Dreams. For the Apparitions men thought they
saw, and the voices they thought they heard in sleep, were not believed to be
Phantasmes, but things subsisting of themselves, and Objects without those that
Dreamed. For to some men, as well sleeping as waking, but especially to guilty
men, and in the night, and in hallowed places, Fear alone, helped a little with
the stories of such Apparitions, has raised in their minds terrible
Phantasmes which have been and are still deceitfully received for things really
true, under the names of Ghosts and Incorporeal Substances.

5. We will add a third out of the same book, Part 1. Chap. 5. Art. 4. For
seeing Ghosts, sensible species, a shadow, light, color, sound, space, etc.
appear to us no less sleeping then waking, they cannot be things without us,
but only Phantasmes of the mind that imagines them.

6. And a fourth out of his Humane Nature, Chap. 11. Art. 4. But Spirits
supernatural commonly signify some Substance without dimension, which two
words do flatly contradict one another. And Article 5. Nor I think is that
word Incorporeal at all in the Bible, but is said of the Spirit, that it
abides in men, sometimes that it dwells in them, sometimes that it comes on
them, that it descends, and goes, and comes, and that Spirits are Angels,
that is to say, Messengers; all which words do imply locality, and locality is
Dimension, and whatsoever has dimension is Body, be it never so subtle.

7. The fifth Excerption shall be out of his Leviathan, Chap. 12. And for the
Matter or Substance of the Invisible agents so fancyed, they could not by
natural cogitation fall upon any other conceit, but that it was the same with
that of the Soul of Man, and that the Soul of Man was of the same Substance
with that which appears in a Dream to one that sleeps, or in a
Looking-glass to one that is awake: Which, men not knowing that such
Apparitions are nothing else but creatures of the Fancy, think to be real and
external Substances, and therefore call them Ghosts, as the Latins called them
Imagines, and Umbrae; and thought them Spirits, that is, thin aereal bodies;
and those invisible Agents, which they feared, to be like them, save that they
appear and vanish when they please. But the opinion that such Spirits were
Incorporeal or Immateriall, could never enter into the mind of any man by
nature; because, though men may put together words of contradictory
signification, as Spirit and Incorporeal, yet they can never have the
imagination of any thing answering to them. We will help out this further from
what he writes in his Humane Nature, Cap. 11. Art. 5. To know that a Spirit is,
that is to say, to have natural evidence of the same, it is impossible. For all
evidence is conception, and all conception is imagination, and proceeds from
Sense; and Spirits we suppose to be those Substances which work not upon the
Sense, and therefore are not conceptible.

8. The sixth, out of Chap. 45. where he writes thus: This nature of Sight
having never been discovered by the ancient pretenders to natural knowledge,
much less by those that consider not things so remote (as that knowledge is)
from their present use, it was hard for men to conceive of those Images in the
Fancy and in the Sense, otherwise then of things really without us. Which some
(because they vanish away they know not whether nor how) will have to be
absolutely incorporeal, that is to say, Immaterial, or Forms without Matter,
Color and Figure, without any colored or figured body, and that they can put
on aerie bodies, (as a garment) to make them visible when they will to our
bodily eyes; and others say, are Bodies and living Creatures, but made of Air,
or other more subtle and ethereal matter, which is then, when they will be
seen, condensed. But both of them agree on one general appellation of them,
Demons. As if the dead of whom they dreamed were not the Inhabitants of their
own Brain, but of the Air or of Heaven or Hell, not Phantasmes but Ghosts;
with just as much reason as if one should say he saw his own Ghost in a
Looking-glass, or the Ghosts of the stars in a River, or call the ordinary
Apparition of the Sun of the quantity of about a foot, the Demon or Ghost of
that great Sun that enlightneth the whole visible world.

9. The seventh is out of the next Chapter of the same book. Where he again
taking to task that Jargon, as he calls it, of Abstract Essences and
Substantial Forms, he writes thus: The world (I mean not the Earth only, but
the Universe, that is, the whole mass of all things that are) is corporeal,
that is to say, Body, and has the Dimensions of Magnitude, namely Length,
Breadth and Depth; also every part of Body is likewise Body, and has the like
dimensions; and consequently every part of the Universe is Body, and that which
is not Body is no part of the Universe: And because the Universe is all, that
which is no part of it is nothing, and consequently no where.

10. The eighth and last we have a little after in the same Chapter, which runs
thus; Being once fallen into this error of separated essences, they are
thereby necessarily involved in many other absurdities that follow it. For
seeing they will have these Forms to be real, they are obliged to assign them
some place. But because they hold them incorporeal without all dimension of
Quantity, and all men know that Place is Dimension, and not to be filled but by
that which is corporeal, they are driven to uphold their credit with a
distinction, that they are not indeed any where Circumscriptive, but
Definitive. Which terms, being mere words, and in this occasion insignificant,
pass only in Latin, that the vanity of them might be concealed. For the
Circumscription of a thing is nothing else but the determination or defining of
it is place, and so both the terms of distinction are the same. And in
particular of the essence of man, which they say is his Soul, they affirm it
to be all of it in his little finger, and all of it in every other part (how
small soever) of his Body, and yet no more Soul in the whole Body then in any
one of these parts. Can any man think that God is served with such Absurdities?
And yet all this is necessary to believe to those that will believe the
existence of an incorporeal Soul separated from the Body.

CHAP. X.
1. An Answer to the first Excerption. 2. To the second. 3. An Answer to the
third. 4. To the fourth Excerption. 5. An Answer to the fifth. 6. To the sixth.
7. To the seventh. 8. An Answer to the eighth and last. 9. A brief
Recapitulation of what has been said hitherto.

1. WE have set down the chiefest passages in the Writings of Mr. Hobbs, that
confident Exploder of Immaterial Substances out of the world. It remains now
that we examine them, and see whether the force of his Arguments bears any
proportion to the firmness of his belief, or rather mis-belief, concerning
these things. To strip therefore the first Excerption of that long Ambages of
words, and to reduce it to a more plain and compendious form of reasoning, the
force of his Argument lies thus: That seeing every thing in the Universe is
Body (the Universe being nothing else but an Aggregate of Bodies) Body and
Substance are but names of one and the same thing; it being called Body as it
fills a place, and Substance as it is the Subject of several Alterations and
Accidents. Wherefore Body and Substance being all one, Incorporeal Substance is
no better sense then an Incorporeal Body, which is a contradiction in the very
terms. But it is plain to all the world that this is not to prove, but to
suppose what is to be proved, That the Universe is nothing else but an
Aggregate of Bodies: When he has proved that, we will acknowledge the sequel;
till then he has proved nothing, and therefore this first argumentation must
pass for naught.

2. Let us examine the strength of the Second, which certainly must be this, if
any at all; That which has its original merely from Dreams, Fears and
Superstitious Faneyes, has no real existence in the world. But Incorporeall
Substances have no other Original. The Proposition is a Truth indubitable, but
the Assumption is as weak as the other is strong; whether you understand it of
the real Original of these Substances, or of the Principles of our knowledge
That they are. And be their Original what it will, it is nothing to us, but so
far forth as it is cognoscible to us by Axiom first. And therefore when he
says, they have no other Original then that of our own Fancy, he must be
understood to affirm that there is no other principle of the knowledge of
their Existence then that we vainly imagine them to be; which is grossly false.
For it is not the Dreams and Fears of Melancholic and Superstitious persons,
from which Philosophers and Christians have argued the Existence of Spirits and
Immaterial Substances, but from the evidence of External Objects of Sense,
that is, the ordinary Phenomenon of Nature, in which there is discoverable so
profound Wisdom and Counsel, that they could not but conclude that the order
of things in the world was from a higher Principle then the blind motions and
jumblings of Matter and mere Corporeal Beings. To which you may add what
usually they call Apparitions, which are so far from being merely the Dreams
and Fancyes of the Superstitious, that they are acknowledged by such as cannot
but be deemed by most men over Atheistical, I mean Pomponatius and Cardan, nay
by Vaninus himself, though so devoted to Atheism, that out of a perfect mad
zeal to that despicable cause he died for it. I omit to name the operations of
the Soul, which ever appeared to the wisest of all Ages of such a transcendent
condition, that they could not judge them to spring from so contemptible a
Principle as bare Body or Matter. Wherefore to decline all these, and to make
representation only of Dreams and Fancyes to be the occasions of the world's
concluding that there are Incorporeall Substances, is to fancy his Reader a
mere fool, and publicly to profess that he has a mind to impose upon him.

3. The third argumentation is this: That which appears to us as well sleeping
as wakeing, is nothing without us: But Ghosts, that is Immateriall Substances,
appear to us as well sleeping as waking. This is the weakest argument that has
been yet produced: for both the Proposition and Assumption are false. For if
the Proposition were true, the Sun, Moon, Stars, Clouds, Rivers, Meadows, Men,
Women, and other living creatures were nothing without us: For all these
appear to us as well when we are sleeping as waking. But Incorporeall
Substances do not appear to us as well sleeping as waking. For the notion of
an Incorporeall Substance is so subtle and refined, that it leaving little or
no impression on the Fancy, it is representation is merely supported by the free
power of Reason, which seldom exercises it self in sleep, unless upon easy
imaginable Phantasmes.

4. The force of the fourth Argument is briefly this: Every Substance has
dimensions; but a Spirit has no dimensions. Here I confidently deny the
Assumption. For it is not the Characteristicall of a Body to have dimensions,
but to be Impenetrable. All Substance has Dimensions, that is, Length, Breadth,
and Depth: but all has not Impenetrability. See my Letters to Monsieur
Descartes, besides what I have here writ, Cap. 2, and 3.

5. In the Excerptions belonging to the fifth place these Arguments are
comprised. 1. That we have no principle of knowledge of any Immateriall Being,
but such as a Dream or a Looking-glass furnishes us withal. 2. That the word
Spirit or Incorporeall implies a contradiction, and cannot be conceived to be
sense by a natural Understanding. 3. That nothing is conceived by the
Understanding but what comes in at the Senses, and therefore Spirits not acting
upon the Senses must remain unknown and unconceivable.

We have already answered to the first in what we have returned to his second
Argument in the second Excerption.

To the second I answer, That Spirit or Incorporeall implies no contradiction,
there being nothing understood thereby but Extended Substance with Activity and
Indiscerpibility, leaving out Impenetrability: Which I have above demonstrated
to be the notion of a thing possible, and need not repeat what I have already
written.

To the third I answer, That Spirits do act really upon the Senses, by acting
upon Matter that affects the Senses; and some of these operations being such,
that they cannot be rationally attributed to the Matter alone, Reason by the
information of the Senses concludes, that there is some other more noble
Principle distinct from the Matter. And as for that part of the Argument that
asserts that there is nothing in the Understanding but what comes in at the
Senses, I shall in it is due place demonstrate it to be a very gross Error. But
in the mean time I conclude, that the Substance of every thing being utterly
unconceivable by Axiom 8. and it being only the Immediate properties by which
a man conceives every thing, and the properties of Penetrability and
Indiscerpibility being as easy to conceive, as of Discerpibility and
Impenetrability, and the power of communicating of motion to Matter as easy as
the Matters reception of it, and the Union of Matter with Spirit, as of Matter
with Matter; it plainly follows, that the notion of a Spirit is as naturally
conceivable as the notion of a Body.

6. In this sixth Excerption he is very copious in jearing and making
ridiculous the opinion of Ghosts and Demons; but the strength of his Argument,
if it have any, is this, viz. If there be any such things as Ghosts or Demons,
then they are (according to them that hold this opinion) either those Images
reflected from water or Looking-glasses, clothing themselves in aerie
garments, and so wandering up and down, or else they are living Creatures made
of nothing but Air or some more subtle and AEthereall Matter. One might well
be amazed to observe such slight and vain arguing come from so grave a
Philosopher, were not a man well aware that his peculiar eminency, as himself
somewhere professes, lies in Politics, to which the humors and Bravadoes of
Eloquence, especially amongst the simple, is a very effectual and serviceable
instrument. And certainly such Rhetorications as this cannot be intended for
any but such as are of the very weakest capacity. Those two groundless conceits
that he would obtrude upon the sober Assertors of Spirits and Demons belong
not to them, but are the genuine issue of his own Brain. For, for the former of
them, it is most justly adjudged to him, as the first Author thereof; it being
a Rarity, which neither my self nor (I dare say) any else ever met with out of
Mr. Hobbs his Writings. And the latter he does not only not go about to
confute here, but makes a show of allowing it, for fear he should seem to deny
Scripture, in Chap. 34. of his Leviathan. But those that assert the existence
of Spirits, will not stand to Mr. Hobbs his choice for defining of them, but
will make use of their own Reason and Judgment for the settling of so concerning
a Notion.

7. In this seventh Excerption is contained the same Argument that was found in
the first; but to deal fairly and heartily, I must confess it is better backed
then before. For there he supposes, but does not prove, the chief ground of his
Argument; but here he offers at a proof of it, couched, as I conceive, in these
words [and has the dimensions of Magnitude, namely Length, Breadth and Depth]
for hence he would infer that the whole Universe is corporeal, that is to say,
every thing in the Universe, because there is nothing but has Length, Breadth
and Depth. This therefore is the very last ground his Argument is to be
resolved into. But how weak it is I have already intimated, it being not
Trinall Dimension, but Impenetrability, that constitutes a Body.

8. This last Excerption seems more considerable then any of the former, or all
of them put together: but when the force of the Arguments therein contained is
duly weighed, they will be found of as little efficacy to make good the
Conclusion as the rest. The first Argument runs thus; Whatsoever is real, must
have some place: But Spirits can have no place. But this is very easily
answered. For if nothing else be understood by Place, but Imaginary Space,
Spirits and Bodies may be in the same imaginary Space, and so the Assumption is
false. But if by Place be meant the Concave Superficies of one Body immediately
environing another Body, so that it be conceived to be of the very Formality of
a Place, immediately to environ the corporeal Superficies of that Substance
which is said to be placed; then it is impossible that a Spirit should be
properly said to be in a Place, and so the Proposition will be false. Wherefore
there being these two acceptions of Place, that Distinction of being there
Circumscriptive and Definitive is an allowable Distinction, and the terms may
not signify one and the same thing. But if we will with Mr. Hobbs (and I know
no great hurt if we should do so) confine the notion of Place to Imaginary
Space, this distinction of the Schools will be needless here, and we may,
without any more ado, assert, that Spirits are as truly in Place as Bodies.

His second Argument is drawn from that Scholastic Riddle, which I must
confess seems to verge too near to profound Nonsense, That the Soul of man is
tota in toto and tota in qualibet part corporis. This mad Jingle it seems has
so frighted Mr. Hobbs sometime or other, that he never since could endure to
come near the notion of a Spirit again, not so much as to consider whether it
were a mere Bug-beare, or some real Being. But if Passion had not surprised
his better Faculties, he might have found a true settled meaning thereof, and
yet secluded these wild intricacies that the heedless Schools seem to have
charged it with: For the Immediate properties of a Spirit are very well
intelligible without these aenigmaticall flourishes, viz. That it is a
Substance Penetrable and Indiscerpible, as I have already shown at large.

Nor is that Scholastic AEnigme necessary to be believed by all those that
would believe the existence of an Incorporeal Soul; nor do I believe Mr. Hobbs
his interpretation of this Riddle to be so necessary. And it had been but fair
play to have been assured, that the Schools held such a perfect contradiction,
before he pronounced the belief thereof necessary to all those that would hold
the Soul of Man an Immateriall Substance, separable from the Body. I suppose
they may mean nothing by it, but what Plato did by his making the Soul to
consist (...) nor Plato any thing more by that divisible and indivisible
Substance, then an Essence that is intellectually divisible, but really
indiscerpible.

9. We have now firmly made good, that the notion of a Spirit implies no
contradiction nor incompossibility in it; but is the notion or Idea of a thing
that may possibly be. Which I have done so punctually and particularly, that I
have cleared every Species of Substances Incorporeall from the imputation of
either obscurity or inconsistency. And that I might not seem to take advantage
in pleading their cause in the absence of the adverse party, I have brought in
the most able Advocate and the most assured that I have hitherto ever met
withal; and dare now appeal to any indifferent Judge, whether I have not
demonstrated all his Allegations to be weak and inconclusive. Wherefore having
so clearly evinced the possibility of the Existence of a Spirit, we shall now
make a step further, and prove That it is not only a thing possible, but that
it is really and actually in Nature.

CHAP. XI.
1. Three grounds to prove the Existence of an Immateriall Substance, whereof
the first is fetched from the Nature of God. 2. The second from the Phenomenon
of Motion in the world. 3. That the Matter is not self-moveable. 4. An
Objection that the Matter may be part self-moved, part not. 5. The first Answer
to the Objection. 6. The second Answer. 7. Other Evasions answered. 8. The
Conclusion, That no Matter is self-moved, but that a certain quantity of motion
was impressed upon it at its first Creation by God.

1. THere be three main Grounds from whence a man may be assured of the
Existence of Spiritual or Immateriall Substance. The one is the consideration
of the transcendent excellency of the nature of God; who being, according to
the true Idea of Him, an Essence absolutely perfect, cannot possibly be Body,
and consequently must be something Incorporeall: and seeing that there is no
contradiction in the notion of a Spirit in general, nor in any of those kinds
of Spirits which we have defined, (where the notion of God was set down amongst
the rest) and that in the very notion of him there is contained the reason of
his Existence, as you may see at large in my Antidote, Lib. 1. Cap. 7. 8;
certainly if we find any thing at all to be, we may safely conclude that He is
much more. For there is nothing besides Him of which one can give a reason why
it is, unless we suppose him to be the Author of it. Wherefore though God be
neither Visible nor Tangible, yet his very Idea representing to our
Intellectual Faculties the necessary reason of his Existence, we are by Axiom
5. (though we had no other Argument drawn from our Senses) confidently to
conclude That He is.

2. The second ground is the ordinary Phenomenon of Nature, the most general
whereof is Motion. Now it seems to me demonstrable from hence, that there is
some Being in the world distinct from Matter. For Matter being of one simple
homogeneal nature, and not distinguishable by specificall differences, as the
Schools speak, it must have every where the very same Essential properties;
and therefore of it self it must all of it be either without motion, or else be
self-moving, and that in such or such a tenor, or measure of Motion; there
being no reason imaginable, why one part of the Matter should move of it self
less then another; and therefore if there be any such thing, it can only
arise from external impediment.

3. Now I say, if Matter be utterly devoid of Motion in it self, it is plain it
has it is motion from some other Substance, which is necessarily a Substance
that is not Matter, that is to say, a Substance Incorporeall. But if it be
moved of it self, in such or such a measure, the effect here being an Emanative
effect, cannot possibly fail to be wherever Matter is, by Axiom 17.
especially if there be no external impediment: And there is no impediment at
all, but that the terrestrial parts might regain an activity very nigh equal
to the aethereall, or rather never have lost it. For if the Planets had but a
common Dividend of all the motion which themselves and the Sun and Stars, and
all the AEthereall matter possess, (the matter of the Planets being so little
in comparison of that of the Sun, Stars and Ether) the proportion of motion
that will fall due to them would be exceeding much above what they have. For it
would be as if four or five poor men in a very rich and populous city should,
by giving up that estate they have, in a levelling way, get equal share with
all the rest. Wherefore every Planet could not fail of melting it self into
little less finer Substance then the purest Ether. But they not doing so, it
is a sign they have not that Motion nor Agitation of themselves, and therefore
rest content with what has extrinsecally accrued to them, be it less or more.

4. But the pugnacious, to evade the stroke of our Dilemma, will make any bold
shift, and though they affront their own faculties in saying so, yet they will
say, and must say, That part of the Matter is self-moving, part without motion
of it self.

5. But to this I answer, That first this evasion of theirs is not so agreeable
to experience; but, so far as either our Sense or Reason can reach, there is
the same Matter every where. For consider the subtilest parts of Matter
discoverable here below, those which for their Subtilty are invisible, and for
their Activity wonderful, I mean those particles that cause that vehement
agitation we fell in Winds: They in time loose their motion, become of a
visible vaporous consistency, and turn to Clouds, then to Snow or Rain, after
happily to Ice it self; but then in process of time, first melted into Water,
then exhaled into Vapors, after more fiercely agitated, do become Wind again.
And that we may not think that this Reciprocation into Motion and Rest belongs
only to Terrestrial particles; that the Heavens themselves be of the same
Matter, is apparent from the Ejections of Comets into our Vortex, and the
perpetual rising of those Spots and Scum upon the Face of the Sun.

6. But secondly, to return what is still more pungent. This Matter that is
Self-moved, in the impressing of Motion upon other Matter, either looses of its
own motion, or retains it still entire. If the first, it may be despoiled of
all its motion: And so that whose immediate nature is to move, shall rest, the
entire cause of its motion still remaining, viz. it self: which is a plain
contradiction by Axiom 17. If the second, no meaner an inconvenience then this
will follow, that the whole world had been turned into pure Ether by this
time, if not into a perfect flame, or at least will be in the conclusion, to
the utter destruction of all corporeal Consistencies. For, that these
Self-moving parts of Matter are of a considerable copiousness, the event does
testify, they having melted almost all the world already into Suns, Stars and
Ether, nothing remaining but Planets and Comets to be dissolved: Which all put
together scarce bear so great a proportion to the rest of the Matter of the
Universe, as an ordinary apple to the ball of the Earth. Wherefore so potent a
Principle of Motion still adding new motion to Matter, and no motion once
communicated being lost, (for according to the laws of motion, no Body looses
any more motion then it communicates to another) it plainly follows, that
either the world had been utterly burnt up ere now, or will be at least in an
infinite less time then it has existed, nay, I may say absolutely in a very
little time, and will never return to any frame of things again, which though
it possibly may be, yet none but a madman will assert, by Axiom 2. And that
it has not yet been since the first Epoches of History, is a Demonstration this
second Hypothesis is false.

7. There is yet another Evasion or two, which when they are answered there
will be no scruple remaining touching this point. The first is, That the Matter
is all of it homogeneall, of the like nature every where, and that it is the
common property of it all to be of it self indifferent to Motion or Rest; and
therefore, that it is no wonder that some of it moves and other some of it
rests, or moves less then other some. To which I answer, That this Indifferency
of the Matter to Motion or Rest may be understood two ways: Either
privatively, that is to say, That it has not any real or active propension to
Rest, more then to Motion, or vice versa, but is merely passive and susceptive
of what Motion or Fixation some other Agent confers upon it, and keeps that
modification exactly and perpetually till again some other Agent change it; (in
which sense I allow the Assertion to be true, but it makes nothing against us,
but for us, it plainly implying that there is an Incorporeal Substance distinct
from the Matter, from whence the Matter both is and must be moved.) Or else,
this Indifferency is to be understood positively, that is to say, That the
Matter has a real and active propension as well to Motion as to Rest, so that
it moves it self and fixes it self from its own immediate nature: From whence
there are but these two Absurdities that follow: the first, That two absolutely
contrary properties are immediately seated in one simple Subject; then which
nothing can seem more harsh and unhandsome to our Logical faculties; unless
the second, which is, That Motion and Rest being thus the emanative effects of
this one simple Subject, the Matter will both move and rest at once; or, if
they do not understand by Rest, Fixation, but a mere absence of motion, That
it will both move and not move at once. For what is immediate to any Subject,
will not cease to be, the Subject not being destroyed, by Axiom 17. Nor will
they much help themselves by fancying that Matter necessarily exerting both
these immediate powers or properties at once of Motion and Rest, moves her self
to such a measure and no swifter. For this position is but coincident with the
second member of the Dilemma, Sect. 3. of this Chapter; and therefore the same
Argument will serve for both places. The other Evasion is, by supposing part of
the Matter to be Self-moving, and part of it Self-resting, in a positive sense,
or Self-fixing: Which is particularly directed against what we have argued
Sect. 6. But that this supposition is false is manifest from experience. For if
there be any such Self-fixing parts of Matter, they are certainly in Gold and
Lead and such like Metalls; but it is plain that they are not there. For what
is Self-fixing, will immediately be reduced to Rest, so soon as external
violence is taken off, by Axiom 17. Whence it will follow that though these
Self-fixing parts of Matter may be carried by other matter while they are made
fast to it, yet left free they will suddenly rest, they having the immediate
cause of Fixation in themselves. Nor can any one distrust that the change will
be so sudden, if he consider how suddenly an external force puts Matter upon
motion. But a Bullet of gold or lead put thus upon motion, swift or slow, does
not suddenly reduce it self to rest. Whence it plainly appears that this last
Evasion contradicts Experience, and therefore has no force against our former
Arguments.

8. Wherefore it is most rational to conclude, That Matter of its own Nature
has no active Principle of Motion, though it be receptive thereof, but that
when God created it, he superadded an impress of Motion upon it, such a measure
and proportion to all of it, which remains still much-what the same for
quantity in the whole, though the parts of Matter in their various occursion of
one to another have not always the same proportion of it. Nor is there any
more necessity that God should reiterate this impress of Motion on the Matter
created, then that he should perpetually create the Matter. Neither does his
conservation of this quantity of Motion any thing more imply either a
repetition or an augmentation of it, then the conservation of the Matter does
the superaddition of new Matter thereunto. Indeed he need but conserve the
Matter, and the Matter thus conserved will faithfully retain, one part with
another, the whole sum of Motion first communicated to it, some small moments
excepted, which are not worth the mentioning in this place.

CHAP. XII.
1. That the Order and Nature of things in the Universe argue an Essence
Spiritual or Incorporeall. 2. The Evasion of this Argument. 3. A preparation
out of Mr. Hobbs to answer the Evasion. 4. The first Answer. 5. The second
Answer. 6. Mr. Hobbs his mistake, of making the Ignorance of Second Causes the
only Seed of Religion.

1. WE have discovered out of the simple Phenomenon of Motion, the necessity
of the Existence of some Incorporeall Essence distinct from the Matter: But
there is a further assurance of this Truth, from the consideration of the Order
and admirable Effect of this Motion in the world. Suppose Matter could move it
self, would mere Matter, with Self-motion, amount to that admirable wise
contrivance of things which we see in the world? Can a blind impetus produce
such effects, with that accuracy and constancy, that, the more wise a man is,
the more he will be assured That no Wisdom can add, take away, or alter any
thing in the works of Nature, whereby they may be bettered? How can that
therefore that has not so much as Sense, arise to the effects of the highest
pitch of Reason or Intellect? But of this I have spoke so fully and
convincingly in the second Book of my Antidote, that it will be but a needless
repetition to proceed any further on this Subject.

2. All the evasion that I can imagine our Adversaries may use here, will be
this: That Matter is capable of Sense, and the finest and most subtle of the
most refined Sense, and consequently of Imagination too, yea happily of Reason
and Understanding. For Sense being nothing else, as some conceit, but Motion,
or rather Reaction of a Body pressed upon by another Body, it will follow that
all the Matter in the world has in some manner or other the power of Sensation.

3. Let us see now what this Position will amount to: Those that make Motion
and Sensation thus really the same, they must of necessity acknowledge that no
longer Motion no longer Sensation, as Mr. Hobbs has ingenuously confessed
Physic. Chap. 25. And that every Motion or Reaction must be a new Sensation, as
well as every ceasing of Reaction a ceasing of Sensation.

4. Now let us give these busy active particles of the Matter that play up and
down every where the advantage of Sense, and let us see if all their heads laid
together can contrive the Anatomicall fabric of any Creature that lives.
Assuredly when all is summed up that can be imagined, they will fall short of
their account. For I demand, has every one of these particles that must have an
hand in the framing of the Body of an Animal, the whole design of the work by
the impress of some Phantasme upon it, or, as they have several offices, so
have they several parts of the design? If the first, it being most certain,
even according to their opinion whom we oppose, that there can be no knowledge
nor perception in the Matter, but what arises out of the Reaction of one part
against another, how is it conceivable that any one particle of Matter or many
together (there not existing yet in Nature any Animal) can have the Idea
impressed of that Creature they are to frame? Or if one or some few particles
have the sense of one part of the Animal (they seeming more capable of this,
the parts being far more simple then the whole Compages and contrivement) and
other some few of other parts; how can they confer notes? by what language or
speech can they communicate their counsel one to another? Wherefore that they
should mutually serve one another in such a design, is more impossible, then
that so many men blind and dumb from their nativity should join their forces
and wits together to build a Castle, or carve a Statue of such a Creature as
none of them knew any more of in several, then some one of the smallest parts
thereof, but not the relation it bore to the whole.

5. Besides this, Sense being really the same with Corporeal Motion, it must
change upon new impresses of Motion, so that if a particle by Sense were
carried in this line, it meeting with a counterbuffe in the way, must have
quite another Impress and Sense, and so forget what it was going about, and
divert its course another way. Nay though it escaped free, Sense being Reaction,
when that which it bears against is removed, Sense must needs cease, and
perfect Oblivion succeed. For it is not with these particles as with the Spring
of a Watch, or a bent Crosbow, that they should for a considerable time retain
the same Reaction, and so consequently the same Sense. And lastly, if they
could, it is still nothing to the purpose; for let their Sense be what it will,
their motion is necessary, it being merely corporeal, and therefore the result
of their motion cannot be from any kind of knowledge. For the corporeal motion
is first, and is only felt, not directed by feeling. And therefore whether the
Matter have any Sense or no, what is made out of it is nothing but what results
from the wild jumblings and knockings of one part thereof against another,
without any purpose, counsel or direction. Wherefore the ordinary Phenomenon
of Nature being guided according to the most* Exquisite Wisdom imaginable, it
is plain that they are not the effects of the mere motion of Matter, but of
some Immateriall Principle, by Axiom 10.

6. And therefore the Ignorance of Second Causes is not so rightly said to be
the Seed of Religion, (as Mr. Hobbs would have it) as of Irreligion and
Atheism. For if we did more punctually and particularly search into their
natures, we should clearly discern their insufficiency for such effects as we
discover to be in the world. But when we have looked so closely and carefully
into the nature of Corporeal Beings, and can find no Causality in them
proportionable to these Effects we speak of, still to implead our selves rather
of Ignorance, then the Matter and Corporeal motion of Insufficiency, is to
hold an opinion upon humor, and to transgress against our first and second
Axioms.

CHAP. XIII.
1. The last proof of Incorporeall Substances from Apparitions. 2. The first
Evasion of the force of such Arguings. 3. An answer to that Evasion. 4. The
second Evasion. 5. The first kind of the second Evasion. 6. A description out
of Virgil of that Genius that suggests the dictates of the Epicurean
Philosophy. 7. The more full and refined sense of that Philosophy now a days.
8. The great efficacy of the Stars (which they suppose to consist of nothing
but Motion and Matter) for production of all manner of Creatures in the world.

1. THE Third and last ground which I would make use of, for evincing the
Existence of Incorporeall Substances, is such extraordinary effects as we
cannot well imagine any natural, but must needs conceive some free or
spontaneous Agent to be the Cause thereof, when as yet it is clear that they
are from neither Man nor Beast. Such are speakings, knockings, opening of
doors when they were fast shut, sudden lights in the midst of a room floating
in the air, and then passing and vanishing; nay, shapes of Men and several
sorts of Brutes, that after speech and converse have suddenly disappeared.
These and many such like extraordinary effects (which, if you please, you may
call by one general term of Apparitions) seem to me to be an undeniable
Argument, that there be such things as Spirits or Incorporeall Substances in
the world; and I have demonstrated the sequel to be necessary in the last
Chapter of the Appendix to my Treatise against Atheism; and in the third Book
of that Treatise have produced so many and so unexceptionable stories
concerning Apparitions, that I hold it superfluous to add any thing here of
that kind, taking far more pleasure in exercising of my Reason then in
registring of History. Besides that I have made so careful choice there
already, that I cannot hope to cull out any that may prove more pertinent or
convictive; I having penned down none but such as I had compared with those
severe laws I set my self in the first Chapter of that third Book, to prevent
all tergiversations and evasions of gainsayers.

2. But, partly out of my own observation, and partly by information from
others, I am well assured there are but two ways whereby they escape the force
of such evident narrations. The first is a firm persuasion that the very notion
of a Spirit or Immateriall Substance is an Impossibility or Contradiction in
the very terms. And therefore such stories implying that which they are
confident is impossible, the Narration at the very first hearing must needs be
judged to be false, and therefore they think it more reasonable to conclude all
those that profess they have seen such or such things to be madmen or cheats,
then to give credit to what implies a Contradiction.

3. But this Evasion I have quite taken away, by so clearly demonstrating that
the notion of a Spirit implies no more contradiction then the notion of Matter;
and that its Attributes are as conceivable as the Attributes of Matter: so that
I hope this creep-hole is stopped for ever.

4. The second Evasion is not properly an evasion of the truth of these stories
concerning Apparitions, but of our deduction therefrom. For they willingly
admit of these Apparitions and Prodigies recorded in History, but they deny
that they are any Arguments of a truly Spiritual and Incorporeall Substance
distinct from the Matter thus changed into this or that shape, that can walk
and speak, etc. but that they are special effects of the influence of the
Heavenly Bodies upon this region of Generation and Corruption.

5. And these that answer thus are of two sorts. The one have great Affinity
with Aristotle and Avenroes, who look not upon the Heavenly Bodies as mere
Corporeal Substances, but as actuated with Intelligencies, which are Essences
separate and Immateriall. But this Supposition hurts not us at all in our
present design; they granting that which I am arguing for, viz. a Substance
Incorporeall. The use of this perverse Hypothesis is only to shuffle off all
Arguments that are drawn from Apparitions, to prove that the Souls of men
subsist after death, or that there are any such things as Demons or Genii of a
nature permanent and immortal. But I look upon this Supposition as confutable
enough, were it worth the while to encounter it. That of the Sadduces is far
more firm, they supposing their (...) to be nothing else but the efficacy of
the presence of God altering Matter into this or the other Apparition, or
Manifestation; as if there were but one Soul in all things, and God were that
Soul variously working in the Matter. But this I have already confuted in my
Philosophical Poems.

6. The other Influenciaries hold the same power of the Heavens as these;
though they do not suppose so high a Principle in them, yet they think it
sufficient for the salving of all Sublunary Phenomenon, as well ordinary as
extraordinary. Truly it is a very venerable Secret, and not to be uttered or
communicated but by some old Silenus lying in his obscure Grot or Cave, nor
that neither but upon due circumstances, and in a right humor, when one may
find him with his veins swelled out with wine, and his Garland fallen off from
his head through his heedless drousiness: then if some young Chromis and
Mnasylus, especially assisted by a fair and forward AEgle, that by way of a
love-srollick will leave the tracts of her fingers in the blood of Mulberies on
the temples and forehead of this aged Satyr, while he sleeps dogsleep, and
will not seem to see for fear he forfeit the pleasure of his feeling; then, I
say, if these young lads importune him enough, he will again sing that old song
of the Epicurean Philosophy, in an higher strain then ever, which I profess I
should abhor to recite, were it not to confute; it is so monstrous and impious.
But because no sore can be cured that is concealed, I must bring this
Hypothesis into view also, which the Poet has briefly comprised in this
summary. Namque canebat, uti magnum per inane coacta
Semina terrarumque animaeque marisque fuissent,
Et liquidi simul ignis; ut his exordia primis
Omnia, and ipse tener mundi concreverit orbis.


7. The fuller and more refined sense whereof now a days is this; That Matter
and Motion are the Principles of all things whatsoever; and that by Motion some
Atoms or particles are more subtle then others, and of more nimbleness and
activity. That motion of one Body against another does every where necessarily
produce Sense, Sense being nothing else but the Reaction of parts of the
Matter. That the subtiler the Matter is, the Sense is more subtle. That the
subtilest Matter of all is that which constitutes the Sun and Stars, from
whence they must needs have the purest and subtilest Sense. That what has the
most perfect Sense, has the most perfect Imagination and Memory, because Memory
and Imagination are but the same with Sense in reality, the latter being but
certain Modes of the former. That what has the perfectest Imagination, has the
highest Reason and Providence; Providence and Reason being nothing else but an
exacter train of Phantasmes, Sensations or Imaginations. Wherefore the Sun and
the Stars are the most Intellectual Beings in the world, and in them is that
Knowledge Counsel, and Wisdom by which all Sublunary things are framed and
governed.

8. These by their several impresses and impregnations have filled the whole
Earth with vital Motion, raising innumerable sorts of Flowers, Herbs and Trees
out of the ground. These have also generated the several Kinds of living
Creatures. These have filled the Seas with Fishes, the Fields with Beasts, and
the Air with Fowls; the Terrestrial matter being as easily formed into the
living shapes of these several Animals by the powerful impress of the
Imagination of the Sun and Stars, as the Embryo in the womb is marked by the
strong fancy of his Mother that bears him. And therefore these Celestial
powers being able to frame living shapes of earthly matter by the impress of
their Imagination, it will be more easy for them to change the vaporous Air
into like transfigurations. So that admitting all these Stories of Apparitions
to be true that are recorded in Writers, it is no Argument of the Existence of
any Incorporeall Principle in the world. For the piercing Foresight of these
glorious Bodies, the Sun and Stars, is able to raise what Apparitions or
Prodigies they please, to usher in the Births or fore-signify the Deaths of the
most considerable persons that appear in the world; of which Pomponatius
himself does acknowledge that there are many true examples both in Greek and
Latin History. This is the deepest Secret that old Silenus could ever sing to
ensnare the ears of deceivable Youth. And it is indeed (...), in the very worst
sense, Horrendum mysterium, a very dreadful and dangerous Mystery, saving that
there is no small hope that it may not prove true. Let us therefore now examine
it.

CHAP. XIV.
1. That the Splendour of the Celestial Bodies proves no Foresight nor
Sovereignty that they have over us. 2. That the Stars can have no knowledge of
us, Mathematically demonstrated. 3. The same Conclusion again demonstrated more
familiarly. 4. That the Stars cannot communicate Thoughts, neither with the Sun
nor with one another. 5. That the Sun has no knowledge of our affairs. 6.
Principles laid down for the inferring that Conclusion. 7. A demonstration that
he cannot see us. 8. That he can have no other kind of knowledge of us, nor of
the frame of any Animal on Earth. 9. That though the Sun had the knowledge of
the right frame of an Animal, he could not transmit it into Terrestrial
matter. 10. An Answer to that Instance of the Signature of the Foetus. 11. 12.
Further Answers thereto. 13. A short Increpation of the confident Exploders of
Incorporeall Substance out of the world.

1. THat the Light is a very glorious thing, and the luster of the Stars very
lovely to look upon, and that the Body of the Sun is so full of splendor and
Majesty, that without flattery we may profess our selves constrained to look
aside, as not being able to bear the brightness of his aspect; all this must be
acknowledged for Truth: but that these are as so many Eyes of Heaven to watch
over the Earth, so many kind and careful Spectators and intermedlers also in
humane affairs, as that phansifull Chemist Paracelsus conceits, who writes
that not only Princes and Nobles, or men of great and singular worth, but even
almost every one, near his death has some prognostic sign or other (as
knockings in the house, the dances of dead men, and the like) from these
compassionate Foreseers of his approaching Fate; this I must confess I am not
so paganly Superstitious as to believe one syllable of, but think it may be
demonstrated to be a mere fancy, especially upon this present Hypothesis, That
the Sun and Stars have no immateriall Being residing in them, but are mere
Matter consisting of the subtilest Particles and most vehemently agitated. For
then we cannot but be assured that there is nothing in them more Divine then
what is seen in other things that shine in the dark, suppose rotten wood,
glo-worms, or the flame of a rush-candle.

2. This at least we will demonstrate, That let the Sun and Stars have what
knowledge they will of other things, they have just none at all of us, nor of
our affairs; which will quite take away this last Evasion. That the Stars can
have no knowledge of us is exceeding evident. For whenas the Magnus Orbis of the
Earth is but as a Point compared with the distance thereof to a fixed Star,
that is to say, when as that Angle which we may imagine to be drawn from a
Star, and to be subtended by the Diameter of the Magnus Orbis, is to Sense no
Angle at all, but as a mere Line; how little then is the Earth it self? and how
utterly invisible to any Star, when as her Diameter is above 1100. times less
then that of her Magnus Orbis? From whence it is clear that it is perfectly
impossible that the Stars, though they were endued with sight, could so much as
see the Earth it self, (much less the inhabitants thereof) to be Spectators and
Intermedlers in their affairs for good or evil; and there being no higher
Principle to inspire them with the knowledge of these things, it is evident that
they remain utterly ignorant of them.

3. Or if this Demonstration (though undeniably true in it self) be not so
intelligible to every one, we may add what is more easy and familiar, viz.
That the Stars being lucid Bodies, and those of the first magnitude near an
hundred times bigger then the Earth, and yet appearing so small things to us,
hence any one may collect, that the opake Earth will either be quite invisible
to the Stars, or else at least appear so little, that it will be impossible
that they should see any distinct Countries, much less Cities, Houses, or
Inhabitants.

4. Wherefore we have plainly swept away this numerous Company of the
celestial Senators from having any thing to do to consult about, or any way
to oversee the affairs of Mankind; and therefore let them seem to wink and
twinkle as cogitabundly as they will, we may rest in assurance that they have
no plot concerning us, either for good or evil, as having no knowledge of us.
Nor if they had, could they communicate their thoughts to that great deemed
Sovereign of the world, the Sun; they being ever as invisible to him, as they
are to us in the day time. For it is nothing but his light that hinders us from
seeing so feeble Objects, and this hindrance consists in nothing else but
this, That that motion which by his Rays is caused in the Organ is so fierce
and violent, that the gentle vibration of the light of the Stars cannot master
it, nor indeed bear any considerable proportion to it: What then can it do in
reference to the very Body of the Sun himself, the matter whereof has the most
furious motion of any thing in the world?

5. There is nothing now therefore left, but the Sun alone, that can possibly
be conceived to have any knowledge of, or any superintendency over our
terrestrial affairs. And how incapable he is also of this office, I hold it no
difficult thing to demonstrate. Whence it will plainly appear, that those
Apparitions that are seen, whether in the Air or on Earth (which are rightly
looked upon as an Argument of Providence and Existence of some Incorporeall
Essence in the world) cannot be attributed to the power and prevision of the
Sun, supposing him purely corporeal.

6. For it is a thing agreed upon by all sides, That mere Matter has no connate
Ideas in it of such things as we see in the world; but that upon Reaction of
one part moved by another arises a kind of Sense, or Perception. Which opinion
as it is most rational in it self to conceive (supposing Matter has any sense
in it at all) so it is most consonant to experience, we seeing plainly that
Sense is ever caused by some outward corporeal motion upon our Organs, which
are also corporeal. For that Light is from a corporeal motion, is plain from
the reflection of the rays there of, and no Sound is heard but from the motion
of the Air or some other intermediate Body; no Voice but there is first a
moving of the tongue; no Music but there must either be the blowing of wind,
or the striking upon strings, or something Analogicall to these, and so in the
other Senses. Wherefore if there be nothing but Body in the world, it is
evident that Sense arises merely from the motion of one part of Matter against
another, and that Motion is ever first, and perception follows, and that
therefore perception must necessarily follow the laws of Motion, and that no
Percipient can have any thing more to conceive then what is conveyed by
corporeal motion. Now from these Principles it will be easy to prove that,
though we should acknowledge a power of perception in the Sun, yet it will not
amount to any ability of his being either a Spectator, or Governor of our
affairs here on Earth.

7. According to the Computation o^ Astronomers, even of those that speak more
modestly, the Sun is bigger then the Earth above an hundred and fifty times.
But how little he appears to us every eye is able to judge. How little then
must the Earth appear to him? If he see her at all, he will be so far from
being able to take notice of any Persons or Families, that he cannot have any
distinct discerning of Streets, nor Cities, no not of Fields, nor Countries;
but whole Regions, though of very great Extent, will vanish here, as Alcibiades
his Patrimony, in that Map of the world Socrates showed him, to repress the
pride of the young Heir. The Earth must appear considerably less to him then
the Moon does to us, because the Sun appears to us less then the Moon. It were
easy to demonstrate that her discus would appear to the Sun near thirty, nay
sixty times less then the Moon does to us, according to Lansbergius his
computation. Now consider how little we can discern in that broader Object of
sight, the Moon, when she is the nighest, notwithstanding we be placed in the
dark, under the shadow of the Earth, whereby our sight is more passive and
impressible. How little then must the fiery eye of that Cyclops the Sun, which
is all Flame and Light, discern in this lesser Object the Earth, his vigor and
motion being so vehemently strong and unyielding? What effect it will have upon
him, we may in some sort judge by our selves; For though our Organ be but moved
or agitated with the reflection of his Rays, we hardly see the Moon when she
is above the Horizon by day: What impress then can our Earth, a less Object to
him then the Moon is to us, make upon the Sun, whose Body is so furiously hot,
that he is as boiling Fire, if a man may so speak, and the Spots about him are,
as it were, the scum of this fuming Cauldron? Besides that our Atmosphere is so
thick a covering over us at that distance, that there can be the appearance of
nothing but a white mist enveloping all and shining like a bright cloud; in
which the rays of the Sun will be so lost, that they can never return any
distinct representation of things unto him. Wherefore it is as evident to
Reason that he cannot see us, as it is to Sense that we see him; and therefore
he can be no Overseer nor Intermedler in our actions.

8. But perhaps you will reply That though the Sun cannot see the Earth, yet he
may have a Sense and perception in himself (for he is a fine glittering thing,
and some strange matter must be presumed of him) that may amount to a
wonderful large sphere of Understanding, Fore-knowledg, and Power. But this is
a mere fancyfull surmise, and such as cannot be made good by any of our
Faculties: Nay the quite contrary is demonstrable by such Principles as are
already agreed upon. For there are no connate Ideas in the Matter, and
therefore out of the collision and agitation of these Solar particles, we
cannot rationally expect any other effect in the Sun, then such as we
experiment in the percussion of our own eyes, out of which ordinarily follows
the sense of a confused light or flame. If the Sun therefore has any sense of
himself, it must be only the perception of a very vigorous Light or Fire, which
being still one and the same representation, it is a question whether he has a
sense of it or no, any more then we have of our bones, which we perceive not,
by reason of our accustomary and uninterrupted sense of them, as Mr. Hobbs
ingeniously conjectures in a like supposition. But if you will say that there
is a perception of the jogging or justling, or of what ever touch or rubbing of
one Solar particle against another, the body of the Sun being so exceeding
liquid, and consequently the particles thereof never resting, but playing and
moving this way and that way; they hitting and fridging so fortuitously one
against another, the perceptions that arise from hence must be so various and
fortuitous, so quick and short, so inconsistent, flitting and unpermanent, that
if any man were in such a condition as the Sun necessarily is, according to
this Hypothesis, he would both be, and appear to all the world to be, stark
mad; he would be so off and on, and so unsettled, and do, and think, and speak
all things with such ungovernable rashness and temerity. In brief, that the Sun
by this tumultuous agitation of his fiery Atoms, should hit upon any rational
contrivance or right Idea of any of these living Creatures we see here on
Earth, is utterly as hard to conceive, as that the Terrestrial particles
themselves should justle together into such contrivances and forms, which is
that which I have already sufficiently confuted.

9. And if the Sun could light on any such true frame or form of any Animal,
or the due rudiments or contrivance thereof, it is yet unconceivable how he
should conveigh it into this Region of Generation here on Earth, partly by
reason of the Earths Distance and Invisibleness, and partly because the deepest
Principle of all being but mere Motion, without any superior power to govern
it, this imagination of the Sun working on the Earth can be but a simple
Rectilinear impress, which can never arise to such an inward solid organization
of parts in living Creatures, nor hold together these Specter or Apparitions
in the Air, in any more certain form then the smoke of chymnies, or the fume
of Tobacco.

10. Nor is that instance of the power of the Mothers fancy on the Foetus in
the womb, any more then a mere flourish; for the disparity is so great, that
the Argument proves just nothing: For whereas the Mother has an Explicit Idea
of the Foetus and every part thereof, the Sun and Stars have no distinct Idea
at all of the parts of the Earth; nay I dare say that what we have already
intimated will amount to a Demonstration, That though they had Sense, yet they
do not so much as know whether this Earth we live on be in rerum Natura or no.

11. Again, the mark that is impressed on the Foetus, the Mother has a clear
and vivid conception of; but the curious contrivance in the Idea of Animals, I
have shown how incompetible it is to the fortuitous justling of the fiery
particles of either Sun or Stars.

12. Thirdly, the impress on the Foetus is very simple and slight, and seldom
so curious as the ordinary impresses of Seals upon Wax, which are but the
modifications of the surface thereof; but this supposed impress of the
Imagination of the Sun and Stars is more then a solid Statue, or the most
curious Automaton that ever was invented by the wit of man; and therefore
impossible to proceed from a mere Rectilinear impress upon the Ether down to
the Earth from the Imagination of the Sun, no not if he were supposed to be
actuated with an Intelligent Soul, if the Earth and all the space betwixt her
and him were devoid thereof. Nor do I conceive, though it be an infinitely more
slight business, that the direction of the Signature of the Foetus upon such a
part were to be performed by the Fancy of the Mother, notwithstanding the
advantage of the organization of her body, were not both her self and the
Foetus animated Creatures.

13. Wherefore we have demonstrated beyond all Evasion, from the Phenomenon of
the Universe, That of necessity there must be such a thing in the world as
Incorporeall Substance; let inconsiderable Philosophasters hoot at it, and
deride it as much as their Follies please.

BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
1. An addition of more Axioms for the demonstrating that there is a Spirit or
Immateriall Substance in Man. 2. The Truth of the first of these Axioms
confirmed from the testimony of Mr. Hobbs. 3. The proof of the second Axiom.
4. The proof of the third. 5. The confirmation of the fourth from the testimony
of Mr. Hobbs, as also from Reason. 6. An explication and proof of the fifth. 7.
A further proof thereof. 8. A third Argument of the Truth thereof. 9. An Answer
to an Evasion. 10. Another Evasion answered. 11. A further Answer thereto. 12.
A third Answer. 13. A fourth Answer, wherein is mainly contained a confirmation
of the first Answer to the second Evasion. 14. The plainness of the sixth
Axiom. 15. The proof of the seventh.

1. HAving cleared the way thus far as to prove that there is no Contradiction
nor Inconsistency in the notion of a Spirit, but that it may Exist in Nature,
nay that de facto there are Incorporeall Substances really Existent in the
world, we shall now drive more home to our main design, and demonstrate That
there is such an Immateriall Substance in Man, which, from the power it is
conceived to have in actuating and guiding the Body, is usually called the
Soul. This Truth we shall make good first in a more general way, but not a
whit the less stringent, by evincing That such Faculties or Operations as we
are conscious of in our selves, are utterly incompetible to Matter considered
at large without any particular organization. And then afterward we shall more
punctually consider the Body of man, and every possible fitness in the
structure thereof, that is worth taking notice of for the performance of these
Operations we ordinarily find in our selves. And that this may be done more
plainly and convincingly* we will here add to the number of our Axioms these
that follow.

AXIOM XX.
Motion or Reaction of one part of the Matter against another, or at least a
due continuance thereof, is really one and the same with Sense and Perception,
if there be any* Sense or Perception in Matter.

2. THis Axiom, as it is plain enough of it self (supposing there were nothing
but Body in the world) so has it the suffrage of our most confident and potent
adversary Mr. Hobbs in his Elements of Philos. Cap. 25. Art. 2. Whose judgment
I make much of in such cases as these, being persuaded as well out of Reason as
Charity, that he seeing so little into the nature of Spirits, that defect is
compensated with an extraordinary Quick sightedness in discerning of the best
and most warrantable ways of salving all Phenomenon from the ordinary allowed
properties of Matter. Wherefore I shall not hold it impertinent to bring in his
Testimony in things of this nature, my Demonstrations becoming thereby more
recommendable to men of his own Conclusions. But my design being not a
particular victory over such a sort of Men, but an absolute establishing of the
Truth, I shall lay down no Grounds that are merely Argumenta ad hominem; but
such as I am persuaded (upon this Hypothesis, That there is nothing but Body in
the world) are evident to any one that can indifferently judge thereof. And the
demonstration of this present Axiom I have prefixed in my Preface Sect. 5.

AXIOM XXI.
So far as this continued Reaction reaches, so far reaches Sense or Perception,
and no farther.

3. THis Axiom is to be understood as well of Duration of time, as Extension
of the Subject, viz. That Sense and Perception spread no further in Matter then
Reaction does, nor remain any longer then this Reaction remains. Which Truth is
fully evident out of the foregoing Axiom.

AXIOM XXII.
That diversity there is of Sense or Perception does necessarily arise from the
diversity of the Magnitude, Figure, Position, Vigor and Direction of Motion in
parts of the Matter.

4. THE truth of this is also clear from the 20. Axiom, For Perception being
really one and the same thing with Reaction of Matter one part against another,
and there being a diversity of perception, it must imply also a diversity of
modification of Reaction; and Reaction being nothing but Motion in Matter, it
cannot be varied but by such variations as are competible to Matter, viz. such
as are Magnitude, Figure, Posture, Local Motion, wherein is contained any
endeavor toward it, as also the Direction of that either full Motion or
curbed endeavor, and a Vigor thereof; which if you run to the lowest degrees,
you will at last come to Rest, which therefore is someway referrible to that
head, as to Magnitude you are to refer Littleness. These are the first
conceivables in Matter, and therefore diversity of perception must of necessity
arise from these.

AXIOM XXIII.
Matter in all the variety of those Perceptions it is sensible of, has none but
such as are impressed by Corporeal Motions, that is to say, that are
perceptions of some actions or modificated Impressions of parts of Matter
bearing one against another.

5. TO this Truth Mr. Hobbs sets his seal with all willingness imaginable, or
rather eagerness, as also his followers, they stoutly contending that we have
not the perception of any thing but the Phantasmes of material Objects, and of
sensible words or Marks, which we make to stand for such and such Objects.
Which certainly would be most true if there were nothing but Matter in the
world; so that they speak very consonantly to their own Principles: I say, this
is not only true in that School, but also rational in it self, supposing
nothing but Matter in the world, and that Perception and Reaction is really
one. For that Reaction being in Brutes as well as in Men, there must not be any
difference by a perception of quite another kind, but by an external way of
communication of their perceptions. And therefore the distinction betwixt Men
and Beasts must consist only in this, that the one can agree in some common
mark, whether Voices or Characters, or whatever else, to express their
perceptions, but the other cannot; but the perceptions themselves must be of
one kind in both, they neither of them perceiving any thing but corporeal
impressions, such as they feel by the parts of the Matter bearing one against
another.

AXIOM XXIV.
The distinct Impression of any considerable extent of variegated Matter cannot
be received by a mere point of Matter.

6. BY a mere point of Matter I do not mean a mere Mathematical point, but a
perfect Parvitude, or the least Reality of which Matter can consist, concerning
which I have already spoke Lib. 1. Cap. 6. This being the least quantity that
discerpible Matter can consist of, no particle of Matter can touch it less then
it self. This Parvitude therefore that is so little that it has properly no
integrall parts, really distinguishable, how can it possibly be a Subject
distinctly receptive of the view, happily, of half an Horizon at once? which
sight is caused by real and distinct motion from real distinct parts of the
Object that is seen.

7. I acknowledge indeed that the Pupil of the Eye is but small in comparison
of those vast Objects that are seen through it, as also that through a Hole
exceedingly much less, made suppose in brass or lead, large Objects are
transmitted very clearly; but I have observed with all that you may lessen the
hole so far, that an unclouded day at noon will look more obscure then an
ordinary moonshine night. Wherefore Nature has bounds, and reducing her to the
least measure imaginable, the effect must prove insensible.

8. Again, this Object we speak of may be so variegated, I mean with such
colors, that it may imply a contradiction, that one and the same particle of
Matter (suppose some very small round one, that shall be the Cuspe of the
visuall Pyramide or Cone) should receive them all at once; the opposite kinds
of those colors being uncommunicable to this round particle, otherwise then by
contrariety of Motions, or by Rest and Motion, which are as contrary; as is
manifest out of that excellent Theorem concerning Colors in Descartes his
Meteors, which if it were possible to be false, yet it is most certainly true,
that seeing Motion is the cause of Sight, the contrariety of Objects for Color
must arise out of contrary modifications of Motion in this particle we speak
of, that immediately communicates the Object to the Sentient: which contrariety
of Motions at the same time and within the same surface of the adaequate place
of a Body is utterly incompetible thereto.

9. Nor is that Evasion any thing available, That there is not any contrariety
of real Motion here, but that there is only endeavor to Motion: For it is
plain that Endeavor is as real as Motion it self, and as contrary, because it
does really affect the sight, and in a contrary manner. Besides, this Endeavor
toward Motion is Motion it self, though of an exceeding small progress: But be
it as little as it will, it is as great a contradiction, for example, that the
Globe A. should upon the same center, and within the same superficies (which is
its adaequate place according to the meaning of that Notion in Aristotle's
School) be turned never so little from C. to B. and from B. to C. at once, as
to be turned quite about in that manner. To which you may add that some
Colors imply the ones Motion, and the others Rest; but a Globe if it rest in
any one part from turning, rests in all. From whence it will follow, That it is
impossible to see Red and Black at once.

10. This Subterfuge therefore being thus clearly taken away, they substitute
another, viz. That the distinct parts of the Object do not act upon this round
particle, which is the Cuspe of the visuall Pyramide, at once, but
successively, and so swiftly, that the Object is represented at once; as when
one swings about a fire-stick very fast, it seems one continued circle of fire.
But we shall find this instance very little to the purpose, if we consider,
that when one swings a fire-stick in a circle, it describes such a circle in
the bottom of the Eye, not upon one point there, but in a considerable
distance; and that the Optic Nerve, or the Spirits therein, are touched
successively, but left free to a kind of Tremor or Vibration as it were, (so as
it is in the playing of a Lute) till the motion has gone round, and then
touches in the same place again, so quick, that it finds it still vigorously
moved: But there being but one particle to touch upon here, some such like
inconveniences will recurre as we noted in the former case.

11. For, as I demonstrated before, that some Colors cannot be communicated at
once to one and the same round particle of Matter; so from thence it will
follow here, That, such Colors succeeding one another, the impress of the one
will take off immediately the impress of the other; from whence we shall not be
able to see such various Colors as are discernible in a very large Object at
once. For unless the impression make some considerable stay upon that which
receives it, there is no Sensation; insomuch that a man may wag his finger so
fast that he can scarce see it: and if it do make a due stay, suppose a large
Object checkered with the most opposite Colors, it were impossible that we
should see that checker-work at once in so large a compass as we do, but we
shall only see it by parts, the parts vanishing and coming again in a
competent swiftness, but very discernible.

12. Again; If we could possibly imagine the vicissitudes of the impresses,
from the distinct parts of the Basis of the visuall Cone to the point of it,
which we will suppose to be a very small globulus, such as Descartes his
second element consists of, it being thus successively thrust against, things
must then be as I have represented them in the adjoining figure, where C. A. is
the Object, G. H. the Sentient Matter, and I. the Globulus, which will be born
from E. directly toward F. where there will be received such a color in the
least Reality of the Sentient Matter in F. but from A. it will be borne toward
B. and with a very short rolling touch in another Reality, or it may be more
distantly from F. and impress such a color from A. upon B. or thereabout, and
so from C. upon D. so that hereby also it is manifest that no one perfect
Parvitude receives the whole Object C. E. A.

13. Lastly, this quick vicissitude of impulse or impression would contaminate
all the Colors, and make the whole Object as it were of one confounded color,
as a man may easily perceive in a painted Wheel; For what is it but a quick
coming on of one color upon the same part of the Optic nerve, upon which
another was, immediately that makes the whole Wheel seem of one blended color?
But not to impose upon any one, this instance of the Wheel has a peculiar
advantage above this present Supposition for making all seem one confounded
color, because the colors of the Wheel come not only upon one and the same
part of the Nerve, but in one and the same line from the Object; so that in
this regard the instance is less accommodate. But it is shreudly probable, that
fluid perceptive Matter will not fail to find the colors tinctured from one
another in some measure in the whole Object here also, by reason of the
instability of that particle that is played upon from all parts thereof. At
least it is an unexceptionable confirmation of our first Demonstration of the
weakness of the second Evasion, from the necessity of a considerable stay upon
the percipient Matter, and that Sensation cannot be but with some leisurely
continuance of this or that Motion before it be wiped out. We might add also
that there ought to be a due permanency of the Object that presses against the
Organ, though no new impression suddenly succeeded to wipe out the former, as
one may experiment in swiftly swinging about a painted Bullet in a string,
which will still more fully confirm what we aim at. But this is more then
enough for the making good of this 24. Axiom; whose evidence is so clear of it
self, that I believe there are very few but will be convinced of it at the
first sight.

AXIOM XXV.
Whatever impression or parts of any impression are not received by this
perfect Parvitude or Real point of Matter, are not at all perceived by it.

14. THis is so exceeding plain of it self, that it wants neither explication
nor proof.

AXIOM XXVI.
What ever Sense or Motion there is now in Matter, it is a necessary impression
from some other part of Matter, and does necessarily continue till some part or
other of Matter has justled it out.

15. THat what Motion there is in any part of Matter is necessarily there, and
there continues, till some other part of Matter change or diminish its Motion,
is plain from the laws of Motion set down by Descartes in his Principia
Philosophiae. And that there is the same Reason of Sense or Perception
(supposing there is nothing but Matter in the world) is plain from Axiom 20.
that makes Motion and Sense or Perception really the same.

CHAP. II.
1. That if Matter be capable of Sense, Inanimate things are so too: And of Mr.
Hobbs his wavering in that point. 2. An Enumeration of several Faculties in us
that Matter is utterly incapable of. 3. That Matter in no kind of Temperature
is capable of Sense. 4. That no one point of Matter can be the Common
Sensorium. 5. Nor a multitude of such Points receiving singly the entire image
of the Object. 6. Nor yet receiving part part, and the whole the whole. 7. That
Memory is incompetible to Matter. 8. That the Matter is incapable of the notes
of some circumstances of the Object which we remembered. 9. That Matter cannot
be the seat of second Notions. 10. Mr. Hobbs his Evasion of the foregoing
Demonstration clearly confuted. 11. That the freedom of our Will evinces that
there is a Substance in us distinct from Matter. 12. That Mr. Hobbs therefore
acknowledges all our actions necessary.

1. WE have now made our addition of such Axioms as are most useful for our
present purpose. Let us therefore, according to the order we propounded, before
we consider the fabric and organization of the Body, see if such Operations as
we find in our selves be competible to Matter looked upon in a more general
manner. That Matter from its own nature is incapable of Sense, plainly appears
from Axiom 20. and 21. For Motion and Sense being really one and the same
thing, it will necessarily follow, that where ever there is Motion, especially
any considerable duration thereof, there must be Sense and Perception: Which is
contrary to what we find in a Catochus, and experience daily in dead Carcasses;
in both which, though there be Reaction, yet there is no Sense. In brief, if
any Matter have Sense, it will follow that upon Reaction all shall have the
like, and that a Bell while it is ringing, and a Bow while it is bent, and
every Jack-in-a-box that Schoolboyes play with, while it is held in by the
cover pressing against it, shall be living Animals, or Sensitive Creatures. A
thing so foolish and frivolous, that the mere recital of the opinion may well
be thought confutation enough with the sober. And indeed Mr. Hobbs himself,
though he resolve Sense merely into Reaction of Matter, yet is ashamed of these
odd consequences thereof, and is very loath to be reckoned in the company of
those Philosophers, (though, as he says, learned men) who have maintained that
all Bodies are endued with Sense, and yet he can hardly abstain from saying
that they are; only he is more shie of allowing them Memory, which yet they
will have whether he will or no, if he give them Sense. As for Example, in the
ringing of a Bell, from every stroke there continues a tremor in the Bell,
which decaying, must according to his Philosophy be Imagination, and referring
to the stroke past must be Memory; and if a stroke overtake it within the
compass of this Memory, what hinders but Discrimination or Judgment may follow?
But the conclusion is consonant enough to this absurd Principle, That there is
nothing but Matter in the Universe, and that it is capable of perception. See
Mr. Hobbs his Elements of Philos. Chap. 25.

2. But we will not content our selves only with the discovery of this one
ugly inconvenience of this bold Assertion, but shall further endeavor to show
that the Hypothesis is false, and that Matter is utterly incapable of such
operations as we find in our selves, and that therefore there is something in
us Immateriall or Incorporeall. For we find in our selves, that one and the
same thing both hears, and sees, and tastes, and, to be short, perceives all
the variety of Objects that Nature manifests unto us. Wherefore Sense being
nothing but the impress of corporeal motion from Objects without, that part of
Matter which must be the common Sensorium, must of necessity receive all that
diversity of impulsions from Objects; it must likewise Imagine, Remember,
Reason, and be the fountain of spontaneous Motion, as also the Seat of what the
Greeks call the (...) or liberty of Will: Which supposition we shall find
involved in unextricable difficulties.

3. For first, we cannot conceive of any Portion of Matter but it is either
Hard or Soft. As for that which is Hard, all men leave it out as utterly unlike
to be endued with such Cognitive faculties as we are conscious to our selves
of. That which is Soft will prove either opake, pellucid, or lucid. If opake,
it cannot see, the exterior superficies being a bar to the inward parts. If
pellucid, as Air and Water, then indeed it will admit inwardly these Particles
and that Motion which are the conveighers of the Sense, and distinction of
Colors; and Sound also will penetrate. But this Matter being heterogeneall,
that is to say consisting of parts of a different nature and office, the Air,
suppose, being proper for Sound, and those Round particles which Cartesius
describes for Color and Light; the perception of these Objects will be
differently lodged; but there is some one thing in us that perceives both.
Lastly, if lucid, there would be much-what the same inconvenience that there is
in the opake, for its own fieriness would fend off the gentle touch of
external impresses; or if it be so mild and thin that it is in some measure
diaphanous, the inconveniences will again recurre that were found in the
pellucid. And in brief, any liquid Matter has such variety of particles in it,
that if the Whole, as it must, (being the common Sensorium) be affected with
any impress from without, the parts thereof must be variously affected, so that
no Object will seem homogeneall, as appears from Axiom 22. Which Truth I
shall further illustrate by a homely but very significant representation.
Suppose we should put Feathers, Bullets and Spur-rowels in a Box, where they
shall lie intermixedly, but close, one with another: upon any jog this Box
receives, supposing all the stuffage thereof has Sense, it is evident that the
several things therein must be differently affected, and therefore if the
common Sensorium were such, there would seem no homogeneall Object in the
world. Or at least these several particles shall be the several Receptives of
the several motions of the same kind from without, as the Air of Sounds, the
Cartesian Globuli of Light and Colors. But what receives all these, and so can
judge of them all, we are again at a loss for, as before: unless we imagine it
some very fine and subtle Matter, so light and thin, that it feels not it
self, but so yielding and passive, that it easily feels the several assaults
and impresses of other Bodies upon it, or in it; which yet would imply, that
this Matter alone were Sensitive, and the others not; and so it would be
granted, that not all Matter (no not so much as in Fluid Bodies) has Sense.
Such a tempered Matter as this is analogous to the Animal Spirits in Man,
which, if Matter could be the Soul, were the very Soul of the Body, and
common percipient of all Motions from within or without, by reason of the
tenuity, passivity and near homogeneity and imperceptibility of any change or
alteration from the playing together of its own tenuious and light particles;
and therefore very fit to receive all manner of impresses from others. Whence
we may rationally conclude, That some such subtle Matter as this, is either
the Soul, or her immediate instrument for all manner of perceptions. The
latter whereof I shall prove to be true in its due place. That the former part
is false I shall now demonstrate, by proving more stringently, That no Matter
whatsoever is capable of such Sense and Perception as we are conscious to our
selves of.

4. For concerning that part of Matter which is the Common Sensorium, I demand
whether some one point of it receive the whole image of the Object, or whether
it is wholly received into every point of it, or finally whether the whole
Sensorium receive the whole image by expanded parts, this part of the Sensorium
this part of the image, and that part that. If the first, seeing That in us
which perceives the external Object moves also the Body, it will follow, That
one little point of Matter will give local motion to what is innumerable
millions of times bigger then it self, of which there cannot be found nor
imagined any example in Nature.

5. If the second, this difficulty presents it self, which also reflects upon
the former Position, How so small a point as we speak of should receive the
images of so vast, or so various Objects at once, without Obliteration or
Confusion; a thing impossible, as is manifest from Axiom 24. And therefore not
receiving them, cannot perceive them by Axiom 25. But if every point or
particle of this Matter could receive the whole image, which of these
innumerable particles, that receive the Image entirely, may be deemed I my self
that perceive this Image? For if I be all those Points, it will come to pass,
especially in a small Object, and very near at hand, that the line of impulse
coming to diverse and distant Points, it will seem to come as from several
places, and so one Object will necessarily seem a Cluster of Objects. But if I
be one of these Points, what becomes of the rest? or who are they?

6. There remains therefore only the third way, which is that the parts of the
image of the Object be received by the parts of this portion of Matter, which
is supposed the common Sensorium. But this does perfectly contradict
experience; for we find our selves to perceive the whole Object, when in this
case nothing could perceive the whole, every part only perceiving its part;
and therefore there would be nothing that can judge of the whole. No more then
three men, if they were imagined to sing a song of three parts, and none of
them should hear any part but his own, could judge of the Harmony of the whole.

7. As concerning the Seat of Imagination and Memory, especially Memory, what
kind of matter can be found fit for this function? If it be Fluid, the images
of Objects will be prone to vanish suddenly, as also to be perverted or turned
contrary ways. For example C. a particle of this fluid Matter receiving an
impress from B. must feel it as coming from B: but it toying and tumbling up
and down, as the particles of fluid Matter do, turns the side E. F. which
received that impress from B. toward L. whence it will feel as if the impress
had been from L. for it must feel it as from the place directly opposite to it
self: and the same reason will be in other particles of this fluid Matter,
which must needs force a great deal of preposterous confusion both upon the
Fancy and Memory. If it be Hard, it will soon be composed to rest, as in a Bell
whose tremor is gone in a little time; but we remember things some years
together, though we never think of them till the end of that term. If Viscid,
there is the like inconvenience, nay it is the unfittest of all for either
receiving of Motion, or continuing it, and therefore unlikely to be the Seat of
either Fancy or Memory. For if Motion or Reaction and Sense, whether internal
or external, be all one, Motion ceasing Memory must needs cease, by Axiom 21.
Nor can it any more remember when it is again moved in the same manner, then a
Stone or a piece of Lead that was flung up into the Air, can become more light
or more prone to fly upwards when they have once ceased from Motion; for they
are both exquisitely as if they had never been moved.

8. Lastly, we remember some things, of which there can be no Signatures in
Matter to represent them, as for example, Wideness and Distance. For as for
both of them, there is no note can be made in the Matter E. by lines from the
two Objects A. B. and C. D. whereby the difference of remoteness of A. E. above
C. E. or of the wideness of A. B. above C. D. can be discerned; for both the
Objects make one and the same signature in the matter E.

9. Those that are commonly called by the name of Secundae notiones, and are
not any sensible Objects themselves, nor the Phantasmes of any sensible
Objects, but only our manner of conceiving them, o^ reasoning about them, in
which number are comprehended all Logical and Mathematical terms; these, I
say, never came in at the Senses, they being no impresses of corporeal motion,
which excite in us, as in Dogs and other Brutes, the sense only of Sounds, of
Colors, of Hot, of Cold, and the like. Now Matter being affected by no
perception but of corporeal impression, by the bearing of one Body against
another; it is plain from Axiom 23. that these second Notions, or
Mathematical and Logical conceptions, cannot be seated in Matter, and
therefore must be in some other Substance distinct from it, by Axiom 10.

10. Here Mr. Hobbs, to avoid the force of this Demonstration, has found out a
marvelous witty invention to befool his followers withal, making them believe
that there is no such thing as these Secundae Notiones, distinct from the Names
or Words whereby they are said to be signified; and that there is no perception
in us, but of such Phantasmes as are impressed from external Objects, such as
are common to Us and Beasts: and as for the Names which we give to these, or
the Phantasmes of them, that there is the same reason of them, as of other
Marks, Letters, or Characters, all which coming in at the Senses, he would
bear them in hand that it is a plain case, that we have the perception of
nothing but what is impressed from corporeal Objects. But how ridiculous an
Evasion this is, may be easily discovered, if we consider, that if these
Mathematical and Logical Notions we speak of be nothing but Names, Logical
and Mathematical Truths will not be the same in all Nations, because they have
not the same names. For Example, Similitudo and (...) and Proportio, (...) and
Ratio, these names are utterly different, the Greek from the Latin; yet the
Greeks, Latins, nor any Nation else, do vary in their conceptions couched
under these different names: Wherefore it is plain, that there is a settled
Notion distinct from these Words and Names, as well as from those corporeal
Phantasmes impressed from the Object; which was the thing to be demonstrated.

11. Lastly, we are conscious to our selves of that faculty which the Greeks
call (...), or a Power in our selves, notwithstanding any outward assaults or
importunate temptations, to cleave to that which is virtuous and honest, or to
yield to pleasures, or other vile advantages. That we have this Liberty and
freedom in our selves, and that we refuse the good, and choose the evil, when
we might have done otherwise; that natural Sense of Remorse of Conscience is
an evident and undeniable witness of. For when a man has done amiss, the pain,
grief, or indignation that he raises in himself, or at least feels raised in
him, is of another kind from what we find from misfortunes or affronts we
could not avoid. And that which pinches us and vexes us so severely, is the
sense that we have brought such an evil upon our selves, when it was in our
power to have avoided it. Now if there be no sense nor perception in us, but
what arises from the Reaction of Matter one part against another; whatever
Representation of things, whatever Deliberation or Determination we fall upon,
it will by Axiom 26. be purely necessary, there being upon this Hypothesis no
more Freedom while we deliberate or conclude, then there is in a pair of
scales, which rests as necessarily at last as it moved before. Wherefore it is
manifest that this faculty we call Free Will is not found in Matter, but in
some other Substance, by Axiom 10.

12. Mr Hobbs therefore, to give him his due, consonantly enough to his own
principles, does very peremptorily affirm that all our actions are necessary.
But I having proved the contrary by that Faculty which we may call Internal
Sense or Common Notion, found in all men that have not done violence to their
own Nature; unless by some other approved Faculty he can discover the contrary,
my Conclusion must stand for an undoubted Truth by Axiom 5. He pretends
therefore some Demonstration of Reason, which he would oppose against the
dictate of this Inward Sense; which it will not be amiss to examine, that we
may discover his Sophistry.

CHAP. III.
1. Mr. Hobbs his Arguments whereby he would prove all our actions
necessitated. His first Argument. 2. His second Argument. 3. His third
Argument. 4. His fourth Argument. 5. What must be the meaning of these words,
Nothing takes beginning from it self, in the first Argument of Mr. Hobbs. 6. A
fuller and more determinate explication of the foregoing words, whose sense is
evidently convinced to be, That no Essence of it self can vary its
modification. 7. That this is only said by Mr. Hobbs, not proved, and a full
confutation of his Assertion. 8. Mr. Hobbs imposed upon by his own Sophistry.
9. That one part of this first Argument of his is groundless, the other
sophistical. 10. The plain proposal of his Argument, whence appears more
fully the weakness and sophistry thereof. 11. An Answer to his second Argument.
12. An Answer to the third. 13. An Answer to a difficulty concerning the Truth
and Falsehood of future Propositions. 14. An Answer to Mr. Hobbs his fourth
Argument, which, though slighted by himself, is the strongest of them all. 15.
The difficulty of reconciling Free Will with Divine Prescience and Prophecies.
16. That the faculty of Free Will is seldom put in use. 17. That the use of it
is properly in Moral conflict. 18. That the Soul is not invincible there
neither. 19. That Divine decrees either find fit Instruments or make them. 20.
That the more exact we make Divine Prescience, even to the comprehension of any
thing that implies no contradiction in it self to be comprehended, the more
clear it is that man's Will may be sometimes free. 21. Which is sufficient to
make good my last Argument against Mr. Hobbs.

1. HIS first Argument runs thus (I will repeat it in his own words, as also
the rest of them as they are to be found in his Treatise of Liberty and
Necessity) I conceive, (says he) that nothing takes beginning from it self,
but from the action of some other immediate agent without it self; and that
therefore, when first a man has an appetite or Will to something, to which
immediately before he had no appetite nor Will, the cause of his Will is not the
Will it self, but something else not in his own disposing: So that whereas it
is out of controversy, that of voluntary actions the Will is the necessary
cause, and by this which is said the Will is also caused by other things,
whereof it disposes not, it follows, that voluntary actions have all of them
necessary causes, and therefore are necessitated.

2. His second thus, I hold (says he) that to be a sufficient cause, to which
nothing is wanting that is needful to the producing of the effect: The same
also is a necessary cause. For if it be possible that a sufficient cause shall
not bring forth the effect, then there wants somewhat which was needful for
the producing of it, and so the cause was not sufficient; but if it be
impossible that a sufficient cause should not produce the effect, then is a
sufficient cause a necessary cause, for that is said to produce an effect
necessarily that cannot but produce it. Hence it is manifest, that whatsoever
is produced, is produced necessarily. For whatsoever is produced, has had a
sufficient cause to produce it, or else it had not been. What follows is
either the same, or so closely depending on this, that I need not add it.

3. His third Argument therefore shall be that which he urges from Future
disjunctions. For example, let the case be put of the Weather, It Is necessary
that to morrow it shall rain, or not rain; If therefore, says he, it be not
necessary it shall rain, it is necessary it shall not rain, otherwise there is
no necessity that the Proposition, It shall rain or not rain, should be true.

4. His fourth is this, That the denying of Necessity destroys both the
Decrees and the Prescience of God Almighty. For whatsoever God has purposed to
bring to pass by man, as an Instrument, or foreseeth shall come to pass, a man,
if he have liberty from necessitation, might frustrate, and make not to come to
pass; and God should either not foreknow it, and not decree it, or he should
foreknow such things shall be as shall never be, and decree that which shall
never come to pass.

5. The Entrance into his first Argument is something obscure and ambiguous,
Nothing takes beginning from it self: But I shall be as candid and faithful
an Interpreter as I may. If he mean by beginning, beginning of Existence, it is
undoubtedly true, That no Substance, nor Modification of Substance takes
beginning from it self; but this will not infer the Conclusion he drives at.
But if he mean, that Nothing takes beginning from it self, of being otherwise
affected or modified then before; he must either understand by nothing, no
Essence, neither Spirit nor Body, or no Modification of Essence. He cannot mean
Spirit, as admitting no such thing in the whole comprehension of Nature. If
Body, it will not infer what he aims at, unless there be nothing but Body in
the Universe, which is a mere precarious Principle of his, which he beseeches
his credulous followers to admit, but he proves it no where, as I have already
noted. If by Modification he mean the Modification of Matter or Body, that runs
still upon the former Principle, That there is nothing but Body in the world,
and therefore he proves nothing but upon a begged Hypothesis, and that a false
one; as I have elsewhere demonstrated. Wherefore the most favorable
Interpretation I can make is, That he means by no thing, no Essence, nor
Modification of Essence, being willing to hide that dearly-hug'd Hypothesis of
his (That there is nothing but Body in the world) under so general and
uncertain terms.

6. The words therefore in the other senses having no pretense to conclude any
thing, let us see how far they will prevail in this, taking no thing, for no
Essence, or no Modification of Essence, or what will come nearer to the Matter
in hand, no Faculty of an Essence. And from this twofold meaning, let us
examine two Propositions, that will result from thence, viz. That no Faculty of
any Essence can vary its Operation from what it is, but from the action of some
other immediate agent without it self; or, That no Essence can vary its
Modification or Operation by it self, but by the action of some other immediate
Agent without it. Of which two Propositions the latter seems the better sense
by far, and most natural. For it is very harsh, and, if truly looked into, as
false, to say, That the Mode or Faculty of any Essence changes it self, for it
is the Essence it self that exerts it self into these variations of Modes, if
no external Agent is the cause of these changes. And Mr. Hobbs opposing an
External Agent to this Thing that he says does not change it self, does
naturally imply, That they are both not Faculties but Substances he speaks of.

7. Wherefore there remains only the latter Proposition to be examined, That
no Essence of it self can vary its Modification. That some Essence must have
had a power of moving is plain, in that there is Motion in the world, which
must be the effect of some Substance or other. But that Motion in a large
sense, taking it for mutation or change, may proceed from that very Essence in
which it is found, seems to me plain by Experience: For there is an Essence in
us, whatever we will call it, which we find endued with this property; as
appears from hence, that it has variety of perceptions, Mathematical,
Logical, and I may add also Moral, that are not any impresses nor footsteps
of Corporeal Motion, as I have already demonstrated; and any man may observe
in himself, and discover in the writings of others, how the Mind has passed
from one of these perceptions to another, in very long deductions of
Demonstration; as also what stilness from bodily Motion is required in the
excogitation of such series of Reasons, where the Spirits are to run into no
other posture nor motion then what they are guided into by the Mind it self,
where these immateriall and intellectual Notions have the leading and rule.
Besides in grosser Phantasmes, which are supposed to be somewhere impressed in
the Brain, the composition of them, and disclusion and various disposal of
them, is plainly an arbitrarious act, and implies an Essence that can, as it
lists, excite in it self the variety of such Phantasmes as have been first
exhibited to her from External Objects, and change them and transpose them at
her own will. But what need I reason against this ground of Mr. Hobbs so
sollicitously? it being sufficient to discover, that he only says, that No
Essence can change the Modifications of it self, but does not prove it; and
therefore whatever he would infer hereupon is merely upon a begged Principle.

8. But however, from this precarious ground he will infer, that whenever we
have a Will to a thing, the cause of this Will is not the Will it self, but
something else not in our own disposing; the meaning whereof must be, That
whenever we Will, some corporeal impress, which we cannot avoid, forces us
thereto. But the Illation is as weak as bold; it being built upon no
foundation, as I have already shown. I shall only take notice how Mr. Hobbs,
though he has rescued himself from the authority of the Schools, and would fain
set up for himself, yet he has not freed himself from their fooleries in
talking of Faculties and Operations (and the absurdity is alike in both) as
separate and distinct from the Essence they belong to, which causes a great deal
of distraction and obscurity in the speculation of things. I speak this in
reference to those expressions of his of the Will being the cause of willing,
and of its being the necessary cause of voluntary actions, and of things not
being in its disposing. Whenas, if a man would speak properly, and desired to
be understood, he would say, That the Subject in which is this power or act of
willing, (call it Man or the Soul of Man) is the cause of this or that
voluntary action. But this would discover his Sophistry, wherewith happily he has
entrapt himself, which is this, Something out of the power of the Will
necessarily causes the Will; the Will once caused is the necessary cause of
voluntary actions; and therefore all voluntary actions are necessitated.

9. Besides that the first part of this Argumentation is groundless (as I have
already intimated) the second is sophistical, that says That the Will is the
necessary cause of voluntary actions: For by necessary may be understood either
necessitated, forced and made to act, whether it will or no; or else it may
signify that the Will is a requisite cause of voluntary actions, so that there
can be no voluntary actions without it. The latter whereof may be in some sense
true, but the former is utterly false. So the Conclusion being inferred from
assertions whereof the one is groundless, the other Sophistical, the Illation
cannot but be ridiculously weak and despicable. But if he had spoke in the
Concrete in stead of the Abstract, the Sophistry had been more grossly
discoverable, or rather the train of his reasoning languid and contemptible.
Omitting therefore to speak of the Will separately, which of it self is but a
blind Power or Operation, let us speak of that Essence which is endued with
Will, Sense, Reason, and other Faculties, and see what face this argumentation
of his will bear, which will then run thus;

10. Some external, irresistible Agent does ever necessarily cause that
Essence (call it Soul or what you please) which is endued with the faculties
of Will and Understanding, ^o Will. This Essence, endued with the power of
exerting it self into the act of Willing, is the necessary cause of Voluntary
actions. Therefore all voluntary actions are necessitated. The first Assertion
now at first sight appears a gross falsehood, the Soul being endued with
Understanding as well as Will, and therefore she is not necessarily determined
to will by external impresses, but by the displaying of certain notions and
perceptions she raises in her self, that be purely intellectual. And the
second seems a very slim and lank piece of Sophistry. Both which my reasons
already alleged do so easily and so plainly reach, that I need add nothing
more, but pass to his second Argument, the form whereof in brief is this;

11. Every Cause is a sufficient cause, otherwise it could not produce its
effect: Every sufficient cause is a necessary cause, that is to say, will be
sure to produce the effect, otherwise something was wanting thereto, and it was
no sufficient cause: And therefore every cause is a necessary cause, and
consequently every Effect or Action, even those that are termed Voluntary, are
necessitated. This reasoning looks smartly at first view, but if we come closer
to it, we shall find it a pitiful piece of Sophistry, which is easily
detected by observing the ambiguity of that Proposition, Every sufficient cause
is a necessary cause: For the force lies not so much in that it is said to be
Sufficient, as in that it is said to be a Cause; which if it be, it must of
necessity have an Effect, whether it be sufficient or insufficient; which
discovers the Sophisme. For these relative terms of Cause and Effect
necessarily imply one another. But every Being that is sufficient to act this
or that if it will, and so to become the Cause thereof, does neither act, nor
abstain from acting necessarily. And therefore if it do act, it adds Will to
the Sufficiency of its power; and if it did not act, it is not because it had
not sufficient power, but because it would not make use of it. So that we see
that every sufficient Cause rightly understood without captiositie is not a
necessary cause, nor will be sure to produce the Effect; and that though there
be a sufficiency of power, yet there may be something wanting, to wit, the
exertion of the Will; whereby it may come to pass, that what might have acted,
if it would, did not: but if it did, Will being added to sufficient Power, that
it cannot be said to be necessary in any other sense, then of that Axiom in
Metaphysics, Quicquid est, quamdiu est, necesse est esse: The reason whereof
is, because it is impossible that a thing should be and not be at once. But
before it acted, it might have chosen whether it would have acted or no; but it
did determine it self. And in this sense is it to be said to be a free Agent,
and not a necessary one. So that it is manifest, that though there be some
pretty perverseness of wit in the contriving of this Argument, yet there is no
solidity at all at the bottom.

12. And as little is there in his third. But in this, I must confess, I cannot
so much accuse him of Art and Sophistry, as of ignorance of the rules of
Logic; for he does plainly assert That the necessity of the truth of that
Proposition there named depends on the necessity of the truth of the parts
thereof; then which no grosser error can be committed in the Art of reasoning.
For he might as well say that the necessity of the truth of a Connex Axiom
depends on the necessity of the truth of the parts, as of a Disjunct. But in a
Connex, when both the parts are not only false, but impossible, yet the Axiom
is necessarily true. As for example, If Bucephalus be a man, he is endued with
humane reason; this Axiom is necessarily true, and yet the parts are
impossible. For Alexanders horse can neither be a man, nor have the reason of a
man, either radically or actually. The necessity therefore is only laid upon
the connection of the parts, not upon the parts themselves. So when I say, To
morrow it will rain, or it will not rain, this Disjunct Proposition also is
necessary, but the necessity lies upon the Disjunction of the parts, not upon
the parts themselves: For they being immediately disjoined, there is a
necessity that one of them must be, though there be no necessity that this must
be determined rather then that. As when a man is kept under custody where he
has the use of two rooms only, though there be a necessity that he be found in
one of the two, yet he is not confined to either one of them. And to be brief,
and prevent those frivolous both answers and replies that follow in the pursuit
of this Argument in Mr. Hobbs; As the necessity of this Disjunct Axiom lies
upon the Disjunction it self, so the truth, of which this necessity is a mode,
must lie there too; for it is the Disjunction of the parts that is affirmed,
and not the parts themselves, as any one that is but moderately in his wits
must needs acknowledge.

13. There is a more dangerous way that Mr. Hobbs might have made use of, and
with more credit, but yet scarce with better success, which is the
consideration of an Axiom that pronounces of a future Contingent, such as
this, Cras Socrates disputabit. For every Axiom pronouncing either true or
false, as all do agree upon; if this Axiom be now true, it is impossible but
Socrates should dispute to morrow; or if it be now false, it is impossible he
should: and so his Action of disputing or the omission thereof will be
necessary, for the Proposition cannot be both true and false at once. Some are
much troubled to extricate themselves out of this Nooze; but if we more
precisely enquire into the sense of the Proposition, the difficulty will
vanish. He therefore that affirms that Socrates will dispute to morrow, affirms
it (to use the distinction of Futurities that Aristotle somewhere suggests)
either as a (...), or (...), that is, either as a thing that is likely to be,
but has a possibility of being otherwise, or else as a thing certainly to come
to pass. If this latter, the Axiom is false; if the former, it is true: and so
the liberty of Socrates his action, as also of all like contingent effects, are
thus easily rescued from this sophistical entanglement. For every Future Axiom
is as incapable of our judgment, unless we determine the sense of it by one of
the forenamed modes, as an Indefinite Axiom is, before we in our minds add
the notes of Universality or Particularity: Neither can we say of either of
them, that they are true or false, till we have completed and determined their
sense.

14. His fourth Argument he proposes with some diffidence and dislike, as if he
thought it not good Logic (they are his own words) to make use of it, and add
it to the rest. And for my own part, I cannot but approve of the consistency of
his judgment, and coherency with other parts of his Philosophy: For if there
be nothing but Body or Matter in the whole comprehension of things, it will be
very hard to find out any such Deity as has the knowledge or foreknowledg of any
thing: And therefore I suspect that this last is only cast in as argumentum ad
hominem, to puzzle such as have not dived to so profound a depth of natural
knowledge, as to fancy they have discovered there is no God in the world.

15. But let him vilify it as he will, it is the only Argument he has brought,
that has any tolerable sense or solidity in it; and it is a Subject that has
exercised the wits of all Ages, to reconcile the Liberty of man's Will with the
Decrees and Praescience of God. But my Freeness, I hope, and Moderation shall
make this matter more easy to me, then it ordinarily proves to them that
venture upon it. My Answer therefore in brief shall be this;

16. That though there be such a Faculty in the Soul of man as Liberty of
Will, yet she is not always in a state of acting according to it. For she may
either degenerate so far, that it may be as certainly known what she will do
upon this or that occasion, as what an hungry Dog will do when a crust is
offered him; which is the general condition of almost all men in most
occurrencies of their lives: or else she may be so Heroically good, though that
happen in very few, that it may be as certainly known as before what she will
do or suffer upon such or such emergencies: and in these cases the use of
Liberty of Will ceases.

17. That the use of the Faculty of Freewill is properly there, where we find
our selves so near to an AEquiponderancy, being touched with the sense of Virtue
on the one side, and the ease or pleasure of some vicious action on the other,
that we are conscious to our selves that we ought, and that we may, if we will,
abandon the one and cleave to the other.

18. That in this Conflict the Soul has no such absolute power to determine
her self to the one or the other action, but Temptation or Supernatural
assistance may certainly carry her this way or that way; so that she may not be
able to use that liberty of going indifferently either way.

19. That Divine Decrees either find men sit, or make them so, for the
executing of whatever is absolutely purposed or prophesied concerning them.

20. That the Praescience of God is so vast and exceeding the comprehension of
our thoughts, that all that can be safely said of it is this, That this
knowledge is most perfect and exquisite, accurately representing the Natures,
Powers and Properties of the thing it does foreknow. Whence it must follow,
that if there be any Creature free and undeterminate, and that in such
circumstances and at such a time he may either act thus or not act thus, this
perfect Foreknowledge must discern from all eternity, that the said Creature in
such circumstances may either act thus, or so, or not. And further to declare
the perfection of this Foreknowledg and Omniscience of God; as His Omnipotence
ought to exten so far, as to be able to do whatsoever implies no contradiction
to be done; so his Praescience and Omniscience ought to extend so far, as to
know precisely and fully whatever implies no contradiction to be known. To
conclude therefore briefly; Free or Contingent Effects do either imply a
contradiction to be foreknown, or they do not imply it. If they imply a
contradiction to be foreknown, they are no Object of the Omniscience of God,
and therefore there can be no pretense that his Foreknowledg does determinate
them, nor can they be argued to be determined thereby. If they imply no
contradiction to be foreknown, that is to acknowledge that divine Praescience
and they may very well consist together. And so either way, notwithstanding the
divine Omniscience, the Actions of men may be free.

21. The sum therefore of all is this, That men's actions are sometimes free and
sometimes not free; but in that they are at any time free, is a Demonstration
that there is a faculty in us that is incompetible to mere Matter: which is
sufficient for my purpose.

CHAP. IV.
1. An Enumeration of sundry Opinions concerning the Seat of Common Sense. 2.
Upon supposition that we are nothing but mere Matter, That the whole Body
cannot be the Common Sensorium; 3. Nor the Orifice of the Stomach; 4. Nor the
Heart; 5. Nor the Brain; 6. Nor the Membranes; 7. Nor the Septum lucidum; 8.
Nor Regius his small and perfectly solid Particle. 9. The probability of the
Conarion being the common Seat of Sense.

1. I Have plainly proved, that neither those more Pure and Intellectual
faculties of Will and Reason, nor yet those less pure of Memory and
Imagination, are competible to mere Bodies. Of which we may be the more secure,
I having so convincingly demonstrated, That not so much as that which we call
External Sense is competible to the same: all which Truths I have concluded
concerning Matter generally considered. But because there may be a suspicion in
some, which are over credulous concerning the powers of Body, that Organization
may do strange feats (which Surmise notwithstanding is as fond as if they
should imagine, that though neither Silver, nor Steel, nor Iron, nor
Lute-strings, have any Sense apart, yet being put together in such a manner and
form, as will (suppose) make a complete Watch, they may have Sense; that is to
say, that a Watch may be a living creature, though the several parts have
neither Life nor Sense) I shall for their sakes go more particularly to work,
and recite every opinion that I could ever meet with by converse with either
men or books concerning the Seat of the Common Sense, and after try whether
any of these Hypotheses can possibly be admitted for Truth, upon supposition
that we consist of nothing but mere modified and organized Matter. I shall
first recite the Opinions, and then examine the possibility of each in
particular, which in brief are these. 1. That the whole Body is theSeat of
Common Sense. 2. That the Orifice of the Stomach. 3. The Heart. 4. The Brain.
5. The Membranes. 6. The Septum lucidum. 7. Some very small and perfectly solid
particle in the Body. 8. The Conarion. 9. The concurse of the Nerves about the
fourth ventricle of the Brain. 10. The Spirits in that fourth ventricle.

2. That the first Opinion is false is manifest from hence, That upon
supposition we are nothing but mere Matter, if we grant the whole Body to be
one common Sensorium, perceptive of all Objects, Motion which is impressed upon
the Eye or Ear, must be transmitted into all the parts of the Body. For Sense
is really the same with communication of Motion, by Axiom 20. And the variety
of Sense arising from the modification of Motion, which must needs be variously
modified by the different temper of the parts of the Body, by Axiom 22. it
plainly follows that the Eye must be otherwise affected by the motion of
Light, then the other parts to which this motion is transmitted. Wherefore if
it be the whole Body that perceives, it will perceive the Object in every part
thereof several ways modified at once; which is against all Experience. It
will also appear in all likelihood in several places at once, by reason of the
many windings and turnings that must happen to the transmission of this Motion,
which are likely to be as so many Refractions or Reflections.

3. That the Orifice of the Stomach cannot be the seat of Common Sense, is
apparent from hence, That that which is the common Sentient does not only
perceive all Objects, but has the power of moving the Body. Now besides that
there is no organization in the mouth of the Stomach, that can elude the
strength of our Arguments laid down in the foregoing Chapters, which took away
all capacity from Matter of having any perception at all in it, there is no
Mechanical reason imaginable to be found in the Body, whereby it will appear
possible, that supposing the mouth of the Stomach were the common Percipient of
all Objects, it could be able to move the rest of the members of the Body, as
we find something in us does. This is so palpably plain, that it is needless
to spend any more words upon it.

4. The same may be said concerning the Heart. For who can imagine, that if the
Heart were that common Percipient, that there is any such Mechanical connection
betwixt it and all the parts of the Body, that it may, by such or such a
perception, command the motion of the Foot or little Finger? Besides that it
seems wholly employed in the performance of its Systole and Diastole, which
causes such a great difference of the situation of the Heart by turns, that if
it were that Seat in which the sense of all Objects center, we should not be
able to see things steddily resting in the same place.

5. How incapable the Brain is of being so active a Principle of Motion as we
find in our selves, the viscidity thereof does plainly indicate. Besides that
Physicians have discovered by experience, that the Brain is so far from being
the common Seat of all senses, that it has in it none at all. And the Arabians,
that say it has, have distinguished it into such several offices of
Imagination, Memory, Common Sense, etc. that we are still at a loss for some
one part of Matter, that is to be the Common Percipient of all these. But I
have so clearly demonstrated the impossibility of the Brains being able to
perform those functions that appertain truly to what ordinarily men call the
Soul, in my Antidote against Atheism, that it is enough to refer the Reader
thither.

6. As for the Membranes, whether we would fancy them all the Seat of Common
Sense, or some one Membrane, or part there of; the like difficulties will accur
as have been mentioned already. For if all the Membranes, the difference and
situation of them will vary the aspect and sight of the Object, so that the
same things will appear to us in several hues and several places at once, as
is easily demonstrated from Axiom 22. If some one Membrane, or part thereof,
it will be impossible to excogitate any Mechanical reason, how this one
particular Membrane, or any part thereof, can be able so strongly and
determinately to move upon occasion every part of the Body.

7. And therefore for this very cause cannot the Septum lucidum be the Common
Percipient in us, because it is utterly unimaginable, how it should have the
power of so stoutly and distinctly moving our exterior parts and limbs.

8. As for that new and marvelous Invention of Henricus Regius, that it may be
a certain perfectly solid, but very small particle of Matter in the Body, that
is the seat of common perception; besides that it is as boldly asserted, that
such an hard particle should have sense in it, as that the filings of Iron and
Steel should; it cannot be the spring of Motion: For how should so small at
Atome move the whole Body, but by moving it self? But it being more subtle
then the point of any needle, when it puts it self upon motion, especially such
strong thrustings as we sometimes use, it must needs pass through the Body and
leave it.

9. The most pure Mechanical Invention is that of the use of the Conarion,
proposed by Descartes; which, considered with some other organizations of the
Body, bids the fairest of any thing I have met withal, or ever hope to meet
withal, for the resolution of the Passions and Properties of living Creatures
into mere corporeal motion. And therefore it is requisite to insist a little
upon the explication thereof, that we may the more punctually confute them that
would abuse his Mechanical contrivances to the exclusion of all Principles but
Corporeal, in either Man or Beast.

CHAP. V.
1. How Perception of external Objects, Spontaneous Motion, Memory and
Imagination, are pretended to be performed by the Conarion, Spirits and
Muscles, without a Soul. 2. That the Conarion, devoid of a Soul, cannot be
the common Percipient, demonstrated out of Descartes himself. 3. That the
Conarion, with the Spirits and organization of the Parts of the Body, is not a
sufficient Principle of Spontancous motion, without a Soul. 4. A aescription
of the use of the Valvulae in the Nerves of the Muscles for spontaneous motion.
5. The insufficiency of this contrivance for that purpose. 6. A further
demonstration of the insufficiency thereof, from whence is clearly evinced that
Brutes have Souls. 7. That Memory cannot be salved the way above described; 8.
Nor Imagination. 9. A Distribution out of Descartes of the Functions in us,
some appertaining to the Body, and others to the Soul. 10. The Authors
Observations there upon.

1 THE sum of this Abuse must in brief be this, That the Glandula Pinealis is
the common Sentient or Percipient of all Objects; and without a Soul, by
virtue of the Spirits and Organization of the Body, may do all those feats
that we ordinarily conceive to be performed by Soul and Body joined together.
For it being one, whenas the rest of the Organs of Sense are double, and so
handsomely seated as to communicate with the Spirits as well of the posteriour
as anteriour Cavities of the Brain; by their help all the motions of the Nerves
(both those that transmit the sense of outward Objects, and of inward
affections of the Body, such as Hunger, Thirst and the like) are easily
conveyed unto it: and so being variously moved, it does variously determine
the course of the Spirits into such and such Muscles, whereby it moves the
Body. Moreover that the transmission of Motion from the Object, through the
Nerves, into the inward concavities of the Brain, and so to the Conarion, opens
such and such Pores of the Brain, in such and such order or manner, which
remain as tracts or footsteps of the presence of these Objects after they are
removed. Which tracts, or signatures, consist mainly in this, that the Spirits
will have an easier passage through these Pores then other parts of the Brain.
And hence arises Memory, when the Spirits be determined, by the inclining of
the Conarion, to that part of the Brain where these tracts are found, they
moving then the Conarion as when the Object was present, though not so
strongly. From the hitting of the Spirits into such like tracts, is also the
nature of Imagination to be explained; in which there is little difference from
Memory, saving that the reflection upon time as past, when we saw or perceived
such or such a thing, is quite left out. But these are not all the operations
we are conscious to our selves of, and yet more then can be made out by this
Hypothesis, That Perception of Objects, Spontaneous Motion, Memory and
Imagination, may be all performed by virtue of this Glandula, the Animal
Spirits, and mere organization of the Body; as we shall plainly find, though
but upon an easy examination.

2. For that the Conarion, devoid of a Soul, has no perception of any one
Object, is demonstrable from the very description Cartesius makes of the
transmission of the image, suppose through the Eye to the Brain, and so to the
Conarion. For it is apparent from what he sets down in the 35. Article of his
Treatise of the Passions of the Soul, that the Image that is propagated from
the Object to the Conarion, is impressed thereupon in some latitude of space.
Whence it is manifest that the Conarion does not, nor can perceive the whole
Object, though several parts may be acknowledged to have the perception of the
several parts thereof. But something in us perceives the whole, which
therefore cannot be the Conarion. And that we do not perceive the external
Object double, is not so much because the Image is united in the Organ of
Common Sense, as that the lines come so from the Object to both the Eyes, that
it is felt in one place; otherwise if the Object be very near, and the
direction of our Eyes be not fitted to that nearness, it will seem double
however. Which is a Demonstration that a man may see with both eyes at once;
and for my own part, I Am sure that I see better at distance, when I use both,
then when one.

3. As for Spontaneous Motion, that the Conarion cannot be a sufficient
Principle thereof, with the Spirits and organization of other parts of the
Body, though we should admit it a fit seat of Common Sense, will easily appear,
if we consider, that so weak and so small a thing as that Glandula is, seems
utterly unable to determine the spirits with that force and violence we find
they are determined in running, striking, thrusting and the like; and that it
is evident, that sometimes scarce the thousandth part of the Conarion shall be
directer of this force; viz. when the Object of Sight, suppose, is as little as
a pin's point, or when a man is pricked with a needle, these receptions must be
as little in the Glandula as in the exterior Sense. But suppose the whole
Conarion always did act in the determining the motion of the Spirits into this
or that Muscle; it is impossible that such fluid Matter as these Spirits are,
that upon the noddings of the Conarion forward may easily recede back, should
ever determine their course with that force and strength they are determined.
But happily it will be answered, That such subtle and fluid bodies as the
Animal Spirits, that are in a readiness to be upon Motion any way, the least
thing will determine their course, and that the Muscles themselves, being well
replenisht with Spirits, and framed with such Valvulae as will easily intromit
them from the Brain, and also conveigh them out of one opposite Muscle into
another upon the least redundance of Spirits in the one above the other, and so
shut them in; that that force we find in spontaneous Motion may very well be
salved by this Mechanical Artifice.

4. That the insufficiency of this answer may appear, let us more accurately
consider the contrivance in the following Figure, which must be some such thing
as Regius has, Philosop. Natural. Lib. 4. cap. 16. and which may serve for the
more easy understanding of what Descartes writes in his book of Passions
Artic. II. Here B. C. are two opposite Muscles, the known Instruments of
spontaneous Motion; K. some part of the Body to be moved; D. E. and F. G. are
the Nerves through which Spirits are transmitted from the Brain into the
foresaid Muscles; D. and F. two Valvulae to let pass the Spirits from the Brain
into the Muscles, but stop them if they would regurgitate; G. is a Valve that
lets the Spirits out of the Muscle C. into B, and E. another Valve that lets
the Spirits out of B. into C. Now in brief, the result of this Mechanical
contrivance is this, viz. That the Spirits being determined by the Conarion
never so little more copiously into B. then into C, those in C. will pass
through the Valve G. into B, and so B. swelling, and consequently shortning it
self, it must needs bring up the member K.

5. We will not here allege that this may be only a mere fancy, these
Valvulae in the Nerves not being yet discovered by any Anatomist to be part of
the Organization of the Body of any Animal; but rather show, that they would
not effect what is aimed at, though they were admitted. For first it does not
appear that the Spirits will make more have out of C. into B, then the pressure
caused in B. by the determination of the Spirits from the Conarion forces them
to. For all places being alike to them to play in, they will go no further
then they are driven or pressed, as Wind in a Bladder. And how the Conarion
should drive or press the Spirits into B, so as to make it press those in C,
and force them out so quick and smart as we find in some Actions, is a thing
utterly unconceivable.

6. Besides, admit that the Conarion could determine them with some
considerable force so into B, that they would make those in C. come to them
through the Valve G, there being the Valve E. to transmit them into C. again,
it is impossible but that the Tenth part of that force which we ordinarily use
to open a man's hand against his will, should whether he would or no easily open
it. For a very ordinary strength moveing K. from B. toward C. must needs so
press the Spirits in B, that they will certainly pass by E. into C, if our Body
be nothing but Matter Mechanically organized. And therefore it is the mere
Imperium of our Soul that does determine the Spirits to this Muscle rather
then the other, and holds them there in despite of external force. From whence
it is manifest that brute Beasts must have Souls also.

7. Concerning Memory and Imagination, that the mere Mechanical reasons of
Descartes will not reach them, we shall clearly understand, if we consider
that the easy aperture of the same Pores of the Brain, that were opened at the
presence of such an Object, is not sufficient to represent the Object, after
the Conarion has by inclining it self thitherward determined the course of the
Spirits into the same Pores. For this could only represent the Figure of a
thing, not the Colors thereof. Besides a man may bring an hundred Objects, and
expose them to our view at the same distance, the Eye keeping exactly in the
same posture, insomuch that it shall be necessary for these images to take up
the very same place of the Brain, and yet there shall be a distinct remembrance
of all these; which is impossible if there be no Soul in us, but all be mere
Matter. The same may be said of so many Names or Words levelled if you will out
of a Trunk into the Ear kept accurately in the same posture, so that the Sound
shall beat perpetually upon the same parts of the Organ, yet if there be five
hundred of them, there may be a distinct memory for every one of them; which is
a power perfectly beyond the bounds of mere Matter, for there would be a
necessary confusion of all.

8. Lastly, for those imaginations or representations that are of no one Object
that we ever see, but made up of several that have taken their distinct places
in the Brain, how can the Conarion join these together? Or rather in one and
the same Object, suppose this Man or that House, which we see in a right
posture, and has left such a signature or figure in the Brain as is fit to
represent it so, how can the Conarion invert the posture of the image, and make
it represent the House and Man with the heels upwards? Besides the difficulty
of representing the Distance of an Object, or the Breadth thereof, concerning
which we have spoken already. It is impossible the Conarion, if it be mere
Matter, should perform any such operations as these. For it must raise motions
in it self, such as are not necessarily conveyed by any corporeal impress of
another Body, which is plainly against Axiom 26.

9. And therefore that sober and judicious Wit Descartes dares not stretch the
power of Mechanical organization thus far, but does plainly confess, that as
there are some Functions that belong to the Body alone, so there are others
that belong to the Soul, which he calls Cogitations; and are according to him
of two sorts, the one Actions, the other Passions. The Actions are all the
operations of our Will, as in some sense all Perceptions may be termed Actions.
And these Actions of the Will are either such as are mere Intellectual
Operations, and end in the Soul her self, such as her stirring up her self to
love God, or contemplate any Immateriall Object; or they are such as have an
influence on the Body, as when by virtue of our Will we put ourselves upon
going to this or that place.

He distinguishes again our Perceptions into two sorts, whereof the one has the
Soul for their cause, the other the Body. Those that are caused by the Body
are mostwhat such as depend on the Nerves. But besides these there is one kind
of Imagination that is to be referred hither, and that properly has the Body
for its cause, to wit, that Imagination that arises merely from the hitting of
the Animal Spirits against the tracts of those Images that external Objects
have left in the Brain, and so representing them to the Conarion; which may
happen in the daytime when our Fancy roves, and we do not set our selves on
purpose to think on things, as well as it does in sleep by night. Those
Perceptions that arrive to the Soul by the interposition of the Nerves, differ
one from another in this, that some of them refer to outward Objects that
strike our Sense, others to our Body, such as Hunger, Thirst, Pain, etc. and
others to the Soul it self, as Sorrow, Joy, Fear, etc.

Those Perceptions that have the Soul for their cause, are either the
Perceptions of her own Acts of Will, or else of her Speculation of things
purely intelligible, or else of Imaginations made at pleasure, or finally of
Reminiscency, when she searches out something that she has let slip out of her
Memory.

10. That which is observable in this Distribution is this, That all those
Cogitations that he calls Actions, as also those kind of Perceptions, whose
cause he assigns to the Soul, are in themselves (and are acknowledged by him)
of that nature, that they cannot be imitated by any creature by the mere
organization of i'ts Body. But for the other, he holds they may, and would make
us believe they are in Bodies of Brutes, which he would have mere Machina's,
that is, That from the mere Mechanical frame of their Body, outward Objects of
Sense may open Pores in their Brains so, as that they may determine the Animal
Spirits into such and such Muscles for spontaneous Motion. That the course of
the Spirits also falling into the Nerves in the Intestines and Stomach, Spleen,
Heart, Liver, and other parts, may cause the very same effects of Passion,
suppose of Love, Hatred, Joy, Sorrow, in these brute Machina's, as we feel in
our Bodies, though they, as being senseless, feel them not; and so the
vellication of certain Tunicles and Fibers in the Stomach and Throat, may
affect their Body as ours is in the Sense of Hunger or Thirst; and finally that
the hitting of the Spirits into the tracts of the Brain, that have been signed
by External Objects, may act so upon their Body as it does upon ours in
Imagination and Memory.

Now add to this Machina of Descartes, the capacity in Matter of Sensation
and Perception, (which yet I have demonstrated it to be incapable of) and it
will be exquisitely as much as Mr. Hobbs himself can expect to arise from mere
Body, that is, All the Motions thereof being purely Mechanical, the
perceptions and propensions will be fatal, necessary, and unavoidable, as he
loves to have them.

But being all Cogitations that Descartes terms Actions, as also all those
kind of Perceptions that he acknowledges the Soul to be the cause of, are not
to be resolved into any Mechanical contrivance; we may take notice of them as
a peculiar rank of Arguments, and such, as that if it could be granted, that
the Souls of Brutes were nothing but sentient Matter, yet it would follow that
a Substance of an higher nature, and truly Immateriall, must be the Principle
of those more noble Operations we find in our selves, as appears from Axiom
20. and 26.

CHAP. VI.
1. That no part of the Spinall Marrow can be the Common Sensorium without a
Soul in the Body. 2. That the Animal Spirits are more likely to be that Common
Percipient. 3. But yet it is demonstrable they are not: 4. As not being so much
as capable of Sensation; 5. Nor of directing Motion into the Muscles; 6. Much
less of Imagination and rational Invention; 7. Nor of Memory. 8. An answer to
an Evasion. 9. The Authors reason, why he has confuted so particularly all the
suppositions of the Seat of Common Sense, when few of them have been asserted
with the exclusion of a Soul.

1. THere remain now only Two Opinions to be examined: the one, That place of
the Spinall Marrow where Anatomists conceive there is the nearest concurse of
all the Nerves of the Body; the other, the Animal Spirits in the fourth
Ventricle of the Brain. As for the former, viz. That part of the Spinall
Marrow, where the concurse of the Nerves are conceived to be, as I have
answered in like case, so I say again, that besides that I have already
demonstrated, that Matter is incapable of Sense, and that there is no
modification thereof in the Spinall Marrow, that will make it more likely to be
endued with that Faculty then the pith of Elder or a mess of Curds; we are also
to take notice, that it is utterly inept for Motion, nor is it conceivable how
that part of it, or any other that is assigned to this office of being the
Common Percipient in us of all Thoughts and Objects, (which must also have the
power of moving our members) can, having so little agitation in it self, (as
appearing nothing but a kind of soft Pap or Pulp) so nimbly and strongly move
the parts of our Body.

2. In this regard the Animal Spirits seem much more likely to perform that
office; and those, the importunity of whose gross fancyes constrains them to
make the Soul Corporeal, do nevertheless usually pitch upon some subtle
thin Matter to constitute her nature or Essence: And therefore they imagine her
to be either Air, Fire, Light, or some such like Body; with which the Animal
Spirits have no small affinity.

3. But this opinion, though it may seem plausible at first sight, yet the
difficulties it is involved in are insuperable. For it is manifest, that all
the Arguments that are brought Chap. 2. Sect. 3. will recur with full force in
this place. For there is no Matter that is so perfectly liquid as the Animal
Spirits, but consists of particles only contiguous one to another, and
actually upon Motion playing and turning one by another, as busy as Atoms in
the Sun. Now therefore, let us consider whether that Treasury of pure Animal
Spirits contained in the Fourth Ventricle be able to Sustain so noble an office
as to be the common Percipient in our Body, which, as I have often repeated, is
so complex a Function, that it does not only contain the perception of
external Objects, but Motion, Imagination, Reason and Memory.

4. Now at the very first dash, the transmission of the image of the Object
into this crowd of particles cannot but hit variously upon them, and therefore
they will have several Perceptions amongst them, some happily perceiving part of
the Object, others all, others more then all, others also perceiving of it in
one place, and others in another. But the Percipient in us representing no such
confusion or disorder in our beholding of Objects, it is plain that it is not
the Animal Spirits that is it.

5. Again, that which is so confounded a Percipient, how can it be a right
Principle of directing Motion into the Muscles? For besides what disorder may
happen in this function upon the distracted representation of present Objects,
the power of thinking, excogitating and deliberating, being in these Animal
Spirits also, (and they having no means of communicating one with another, but
justling one against another; which is as much to the purpose, as if men should
knock heads to communicate to each other their conceits of Wit) it must needs
follow that they will have their perceptions, inventions, and deliberations
apart; which when they put in Execution, must cause a marvelous confusion in
the Body, some of them commanding the parts this way, others driving them
another way: or if their factions have many divisions and subdivisions, every
one will be so weak, that none of them will be able to command it any way. But
we find no such struggling or countermands of any thing in us, that would act
our Body one way when we would another; as if when one was a going to write
(...) --
something stronger in him, whose conceits he is not privy to, should get the
use of his hand, and, in stead of that, write down Arma virumque cano.
And the like may be said of any other Spontaneous Motion, which being so
constantly within our command as it is, it is a sufficient Argument to prove
that it is not such a lubricous Substance as the Animal Spirits, nor so
disunited; but something more perfectly One and Indivisible.

6. We need not instance any further concerning the power of Invention and
Reason, how every particle of these Animal Spirits has a liberty to think by it
self, and consult with it self, as well as to play by it self, and how there is
no possible means of communicating their Thoughts one to another, unless it
should be, as I have said, by hitting one against another: but that can only
communicate Motion, not their determinate Thought; unless that these particles
were conceived to figure themselves into the shape of those things they think
of, which is impossible by Axiom 26. And suppose it were possible one particle
should shape it self, for example, into a George on Horseback with a Lance in
his hand, and another into an Enchanted Castle; this George on Horseback must
run against the Castle, to make the Castle receive his impress and similitude.
But what then? Truly the encounter will be very unfortunate. For St. George
indeed may easily break his Lance, but it is impossible that he should by
justling against the Particle in the form of a Castle conveigh the entire shape
of himself and his Horse thereby, such as we find our selves able to imagine of
a man on horseback. Which is a Truth as demonstrable as any Theorem in
Mathematics, but so plain at first sight, that I need not use the curiosity of
a longer Demonstration to make it more firm. Nor is there any colorable
evasion by venturing upon a new way, as if this particle having transformed it
self into a Castle, and that into an Horseman, all the others then would see
them both. For by what light, and how little would they appear, and in what
different places, according to the different posture of the particles of the
Animal Spirits, and with what different faces, some seeing one side, others
another? But besides this, there is a further difficulty, that if such Sensible
representations as these could be conveyed from one particle to another by
corporeal encounters and justlings, or by that other way after alleged;
Logical and Mathematical notions can not. So that some of the Animal Spirits
may think of one Demonstration in Mathematics, or of part of that
Demonstration, and others of another: insomuch that if a Mathematician be to
write, while he would write one thing upon the determination of these Animal
Spirits, others may get his hand to make use of for the writing something else,
to whose Thoughts and Counsel he was not at all privy; nor can tell any thing,
till those other Animal Spirits have writ it down. Which Absurdities are so mad
and extravagant, that a man would scarce defile his pen by recording them, were
it not to awaken those that dote so much on the power of Matter (as to think it
of it self sufficient for all Phenomenon in the world) into due shame and
abhorrence of their foolish Principle.

7. The last Faculty I will consider is Memory, which is also necessarily
joined with the rest in the Common Percipient; of which not only the fluidity
of parts, but also their dissipability, makes the Animal Spirits utterly
incapable. For certainly, the Spirits by reason of their Subtilty and Activity
are very dissipable, and in all likelihood remain not the same for the space of
a week together; and yet things that one has not thought of for many years,
will come as freshly into a man's mind, as if they were transacted but
yesterday.

8. The only Evasion they can excogitate here is this, That as there is a
continual supply of Spirits by degrees, so, as they come in, they are
seasoned, fermented, and tinctured with the same notions, perceptions and
propensions that the Spirits they find there have. These are fine words, but
signify nothing but this, that the Spirits there present in the Brain
communicate the Notions and Perceptions they have to these new-comers; which is
that which I have already proved impossible in the foregoing Sections. And
therefore it is impossible that the Animal Spirits should be that Common
Percipient, that hears, sees, moves, remembers, understands, and does other
functions of life that we perceive performed in us or by us.

9. We have now particularly evinced, that neither the whole Body, nor any of
those parts that have been pitched upon, if we exclude the presence of a Soul
or Immaterial Substance, can be the Seat of Common Sense. In which I would not
be so understood, as if it employed that there are none of these parts, but some
or other have affirmed might be the common Sensorium, though we had no Soul;
but because they have been stood upon, all of them, by some or other to be the
Seat of Common Sense, supposing a Soul in the Body, that there might no
imaginable doubt or scruple be left behind, I have taken the pains thus
punctually and particularly to prove, that none of them can be the place of
Common Sense without one. And thus I have perfectly finished my main design,
which was to demonstrate That there is a Soul or Incorporeall Substance
residing in us, distinct from the Body. But I shall not content my self here,
but for a more full discovery of her Nature and Faculties, I shall advance
further, and search out her chief Seat in the Body, where and from whence she
exercises her most noble Functions, and after enquire whether she be confined
to that part thereof alone, or whether she be spread through all our members;
and lastly consider after what manner she sees, feels, hears, imagines,
remembers, reasons, and moves the Body. For beside that I shall make some good
use of these discoveries for further purpose, it is also in it self very
pleasant to have in readiness a rational and cohaerent account, and a
determinate apprehension of things of this nature.

CHAP. VII.
1. His enquiry after the Seat of Common Sense, upon supposition there is a
Soul in the Body. 2. That there is some particular part in the Body that is
the Seat of Common Sense. 3. A general division of their Opinions concerning
the place of Common Sense. 4. That of those that place it out of the Head there
are two sorts. 5. The Invalidity of Helmont's reasons whereby he would prove
the Orifice of the Stomach to be the principal Seat of the Soul. 6. An Answer
to Helmont's stories for that purpose. 7. A further confutation out of his own
concessions. 8. Mr. Hobbs his Opinion confuted, that makes the Heart the Seat
of Common Sense. 9. A further confutation thereof from Experience. 10. That the
Common Sense is seated somewhere in the Head. 11. A caution for the choice of
the particular place thereof. 12. That the whole Brain is not it; 13. Nor
Regius his small solid Particle; 14. Nor any external Membrane of the Brain,
nor the Septum Lucidum. 15. The three most likely places. 16. Objections
against Cartesius his Opinion concerning the Conarion answered. 17. That the
Conarion is not the Seat of Common Sense; 18. Nor that part of the Spinall
Marrow where the Nerves are conceived to concur, but the Spirits in the
fourth Ventricle of the Brain.

1. IT will therefore be requisite for us to resume the former Opinions,
altering the Hypothesis; and to examine which of them is most reasonable,
supposing there be a Substance immateriall or Soul in man.

2. That there is some particular or restrained Seat of the Common Sense, is an
Opinion that even all Philosophers and Physicians are agreed upon. And it is an
ordinary Comparison amongst them, that the External Senses and the Common
Sense considered together are like a Circle with five lines drawn from the
Circumference to the Center. Wherefore as it has been obvious for them to find
out particular Organs for the external Senses, so they have also attempted to
assign some distinct part of the Body for to be an Organ of the Common Sense;
that is to say, as they discovered Sight to be seated in the Eye, Hearing in
the Ear, Smelling in the Nose, etc. so they conceived that there is some part
of the Body wherein Seeing, Hearing and all other Perceptions meet together, as
the lines of a circle in the center: and that there the Soul does also judge
and discern of the difference of the Objects of the outward Senses. They have
justly therefore excluded all the External parts of the Body from the lightest
suspicion of any capacity of undergoing such a function as is thus general,
they being all employed in a more particular task, which is to be the Organ of
some one of these five outward Senses; and to be affected no otherwise, then by
what is impressed upon themselves, and chiefly from their proper Objects,
amongst which five, Touch properly so called has the greatest share, it being
as large as the Skin that covers us, and reaching as deep as any Membrane and
Nerve in the limbs and trunk of the Body, besides all the Exterior parts of
the Head. All which can no more see, then the Eye can hear, or the Ear can
smell.

3. Besides this, all those Arguments that do so clearly evince that the place
of Common Sense is somewhere in the Head, is a plain demonstration that the
whole Body cannot be the Seat thereof, and what those Arguments are you shall
hear anon. For all those Opinions that have pitched on any one Part for the
Seat of Common Sense, being to be divided into two Ranks, to wit, either such
as assign some particular place in the Body, or else in the Head, we will
proceed in this order; as first to confute those that have made choice of any
part for the Seat of Common Sense out of the Head; and then in the second place
we will in general show, that the common Sensorium must be in some part of the
Head; and lastly, of those many opinions concerning what part of the Head this
common Sensorium should be, those which seem less reasonable being rejected, we
shall pitch upon what we conceive the most unexceptionable.

4. Those that place the Common Sensorium out of the Head, have seated it
either in the upper Orifice of the Stomach, or in the Heart. The former is
Van-Helmont's Opinion, the other Mr. Hobbs his.

5. As for Van-Helmont, there is nothing he alleges for his Opinion but may be
easily answered. That which mainly imposed upon him was the exceeding
Sensibility of that part, which Nature made so, that, as a faithful and
sagacious Porter, it might admit nothing into the Stomach that might prove
mischievous or troublesome to the Body. From this tender Sensibility, great
offenses to it may very well cause Swoonings, and Apoplexies, and cessations of
Sense. But Fear and Joy and Grief have dispatched some very suddenly, when yet
the first entrance of that deadly stroke has been at the Ear or the Eye, from
some unsupportable ill news or horrid spectacle. And the harsh handling of an
angry Sore, or the treading on a Corn on the Toe, may easily cast some into a
swoon, and yet no man will ever imagine the Seat of the Common Sense to be
placed in the Foot. In fine, there is no more reason to think the Common
Sensorium is in the mouth of the Stomach, because of the Sensible Commotions we
feel there, then that it is seated in the Stars, because we so clearly perceive
their Light, as Descartes has well answered upon like occasion. Nor can
Phrensies and Madnesses, though they may sometimes be observed to take their
rise from thence, any more prove that it is the Seat of the Common Sense, then
the Furor uterinus, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and Syncopes proceeding from the
Womb, do argue that the common Sensorium of Women lies in that part.

6. And if we consider the great Sympathy betwixt the Orifice of the Stomach
and the Heart, whose Pathemata are so alike and conjoined, that the Ancients
have given one name to both parts, calling them promiscuously (...), and the
pains of the Stomach (...), and (...), as also that the Heart is that part from
which manifestly are the supplies of life, whence the Pulse ceasing life cannot
long continue for want of warmth and Spirits; here is an evident reason, how it
may happen that a Wound about the mouth of the Stomach may dispatch a man more
suddenly then a wound in the Head, they being both supposed mortal, though the
seat of the Sensitive Soul be not chiefly in the aforesaid Orifice. For partly
the natural Sympathy betwixt the Orifice of the Stomach and the Heart, and
partly the horror and pain perceived by the Soul in the common Sensorium,
which we will suppose in the Head, does so dead the Heart, that, as in the
sudden Passions above named, it ceases to perform the ordinary functions of
Life, and so Pulse and Sense and all is gone in short time; when as the Head
being wounded mortally, Perception is thereby so diminished, that the Heart
scapes the more free from the force of that lethiferous passion; and so though
Sense be gone, can continue the Pulse a longer time: which is a perfect answer
to Helmont's stories he recites in his Seeds Animae.

7. To all which I may add, That himself does acknowledge in the end of that
Treatise, that the power of Motion, of Will, Memory and Imagination, is in the
Brain; and therefore unless a man will say and deny any thing, he must say that
the Common Sense is there also.

8. The Opinion of Mr. Hobbs bears more credit and countenance with it, as
having been asserted heretofore by Philosophers of great fame, Epicurus,
Aristotle, and the School of the Stoics: but if we look closer to it, it will
prove as little true as the other; especially in his way, that holds there is
no Soul in a Man, but that all is but organized Matter. For let him declare
any Mechanical reason whereby his Heart will be able to move his Finger. But
upon this Hypothesis I have confuted this Opinion already. It is more
maintainable, if there be granted a Soul in the Body, that the Heart is the
chief Seat thereof, and place of Common Sense, as Aristotle and others would
have it, as also the spring of Spontaneous Motion. But it is very unlikely,
that that part that is so continually employed in that natural Motion of
contracting and dilating it self, should be the Seat of that Principle which
commands Free and Spontaneous progressions: Perceptions also would be horribly
disturbed by its squeezing of it self, and then flagging again by vicissitudes.
Neither would Objects appear in the same place when the Heart is drawn up and
when it is let down again, as I have above intimated: the extreme heat also of
it could not admit that it be affected with the gentle motions of the Objects
of Sense, the Blood being there in a manner scalding hot. And it is in this
sense that that Aphorism in Aristotle is to be understood, (...), That which
must receive the variety of external impresses, must not be it self in any
high temper or agitation.

9. Wherefore it is a very rash thing to assert, that the Heart is the Seat of
Common Sense, unless by some plain experience it could be evinced to be so,
whenas indeed Experiments are recorded to the contrary. As, that if we bind a
Nerve, Sense and Motion will be betwixt the Ligature and the Brain, but not
betwixt the Heart and the Ligature. And that the Crocodile, his Heart being cut
cut, will live for a considerable time, and fight, and defend himself. The like
is observed of the Sea-Tortoise, and the wild Goat, as Calcidius writes. To
which you may add what Galen relates of sacrificed Beasts, that their Hearts
being taken out and laid upon the Altar, they have been seen in the mean time
not only to breath, and roar aloud, but also to run away, till the expense of
Blood has made them fall down. Which Narrations to me are more credible, I
having seen with mine own eyes a Frog quite exenterated, heart, stomach, guts
and all taken out by an ingenious friend of mine, and dexterous Anatomist,
after which the Frog could see, and would avoid any object in its way, and
skipped as freely and nimbly up and down, as when it was entire, and that for a
great while. But a very little wound in the Head deprives them immediately of
Life and Motion. Whence it is plain that the derivation of Sense and
spontaneous Motion is not from the Heart. For if the Motion be intercepted
betwixt the Brain and the Heart, by Mr. Hobbs his own concession, there will be
no perception of the Object. And there is the same reason of the Orifice of the
Stomach: so that this one Experiment does clearly evince these two Opinions to
be erroneous.

10. And that no man hereafter may make any other unhappy choice in the parts
of the Body, we shall now propose such Reasons as we hope will plainly prove,
That the common Sensorium must needs be in the Head; or indeed rather repeat
them: For some of those whereby we proved that the Heart is not the Seat of
Common Sense, will plainly evince that the Head is. As that out of Laurentius,
that a Nerve being tied, Sense and Motion will be preserved from the ligature
up toward the Head, but downwards they will be lost. As also that experiment
of a Frog, whose brain if you pierce will presently be devoid of Sense and
Motion, though all the Entrals being taken out it will skip up and down, and
exercise its senses as before. Which is a plain evidence that Motion and Sense
is derived from the Head; and there is now no pretense to trace any Motion into
a farther fountain, the Heart (from whence the Nerves were conceived to branch
by Aristotle, and from whence certainly the Veins and Arteries do, as appears
by every Anatomy) being so justly discharged from that office. To which it may
suffice to add the consideration of those diseases that seize upon all the
Animal functions at once, such as are the Lethargy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, and
the like, the causes of which Physicians find in the Head, and accordingly
apply remedies. Which is a plain detection that the Seat of the Soul, as much
as concerns the Animal Faculties, is chiefly in the Head. The same may be said
of Phrensy and Melancholy, and such like distempers, that deprave a man's
Imagination and Judgment; Physicians always conclude something amiss within
the Cranium. Lastly, if it were nothing but the near attendance of the outward
Senses on the Soul, or her discerning Faculty, being so fitly placed about her
in the Head; this, unless there were some considerable Argument to the
contrary, should be sufficient to determine any one that is unprejudiced, to
conclude that the Seat of Common Sense, Understanding, and command of Motion,
is there also.

11. But now the greatest difficulty will be to define In what part thereof it
is to be placed. In which, unless we will go overboldly and carelessly to work,
we are to have a regard to Mechanical congruities, and not pitch upon any
thing that, by the advantage of this Supposall, That there is a Soul in man,
may go for possible; but to choose what is most handsome and convenient.

12. That the whole Brain is not the Seat of Common Sense, appears from the
wounds and cuts it may receive without the destruction of that Faculty; for
they will not take away Sense and Motion, unless they pierce so deep as to
reach the Ventricles of the Brain, as Galen has observed.

13. Nor is it in Regius his small solid particle. For besides that it is not
likely the Center of Perception is so minute, it is very incongruous to place
it in a Body so perfectly solid, more hard then Marble, or Iron. But this
Invention being but a late freak of his petulant fancy, that has an ambition to
make a blunder and confusion of all Descartes his Metaphysicall Speculations,
(and therefore found out this rare quirk of wit to show, how though the Soul
were nothing but Matter, yet it might be incorruptible and immortal) it was not
worth the while to take notice of it here in this Hypothesis, which we have
demonstrated to be true, viz. That there is a Soul in the Body, whose nature
is immateriall or incorporeall.

14. Nor are the Membranes in the Head the common Sensorium; neither those that
envelop the Brain, (for they would be able then to see the light through the
hole the Trepan makes, though the party Trepan'd winked-with his eyes; to say
nothing of the conveyance of the Nerves, the Organs of external Sense, that
carry beyond these exterior Membranes, and therefore point to a place more
inward, that must be the Recipient of all their impresses) nor any Internal
membrane, as that which bids fairest for it, the Septum Lucidum, as being in
the midst of the upper Ventricle. But yet if the level of Motion through the
external Senses be accurately considered, some will shoot under, and some in a
distant parallel, so that this Membrane will not be struck with all the Objects
of our Senses. Besides that it seems odd and ridiculous that the center of
Perception should be either driven out so into plates, or spread into hollow
convexities, as it must be supposed, if we make either the external or
internal Membranes of the Brain the Seat of Common Sense.

15. The most likely place is some one of those that the three last Opinions
point at, viz. either the Conarion, or the Concurse of the Nerves in the fourth
Ventricle, or the Animal Spirits there.

16. The first is Descartes Opinion, and not rashly to be refused, neither do
I find any Arguments hitherto that are valid enough to deface it. Those that
are recited out of Bartholine, and subscribed to by the learned Author of
Adenographia, in my apprehension have not the force to ruin it: we will first
repeat them, and then examine them.

The first is, that this Glandula is too little to be able to represent the
Images of all that the Soul has represented to her.

The second, that the external Nerves do not reach to the Glandula, and that
therefore it cannot receive the impress of sensible Objects.

The third, that it is placed in a place of excrements which would soil the
species of things.

The fourth, that the species of things are perceived there where they are
carried by the Nerves. But the Nerves meet about the beginning or head of the
Spinall Marrow, a more noble and ample place then the Glandula pinealis.

To the first I answer, That the amplitude of that place where the Nerves meet
in the Spinall Marrow, is not large enough to receive the distinct impresses of
all the Objects the mind retains in Memory. Besides, that the other parts of
the Brain may serve for that purpose, as much as any of it can. For it is the
Soul it self alone that is capable of retaining so distinct and perfect
representations, though it may make an occasional use of some private marks it
impresses in the Brain; which happily may be nothing at all like the things it
would remember, nor of any considerable magnitude nor proportion to them, such
as we observe in the words Arx and Atomus, where there is no correspondency of
either likeness or bigness, betwixt the words and the things represented by
them.

To the second, That though there be no continuation of Nerves to the Conarion,
yet there is of Spirits; which are as able to conveigh the impresses of Motion
from external Sense to the Conarion, as the Air and Ether the impress of the
Stars unto the Eye.

To the third, That the Glandula is conveniently enough placed, so long as the
Body is sound, for no excrementitious humors will then overflow it or besmeare
it. But in such distempers wherein they do, Apoplexies, Catalepsies, or such
like diseases will arise; which we see do fall out, let the seat of Common
Sense be where it will.

To the last I answer, that the Nerves, when they are once got any thing far
into the Brain, are devoid of Tunicles, and be so soft and spongy, that the
motion of the Spirits can play through them, and that therefore they may ray
through the sides, and so continue their motion to the Conarion, wherever
their extremities may seem to tend.

17. But though these Arguments do not sufficiently confute the Opinion, yet I
am not so wedded to it, but I can think something more unexceptionable may be
found out, especially it being so much to be suspected, that all Animals have
not this Conarion; and then, that what pleased Descartes so much in this
Invention, was that he conceited it such a marvelous fine instrument to beat
the Animal Spirits into such and such Pores of the Brain, a thing that I cannot
at all close with for reasons above alleged. Besides that Stones have been
found in this Glandula, and that it is apparent that it is environed with a net
of veins and arteries, which are indications that it is a part assigned for
some more inferior office. But yet I would not dismiss it without fair play.

18. Wherefore that opinion of the forecited Author, who places the Seat of
Common Sense in that part of the Spinall Marrow where the Nerves are suspected
to meet, as it is more plain and simple, so it is more irrefutable, supposing
that the Soul's Center of perception (whereby she does not only apprehend all
the Objects of the external Senses, but does imagine, reason, and freely
command and determine the Spirits into what part of the Body she pleases) could
be conveniently seated in such dull pasty Matter as the Pith of the Brain is; a
thing, I must needs profess, that pleases not my Palate at all, and therefore I
will also take leave of this opinion too, and adventure to pronounce, That the
chief Seat of the Soul, where she perceives all Objects, where she imagines,
reasons, and invents, and from whence she commands all the parts of the Body,
is those purer Animal Spirits in the fourth Ventricle of the Brain.

CHAP. VIII.
1. The first reason of his Opinion, the convenient Situation of these Spirits.
2. The second, that the Spirits are the immediate instrument of the Soul in
all her functions. 3. The proof of the second Reason from the general
Authority of Philosophers, and particularly of Hippocrates; 4. From our
Sympathizing with the changes of the Air; 5. From the celerity of Motion and
Cogitation; 6. From what is observed generally in the Generation of things; 7.
From Regius his experiment of a Snaile in a glass; 8. From the running round of
Images in a Vertigo; 9. From the constitution of the Eye, and motion of the
Spirits there; 10. From the dependency of the actions of the Soul upon the
Body, whether in Meditation or corporeal Motion; 11. From the recovery of
Motion and Sense into a stupefied part; 12. And lastly from what is observed in
swooning fits, of paleness and sharpness of visage, etc. 13. The inference from
all this, That the Spirits in the fourth Ventricle are the seat of Common
Sense, and that the main use of the Brain and Nerves is to preserve the Spirits.

1. THat which makes me embrace this Opinion rather then any other is this,
That first, this situation of the common Sensorium betwixt the Head and the
trunk of the Body, is the most exactly convenient to receive the impresses of
Objects from both, as also to impart Motion to the Muscles in both the Head and
in the Body. In which I look upon it as equal with the last Opinion, and
superior to all them that went before. For whatever may be objected is already
answered in what I have said to the last Objection against Descartes.

2. But now in the second place, (wherein this opinion of mine has a notorious
advantage above all else that I know) It is most reasonable that that Matter,
which is the immediate instrument of all the Animal functions of the Soul,
should be the chiefest Seat from whence and where she exercises these
functions, and if there be any place where there is a freer plenty of the
purest sort of this Matter, that her peculiar residence should be there. Now
the immediate instrument of the functions of the Soul is that thinner Matter
which they ordinarily call Animal Spirits, which are to be found in their
greatest purity and plenty in the fourth Ventricle of the Brain. From whence it
must follow that that precious and choice part of the Soul which we call the
Center of perception is to be placed in that Ventricle, not in any pith of the
Brain thereabout, but in the midst of these Spirits themselves; for that is the
most natural situation for the commanding them into the parts of the Head and
Body, besides a more delicate and subtle use of them at home, in pursuing
various imaginations and inventions.

3. That this thin and Spirituous Matter is the immediate engine of the Soul
in all her operations, is in a manner the general opinion of all Philosophers.
And even those that have placed the Common Sensorium in the Heart, have been
secure of the truth of this their conceit, because they took it for granted,
that the left Ventricle thereof was the fountain of these pure and subtle
Spirits, and please themselves very much, in that they fancied that Oracle of
Physicians, the grave and wise Hippocrates, to speak their own sense so fully
and significantly, (...) that is to say, That the mind of man is in the left
Ventricle of his Heart, and that it is not nourished from meats and drinks from
the belly, but by a clear and luminous Substance that redounds by separation
from the blood: which is that which happens exactly in the Brain. For the
Spirits there are nothing else but more pure and subtle parts of the blood,
whose tenuity and agitation makes them separate from the rest of the mass
thereof, and so replenish the Ventricles of the Brain.

4. Moreover our sympathizing so sensibly with the changes of the Air, which
Hippocrates also takes notice of, that in clear Air our thoughts are more
clear, and in cloudy more obscure and dull, is no slight indication that that
which conveighs Sense, Thoughts and Passions immediately to the Soul, is very
tenuious and delicate, and of a nature very congenerous to the Air with which
it changes so easily.

5. The strange Agility also of Motions and Cogitations that we find in our
selves, has forced the most sluggish wits, even such as have been so gross as
to deem the Soul Corporeal, yet to choose the freest, subtilest and most
active Matter to compound her of, that their imaginations could excogitate. And
Lucretius, the most confident of the Epicurean Sect, thinks he has hit the
nail on the head in his choice, De rerum Not. lib. 3. where he concludes thus,
Nunc igitur quoniam est animi natura reperta
Mobilis egregie, per quam constare necesse est
Corporibus parvis and laevibus atque rotundis:
whose testimony I account the better in this case, by how much the more crass
Philosopher he is, the necessity of the tenuity of particles that are to
pervade the Body of a Man being convinced hence to be so plain, that the
dimmest eyes can easily discover it.

6. But we will advance higher to more forcible Arguments, amongst which this,
I think, may find some place, That we cannot discover any immediate operation
of any kind of Soul in the world, but what it first works upon that Matter
which participates in a very great measure of this fineness and tenuity of
parts, which will easily yield and be guided; as may be universally observed in
all Generations, where the Body is always organized out of thin fluid liquor,
that will easily yield to the plastic power of the Soul. In which I do not
doubt but it takes the advantage of moving the most subtle parts of all first,
such as Descartes his first and second element, which are never excluded from
any such humid and tenuious substance: which elements of his are that true
Heavenly or Ethereal matter which is every where, as Ficinus somewhere says
Heaven is; and is that fire which Trismegist affirms is the most inward vehicle
of the mind, and the instrument that God used in the forming of the world, and
which the Soul of the world, wherever she acts, does most certainly still use.

7. And to make yet a step further, That ocular demonstration that Henricus
Regius brings Philos. Nature. lib. 4. cap. 16. seems to me both ingenious and
solid. It is in a Snail, such as have no shells, moving in a glass: so soon as
she begins to creep, certain Bubbles are discovered to move from her tail to
her head; but so soon as she ceases moving, those Bubbles cease. Whence he
concludes, That a gale of spirits that circuit from her head along her back to
her tail, and thence along her belly to her head again, is the cause of her
progressive motion.

8. That such thin Spirits are the immediate instruments of Sense, is also
discovered by what is observed in a Vertigo. For the Brain it self is not of
such a fluid substance as to turn round, and to make external Objects seem to
do so. Wherefore it is a sign that the immediate corporeal instrument of
conveying the images of things is the Spirits in the Brain.

9. And that they are the chief Organ of Sight is plain in the exterior parts
of the Eye; for we may easily discern how full they are of that (...), pure and
lucid substance which Hippocrates speaks of, though he seat it in a wrong
place; and how upon the passions of the mind these Spirits ebb or flow in the
Eye, and are otherwise wonderful-significantly modified, insomuch that the Soul
even seems to speak through them, in that silent voice of Angels, which some
fancy to be by nothing but by dumb shows, but I do not at all believe it. It
is also plain enough, that dimness of sight comes from deficiency of these
Spirits, though the parts of the Eye otherwise be entire enough. The wider
opening also of the pupil of one Eye upon the shutting of the other does
indicate the flux and more copious presence of Spirits there, as Galen has
ingeniously collected.

10. To which we may add that in those more noble operations of the Mind,
when she meditates and excogitates various Theorems, that either she uses some
part of the Body as an Instrument then, or acts freely and independently of the
Body. That the latter is false is manifest from hence, that then the change of
Air, or Distemper and Diseasedness, could not prejudice her in her Inventive
and purely Intellectual Operations; but it is manifest that they do, and that
a man's Mind is much more cloudy one time then another, and in one Country then
another, whence is that proverbiall Verse, Boeotum crasso jurares aere natum.
If she uses any part of the Body, it must be either these animal Spirits, or
the Brain. That it is not the Brain, the very consistency thereof so clammy and
sluggish is an evident demonstration, which will still have the more force, if
we consider what is most certainly true, That the Soul has not any power, or
else exceeding little, of moving Matter; but her peculiar privilege is of
determining Matter in motion; which the more subtle and agitated it is, the
more easily by reason of its own mobility is it determined by her. For if it
were an immediate faculty of the Soul to contribute motion to any matter, I do
not understand how that faculty never failing nor diminishing no more then the
Soul it self can fail or diminish, that we should ever be weary of motion. In
so much that those nimble-footed Maenades or she-Priests of Bacchus, with other
agile Virgins of the Country, which Dionysius describes dancing in the flowery
meadows of Maeander and Cayster, might, if life and limbs would last, be found
dancing there to this very day, as free and frolic as wanton Kids (as he
pleases to set out their activity) and that without any lassitude at all. For
that immediate motive faculty of the Soul can still as fresh as ever impart
motion to all the Body, and sooner consume it into air or ashes by heating and
agitating it, then make her self weary or the Body seem so. Wherefore it is
plain that that motion or heat that the Soul voluntarily confers upon the Body
is by virtue of the Spirits, which she, when they are playing only and gently
toying amongst themselves, sends forth into the exterior members, and so
agitates and moves them: but they being so subtle and dissipable, the Soul
spends them in using of them; and they being much spent, she can hardly move
the Body any longer, the sense whereof we call Lassitude. These are the (...)
or (...) of Hippocrates, and the Souls immediate engine of motion through all
the parts of the Body.

11. As they are also of Sense in the more remote parts, as well as in the
Head, as Spigelius handsomely insinuates by that ordinary example of a man's
leg being stupefied or asleep, as some call it, by compression or whatever
hinderance may be of the propagation of the Spirits into that part. For as
sense and motion is restored, a man may plainly feel something creep into it
tingling and stinging like Pismires, as he compares it; which can be nothing
but the Spirits forcing their passage into the part. Wherein what they suffer
is made sensible to the Soul, they being her immediate Vehicle of life and
sense.

12. Lastly, in swooning fits, when motion and sense fails, the exterior parts
are pale and fallen, the Face looking more lean and sharp; of which there can
be no other meaning, then that that benign gale of vital air, that filled up
the parts before, is now absent and retreated from them; that is, that the
fluid Spirits are retired, without which no sense nor motion can be performed:
whence it is apparent that they are the immediate instrument of both.

13. I have proved that the Animal Spirits are the Souls immediate organ for
sense and motion. If therefore there be any place where these Spirits are in
the fittest plenty and purity, and in the most convenient situation for Animal
functions; that in all reason must be concluded the chief seat and Acropolis of
the Soul. Now the Spirits in the middle ventricle of the brain are not so
indifferently situated for both the Body and the Head, as those in the fourth
are; nor so pure. The upper Ventricles, being two, are not so fit for this
office, that is so very much one and singular. Besides that the sensiferous
impresses of motion through the eyes play under them; to say nothing how the
Spirits here are less defaecate also then in the fourth Ventricle. Wherefore
there being sufficient plenty, and greatest purity, and fittest situation of
the Spirits in this fourth Ventricle, it is manifest that in these is placed
the Center of Perception, and that they are the common Sensorium of the Soul.
And that as the Heart pumps out Blood perpetually to supply the whole Body with
nourishment, and to keep up the bulk of this edifice for the Soul to dwell in,
as also from the more subtle and agile parts thereof, to replenish the Brain
and Nerves with Spirits, which are the immediate instrument of the Soul for
Sense and Motion; so it is plain likewise that the main use of the Brain and
Nerves is to keep these subtle Spirits from over speedy dissipation, and that
the Brain with its Caverns is but one great round Nerve; as the Nerves with
their invisible porosities are but so many smaller productions or slenderer
prolongations of the Brain.

CHAP. IX.
1. Several Objections against Animal Spirits. 2. An Answer to the first
Objection touching the Porosity of the Nerves. 3. To the second and third from
the Extravasation of the Spirits and pituitous Excrements found in the Brain.
4. To the fourth fetched from the incredible swiftness of motion in the Spirits.
5. To the last from Ligation. 6. Undeniable Demonstrations that there are
Animal Spirits in the Ventricles of the Brain.

1. BEfore we proceed to our other two Enquiries, we are forced to make a stop
a while, and listen to some few Objections made by some late Authors, who
against the common stream of all other Philosophers, Physicians and Anatomists,
are not ashamed to deny that there are any such things as Spirits in the Body;
or at least that there are any in the Ventricles of the Brain. For as for the
Nerves, say they, they have no Pores or Cavities to receive them; and besides,
it is plain that what is fluid in them is nothing but a milky white juice, as
is observed in the pricking of a Nerve. And as for the Ventricles of the Brain,
those Cavities are too big, and the Spirits if they issue into them, will be as
extravasated Blood, whence they must needs be spoiled and corrupt. Besides that
they will evaporate at those passages through which the mucous or pituitous
excrements pass from the Brain. Whose appearance there is, say they, another
great argument that these Ventricles were intended only for receptacles and
conveyances of such excrementitious Humors which the Brain discharges it self
of. Lastly, if Spontaneous Motion be made by means of these Spirits, it could
not be so extremely sudden as it is, for we can wagge our finger as quick as
thought, but corporeal Motion cannot be so swift. And if the Spirits be
continued from the Head to the Finger, suppose, in the ligation of the Nerve
there would be sense from the Ligature to the Fingers end; which is, say they,
against Experience. These are the main Objections I have met withal in Hofman
and others; but are such as I think are very easily answered: and indeed they
do in some sort clash some of them one with another.

2. For how can the Nerves derive juice if they have no Pores, or are not so
much as passable to these thin active Spirits we speak of? or from whence can
we better conceive that juice to arise, then from these Spirits themselves, as
they loose their agitation, and flag into a more gross consistency?

3. Neither can the Spirits be looked upon as extravasated in the Ventricles of
the Brain, more then the Blood in the Auricles or Ventricles of the Heart. Nor
is there any fear of their sliding away through the Infundibulum, the pituitous
excrements having no passage there but what they make by their weight, as well
as their insinuating moistness, which always besmearing these parts makes them
more impervious to the light Spirits, whose agility also and componderancy with
the outward Air renders them incapable of leaving the Caverns in which they
are. That arguing from the pituitous excrements found there, that they were
made only for a Receptacle of such useless redundancy, is as ineptly inferred,
as if a man should argue from what is found in the Intestinum rectum, that the
Stomach and all the Intestines were made for a Receptacle of Stercoreous
excrement. The Spirits in the Ventricles of the Brain, playing about and
hitting against the sides of the Caverns they are in, will in process of time
abate of their agitation, the grosser parts especially; and so necessarily come
to a more course consistency, and settle into some such like moist Sediment as
is found at the bottom of the Ventricles, which nature discharges through fit
passages, whereby the Spirits are left more pure. But because this necessary
faeculency is found in these Cavities, to conclude that that is the only use
of them, is as ridiculous as to infer That because I spit at my Mouth, and
blow my Nose, that that was the chief end and use of these two parts of my
Body, or that my Eyes were not made for seeing, but weeping.

4. The nature of the swiftness of Motion in these Spirits is much like that of
Light, which is a Body as well as they. But that Lucid Matter in the Sun does
not, so soon as he appears upon the Horizon, fly so many thousand miles in a
moment to salute our eyes; but Motion is propagated as it were at once from the
Sun to our Eye through the ethereal Matter betwixt. Or suppose a long Tube, as
long as you will, and one to blow in it; in a moment, so soon as he blows at
one end, the Motion will be felt at the other, and that downwards as well as
upwards, and as easily; to satisfy that other frivolous Objection I find in
Hofman, as if it were so hard a business that these Spirits should be commanded
downwards into the Nerves. But the Opposers of this ancient and solid Opinion
are very simple and careless.

5. That of the Ligature proves nothing. For though the Nerve betwixt the
Ligature and the Finger be well enough stored with Spirits, yet the Center of
Perception being not there, and there being an interruption and division
betwixt the Spirits that are continued to their Common Sensorium, and these on
the other side of the Ligature; it is no more wonder, that we feel nothing on
this side of the Ligature, then that we see nothing in our neighbors garden,
when a wall is betwixt, though the Sun shine clearly on both sides of the wall.

6. We see how invalid their Arguments are against this received Opinion of
almost all both Physicians and Philosophers: It is needless to produce any for
the confirmation of it, those which we have made use of for proving that the
Spirits are the immediate Instrument of the Soul, being of equal force most
of them to conclude their existence in the Body. And yet for an overplus I will
not much care to cast in a brief suggestion of the use of the Lungs, which the
best Physicians and Anatomists adjudge to be chiefly for conveighing prepared
air to the Heart; as also of the Rete mirabile and Plexus Choroides, whose
bare situation discover their use, that they may more plentifully evaporate the
thinner and more agile particles of the Blood into the Ventricles of the Brain.
The Diastole also of the Brain keeping time with the Pulse of the Heart, is a
manifest indication, what a vehement steam of Spirits, by the direct and short
passage of the Arteriae Carotides, are carried thither. For if one part of the
Blood be more fiery and subtle then another, it will be sure to reach the
Head. From whence considering the sponginess and laxness of the Brain, and
thinness of the Tunicles in the little Arteries that are there; it will follow
by Mechanical necessity that the Ventricles thereof will be filled with that
(...) which Hippocrates so fitly describes, though he fancy the Seat of it in
an unfitting place. But the purest of these Spirits being in the fourth
Ventricle, as Bartholine and others have judiciously concluded, it follows
plainly from what has been alleged, That the Common Sensorium is to be placed
in the midst of these purer Spirits of the fourth Ventricle of the Brain.

CHAP. X.
1. That the Soul is not confined to the Common Sensorium. 2. The first
Argument from the Plastic power of the Soul. 3. Which is confirmed from the
graduall dignity of the Souls Faculties, of which this Plastic is the lowest;
4. External Sensation the next; 5. After that Imagination, and then Reason. 6.
The second Argument from Passions and Sympathies in Animals. 7. An illustration
of the manner of natural Magic. 8. The third Argument from the Perception of
Pain in the exterior parts of the Body. 9. The fourth and last from the nature
of Sight.

1. WE are now at leisure to resume the two remaining Enquiries; the former
whereof is, whether the Soul be so in this fourth Ventricle, that it is
essentially no where else in the Body, or whether it be spread out into all the
Members. Regius would coup it up in the Conarion, which he believes to be the
Common Sensorium, and so by consequence it should be confined to the fourth
Ventricle, and not expatiate at all thence, supposing that the Seat of Common
Sense. The reason of this conceit of his is this, That whatever is in the rest
of the Body, may come to pass by powers merely Mechanical; wherein he does very
superstitiously tread in the footsteps of his Master Descartes. But for my own
part, I cannot but dissent, I finding in neither any sufficient grounds of so
novell an Opinion, but rather apparent reasons to the contrary.

2. As first the Frame of the Body, of which I think most reasonable to
conclude the Soul her self to be the more particular Architect (for I will not
wholly reject Plotinus his opinion;) and that the Plastic power resides in
her, as also in the Souls of Brute animals, as very learned and worthy Writers
have determined. That the Fabric of the Body is out of the concurse of Atoms,
is a mere precarious Opinion, without any ground or reason. For Sense does not
discover any such thing, the first rudiments of life being out of some liquid
homogeneall Matter; and it is against reason, that the tumbling of Atoms or
corporeal particles should produce such exquisite frames of creatures, wherein
the acutest wit is not able to find any thing inept, but all done exquisitely
well everywhere, where the foulness and courseness of Matter has not been in
fault. That God is not the immediate Maker of these Bodies, the particular
miscarriages demonstrate. For there is no Matter so perverse and stubborn but
his Omnipotency could tame; whence there would be no Defects nor Monstrosities
in the generation of Animals. Nor is it so congruous to admit, that the
Plastic faculty of the Soul of the World is the sole contriver of these
Fabrics of particular creatures (though I will not deny but she may give some
rude preparative strokes toward Efformation:) but that in every particular
world, such as Man is especially, his own Soul is the peculiar and most
perfective Architect thereof, as the Soul of the World is of it. For this
vital Fabrication is not as in artificial Architecture, when an external
person acts upon Matter, but implies a more particular and near union with that
Matter it thus intrinsecally shapes out and organizes. And what ought to have a
more particular and close union with our Bodies then our Souls themselves? My
opinion is therefore, That the Soul, which is a Spirit, and therefore
contractible and dilatable, begins within less compass at first in Organizing
the fitly-prepared Matter, and so bears it self on in the same tenor of work
till the Body has attained its full growth; and that the Soul dilates it self
in the dilating of the Body, and so possesses it through all the members
thereof.

3. The congruity of this Truth will further discover it self, if we consider
the nature of the faculties of the Soul (of which you may read more fully in
Enthusiasmus Triumphatus Artic. 3, 4, 5.) in what a natural graduality they
arise till they come to the most free of all. The deepest or lowest is this
Plastic power we have already spoke of, in virtue whereof is continued that
perpetual Systole and Diastole of the Heart, as I am more prone to think then
that it is merely Mechanical, as also that Respiration that is performed
without the command of our Will: For the Libration or Reciprocation of the
Spirits in the Tensility of the Muscles would not be so perpetual, but cease
in a small time, did not some more mystical Principle then what is merely
Mechanical give Assistance, as any one may understand by observing the
insufficiency of those devices that Henricus Regius propounds for adaequate
causes of such motions in the Body. These I look upon as the First Faculties of
the Soul, which may be bounded by this general character, That the exercise
of them does not at all imply so much as our Perception.

4. Next to these is the Sensation of any external Object, such as Hearing,
Seeing, Feeling, etc. All which include Perception in an unresistible necessity
thereof, the Object being present before us, and no external Obstacle
interposing.

5. Imagination is more free, we being able to avoid its representations for
the most part, without any external help; but it is a degree on this side Will
and Reason, by which we correct and silence unallowable fancies. Thus we see
how the Faculties of the Soul rise by Degrees; which makes it still the more
easy and credible, that the lowest of all is competible to her as well as the
highest.

6. Moreover, Passions and Sympathies, in my judgment, are more easily to be
resolved into this Hypothesis of the Souls pervading the whole Body, then in
restraining its essential presence to one part thereof. For to believe that
such an horrible Object as, suppose, a Bear or Tiger, by transmission of Motion
from it through the eyes of an Animal to the Conarion, shall so reflect thence,
as to determine the Spirits into such Nerves as will streighten the Orifice of
the Heart, and lessen the Pulse, and cause all other symptoms of Fear; seems
to me little better then a mere piece of Mechanical Credulity. Those Motions
that represent the Species of things, being turned this way or the other way,
without any such impetus of Matter as should do such feats as Descartes
speaks of in his Book of Passions. And that which he would give us as a pledge
of this Truth is so false, that it does the more animate me to dis-believe the
Theorem, Artic. 13. For the wafting of one's hand near the Eye of a man's
friend, is no sufficient proof That external Objects will necessarily and
Mechanically determine the Spirits into the Muscles, no Faculty of the Soul
intermedling. For if one be fully assured, or rather can keep himself from the
fear of any hurt, by the wafting of his friends Hand before his Eye, he may
easily abstain from winking: But if fear surprise him, the Soul is to be
entitled to the action, and not the mere Mechanisme of the Body. Wherefore this
is no proof that the Phenomenon of Passions, with their consequences, may be
salved in brute Beasts by pure Mechanics; and therefore neither in Men: but it
is evident that they arise in us against both our Will and Appetite. For who
would bear the tortures of Fears and Jealousies, if he could avoid it? And
therefore the Soul sends not nor determines the Spirits thus to her own
Torture, as she resides in the Head. Whence it is plain that it is the effect
of her as she resides in the Heart and Stomach, which sympathize with the
horrid representation in the Common Sensorium, by reason of the exquisite unity
of the Soul with her self, and of the continuity of Spirits in the Body, the
necessary instrument of all her Functions. And there is good reason the Heart
and Stomach should be so much affected, they being the chief Seats of those
Faculties that maintain the life of the Body* the danger whereof is the most
eminent Object of Fear in any Animal.

7. From this Principle, I conceive that not only the Sympathy of parts in one
particular Subject, but of different and distant Subjects, may be understood:
such as is betwixt the party wounded, and the Knife or Sword that wounded him,
besmeared with the Weapon-salve, and kept in a due temper: Which certainly is
not purely Mechanical, but Magical, though not in an unlawful sense; that is to
say, it is not to be resolved into mere Matter, of what thinness or subtilty
soever you please, but into the Unity of the Soul of the Universe, and
Continuity of the subtle Matter, which answers to our Animal Spirits. And in
this sense it is that Plotinus says, that the World is (...), the grand Magus
or Enchanter. And I do not question, but that upon this score merely, without
the association of any Familiar Spirit, several odd things may be done, for
evil as well as good. For this Spirit of the World has Faculties that work not
by Election, but fatally or naturally, as several Gamaitus we meet withal in
Nature seem somewhat obscurely to subindicate. Of this Principle we shall speak
more fully in its due place.

8. But we have yet a more clear discovery, that our Soul is not confined to
any one part of the Head, but possesses the whole Body, from the Perception of
Pain in the parts thereof: For it is plainly impossible, that so high a torture
as is felt but in the pricking of a Pin, can be communicated to the Center of
Perception upon a mere Mechanical account. For whether the immediate Instrument
of Sense be the Pith of the Nerves, as Descartes would have it, or whether it
be the Spirits, as is most true; it is ridiculous to think, that by the
forcible parting of what was joined together at ease (when this case is not
communicated to either the Spirits, or Pith of the Nerves, from the place of
the Puncture, to the very seat of Common Sense) that the Soul there seated
should feel so smart a torment, unless that her very Essence did reach to the
part where the pain is felt to be. For then the reason of this is plain, that
it is the Unity of Soul possessing the whole Body, and the Continuity of
Spirits that is the cause thereof. And it is no wonder, if the continuation and
natural composure of the Spirits be Rest and Ease to the Soul, that a violent
disjoyning and bruising of them, and baring the Soul of them, as I may so
speak, should cause a very harsh and torturous sense in the Center of
Perception. This Argument bears undeniable Evidence with it, if we do but
consider the fuzziness of the Pith of the Nerves, and the fluidity of the
Spirits, and what little stress or crouding so small a thing as a Pin or Needle
can make in such soft and liquid Matter.

9. Lastly, unless the very Essence of the Soul reach from the Common Sensorium
to the Eye, there will be very great difficulties how there should be so
distinct a representation of any visible Object: for it is very hard to
conceive that the Colors will not be confounded, and the bigness of the Object
diminished, and indeed that the image will not be quite lost before it can come
to the Soul, if it be only in the Common Sensorium. For it is plain, and
experience will demonstrate that there is a very perfect Image of the Object in
the bottom of the Eye, which is made by the decussation of the lines of Motion
from it, thus: The Line A. B. from the Object A. C. bears against that point in
the bottom of the Eye in B, and the line C. D. against the point D; whereby C.
and A. are felt in their place, and in such a distance as they are in the
Object C. A: and so of all the lines which come from the Object C. A. into the
bottom of the Eye B. D. From whence the Object is felt in such a length and
breadth as it is capable of being perceived in at such a distance from the Eye.
And as the Motion that is conveyed from A. to B, and from C. to D, is felt
there; so the modification of it, whereby the Object in those parts may seem
red, yellow, green, or any other color, is felt there also. Whence it is plain
that there will be an exquisite impression, according to all circumstances of
the Object, in the bottom of the Eye: so that if the Soul receive it there,
and convey it thence to her Center of Perception entirely in the same
circumstances, the representation will be complete. But if the Soul be not
there, but the conveyance thereof must be left to the bare laws of Matter, the
Image will be much depraved, or lost, before it can come to the Common
Sensorium. For this Motion must be propagated from B and D, till it come to the
hole E, and so pass into the Optic Nerve, to be carried into the Brain, and so
to the seat of Common Sense: but betwixt B and E, or D and E, there may be the
depainture of sundry colors, whence it will be necessary that F be tinctured
with the color D, and G with the color of both D and F; and so of the rest of
the Lines drawn from the Object to the Eye: so that all their colors would be
blended before they came to E. Now at that harsh flexure at E, where the visual
Line is as crooked as B E R, according to the experiments of Reflection and
Refraction, the breadth or length of the Object C A. would be lost. For we must
needs expect, that as it is in Reflections and Refractions, where the Object
will appear in that Line that immediately conveys the sense of it, so here it
must be also, and therefore the point C and A must appear about Q, whence the
Object will shrivel up in a manner into nothing. And suppose it might appear in
some tolerable latitude, for all this, the Brain being an opake substance, so
soon as the Motion comes thither, it would be so either changed or lost, that
the Image could not pass the opacity of it, in any splendor or entireness.
Wherefore I do not doubt but that the Image which the Soul perceives is that in
the Eye, and not any other corporeally producted to the inside of the Brain
(where Color and Figure would be so strangely depraved, if not quite
obliterated) I mean it is the concourse of the lucid Spirits in the bottom of
the Eye, with the outward Light conveyed through the Humors thereof (which is
the best sense of the Platonic (...) that Plutarch speaks of) wherein the
great Mystery of Sight consists.

CHAP. XI.
1. That neither the Soul without the Spirits, nor the Spirits without the
presence of the Soul in the Organ, are sufficient causes of Sensation. 2. A
brief declaration how Sensation is made. 3. How Imagination. 4. Of Reason and
Memory, and whether there be any Marks in the Brain. 5. That the Spirits are
the immediate Instrument of the Soul in Memory also; and how Memory arises; 6.
As also Forgetfulness. 7. How spontaneous Motion is performed. 8. How we walk,
sing, and play, though thinking of something else. 9. That though the Spirits
be not alike fine every where, yet the Sensiferous Impression will pass to the
Common Sensorium. 10. That there is an Heterogeneity in the very Soul her self;
and what it is in her we call the Root, the Center, and the Eye; and what the
Rays and Branches. 11. That the sober and allowable Distribution of her into
Parts, is into Perceptive and Plastic.

1. AFter our evincing that the Soul is not confined to the Common Sensorium,
but does essentially reach all the Organs of the Body; it will be more easy to
determine the Nature of Sensation and other Operations we mentioned. For we
have already demonstrated these two things of main consequence; That the
Spirits are not sufficient of themselves for these Functions; nor the Soul of
her self, without the assistance of the Spirits: as is plain in the
interception or disjunction of the Spirits by Ligature or Obstruction; whence
it is, that Blindness sometimes happens merely for that the Optic Nerve is
obstructed.

2. Wherefore briefly to dispatch our third Querie; I say in general, That
Sensation is made by the arrival of motion from the Object to the Organ; where
it is received in all the circumstances we perceive it in, and conveyed by
virtue of the Souls presence there, assisted by her immediate Instrument the
Spirits, by virtue of whose continuity to those in the Common Sensorium, the
Image or Impress of every Object is faithfully transmitted thither.

3. As for Imagination, there is no question but that Function is mainly
exercised in the chief seat of the Soul, those purer Animal Spirits in the
fourth Ventricle of the Brain. I speak especially of that Imagination which is
most free, such as we use in Romantic Inventions, or such as accompany the
more severe Meditations and Disquisitions in Philosophy, or any other
Intellectual entertainments. For Fasting, fresh Air, moderate Wine, and all
things that tend to an handsome supply and depuration of the Spirits, make our
thoughts more free, subtle, and clear.

4. Reason is so involved together with Imagination, that we need say nothing
of it apart by it self. Memory is a Faculty of a more peculiar consideration;
and if the Pith of the Brain contribute to the Functions of any power of the
mind, (more then by conserving the Animal Spirits) it is to this. But that the
Brain should be stored with distinct images (whether they consist of the
Flexures of the supposed Fibrillae, or the orderly puncture of Pores, or in a
continued modified Motion of the parts thereof, some in this manner, and others
in that) is a thing, as I have already proved, utterly impossible. If there be
any Marks in it, it must be a kind of Brachygraphie, some small dots here and
there standing for the recovering to Memory a series of things that would fill,
it may be, many sheets of paper to write them at large. As if a man should tie
a string about a friends finger to remember a business, that a whole days
discourse, it may be, was but little enough to give him full instructions in.
From whence it is plain that the Memory is in the Soul, and not in the Brain.
And if she do make any such Marks as we speak of, she having no perception of
them distinct from the representation of those things which they are to remind
her of, she must not make them by any Cognitive power, but by some such as is
Analogous to her Plastic Faculty of organizing the Body, where she acts and
perceives it not.

5. But whether the Soul act thus or no upon the Brain, is a Matter of
uncertain determination; nor can it be demonstrated by any experiment that I
know. And therefore if we will contain our selves within the capacities of the
Spirits, which I have so often affirmed to be the immediate instrument of the
Soul in all her operations, that Position will be more unexceptionable. And
truly I do not understand but that they and the Soul together will perform
all the Functions of Memory that we are conscious to our selves of. And
therefore I shall conclude that Memory consists in this, That the Soul has
acquired a greater Promptitude to think of this, or that Phantasm, with the
circumstances thereof, which were raised in her upon some occasion. Which
Promptitude is acquired by either the often representation of the same
Phantasme to her; or else by a more vivid impress of it from its novelty,
excellency, mischievousness, or some such like condition that at once will
pierce the Soul with an extraordinary resentment; or finally by voluntary
attention, when she very carefully and on set purpose imprints the Idea as
deeply as she can into her inward Sense. This Promptitude to think on such an
Idea will lessen in time, and be so quite spent, that when the same Idea is
represented again to the Soul, she cannot tell that ever she saw it before.
But before this inclination thereto be quite gone, upon this proneness to
return into the same conception, with the circumstances, the Relative Sense of
having seen it before (which we call Memory) does necessarily emerge upon a
fresh representation of the Object.

6. But Forgetfulness arises either out of mere Desuetude of thinking on such
an Object, or on others that are linked in with it, in such a Series as would
represent it as past, and so make it a proper Object of Memory. Or else for
that the Spirits, which the Soul uses in all her Functions, be not in a due
temper; which may arise from overmuch Coolness, or Waterishness in the Head, to
which alone Sennertus ascribes Obliviousness.

7. The last thing we are to consider is Spontaneous Motion. Which that it is
performed by the continuation of the Spirits from the Seat of Common Sense to
the Muscles, which is the gross Engine of Motion, is out of doubt. The manner
how it is, we partly feel and see; that is to say, we find in our selves a
power, at our own pleasure to move this or the other member with very great
force, and that the Muscle swells that moves the part; which is a plain
indication of influx of Spirits, thither directed or there guided by our mere
Will: a thing admirable to consider, and worth our most serious meditation.
That this direction of the impresse of Motion is made by our mere Will, and
Imagination of doing so, we know and feel it so intimately, that we can be of
nothing more sure. That there is some fluid and subtle Matter, which we
ordinarily call Spirits, directed into the Muscle that moves the Member, its
swelling does evidence to our sight; as also the experience, that moderate use
of wine which supplies Spirits apace, will make this motion the more strong. As
for the manner, whether there be any such Valvulae or no in the Nerve, common
to the opposite Muscles, as also in those that are proper to each, it is not
material. This great privilege of our Souls directing the motion of Matter
thus, is wonderful enough in either Hypothesis. But I look upon the Fibrous
parts of the Muscle as the main engine of motion; which the Soul moistning
with that subtle liquor of the Animal Spirits, makes them swell and shrink,
like Lute-strings in rainy weather: And in this chiefly consists that notable
strength of our Limbs in spontaneous motion. But for those conceived Valvulae
that Experience has not found out yet, nor sufficient Reason, they are to wait
for admission till they bring better evidence. For the presence of the Animal
Spirits in this Fibrous flesh, and the command of the Soul to move, is
sufficient to salve all Phenomenon of this kind. For upon the Will conceived in
the Common Sensorium, that part of the Soul that resides in the Muscles, by a
power near akin to that by which she made the Body and the Organs thereof,
guides the Spirits into such Pores and parts, as is most requisite for the
showing the use of this excellent Fabric.

8. And in virtue of some such power as this, do we so easily walk, though we
think not of it, as also breath, and sing, and play on the Lute, though our
Minds be taken up with something else. For Custom is another Nature: and
though the Animal Spirits, as being merely corporeal, cannot be capable of any
habits; yet the Soul, even in that part thereof that is not Cognitive, may,
and therefore may move the Body, though Cogitation cease; provided the members
be well replenished with Spirits, whose assistance in natural motions of
Animals is so great, that their Heads being taken off, their Body for a long
time will move as before: as Chalcidius relates of Wasps and Hornets, who will
fly about, and use their wings, a good part of an hour after they have lost
their Heads: which is to be imputed to the residence of their Soul in them
still, and the intireness of the Animal Spirits, not easily evaporating through
their crustaceous Bodies. For it is but a vulgar conceit to think, that the
Head being taken off, the Soul must presently fly out, like a Bird out of a
Basket, when the Lid is lifted up. For the whole World is as much thronged with
Body, as where she is; and that Tie of the Spirits as yet not being lost, it is
a greater engagement to her to be there then any where else. This motion
therefore in the Wasp, that is so perfect and durable, I hold to be vital; but
that in the parts of dismembered creatures, that are less perfect, may be
usually Mechanical.

9. We have now, so far forth as it is requisite for our design, considered the
Nature and Functions of the Soul; and have plainly demonstrated, that she is a
Substance distinct from the Body, and that her very Essence is spread
throughout all the Organs thereof: as also that the general instrument of all
her Operations is the subtle Spirits; which though they be not in like
quantity and sincerity every where, yet they make all the Body so pervious to
the impresses of Objects upon the external Organs, that like Lightning they
pass to the Common Sensorium. For it is not necessary that the Medium be so
fine and tenuious as the Matter where the most subtle motion begins. Whence
Light passes both Air and Water, though Air alone is not sufficient for such
a motion as Light, and Water almost incapable of being the Seat of the fountain
thereof. This may serve to illustrate the passage of Sense from the Membranes
(or in what other seat soever the Spirits are most subtle and lucid) through
thicker places of the Body to the very Center of Perception.

10. Lastly, we have discovered a kind of Heterogeneity in the Soul; and that
she is not of the same power every where. For her Center of Perception is
confined to the Fourth Ventricle of the Brain; and if the Sensiferous Motions
we speak of be not faithfully conducted thither, we have no knowledge of the
Object. That part therefore of the Soul is to be looked upon as most precious;
and she not being an independent Mass, as Matter is, but one part resulting
from another, that which is the noblest is in all reason to be deemed the cause
of the rest. For which reason (as Synesius calls God, on whom all things
depend, (...)) so, I think this Part may be called the Root of the Soul. Which
apprehension of ours will seem the less strange, if we consider that from the
highest Life, viz. the Deity, there does result that which has no Life nor
Sense at all, to wit the stupid Matter. Wherefore in very good Analogy we may
admit, that that precious part of the Soul in which resides Perception, Sense,
and Understanding, may send forth such an Essential Emanation from it self, as
is utterly devoid of all Sense and Perception; which you may call, if you will,
the Exterior branches of the Soul, or the Rays of the Soul, if you call
that nobler and diviner part the Center; which may very well merit also the
appellation of the Eye of the Soul, all the rest of its parts being but mere
darkness without it. In which, like another Cyclops, it will resemble the World
we live in, whose one Eye is conspicuous to all that behold the light.

11. But to leave such lusorious Considerations, that rather gratify our fancy
then satisfy our severer faculties; we shall content our selves hereafter, from
those two notorious Powers, and so perfectly different, which Philosophers
acknowledge in the Soul, to wit, Perception and Organization, only to term
that more noble part of her in the Common Sensorium, the Perceptive, and all
the rest the Plastic part of the Soul.

CHAP. XII.
1. An Answer to an Objection, That our Arguments will as well prove the
Immortality of the Souls of Brutes, as of Men. 2. Another Objection inferring
the Praeexistence of Brutes Souls, and consequently of ours. 3. The first
Answer to the Objection. 4. The second Answer consisting of four parts. 5.
First, That the Hypothesis of Praeexistence is more agreeable to Reason then
any other Hypothesis. 6. And not only so, but that it is very solid in it
self. 7. That the Wisdom and Goodness of God argue the truth thereof. 8. As
also the face of Providence in the World. 9. The second part of the second
Answer, That the Praeexistence of the Soul has the suffrage of all Philosophers
in all Ages, that held it Incorporeal. 10. That the Gymnosophists of Egypt,
the Indian Brachmans, the Persian Magi, and all the learned of the Jews were of
this Opinion. 11. A Catalogue of particular famous persons that held the same.
12. That Aristotle was also of the same mind. 13. Another more clear place in
Aristotle to this purpose, with Sennertus his Interpretation. 14. An Answer to
an evasion of that Interpretation. 15. The last and clearest place of all out
of Aristotle's Writings.

1. HAving thus discovered the Nature of the Soul, and that she is a Substance
distinct from the Body; I should be in readiness to treat of her Separation
from it, did I not think my self obliged first, to answer an envious Objection
cast in our way, whereby they would make us believe, that the Arguments which
we have used, though they be no less then Demonstrations, are mere Sophisms,
because some of them, and those of not the least validity, prove what is very
absurd and false, viz. That the Souls of Brutes also are Substances
Incorporeal, distinct from the Body: from whence it will follow, that they are
Immortal. But to this I have answered already in the Appendix to my Antidote,
etc. Cap. 10. and in brief concluded, That they are properly no more Immortal
then the stupid Matter, which never perishes, and that out of a terrestrial
Body they may have no more sense then it. For all these things are as it
pleases the first Creator of them.

2. To this they perversely reply, That if the Souls of Brutes subsist after
death, and are then senseless and unactive, it will necessarily follow that they
must come into Bodies again. For it is very ridiculous to think that these
Souls, having a Being yet in the world, and wanting nothing but fitly-prepared
Matter to put them in a capacity of living again, should be always neglected,
and never brought into play, but that new ones should be daily created in their
stead: for those innumerable Myriads of Souls would lie useless in the
Universe, the number still increasing even to infinity. But if they come into
Bodies again, it is evident that they praeexist: and if the Souls of Brutes
praeexist, then certainly the Souls of Men do so too. Which is an Opinion so
wild and extravagant, that a wry mouth and a loud laughter (the Argument that
every Fool is able to use) is sufficient to silence it and dash it out of
countenance. No wise man can ever harbor such a conceit as this, which every
Idiot is able to confute by consulting but with his own Memory. For he is sure,
if he had been before, he could remember something of that life past. Besides
the unconceivableness of the Approach and Entrance of these praeexistent Souls
into the Matter that they are to actuate.

3. To this may be answered two things. The first, That though indeed it cannot
be well denied, but that the concession of the Praeexistence of the Souls of
Brutes is a very fair introduction to the belief of the Praeexistence of the
Souls of Men also; yet the sequel is not at all necessary, but one may be
without the other.

4. The second is this, That if the sequel were granted, that no Absurdity can
be detected from thence in Reason, if the prejudices of Education, and the
blind suggestion of unconcerned Faculties, that have no right to vote here, be
laid aside. To speak more explicitly, I say, This consequence of our Souls
Praeexistence is more agreeable to Reason then any other Hypothesis whatever;
has been received by the most learned Philosophers of all Ages, there being
scarce any of them that held the Soul of man immortal upon the mere light of
Nature and Reason, but asserted also her Praeexistence; That Memory is no fit
Judge to appeal to in this Controversy; and lastly, That Traduction and
Creation are as intricate and unconceivable as this opposed Opinion.

5. I shall make all these four parts of my Answer good in order. The truth of
the first we shall understand, if we compare it with those Opinions that stand
in competition with it, which are but two that are considerable. The one is of
those that say, the Soul is ex traduce; the other of those that say it is
created, upon occasion. The first Opinion is a plain contradiction to the
notion of a Soul, which is a Spirit, and therefore of an Indivisible, that is
of an Indiscerpible, Essence. The second Opinion implies both an Indignity to
the Majesty of God, (in making Him the chief assistant and actour in the
highest, freest, and most particular way that the Divinity can be conceived to
act, in those abominable crimes of Whoredom, Adultery, Incest, nay Buggery it
self, by supplying those foul coitions with new created Souls for the purpose:)
and also an injury to the Souls themselves; that they being ever thus created
by the immediate hand of God, and therefore pure, innocent and immaculate,
should be imprisoned in unclean, diseased and disordered Bodies, where very
many of them seem to be so fatally over-mastered, and in such an utter
incapacity of closing with what is good and virtuous, that they must needs be
adjudged to that extreme calamity which attends all those that forget God.
Wherefore these two opinions being so incongruous, what is there left that can
seem probable, but the Praeexistency of the Soul?

6. But I shall not press the Reasonableness of this Opinion only from
comparing it with others, but also from the concinnity that is to be found in
it self. For as it is no greater wonder that every particular man's Soul that
lives now upon Earth should be a mundo condito, then the particular Matter of
their Bodies should (which has happily undergone many Millions of Alterations and
Modifications, before it lighted into such a contexture as to prove the entire
Body of any one person in the world, has been in places unimaginably distant,
has filed, it may be, through the triangular passages of as many Vortices as we
see Stars in a clear frosty night, and has shone once as bright as the Sun (as
the Cartesian Hypothesis would have all the Earth to have done) in so much that
we eat, and drink, and cloth our selves with that which was once pure Light
and Flame;) so that de facto they do bear the same date with the Creation of
the World, that unavoidable certainty of the Praeexistence of the Souls of
Brutes does, according to the very concession of our Adversaries, fairly
insinuate.

7. But this is not all. Both the Attributes of God, and Face of things in the
world, out of which his Providence is not to be excluded, are very strong
Demonstrations thereof to Reason unprejudiced. For first, if it be good for the
Souls of men to be at all, the sooner they are the better. But we are most
certain that the Wisdom and Goodness of God will do that which is the best;
and therefore if they can enjoy themselves before they come into these
terrestrial Bodies (it being better for them to enjoy themselves then not) they
must be before they come into these Bodies; that is, they must be in a capacity
of enjoying themselves without them for long periods of time, before they
appeared here in this Age of the World. For nothing hinders but that they may
live before they come into the Body, as well as they may after their going out
of it: the latter whereof is acknowledged even by them that deny the
Praeexistence. Wherefore the Praeexistence of Souls is a necessary result of
the Wisdom and Goodness of God, who can no more fail to do that which is
best, then he can to understand it: for otherwise his Wisdom would exceed his
Benignity; nay there would be less hold to be taken of his Goodness, then of
the Bounty of a very benign and good man, who, we may be well assured, will
slip no opportunity of doing good that lies in his power, especially if it be
neither damage nor trouble to him; both which hindrances are incompetible to
the Deity.

8. Again, the face of Providence in the World seems very much to suit with
this Opinion; there being not any so natural and easy account to be given of
those things that seem the most harsh in the affairs of men, as from this
Hypothesis, That their Souls did once subsist in some other state; where, in
several manners and degrees, they forfeited the favor of their Creator. And
so according to that just Nemesis that He has interwoven in the constitution of
the Universe, and of their own natures, they undergo several calamities and
asperities of fortune, and sad drudgeries of Fate, as a punishment inflicted,
or a disease contracted from the several Obliquities of their Apostasy. Which
key is not only able to unlock that recondite mystery of some particular Men's
almost fatal aversness from all Religion and Virtue, their stupidity and
dullness and even invincible slowness to these things from their very
childhood, and their uncorrigible propension to all manner of Vice; but also
of that squalid forlorneness and brutish Barbarity, that whole Nations for many
Ages have layen under, and many do still lie under at this very day. Which sad
Scene of things must needs exceedingly cloud and obscure the ways of Divine
providence, and make them utterly unintelligible; unless some light be let in
from the present Hypothesis we speak of. It is plain therefore that there are
very weighty Reasons may be found out, to conclude the Praeexistence of Souls.
And therefore this Opinion being so demonstrable from this Faculty, and there
being no other that can contradict it, (for that the verdict of Memory in this
case is invalid I shall prove anon) we are according to the Light of Nature
undoubtedly to conclude, that the Souls of Men do praeexist, by Axiom 5.

9. And as this Hypothesis is Rational in it self, so has it also gained the
suffrage of all Philosophers of all Ages, of any note, that have held the Soul
of Man Incorporeal and Immortal. And therefore I am not at all sollicitous
what either the Epicureans or Stoics held concerning this Matter; this contest
being betwixt those only that agree on this Truth, That the Soul is a
Substance Immateriall. And such amongst the Philosophers as held it so, did
unanimously agree that it does Praeexist. This is so plain, that it is enough
only to make this challenge; every one in the search will satifie himself of
the Truth thereof. I shall only add, for the better countenance of the
business, some few instances herein, as a pledge of the Truth of my general
Conclusion. Let us cast our Eye therefore into what corner of the World we
will, that has been famous for Wisdom and Literature, and the wisest of those
Nations you shall find the Assertours of this Opinion.

10. In Egypt, that ancient Nurse of all hidden Sciences, that this Opinion was
in vogue amongst the wise men there, those fragments of Trismegist do
sufficiently witness. For though there may be suspected some fraud and
corruption in several passages in that Book, in reference to the interest of
Christianity; yet this Opinion of the Praeexistency of the Soul, in which
Christianity did not interest it self, cannot but be judged, from the Testimony
of those Writings, to have been a Branch of the Wisdom of that Nation: of
which Opinion not only the Gymnosophists and other wise men of Egypt were, but
also the Brachmans of India, and the Magi of Babylon and Persia; as you may
plainly see by those Oracles that are called either Magical or Chaldaicall,
which Pletho and Psellus have commented upon. To these you may add the
abstruse Philosophy of the Jews, which they call their Cabbala, of which the
Souls Praeexistence makes a considerable part; as all the learned of the Jews
do confess. And how naturally applicable this Theory is to those three first
mysterious chapters of Genesis, I have, I hope, with no contemptible success,
endeavored to show in my Conjectura Cabbalistica.

11. And if I should particularize in persons of this Opinon, truly they are
such, of so great fame for depth of Understanding and abstrusest Science, that
their testimony alone might seem sufficient to bear down any ordinary modest
man into an assent to their doctrine. And in the first place, if we can believe
the Cabbala of the Jews, we must assign it to Moses, the greatest Philosopher
certainly that ever was in the world; to whom you may add Zoroaster,
Pythagoras, Epicharmus, Empedocles, Cebes, Euripides, Plato, Euclide, Philo,
Virgil, Marcus Cicero, Plotinus, Iamblicus, Proclus, Boethius, Psellus, and
several others which it would be too long to recite. And if it were fit to
add Fathers to Philosophers, we might enter into the same list Synesius and
Origin: the latter of whom was surely the greatest Light and Bulwark that
ancient Christianity had; who unless there had been some very great Matter in
it, was far from that levity and vanity, as to entertain an Opinion so vulgarly
slighted and neglected by other men: and the same may be said of others that
were Christians, as Boethius, Psellus, and the late learned Marsilius Ficinus.
But I have not yet ended my Catalogue: that admirable Physician Johannes
Fernelius is also of this persuasion, and is not content to be so himself
only, but discovers those two grand Masters of Medicine, Hippocrates and
Galen, to be so too; as you may see in his De abditis rerum causis. Cardan
also, that famous Philosopher of his Age, expressly concludes, that the
Rational Soul is both a distinct Being from the Soul of the World, and that
it does praeexist before it comes into the Body: and lastly Pomponatius, no
friend to the Souls Immortality, yet cannot but confess, that the safest way
to hold it, is also therewith to acknowledge her Praeexistence.

12. And that nothing may be wanting to show the frivolousness of this part of
the Objection, we shall also evince that Aristotle, that has the luck to be
believed more then most Authors, was of the same opinion, in his Treatise De
Anima Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Where he speaks of the necessity of the qualification of
the Body that the Soul is to actuate; and blaming those that omit that
consideration, says, that they are as careless of that Matter, as if it were
possible that, according to the Pythagorick fables, any Soul might enter into
any Body. Whenas every Animal, as it has its proper species, so it is to have
its peculiar form. But those that define otherwise, (...), says he, (...), i.
e. They speak as if one should affirm that the skill of a Carpenter did enter
into a Flute or Pipe; for every Art must use its proper Instruments, and every
Soul its proper Body. Where (as Cardan also has observed) Aristotle does not
find fault with the opinion of the Souls going out of one Body into another,
(which implies their Praeexistence:) but that the Soul of a Beast should go
into the Body of a Man, and the Soul of a Man into a Beasts Body; this is the
Absurdity that Aristotle justly rejects, the other Opinion he seems tacitly to
allow of.

13. He speaks something more plainly in his De Generat. Animal. Lib. 3. Cap.
11. There are generated, says he, in the Earth, and in the moisture thereof,
Plants and living Creatures; because in the Earth is the moisture, and in the
moisture Spirit, and in the whole Universe an Animal warmth or heat; insomuch
that in a manner all places are full of Souls, (...), Adeo ut modo quodam
omnia sint Animarum plena, as Sennertus interprets the place: Aristotle
understanding by (...), the same that he does afterward by (...) (...), that
Principle we call Soul, according to the nobility whereof he asserts, that
Animals are more or less noble; which assertion therefore reaches Humane Souls
as well as these of Beasts.

14. Nor can this Text be eluded by being so injurious to Aristotle, as to make
him to assert that there is but one Soul in the world, because he says (...),
not (...). For the text admitting of Sennertus his exposition as well as this
other; that which is most reasonable is to be attributed to him. Now if his
meaning was, that there is but One Soul in the World that goes through all
things, and makes the Universe one great Animal, as the Stoics would have it,
he need not say that all places are in a manner full of this Soul, but
absolutely full of it, as our Body is wholly actuated by the Soul in it. And
therefore the Sense must be, that all places indeed are in a manner full of
Souls: not that they have opportunity to actuate the Matter, and show their
presence there by vital operation; but are there dormient as to any visible
energie, till prepared Matter engage them to more sensible actions.

15. We will add a third place still more clear, Lib. 2. Chap. 3. where he
starts this very question of the Praeexistency of Souls, of the Sensitive and
Rational especially; (...), whether both kinds do (...), that is praeexist,
before they come into the Body, or whether the Rational only; and he
concludes thus, (...) i. e. It remains that the rational or intellectual Soul
only enter from without, as being only of a nature purely divine, with whose
actions the actions of this gross Body have no communication. Concerning which
point he concludes like an Orthodox Scholar of his excellent Master Plato; to
whose footsteps the closer he keeps, the less he ever wanders from the truth.
For in this very place he does plainly profess, what many would not have him so
apertly guilty of, that the Soul of man is immortal, and can perform her
proper Functions without the help of this terrestrial Body. And thus I think I
have made good the two first parts of my answer to the proposed Objection; and
have clearly proved, that the Praeexistence of the Soul is an opinion both in
it self the most rational that can be maintained, and has had the suffrage of
the renownedst Philosophers in all Ages of the World; and that therefore this
sequel from our arguments for the Immortality of the Soul is no discovery of
any fallacy in them.

CHAP. XIII.
1. The third part of the second Answer, That the forgetting of the former
state is no good argument against the Souls Praeexistence. 2. What are the
chief causes of Forgetfulness. 3. That they all conspire, and that in the
highest degree, to destroy the memory of the other state. 4. That mischances
and Diseases have quite taken away the Memory of things here in this life. 5.
That it is impossble for the Soul to remember her former condition without a
Miracle. 6. The fourth part of the second Answer, That the entrance of a
Praeexistent Soul into a Body is as intelligible as either Creation or
Traduction.

1. AS for the two last Difficulties, concerning the Souls Memory of her
former state, and the manner of her coming into the Body; I hope I shall with
as much ease extricate my self here also, especially in the former. For if we
consider what things they are that either quite take away, or exceedingly
diminish our Memory in this life; we shall find the concurse of them all, and
that in a higher degree, or from stronger causes, contained in our descent into
this earthly Body, then we can meet with here: they none of them being so
violent as to dislodge us out of it.

2. Now the things that take away our Memory here, are chiefly these; either
the want of opportunity of being reminded of a thing, as it happens with many,
who rise confident they slept without dreaming such a night, and yet before
they go to bed again, recover a whole Series of representations they had in
their last sleep, by something that sell out in the day, without which it had
been impossible for them to recall to mind their Dream. Or else, in the second
place, Desuetude of thinking of a Matter; whereby it comes to pass, that what
we have earnestly meditated, labored for, and penned down with our own hands
when we were at School, were it not that we saw our names written under the
Exercise, we could not acknowledge for ours when we are grown men. Or lastly,
some considerable change in the frame and temper of our Body, whether from some
external mischance, or from some violent Disease, or else from old age, which
is disease enough of it self: which often do exceedingly impair, if not quite
take away, the Memory, though the Soul be still in the same Body.

3. Now all these Principles of Forgetfulness, namely the want of something to
reminde us, Desuetude of thinking, and an Extraordinary change in the Body, are
more eminently to be found in the Descent of the Soul into these Earthly
prisons, then can happen to her for any time of her abode therein. For there is
a greater difference, in all probability, betwixt that Scene of things the
Soul sees out of the Body and in it, then betwixt what she sees sleeping and
waking: and the perpetual occursions of this present life continue a long
Desuetude of thinking on the former. Besides that their descent hither in all
likelihood scarce befalls them but in their state of Silence and Inactivity, in
which myriads of Souls may happily be for many Ages, as the maintainers of this
Opinion may pretend, by reason of the innumerable expirations of the aereal
periods of life, and the more narrow Laws of preparing terrestrial Matter. And
lastly, her coming into this Earthly Body is a greater and more disadvantageous
change, for the utter spoiling of the memory of things she was acquainted with
before, then any Mischance or Disease can be for the bringing upon her a
forgetfulness of what she has known in this life.

4. And yet that Diseases and Casualties have even utterly taken away all
memory, is amply recorded in History. As that Messala Corvinus forgot his own
name; that one, by a blow with a stone, forgot all his learning; another, by a
fall from an Horse, the name of his Mother and kinsfolks. A young Student of
Montpelier, by a wound, lost his Memory so, that he was fain to be taught the
letters of the Alphabet again. The like befell a Franciscan after a Fever. And
Thucydides writes of some, who after their recovery from that great Pestilence
at Athens, did not only forget the names and persons of their friends, but
themselves too, not knowing who themselves were, nor by what name they were
called: Atque etiam quosdam cepisse oblivia rerum
Cunctarum, neque se possent cognoscere ut ipsi;
as the Poet Lucretius sadly sets down in his description of that devouring
Plague, out of the forenamed Historian.

5. Wherefore without a miracle it is impossible the Soul should remember any
particular circumstance of her former condition, though she did really
praeexist, and was in a capacity of acting before she came into this Body, (as
Aristotle plainly acknowledges she was) her change being far greater by coming
into the Body then can ever be made while she stays in it. Which we happily
shall be yet more assured of, after we have considered the manner of her
descent, which is the last Difficulty objected.

6. I might easily decline this Controversy, by pleading only, that the
entrance of the Soul into the Body, supposing her Praeexistence, is as
intelligible as in those other two ways, of Creation and Traduction. For how
this newly-created Soul is infused by God, no man knows; nor how, if it be
traducted from the Parents, both their Souls contribute to the making up a new
one. For if there be decision of part of the Soul of the Male, in the
injection of his seed into the matrix of the Female, and part of the Female
Soul to join with that of the Males; besides that the decision of these parts
of their Souls makes the Soul a Discerpible essence, it is unconceivable how
these two parts should make up one Soul for the Infant: a thing ridiculous at
first view. But if there be no decision of any parts of the Soul, and yet the
Soul of the Parent be the cause of the Soul of the Child, it is perfectly an
act of Creation; a thing that all sober men conclude incompetible to any
particular Creature. It is therefore plainly unintelligible, how any Soul should
pass from the Parents into the Body of the seed of the Foetus, to actuate and
inform it: which might be sufficient to stop the mouth of the Opposer, that
pretends such great obscurities concerning the entrance of Praeexistent Souls
into their Bodies.

CHAP. XIV.
1. The knowledge of the difference of Vehicles, and the Souls Union with
them, necessary for the understanding how she enters into this Earthly Body. 2.
That though the name of Vehicle be not in Aristotle, yet the thing is there. 3.
A clearing of Aristotle's notion of the Vehicle, out of the Philosophy of
Descartes. 4. A full interpretation of his Text. 5. That Aristotle makes only
two Vehicles, Terrestrial and AEthereall; which is more then sufficient to
prove the Soul's Oblivion of her former state. 6. That the ordinary Vehicle of
the Soul after death is Air. 7. The duration of the Soul in her several
Vehicles. 8. That the Union of the Soul with her Vehicle does not consist in
Mechanical Congruity, but Vital. 9. In what Vital congruity of the Matter
consists. 10. In what Vital congruity of the Soul consists, and how it
changing, the Soul may be free from her aerie Vehicle, without violent
precipitation out of it. 11. Of the manner of the descent of Souls into Earthly
Bodies. 12. That there is so little Absurdity in the Praeexistence of Souls,
that the concession thereof can be but a very small prejudice to our
Demonstrations of her Immortality.

1. BUT I shall spend my time better in clearing the Opinion I here defend,
then in perplexing that other that is so gross of it self, that none that
thoroughly understand the nature of the Soul, can so much as allow the
possibility thereof: wherefore for the better conceiving, how a Praeexistent
Soul may enter this Terrestrial Body, there are two things to be enquired
into; the difference of the Vehicles of Souls, and the cause of their union
with them. The Platonists do chiefly take notice of Three kinds of Vehicles,
Ethereal, AEreal, and Terrestrial, in every one whereof there may be several
degrees of purity and impurity, which yet need not amount to a new Species.

2. This notion of Vehicles, though it be discoursed of most in the School of
Plato, yet is not altogether neglected by Aristotle, as appears in his De
Generat. Animal. Lib. 2. Cap. 3. where, though he does not use the Name, yet he
does expressly acknowledge the Thing it self: For he does plainly affirm, that
every Soul partakes of a Body distinct from this organized terrestrial Body,
and of a more divine nature then the Elements so called; and that as one Soul
is more noble then another, so is the difference of this diviner Body; which
yet is nothing else with him then that warmth or heat in the seed, (...), which
is not fire, but a Spirit contained in the spumeous seed; and in this Spirit a
nature analogous to the element of the Stars.

3. Of which neither Aristotle himself had, nor any one else can have, so
explicit an apprehension as those that understand the first and second Element
of Descartes; which is the most subtle and active Body that is in the World,
and is of the very same nature that the Heaven and Stars are, that is to say,
is the very Body of Light, (which is to be understood chiefly of the first
Element) though so mingled with other Matter here below that it does not shine,
but is the Basis of all that natural warmth in all generations, and the
immediate instrument of the Soul, when it organizeth any Matter into the
figure or shape of an Animal; as I have also intimated elsewhere, when I
proved, that the Spirits are the immediate instrument of the Soul in all Vital
and Animal functions. In which Spirits of necessity is contained this
Celestial Substance, which keeps them from congealing, as it does also all
other liquid bodies, and must needs be in the Pores of them; there being no
Vacuum in the whole comprehension of Nature.

4. The full and express meaning therefore of Aristotle's text must be this,
that in the spumeous and watery or terrene moisture of the seed is contained a
Body of a more spirituous or aereal consistency, and in this aereal or
spirituous consistency is comprehended (...), a nature that is analogous or
like to the Element of the stars, namely that is of it self ethereal and lucid.

5. And it is this Vehicle that Aristotle seems to assert that the Soul does
act in, separate from the Body; as if she were ever either in this terrestrial
Body, or in her ethereal one: which if it were true, so vast a change must
needs obliterate all Memory of her former condition, when she is once plunged
into this earthly prison. But it seems not so probable to me, that Nature
admits of so great a Chasme; nor is it necessary to suppose it, for this
purpose: the descent of the Soul out of her aerie Vehicle into this
terrestrial Body, and besmearing moisture of the first rudiments of life, being
sufficient to lull her into an eternal oblivion of whatever happened to her in
that other condition; to say nothing of her long state of Silence and
Inactivity before her turn come to revive in an earthly body.

6. Wherefore not letting go that more orderly conceit of the Platonists; I
shall make bold to assert, that the Soul may live and act in an aereal Vehicle
as well as in the ethereal; and that there are very few that arrive to that
high happiness, as to acquire a Celestial Vehicle immediately upon their
quitting the terrestrial one: that heavenly Chariot necessarily carrying us in
triumph to the greatest happiness the Soul of man is capable of: which would
arrive to all men indifferently, good and bad, if the parting with this earthly
Body would suddenly mount us into the heavenly. Wherefore by a just Nemesis,
the Souls of Men that are not very Heroically virtuous, will find themselves
restrained within the compass of this caliginous Air, as both Reason it self
will suggest, and the Platonists have unanimously determined.

7. We have competently described the difference of those three kinds of
Vehicles, for their purity and consistency. The Platonists add to this the
difference of duration, making some of them of that nature as to entertain the
Soul a longer time in them, others a shorter. The shortest of all is that of
the Terrestrial Vehicle. In the Aereal the Soul may inhabit, as they define,
many Ages, and in the Ethereal for ever.

8. But this makes little to the clearing of the manner of their descent (...),
which cannot be better understood, then by considering their Union with the
Body generated, or indeed with any kind of Body whatever, where the Soul is
held captive, and cannot quit her self thereof by the free imperium of her own
Imagination and Will. For what can be the cause of this cohaesion, the very
essence of the Soul being so easily penetrative of Matter, and the dimensions
of all Matter being alike penetrable every where? For there being no more Body
or Matter in a Vessel filled with Lead then when it is full of Water, nor when
full with Water then when with Air, or what other subtiler Body soever that
can be imagined in the Universe; it is manifest that the Crassities of Matter
is every where alike, and alike penetrable and passable to the Soul. And
therefore it is unconceivable how her Union should be so with any of it, as
that she should not be able at any time to glide freely from one part thereof
to another as she pleases. It is plain therefore, that this Union of the Soul
with Matter does not arise from any such gross Mechanical way, as when two
Bodies stick one in another by reason of any toughness and viscosity, or
straight commissure of parts; but from a congruity of another nature, which I
know not better how to term then Vital: which Vital Congruity is chiefly in the
Soul it self, it being the noblest Principle of Life; but is also in the
Matter, and is there nothing but such modification thereof as fits the Plastic
part of the Soul, and tempts out that Faculty into act.

9. Not that there is any Life in the Matter with which this in the Soul should
sympathize and unite; but it is termed Vital because it makes the Matter a
congruous Subject for the Soul to reside in, and exercise the functions of
life. For that which has no life it self, may tie to it that which has. As some
men are said to be tied by the teeth, or tied by the ear, when they are
detained by the pleasure they are struck with from good Music or delicious
Viands. But neither is that which they eat alive, nor that which makes the
Music, neither the Instrument, nor the Air that conveys the sound. For there
is nothing in all this but mere Matter and corporeal motion, and yet our vital
functions are affected thereby. Now as we see that the Perceptive part of the
Soul is thus vitally affected with that which has no life in it, so it is
reasonable that the Plastic part thereof may be so too; That there may be an
Harmony betwixt Matter thus and thus modified, and that Power that we call
Plastic, that is utterly devoid of all Perception. And in this alone consists
that which we call Vital Congruity in the prepared Matter, either to be
organized, or already shaped into the perfect form of an Animal.

10. And that Vital Congruity which is in the Soul, I mean in the Plastic part
thereof, is analogous to that Pleasure that is perceived by the Sense, or
rather to the capacity of receiving it, when the Sense is by agreeable motions
from without or in the Body it self very much gratified, and that whether the
Mind will or no. For there are some Touches that will in their Perception seem
pleasant, whether our Judgment would have them so or not. What this is to the
Perceptive part of the Soul, that other Congruity of Matter is to the Plastic.
And therefore that which ties the Soul and this or that Matter together, is an
unresistible and unperceptible pleasure, if I may so call it, arising from the
congruity of Matter to the Plastic faculty of the Soul: which Congruity in the
Matter not failing, nor that in the Soul, the Union is at least as necessary as
the continuation of eating and drinking, so long as Hunger and Thirst
continues, and the Meat and Drink proves good. But either satiety in the
Stomach, or some ill taste in the Meat may break the congruity on either side,
and then the action will cease with the pleasure thereof. And upon this very
account may a Soul be conceived to quit her aerie Vehicle within a certain
period of Ages, as the Platonists hold she does, without any violent
precipitation of her self out of it.

11. What are the strings or cords that tie the Soul to the Body, or to what
Vehicle else soever, I have declared as clearly as I can. From which it will be
easy to understand the manner of her descent. For assuredly, the same cords or
strings that tie her there, may draw her thither: Where the carcass is, there
will the Eagles be gathered. Not that she need use her Perceptive faculty in
her descent, as Hawks and Kites by their sight or smelling fly directly to the
lure or the prey: but she being within the Atmosphear (as I may so call it) of
Generation, and so her Plastic power being reached and touched by such an
invisible reek, (as Birds of prey are, that smell out their food at a
distance;) she may be fatally carried, all Perceptions ceasing in her, to that
Matter that is so fit a receptacle for her to exercise her efformative power
upon. For this Magick-sphere, as I may so term it, that has this power of
conjuring down Souls into earthly Bodies, the nearer the Center, the virtue is
the stronger; and therefore the Soul will never cease till she has slided into
the very Matter that sent out those rays or subtle reek to allure her. From
whence it is easy to conceive that the Souls of Brutes also, though they be not
able to exercise their Perceptive faculty out of a terrestrial body, yet they
may infallibly find the way again into the world, as often as Matter is fitly
prepared for generation. And this is one Hypothesis, and most intelligible to
those that are pleased so much with the opinion of those large Spears they
conceive of emissary Atoms. There is also another, which is the Power and
Activity of the Spirit of Nature or Inferior Soul of the World, who is as fit
an Agent to transmit particular Souls, as she is to move the parts of Matter.
But of this hereafter.

12. What has been said is enough for the present to illustrate the pretended
obscurity and unconceivableness of this Mystery. So that I have fully made good
all the four parts of my Answer to that Objection that would have supplanted
the force of my strongest Arguments for the Souls Immortality, and have clearly
proved, that though this sequel did necessarily result from them, That the
Souls both of Men and Beasts did Prae-exist, yet to unprejudiced reason there
is no Absurdity nor Inconvenience at all in the Opinion. And therefore this
Obstacle being removed, I shall the more cheerfully proceed to the
demonstrating of the Souls actual Separation from the Body.

CHAP. XV.
1. What is meant by the Separation of the Soul, with a confutation of Regius,
who would stop her in the dead Corpse. 2. An Answer to those that profess
themselves puzzled how the Soul can get out of the Body. 3. That there is a
threefold Vital Congruity to be found in three several Subjects. 4. That this
triple Congruity is also competible to one Subject, viz. the Soul of Man 5.
That upon this Hypothesis it is very intelligible how the Soul may leave the
Body. 6. That her Union with the aereal Vehicle may be very sudden, and as it
were in a moment. 7. That the Soul is actually separate from the Body is to be
proved either by History or Reason. Examples of the former kind out of Pliny,
Herodotus, Ficinus. 8. Whether the Exstasie of Witches prove an actual
separation of the Soul from the Body. 9. That this real separation of the Soul
in Exstasie is very possible. 10. How the Soul may be loosned and leave the
Body, and yet return thither again. 11. That though Reason and Will cannot in
this life release the Soul from the Body, yet Passion may; and yet so that she
may return again. 12. The peculiar power of Desire for this purpose. 13. Of
Cardans Exstasies, and the Ointment of Witches, and what truth there may be in
their confessions.

1. COncerning the actual and local Separation of the Soul from the Body, it is
manifest that it is to be understood of this Terrestrial Body. For to be in
such a separate state, as to be where no Body or Matter is, is to be out of the
World: the whole Universe being so thick set with Matter, or Body, that there
is not to be found the least vacuity therein. The question therefore is only,
whether upon death the Soul can pass from the Corpse into some other place.
Henricus Regius seems to arrest her there by that general law of Nature, termed
the law of Immutability; whereby every thing is to continue in the same
condition it once is in, till something else change it. But the application of
this law is very grossly injust in this case. For as I have above intimated, the
Union of the Soul with the Body is upon certain terms; neither is every piece
of Matter fit for every Soul to unite with, as Aristotle of old has very
solidly concluded. Wherefore that condition of the Matter being not kept, the
Soul is no longer engaged to the Body. What he here says for the justifying of
himself, is so arbitrarious, so childish and ridiculous, that, according to the
merit thereof, I shall utterly neglect it, and pass it by, not vouchsafing of
it any Answer.

2. Others are much puzzled in their imagination, how the Soul can get out of
the Body, being imprisoned and locked up in so close a Castle. But these seem to
forget both the nature of the Soul, with the tenuity of her Vehicle, and also
the Anatomy of the Body. For considering the nature of the Soul her self, and
of Matter which is alike penetrable every where, the Soul can pass through
solid Iron and Marble as well as through the soft Air and Ether; so that the
thickness of the Body is no impediment to her. Besides, her Astral Vehicle is
of that tenuity, that it self can as easily pass the smallest pores of the
Body, as the Light does Glass, or the Lightning the Scabbard of a Sword without
tearing or scorching of it. And lastly, whether we look upon that principal
seat of the Plastic power, the Heart, or that of Perception, the Brain; when a
man dies, the Soul may collect her self and the small residue of Spirits (that
may happily serve her in the inchoation of her new Vehicle) either into the
Heart, whence is an easy passage into the Lungs, and so out at the Mouth; or
else into the Head, out of which there are more doors open then I will stand to
number. These things are very easily imaginable, though as invisible as the
Air, in whose element they are transacted.

3. But that they may still be more perfectly understood, I shall resume again
the consideration of that Faculty in the Plastic part of the Soul, which we
call Vital Congruity. Which according to the number of Vehicles, we will define
to be threefold, Terrestrial, AEreal, and Ethereal or Celestial. That these
Vital Congruities are found, some in some kind of Spirits, and others in
othersome, is very plain. For that the Terrestrial is in the Soul of Brutes and
in our own is without controversy; as also that the AEreal in that kind of
Beings which the Ancients called (...) and lastly, that the Heavenly and
Ethereal in those Spirits that Antiquity more properly called (...), as being
Inhabitants of the Heavens. For that there are such AEreal and Ethereal Beings
that are analogous to Terrestrial Animals; if we compare the nature of God with
the Phenomenon of the world, it cannot prove less then a Demonstration. For
this Earth that is replenisht with living Creatures, nay put in all the Planets
too that are in the world, and fancy them inhabited, they all joined together
bear not so great a proportion to the rest of the liquid Matter of the Universe
(that is in a nearer capacity of being the Vehicle of Life) as a single
Cuminseed to the Globe of the Earth. But how ridiculous a thing would it be,
that all the Earth beside being neglected, only one piece thereof no better
then the rest, nor bigger then the smallest seed, should be inhabited? The same
may be said also of the compass of the Air; and therefore it is necessary to
enlarge their Territories, and confidently to pronounce there are Ethereal
Animals, as well as Terrestrial and AEreal.

4. It is plain therefore that these three Congruities are to be found in
several Subjects; but that which makes most to our purpose, is to find them
in one, and that in the Soul of Man. And there will be an easy intimation
thereof, if we consider the vast difference of those Faculties that we are sure
are in her Perceptive part, and how they occasionally emerge, and how upon the
laying asleep of one, others will spring up. Neither can there be any greater
difference betwixt the highest and lowest of these Vital congruities in the
Plastic part, then there is betwixt the highest and lowest of those Faculties
that result from the Perceptive. For some Perceptions are the very same with
those of Beasts; others little inferior to those that belong to Angels, as we
ordinarily call them; some perfectly brutish, others purely divine: why
therefore may there not reside so great a Latitude of capacities in the
Plastic part of the Soul, as that she may have in her all those three Vital
Congruities, whereby she may be able livingly to unite as well with the
Celestial and AEreal Body, as with this Terrestrial one? Nay, our nature being
so free and multifarious as it is, it would seem a reproach to Providence, to
deny this capacity of living in these several Vehicles; because that Divine
Nemesis which is supposed to rule in the world, would seem defective without
this contrivance. But without controversy, Eternal Wisdom and Justice has
forecast that which is the best: and, unless we will say nothing at all, we
having nothing to judge by but our own Faculties, we must say that the Forecast
is according to what we, upon our most accurate search, do conceive to be the
best. For there being no Envy in the Deity, as Plato somewhere has noted, it is
not to be thought but that He has framed our Faculties so, that when we have
rightly prepared our selves for the use of them, they will have a right
correspondency with those things that are offered to them to contemplate in the
world. And truly if we had here time to consider, I do not doubt but it might
be made to appear a very rational thing, that there should be such an
Amphibion as the Soul of man, that had a capacity (as some Creatures have to
live either in the Water or on the Earth) to change her Element, and after her
abode here in this Terrestrial Vehicle amongst Men and Beasts, to ascend into
the company of the AEreal Genii, in a Vehicle answerable to their nature.

5. Supposing then this triple capacity of Vital Congruity in the Soul of Man,
the manner how she may leave this Body is very intelligible. For the Bodies
fitness of temper to retain the Soul being lost in Death, the lower Vital
Congruity in the Soul loses its Object, and consequently its Operation. And
therefore as the letting go one thought in the Perceptive part of the Soul is
the bringing up another; so the ceasing of one Vital Congruity is the wakening
of another, if there be an Object, or Subject, ready to entertain it; as
certainly there is, partly in the Body, but mainly without it. For there is a
vital Air that pervades all this lower world, which is continued with the
life of all things, and is the chiefest Principle thereof. Whence Theon in his
Scholia upon Aratus interprets that Hemistich -- (...),
in a secondary meaning as spoken of the Air, which he calls (...) or (...),
the natural Jupiter, in whom, in an inferior sense, we may be said to live,
and move, and have our Being: for without Air, neither Fishes, Fowls, nor
Beasts can subsist, it administering the most immediate matter of life unto
them, by feeding and refreshing their Animal Spirits. Wherefore upon the
cessation of the lowest Vital Congruity, that AEreal capacity awakening into
Act, and finding so fit Matter every where to employ her self upon, the Soul
will not fail to leave the Body; either upon choice, by the power of her own
Imagination and Will; or else (supposing the very worst that can happen) by a
natural kind of Attraction, or Transvection, she being her self, in that
stound and confusion that accompanies Death, utterly unsensible of all things.
For the Air without being more whole some and vital then in the corrupt
caverns of the dead Body, and yet there being a continuation thereof with that
without; it is as easy to understand, how (that Principle of joining therewith
in the Plastic part of the Soul being once excited) she will naturally glide
out of the Body into the free Air, as how the Fire will ascend upwards, or a
Stone fall downwards: for neither are the motions of these merely Mechanical,
but vital or Magical, that cannot be resolved into mere Matter, as I shall
demonstrate in my Third Book.

6. And being once recovered into this vast Ocean of Life, and sensible Spirit
of the world, so full of enlivening Balsame; it will be no wonder if the Soul
suddenly regain the use of her Perceptive faculty, being, as it were in a
moment, regenerate into a natural power of Life and Motion, by so happy a
concurse of rightly-prepared Matter for her Plastic part vitally to unite
withal. For grosser generations are performed in almost as inconsiderable a
space of time; if those Histories be true, of extemporary Sallads, sown and
gathered not many hours before the meal they are eaten at: and of the sudden
ingendring of Frogs upon the fall of rain, whole swarms whereof that had no
Being before, have appeared with perfect shape and liveliness in the space of
half an hour, after some more unctuous droppings upon the dry ground; as I
find not only recited out of Fallopius, Scaliger, and others, but have been
certainly my self informed of it by them that have been eyewitnesses thereof;
as Vaninus also professes himself to have been by his friend Johannes
Ginochius, who told him for a certain, that in the month of July he saw with
his own eyes a drop of rain suddenly turned into a Frog. By such examples as
these it is evident, that the reason why Life is so long a completing in
Terrestrial generations, is only the sluggishness of the Matter the Plastic
power works upon. Wherefore a Soul, once united with Air, cannot miss of
being able, in a manner in the twinkling of an eye, to exercise all Perceptive
functions again, if there was ever any intercessation of them in the
astonishments of Death.

7. How the Soul may live and act separate from the Body, may be easily
understood out of what has been spoken. But that she does so de facto, there
are but two ways to prove it; the one by the testimony of History, the other
by Reason. That of History, is either of persons perfectly dead, or of those
that have been subject to Ecstasies, or rather to that height thereof which is
more properly called (...), when the Soul does really leave the Body, and yet
return again. Of this latter sort is that example that Pliny recites of
Hermotimus Clazomenius, whose Soul would often quit her Body, and wander up
and down; and after her return tell many true stories of what she had seen
during the time of her disjunction. The same, Maximus Tyrius and Herodotus
report of Aristaeus Proconnesius. Marsilius Ficinus adjoyns to this rank that
narration in Aulus Gellius, concerning one Cornelius, a Priest, who in an
Ecstasie saw the Battle fought betwixt Caesar and Pompey in Thessalie, his Body
being then at Padua; and yet could, after his return to himself, punctually
declare the Time, Order and Success of the Fight. That in Wierus of the Weasell
coming out of the Soldiers mouth when he was asleep, is a more plain example:
which, if it were true, would make Aristaeus his Pigeon not so much suspected
of fabulosity as Pliny would have it. Several Relations there are in the world
to this effect, that cannot but be loudly laughed at by them that think the
Soul inseparable from the Body; and ordinarily they seem very ridiculous also
to those that think it is separable, but as firmly believe that it is never,
nor ever can be, separate but in Death.

8. Bodinus has a very great desire, notwithstanding it is so incredible to
others, that the thing should be true; it being so evincing an argument for the
Souls Immortality. And he thinks this Truth is evident from innumerable
examples of the Ecstasies of Witches: which we must confess with him not to be
natural; but that they amount to a perfect (...) or carrying away the Soul out
of the Body, the lively sense of their meeting, and dancing, and adoring the
Devil, and the mutual remembrance of the persons that meet one another there
at such a time, will be no infallible Demonstration that they were there
indeed, while their Bodies lay at home in Bed. Conformity of their Confessions
concerning the same Conventicle is only a shrewd probability, if it once could
be made good, that this leaving their Bodies were a thing possible. For when
they are out of them, they are much-what in the same condition that other
Spirits are, and can imitate what shape they please; so that many of these
Transformations into Wolves and Cats, may be as likely of the Soul having left
thus the Body, as by the Devils possessing the Body and transfiguring it
himself. And what these aerie Cats or Wolves suffer, whether cuttings of their
limbs, or breaking the Back, or any such like mischief, that the Witch in her
Bed suffers the like, may very well arise from that Magic Sympathy that is
seated in the Unity of the Spirit of the World, and the continuity of the
subtle Matter dispersed throughout. The Universe in some sense being, as the
Stoics and Platonists define it, one vast entire Animal.

9. Now that this real Separation of the Soul may happen in some Ecstasies,
will be easily admitted, if we consider that the Soul in her own Nature is
separable from the Body, as being a Substance really distinct therefrom; and
that all Bodies are alike penetrable and passable to her, she being devoid of
that corporeal property which they ordinarily call (...), and therefore can
freely slide through any Matter whatsoever, without any knocking or resistance;
and lastly, that she does not so properly impart Heat and Motion to the Body,
as Organization: and therefore when the Body is well organized, and there be
that due temper of the Blood, the Heart and Pulse will in some measure beat,
and the Brain will be replenish't with Spirits, and therewith the whole Body,
though the Soul were out of it. In which case (saving that the Spirit of
Nature cannot be excluded thence) it would be perfectly Cartesius his Machina
without Sense; though seemingly as much alive as any animate Creature in a deep
sleep. Whence it appears, that if the Soul could leave the Body, that she
might do it for a certain time without any detriment thereto, that is, so long
as she might well live without Repast. Which fully answers their fears, who
conceit that if the Soul was but once out of the Body, perfect Death must
necessarily ensue, and all possible return thither be precluded.

10. But all the difficulty is to understand how the Soul may be loosned from
the Body, while the Body is in a fit condition to retain her. That is a very
great Difficulty indeed, and in a manner impossible for any power but what is
supernatural. But it is not hard to conceive that this vital fitness in the
Body may be changed, either by way of natural Disease, or by Art. For why may
not some certain Fermentation in the Body so alter the Blood and Spirits, that
the powers of the Plastic part of the Soul may cease to operate, as well as
sometimes the Perceptive faculties do, as in Catalepsies, Apoplexies, and the
like? Wherefore this passing of the Soul out of the Body in Sleep, or Ecstasie,
may be sometime a certain Disease, as well as that of the (...), those that
walk in their sleep. Now if it should happen that some such distemper should
arise in the Body, as would very much change the Vital Congruity thereof for a
time, and in this Paroxysm that other Disease of the Noctambuli should surprise
the party; his Imagination driving him to walk to this or that place, his Soul
may very easily be conceived in this loosned condition it lies in, to be able
to leave the Body, and pass in the Air, as other Inhabitants of that Element
do, and act the part of separate Spirits, and exercise such Functions of the
perceptive faculty, as they do that are quite released from Terrestrial Matter.
Only here is the difference, That that damp in the Body that loosned the Union
of the Soul being spent; the Soul, by that natural Magic I have more then once
intimated, will certainly return to the Body, and unite with it again as firm
as ever. But no man can when he pleases pass out of his Body thus, by the
Imperium of his Will, no more then he can walk in his Sleep: For this capacity
is pressed down more deep into the lower life of the Soul, whither neither the
Liberty of Will, nor free Imagination can reach.

11. Passion is more likely to take effect in this case then either of the
other two Powers, the seat of Passions being originally in the Heart, which is
the chief Fort of these lower Faculties; and therefore by their propinquity can
more easily act upon the first Principles of Vital Union. The effect of these
has been so great, that they have quite carried the Soul out of the Body, as
appears in sundry Histories of that kind. For both Sophocles and Dionysius the
Sicilian Tyrant died suddenly upon the news of a Tragic Victory; as Polycrita
also a Noble-Woman of the Isle of Naxus, the Poet Philippides, and Diagoras of
Rhodes, upon the like excess of Joy. We might add examples of sudden Fear and
Grief, but it is needless. It is a known and granted Truth, that Passion has so
much power over the vital temper of the Body, as to make it an unfit mansion
for the Soul; from whence will necessarily follow her disunion from it. Now if
Passion will so utterly change the Harmony of the Blood and Spirits, as quite
to release the Soul from the Body by a perfect Death; why may it not sometime
act on this side that degree, and only bring a present intemperies, out of
which the Body may recover, and consequently regain the Soul back again, by
virtue of that Mundane Sympathy I have so often spoke of?

12. Now of all Passions whatever, excess of Desire is fittest for this more
harmless and momentany ablegation of the Soul from the Body; because the great
strength thereof is so closely assisted with the imagination of departing to
the place where the party would be, that upon disunion not amounting to perfect
Death, the power of Fancy may carry the Soul to the place intended; and being
satisfied and returned, may rekindle life in the Body to the same degree it had
before it was infested by this excess of Desire. This is that, if any thing,
that has made dying men visit their friends before their departure, at many
miles distance, their Bodies still keeping their sick bed; and those that have
been well, give a visit to their sick friends, of whose health they have been
over-desirous and solicitous. For this Ecstasie is really of the Soul, and not
of the Blood or Animal Spirits; neither of which have any Sense or Perception
in them at all. And therefore into this Principle is to be resolved that Story
which Martinus Del-Rio reports of a Lad who, through the strength of
Imagination and Desire of seeing his Father, fell into an Ecstasie; and after
he came to himself, confidently affirmed he had seen him, and told infallible
circumstances of his being present with him.

13. That Cardan and others could fall into an Ecstasie when they pleased, by
force of Imagination and Desire to fall into it, is recorded and believed by
very grave and sober Writers: but whether they could ever do it to a complete
(...), or local disjunction of the Soul from the Body, I know none that dare
affirm; such events being rather the chances of Nature and Complexion, as in
the Noctambuli, then the effects of our Will. But we cannot assuredly conclude
but that Art may bring into our own power and ordering that which natural
causes put upon us sometimes without our leaves. But whether those Ointments of
Witches have any such effect, or whether those unclean Spirits they deal with,
by their immediate presence in their Bodies, cannot for a time so suppress or
alter their Vital fitness to such a degree as will loosen the Soul, I leave to
more curious Inquisitors to search after. It is sufficient that I have
demonstrated a very intelligible possibility of this actual separation without
Death properly so called. From whence the peremptory Confessions of Witches,
and the agreement of the story which they tell in several, as well those that
are there bodily, as they that leave their Bodies behind them, especially when
at their return they bring something home with them, as a permanent sign of
their being at the place, is (though it may be all the delusion of their
Familiars) no contemptible probability of their being there indeed where they
declare they have been. For these are the greatest evidences that can be had in
humane affairs: And nothing, so much as the supposed Impossibility thereof, has
deterred men from believing the thing to be true.

CHAP. XVI.
1. That Souls departed communicate Dreams. 2. Examples of Apparitions of Souls
deceased. 3. Of Apparitions in fields where pitched Battles have been fought; as
also of those in Churchyards, and other vaporous places. 4. That the Spissitude
of the Air may well contribute to the easiness of the appearing of Ghosts and
Specter. 5. A further proof thereof from sundry examples. 6. Of Marsilius
Ficinus his appearing after death. 7. With what sort of people such examples as
these avail little. 8. Reasons to persuade the unprejudiced that ordinarily
those Apparitions that bear the shape and person of the deceased, are indeed
the Souls of them.

1. THE Examples of the other sort, viz. of the appearing of the Ghosts of men
after death, are so numerous and frequent in all men's mouths, that it may seem
superfluous to particularize in any. This appearing is either by Dreams, or
open Vision, In Dreams, as that which happened to Avenzoar Albumaron an Arabian
Physician, to whom his lately-deceased friend suggested in his sleep a very
soverain Medicine for his sore Eyes. Like to this is that in Diodorus
concerning Isis Queen of Egypt, whom he reports to have communicated remedies
to the Egyptians in their sleep after her death, as well as she did when she
was alive. Of this kind is also that memorable story of Posidonius the Stoic,
concerning two young men of Arcadia, who being come to Megara, and lying the
one at a Victuallers, the other in an Inn; he in the Inn while he was asleep
dreamed that his Fellow-traveller earnestly desired him to come and help him,
as being assaulted by the Victualler, and in danger to be killed by him: But
he, after he was perfectly awake, finding it but a Dream, neglected it. But
fallen asleep again, his murdered friend appeared to him the second time,
beseeching him, that though he did not help him alive, yet he would see his
Death revenged; telling him how the Victualler had cast his Body into a
Dung-cart, and that if he would get up timely in the morning, and watch at the
Town-gate, he might thereby discover the murder: which he did accordingly, and
so saw Justice done on the Murderer. Nor does the first Dream make the second
impertinent to our purpose: For as that might be from the strength of
Imagination, and desire of help in the distressed Arcadian, impressed on the
Spirit of the World, and so transmitted to his friend asleep (a condition
fittest for such communications;) so it is plain that this after his Death must
fail, if his Soul did either cease to be or to act. And therefore it is
manifest that she both was and did act, and suggested this Dream in revenge of
the Murder. Of which kind there be infinite examples, I mean of Murders
discovered by Dreams, the Soul of the person murdered seeming to appear to some
or other asleep, and to make his complaint to them. But I will content my self
only to add an Example of Gratitude to this of Revenge. As that of Simonides,
who lighting by chance on a dead Body by the Sea side, and out of the sense of
Humanity bestowing Burial upon it, was requited with a Dream that saved his
life. For he was admonisht to desist from his Voyage he intended by Sea, which
the Soul of the deceased told him would be so perilous, that it would hazard
the lives of the Passengers. He believed the Vision, and abstaining was safe:
those others that went suffered Shipwreck.

2. We will adjoyn only an Example or two of that other kind of Visions, which
are ordinarily called the Apparitions of the dead. And such is that which Pliny
relates at large in his Epistle to Sura, of an house haunted at Athens, and
freed by Athenodorus the Philosopher, after the Body of that person that
appeared to him was dug up, and interred with due solemnity. It is not a
thing unlikely, that most houses that are haunted, are so chiefly from the
Souls of the deceased; who have either been murdered, or some way injured, or
have some hid treasure to discover, or the like. And persons are haunted for
the like causes, as well as houses; as Nero was after the murdering of his
Mother; Otho pulled out of his bed in the night by the Ghost of Galba. Such
instances are infinite: as also those wherein the Soul of ones friend, suppose
Father, Mother, or Husband, have appeared to give them good counsel, and to
instruct them of the event of the greatest affairs of their life. The Ghosts
also of deceased Lovers have been reported to adhere to their Paramours, after
they had left their Bodies; taking all opportunities to meet them in Solitude,
whether by day or by night.

3. There be also other more fortuitous occursions of these deceased Spirits;
of which one can give no account, unless it be, because they find themselves in
a more easy capacity to appear. As happily it may be in Fields after great
slaughters of Armies, and in public Buriall-places. Though some would
ridiculously put off these Apparitions, by making them nothing but the reek or
vapor of the Bodies of the dead, which they fancy will fall into the like
stature and shape with the man it comes from: Which yet Cardan plays the fool
in as well as Vaninus and others; as he does also in his account of those
Spectra that appear so ordinarily in Iseland, where the Inhabitants meet their
deceased friends in so lively an Image, that they salute them and embrace them
for the same persons; not knowing of their death, unless by their sudden
disappearing, or by after-information that they were then dead. This he imputes
partly to the Thickness of the Air, and partly to the foul food and gross
spirits of the Islanders; and yet implies, that their fancies are so strong, as
to convert the thick vaporous air into the complete shape of their absent and
deceased acquaintance, and so persuade themselves that they see them, and talk
with them, whenas it is nothing else but an aerie Image made by the power of
their own Fancy. But certainly it had been better flatly to have denied the
Narration, then to give so slight and unprobable reason of the Phenomenon.

4. That the Spissitude of the Air in that place may contribute something to
the frequency of these Spectra, is rational enough. For it being more thick,
it is the more easily reduced to a visible consistency: but must be shaped, not
by the fancy of the Spectatour, (for that were a monstrous power) but by the
Imagination of the Spirit that actuates its own Vehicle of that gross Air. For
the same reason also in other places these Apparitions happily appear oftener in
the Night then in the Day, the Air being more clammy and thick after the Sun
has been some while down then before. To which also that custom of the
Lappians, a people of Scandia, seems something to agree; who, as Caspar
Peucerus relates, are very much haunted with Apparitions of their deceased
friends. For which trouble they have no remedy but burying them under their
Hearth. Which Ceremony can have no natural influence upon these Lemures,
unless they should hereby be engaged to keep in a warmer air, and consequently
more rarefied, then if they were interred elsewhere, Or rather because their
Bodies will sooner putrify by the warmth of the hearth; whenas otherwise the
coldness of that Clime would permit them to be sound a longer time, and
consequently be fit for the Souls of the deceased to have recourse to and
replenish their Vehicle with such a Cambium or gluish moisture, as will make it
far easier to be commanded into a visible consistence.

5. That this facilitates their condition of appearing, is evident from that
known recourse these infestant Spirits have to their dead Bodies. As is
notorious in the History of Cuntius, which I have set down at large in my
Antidote, Lib. 3. Cap. 9. and of the Silesian Shoemaker and his Maid in the
foregoing Chapter. To which you may add what Agrippa writes out of the Cretian
Annals, How there the Catechanes, that is the Spirits of the deceased Husbands,
would be very troublesome to their Wives, and endeavor to lie with them, while
they could have any recourse to their dead Bodies. Which mischief therefore was
prevented by a Law, that if any Woman was thus infested, the Body of her
Husband should be burnt, and his Heart struck through with a stake. Which also
put a speedy end to those stirs and tragedies the Ghost of Cuntius and those
others caused at Pentsch and Breslan in Silesia. The like disquietnesses are
reported to have happened in the year 1567. at Trawtenaw a city of Bohemia, by
one Stephanus Hubener, who was to admiration grown rich, as Cuntius of Pentsch,
and when he died, did as much mischief to his fellow-Citizens. For he would
ordinarily appear in the very shape he was when he was alive, and such as he
met would salute them with so close embraces, that he caused many to fall sick
and several to die by the unkind huggs he gave them. But burning his Body rid
the Town of the perilous occursations of this malicious Gobling. All which
instances do prove not only the appearing of Souls after they have left this
life, but also that some thickning Matter, such as may be got either from
Bodies alive, or lately dead, or as fresh as those that are but newly dead (as
the Body of this Hubener was, though it had lain 20 weeks in the Grave,) or
lastly from thick vaporous Air, may facilitate much their appearing, and so
invite them to play tricks, when they can do it at so cheap a rate; though
they have little or no end in doing them, but the pleasing of their own, either
ludicrous, or boisterous and domineering, humor.

6. But of any private person that ever appeared upon design after his death,
there is none did upon a more noble one then that eximious Platonist Marsilius
Ficinus; who having, as Baronius relates, made a solemn vow with his
fellow-Platonist Michael Mercatus (after they had been pretty warmly disputing
of the Immortality of the Soul, out of the Principles of their Master Plato)
that whether of them two died first should appear to his friend, and give him
certain information of that Truth; (it being Ficinus his fate to die first, and
indeed not long after this mutual resolution) he was mindful of his promise
when he had left the Body. For Michael Mercatus being very intent at his
Studies betimes on a morning, heard an horse riding by with all speed, and
observed that he stopped at his window; and therewith heard the voice of his
friend Ficinus crying out aloud, O Michael, Michael, vera, vera sunt illa.
Whereupon he suddenly opened the window, and espying Marsilius on a white
Steed, called after him; but he vanished in his sight. He sent therefore
presently to Florence to know how Marsilius did; and understood that he died
about that hour he called at his window, to assure him of his own and other
men's Immortalities.

7. The Examples I have produced of the appearing of the Souls of men after
death, considering how clearly I have demonstrated the separability of them
from the Body, and their capacity of Vital Union with an aerie Vehicle, cannot
but have their due weight of Argument with them that are unprejudiced. But as
for those that have their minds enveloped in the dark mist of Atheism, that
lazy and Melancholy saying which has dropped from the careless pen of that
uncertain Writer Cardan, Orbis magnus est, and aevum longum, and error ac timor
multum in hominibus possunt, will prevail more with them then all the Stories
the same Author writes of Apparitions, or whatever any one else can add unto
them. And others that do admit of these things, praeconceptions from
Education, That the Soul when she departs this life, is suddenly either
twitched up into the Coelum Empyreum, or hurried down headlong toward the
Center of the Earth, makes the Apparitions of the Ghosts of men altogether
incredible to them; they always substituting in their place some Angel or Devil
which must represent their persons, themselves being not at leisure to act any
such part.

8. But Misconceit and Prejudice, though it may hinder the force of an Argument
with those that are in that manner entangled, yet Reason cannot but take place
with them that are free. To whom I dare appeal whether (considering the aereal
Vehicles of Souls which are common to them with other Genii, so that whatever
they are fancied to do in their stead, they may perform themselves; as also
how congruous it is, that those persons that are most concerned, when it is in
their power, should act in their own affairs, as in detecting the Murderer, in
disposing their estate, in rebuking injurious Executors, in visiting and
counselling their Wives and Children, in forewarning them of such and such
courses, with other matters of like sort; to which you may add the profession
of the Spirit thus appearing, of being the Soul of such an one, as also the
similitude of person; and that all this ado is in things very just and
serious, unfit for a Devil with that care and kindness to promote, and as unfit
for a good Genius, it being below so noble a nature to tell a Lie, especially
when the affair may be as effectually transacted without it;) I say, I dare
appeal to any one, whether all these things put together and rightly weighed,
the violence of prejudice not pulling down the balance, it will not be
certainly carried for the present cause; and whether any indifferent Judge
ought not to conclude, if these Stories that are so frequent every where and in
all Ages concerning the Ghosts of men appearing be but true, that it is true
also that it is their Ghosts, and that therefore the Souls of men subsist and
act after they have left these earthly Bodies.

CHAP. XVII.
1. The preeminence of Arguments drawn from Reason above those from Story. 2.
The first step toward a Demonstration of Reason that the Soul acts out of her
Body, for that she is an immaterial Substance separable therefrom. 3. The
second, That the immediate instruments for Sense, Motion, and Organization of
the Body, are certain subtle and tenuious Spirits. 4. A comparison betwixt the
Soul in the Body and the AEreal Genii, 5. Of the nature of Demons from the
account of Marcus the Eremite, and how the Soul is presently such, having once
left this Body. 6. An Objection concerning the Souls of Brutes: to which is
answered, First by way of concession; 7. Secondly, by confuting the Arguments
for the former concession. 8. That there is no rational doubt at all of the
Humane Soul acting after death. 9. A further Argument of her activity out of
this Body, from her conflicts with it while she is in it. 10. As also from the
general hope and belief of all Nations, that they shall live after death.

1. BUT we proceed now to what is less subject to the evasions and
misinterpretations of either the Profane or Superstitious. For none but such as
will profess themselves mere Brutes can cast off the Decrees and Conclusions of
Philosophy and Reason; though they think that in things of this nature they
may, with a great deal of applause and credit, refuse the testimony of other
men's senses if not of their own: all Apparitions being with them nothing but
the strong surprisals of Melancholy and Imagination. But they cannot with that
ease nor credit silence the Deductions of Reason, by saying it is but a
Fallacy, unless they can show the Sophisme: which they cannot do, where it is
not.

2. To carry on therefore our present Argument in a rational way, and by
degrees; we are first to consider, That (according as already has been clearly
demonstrated) there is a Substance in us which is ordinarily called the Soul,
really distinct from the Body, (for otherwise how can it be a Substance?) And
therefore it is really and locally separable from the Body. Which is a very
considerable step toward what we aim at.

3. In the next place we are to take notice, That the immediate Instrument of
the Soul are those tenuious and aereal particles which they ordinarily call the
Spirits; that these are they by which the Soul hears, sees, feels, imagines,
remembers, reasons, and by moving which, or at least directing their motion,
she moves likewise the Body; and by using them, or some subtle Matter like
them, she either compleats, or at least contributes to the Bodies Organization.
For that the Soul should be the Vital Architect of her own house, that close
connection and sure possession she is to have of it, distinct and secure from
the invasion of any other particular Soul, seems no slight Argument. And yet
that while she is exercising that Faculty, she may have a more then ordinary
Union or Implication with the Spirit of Nature, or the Soul of the World, so
far forth as it is Plastic, seems not unreasonable: and therefore is asserted
by Plotinus; and may justly be suspected to be true, if we attend to the
prodigious effects of the Mothers Imagination derived upon the Infant, which
sometimes are so very great, that, unless she raised the Spirit of Nature into
consent, they might well seem to exceed the power of any Cause. I shall abstain
from producing any Examples till the proper place: in the mean time I hope I
may be excused from any rashness in this assignation of the cause of those many
and various Signatures found in Nature, so plainly pointing at such a Principle
in the World as I have intimated before.

4. But to return, and cast our eye upon the Subject in hand. It appears from
the two precedent Conclusions, that the Soul considered as invested immediately
with this tenuious Matter we speak of, which is her inward Vehicle, has very
little more difference from the aereal Genii, then a man in a Prison from one
that is free. The one can only see, and suck air through the Grates of the
Prison, and must be annoyed with all the stench and unwholesome fumes of that
sad habitation; whenas the other may walk and take the fresh air, where he
finds it most commodious and agreeable. This difference there is betwixt the
Genii and an incorporated Soul. The Soul, as a man fallen into a deep pit, (who
can have no better Water, nor Air, nor no longer enjoyment of the Sun, and his
cheerful light and warmth, then the measure and quality of the pit will permit
him) so she once immured in the Body cannot enjoy any better Spirits (in which
all her life and comfort consists) then the constitution of the Body after such
circuits of concoction can administer to her. But those Genii of the Air, who
possess their Vehicles upon no such hard terms, if themselves be not in fault,
may by the power of their minds accommodate themselves with more pure and
impolluted Matter, and such as will more easily conspire with the noblest and
divinest functions of their Spirit. In brief therefore, if we consider things
aright, we cannot abstain from strongly surmising, that there is no more
difference betwixt a Soul and an aereal Genius, then there is betwixt a Sword
in the scabbard and one out of it: and that a Soul is but a Genius in the
Body, and a Genius a Soul out of the Body; as the Ancients also have defined,
giving the same name, as well as nature, promiscuously to them both, by calling
them both (...), as I have elsewhere noted.

5. This is very consonant to what Michael Psellus sets down, from the singular
knowledge and experience of Marcus the Eremite, in these matters; who describes
the nature of these (...), as being throughout Spirit and Air; whence they
hear and see and feel in every part of their Body. Which he makes good by this
reason, and wonders at the ignorance of men that do not take notice of it,
viz. (...), that it is neither Bones, nor Nerves, nor any gross or visible part
of the Body, or of any Organ thereof, whereby the Soul immediately exercises
the functions of Sense; but that it is the Spirits that are her nearest and
inmost instrument of these operations: Of which when the Body is deprived,
there is found no Sense in it, though the gross Organs and parts are in their
usual consistency, as we see in Syncopes and Apoplexies. Which plainly shows,
that the immediate Vehicle of Life are the Spirits; and that the Souls
connection with the Body is by these; as the most learned Physicians do
conclude with one consent. Whence it will follow, that this Vinculum being
broke, the Soul will be free from the Body, and will as naturally be carried
out of the corrupt carcass that now has no harmony with the Soul, into that
Element that is more congenerous to her, the vital Air, as the Fire will mount
upwards; as I have already noted. And so Principles of Life being fully kindled
in this thinner Vehicle, she becomes as complete for Sense and Action as any
other Inhabitants of these aerie regions.

6. There is only one perverse Objection against this so easy and natural
Conclusion, which is this; That by this manner of reasoning, the Souls of
Brutes, especially those of the perfecter sort, will also not only subsist,
(for that difficulty is concocted pretty well already) but also live and enjoy
themselves after death. To which I dare boldly answer, That it is a thousand
times more reasonable that they do, then that the Souls of Men do not. Yet I
will not confidently assert, that they do, or do not; but will lightly
examine each Hypothesis. And first, by way of feigned concession, we will say,
They do; and take notice of the Reasons that may induce one to think so.
Amongst which two prime ones are those involved in the Objection, That they do
subsist after death; and, That the immediate instrument of their Vital
Functions is their Spirits, as well as in Man. To which we may add, That for
the present we are fellow-inhabitants of one and the same Element, the Earth,
subject to the same fate of Fire, Deluges and Earthquakes. That it is
improbable, that the vast space of Air and Ether, that must be inhabited by
living creatures, should have none but of one sort, that is the Angels or
Genii, good or bad. For it would seem as great a solitude, as if Men alone were
the Inhabitants of the Earth, or Mermaids of the Sea. That the periods of
vital congruity, wound up in the Nature of their Souls, by that eternal
Wisdom that is the Creatress of all things, may be shorter or longer,
according as the property of their essence and relation to the Universe
requires; and that so their Descents and Returns may be accordingly swifter or
slower. That it is more conformable to the Divine goodness to be so then
otherwise, if their natures will permit it: And that their existence would be
in vain, while they were deprived of vital operation when they may conveniently
have it. That they would be no more capable of Salvation in the other state,
then they are here of Conversion. That the intellectual Inhabitants of the Air
having also external and corporeal Sense, variety of Objects would do as
well there, as here amongst us on Earth. Besides that Historyes seem to imply,
as if there were such kind of aereal Animals amongst them, as Dogs, Horses, and
the like. And therefore to be short, that the Souls of Brutes cease to be
alive after they are separate from this Body, can have no other reason, then
Immorality the Mother of Ignorance, (that is, nothing but narrowness of spirit,
out of overmuch self-love, and contempt of other Creatures) to embolden us so
confidently to adhere to so groundless a Conclusion.

7. This Position makes indeed a plausible show, insomuch that if the Objection
drove one to acknowledge it for Truth, he might seem to have very little reason
to be ashamed of it. But this Controversy is not so easily decided. For though
it be plain that the Souls of Beasts be Substances really separable from their
Bodies; yet if they have but one Vital congruity, namely the Terrestrial one,
they cannot recover life in the Air. But their having one or two, or more
Vital congruities, wholly depends upon his wisdom and counsel that has made all
things. Besides, the Souls of Brutes seem to have a more passive nature, then
to be able to manage or enjoy this escape of Death, that free and commanding
Imagination belonging only to us, as also Reminiscency. But Brutes have only
a passive Imagination, and bare Memory; which failing them in all likelihood in
the shipwreck of their Body, if they could live in the Air, they would begin
the World perfectly on a new score, which is little better then Death: so that
they might in this sense be rightly deemed mortal. Our being Co-inhabitants of
the same element, the Earth, proves nothing: for by the same reason, Worms and
Fleas should live out of their Bodies, and Fishes should not, who
notwithstanding, their shape, it may be, a little changed (for there is no
necessity that these creatures in their aerie Vehicles should be exactly like
themselves in their terrestrial ones) might act and live in the more moist
tracts of the Air. As for the supposed solitude that would be in the Air, it
reaches not this Matter. For in the lower Regions thereof, the various Objects
of the Earth and Sea will serve the turn. The winding up of those several
circuits of vital congruity may indeed pass for an ingenious invention, as of
a thing possible in the Souls of Brutes: but, as the Schools say well, A posse
ad esse non valet consequentia. As for that Argument from Divine Goodness, it
not excluding his Wisdom which attempers it self to the natures of things, and
we not knowing the nature of the Souls of Brutes so perfectly as we do our
own, we cannot so easily be assured from thence what will be in this case. A
Musician strikes not all strings at once; neither is it to be expected that
every thing in Nature at every time should act: but when it is its turn, then
touched upon it will give its sound; in the interim it lies silent. And so it
may be with the Souls of Brutes for a time, especially when the vital temper
of Earth and Air and Sea shall fail; yea and at other times too, if none but
Intellectual Spirits be fit to manage AEreall Vehicles. I confess indeed, that
Salvation can no more belong to the Souls of Brutes then Conversion; but that
is as true of the Souls of Plants, (if they have any distinct from the
Universal Spirit of Nature) but yet it does not prove that the Souls of
Vegetables shall live and act in Aerie Vehicles, after an Herb or Tree is dead
and rotten here. To that of convenience of variety of Objects for the aerie
Inhabitants I have answered already. And for the Apparitions of Horses, Dogs
and the like, they may be the transformation of the aerial Genii into these
shapes: Which though it be a sign that they would not abhor from the use and
society of such aeriall Animals, if they had them; yet they may the better want
them, they being able so well themselves to supply their places. We will
briefly therefore conclude, that from the mere light of Reason it cannot be
infallibly demonstrated, that the Souls of Brutes do not live after death,
nor that it is any Incongruity in Nature to say they do. Which is sufficient to
enervate the present Objection.

8. But for the life and activity of the Souls of Men out of this Body, all
things go on hand-smooth for it, without any check or stop. For we finding the
aerial Genii so exceeding near-a-kin to us in their Faculties, we being both
intellectual Creatures, and both using the same immediate instrument of Sense
and Perception, to wit, aeriall Spirits, insomuch that we can scarce discover
any other difference betwixt us then there is betwixt a man that is naked and
one clad in gross thick clothing; it is the most easy and natural inference
that can be, to conclude, that when we are separate from the Body, and are
invested only in Air, that we shall be just like them, and have the same life
and activity they have. For though a Brute fall short of this Privilege, it
ought to be no disheartning to us, because there is a greater cognation betwixt
the Intellectual Faculties and the aerie or ethereal Vehicle, then there is
betwixt such Vehicles and those more low and sensual powers common to us with
Beasts. And we find, in taking the fresh air, that the more fine and pure our
Spirits are, our thoughts become the more noble and divine, and the more purely
intellectual. Nor is the step greater upwards then downwards: For seeing that
what in us is so Divine and Angelical may be united with the body of a Brute,
(for such is this Earthly clothing) why may not the Soul, notwithstanding her
terrestrial Congruity of life, (which upon new occasions may be easily
conceived to surcease from acting) be united with the Vehicle of an Angel? So
that there is no puzzle at all concerning the Soul of Man, but that immediately
upon Death she may associate her self with those aeriall Inhabitants, the Genii
or Angels.

9. Which we may still be the better assured of, if we consider how we have
such Faculties in us, as the Soul finds hoppled and fettered, clouded and
obscured by her fatal residence in this prison of the Body. In so much that, so
far as it is lawful, she falls out with it for those incommodations that the
most confirmed brutish health brings usually upon her. How her Will tuggs
against the impurity of the Spirits that stir up bestial Passions, (that are
notwithstanding the height and flower of other Creatures enjoyments) and how
many times her whole life upon Earth is nothing else but a perpetual warfare
against the results of her union with this lump of Earth that is so much like
to other terrestrial Animals. Whence it is plain she finds her self in a wrong
condition, and that she was created for a better and purer state; which she
could not attain to, unless she lived out of the Body: which she does in some
sort in divine Ecstasies and Dreams; in which case she making no use of the
Bodies Organs, but of the purer Spirits in the fourth Ventricle of the Brain,
she acts as it were by her self, and performs some preludious Exercises,
conformable to those in her aerie Vehicle.

10. Add unto all this, that the Immortality of the Soul is the common, and
therefore natural, hope and expectation of all Nations; there being very few
so barbarous as not to hold it for a Truth: though, it may be, as in other
things, they may be something ridiculous in the manner of expressing themselves
about it; as that they shall retire after Death to such a Grove or Wood, or
beyond such a Hill, or unto such an Island, such as was (...), the Island where
Achilles Ghost was conceived to wander, or the Insulae Fortunatae, the noted
Elysium of the Ancients. And yet, it may be, if we should tell these of the
Coelum Empyreum, and compute the height of it, and distance from the Earth, and
how many solid Orbs must be glided through before a Soul can come thither;
these simple Barbarians would think as odly of the Scholastic Opinion as we do
of theirs: and it may be some more judicious and sagacious Wit will laugh at us
both alike. It is sufficient, that in the main all Nations in a manner are
agreed that there is an Immortality to be expected, as well as that there is a
Deity to be worshipped; though ignorance of circumstances makes Religion vary,
even to Monstrosity, in many parts of the world. But both Religion, and the
belief of the Reward of it, which is a blessed state after Death, being so
generally acknowledged by all the Inhabitants of the Earth; it is a plain
Argument that it is true according to the Light of Nature. And not only
because they believe so, but because they do so seriously either desire it, or
are so horribly afraid of it, if they offend much against their Consciences:
which properties would not be in men so universally, if there were no Objects
in Nature answering to these Faculties, as I have elsewhere argued in the like
case.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. That the Faculties of our Souls, and the nature of the immediate instrument
of them, the Spirits, do so nearly symbolize with those of Demons, that it
seems reasonable, if God did not on purpose hinder it, that they would not fail
to act out of this earthly Body. 2. Or if they would, his power and wisdom
could easily implant in their essence a double or triple Vital Congruity, to
make all sure. 3. A further demonstration of the present Truth from the
Veracity of God. 4. An Answer to an Objection against the foregoing Argument.
5. Another Demonstration from His Justice. 6. An Answer to an Objection. 7. An
Answer to another Objection. 8. Another Argument from the Justice of God. 9. An
Objection answered. 10. An invincible Demonstration of the Souls Immortality
from the Divine Goodness. 11. A more particular enforcement of that Argument,
and who they are upon whom it will work least. 12. That the noblest and most
virtuous Spirit is the most assurable of the Souls Immortality.

1. BUT finally, to make all sure, let us contemplate the Nature of God, who is
the Author and Maker of all things, according to whose Goodness, Wisdom and
Power all things were created, and are ever ordered; and let us take special
notice how many steps toward this Immortality we now treat of, are impressed
upon the very nature of the Soul already; and then seriously consider, if it be
possible that the Sovereign Deity should stop there, and go no further, when
there are so great reasons, if we understand any thing, that He perfect our
expectations. For we have already clearly demonstrated, That the Soul of man is
a Substance actually separable from the Body, and that all her Operations and
Functions are immediately performed, not by those parts of the Body that are of
an earthly and gross consistency, but by what is more aeriall or aethereall,
the Vital and Animal Spirits; which are very congenerous to the Vehicles of
the Angels or Genii. Insomuch that if the Divine power did but leave Nature to
work of it self, it might seem very strange, considering those Divine and
Intellectual Faculties in us, (as conformable to the essences or Souls of
Angels as our Animal Spirits are to their Vehicles) if it would not be an
immediate sequel of this Privilege, that our Souls, once separate from the
Body, should act and inform the Air they are in with like facility that other
Genii do, there being so very little difference betwixt both their natures.

2. Or if one single Plastic power, in a Subject so near akin to these aerial
people, will not necessarily suffice for both states, certainly it must be a
very little addition that will help out: and how easy is it for that Eternal
Wisdom to contrive a double or triple Vital Congruity, to wit, aeriall and
ethereal, as well as terrestrial, in such an Essence, whose Faculties and
properties do so plainly symbolize with those purer Inhabitants of both the
Ether and Air?

3. But this is not all we have to say. For if there be one thing more precious
in the Deity then another, we shall have it all as a sure and infallible pledge
of this present Truth, That our Souls will not fail to prove Immortal. And for
my own part, I know nothing more precious in the Godhead then his Veracity,
Justice and Goodness; and all these three will assure us and secure us, that we
shall sustain no loss or damage by our departure out of these Earthly Bodies,
in either Life or Essence. For it were a very high reproach to that Attribute
of God which we call his Veracity, he so plainly and universally promising to
all the Nations of the World, where there is any Religion at all, a happy state
after this life; if there should in reality be no such thing to be expected.
For he does not only connive it the Error, if it be one, by not declaring
himself against it, (as any upright person would, if another should take upon
him, in his presence or hearing, to tell others that he intended to bestow such
and such gifts and revenues upon them, when there was no such matter:) but he
has, as a man may say, on set purpose endued men with extraordinary parts and
powers, to set this Opinion on foot in the Earth; all Prophets and Workers of
Miracles that have appeared in the world, having one way or other assured to
Mankind this so weighty Truth. And the most Noble and Virtuous Spirits in all
Ages have been the most prone to believe it. And this not only out of a sense
of their own Interest; but any one that ever had the happiness to experience
these things, may observe, That that Clearness and Purity of temper that most
consists with the Love and admiration of God and Virtue, and all those divine
Accomplishments that even those that never could attain to them give their
highest approbation of, I say, that this more refined temper of Mind does of
it self beget a wonderful proneness, if not a necessity, of presuming of the
Truth of this Opinion we plead for. And therefore if it be not true, God has
laid a train in Nature, that the most virtuous and pious men shall be the most
sure to be deceived: Which is a contradiction to his Attribute of Veracity.

4. Nor can the strength of this Argument be evaded by replying, that God may
deceive men for their good, as Parents do their Children; and therefore His
Wisdom may contrive such a natural Error as this, to be serviceable for
States and Polities, to keep the people in awe, and so render them more
faithful and governable. I must confess that there does result from this
divine Truth such an usefulness, by the by, for the better holding together of
Common-weals; but to think that this is the main use thereof, and that there is
nothing more in it then so, is as Idioticall and Childish, as to conclude, that
because the Stars, those vast lights, do some small offices for us by Night,
that therefore that is all the meaning of them, and that they serve for nothing
else. Besides, there is no Father would tell a Lie to his Child, if he were
furnished with truth as effectual for his purpose; and if he told any thing
really good, as well as desirable, to his Child, to induce him to Obedience,
if it lay in his power, he would be sure to perform his promise. But it is in
the power of God to make good whatever he has propounded for reward; nor need
he make use of any falsehood in this matter. Wherefore if he do, he has less
Veracity then an ordinary honest man; which is blasphemous, and contradictious
to the nature of the Deity.

5. Again upon point of Justice, God was engaged to contrive the Nature and
Order of things so, that the Souls of Men may live after death, and that they
may fare according to their behavior here upon earth. For the Godhead, as the
Philosopher calls him, is (...), and does immutably and inevitably distribute
Justice, both Reward and Punishment, in the world. But how difficult a thing it
is to be good and to live according to Virtue, the common practice and
complaint of all men do confess with one consent; and that it is exceeding
hard to persuade any one to do that violence to their own natures, as to
endeavor after a due degree and right sense of Virtue (for Craft and Policy
are easy enough, and other things there are that, set against the contrary
Vices, look like Virtues, but are not:) But to persuade to those that truly
are, is, I say, exceeding hard, if not impossible, without the inculcation of
this grand concernment, the State of the Soul after Death, and the Reward that
will then follow a Virtuous life. Of which hopes if we be frustrated by the
Souls Mortality, we are defrauded of our Reward, and God of the honor of
Justice.

6. Nor can the force of this Argument be enervated by either that high
pretension of Stoicisme, That Virtue to it self is a sufficient reward; or that
the very hopes of this Immortality, it being accompanied with so much joy,
tranquillity and contentment, will countervail all the pain and trouble of
either acquiring, or keeping close to Virtue once acquired. For as for the
first, It is one thing to talk high, and another thing to practice. And for my
own part, I think in the main, that Epicurus, who placed the chiefest good in
Pleasure, Philosophized more solidly then the paradoxical Stoics. For
questionless that is that which all men ought to drive at, if they had the true
notion of it, and knew wherein to place it, or could arrive to the purest and
most warrantable sense of it. But there can be no Pleasure, (without a perfect
Miracle) while our Spirits are disturbed and vitiated by sordid and
contemptible Poverty, by Imprisonments, Sicknesses, Tortures, ill Diet, and a
number of such Adversities, that those that are the most exactly virtuous have
been in all Ages most liable to. Besides the care and solicitude of
perpetually standing upon their guard, the stings of Calumny and Defamation,
and a continual vexation to see the baseness and vileness of men's tempers, and
ugly oblique transactions of affairs in the world. Which inquietudes cannot be
avoided by any other remedy but what is as ill as the disease, or worse, it
being altogether incompetible to a true Heroical tenor of mind; I mean their
Stoical Apathy; of which the best that can be said is, that it is a kind of
constant and safe piece of fullenness, stating us only in the condition of
those that are said to have neither wone nor lost: So poor a reward is
persecuted and distressed Virtue of it self, without the hope of future
Happiness.

7. But to say, the Hope thereof without Enjoyment is a sufficient
compensation, is like that mockery Plutarch records of Dionysius toward a
Fiddler, whom he caused to play before him, promising him a reward; but when he
demanded it of him for his pains, denied it him, or rather said it was paid
already, putting him off with this jest, (...), i. e. So long as you pleased me
with playing, so long you rejoiced your self with hoping after the reward; so
that you are sufficiently paid already. Which piece of injurious mirth may be
passable in a ludicrous matter, and from a Tyrant, where height of Fortune
makes proud and forgetful Mortality contemn their inferiors: But in a thing of
this nature, that concerns not only this transient life, but the sempiternal
duration of the Soul, Injustice there is unspeakably grievous; and so much the
more harsh and uncomely, if we consider that it is supposed to be committed,
not by a frail earthly Potentate, (the height of whose Honors may make him
regardless of smaller affairs and meaner persons,) but by the God of Heaven,
who can with the like ease attend all things as he can any one thing; and who
is perfectly and immutably just, not doing nor omitting any thing by changeable
humors, as it happens in vain Men, but ever acting according to the
transcendent Excellency and Holiness of his own Nature.

8. Neither is Divine Justice engaged only to reward, but also to punish;
which cannot be, unless the Souls of men subsist after Death. For there are
questionless many thousands that have committed most enormous Villainies,
persecuted the Good, taking away their possessions, liberties, or lives; adding
sometimes most barbarous tortures and reproachful abuses; and in all this
highly gratified their covetousness, ambition and revenge; nay, it may be the
bestial ferocity of their own spirits, that have pleased themselves exceedingly
to bring the truly religious into disgrace, and have laughed at all virtuous
actions as the fruits of Ignorance and Folly; and yet for all this have died in
peace on their beds, after their lives have been as thick set with all sensual
enjoyments of Honor, Riches and Pleasure, as their Story is with Frauds,
Rapines, Murders, Sacriledges, and whatever crimes the impious boldness of
lawless persons will venture on.

9. Such things as these happen proportionably through all the ranks and orders
of men. Nor is it sufficient to reply that their own Consciences, as so many
Furies, do lash them and scorch them in this life: For we speak of inveterate
and successful wickedness, where that Principle is utterly laid asleep; or if
it at any time wake and cry, the noise of the affairs of the world, and hurry
of business, and continual visits of friends and flatterers, false instructions
of covetous Priests or mercenary Philosophers (who for gain will impudently
corrupt and pervert both the Light of Nature and Sense of Religion) the sound
and clatter of these, I say, will so possess the ear of the prosperously
wicked, that the voice of conscience can be no more heard in this continual
tumult, then the vagient cries of the Infant Jupiter amidst the rude shuffles
and dancings of the Cretick Corybantes, and the tinckling and clashing of their
brazen Targets. And therefore if there be no Life hereafter, the worst of men
have the greatest share of happiness, their passions and affections being so
continually gratified, and that to the height, in those things that are so
agreeable, and, rightly circumstantiated, allowable to humane Nature: such as
are the sweet reflection on the success of our political management of the
affairs of the World; the general tribute of Honor and respect for our Policy
and Wit, and that ample testimony thereof, our acquisitions of Power or Riches;
that great satisfaction of foiling and bearing down our Enemies, and obliging
and making sure our more serviceable Friends; to which finally you may add all
the variety of Mirth and Pastime that flesh and blood can entertain it self
with, from either Music, Wine, or Women.

10. Thirdly and lastly, the Mortality of the Soul is not only inconsistent
with the Veracity and Justice of God, but also with his Goodness, the most
sovereign and sacred Attribute in the Deity, and which alone is enough to
demonstrate, That the Soul of man cannot perish in Death. For suppose that God
had made no promise to us, either by any extraordinary Prophet, or by the
suggestion of our own natural Faculties, that we shall be Immortal, and that
there was neither Merit nor Demerit in this life, so that all plea from either
the Divine Veracity or Justice were quite cut off; his Goodness alone
(especially if we consider how capable the Soul is of after-subsistence) is a
sufficient assurance that we shall not fail to live after Death. For how can
that sovereign Goodness, assisted by an omnipotent Knowledge, fail to contrive
it so; it being so infinitely more conformable to his Transcendent Bounty, to
ordain thus then otherwise? that is to say, so soon as he created the World, to
make it so complete, as at once to bring into Being not only all Corporeal
Substance (according as all men confess he did) but also all Substances
Immaterial or Incorporeal, and as many of them as can partake of Life, and of
enjoyment of themselves and the Universe, to set them upon living and working
in all places and Elements that their Nature is able to operate in; and
therefore amongst other Beings of the Intellectual Order, that the Souls of men
also, wherever they were, or ever should be, especially if it were not long of
themselves, should have a power of Life and Motion, and that no other Nemesis
should follow them then what they themselves lay the trains of; nor this to
utter annihilation, but by way of chastisement or punishment: and that they
being of so multifarious a nature, as to have such Faculties as are nearly
akin to Brutes, as well as such as have so close an affinity with those of the
aereal Genii and celestial Angels, that their Vital Congruity should be as
multifarious, and themselves made capable of a living Union with either
Celestial, AErial, or Terrestrial Vehicles; and that the leaving of one should
be but the taking up of another, so long as the Elements continue in their
natural temper, and as soon as the Laws of Generation will permit.

11. These, and a long series of other things consonant to these, represent
themselves to their view that have the favor of beholding the more hidden
treasures of the Divine Benignity. But they being more then the present
occasion requires, I shall content my self with what precisely touches the
matter in hand, which is, That the Soul of Man being capable to act after this
life in an AErial Vehicle, as well as here in an Earthly; and it being better
that she do live and act, then that she be idle and silent in death; and it
depending merely upon the Will of God whether she shall or no; He ordering the
natures of things infallibly according to what is best, must of necessity
ordain that the Souls of men live and act after death. This is an unavoidable
Deduction of Reason to those that acknowledge the Being of God, and rightly
relish that transcendent Attribute in the Divine Nature. For those that have a
true sense thereof, can as hardly deny this Conclusion as the Existence of the
Deity. Nor can they ever be persuaded, that He who is so perfectly good in
himself, and to whom they have so long adhered in faithful obedience and
amorous dedevotion, has made them of such a nature, that when they hope most to
enjoy him, they shall not be able to enjoy him at all, nor any thing else; as
not being in a capacity to act but in an earthly Body. But to those that be of
a mere animal temper, that relish no love but that of themselves and their own
interest, nor care for any but those that are serviceable to them, and make for
their profit, these being prone to judge of God according to the vileness of
their own Spirit, will easily conceit, that Gods care of us and tenderness over
us is only proportionable to the fruit he reaps by us; which is just none at
all.

12. And therefore this Argument especially, and also the two former, though
they be undeniable Demonstrations in themselves, yet they requiring a due
resentment of Morality, that is of Veracity, Justice and Goodness, in him that
is to be persuaded by them; it will follow, that those whose minds are most
blinded and debased by Vice, will feel least the force of them; and the Noblest
and most generous Spirit will be the most firmly assured of the Immortality of
the Soul.

BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
1. Why the Author treats of the state of the Soul after Death, and in what
Method. 2. Arguments to prove that the Soul is ever united vitally with some
Matter or other. 3. Further Reasons to evince the same. 4. That the Soul is
capable of an aerie and ethereal Body, as well as a terrestrial. 5. That she
ordinarily passes out of an earthly into an aereal Vehicle first. 6. That in
her aerie Vehicle she is capable of Sense, Pleasure, and Pain. 7. That the main
power of the Soul over her aereal Vehicle is the direction of Motion in the
particles thereof. 8. That she may also add or diminish Motion in her
ethereal. 9. How the purity of the Vehicle confers to the quickness of Sense
and Knowledge. 10. Of the Souls power of changing the temper of her aereal
Vehicle; 11. As also the shape thereof. 12. The plainness of the last Axiom.

1. WE have, I hope, with undeniable evidence demonstrated the Immortality of
the Soul to such as neither by their slowness of parts, nor any prejudice of
Immor^ality, are made incompetent Judges of the truth of Demonstrations of this
kind: so that I have already perfected my main Design. But my own curiosity,
and the desire of gratifying others who love to entertain themselves with
speculations of this nature, do call me out something further; if the very
Dignity of the present Matter I am upon does not justly require me, as will be
best seen after the finishing thereof: Which is concerning the State of the
Soul after Death. Wherein though I may not happily be able to fix my foot so
firmly as in the foregoing part of this Treatise, yet I will assert nothing but
what shall be reasonable, though not demonstrable, and far preponderating to
whatever shall be alleged to the contrary, and in such clear order and Method,
that if what I write be not worthy to convince, it shall not be able to deceive
or entangle by perplexedness and obscurity; and therefore I shall offer to view
at once the main Principles upon which I shall build the residue of my
Discourse.

AXIOM XXVII.
The Soul separate from this Terrestrial Body is not released from all Vital
Union with Matter.

2. THis is the general Opinion of the Platonists. Plotinus indeed dissents,
especially concerning the most divine Souls, as if they at last were perfectly
unbared of all Matter, and had no union with any thing but God himself: which I
look upon as a fancy proceeding from the same inequality of temper, that made
him surmise that the most degenerate Souls did at last sleep in the bodies of
Trees, and grew up merely into Plantal life. Such fictions as these of
fancyfull men have much depraved the ancient Cabbala and sacred Doctrine which
the Platonists themselves do profess to be (...), a holy Tradition received
from the mouth of God or Angels. But however Plotinus himself does not deny but
till the Soul arrive to such an exceeding height of purification, that she
acts in either an aerie or celestial Body. But that she is never released so
perfectly from all Matter, how pure soever and tenuious, her condition of
operating here in this life is a greater presumption then can be fetched from
any thing else, that she ever is. For we find plainly that her most subtle and
most intellectual operations depend upon the fitness of temper in the Spirits;
and that it is the fineness and purity of them that invites her and enables her
to love and look after divine and intellectual Objects: Which kind of Motions
if she could exert immediately by her own proper power and essence, what should
hinder her but that, having a will, she should bring it to effect, which yet we
find she cannot if the Spirits be indisposed. Nor can the Soul well be
hindered by the undue temper of the Spirits in these Acts, if they be of that
nature that they belong to the bare essence of the Soul quite praescinded from
all Union with Matter. For then as to these Acts it is all one where the Soul
is, that is, in what Matter she is (and she must be in some, because the
Universe is every where thick-set with Matter) whether she be raised into the
purest regions of the Air, or plunged down into the foulest Receptacles of
Earth or Water; for her intellectual actings would be alike in both. What then
is there imaginable in the Body that can hinder her in these Operations?
Wherefore it is plain that the nature of the Soul is such, as that she cannot
act but in dependence on Matter, and that her Operations are some way or other
always modified thereby. And therefore if the Soul act at all after death,
(which we have demonstrated she does) it is evident that she is not released
from all vital union with all kind of Matter whatsoever: Which is not only
the Opinion of the Platonists, but of Aristotle also, as may be easily gathered
out of what we have above cited out of him, Lib. 2. Cap. 14.

3. Besides, it seems a very wild leap in nature, that the Soul of Man, from
being so deeply and muddily immersed into Matter, as to keep company with
Beasts, by vital union with gross flesh and bones, should so on a sudden be
changed, that she should not adhere to any Matter whatsoever, but ascend into
an (...) competible happily to none but God himself; unless there be such
Creatures as the Platonists call (...) or pure Intellects. This must seem to
any indifferent man very harsh and incongruous, especially if we consider what
noble Beings there are on this side the (...) or (...), that all the
Philosophers that ever treated of them acknowledge to be vitally united with
either aerial or ethereal Vehicles. For of this condition are all the Genii or
Angels. It is sufficient therefore that the Soul never exceed the
immateriality of those orders of Beings; the lower sort whereof that they are
vitally united to Vehicles of Air, their ignorance in Nature seems manifestly
to bewray. For it had been an easy thing, and more for their credit, to have
informed their followers better in the Mysteries of Nature; but that themselves
were ignorant of these things, which they could not but know, if they were not
thus bound to their aerie bodies. For then they were not engaged to move with
the whole course of the Air, but keeping themselves steady, as being disunited
from all Matter, they might in a moment have perceived both the diurnal and
annual motion of the Earth, and so have saved the Credit of their followers, by
communicating this Theory to them; the want of the knowledge whereof spoils
their repute with them that understand the Systeme of the world better then
themselves, for all they boast of their Philosophy, so as if it were the
Dictate of the highest Angels.

AXIOM XXVIII.
There is a Triple Vital Congruity in the Soul, namely AEthereall, AEriall,
and Terrestrial.

4. THat this is the common Opinion of the Platonists, I have above intimated.
That this Opinion is also true in it self, appears from the foregoing Axiom.
Of the Terrestrial Congruity there can be no doubt; and as little can there be
but that at least one of the other two is to be granted, else the Soul would
be released from all vital union with Matter after Death. Wherefore she has a
vital aptitude at least to unite with Air: But Air is a common Receptacle of
bad and good Spirits (as the Earth is of all sorts of men and beasts) nay
indeed rather of those that are in some sort or other bad, then of good, as it
is upon Earth. But the Soul of Man is capable of very high refinements, even
to a condition purely Angelical. Whence Reason will judge it fit, and all
Antiquity has voted it, That the Souls of men arrived to such a due pitch of
purification must at last obtain celestial Vehicles.

AXIOM XXIX.
According to the usual custom of Nature, the Soul awakes orderly into these
Vital Congruities, not passing from one Extreme to another without any stay in
the middle.

5. THis Truth, besides that at first sight it cannot but seem very reasonable,
according to that known Aphorism, Natura non facit saltum; so if it be further
examined, the solidity thereof will more fully appear. For considering how
small degrees of purification the Souls of almost all men get in this life,
even theirs who pass vulgarly for honest and good men, it will plainly follow
that very few arrive to their Ethereal Vehicle immediately upon quitting their
Terrestrial Body; that being a privilege that has appertained to none but very
Noble and Heroical Spirits indeed, of which History records but very few. But
that there may be degrees of purity and excellency in the AErial Bodies, is a
thing that is not to be denied, so that a just Nemesis will find out every one
after death.

AXIOM XXX.
The Soul in her AErial Vehicle is capable of Sense properly so called, and
consequently of Pleasure and Pain.

6. THIS plainly appears from the 27. and 28. Axioms. For there is a necessity
of the resulting of Sense from Vital Union of the Soul with any Body
whatsoever: and we may remember that the immediate instrument of Sense, even in
this earthly Body, are the Spirits: so that there can be no doubt of this
Truth. And Pleasure and Pain being the proper modifications of Sense, and there
being no Body but what is passible, it is evident that these Vehicles of Air
are subject to Pain as well as Pleasure, in this Region where ill things are to
be met with as well as good.

AXIOM XXXI.
The Soul can neither impart to nor take away from the Matter of her Vehicle of
Air any considerable degree of Motion, but yet can direct the particles moved
which way she pleases by the Imperium of her Will.

7. THE reasonableness of this Axiom may be evinced, partly out of the former;
for considering the brushiness and angulosity of the parts of the Air, a more
then ordinary Motion or compressive Rest may very well prove painful to the
Soul, and dis-harmonious to her touch; and partly from what we may observe in
our own Spirits in this Body, which we can only direct, not give Motion to,
nor diminish their Motion by our Imagination or Will, (for no man can imagine
himself into Heat or Cold, the sure consequences of extraordinary Motion and
Rest, by willing his Spirits to move faster or slower; but he may direct them
into the Organs of spontaneous Motion, and so by moving the grosser parts of
the Body, by this direction he may spend them, and heat these parts in the
expense of them; and this is all we can do) and partly from that Divine
Providence that made all things, and measures out the Powers and Faculties of
his Creatures according to his own Wisdom and Counsel, and therefore has bound
that state of the Soul to straighter conditions, that is competible to the bad
as well as to the good.

AXIOM XXXII.
Though the Soul can neither confer nor take away any considerable degree of
Motion from the Matter of her Aerie Vehicle, yet nothing hinders but that she
may do both in her Ethereal.

8. THE reason hereof is, because the particles of her Ethereal Vehicle
consist partly of smooth sphaericall Figures, and partly of tenuious Matter, so
exceeding liquid that it will without any violence comply to any thing: whenas
the Air, as may be observed in Winde-Guns, has parts so stubborn and so stiff,
that after they have been compressed to such a certain degree that the barrel
of the Piece grows hot again, they have not lost their shapes nor virtue; but
like a spring of Steel, liberty being given, they return to their natural
posture with that violence, that they discharge a Bullet with equal force that
Gunpowder does. Besides that the Goodness of that Deity on whom all Beings
depend, may be justly thought to have privileged the Ethereal Congruity of
Life (which awakes only in perfectly-obedient Souls, such as may be trusted as
thoroughly faithful to his Empire) with a larger power then the other, there
being no incompetibleness in the Subject. For it is as easy a thing to conceive
that God may endow a Soul with a power of moving or resting Matter, as of
determining the motions thereof.

AXIOM XXXIII.
The purer the Vehicle is, the more quick and perfect are the Perceptive
Faculties of the Soul.

9. THE truth of this we may in a manner experience in this life, where we
find that the quickness of Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, Smelling, the nimbleness
of Reminiscency, Reason, and all other Perceptive Faculties, are advanced or
abated by the clearness, or foulness and dullness of the Spirits of our Body;
and that Oblivion and Sottishness arise from their thickness and earthiness, or
waterishness, or whatsoever other gross consistency of them: which distemper
removed, and the Body being replenished with good Spirits in sufficient plenty
and purity, the Mind recovers her activity again, remembers what she had
forgot, and understands what she was before incapable of, sees and hears at a
greater distance; and so of the rest.

AXIOM XXXIV.
The Soul has a mavelous power of not only changing the temper of her Aerie
Vehicle, but also of the external shape thereof.

10. THE truth of the first part of this Axiom appears from daily experience;
for we may frequently observe how strangely the Passions of the Mind will work
upon our Spirits in this state, how Wrath, and Grief, and Envy will alter the
Body, to say nothing of other Affections. And assuredly the finer the Body is,
the more mutable it is upon this account: so that the Passions of the Mind
must needs have a very great influence upon the Souls AEreal Vehicle; which
though they cannot change into any thing but Air, yet they may change this Air
into qualifications as vastly different as Virtue is from Vice, Sickness from
Health, Pain from Pleasure, Light from Darkness, and the stink of a Gaol from
the Aromatic odours of a flourishing Paradise.

11. The truth of the latter part is demonstrable from the latter part of the
31. Axiom. For supposing a power in the Soul of directing the motions of the
particles of her fluid Vehicle, it must needs follow that she will also have a
power of shaping it in some measure according to her own Will and Fancy. To
which you may add, as no contemptible pledge of this Truth, what is done in
that kind by our Will and Fancy in this life: as, only because I will and
fancy the moving of my Mouth, Foot, or Fingers, I can move them, provided I
have but Spirits to direct into this motion; and the whole Vehicle of the Soul
is in a manner nothing else but Spirits. The Signatures also of the Foetus in
the Womb by the Desire and Imagination of the Mother, is very serviceable for
the evincing of this Truth: but I shall speak of it more fully in its place.

AXIOM XXXV.
It is rational to think, that as some Faculties are laid asleep in Death or
after Death, so others may awake that are more suitable for that state.

12. THE truth of this Axiom appears from hence, That our Souls come not by
chance, but are made by an All-wise God, who foreseeing all their states, has
fitted the Excitation or Consopition of Powers and Faculties, sutably to the
present condition they are to be in.

AXIOM XXXVI.
Whether the Vital Congruity of the Soul expire, as whose period being quite
unwound, or that of the Matter be defaced by any essential Dis-harmony, Vital
Union immediately ceases.

13. THis last Axiom is plain enough of it self at first sight, and the
usefulness thereof may be glanced at in his due place.

These are the main Truths I shall recurre to, or at least suppose, in my
following Disquisitions: others will be more seasonably delivered in the
continuation of our Discourse.

CHAP. II.
1. Of the Dimensions of the Soul considered barely in her self. 2. Of the
Figure of the Souls Dimensions. 3. Of the Heterogeneity of her Essence. 4. That
there is an Heterogeneity in her Plastic part distinct from the Perceptive. 5.
Of the acting of this Plastic part in her framing of the Vehicle. 6. The
excellency of Descartes his Philosophy. 7. That the Vehicles of Ghosts have as
much of solid corporeal Substance in them as the Bodies of Men. 8. The folly of
the contrary Opinion evinced. 9. The advantage of the Soul, for matter of Body,
in the other state, above this.

1. THat we may now have a more clear and determinate apprehension of the
nature and condition of the Soul out of the Body, let us first consider her a
while, what she is in her own Essence, without any reference to any Body at
all, and we shall find her a Substance extended and indiscerpible, as may be
easily gathered out of what we have written, Lib. 1. Cap. 3, 5, 8. as also Lib.
2. Cap. 1, 2. And it is a seasonable contemplation here (where we consider the
Soul as having left this Terrestrial Body) that she has as ample, if not more
ample, Dimensions of her own, then are visible in the Body she has left. Which
I think worth taking notice of, that it may stop the mouths of them that, not
without reason, laugh at those unconceivable and ridiculous fancies of the
Schools; that first rashly take a way all Extension from Spirits, whether
Souls or Augels, and then dispute how many of them booted and spurred may dance
on a needles point at once. Fooleries much derogatory to the Truth, and that
pinch our perception into such an intolerable streightness and evanidness, that
we cannot imagine any thing of our own Being; and if we do, are prone to fall
into despair, or contempt of our selves, by fancying our selves such
unconsiderable Motes of the Sun.

2. But as it is very manifest that the Soul has Dimensions, and yet not
infinite, and therefore that she is necessarily bounded in some Figure or
other; so it is very uncertain whether there be any peculiar Figure natural to
her, answerable to animal shape, or whether she be of her self of either a
Round or Oval figure, but does change her shape according as occasion requires.
It is not material to define any thing in this Question more then thus, That
when the Soul acts in Terrestrial Matter, her Plastic part is determined to
the Organization of the Body into humane form; and in the AEreal or Ethereal,
that she is neither more nor less determined to any shape then the Genii or
Angels, and that if their Vehicles are more naturally guided into one shape
then another, that hers is in the same condition; so that in her visible
Vehicle she will bear the ordinary form of Angels, such a countenance, and so
clothed, as they.

3. That which is more material, I think is more easy to be defined, and that
is, whether the Soul be one Homogeneal Substance, or whether it be in some
manner Heterogeneal. That the latter is in some measure true, is manifest from
what we have written Lib. 2. Cap. 11. viz. That the Perceptive faculty reaches
not throughout the whole Soul, but is confined to a certain part, which we
called the Center or Eye of the Soul, as also her Perceptive part; but all the
rest Plastic. But here arises a further Scruple, whether there be not an
Heterogeneity in the very Plastic part also of the Soul. The Aristotelians
seem to be confident there is not, and do affirm that if there were an Eye in
the Toe, the Toe would see as well as the Head. Of which I very much doubt: For
hence it would follow that some Creatures would have a glimmering of Light all
over, they being in a manner all over transparent; and some thin and clear
Complexions might happily have the perception of Light betwixt the lower parts of
their Fingers, which are in some good measure pellucid; and therefore Life and
Spirits being continued from thence to the Conarion, as they are, or to the
fourth Ventricle of the Brain, it would follow that the Soul would have a
perception of some glimmerings of Light from thence, which were to see there as
well as to feel.

4. Wherefore it seems more rational to admit an Heterogeneity in the Plastic
part of the Soul also, and to acknowledge that every removal from the Seat of
Common Sense, that is to say, every Circle that surrounds the Center of the
Soul, has not the same bounds of power, neither for number nor extent. But
that as concerning the former, there is a gradual falling off from the first
excellency, which is the Perceptive part of the Soul; the closest Circle to
which is that part of the Plastic that is able to convey Objects of Sight as
well as of Touch and Hearing, and what other Senses else there may be in the
Soul. The next Circle is Hearing without Seeing, though not without Touch: for
Touch spreads through all, but in its exterior region, which is excessively
the greatest, it transmits the circumstantiated Perceptions of no Objects but
those that are Tactile; but to others it is only as a dead Medium, as the
Circle of Hearing is but as a dead Medium to the Objects of Sight. So that if
we would please our Imagination with Ficinus, in fancying the Soul as a Star,
we shall do it more perfectly, if we look upon her in her Circles, as having
an Halo about her: For the Soul to our Reason is no more homogeneal, then that
Spectacle is to our Sight.

5. But if we look upon the Soul as ever propending to some personal shape,
the direction of the Plastic rays must then tend to a kind of Organization,
so far as is conducent to the state the Soul is in, whether in an Aerie or
Ethereal Vehicle. For that the Plastic power omits or changes as she is drawn
forth by the nature of the Matter she acts upon, is discoverable in her
Organization of our Bodies here. For in all likelihood the Soul in her self is
as much of one sex as another; which makes her sometimes sign the Matter with
both, but that very seldom: and therefore it is manifest that she omits one
part of her Plastic power, and makes use of the other, in almost all
efformations of the Foetus. Whence it is easy to conclude, that supposing her
Plastic power naturally work the Ethereal or AEreal Vehicle into any animal
shape, it may put forth only such strokes of the efformative virtue as are
convenient and becoming the Angelical Nature. But according to this Hypothesis
happily all Objects of Sense will not arrive to the Center of the Soul from
every part of the Horizon; no not though this Organization were not natural
but merely arbitrarious. But be the Soul conceived either bound up thus into
animal form, or spread loose into any careless round shape, according as her
rays shall display themselves in her Vehicle of Air or Ether, yet the seat
of sight will be duly restrained, which is a consideration of no contemptible
consequence.

6. This in general may suffice concerning the very Nature of the Soul it
self, her Extension and Heterogeneity. I shall only add to this one
Observable concerning her Aerie and Ethereal Vehicle, and then I shall descend
to more particular disquisitions. Rash fancies and false deductions from
misunderstood Experiments have made some very confident that there is a Vacuum
in Nature, and that every Body by how much more light it is, so much less
substance it has in it self. A thing very fond and irrational, at the first
sight, to such as are but indifferently well versed in the incomparable
Philosophy of Renatus Descartes, whose dexterous wit and through insight into
the nature and laws of Matter, has so perfected the reasons of those
Phenomenon, that Demooritus, Epicurus, Lucretius and others have puzzled
themselves about, that there seems nothing now wanting as concerning that way
of Philosophizing, but patience and an unprejudiced judgment to peruse what he
has writ.

7. According therefore to his Philosophy and the Truth, there is ever as much
Matter or Body in one consistency as another; as for example, there is as much
Matter in a Cup of Air as in the same Cup filled with Water, and as much in
this Cup of Water as if it were filled with Lead or Quicksilver. Which I take
notice of here, that I may free the imagination of men from that ordinary and
idiotick misapprehension which they entertain of Spirits that appear, as if
they were as evanid and devoid of Substance as the very shadows of our Bodies
cast against a Wall, or our Images reflected from a River or Looking-glass: and
therefore from this error have given them names accordingly, calling the
Ghosts of men that present themselves to them, (...) and Umbrae, Images and
Shades. The which, the more visible they are, they think them the more
substantial; fancying that the Air is so condensed, that there is not only
more of it, but also that simply there is more Matter or Substance, when it
appears thus visible, then there was in the same space before. And therefore
they must needs conceit that Death reduces us to a pitiful thin pittance of
Being, that our Substance is in a manner lost, and nothing but a tenuious reek
remains, no more in proportion to us, then what a sweating horse leaves behind
him as he gallops by in a frosty morning. Which certainly must be a very
lamentable consideration to such as love this thick and plump Body they bear
about with them, and are pleased to consider how many pounds they outweighed
their Neighbor the last time they were put in the balance together.

8. But if a kind of dubious Transparency will demonstrate the deficiency of
Corporeal Substance, a Pillar of Crystal will have less thereof then one of
Tobacco-smoak; which though it may be so doubtful and evanid an Object to the
Eye, if we try it by the Hand, it will prove exceeding solid: as also these
Ghosts that are said to appear in this manner have proved to them that have
touched them, or have been touched by them. For it is a thing ridiculous and
unworthy of a Philosopher, to judge the measure of corporeal Matter by what it
seems to our sight; for so Air would be nothing at all: or what it is to our
handing or weighing of it; for so indeed a Cup of Quicksilver would seem to
have infinitely more Matter in it then one filled with Air only, and a vessel
of Water less when it is plunged under the water in the River, then when it is
carried in the Air. But we are to remember, that let Matter be of what
consistency it will, as thin and pure as the flame of a candle, there is not
less of corporeal Substance therein then there is in the same dimensions of
Silver, Lead, or Gold.

9. So that we need not bemoan the shrivelled condition of the deceased, as if
they were stripped almost of all Substance corporeal, and were too thinly clad to
enjoy themselves as to any Object of Sense. For they have no less Body then we
our selves have, only this Body is far more active then ours, being more
spiritualized, that is to say, having greater degrees of Motion communicated
unto it; which the whole Matter of the world receives from some spiritual Being
or other, and therefore in this regard may be said the more to symbolize with
that immaterial Being, the more Motion is communicated to it: As it does also
in that which is the effect of Motion, to wit the tenuity and subtilty of its
particles, whereby it is enabled to imitate, in some sort, the proper
privilege of Spirits that pass through all Bodies whatsoever. And these
Vehicles of the Soul, by reason of the tenuity of their parts, may well pass
through such Matter as seems to us impervious, though it be not really so to
them. For Matter reduced to such fluid subtilty of particles as are invisible,
may well have entrance through Pores unperceptible. Whence it is manifest that
the Soul, speaking in a natural sense, loses nothing by Death, but is a very
considerable gainer thereby. For she does not only possess as much Body as
before, with as full and solid dimensions, but has that accession cast in, of
having this Body more invigorated with Life and Motion then it was formerly.
Which consideration I could not but take notice of, that I might thereby
expunge that false conceit that adheres to most men's fancies, of that evanid
and starved condition of the other state.

CHAP. III.
1. That the natural abode of the Soul after death is the Air. 2. That she
cannot quit the AErial Regions till the Ethereal Congruity of life be awakened
in her. 3. That all Souls are not in the same Region of the Air. 4. Cardans
conceit of placing all Demons in the upper Region. 5. The use of this conceit
for the showing the reason of their seldom appearing. 6. That this Phenomenon
is salved by a more rational Hypothesis. 7. A further confutation of Cardans
Opinion. 8. More tending to the same scope. 9. The Original of Cardans error
concerning the remote operations of Demons. 10. An Objection how Demons and
Souls separate can be in this lower Region, where Winds and Tempests are so
frequent. 11. A preparation to an Answer from the consideration of the nature
of the Winds. 12. Particular Answers to the Objection. 13. A further Answer
from the nature of the Statick Faculty of the Soul. 14. Another from the
sudden power of actuating her Vehicle. 15. What incommodations she suffers
from hail, rain, etc.

1. THose more particular Enquiries we intend to fall upon, may be reduced to
these few Heads: viz. The place of the Souls abode, Her employment, and Her
moral condition after Death. That the place of Her abode is the Air, is the
constant opinion of the ancient Philosophers and natural Theologers, who do
unanimously make that Element the Receptacle of Souls departed: which therefore
they called (...), that is, (...), because men deceased are in a state of
invisibility, as the place they are confined to is an Element utterly invisible
of its own nature, and is accloy'd also with caliginous mists, and enveloped by
vicissitudes with the dark shadow of the Earth. The truth of this opinion of
theirs is plainly demonstrable from the 29. and 31. Axioms. For Nature making
no enormous jumps, it must needs follow, that separate Souls must take their
first station in the Air, because that Vital Congruity that fits an AErial
Vehicle does of order awaken immediately upon the quitting of the Earthly Body.

2. Wherefore the Soul being thus vitally united with a Body or Vehicle of
Air, it is impossible that she should drive out of those Regions: because her
motions are only according to the capacity of her Vehicle, she being not able
to alter the consistency thereof into any more subtle or purer temper then the
Air will admit of, keeping still its own Species. Only she may conspissate
the Air by directing the motion thereof toward her, and so squeezing out a
considerable part of the first and second Element may retain more Air then
ordinary: But she cannot command the Air from her so entirely, as to actuate
these two Elements alone, or any considerable part of them, because the
Ethereal Congruity of life is as yet wholly asleep; nor is it in the power of
the Soul to awake it as she pleases: and therefore it would be Pain and Death
to her to attempt the removal of the aerial Matter quite from her. Besides that
it would require such a force as would imply a contribution of motion to it, as
well as direction of it, to make it able to bear against other parts of the
Air that love not to be straightened nor crowded: which though it may happily be
done in some measure, yet that she may by this force of direction recover a
whole Vehicle of Ether, seems excessively improbable, as is plain from the 31.
Axiom.

3. Wherefore it is necessary that the Soul departed this life should be
somewhere in the Air, though it be not at all necessary that they should
inhabit all of them the same Region thereof. For as some Souls are more
purified then others when they leave the Body, so a more pure degree of Vital
Congruity will awake in them: whence by that Divine Nemesis that runs through
all things, they will be naturally conveyed to such places, and be associated
to such company as is most congruous to their Nature; and will be as distinctly
sorted by that eternal Justice that God has so deeply ingrafted in the very
essential contexture of the Universe, as humane Laws dispose of persons with
us, sending some to Prisons, some to Pest-houses, and others to the Prytaneum.

4. It will therefore, in all likelihood, fall to some of their shares to be
fatally fettered to this lower Region of the Air, as I doubt not but many
other Spirits are; though Cardan much pleases himself with a peculiar conceit
of his own, as if the supreme Region of the Air was the only habitation of
all Demons or Spirits whatever, and that their descent to us is as rare as the
diving of Men into the bottom of the Sea, and almost as difficult, this thick
Air we breathe in being in a manner as unsuitable to their tenuious
consistencies as the Water is to us; in which we are fain to hold out breath,
and consequently to make a very short stay in that Element. Besides that he
fancies the passage of the Middle Region tedious to them, by reason of its
Coldness; which therefore he says is as it were a fence betwixt us and them,
as the Sea is betwixt the Fishes and us; whom though we exceed much in Wit and
Industry, and have a great desire to catch them and kill them, yet we get very
few into our hands in comparison of those that escape us: And so these Daemos,
though they bear us no good will, by bodily conflict they can hurt none of us
(as being so difficult a thing to come at us) and very few of us by their Art
and Industry. For this fancyfull Philosopher will have them only attempt us as
we do the Fishes, by Baits, and Nets, and Eel-spears, or such like Engines
which we cast into the bottom of the Water: So these aerial Genii, keeping
their station above in the third Region of the Air (as we do on the bank of
the River, or in a Boat on the Sea, when we fish) by sending down Dreams and
Apparitions, may entangle some men so, that by affrightments and disturbances
of mind at last, though at this distance, they may work their ruin and
destruction.

5. This Hypothesis, I suppose, he has framed to give an account why the
appearing of the Genii is so seldom, and why so little hurt is done by them as
there is. For an Answer would be ready, that this lower A^^e is no Element for
them to abide in: and that it is as foolishly argued by those that say there
are no Spirits, because they are so seldom seen, as if the Fishes, upon a
concession of Speech and Reason to their mute Tribe, should generally conclude,
that there are no such Creatures as Men or Horses, because it happens so very
seldom that they can see them; and should contemn and laugh ac those Fishes
that, having had the hap to meet with them, should say they have seen such
Creatures, as if they were fanatic and lunatic, and not well in their wits,
or else too much in them, and that they contrived such fictions for some
political design.

6. Which Parable may hold good, though not upon the same grounds, only by
substituting difference of condition for distance of place; and the similitude
will prove as sound as before. For, for a Spirit to condensate his Vehicle to
almost a Terrestrial grossness and Visibility, is as rare and uncouth as for
Terrestrial animals to dive to the bottom of the Sea, and its likely every jot
as difficult: and so the reason as obvious why so few are seen, and the
confident denial of their existence as rash and foolish, by then that have not
seen them themselves. For it is as if the Fishes should contest amongst
themselves about the existence of Men, and their diving into the Water, and
whether there were any places haunted in the Sea; as those would be the most
famous where they fish for Pearls, or that cause the most frequent Shipwracks,
or are most pleasant to swim in. And some notable occasion, mischance, or
weighty design, such as occur more rarely, must be reasonably conceived the
only invitements to the Genii to expose themselves to our view.

7. That there is so little hurt done by them, need not be resolved into the
distance of their habitation, but into the Law of the Universe, whose force
penetrates through all orders of Beings. Besides, it is too trivial and
idiotick a conceit, and far below the pitch of a Philosopher, to think that all
AErial Spirits are Haters of Mankind, so as to take delight merely in
destroying them. For Men do not hate Fishes because they live in another
Element different from theirs, but catch them merely in love to themselves, for
gain and food; which the aerie Genii cannot aim at in destroying of us. But to
do Mischef merely for Mischiefs sake, is so excessive an Enormity, that some
doubt whether it be competible to any Intellectual Being. And therefore Cardan
ought to have proved that first: as also, if there be any so extremely
degenerate, that there be many of them, or rather so many that they cannot be
awed by the number of those that are less depraved. For we may observe that men
amongst our selves that are sufficiently wicked, yet they abhor very much from
those things that are grossly and causlesly destructive to either Man or Beast;
and themselves would help to destroy, punish, or at least hinder the attempters
of such wild and exorbitant outrages that have no pretense of Reason, but are a
mere exercise of Cruelty and Vexation to other Creatures. He also ought to have
demonstrated, that all Mankind are not the Peculium of some Spirits or other,
and that there are not invisible Governors of Nations, Cities, Families, and
sometime of particular Men; and that at least a Political Goodness, such as
serves for the safety of Persons and what belongs to them, is not exceedingly
more prevalent even in these Kingdoms of the Air, then gross Injustice. For
all this may be on this side of the Divine Life: so that there is no fear of
making these aerial Inhabitants over-perfect by this Supposition. In a word, he
should have proved that Political Order, in the full exercise thereof, did not
reach from Heaven to Earth, and pierce into the Subterraneous Regions also, if
there be any Intellectual Creatures there. For this will suffice to give a
reason that so little hurt is done, though all places be full of AErial Spirits.

8. Add unto all this, that though they may not be permitted to do any gross
evil themselves, and to kill men at pleasure without their consents, yet they
may abet them in such ways, or invite them to such courses, as will prove
destructive to them: but, it may be, with no greater plot then we have when we
set Dogs together by the ears, fight Cocks, bait Bears and Bulls, run
Horses, and the like; where often, by our occasion, as being excited and
animated by us, they pursue their own inclinations, to the loss of their lives.
But though we do not care to kill a Dog or a Cock in this way; yet there is
none so barbarous as to knock these Creatures on the head merely because they
will do so. So these worser kind of Genii, according as their tempers are, may
happily follow some men prone to such or such vices, in which they may drive them
in way of contest, or to please their own fancies, to the utmost they can do
in it; and, taking their parts, sport themselves in making one man overcome
another in duelling, in drinking, in craft and undermining, in wenching, in
getting riches, in clambering to honors; and so of the rest. Where it may be
their pastime to try the Victory of that Person they have taken to; and if he
perish by the hurry of their temptations and animations, it is a thing they
intended no more, it may be, then he that sets his Cock into the pit desires
his neck should be broke: but if it happen so, the sorrow is much alike in both
cases. And therefore these Spirits may do mischief enough in the world, in
abetting men that act it, though happily they neither take pleasure in doing of
it upon any other terms, nor if they did, are able to do it, there being so
many watchful eyes over them. For these AErial Legions are as capable of
Political Honesty, and may as deeply resent it, as the Nations of the Earth
do, and it may be more deeply.

9. But if these Creatures were removed so far off as Cardan would have them, I
do not see how they could have any communion at all with us, to do us either
good or hurt. For that they are able to send Apparitions or Dreams at this
distance, is it self but a Dream, occasioned from that first error in the
Aristotelian Philosophy, that makes God and the Intelligences act from the
heavenly spears, and so to produce all these effects of Nature below; such as
can never be done but by a present Numen and Spirit of Life that pervades all
things.

10. This conceit therefore of his shall be no hindrance to our concluding,
That this lower Region of the Air is also replenisht with Demons. Which if it
be, it is not unlikely but that the impurer Souls wander there also; though I
have taken all this pains to bring still greater trouble upon my self. For it
is obvious to object that which Lucretius has started of old, that this Region
being so obnoxious to Winds and tempests, the Souls will not be able to keep
their Vehicles of Air about them, but that they will be blown in pieces by the
roughness of these storms. But we may be easily delivered of this solicitude,
if we consider the nature of the Winds, the nature of these Vehicles, and the
Statick power of the Soul. For to say theywil make as good shift as the Genii
here, is not fully satisfactory, because a man would also willingly understand
how the Genii themselves are not liable to this inconvenience. My Answer
therefore shall reach both.

11. That Winds are nothing else but Watery particles at their greatest
agitation, Cartesius has very handsomely demonstrated in his Meteors: Which
particles do not so much drive the Air before them, as pass through it, as a
flight of arrows and showers of hail or rain. One part of the Air therefore
is not driven from another; but it is as if one should conceive so many little
pieces of hair twirling on their middle point as at quarter-staffe, and so
passing through the Air; which motion would pass free, without carrying the
Air along with it. This therefore being the nature of Wind, the Air is not
torn apieces thereby, though we find the impetus of it moveing against us,
because it cannot penetrate our Bodies with that facility that it does the Air.

12. But the Vehicles of the Genii and Souls deceased are much-what of the very
nature of the Air; whence it is plainly impossible that the Wind should have
any other force on them, then what it has on the rest of that Element; and
therefore the least thing imaginable will hold all the parts together. Which is
true also if the Wind did carry along the Air with it: for then the Vehicles
of the Genii would move along with the stream, suffering little or no violence
at all, unless they would force themselves against it. Which they are not
necessitated to do, as indeed not so much as to come into it, or not at least
to continue in it, but may take shelter, as other living Creatures do, in
houses, behind walls, in woods, dales, caverns, rocks and other obvious places;
and that maturely enough, the change of Air and prognostic of storms being
more perceptible to them then to any terrestrial animal.

13. And yet they need not be so cautious to keep out of danger, they having a
power to grapple with the greatest of it, which is their Statick faculty; which
arises from the power of directing the motion of the particles of their
Vehicle. For they having this power of directing the motion of these particles
which way they please, by Axiom 31. it necessarily follows, that they can
determinate their course inwards, or toward the Center; by which direction they
will be all kept close together, firm and tight: which ability I call the
Statick power of the Soul. Which if it can direct the whole agitation of the
particles of the Vehicle, as well those of the first and second Element as
those of the Air, and that partly toward the Center, and partly in a
countertendency against the storm, this force and firmness will be far above
the strongest winds that she can possibly meet with.

14. Wherefore the Souls Vehicle is in no danger from the boisterousness of
the Winds, and if it were, yet there is no fear of cessation of Life. For as
the Wind blows off one part of Air, it brings on another which may be
immediately actuated by the presence of the Soul; though there be no need to
take refuge in so large an Hypothesis. And it is more probable that she is more
peculiarly united to one part of the Air then another, and that she dismisses
her Vehicle but by degrees, as our Spirits leasurely pass away by insensible
Perspiration.

15. We see how little the Souls Vehicle can be incommodated by storms of
Wind. And yet Rain, Hail, Snow and Thunder will incommodate her still less.
For they pass as they do through other parts of the Air, which close again
immediately, and leave neither wound nor scarre behind them. Wherefore all
these Meteors in their Mediocrity may be a pleasure to her and refreshment; and
in their excess no long pain, nor in their highest rage any destruction of life
at all. From whence we may safely conclude, that not only the Upper Region,
but this Lower also, may be inhabited both by the deceased Souls of Men and by
Demons.

CHAP. IV.
1. That the Soul once having quitted this earthly Body becomes a Demon. 2.
Of the External Senses of the Soul separate, their number and limits in the
Vehicle. 3. Of Sight in a Vehicle organized and unorganized. 4. How Demons and
separate Souls hear and see at a vast Distance: and whence it is that though
they may so easily hear or see us, we may neither see nor hear them. 5. That
they have Hearing as well as Sight. 6. Of the Touch, Smell, Taste, and
Nourishment of Demons. 7. The external employment that the Genii and Souls
deceased may have out of the Body. 8. That the actions of Separate Souls, in
reference to us, are mostwhat conformable to their life here on Earth. 9. What
their entertainments are in reference to themselves. 10. The distinction of
orders of Demons from the places they most frequent.

1. THE next thing we are to enquire into is the Employment of the Soul after
Death; how she can entertain her self, and pass away the time, and that either
in Solitude, in Company, or as she is a Political member of some Kingdom or
Empire. Concerning all which in the general we may conclude, that it is with
her as with the rest of the AErial Genii, (...), for the Soul having once put
off this terrestrial Body becomes a Genius her self; as Maximus Tyrius,
Xenocrates, Philo and others expressly affirm. But we shall consider these
things more particularly.

2. As for those employments wherewith she may entertain her self in solitude,
they are either Objects of the External Senses, or of the Inward Mind.
Concerning the former whereof it is more easy to move Questions then satisfy
them; as Whether she have the same number of Senses she had in this life. That
she is endued with Hearing, Sight and Touch, I think there can be no scruple,
because these will fall to her share necessarily, whether her Vehicle be
organized or not; and that of Seeing and Touch is the most uncontrovertible of
all. For the sense of visible Objects being discovered to us by transmission of
Motion through those Spherical particles that are continued along from the
Object through the Air to our very Organ of Sight (which sees merely by reason
of these particles vitally united with the Soul) the same particles pervading
all the Souls Vehicle, it is impossible but that she should see. But the
Question is, whether she sees in every part thereof. To which I must answer,
No: partly from what I have already declared concerning the Heterogeneity of
her Plastic part; and partly from a gross inconvenience that would follow this
Supposition. For if we should grant that the Soul saw in every part of her
Vehicle, every Object that is near would not only seem double, but centuple,
or millecuple; which would be a very ugly enormity and defacement of Sight.
Wherefore we have, with very good reason, restrained the Visive faculty of the
Soul in this state of Separation, as well as it was in the Terrestrial Body.

3. But this hinders nothing but that the Soul, when she lies in one Homogeneal
orb of Air, devoid of organization, may see round about her, behind, before,
above, beneath, and every way. But if she organize her Vehicle, Sight may happily
be restrained, as in us who cannot see behind us. Which Consideration we
touched upon before.

4. It is plain therefore that these AErial Spirits, though we cannot see them,
cannot miss of seeing us; and that, it may be, from a mighty distance, if they
can transform their Vehicle, or the Organ of Sight, into some such advantageous
Figure as is wrought in Dioptrick Glasses. Which power will infinitely exceed
the contracting and dilating of the pupil of our Eye, which yet is a weaker and
more defectuous attempt toward so high a Privilege as we speak of: which
notwithstanding may seem very possible in Spirits from 31. and 34. Axioms. The
same also may be said of their Hearing. For the same principle may enable them
to shape themselves Organs for the receiving of Sounds, of greater art and
excellency then the most accurate Acoustick we read of, or can excogitate.
Wherefore it is a very childish mistake to think, that because we neither see
the shape nor hear the discourse of Spirits, that they neither hear nor see us.
For soft Bodies are impressible by hard ones, but not on the contrary; as
melted Wax will receive the Signature of the Seal, but the Seal is not at all
impressed upon by the Wax. And so a solid Body will stop the course of the
Air, but the Air will not stop the course of a solid Body; and every
inconsiderable terrestrial consistency will reflect Light, but Light scarce
moves any terrestrial Body out of its place, but is rebounded back by it. That
therefore that is most tenuious and thin, is most passive, and therefore if it
be once the Vehicle of Sense, is most sensible. Whence it will follow, that the
reflection of Light from Objects being able to move our Organs, that are not so
fine, they will more necessarily move those of the Genii, and at a greater
distance. But their Bodies being of diaphanous Air, it is impossible for us to
see them, unless they will give themselves the trouble of reducing them to a
more terrestrial consistency, whereby they may reflect light. Nor can we easily
hear their ordinary speech, partly because a very gentle motion of the Air
will act upon their Vehicles, and partly because they may happily use the finer
and purer part of that Element in this exercise, which is not so fit to move
our Sense. And therefore unless they will be heard data opera, naturally that
impress of the Air in their usual discourse can never strike our Organ.

5. And that we may not seem to say all this for naught; that they will have
Hearing as well as Seeing, appears from what I have intimated above, that this
Faculty is ranged near the Common Sensorium in the Vehicle, as well as that of
Sight, and therefore the Vehicle being all Air, such percussions of it as
cause the sense of Sound in us will necessarily do the like in them; but more
accurately, happily, if they organize their Vehicle for the purpose, which will
answer to the arrection of the Ears of Animals, for the better taking in the
Sound.

6. That they have the sense of Touch is inevitably true, else how could they
feel resistance, which is necessary in the bearing of one Body against another,
because they are impenetrable? And to speak freely my mind, it will be a very
hard thing to disprove that they have not something analogical to Smell and
Taste, which are very near akin to Touch properly so called. For Fumes and
Odours passing so easily through the Air, will very naturally insinuate into
their Vehicles also: which Fumes, if they be grosser and humectant, may raise
that diversification of Touch which we Mortals call Tasting; if more subtle
and dry, that which we call Smelling. Which if we should admit, we are within
modest bounds as yet in comparison of others; as Cardan, who affirms downright
that the AErial Genii are nourished, and that some of them get into the Bodies
of Animals to batten themselves there in their Blood and Spirits. Which is also
averred by Marcus the Mesopotamian Eremite in Psellus, who tells us that the
purer sort of the Genii are nourished by drawing in the Air, as our Spirits
are in the Nerves and Arteries; and that other Genii, of a courser kind, suck
in moisture, not with the Mouth as we do, but as a Sponge does water. And
Moses AEgyptius writes concerning the Zabii, that they eat of the blood of
their Sacrifice, because they thought it was the food of the Demons they
worshipped, and that by eating thereof they were in a better capacity to
communicate with them. Which things if they could be believed, that would be no
such hard Problem concerning the Familiars of Witches, why they suck them. But
such curiosities, being not much to our purpose, I willingly omit.

7. The conclusion of what has been said is this, That it is certain that the
Genii, and consequently the Souls of men departed, who ipso facto are of the
same rank with them, have the sense of Seeing, Hearing, and Touching, and not
improbably of Smelling and Tasting. Which Faculties being granted, they need
not be much at a loss how to spend their time, though it were but upon external
Objects; all the furniture of Heaven and Earth being fairly exposed to their
view. They see the same Sun and Moon that we do, behold the persons and
converse of all men, and, if no special Law inhibit them, may pass from Town to
Town, and from City to City, as Hesiod also intimates, (...).
There is nothing that we enjoy but they may have their fees out of it; fair
Fields, large and invious Woods, pleasant Gardens, high and healthful
Mountains, where the purest gusts of Air are to be met with, Crystal Rivers,
mossy Springs, solemnity of Entertainments, Theatrick Pomps and Shows, public
and private Discourses, the exercises of Religion, whether in Temples,
Families, or hidden Cells. They may be also (and happily not uninteressed)
Spectators of the glorious and mischievous hazards of War, whether Sea Fights
or Land-fights; besides those soft and silent, though sometimes no less
dangerous, Combats in the Camps of Cupid; and a thousand more particularities
that it would be too long to reckon up, where they happily are not men Spectators
but Abettors, as Plutarch writes: Like old men that are past Wrestling,
Pitching the Bar, or playing at Cudgels themselves, yet will assist and abet
the young men of the Parish at those Exercises. So the Souls of men departed,
though they have put off with the Body the capacity of the ordinary functions
of humane Life, yet they may assist and abet them, as pursuing some design in
them; and that either for evil or good, according as they were affected
themselves when they were in the Body.

8. In brief, whatever is the custom and desire of the Soul in this life, that
sticks and adheres to her in that which is to come; and she will be sure, so
far as she is capable, either to act it, or to be at least a Spectator and
Abettor of such kind of actions. -- Quae gratia currum
Armorumque fuit vivis, quae cura nitentes
Pascere equos, eade^ sequitur tellure repostos.
Which rightly understood is no poetical fiction, but a professed Truth in
Plato's Philosophy. And Maximus Tyrius speaks expressly even of the better sort
of Souls, who having left the Body, and so becoming (...), i. e. being made
ipso facto Genii in stead of men, that, beside the peculiar happiness they reap
thereby to themselves, they are appointed by God, and have a mission from him,
to be Overseers of humane affairs: but that every Genius does not perform every
office, but as their natural Inclinations and Customs were in this life, they
exercise the like in some manner in the other. And therefore he will have
AEsculapius to practice Physic still, and Hercules to exercise his strength,
Amphilochus to prophesy, Castor and Pollux to navigate, Minos to hear causes,
and Achilles to war. Which opinion is as likely to hold true in Bad Souls as in
Good; and then it will follow, that the Souls of the wicked make it their
business to assist and abet the exercise of such Vices as themselves were most
addicted to in this life, and to animate and tempt men to them. From whence it
would follow, that they being thus by their separate state Demons, as has been
said already, if they be also tempters to evil, they will very little differ
from mere Devils.

9. But besides this employment in reference to us, they may entertain
themselves with Intellectual Contemplations, whether Natural, Mathematical,
or Metaphysical. For assuredly Knowledge is not so easy and cheap in this state
of Separation, but that they may advance and improve themselves by exercise and
Meditations. And they being in a capacity to forget by reason of desuetude, it
will be a new pleasure to them to recall to mind their almost obliterate
speculations. And for those that take more pleasure in outward Sense then in
the operations of their Understanding; there being so much change in Nature,
and so various qualifications of the Air and these inferior Elements, which
must needs act upon their aerial Bodies to more or less gratification or
dislike, this also will excuse them from being idle, and put them upon quest
after such refreshments and delights as Nature will afford the multifarious
presages and desires of their flitting Vehicles.

10. Not but that they keep constant to some general inclination, which has
divided these aerial wanderers into so many Orders or Tribes; the ancient
Philosophers and Poets (which are Philosophers of the antientest standing of
all) having assigned places proper to each Order: the Sea, Rivers and Springs
to one, Mountains and Groves to others, and so of the rest. Whence they imposed
also those names of the Nereides, Naiades, Oreades, Dryades, and the like: to
which you may add the Dii Tutelares of Cities and Countries, and those that
love the warmth of Families and homely converse of Men, such as they styled
Lares familiares. All which, and hundreds more, which there is no need to
recite, though they be engaged ever in one natural propension, yet there being
so great variety of occasions to gratify it more or less, their thoughts may be
employed in purchasing and improving those delights that are most agreeable to
their own nature. Which particularities to run over would be as infinite as
useless. These short intimations are sufficient to make us understand that the
Genii and separate Souls need want no Employment, no not in Solitude: for such
must their stay also amongst us be esteemed, when they do not sensibly and
personally converse with us.

CHAP. V.
1. That the Separate Soul spends not all her time in Solitude. 2. That her
converse with us seems more intelligible then that with the Genii. 3. How the
Genii may be visible one to another, though they be to us invisible. 4. Of
their approaches, and of the limits of their swiftness of motion: 5. And how
they far exceed us in celerity. 6. Of the figure or shape of their Vehicles,
and of their privacy, when they would be invisible. 7. That they cannot well
converse in a mere simple Orbicular form. 8. That they converse in humane
shape, at least the better sort of them. 9. Whether the shape they be in
proceed merely from the Imperium of their Will and Fancy, or is regulated by a
natural Character of the Plastic part of the Soul. 10. That the personal
shape of a Soul or Genius is partly from the Will, and partly from the
Plastic power. 11. That considering how the Soul organizes the Foetus in the
Womb, and moves our limbs at pleasure; it were a wonder if Spirits should not
have such command over their Vehicles as is believed. 12. A further Argument
from an excessive virtue some have given to Imagination.

1. BUT the separate state of the Soul does not condemn her to this Solitude,
but being admitted into the order of the Genii, she is possessed of their
Privileges, which is to converse personally with this AErial people, and also
upon occasion with the Inhabitants of the Earth; though the latter with far
more difficulty.

2. As for her converse with the AErial Genii and other Souls separate, it must
be in all reason concluded to be exceeding much more frequent then that with
men, and yet this latter is in some sort more intelligible; because it is
certain she can see us, light being reflected from our opake Bodies unto her
Sense, and by conspissating her Vehicle she may make her self visible to us.
But the Vehicles of the Genii and of Souls being in their natural consistence
purely AErial, and Air being a transparent Body, it will transmit the light
wholly; and so no reflection being made from these aerie Bodies, they can have
no perception of one another presence, and therefore no society nor communion
one with another.

3. This seems a shrewd Difficulty at the first view. But it is easily taken
off, if we consider that Air will admit of many degrees of Rarefaction and
Condensation, and yet still appear unto us alike invisible, as one may observe
in the Weather-glass. But it were more proper to propose in this case the
experiment of the Wind-gun, wherein the Air is compressed to a great number of
degrees of condensatio^ beyond its natural state; within the compass of many
whereof there is no doubt, if not in the utmost, that the Air does remain
invisible to us. But there is no scruple to be made but that in the progress of
these degrees of Condensation the Air, if it were in a Glass-barrel, might
become visible to the Genii, by reason of the tenderness and delicacy of their
Senses, before it would be so to us. Whence it follows, that the Vehicles of
the Genii may have a consistency different from the Air, and perceptible to
them, that is to say, to one another sight, though it be as unperceptible to
us as the rest of the Air is. As, it may be, a man that has but bad eyes would
not be able to distinguish Ice immersed in the Water from the Water it self by
his Sight, though he might by his Touch. Or if their Vehicles could be supposed
purer and finer then the rest of the Air, their presence might be perceptible
by that means too. For this vaporous Air having without question a confused
reflection of light in it, every way in some proportion like that in a Mist, or
when the Sun shines waterishly and prognostics rain; these repercussions of
light being far more sensible to the Genii then to us, the lessening of them
would be more sensible, and therefore the diminution of reflection from their
Vehicles would be sufficient to discover their presence one to another: and for
the illustrating of this Hypothesis, the experiment of the Weather-glass is
more proper. But the other supposition I look upon as the more likely to be
true; and that as the aquatil Animals that live in the Sea have a consistency
grosser then the Element they move in, so it is with these that live in the
Air, though there be nothing near so great a difference here as in that other
Element.

4. It is plain therefore, that the Persons of the Genii and separate Souls are
visible one to another. But yet not at any distance, and therefore there is
necessity of approaching to one another for mutual converse: which enforces us
to say something of their Local Motion. Which is neither by Fins nor Wings, as
in Fishes or Birds, who are fain to sustain themselves by these instruments
from sinking to the bottom of either Element: but it is merely by the
direction of the agitation of the particles of their Vehicle toward the place
they aim at; and in such a swiftness or leasureliness as best pleases
themselves, and is competible to their natures. For they can go no swifter
then the whole sum of agitation of the particles of their Vehicle will carry
so much Matter, nor indeed so swift; for it implies that their Vehicles would
be turned into an absolutely hard Body, such as Brass or Iron, or whatever we
find harder; so that necessarily they would fall down to the Earth as dead as a
Stone. Those therefore are but fantastic conceits that give such agility to
Spirits, as if they could be here and there and every where at once, skip from
one Pole of the World to another, and be on the Earth again in a moment: whenas
in truth they can pass with no greater swiftness then the direction of such a
part of the agitation of the particles of their Vehicles will permit, as may be
spared from what is employed in keeping them within a tolerable compass of a
due aerial fluidity.

5. And this alone will suffice to make them exceed us in activity and
swiftness by many degrees. For their whole Vehicle is happily at least as thin
and moveable as our animal Spirits, which are very few in comparison of this
luggage of an earthly Body that they are to drive along with them. But the
spiritual Bodies of the Genii have nothing to drive along with them but
themselves; and therefore are more free and light, compared to us, then a
mettl'd Steed that has cast his Rider, compared with a Pack-horse laden with a
sack of Salt.

6. The next, thing to be considered, touching the mutual conversation of these
aerial Genii, is the shape they appear in one to another, of what Figure it is,
and whether the Figure be Natural, or Arbitrarious, or Mixed. For that they must
appear in some Figure or other is plain, in that their Vehicles are not of an
infinite extension. It is the more general Opinion, that there is no particular
Figure that belongs unto them naturally, unless it be that which of all Figures
is most simple, and most easy to conform to, even by external helps, which is
the equal compression of the Air on every side of the Vehicle, by which means
drops of Dew and Rain and pellets of Hail come so ordinarily into that shape.
Which also will more handsomely accord with the nature of the Soul, supposing
she consist of Central and Radial essence, as I have above described, and the
Common Sensorium be placed in the midst. In this Figure may the Soul reside in
the Air, and happily melt her self, I mean her Vehicle, into near so equal a
liquidity with that part of that Element adjacent to her, that it may be in
some measure like our retiring into secrecy from the sight of men, when we
desire to be private by our selves.

7. But she may, if she will, and likely with far more ease, change this
consistency of her AErial Body into such a degree of thickness, that there may
be a dubious discovery of her, as in the glimpse of a Fish under the water, and
may still make her self more visible to her fellow- Genii, though keeping yet
this simple Orbicular form. But what converse there can be betwixt two such
heaps of living Air, I know not. They may indeed communicate their affections
one to another in such a way as is discovered in the Eye, wherein the motions
of the Spirits do plainly indicate the Passions of the Mind: so that it may
seem possible, in this simple Figure, to make known their joy or grief,
peaceableness or wrath, love or dislike, by the modification of the motion of
the Spirits of their Vehicle. But how there can well be entertained any
Intellectual or Rational Conference, without any further organization of their
Aerie Bodies, I profess my self at a loss to understand.

8. Wherefore the Genii and separate Souls, whatever their shape be in private,
appear in a more operose and articulate form when they are to converse with one
another. For they can change their Figure in a manner as they please, by Axiom
34. Which power, I conceive, will be made use of not only for service, but
ornament and pulcritude. And the most unexceptionable Beauty, questionless, is
that of Man in the best patterns (choose what Sex you will) and far above the
rest of Creatures; which is not our judgment only, but His that made us. For
certainly he would give to the Principal of terrestrial Animals the noblest
form and shape; which though it be much obscured by our unfortunate Fall, yet
questionless the defacement is not so great, but that we may have a near guess
what it has been heretofore. It is most rational therefore to conclude, that
the AErial Genii converse with one another in Humane shape, at least the better
sort of them.

9. But the difficulty now is, whether that Humane shape that the Soul
transforms her Vehicle into, be simply the effect of the Imperium of her Will
over the Matter she actuates, or that her Will may be in some measure limited
or circumscribed in its effect by a concomitant exertion of the Plastic power;
so that what proceeds from the Will may be only more general, that is, That
the Souls Will may only command the Vehicle into an Animal form; but that it
is the form or shape of a Man, may arise in a more natural way from the
concomitant exertion of the Plastic virtue. I say, in a more easy and natural
way: For vehemence of desire to alter the Figure into another representation
may make the appearance resemble some other creature: But no forced thing can
last long. The more easy and natural shape therefore that, at least, the better
Genii appear in, is Humane: which if it be granted, it may be as likely that
such a determinate Humane shape may be more easy and natural then another, and
that the Soul, when she wills to appear in personal Figure, will transform her
Vehicle into one constant likeness, unless she disguise her self on set
purpose. That is, the Plastic power of every Soul, whether of Men, or of the
other Genii, does naturally display it self into a different modification of
the Humane shape, which is the proper Signature of every particular or
individual person: which though it may be a little changed in Generation by
virtue of the Imagination of the Parents, or quality of their seed, yet the
Soul set free from that Body she got here, may exquisitely recover her ancient
form again.

10. Not that the Plastic virtue, awakened by the Imperium of her Will, shall
renewall the lineaments it did in this Earthly Body (for abundance of them are
useless and to no purpose, which therefore, Providence so ordaining, will be
silent in this aerie figuration, and only such operate as are fit for this
separate state; and such are those as are requisite to perfect the visible
feature of a Person, giving him all parts of either ornament or use for the
pleasure of rational converse;) nor that this Efformative power does determine
the whole appearance alone (for these aerial Spirits appear variously clad,
some like beautiful Virgins, others like valiant Warriors with their Helmets
and Plumes of feathers, as Philostratus would make us believe Achilles did to
Apollonius:) But there is a mixed action and effect, resulting partly from the
freeness of the Will and Imagination, and partly from the natural propension of
the Plastic virtue, to cast the Vehicle into such a personal shape.

11. Which Prerogative of the Soul, in having this power thus to shape her
Vehicle at will, though it may seem very strange, because we do not see it
done before our eyes, nor often think of such things; yet it is not much more
wonderful then that she organizes the Foetus in the womb, or that we can move
the parts of our Body merely by our Will and Imagination. And that the aerial
Spirits can do these things, that they can thus shape their Vehicles, and
transform themselves into several Appearances, I need bring no new instances
thereof. Those Narrations I have recited in my Third Book against Atheism do
sufficiently evince this Truth. And verily, considering the great power
acknowledged in Imagination by all Philosophers, nothing would seem more
strange, then that these Aerie Spirits should not have this command over their
own Vehicles, to transform them as they please.

12. For there are some, and they of no small note, that attribute so wonderful
effects to that Faculty armed with confidence and belief (to which Passion Fear
may in some manner be referred, as being a strong belief of an imminent evil,
and that it will surely take effect, as also vehement Desire, as being
accompanied with no small measure of persuasion that we may obtain the thing
desired, else Desire would not be so very active) I say, they attribute so
wonderful force to Imagination, that they affirm that it will not only alter a
man's own Body, but act upon another, and that at a distance; that it will
inflict diseases on the sound, and heal the sick; that it will cause Hail,
Snows and Winds; that it will strike down an Horse or Camel, and cast their
Riders into a ditch; that it will do all the feats of Witchcraft, even to the
making of Ghosts and Spirits appear, by transforming the adjacent Air into the
shape of a person that cannot only be felt and seen, but heard to discourse,
and that not only by them whose Imagination created this aerie Spectrum, but
by other bystanders, whose Fancy contributed nothing to its existence. To such
an extent as this have Avicenna, Algazel, Paracelsus, Pomponatius, Vaninus and
others, exalted the power of humane Imagination: which if it were true, this
transfiguration of the Vehicles of the separate Souls and Genii were but a
trifle in comparison thereof.

CHAP. VI.
1. More credible Instances of the effects of Imagination. 2. A special and
peculiar Instance in Signatures of the Foetus. 3. That what Fienus grants, who
has so cautiously bounded the power of Fancy, is sufficient for the present
purpose. 4. Examples approved of by Fienus. 5. Certain Examples rejected by
him, and yet approved of by Fernelius and Sennertus. 6. Three notorious Stories
of the power of the Mothers Imagination on the Foetus, out of Helmont. 7. A
conjectural inference from those Stories, what influence the Spirit of Nature
has in all Plastic operations. 8. A further confirmation of the Conjecture
from Signatures on the Foetus. 9. An application thereof to the transfiguration
of the Vehicles of Demons.

1. BUT I shall contain my belief within more moderate bounds, that which the
most sober Authors assent to being sufficient for our turn; and that is the
power of Imagination on our own Bodies, or what is comprehended within our own,
viz. the Foetus in the Womb of the Mother. For that Imagination will bring real
and sensible effects to pass is plain, in that some have raised diseases in
their own Bodies by too strongly imagining of them; by fancying bitter or sour
things, have brought those real sapours into their mouths; at the remembering of
some filthy Object, have fallen a vomiting; at the imagining of a Potion, have
fallen* a purging; and many such things of the like nature. Amongst which, that
of prefixing to ones self what time in the morning we will wake, is no less
admirable then my. Which alterations upon the Spirits for the production of
such qualities, is every jot as hard as the ranging them into new figures or
postures. But the hardest of all is, to make them so determinately active, as
to change the shape of the Body, by sending out knobs like horns, as it happened
to Cyppus, of which Agrippa speaks in his Occult. Philosoph. Which I should not
have repeated here, had I not been credibly informed of a later example of the
like effect of Imagination, though upon more fancyful grounds. That fear has
killed some, and turned others gray, is to be referred to Imagination also: the
latter of which examples is a sign that the Plastic power of the Soul has
some influence also upon the very hairs: which will make it less mavelous
that the Souls Vehicle may be turned into the live effigies of a Man, not a
hair, that is necessary to the perfecting of his representation, being
excluded, free Imagination succeeding or assisting the Plastic power in the
other state.

2. But of all Examples, those of the Signatures of the Foetus by the
Imagination of the Mother come the nearest to our purpose. For we may easily
conceive, that as the Plastic power in the Foetus is directed or seduced by
the force of the Mothers Fancy; so the Efformative virtue in Souls separate and
the Genii may be governed and directed or perverted by the force of their
Imagination. And so much the more surely by how much the union is more betwixt
the Imagination of the Soul and her own Plastic faculty, then betwixt her and
the Plastic power of another Soul; and the capacity of being changed, greater
in the yielding aerial Vehicle, then in the grosser rudiments of the Foetus in
the Womb.

3. And yet the effects of the force of the Mothers Imagination in the signing
of the Foetus is very wonderful, and almost beyond belief, to those that have
not examined these things. But the more learned sort both of Physicians and
Philosophers are agreed on the truth thereof, as Empedocles, Aristotle, Pliny,
Hippocrates, Galen, and all the modern Physicians, being born down into assent
by daily experience. For these Signatures of less extravagance and enormity are
frequent enough, as the similitude of Cherries, Mulberries, the color of
Claret Wine spilt on the woman with child, with many such like instances. And
if we stand but to what Fienus has defined in this matter, who has, I think,
behaved himself as cautiously and modestly as may be, there will be enough
granted to assure us of what we aim at. For he does acknowledge that the
Imagination of the Mother may change the figure of the Foetus so as to make it
bear a resemblance, though not absolutely perfect, of an Ape, Pig, or Dog, or
any such like Animal. The like he affirms of colors, hairs, and excrescencies
of several sorts: that it may produce also what is very like or analogous to
horns and hoofs, and that it may increase the bigness and number of the parts
of the Body.

4. And though he does reject several of the examples he has produced out of
Authors, yet those which he admits for true are Indications plain enough, what
we may expect in the Vehicle of a departed Soul or Demon. As that of the
Hairy girl out of Marcus Damascenus; that other out of Guilielmus Paradinus,
of a Child whose skin and nails resembled those of a Bear; and a third out of
Balduinus Ronsaeus, of one born with many excrescencies colored and figured
like those in a Turky-cock; and a fourth out of Pareus, of one who was born
with an head like a Frog; as lastly that out of Avicenna, of chickens with
hawks heads. All which deviations of the Plastic power happened from the force
of Imagination in the Females, either in the time of Conception, or gestation
of their young.

5. But he scruples of giving assent to others, which yet are assented to by
very learned writers. As that of Black-moores being born of white Parents, and
white Children of black, by the exposal of pictures representing an Ethiopian
or European: which those two excellent Physicians, Fernelius and Sennertus,
both agree to. He rejects also that out of Cornelius Gemma, of a Child that was
born with his Forehead wounded and running with blood, from the husbands
threatening his wife, when she was big, with a drawn sword which he directed
toward her Forehead. Which will not seem so incredible, if we consider what
Sennertus records of his own knowledge, viz. That a Woman with child seeing a
Butcher divide a Swines head with his Cleaver, brought forth her Child with its
face cloven in the upper jaw, the palate, and upper lip to the very nose.

6. But the most notorious instances of this sort are those of Helmont De
injectis materialibus. The one of a Tailors wife at Mechlin, who standing at
her door, and seeing a soldiers hand cut off in a quarrel, presently fell
into labor, being struck with horror at the spectacle, and brought forth a
child with one hand, the other arm bleeding without one, of which wound the
infant died by the great expense of blood. Another woman, the wife of one
Marcus De Vogeler Merchant of Antwerp, in the year 1602. seeing a soldier
begging who had lost his right arm in Ostend-siege, which he showed to the
people still bloody, fell presently into labor, and brought forth a Daughter
with one arm struck off, nothing left but a bloody stump to employ the
Chirurgions skill: this woman married afterward to one Hoochcamer Merchant of
Amsterdam, and was yet alive in the year 1638. as Helmont writes. He adds a
third example, of another Merchants wife which he knew, who hearing that on a
morning there were thirteen men to be beheaded (this happened at Antwerp in Duke
D' Alva his time) she had the curiosity to see the execution. She getting
therefore a place in the Chamber of a certain widow-woman, a friend of hers
that dwelt in the marketplace, beheld this Tragic spectacle; upon which she
suddenly fell into labor, and brought forth a perfectly-formed infant, only
the head was wanting, but the neck bloody as their bodies she beheld that had
their heads cut off. And that which does still advance the wonder is, that the
hand, arm, and head of these infants, were none of them to be found. From
whence Van-Helmont would infer a penetration of corporeal dimensions; but how
groundlessly I will not dispute here.

7. If these Stories he recites be true, as I must confess I do not well know
how to deny them, he reporting them with so honest and credible circumstances;
they are notable examples of the power of Imagination, and such as do not
only win belief to themselves, but also to others that Fienus would reject,
not of this nature only we are upon, of wounding the body of the Infant, but
also of more exorbitant conformation of parts, of which we shall bring an
instance or two anon. In the mean time, while I more carefully contemplate this
strange virtue and power of the Soul of the Mother, in which there is no such
measure of purification or exaltedness, that it should be able to act such
miracles, as I may call them, rather then natural effects; I cannot but be more
then usually inclinable to think that the Plastic faculty of the Soul of the
Infant, or whatever accessions there may be from the Imagination of the Mother,
is not the adaequate cause of the formation of the Foetus: a thing which
Plotinus somewhere intimates by the by, as I have already noted, viz. That the
Soul of the World, or the Spirit of Nature, assists in this performance. Which
if it be true, we have discovered a Cause proportionable to so prodigious an
Effect. For we may easily conceive that the deeply-impassionated fancy of the
Mother snatches away the Spirit of Nature into consent: which Spirit may
rationally be acknowledged to have a hand in the efformation of all vital
Beings in the World, and happily be the only Agent in forming of all manner of
Plants. In which kind whether she exert her power in any other Elements then
Earth and Water, I will conclude no further, then that there may be a
possibility thereof in the calmer Regions of Air and Ether. To the right
understanding of which conjecture, some light will offer it self from what we
have said concerning the Visibility and Consistency of the aerial Demons in
their occursions one with another.

8. But this is not the only Argument that would move one to think that this
Spirit of Nature intermeddles with the Efformation of the Foetus. For those
Signatures that are derived on the Infant from the Mothers fancy in the act of
Conception, cannot well be understood without this Hypothesis. For what can be
the Subject of that Signature? Not the Plastic part of the Soul of the Mother;
for that it is not the Mothers Soul that efforms the Embryo, as Sennertus
ingeniously conjectures from the manner of the efformation of Birds, which is
in their Eggs, distinct from the Hen, and they may as well be hatched without
any Hen at all, a thing ordinarily practiced in Egypt; nor the Body of the
Embryo, for it has yet no Body; nor its Soul, for the Soul, if we believe
Aristotle, is not yet present there. But the Spirit of Nature is present every
where, which snatched into consent by the force of the Imagination of the
Mother, retains the Note, and will be sure to seal it on the Body of the
Infant. For what rude inchoations the Soul of the World has begun in the Matter
of the Foetus, this Signature is comprehended in the whole design, and after
completed by the presence and operation of the particular Soul of the Infant,
which cooperates conformably to the pattern of the Soul of the World, and
insists in her footsteps; who having once begun any hint to an entire design,
she is alike able to pursue it in any place, she being every where like or
rather the same to her self. For as our Soul being one, yet, upon the various
temper of the Spirits, exerts her self into various imaginations and
conceptions; so the Soul of the World, being the same perfectly every where, is
engaged to exert her efformative power every where alike, where the Matter is
exactly the same. Whence it had been no wonder, if those Chickens
abovementioned with Hawks heads had been hatched an hundred miles distant from
the Hen, whose Imagination was disturbed in the act of Conception: because the
Soul of the World had begun a rude draught, which it self would as necessarily
pursue every where, as a Geometrician certainly knows how to draw a Circle that
will fit three Points given.

9. This Opinion therefore of Plotinus is neither irrational nor
unintelligible, That the Soul of the World interposes and insinuates into all
generations of things, while the Matter is fluid and yielding. Which would
induce a man to believe, that she may not stand idle in the transfiguration of
the Vehicles of the Demons, but assist their fancies and desires, and so help
to cloth them and attire them according to their own pleasures: or it may be
sometimes against their wills, as the unwieldiness of the Mothers Fancy forces
upon her a Monstrous birth.

CHAP. VII.
1. Three notable Examples of Signatures, rejected by Fienus: 2. And yet so
far allowed for possible, as will fit our design. 3. That Helmonts Cherry and
Licetus his Crab-fish are shrewd arguments that the Soul of the World has to do
with all Efformations of both Animals and Plants. 4. An Example of a most exact
and lively Signature out of Kircher: 5. With his judgment thereupon. 6.
Another Example out of him of a Child with gray hairs. 7. An application of
what has been said hitherto, concerning the Signatures of the Foetus, to the
transfiguration of the aerie Vehicles of separate Souls and Demons. 8. Of
their personal transformation visible to us.

1. THose other Examples of the Signation of the Foetus from the Mothers Fancy,
which Fienus rejects, the one of them is out of Wierus, of a man that
threatened his wife when she was big with child, saying, she bore the Devil in
her womb, and that he would kill him: whereupon, not long after, she brought
forth a Child well shaped from the middle downwards, but upwards spotted with
black and red spots, with eyes in its forehead, a mouth like a Satyr, ears
like a Dog, and bended horns on its head like a Goat. The other out of
Ludovicus Vives, of one who returning home in the disguise of a Devil, whose
part he had acted on the Stage, and having to do with his wife in that habit,
saying he would beget a Devil on her, impregnated her with a Monster of a shape
plainly diabolical. The third and most remarkable is out of Peramatus, of a
Monster born at S. Laurence in the West Indies, in the year 1573* the narration
whereof was brought to the Duke of Medina Sidonia from very faithful hands. How
there was a Child born there at that time, that besides the horrible deformity
of its mouth, ears and nose, had two horns on the head, like those of young
Goats, long hair on the body, a fleshy girdle about his middle, double, from
whence hung a piece of flesh like a purse, and a bell of flesh in his left
hand, like those the Indians use when they dance, white boots of flesh on his
legs, doubled down: In brief, the whole shape was horrid and diabolical, and
conceived to proceed from some fright the Mother had taken from the antic
dances of the Indians, amongst whom the Devil himself does not fail to appear
sometimes.

2. These Narrations Fienus rejects, not as false, but as not being done by
any natural power, or if they be, that the descriptions are something more
lively then the truth. But in the mean time he does freely admit, that by the
mere power of Imagination there might be such excrescencies as might represent
those things that are there mentioned; though those diabolical shapes could not
have true horns, hoofs, tail, or any other part, specifically distinct from the
nature of Man. But so far as he acknowledges is enough for our turn.

3. But Fortunius Licetus is more liberal in his grants, allowing not only
that the Births of women may be very exqulsitely distorted in some of their
parts into the likeness of those of Brutes, but that Chimaerical imaginations
in Dreams may also effect it, as well as Fancies or external Objects when they
are awake. Of the latter sort whereof he produces an Example that will more
then match our purpose, of a Sicilian matron, who by chance beholding a Crab in
a Fishermans hand new caught, and of a more then ordinary largeness, when she
was brought to bed, brought forth a Crab (as well as a Child) perfectly like
those that are ordinarily caught in the Sea. This was told him by a person of
credit, who both knew the Woman, and saw the Crab she brought forth. Helmonts
Cherry he so often mentions, and how it was green, pale, yellow, and red, at
the times of year other Cherries are, is something of this nature; that is to
say, comes near to the perfect species of a Cherry, as this did of a Crab, the
plantal life of a Cherry being in some measure in the one, as the life of an
Animal was perfectly in the other. Which confirms what we said before, that
strength of our Desire and Imagination may snatch into consent the Spirit of
Nature, and make it act: which once having begun, leaves not off, if Matter
will but serve for to work upon; and being the same in all places, acts the
same upon the same Matter, in the same circumstances. For the Root and Soul of
every Vegetable is the Spirit of Nature; in virtue whereof this Cherry
flourisht and ripened, according to the seasons of the Country where the party
was that bore that live Signature. These two instances are very shrewd
arguments that the Soul of the World has to do with all Efformations of either
Plants or Animals. For neither the Child's Soul nor the Mothers, in any
likelihood, could frame that Crab, though the Mother might, by that strange
power of Desire and Imagination, excite the Spirit of the World that attempts
upon any Matter that is fitted for generation, some way or other, to make
something of it; and being determined by the fancy of the Woman, might sign the
humid materials in her Womb with the image of her Mind.

4. Wherefore if Fienus had considered from what potent causes Signatures may
arise, he would not have been so scrupulous in believing that degree of
exactness that some of them are reported to have: or if he had had the good hap
to have met with so notable an example thereof, as Kircher professes himself to
have met with. For he tells a story of a man that came to him for this very
cause, to have his opinion what a certain strange Signature, which he had on
his Arm from his birth, might portend; concerning which he had consulted both
Astrologers and Cabbalists, who had promised great preferments, the one
imputing it to the Influence of the Stars, the other to the favor of the
sealing Order of Angels. But Kircher would not spend his judgment upon a mere
verbal description thereof; though he had plainly enough told him, it was the
Pope sitting on his Throne, with a Dragon under his feet, and an Angel putting
a Crown on his head. Wherefore the man desirous to hear a further confirmation
of these hopes (he had conceived from the favorable conjectures of others) by
the suffrage of so learned a man, was willing in private to put off his
doublet, and show his Arm to Kircher: who having viewed it with all possible
care, does profess that the Signature was so perfect, that it seemed rather the
work of Art then of exorbitating Nature; and yet by certain observations he
made, that he was well assured it was the work of Nature, and not of Art,
though it was an artificial piece that Nature imitated, viz. the picture of
Pope Gregory the thirteenth, who is sometimes drawn according as this Signature
did lively represent, namely on a Throne, with a Dragon under his feet, leaning
with one hand on his Seat, and bearing the other in that posture in which they
give the Benediction, and an Angel removing a Curtain, and reaching a Crown
toward his head.

5. Kircher therefore leaving the superstitions and fooleries of the spurious
Cabbalists and Astrologers, told him the truth, though nothing so pleasant as
their lies and flatteries, viz. That this Signature was not impressed by any
either influence of the Stars, or Seals of Angels, but that it was the effect
of the Imagination of his Mother that bore him, who in some more then ordinary
fit of affection toward this Pope, whose picture she beheld in some Chapel or
other place of her devotion, and having some occasion to touch her Arm, printed
that image on the Arm of her Child, as it ordinarily happens in such cases.
Which doubtless was the true solution of the mystery.

6. The same Author writes, how he was invited by a friend to contemplate
another strange miracle (as he thought that did invite him to behold it) that
he might spend his judgment upon it. Which was nothing else but an exposed
Infant of some fourteen days old, that was gray-hair'd, both head and
eyebrows. Which his friend, an Apothecary, looked upon as a grand Prodigy,
till he was informed of the cause thereof. That the Mother that brought it
forth, being married to an old man whose head was all white, the fear of being
surprised in the act of Adultery by her snowy-headed husband, made her imprint
that color on the Child she bore. Which Story I could not omit to recite, it
witnessing to what an exact curiosity the power of Fancy will work, for the
fashioning and modifying the Matter, not missing so much as the very colors of
the hair, as I have already noted something to that purpose.

7. To conclude therefore at length, and leave this luxuriant Theme. Whether it
be the Power of Imagination carrying captive the Spirit of Nature into consent,
or the Soul of the Infant, or both; it is evident that the effects are
notable, and sometimes very accurately answering the Idea of the Impregnate,
derived upon the moist and ductil matter in the Womb: Which yet, not being any
thing so yielding as the soft air, nor the Soul of the Mother so much one
with that of the Infant as the separate Soul is one with it self, nor so
peculiarly united to the Body of the Infant as the Soul separate with her own
Vehicle, nor having any nearer or more mysterious commerce with the Spirit of
Nature, then she has when her Plastic part, by the Imperium of her Will and
Imagination, is to organize her Vehicle into a certain shape and form, which is
a kind of a momentaneous birth of the distinct Personality, of either a Soul
separate, or any other Demon; it follows, that we may be very secure, that
there is such a power in the Genii and Separate Souls, that they can with ease
and accuracy transfigure themselves into shapes and forms agreeable to their
own temper and nature.

8. All which I have meant hitherto in reference to their visible congresses
one with another. But they are sometimes visible to us also, under some Animal
shape, which questionless is much more difficult to them then that other
Visibility is. But this is also possible, though more unusual by far, as being
more unnatural. For it is possible by Art to compress Air so, as to reduce it
to visible opacity, and has been done by some, and particularly by a friend of
Descartes, whom he mentions in his Letters as having made this Experiment; the
Air getting this opacity by squeezing the Globuli out of it. Which though the
separate Souls and Spirits may do by that directive faculty, Axiom 31. yet
surely it would be very painful. For the first Element lying bare, if the Air
be not drawn exceeding close, it will cause an ungrateful heat; and if it be,
as unnatural a cold; and so small a moment will make the first Element too much
or too little, that it may, happily, be very hard, at least for these inferior
Spirits, to keep steddily in a due mean. And therefore, when they appear, it is
not unlikely but that they soak their Vehicles in some vaporous or glutinous
moisture or other, that they may become visible to us at a more easy rate.

CHAP. VIII.
1. That the Better sort of Genii converse in Humane shape, the Baser sometimes
in Bestial. 2. How they are disposed to turn themselves into several Bestial
forms. 3. Of Psellus his (...), or Igneous splendours of Demons, how they are
made. 4. That the external beauty of the Genii is according to the degree of
the inward virtue of their minds. 5. That their aerial form need not be purely
transparent, but more finely opake, and colored. 6. That there is a
distinction of Masculine and Feminine beauty in their personal figurations.

1. AFter this Digression, of showing the facility of the figuring of the
Vehicles of the Genii into personal shape, I shall return again where we left;
which was concerning the Society of these Genii and Souls separate, and under
what shape they converse one with another; which I have already defined to be
Humane, especially in the better sort of Spirits. And as for the worst kind, I
should think that they are likewise for the most part in Humane form, though
disguised with ugly circumstances; but that they figure themselves also in
Bestial appearances; it being so easy for them to transform their Vehicle into
what shape they please, and to imitate the figures as dexterously as some men
will the voices of brute beasts, whom we may hear sing like a Cuckoo, crow like
a Cock, bellow like a Cow and Calfe, bark like a Dog, grunt and squeak like a
Pig, and indeed imitate the cry of almost any Bird or Beast whatsoever. And as
easy a matter is it for these lower Genii to resemble the shapes of all these
Creatures, in which they also appear visibly oftentimes to them that entertain
them, and sometimes to them that would willingly shun them.

2. Nor is it improbable, but the variety of their impurities may dispose them
to turn themselves into one brutish shape rather then another; as envying, or
admiring, or in some sort approving and liking the condition and properties of
such and such Beasts: as Theocritus merrily sets out the Venereousness of the
Goatheard he describes, (...),
(...),
As if he envied the happiness of the he-Goats, and wished himself in their
stead, in their acts of carnal Copulation. So according to the several bestial
properties that symbolize with uncleanness and vitiousness of the tempers of
these Demons, they may have a propension to imitate their shape rather then
others, and appear ugly, according to the manner and measure of their internal
turpitudes.

3. As it is likely also that those (...) or (...), those Igneous Splendours
Psellus makes mention of, (as the end and scope of the nefarious ceremonies
those wicked wretches, he describes, often used) were colored according to the
more or less feculency of the Vehicle of the Demon that did appear in this
manner, viz. in no personal shape, but by exhibiting a light to the eyes of his
abominable Spectatours and Adorers: which, I suppose, he stirred up within the
limits of his own Vehicle; the power of his Will and Imagination, by Axiom 31,
commanding the grosser particles of the Air and terrestrial vapors, together
with the Globuli, to give back every way, from one point to a certain compass,
not great, and therefore the more easy to be done. Whence the first Element
lies bare in some considerable measure, whose activity cannot but lick into it
some particles of the Vehicle that borders next thereto, and thereby exhibit,
not a pure star-like light (which would be, if the first Element thus unbared,
and in the midst of pure air, were it self unmixt with other Matter) but the
feculency of those parts that it abrades and converts into fuel, and the
foulness of the ambient Vehicle through which it shines, makes it look red and
fiery like the Horizontal Sun seen through a thick throng of vapors. Which
fiery splendor may either only slide down amongst them, and so pass by with
the Motion of the Demons Vehicle, which Psellus seems mainly to aim at; or
else it may make some stay and discourse with them it approaches, according as
I have heard some Narrations. The reason of which lucid appearances being so
intelligible out of the Principles of Cartesius his Philosophy, we need not
conceit that they are nothing but the prestigious delusions of Fancy, and no
real Objects, as Psellus would have them; it being no more uncompetible to a
Demon to raise such a light in his Vehicle, and a purer then I have described,
then to a wicked man to light a candle at a tinderbox.

4. But what we have said concerning the purity and impurity of this light,
remindes me of what is of more suitable consequence to discourse of here, which
is the Splendor and Beauty of personal shape in the better sort of the Genii.
Which assuredly is greater or lesser, according to the degrees of Virtue and
moral Affections in them. For even in this Body, that is not so yielding to the
powers of the Mind, a man may observe, that according as persons are better or
worse inclined, the air of their visage will alter much, and that vicious
courses, defacing the inward pulcritude of the Soul, do even change the
outward countenance to an abhorred hue. Which must therefore necessarily take
place, in a far greater measure, in the other state; where our outward form is
wholly framed from the inward Imperium of our Mind: which by how much more pure
it self is, it will exhibit the more irreprehensible pulcritude in the outward
feature and fashion of the Body, both for proportion of parts, the spirit and
air of the Countenance, and the ornament of clothes and attirings: there being
an indissoluble connection in the Soul of the Sense of these three things
together, Virtue, Love, and Beauty; of all which she her self is the first
Root, and especially in the separate state, even of outward Beauty it self:
whence the converse of the most virtuous there must needs afford the highest
pleasure and satisfaction; not only in point of rational communication, but in
reference to external and personal complacency also. For if Virtue and Vice can
be ever seen with outward eyes, it must be in these aerial Vehicles, which
yield so to the Will and Idea of good and pure affections, that the Soul in a
manner becomes perfectly transparent through them, discovering her lovely
beauty in all the efflorescencies thereof, to the ineffable enravishment of the
beholder.

5. Not that I mean, that there is any necessity that their Vehicle should be
as a Statue of fluid Crystal; but that those impresses of beauty and ornament
will be so faithfully and lively represented, according to the dictates of her
inward Sense and Imagination, that if we could see the Soul her self, we could
know no more by her then she thus exhibits to our eye: which personal
figuration in the extimate parts thereof, that represent the Body, Face and
Vestments, may be attempered to so fine an opacity, that it may reflect the
light in more perfect colors then it is from any earthly body, and yet the
whole Vehicle be so devoid of weight, as it will necessarily keep its station
in the Air. Which we cannot wonder at, while we consider the hanging of the
Clouds there, less aerial by far then this consistency we speak of: to say
nothing of aerial Apparitions as high as the clouds, and in the same colors
and figures as are seen here below, and yet no reflections of terrestrial
Objects, as I have proved in my Third Book against Atheism.

6. The exact Beauty of the personal shapes and becoming habits of these aerie
Beings, the briefest and safest account thereof that Philosophy can give, is to
refer to the description of such things in Poets: and then, when we have
perused what the height and elegancy of their fancy has penned down. to write
under it, An obscure Subindication of the transcendent pulcritude of the AErial
Genii, whether Nymphs or Heroes. For though there be neither Lust, nor
difference of Sex amongst them (whence the kindest commotions of mind will
never be any thing else but an exercise of Intellectual love, whose Object is
Virtue and Beauty;) yet it is not improbable but that there are some general
strictures of discrimination of this Beauty into Masculine and Feminine: partly
because the temper of their Vehicles may incline to this kind of pulcritude
rather then that; and partly because several of these aerial Spirits have
sustained the difference of Sex in this life, some of them here having been
Males, others Females: and therefore their History being to be continued from
their departure hence, they ought to retain some character, especially so
general a one, of what they were here. And it is very harsh to conceit that
AEneas should meet with Dido in the other World in any other form then that of
a Woman: whence a necessity of some slighter distinction of habits, and manner
of wearing their hair, will follow. Which dress, as that of the Masculine mode,
is easily fitted to them by the power of their Will and Imagination: as appears
from that Story out of Peramatus, of the Indian Monster that was born with
fleshy boots, girdle, purse, and other things that are no parts of a man, but
his clothing or utensils; and this merely by the Fancy of his Mother,
disturbed and frighted, either in sleep or awake, with some such ugly
appearance as that Monster resembled.

CHAP. IX.
1. A general account of the mutual entertains of the Genii in the other World.
2. Of their Philosophical and Political Conferences. 3. Of their Religious
Exercises. 4. Of the innocent Pastimes and Recreations of the better sort of
them. 5. A confirmation thereof from the Conventicles of Witches. 6. Whether
the purer Demons have their times of repast or no. 7. Whence the bad Genii
have their food. 8. Of the food and feastings of the better sort of Genii.

1. WE have now accurately enough defined in what form or garb the aerial Genii
converse with one another. It remains we consider how they mutually entertain
one another in passing away the time. Which is obvious enough to conceive, to
those that are not led aside into that blind Labyrinth which the generality of
men are kept in, of suspecting that no representation of the state of these
Beings is true, that is not so confounded and unintelligible that a man cannot
think it sense, unless he wink with the inward eyes of his Mind, and command
silence to all his Rational Faculties. But if he will but bethink himself, that
the immediate instrument of the Soul in this life is the Spirits, which are
very congenerous to the body of Angels; and that all our passions and
conceptions are either suggested from them, or impressed upon them; he cannot
much doubt but that all his Faculties of Reason, Imagination and Affection, for
the general, will be in him in the other state as they were here in this:
namely, that he will be capable of Love, of Joy, of Grief, of Anger; that he
will be able to imagine, to discourse, to remember, and the rest of such
operations as were not proper to the Fabric of this earthly Body, which is the
Officine of Death and Generation.

2. Hence it will follow, that the Souls of men deceaed, and the rest of the
aerial Demons, may administer much content to one another in mutual
Conferences concerning the nature of things, whether Moral, Natural, or
Metaphysical. For to think that the quitting the earthly Body entitles us to an
Omnisciency, is a Fable never enough to be laughed at. And Socrates, somewhere
in Plato, presages, that he shall continue his old Trade when he comes into the
other World; convincing and confounding the idle and vainglorious Sophists
wherever he went. And by the same reason Platonists, Aristotelians, Stoics,
Epicureans, and whatever other sects and humors are on the Earth, may in
likelihood be met with there, so far as that estate will permit; though they
cannot doubt of all things we doubt of here. For these aerial Spirits know that
themselves are, and that the Souls of men subsist and act after death, unless
such as are too deeply tinctured with Avenroism. But they may doubt whether
they will hold out for ever, or whether they will perish at the conflagration
of the World, as the Stoics would have them. It may be also a great
controversy amongst them, whether Pythagoras's or Ptolemies Hypothesis be true
concerning the Motion of the Earth; and whether the Stars be so big as some
define them. For these lower Demons have no better means then we to assure
themselves of the truth or falsehood of these Opinions. Besides the discourse of
News, of the affairs as well of the Earth as Air. For the aerial Inhabitants
cannot be less active then the terrestrial, nor less busy, either in the
performance of some solemn exercises, or in carrying on designs party against
party; and that either more Private or more Public; the events of which will
fill the aerial Regions with a quick spreading fame of their Actions. To say
nothing of prudential conjectures concerning future successes aforehand, and
innumerable other entertains of Conference, which would be too long to reckon
up, but bear a very near analogy to such as men pass away their time in here.

3. But of all Pleasures, there are none that are comparable to those that
proceed from their joint exercise of Religion and Devotion. For their Bodies
surpassing ours so much in tenuity and purity, they must needs be a fitter soil
for the Divinest thoughts to spring up in, and the most delicate and most
enravishing affections toward their Maker. Which being heightened by sacred
Hymns and Songs, sung with voices perfectly imitating the sweet passionate
relishes of the sense of their devout minds, must even melt their Souls into
Divine Love, and make them swim with joy in God. But these kinds of exercises
being so highly rapturous and ecstatical, transporting them beyond the ordinary
limits of their Nature, cannot in Reason be thought to be exceeding frequent;
but as a solemn Repast, after which they shall enjoy themselves better for a
good space of time after.

4. Wherefore there be other entertainments, which though they be of an
inferior nature to these, yet they far exceed the greatest pleasure and
contentments of this present state. For the Animal life being as essential to
the Soul as union with a Body, which she is never free from; it will follow
that there be some fitting gratifications of it in the other World. And none
greater can be imagined then Sociableness and Personal complacency, not only
in rational discourses, which is so agreeable to the Philosophical Ingeny, but
innocent Pastimes, in which the Musical and Amorous propension may be also
recreated. For these three dispositions are the flowr of all the rest, as
Plotinus has somewhere noted: And his reception into the other World is set out
by Apollo's Oracle, from some such like circumstances as these. -- (...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Of the meaning of which Verses that the Reader may not quite be deprived, I
shall render their sense in this careless paraphrase: Now the blessed meetings
thou arriv'st unto
Of th'airy Genii, where soft winds do blow,
Where Friendship, Love, and gentle sweet Desire
Fill their thrice-welcom guests with joys entire,
Ever supplied from that immortal spring
Whose streams pure Nectar from great Jove do bring:
Whence kind converse and amorous eloquence
Warm their chaste minds into the highest sense
Of Heavenly Love, whose myst'ries they declare
Midst the fresh breathings of the peaceful Air.
And he holds on, naming the happy company the Soul of Plotinus was to
associate with, viz. Pythagoras, Plato, and the purer Spirits of the Golden
Age, and all such as made up the Chorus of immortal Love and Friendship. These
sing, and play, and dance together, reaping the lawful pleasures of the very
Animal life, in a far higher degree then we are capable of in this World. For
every thing here does as it were taste of the cask, and has some coursness and
foulness with it. The sweet motions of the Spirits in the passion of Love can
very hardly be commanded off from too near bordering upon the shameful sense of
Lust; the Fabric of the terrestrial Body almost necessitating them to that
deviation. The tenderer Ear cannot but feel the rude thumpings of the wood, and
gratings of the rosin, the hoarsness, or some harshness and untunableness or
other, in the best consorts of Musical Instruments and Voices. The judicious
Eye cannot but espy some considerable defect in either the proportion, color,
or the air of the face, in the most famed and most admired beauties of either
Sex: to say nothing of the inconcinnity of their deportment and habits. But in
that other state, where the Fancy consults with that first Exemplar of Beauty,
Intellectual Love and Virtue, and the Body is wholly obedient to the
imagination of the Mind, and will to every Punctilio yield to the impresses of
that inward pattern; nothing there can be found amiss, every touch and stroke
of motion and Beauty being conveyed from so judicious a power through so
delicate and depurate a Medium. Wherefore they cannot but enravish one another
Souls, while they are mutual Spectators of the perfect pulcritude of one
another persons, and comely carriage, of their graceful dancing, their
melodious singing and playing, with accents so sweet and soft, as if we should
imagine the Air here of it self to compose Lessons, and send forth Musical
sounds without the help of any terrestrial Instrument. These, and such like
Pastimes as these, are part of the happiness of the best sort of the aerial
Genii.

5. Which the more certain knowledge of what is done amongst the inferior
Demons will further assure us of. For it is very probable that their
Conventicles, into which Witches and Wizzards are admitted, are but a depraved
adumbration of the friendly meetings of the superior Genii. And what Music,
Dancing and Feasting there is in these, the free confession of those Wretches,
or fortuitous detection of others, has made manifest to the World, viz. How
Humane and Angelical Beauty is transformed there into Bestial Deformity, the
chief in the company ordinarily appearing in the Figures of Satyrs, Apes,
Goats, or such like ugly Animals; how the comely deportments of Body, into
ridiculous gesticulations, perverse postures and antic dances; and how
innocuous love and pure friendship degenerates into the most brutish lust and
abominable obscenity that can be imagined: of which I will add nothing more,
having spoke enough of this matter in the Appendix to my Antidote Chap. 12.

6. What is most material for the present, is to consider, whether as the
Music and Dancing of these lower and more deeply-lapsed Demons, are a
distorted imitation of what the higher and more pure Demons do in their
Regions; so their Feasting may not be a perverted resemblance of the others
Banquetings also: that is to say, it is worth our enquiring into, whether they
do not eat and drink as well as these. For the rich amongst us must have their
repast as well as the poor, and Princes feed as well as Prisoners, though there
be a great difference in their diet. And I must confess, there is no small
difficulty in both, whence the good or bad Genii may have their food; though it
be easy enough to conceive that they may feed and refresh their Vehicles. For
supposing they do vitally actuate some particular portion of the Air that
they drive along with them, which is of a certain extent, it is most natural to
conceive, that partly by local motion, and partly by the activity of their
thoughts, they set some particles of their Vehicles into a more then usual
agitation, which being thus moved, scatter and perspire; and that so the
Vehicle lessens in some measure, and therefore admits of a recruite: which must
be either by formal repast, or by drawing in the crude Air only, which happily
may be enough; but it being so like it self always, the pleasure will be more
flat. Wherefore it is not improbable but that both may have their times of
Refection, for pleasure at least, if not necessity; which will be the greater
advantage for the Good, and the more exquisite misery for the Bad, they being
punishable in this regard also.

7. But, as I said, the greatest difficulty is to give a rational account
whence the bad Genii have their food, in their execrable feasts, so formally
made up into dishes. That the materials of it is a vaporous air, appears as
well from the faintness and emptiness of them that have been entertained at
those feasts, as from their forbidding the use of Salt at them, it having a
virtue of dissolving of all aqueous substances, as well as hindering their
congelation. But how the Air is molded up into that form and consistency, it
is very hard to conceive: whether it be done by the mere power of Imagination
upon their own Vehicles, first dabled in some humidities that are the fittest
for their design, which they change into these forms of Viands, and then
withdraw, when they have given them such a figure, color, and consistency,
with some small touch of such a sapour or tincture: or whether it be the
privilege of these AErial Creatures, by a sharp Desire and keen Imagination,
to pierce the Spirit of Nature, so as to awaken her activity, and engage her to
the completing in a moment, as it were, the full design of their own wishes,
but in such matter as the Element they are in is capable of, which is this
crude and vaporous Air; whence their food must be very dilute and flashie, and
rather a mockery then any solid satisfaction and pleasure.

8. But those Superior Demons, which inhabit that part of the Air that no
storm nor tempest can reach, need be put to no such shifts, though they may be
as able in them as the other. For in the tranquillity of those upper Regions,
that Promus-Condus of the Universe, the Spirit of Nature, may silently send
forth whole Gardens and Orchards of most delectable fruits and flowers, of an
aequilibrious ponderosity to the parts of the Air they grow in, to whose shape
and colors the transparency of these Plants may add a particular luster, as
we see it is in precious Stones. And the Chemists are never quiet till the heat
of their fancy have calcined and vitrified the Earth into a crystal-line
pellucidity, conceiting that it will be then a very fine thing indeed, and all
that then grows out of it: which desirable Spectacle they may happily enjoy in a
more perfect manner, whenever they are admitted into those higher Regions of
the Air. For the very Soil then under them shall be transparent, in which
they may trace the very Roots of the Trees of this Superior Paradise with
their eyes, and if it may not offend them, see this opake Earth through it,
bounding their sight with such a white splendor as is discovered in the full
Moon, with that difference of brightness that will arise from the distinction
of Land and Water; and if they will recreate their palats, may taste of such
Fruits, as whose natural juice will vie with their noblest Extractions and
Quintessences. For such certainly will they there find the blood of the Grape,
the rubie-coloured Cherries, and Nectarines. And if for the completing of the
pleasantness of these habitations, that they may look less like a silent and
dead solitude, they meet with Birds and Beasts of curious shapes and colors,
the single accents of whose voices are very grateful to the ear, and the
varying of their notes perfect musical harmony; they would do very kindly to
bring us word back of the certainty of these things, and make this more then a
Philosophical Conjecture. But that there may be Food and Feasting in those
higher aerial Regions, is less doubted by the Platonists; which makes Maximus
Tyrius call the Soul, when she has left the Body, (...) and the above cited
Oracle of Apollo describes the felicity of that Chorus of immortal Lovers he
mentions there, from feasting together with the blessed Genii, -- (...)
(...).
So that the Nectar and Ambrosia of the Poets may not be a mere fable. For the
Spirit of Nature, which is the immediate instrument of God, may enrich the
fruits of these AErial Paradises with such liquors, as being received into the
bodies of these purer Demons, and diffusing it self through their Vehicles,
may cause such grateful motions analogical to our taste, and excite such a more
then ordinary quickness in their minds, and benign cheerfulness, that it may
far transcend the most delicate Refection that the greatest Epicures could ever
invent upon Earth; and that without all satiety and burdensomeness, it filling
them with nothing but Divine Love, Joy, and Devotion.

CHAP. X.
1. How hard it is to define any thing concerning the AErial or Ethereal
Elysiums. 2. That there is Political order and Laws amongst these aerie
Demons. 3. That this Chain of Government reaches down from the highest
Ethereal Powers through the AErial to the very Inhabitants of the Earth. 4.
The great security we live in thereby. 5. How easily detectible and punishable
wicked Spirits are by those of their own Tribe. 6. Other reasons of the
security we find our selves in from the gross infestations of evil Spirits. 7.
What kind of punishments the AErial Officers inflict upon their Malefactors.

1. I Might enlarge my self much on this Subject, by representing the many
Concamerations of the AErial and Ethereal Elysiums, depainting them out in all
the variety of their Ornaments: but there is no prudence of being lavish of
ones pen in a matter so lubricous and Conjectural. Of the bare existence
whereof we have no other ground, then that otherwise the greatest part of the
Universe by infinite measure, and the most noble, would lie as it were
uncultivate, like a desert of Sand, wherein a man can spy neither Plant nor
living Creature. Which though it may seem as strange, as if Nature should have
restrained all the Varieties she would put forth to one contemptible Mole-hil,
and have made all the rest of the Earth one Homogeneal surface of dry clay or
stone, on which not one sprig of Grass, much less any Flower or Tree, should
grow, nor Bird nor Beast be found once to set their foot thereon: yet the
Spirits of us Mortals being too pusillanimous to be able to grapple with such
vast Objects, we must resolve to rest either ignorant, or skeptical, in this
matter.

2. And therefore let us consider what will more easily fall under our
comprehension, and that is the Polity of the aerie Demons. Concerning which,
that in general there is such a thing among them, is the most assuredly true in
it self, and of the most use to us to be persuaded of. To know their particular
orders and customs is a more needless Curiosity. But that they do lie under
the restraint of Government, is not only the opinion of the Pythagoreans (who
have even to the nicity of Grammatical Criticisme assigned distinct names to
the Law that belongs to these Three distinct ranks of Beings, (...) and (...),
calling the Law that belongs to the first (...), the second (...), and the
third (...)) but it is also the easy and obvious suggestion of ordinary Reason,
that it must needs be so, and especially amongst the AErial Genii in these
lower Regions, they being a mixed rabble of good and bad, wise and foolish, in
such a sense as we may say the Inhabitants of the Earth are so, and therefore
they must naturally fall under a Government, and submit to Laws, as well and
for the same reasons as Men do. For otherwise they cannot tolerably subsist,
nor enjoy what rights may some way or other appertain to them. For the Souls of
men deceased and the Demons, being endued with corporeal Sense, by Axiom 30.
and therefore capable of Pleasure and Pain, and consequently of both Injury and
Punishment, it is manifest, that having the use of Reason, they cannot fail to
mould themselves into some Political form or other; and so to be divided into
Nations and Provinces, and to have their Officers of State, from the King on
his Throne to the very lowest and most abhorred Executioners of Justice.

3. Which invisible Government is not circumscribed within the compass of the
aerie Regions, but takes hold also on the Inhabitants of the Earth, as the
Government of Men does on several sorts of brute Beasts, and the Ethereal
Powers also have a Right and Exercise of Rule over the AErial. Whence nothing
can be committed in the World against the more indispensable Laws thereof, but
a most severe and inevitable punishment will follow: every Nation, City, Family
and Person, being in some manner the Peculium, and therefore in the tutelage,
of some invisible Power or other, as I have above intimated.

4. And such Transgressions as are against those Laws without whose observance
the Creation could not subsist, we may be assured are punished with Torture
intolerable, and infinitely above any Pleasure imaginable the evil Genii can
take in doing of those of their own Order, or us Mortals, any mischief. Whence
it is manifest that we are as secure from their gross outrages (such as the
firing of our houses, the stealing away our jewels, or more necessary Utensils,
murdering our selves or children, destroying our cattle, corn, and other things
of the like sort,) as if they were not in rerum natura. Unless they have some
special permission to act, or we our selves enable them by our rash and
indiscreet tampering with them, or suffer from the malice of some person that
is in league with them. For their greatest liberty of doing mischief is upon
that account; which yet is very much limited, in that all these Actions must
pass the consent of a visible person, not hard to be discovered in these
unlawful practices, and easy to be punished by the Law of Men.

5. And the AErial Genii can with as much ease inflict punishment on one
another, as we Mortals can apprehend, imprison, and punish such as transgress
against our Laws. For though these Demons be invisible to us, yet they are not
so to their own Tribe: nor can the activity and subtilty of the Bad over-master
the Good Commonwealthsmen there, that uphold the Laws better then they are
amongst us. Nor may the various Transfiguration of their shapes conceal their
persons, no more then the disguises that are used by fraudulent men. For they
are as able to discern what is fictitious from what is true and natural amongst
themselves, as we are amongst our selves. And every AErial Spirit being part of
some Political subdivision, upon any outrage committed, it will be an easy
matter to hunt out the Malefactor. No Demon being able so to transfigure
himself, but upon command he will be forced to appear in his natural and usual
form, not daring to deny upon examination to what particular Subdivision he
belongs. Whence the easy discovery of their miscarriages, and certainty of
insupportable torment, will secure the World from all the disorder that some
scrupulous wits suspect would arise from this kind of Creatures, if they were
in Being.

6. To which we may add also, That what we have, is useless to them, and that
it is very hard to conceive that there are many Rational Beings so degenerate
as to take pleasure in ill, when it is no good to themselves. That Socrates his
Aphorism, (...), may be in no small measure true in the other World, as well as
in this. That all that these evil Spirits desire, may be only our lapse into
as great a degree of Apostasy from God as themselves, and to be full partakers
with them of their false Liberty; as debauched persons in this life love to
make Proselytes, and to have respect from their Nurslings in wickedness. And
several other Considerations there are that serve for the taking away this
Panick fear of the incursations and molestations of these aerial Inhabitants,
and might further silence the suspicious Atheist; which I willingly omit,
having said more then enough of this Subject already. See Cap. 3. Sect. 7, 8.

7. If any be so curious, as to demand what kind of Punishment this People of
the Air inflict upon their Malefactors, I had rather refer them to the
Fancies of Cornelius Agrippa, De Occult. Philosoph. Lib. 3. Cap. 41. then be
laughed at my self for venturing to descend to such particularities. Amongst
other things he names their Incarceration, or confinement to most vile and
squalid Habitations. His own words are very significant: Accedunt etiam
vilissimorum ac teterrimorum locorum habitacula, ubi AEtnaei ignes, aquarum
ingluvies, fulgurum and tonitruorum concussus, terrarum voragines, ubi Regio
lucis inops, nec radiorum Solis capax, ignaraque splendoris syderum, perpetuis
tenebris and noctis specie caligat. Whence he would make us believe, that the
subterraneous caverns of the Earth are made use of for Dungeons for the wicked
Demons to be punished in: as if the several Volcano's, such as AEtna,
Vesuvius, Hecla, and many others, especially in America, were so many Prisons
or houses of Correction for the unruly Genii. That there is a tedious restraint
upon them upon villainies committed, and that intolerable, is without all
question; they being endued with corporeal Sense, and that more quick and
passive then ours, and therefore more subject to the highest degrees of
torment. So that not only by incarcerating them, and keeping them in by a
watch, in the caverns of burning Mountains, where the heat of those infernal
Chambers and the steam of Brimstone cannot but excruciate them exceedingly, but
also by commanding them into sundry other Hollows of the ground, noisome by
several fumes and vapors, they may torture them in several fashions and
degrees, fully proportionable to the greatest crime that is in their power to
commit, and far above what the cruellest Tyranny has inflicted here, either
upon the guilty or innocent. But how these Confinements and Torments are
inflicted on them, and by what Degrees and Relaxations, is a thing neither easy
to determine, nor needful to understand. Wherefore we will surcease from
pursuing any further so unprofitable a Subject, and come to the Third general
Head we mentioned, which is, What the Moral condition of the Soul is when she
has left this Body.

CHAP. XI.
1. Three things to be considered before we come to the moral condition of the
Soul after death: namely, her Memory of transactions in this life. 2. The
peculiar feature and individual Character of her AErial Vehicle. 3. The
Retainment of the same Name. 4. How her ill deportment here lays the train of
her Misery hereafter. 5. The unspeakable torments of Conscience worse then
Death, and not to be avoided by dying. 6. Of the hideous tortures of external
sense on them, whose searedness of Conscience may seem to make them incapable
of her Lashes. 7. Of the state of the Souls of the more innocent and
conscientious Pagans. 8. Of the natural accruments of After-happiness to the
morally good in this life. 9. How the Soul enjoys her actings or sufferings in
this Life for an indispensable Cause, when she has passed to the other. 10.
That the reason is proportionably the same in things of less consequence. 11.
What mischief men may create to themselves in the other world by their Zealous
mistakes in this. 12. That though there were no Memory after Death, yet the
manner of our Life here may sow the seeds of the Souls future happiness or
misery.

1. FOR the better solution of this Question, there is another first in nature
to be decided; namely, Whether the Soul remembers any thing of this Life after
Death. For Aristotle and Cardan seem to deny it; but I do not remember any
reasons in either that will make good their Opinion. But that the contrary is
true, appears from what we have already proved Lib. 2. Cap. 11. viz. That the
immediate seat of Memory is the Soul her self, and that all Representations
with their circumstances are reserved in her, not in the Spirits (a thing which
Vaninus himself cannot deny) nor in any part of the Body. And that the Spirits
are only a necessary Instrument whereby the Soul works; which while they are
too cool and gross and waterish, Oblivion creeps upon her, in that measure that
the Spirits are thus distempered; but the disease being chased away, and the
temper of the Spirits rectified, the Soul forthwith recovers the memory of what
things she could not well command before, as being now in a better state of
Activity. Whence, by the 33. Axiom, it will follow, that her Memory will be
rather more perfect after Death, and Conscience more nimble to excuse or accuse
her according to her Deeds here.

2. It is not altogether beside the purpose to take notice also, That the
natural and usual Figure of the Souls AErial Vehicle bears a resemblance with
the feature of the party in this life; it being most obvious for the Plastic
part (at the command of the Will to put forth into personal shape) to fall as
near to that in this life as the new state will permit. With which act the
Spirit of Nature happily does concur, as in the figuration of the Foetus; but
with such limits as becomes the AErial Congruity of life, of which we have
spoke already: as also how the proper Idea or Figure of every Soul (though it
may deflect something by the power of the Parents Imagination in the act of
Conception, or Gestation, yet) may return more near to its peculiar semblance
afterward, and so be an unconcealable Note of Individuality.

3. We will add to all this, the Retainment of the same Name which the
deceased had here, unless there be some special reason to change it: so that
their persons will be as punctually distinguished and circumscribed as any of
ours in this life. All which things, as they are most probable in themselves,
that they will thus naturally fall out, so they are very convenient for
administration of Justice, and keeping of Order in the other State.

4. These things therefore premised, it will not be hard to conceive how the
condition of the Soul after this life depends on her Moral deportment here. For
Memory ceasing not, Conscience may very likely awake more furiously then ever;
the Mind becoming a more clear Judge of evil Actions past, then she could be in
the Flesh, being now stripped of all those circumstances and concurrences of
things that kept her off from the opportunity of calling her self to account,
or of perceiving the ugliness of her own ways. Besides, there being that
communication betwixt the Earth and the Air, that at least the fame of things
will arrive to their cognoscence that have left this life; the after ill
success of their wicked enterprises and unreasonable transactions may arm their
tormenting Conscience with new whips and stings, when they shall either hear,
or see with their eyes, what they have unjustly built up, to run with shame to
ruin, and behold all their designs come to naught, and their fame blasted upon
Earth.

5. This is the state of such Souls as are capable of a sense of dislike of
their pastactions: and a man would think they need no other punishment then
this, if he consider the mighty power of the Mind over her own Vehicle, and
how vulnerable it is from her self. These Passions therefore of the Soul that
follow an ill Conscience, must needs bring her aerie body into intolerable
distempers, worse then Death it self. Nor yet can she die if she would, neither
by fire, nor sword, nor any means imaginable; no not if she should fling her
self into the flames of smoking AEtna. For suppose she could keep her self so
long there, as to endure that hideous pain of destroying the vital Congruity of
her Vehicle by that sulphurous fire; she would be no sooner released, but she
would catch life again in the Air, and all the former troubles and vexations
would return, besides the overplus of these pangs of Death. For Memory would
return, and an ill Conscience would return, and all those busy Furies, those
disordered Passions which follow it. And thus it would be, though the Soul
should kill her self a thousand and a thousand times; she could but pain and
punish her self, not destroy her self.

6. But if we could suppose some men's Consciences seared in the next state as
well as this, (for certainly there are that make it their business to
obliterate all sense of difference of Good and Evil out of their minds; and
hold it to be an high strain of wit (though it be nothing else but a piece of
bestial stupidity) to think there is no such thing as Vice and Virtue, and that
it is a principal part of perfection, to be so degenerate as to act according
to this Principle without any remorse at all;) these men may seem to have an
excellent privilege in the other world, they being thus armour-proof against
all the fiery darts of that domestic Devil: As if the greatest security in the
other life were, to have been completely wicked in this. But it is not out of
the reach of mere Reason and Philosophy to discover, that such bold and
impudent wretches as have lost all inward sense of Good and Evil, may there
against their wills feel a lash in the outward. For the divine Nemesis is
excluded out of no part of the Universe; and Goodness and Justice, which they
contemn here, will be acquainted with them in that other state, whether they
will or no* I speak of such course Spirits that can swallow down Murder,
Perjury, Extortion, Adultery, Buggery, and the like gross crimes, without the
least disgust, and think they have a right to satisfy their own Lust, though it
be by never so great injury against their Neighbor. If these men should carry
it with impunity, there were really no Providence, and themselves were the
truest Prophets and faithfullest Instructers of mankind, divulging the choicest
Arcanum they have to impart to them, namely That there is no God. But the case
stands quite otherwise. For whether it be by the importunity of them they
injure in this life, who may meet with them afterward, as Cardan by way of
objection suggests in his Treatise of this Subject; or whether by a general
desertion by all of the other world that are able to protect, (such Monsters as
I describe being happily far less in proportion to the number of the other state,
then these here are to this;) they will be necessarily exposed to those grim
and remorsless Officers of Justice, who are as devoid of all sense of what is
good as those that they shall punish. So that their penalty shall be inflicted
from such as are of the same principles with themselves, who watch for such
booties as these, and when they can catch them, dress them and adorn them
according to the multifarious petulancy of their own unaccountable humors; and
taking a special pride and pleasure in the making and seeing Creatures
miserable, fall upon their prey with all eagerness and alacrity, as the hungry
Lions on a condemned malefactor, but with more ferocity and insultation by
far. For having more wit, and, if it be possible, less goodness then the Soul
they thus assault, they satiate their lascivient cruelty with all manner of
abuses and torments they can imagine, giving her only so much respite as will
serve to receive their new inventions with a fresher smart and more distinct
pain. Neither can any Reason or Rhetoric prevail with them, no Expostulation,
Petition or Submission. For to what purpose can it be, to expostulate about
injury and violence with them whose deepest reach of wit is to understand this
one main Principle, That every ones Lust, when he can act with impunity, is the
most sacred and sovereign Law? Or what can either Petitions or Submissions do
with those who hold it the most contemptible piece of fondness and filliness
that is, to be entreated to recede from their own Interest? And they
acknowledging no such thing as Virtue and Vice, make it their only interest to
please themselves in what is agreeable to their own desires: and their main
pleasure is, to excruciate and torture, in the most exquisite ways they can,
as many as Opportunity delivers up to their power. And thus we see how, in the
other life, the proud conceited Atheist may at last feel the sad inconvenience
of his own Practices and Principles. For even those that pleased themselves in
helping him forward, while he was in this life, to that high pitch of
wickedness, may happily take as much pleasure to see him punished by those grim
Executioners, in the other. Like that sportful cruelty (which some would
appropriate to Nero's person) of causing the Vestal virgins to be ravished, and
then putting them to death for being so.

7. But this Subject would be too tedious and too Tragical to insist on any
longer. Let us cast our eyes therefore upon a more tolerable Object; and that
is The state of the Soul that has, according to the best opportunity she had of
knowledge, lived virtuously and conscientiously, in what part or Age of the
world soever. For though this Moral Innocence amongst the Pagans will not
amount to what our Religion calls Salvation; yet it cannot but be advantageous
to them in the other state, according to the several degrees thereof; they
being more or less Happy or Miserable, as they have been more or less Virtuous
in this life. For we cannot imagine why God shoud be more harsh to them in the
other world then in this, nothing having happened to them to alienate his
affection but Death; which was not in their power to avoid, and looks more like
a punishment then a fault: though it be neither to those that are well-meaning
and conscientious, and not professed contemners of the wholesome suggestions of
the light of Nature, but are lovers of Humanity and Virtue. For to these it is
only an entrance into another life, -- Ad amoena vireta
Fortunatorum nemorum, sedesque beatas,
Which Truth I could not conceal, it being a great prejudice to Divine
Providence to think otherwise. For to those that are free, her ways will seem
as unintelligible in overloading the simple with punishment, as in not
rewarding the more perfectly righteous and illuminate. For from a fault in
either they will be tempted to a misbelief of the whole, and hold no Providence
at all.

8. Let there therefore be peculiar privileges of Morality, every where, to
those that pass into the other State. For unless God make a stop on purpose, it
will naturally follow, that Memory after Death suggesting nothing but what the
Conscience allows of, much Tranquillity of mind must result from thence, and a
certain health and beauty of the AErial Vehicle; also better Company and
Converse, and more pleasant Tracts and Regions to inhabit. For what Plotinus
speaks of the extreme degrees, Ennead. 4. Lib. 4. Cap. 45. is also true of the
intermediate, else Divine Justice would be very maime. For a man, says he,
having once appropriated to himself a pravity of temper, and united with it, is
known well what he is; and according to his nature is thrust forward to what he
propends to, both here, and departed hence, and so shall be pulled by the
drawings of Nature into a suitable place. But the Good man his Receptions and
Communications shall be of another sort, by the drawing as it were of certain
hidden strings transposed and pulled by Natures own fingers. So admirable is
the power and order of the Universe, all things being carried on in a silent
way of Justice, which none can avoid, and which the wicked man has no
perception nor understanding of, but is drawn, knowing nothing whither in the
Universe he ought to be carried. But the good man both knows and goes whither
he ought, and discerns before he departs hence where he must inhabit, and is
full of hopes that it shall be with the Gods. This large Paragraph of Plotinus
is not without some small Truth in it, if rightly limited and understood; but
seems not to reach at all the Circumstances and accruments of happiness to the
Soul in the other State, which will naturally follow her from her transactions
in this life.

9. For certainly, according to the several degrees of Benignity of Spirit, and
the desire of doing good to mankind in this life, and the more ample
opportunities of doing it, the felicity of the other World is redoubled upon
them; there being so certain communication and intercourse betwixt both. And
therefore they that act or suffer deeply in such Causes as God will maintain in
the World, and are just and holy at the bottom, (and there are some Principles
that are indispensably such, which Providence has countenanced both by
Miracles, the suffrages of the Wisest men in all Ages, and the common voice of
Nature) those that have been the most Heroical Abetters and Promoters of these
things in this life, will naturally receive the greater contentment of Mind
after it, being conscious to themselves how seriously they have assisted what
God will never desert, and that Truth is mighty, and must at last prevail;
which they are better assured of out of the Body, then when they were in it.

10. Nor is this kind of access of Happiness to be confined only to our
furtherance of what is of the highest and most indispensable consideration
here, but in proportion touches all transactions that proceed from a virtuous
and good principle, whereof there are several degrees: amongst which those may
not be esteemed the meanest that refer to a National good. And therefore those
that, out of a natural generosity of Spirit and successful fortitude in War,
have delivered their Country from bondage, or have been so wise and
understanding in Politics, as to have contrived wholesome Laws for the greater
happiness and comfort of the People, while such a Nation prospers and is in
being, it cannot but be an accrument of happiness to these so considerable
Benefactors, unless we should imagine them less generous and good in the other
World, where they have the advantage of being Better. And what I have said in
this more notable instance, is in a degree true in things of smaller
concernment, which would be infinite to rehearse. But whole Nations, with their
Laws and Orders of Men, and Families may fail, and therefore these accessions
be cut off; but he that lays out his pains in this life, for the carrying on
such designs as will take place so long as the World endures, and must have a
complete Triumph at last, such a one lays a train for an everlasting advantage
in the other World, which, in despite of all the tumblings and turnings of
unsettled fortune, will be sure to take effect.

11. But this matter requires Judgment as well as Heat and Forwardness. For
pragmatical Ignorance, though accompanied with some measure of Sincerity and
wellmeaning, may set a-foot such things in the World, or set upon record such
either false, or impertinent and unseasonable, Principles, as being made ill
use of, may very much prejudice the Cause one desires to promote; which will be
a sad spectacle for them in the other State. For though their simplicity may be
pardonable, yet they will not fail to find the ill effect of their mistake
upon themselves. As he that kills a friend in stead of an enemy, though he may
satisfy his Conscience that rightly pleads his innocence, yet he cannot avoid
the sense of shame and sorrow that naturally follows so mischievous an error.

12. Such accruencies as these there may be to our enjoyments in the other
World, from the durable traces of our transactions in this, if we have any
Memory of things after Death, as I have already demonstrated that we have. But
if we had not, but Aristotle's and Cardan's Opinion were true, yet Virtue and
Piety will not prove only useful for this present state. Because according to
our living here, we shall hereafter, by a hidden concatenation of Causes, be
drawn to a condition answerable to the purity or impurity of our Souls in this
life: that silent Nemesis that passes through the whole contexture of the
Universe, ever fatally contriving us into such a state as we our selves have
fitted our selves for by our accustomary actions. Of so great consequence is
it, while we have opportunity, to aspire to the best things.

CHAP. XII.
1. What the Spirit of Nature is. 2. Experiments that argue its real Existence;
such as that of two strings tuned Unisons. 3. Sympathetick Cures and Tortures.
4. The Sympathy betwixt the Earthly and Astral Body. 5. Monstrous Births. 6.
The Attraction of the Loadstone and Roundness of the Sun and Stars.

1. WE had now quite finished our Discourse, did I not think it convenient to
answer a double expectation of the Reader. The one is touching the Spirit of
Nature, the other the producing of Objections that may be made against our
concluded Assention of the Souls Immortality. For as for the former, I can
easily imagine he may well desire a more punctual account of that Principle I
have had so often recourse to, then I have hitherto given, and will think it
fit that I should somewhere more fully explain what I mean by the terms, and
show him my strongest grounds why I conceive there is any such Being in the
World. To hold him therefore no longer in suspense, I shall do both in this
place. The Spirit of Nature therefore, according to that notion I have of it,
is, A substance incorporeal, but without Sense and Animadversion, pervading the
whole Matter of the Universe, and exercising a plastical power therein
according to the sundry predispositions and occasions in the parts it works
upon, raising such Phenomenon in the World, by directing the parts of the
Matter and their Motion, as cannot be resolved into mere Mechanical powers.
This rude Description may serve to convey to any one a conception determinate
enough of the nature of the thing. And that it is not a mere Notion, but a real
Being, besides what I have occasionally hinted already (and shall here again
confirm by new instances) there are several other considerations may persuade
us.

2. The first whereof shall be concerning those experiments of Sympathetick
Pains, Asswagements and Cures, of which there are many Examples, approved by
the most scrupulous Pretenders to sobriety and judgment, and of all which I
cannot forbear to pronounce, that I suspect them to come to pass by some such
power as makes strings that be tuned Unisons (though on several Instruments)
the one being touched, the other to tremble and move very sensibly, and to cast
off a straw or pin or any such small thing laid upon it. Which cannot be
resolved into any Mechanical Principle, though some have ingeniously gone about
it. For before they attempted to show the reason, why that string that is not
Unison to that which is struck should not leap and move, as it does that is,
they should have demonstrated, that by the mere Vibration of the Air that
which is Unison can be so moved; for if it could, these Vibrations would not
fail to move other Bodies more movable by far then the string it self that is
thus moved. As for example, if one hung loose near the string that is struck a
small thread of silk or an hair with some light thing at the end of it, they
must needs receive those reciprocal Vibrations that are communicated to the
Unison string at a far greater distance, if the mere motion of the material
Air caused the subsultation of the string tuned Unison. Which yet is contrary
to experience. Besides that, if it were the mere Vibration of the Air that
caused this tremor in the Unison string, the effect would not be considerable,
unless both the strings lay well-nigh in the same Plane, and that the Vibration
of the string that is struck be made in that Plane they both lie in. But let
the string be struck so as to cut the Plane perpendicularly by its tremulous
excursions, or let both the strings be in two several Planes at a good distance
above one another, the event is much-what the same, though the Air cannot
rationally be conceived to vibrate backwards and forwards, but well-nigh in the
very Planes wherein the strings are moved. All which things do clearly show,
that pure corporeal causes cannot produce this effect: and that therefore we
must suppose, that both the strings are united with some one incorporeal Being,
which has a different Unity and Activity from Matter, but yet a Sympathy
therewith; which affecting this immaterial Being, makes it affect the Matter in
the same manner in another place, where it does symbolize with that other in
some predisposition or qualification, as these two strings do in being tuned
Unisons to one another: and this, without sending any particles to the Matter
it does thus act upon; as my thought of moving of my Toe being represented
within my Brain, by the power of my Soul I can, without sending Spirits into my
Toe, but only by making use of them that are there, move my Toe as I please,
by reason of that Unity and Activity that is peculiar to my Soul as a spiritual
substance that pervades my whole Body. Whence I would conclude also, that there
is some such Principle as we call the Spirit of Nature, or the Inferior Soul
of the World, into which such Phenomenon as these are to be resolved.

3. And I account Sympathetick Cures, Pains and Asswagements to be such. As for
example, when in the use of those Magnetic Remedies, as some call them, they
can make the wound dolorously hot or chill at a great distance, or can put it
into perfect case, this is not by any agency of emissary Atoms. For these hot
Atoms would cool sufficiently in their progress to the party through the frigid
air; and the cold Atoms, if they could be so active as to dispatch so far,
would be warm enough by their journey in the Summer Sun. The inflammations also
of the Cowes Udder by the boiling over of the milk into the fire, the scalding
of men's entrails at a distance by the burning of their excrements, with other
pranks of the like nature, these cannot be rationally resolved into the
recourse of the Spirits of Men or Kine mingled with fiery Atoms, and so
re-entring the parts thus affected, because the minuteness of those toms argues
the suddainness of their extinction, as the smallest wires made red hot soonest
cool. To all which you may add that notable example of the Wines working when
the Vines are in the flower, and that this sympathetick effect must be from the
Vines of that country from which they came: whence these exhalations of the
Vineyards must spread as far as from Spain and the Canaries to England, and by
the same reason must reach round about every way as far from the Canaries,
besides their journey upwards into the Air. So that there will be an
Hemisphere of vineall Atoms of an incredible extent, unless they part
themselves into trains, and march only to those places whither their Wines are
carried. But what corporeal cause can guide them thither? Which question may be
made of other Phenomenon of the like nature. Whence again it will be necessary
to establish the Principle I drive at, though the effects were caused by the
transmission of Atoms.

4. The notablest examples of this Mundane Sympathy are in histories more
uncertain and obscure, and such as, though I have been very credibly informed
yet, as I have already declared my self, I dare only avouch as possible, viz.
the Souls of men leaving their Bodies, and appearing in shapes suppose of Cats,
Pigeons, Wezels, and sometimes of Men, and that whatever hurt befalls them in
these Astral bodies, as the Paracelsians love to call them, the same is
inflicted upon their Terrestrial lying in the mean time in their beds or on the
ground. As if their Astral bodies be scalded, wounded, have the back broke, the
same certainly happens to their Earthly bodies. Which things if they be true,
in all likelihood they are to be resolved into this Principle we speak of, and
that the Spirit of Nature is snatched into consent with the imagination of the
Souls in these Astral bodies or aerie Vehicles. Which act of imagining must
needs be strong in them, it being so set on and assisted by a quick and sharp
pain and fright in these scaldings, woundings, and strokes on the back; some
such thing happening here as in women with child, whose Fancies made keen by a
sudden fear, have deprived their children of their arms, yea and of their
heads too, as also appears by two remarkable stories Sr. Kenelme Digby relates
in his witty and eloquent Discourse of the Cure of Wounds by the powder of
Sympathy, besides what we have already recited out of Helmont. See Lib. 2. Cap.
15. Sect. 8, 9, 10.

5. Which effects I suppose to be beyond the power of any humane Fancy
unassisted by some more forceable Agent; as also that prodigious birth he
mentions of a woman of Carcassona, who by her overmuch sporting and pleasing
her self with an Ape while she was with Child, brought forth a Monster exactly
of that shape. And if we should conclude with that learned Writer, that it was
a real Ape, it is no more wonderful, nor so much, as that birth of a Crabfish
or Lobster we have above mentioned out of Fortunius Licetus; as we might also
other more usual, though no less monstrous births for the wombs of women to
bear. Of which the Soul of the Mother cannot be suspected to be the cause, she
not so much as being the efformer of her own Foetus, as that judicious
Naturalist Dr. Harvey has determined. And if the Mothers Soul could be the
efformer of the Foetus, in all reason her Plastic power would be ever
particular and specific as the Soul it self is particular. What remains
therefore but the universal Soul of the World or Spirit of Nature that can do
these feats? who, Vertumnus like, is ready to change his own Activity and the
yielding matter into any mode and shape indifferently as occasion engages him,
and so to prepare an edifice, at least the more rude strokes and delineaments
thereof, for any specific Soul whatsoever, and in any place where the Matter
will yield to his operations. But the time of the arrival thither of the
particular guest it is intended for, though we cannot say how soon it is, yet
we may be sure it is not later then a clear discovery of Sensation as well as
Vegetation and organization in the Matter.

6. The Attraction of the Lodestone seems to have some affinity with these
instances of Sympathy. This mystery Descartes has explained with admirable
artifice as to the immediate corporeal causes thereof, to wit, those wreathed
particles which he makes to pass certain screw-pores in the Lodestone and
Iron. But how the efformation of these particles is above the reach of the mere
mechanical powers in Matter, as also the exquisite direction of their motion,
whereby they make their peculiar Vortex he describes about the Earth from Pole
to Pole, and thread an incrustated Star, passing in a right line in so long a
journey as the Diameter thereof without being swung to the sides; how these
things, I say, are beyond the powers of Matter, I have fully enough declared
and proved in a large Letter of mine to V. C. and therefore that I may not
actum agere, shall forbear speaking any farther thereof in this place. To which
you may add, that mere corporeal motion in Matter, without any other guide,
would never so much as produce a round Sun or Star, of which figure
notwithstanding Descartes acknowledges them to be. But my reasons why it
cannot be effected by the simple Mechanical powers of Matter, I have
particularly set down in my Letters to that excellent Philosopher.

CHAP. XIII.
1. That the Descent of heavy Bodies argues the existence of the Spirit of
Nature, because else they would either hang in the Air as they are placed, 2.
Or would be diverted from a perpendicular as they fall near a Plate of Metal
set stooping. 3. That the endeavor of the Ether or Air from the Center to
the Circumference is not the cause of Gravity, against Mr. Hobbs. 4. A full
confutation of Mr. Hobbs his Opinion. 5. An ocular Demonstration of the absurd
consequence thereof. 6. An absolute Demonstration that Gravity cannot be the
effect of mere Mechanical powers. 7. The Latitude of the operations of the
Spirit of Nature, how large and where bounded. 8. The reason of its name. 9.
Its grand office of transmitting Souls into rightly-prepared Matter.

1. AND a farther confirmation that I am not mistaken therein, is what we daily
here experience upon Earth, which is the descending of heavy Bodies, as we call
them. Concerning the motion whereof I agree with Descartes in the assignation
of the immediate corporeal cause, to wit, the AEtherial matter, which is so
plentifully in the Air over it is in grosser Bodies; but withal do vehemently
surmise, that there must be some immaterial cause, such as we call the Spirit
of Nature or Inferior Soul of the World, that must direct the motions of the
AEtherial particles to act upon these grosser Bodies to drive them toward the
Earth. For that surplusage of Agitation of the globular particles of the Ether
above what they spend in turning the Earth about, is carried every way
indifferently, according to his own concession; by which motion the drops of
liquors are formed into round figures, as he ingeniously concludes. From whence
it is apparent, that a bullet of iron, silver or gold placed in the air is
equally assalted on all sides by the occursion of these ethereal particles,
and therefore will be moved no more downwards then upwards, but hang in
aequilibrio, as a piece of Cork rests on the water, where there is neither
wind nor stream, but is equally played against by the particles of water on
all sides.

2. Nor is it imaginable how the occursions of this ethereal Element here
against the surface of the Earth, being it is so fluid a Body, should make it
endeavor to lift it self from the Earth at so great a distance as the middle
Region of the Air and further. Besides, that this is not the cause of the
descent of heavy Bodies is manifest, because then a broad Plate of the most
solid Metal and most perfectly polisht, such as is able to reflect the
ethereal particles most efficaciously, being placed slooping would change the
course of the descent of things, and make them fall perpendicularly to it, and
not to the Plane of the Horizon; as for example, not from A to B, but from A to
C: which is against experience. For the heavy Body will always fall down from A
to B, though the recession of the ethereal Matter must needs be from C to A
according to this Hypothesis.

3. Nor can the endeavor of the celestial Matter from the center to the
circumference take place here. For besides that Descartes, the profoundest
Master of Mechanics, has declined that way himself (though Mr. Hobbs has taken
it up,) it would follow, that near the Poles of the Earth there would be no
descent of heavy Bodies at all, and in the very Clime we live in none
perpendicular. To say nothing how this way will not salve the union of that
great Water that adheres to the body of the Moon.

4. But to make good what I said, by undeniable proof that heavy Bodies in the
very Clime where we live will not descend perpendicularly to the Earth, if Mr.
Hobbs his solution of the Phenomenon of Gravity be true; we shall evidently
demonstrate both to the Eye and to Reason the proportion of their declination
from a perpendicular in any Elevation of the Pole. In the Circle therefore A B
D, let the Equator be B D, and from the point C draw a line to E, parallel to
B D: which line C E will cut the circle in F 60. degrees, suppose, from B.
Imagine now a heavy Body at E; according to Mr. Hobbs his solution of the
Problem of Gravity, it must fall toward the Earth in a line parallel to the
Equator, viz. in the line E F; which, say I, declines from the line H F drawn
perpendicular to the Horizon L K two third parts of a right angle, that is to
say, 60. degrees. For the E F H is equal to G F R, which again is equal to the
alternate angle B G F, which is two third parts of a right angle ex thesi.
Whence it is plain that E F declines from a perpendicular no less then 60.
degrees. By the same reason, if we had drawn the Scheme for the elevation of
50. which is more Southern then our Clime, we might demonstrate that the
descent of heavy Bodies declines from a perpendicular to the Horizon 50
degrees, or 5/9 of a right angle, and so of the rest. From whence it will
follow, that men cannot walk upright, but declining, in the elevation suppose
of 60. degrees, as near to the ground as E F is to F L, and much nearer in the
more remote parts of the North, as in Norway, Russia, Frisland, Island,
Scricfinnia, Greenland and others; and there is proportionably the same reason
in other Climes less Northern. So that Mr. Hobbs need not send us so far off
as to the Poles to make the experiment.

5. For if for example we drew a Scheme for the Parallel under which we live,
suppose about 52. degrees of Elevation, we might represent truly to the eye in
what posture men would walk at London or Cambridge, according to Mr. Hobbs his
determination of the causes of Gravity. For it is plain from what has been
above demonstrated, that the natural posture of their Bodies upon the Horizon L
K would be in the line E F, out of which if they did force themselves toward
the perpendicular H F, it would be much pain to them, neither could they place
themselves in the line H F, without being born headlong to the ground, and laid
flat upon the Horizon F K; the force of the Air or whatever more subtle
Elements therein pressing in lines parallel to E F, and therefore necessarily
bearing down whatever is placed loose in the line H F, as is plain to any one
at first sight. But we finding no such thing in experience, it is evident that
Mr. Hobbs his solution is salse; nay I may say that he has not rendered so much
as a possible cause of this so ordinary a Phenomenon. A thing truly much to be
lamented in one who, upon pretense that all the Appearances in the Universe may
be resolved into mere Corporeal causes, has with unparalleled confidence, and
not without some wit, derided and exploded all immaterial Substance out of the
World; whenas in the mean time he does not produce so much as possible
Corporeal causes of the most ordinary effects in Nature. But to leave Mr. Hobbs
to his own ways, and to return to Descartes.

6. Add unto all this, that if the motion of gross Bodies were according to
mere Mechanical laws, a Bullet, suppose of Lead or Gold, cast up into the air,
would never descend again, but would persist in a rectilinear motion. For it
being far more solid then so much Air and Ether put together as would fill
its place, and being moved with no less swiftness then that wherewith the Earth
is carried about in twenty four hours, it must needs break out in a straight
line through the thin air, and never return again to the Earth, but get away
as a Comet does out of a Vortex. And that de facto a Canon Bullet has been shot
so high that it never fell back again upon the ground, Descartes does admit of
as a true experiment. Of which, for my own part, I can imagine no other
unexceptionable reason, but that at a certain distance the Spirit of Nature in
some regards leaves the motion of Matter to the pure laws of Mechanics, but
within other bounds checks it, whence it is that the Water does not swill out
of the Moon.

7. Now if the pure Mechanic powers in Matter and Corporeal motion will not
amount to so simple a Phenomenon as the falling of a stone to the Earth, how
shall we hope they will be the adaequate cause of sundry sorts of Plants and
other things, that have far more artifice and curiosity then the direct
descent of a stone to the ground. Nor are we beaten back again by this
discovery into that dotage of the confounded Schools, who have endued almost
every different Object of our Senses with a distinct Substantial form, and then
puzzle themselves with endless scrupulosities about the generation, corruption,
and mixtion of them. For I affirm with Descartes, that nothing affects our
Senses, but such variations of Matter as are made by difference of Motion,
Figure, Situation of parts, etc. but I dissent from him in this, in that I hold
it is not mere and pure mechanical motion that causes all these sensible
Modifications in Matter, but that many times the immediate Director thereof is
this Spirit of Nature (I speak of) one and the same every where, and acting
always alike upon like occasions, as a clear-minded man and of a solid
judgment gives always the same verdict in the same circumstances. For this
Spirit of Nature intermedling with the efformation of the Foetus of Animals (as
I have already shown more then once) where notwithstanding there seems not so
much need, there being in them a more particular Agent for that purpose; it is
exceeding rational that all Plants and Flowers of all sorts (in which we have
no argument to prove there is any particular Souls) should be the effects of
this Universal Soul of the World. Which Hypothesis, besides that it is most
reasonable in it self, according to that ordinary Axiom, Frustra fit per plura
quod fieri potest per pauciora, is also very serviceable for the preventing
many hard Problems about the Divisibility of the Souls of Plants, their
Transmutations into other Species, the growing of Slips, and the like. For
there is one Soul ready every where to pursue the advantages of prepared
Matter. Which is the common and only (...) of all Plantal appearances, or of
whatever other Phenomenon there be, greater or smaller, that exceed the pure
Mechanical powers of Matter. We except only Men and Beasts, who having all of
them the capacity of some sort of enjoyments or other, it was fit they should
have particular Souls for the multiplying of the sense of those enjoyments
which the transcendent Wisdom of the Creator has contrived.

8. I have now plainly enough set down what I mean by the Spirit of Nature, and
sufficiently proved its Existence. Out of what has been said may be easily
conceived why I give it this name, it being a Principle that is of so great
influence and activity in the Nascency as I may so call it, and Coalescency of
things: And this not only in the production of Plants, with all other
Concretions of an inferior nature, and yet above the mere Mechanical laws of
Matter; but also in respect of the birth of Animals, whereunto it is
preparatory and assistent. I know not whether I may entitle it also to the
guidance of Animals in the chiefest of those actions which we usually impute to
natural Instinct. Amongst which none so famous as the Birds making their Nests,
and particularly the artificial structure of the Martins nests under the arches
of Church-windowes. In which there being so notable a design unknown to
themselves, and so small a pleasure to present Sense, it looks as if they were
actuated by another, inspired and carried away in a natural rapture by this
Spirit of Nature to do they know not what, though it be really a necessary
provision and accommodation for laying their Eggs, and hatching their young, in
the efformation whereof this Inferior Soul of the World is so rationally
conceived to assist and intermeddle: and therefore may the better be supposed
to overpower the Fancy, and make use of the members of the Birds to build
these convenient Receptacles, as certain shops to lay up the Matter whereon she
intends to work, namely the Eggs of these Birds whom she thus guides in making
of their nests.

9. But this argument being too lubricous, I will not much insist upon it. The
most notable of those offices that can be assigned to the Spirit of Nature, and
that sutably to his name, is the Translocation of the Souls of Beasts into such
Matter as is most fitting for them, he being the common Proxenet or Contractor
of all natural Matches and Marriages betwixt forms and matter, if we may also
speak Metaphors as well as Aristotle, whose Aphorism it is, that Materia
appetit formam ut foemina virum. This Spirit therefore may have not only the
power of directing the motion of Matter at hand, but also of transporting of
particular Souls and Spirits in their state of Silence and Inactivity to such
Matter as they are in a fitness to catch life in again. Which Transportation or
Transmission may very well be at immense distances, the effect of this Sympathy
and Coactivity being so great in the working of Wines, as has been above noted,
though a thing of less concernment. Whence, to conclude, we may look upon this
Spirit of Nature as the great Quartermaster-General of divine Providence, but
able alone, without any Underofficers, to lodge every Soul according to her
rank and merit whenever she leaves the Body: And would prove a very serviceable
Hypothesis for those that fancy the praeexistence of humane Souls; to declare
how they may be conveyed into Bodies here, be they at what distance they will
before; and how Matter happily may be so fitted, that the best of them may be
fetched from the purest ethereal Regions into an humane Body, without serving
any long Apprentiship in the intermediate Air: as also how the Souls of
Brutes, though the Earth were made perfectly inept for the life of any Animal,
need not lie for ever useless in the Universe. But such speculations as these
are of so vast a comprehension and impenetrable obscurity, that I cannot have
the confidence to dwell any longer thereon; especially they not touching so
essentially our present design, and being more fit to fill a volume themseves,
then to be comprised within the narrow limits of my now almost-finish'd
Discourse.

CHAP. XIV.
1. Objections against the Souls Immortality from her condition in Infancy, Old
age, Sleep and Sicknesses. 2. Other Objections taken from Experiments that seem
to prove her Discerpibility. 3. As also from the seldom appearing of the Souls
of the deceased; 4. And from our natural fear of Death. 5. A Subterfuge of the
adverso party, in supposing but one Soul common to all Creatures. 6. An Answer
concerning the Littleness of the Soul in Infancy: 7. As also concerning the
weakness of her Intellectuals then, and in Old age. 8. That Sleep does not at
all argue the Souls Mortality, but rather illustrate her Immortality. 9. An
Answer to the Objection from Apoplexies and Catalepsies: 10. As also to that
from Madness. 11. That the various depravations of her Intellectual Faculties
do no more argue her Mortality, then the worser Modifications of Matter its
natural Annihilability. And why God created Souls sympathizing with Matter.

1. AS for the Objections that are usually made against the Immortality of the
Soul; to propound them all, were both tedious and useless, there being scarce
above one in twenty that can appear of any moment to but an indifferent Wit and
Judgment. But the greatest difficulties that can be urged I shall bring into
play, that the Truth we do maintain may be the more fully cleared, and the
more firmly believed. The most material Objections that I know against the
Souls Immortality, are these five. The First is from the consideration of the
condition of the Soul in Infancy, and Old age, as also in Madness, Sleep, and
Apoplexies. For if we do but observe the great difference of our Intellectual
operations in Infancy and Dotage from what they are when we are in the prime of
our years, and how that our Wit grows up by degrees, flourishes for a time, and
at last decays, keeping the same pace with the changes that Age and Years
bring into our Body, which observes the same laws that Flowers and Plants;
what can we suspect, but that the Soul of Man, which is so magnificently
spoken of amongst the learned, is nothing else but a Temperature of Body, and
that it grows and spreads with it, both in bigness and virtues, and withers
and dies as the Body does, or at least that it does wholly depend on the Body
in its Operations, and therefore that there is no sense nor perception of any
thing after death? And when the Soul has the best advantage of years, she is
not then exempted from those Eclipses of the powers of the Mind that proceed
from Sleep, Madness, Apoplexies, and other Diseases of that nature. All which
show her condition, whatever more exalted Wits surmise of her, that she is but
a poor mortal and corporeal thing.

2. The Second Objection is taken from such Experiments as are thought to prove
the Soul divisible in the grossest sense, that is to say, discerpible into
pieces. And it seems a clear case in those more contemptible Animals which are
called Insects, especially the (...), as Aristotle describes them, and does
acknowledge that being cut into pieces, each segment will have its motion and
sense apart to it self. The most notable Instance of this kind is in the
Scolopendra, whose parts Aristotle (Histor. Animal. Lib. 4. Cap. 7.) affirms
to live a long time divided, and to run backwards and forwards; and therefore
he will have it to look like many living Creatures growing together, rather
then one single one, (...). De Juvent. and Senect. Cap. 2. But yet he will not
afford them the privilege of Plants, whose Slips will live and grow, being set
in the Earth. But the instances that belong to this Objection ascend higher,
for they pretend that the parts of perfect Animals will also live asunder.
There are two main instances thereof. The one, that of the Eagle Fromondus
mentions, whose head being chopped off by an angry Clown, for quarrelling with
his dog, the Body flew over the barn near the place of this rude execution.
This was done at Fromondus his fathers house: nor is the story improbable, if
we consider what ordinarily happens in Pigeons and Ducks, when their heads are
cut off. The other instance is, of a Malefactor beheaded at Antwerp, whose
head when it had given some few jumps into the crowd, and a Dog fell a licking
the blood, caught the Dogs ear in its teeth, and held it so fast, that he
being frighted ran away with the man's head hanging at his ear, to the great
astonishment and confusion of the people. This was told Fromondus by an
eyewitness of the fact. From which two examples they think may be safely
inferred, that the Souls of Men, as well as of the more perfect kind of
Brutes, are also discerpible. That example in the same Author out of Josephus
Acosta, if true, yet is finally to this purpose. For the speaking of the
sacrificed Captive, when his Heart was cut out, may be a further confirmation
indeed that the Brain is the Seat of the Common Sense, but no argument of the
Divisibility of the Soul, she remaining at that time entire in the Body, after
the cutting out of the Heart, whose office it is to afford Spirits, which were
not so far yet dissipated, but that they sufficed for that sudden operation of
life.

3. The Third Objection is from the seldom appeara^ce of the Souls of the
deceased. For if they can at all appear, why do they not oftener? if they never
appear, it is a strong suspicion that they are not at all in Being.

4. The Fourth is from the Fear of Death, and an inward down-bearing sense in
us at some times, that we are utterly mortal, and that there is nothing to be
expected after this life.

5. The Fifth and last is rather a Subterfuge then an Objection, That there is
but One Common Soul in all Men and Beasts, that operates according to the
variety of Animals and Persons it does actuate and vivificate, bearing a
seeming particularity according to the particular pieces of Matter it enforms,
but is one in all; and that this particularity of Body being lost, this
particular Man or Beast is lost, and so every living creature is properly and
entirely mortal. These are the reallest and most pertinent Objections I could
ever meet withal, or can excogitate, concerning the Souls Immortality: to
which I shall answer in order.

6. And to the First, which seems to be the shrewdest, I say, that neither the
Contractedness of the Soul in Infancy, nor the Weakness of her Intellectual
Operations either then or in extreme Old age, are sufficient proofs of her
Corporeity or Mortality. For what wonder is it that the Soul, fallen into this
low and fatal condition, where she must submit to the course of Nature, and the
laws of other Animals that are generated here on Earth, should display her
self by degrees, from smaller dimensions to the ordinary size of men; whenas
this faculty of contracting and dilating of themselves is in the very essence
and notion of all Spirits? as I have noted already Lib. 1. Cap. 5. So she does
but that leisurely and naturally now, being subjected to the laws of this
terrestrial Fate, which she does, exempt from this condition, suddenly and
freely: not growing by Juxta-position of parts, or Intromission of Matter, but
enlarging of her self with the Body merely by the dilatation of her own
Substance, which is one and the same always.

7. As for the Debility of her Intellectuals in Infancy and Old age, this
consideration has less force to evince her a mere corporeal essence then the
former, and touches not our Principles at all, who have provided for the very
worst surmise concerning the operations of the Mind, in acknowledging them, of
my own accord, to depend very intimately on the temper and tenor of the Souls
immediate instrument, the Spirits; which being more torpid and watery in
Children and Old men, must needs hinder her in such operations as require
another constitution of Spirits then is usually in Age and Childhood: though I
will not profess my self absolutely confident, that the Soul cannot act
without all dependence on Matter. But if it does not, which is most probable,
it must needs follow, that its Operations will keep the laws of the Body it is
united with. Whence it is demonstrable how necessary Purity and Temperance is
to preserve and advance a man's Parts.

8. As for Sleep, which the dying Philosopher called the Brother of Death, I
do not see how it argues the Souls Mortality, more then a man's inability to
wake again: but rather helps us to conceive, how that though the stounds and
agonies of Death seem utterly to take away all the hopes of the Souls living
after them; yet upon a recovery of a quicker Vehicle of Air, she may suddenly
awake into fuller and fresher participation of life then before. But I may
answer also, that Sleep being only the ligation of the outward Senses, and the
interception of motion from the external world, argues no more any radical
defect of Life and Immortality in the Soul, then the having a man's Sight
bounded within the walls of his chamber by Shuts, does argue any blindness in
the immured party: who happily is busy reading by candlelight, and that with
ease, so small a print as would trouble an ordinary Sight to read it by day.
And that the Soul is not perpetually employed in sleep, is very hard for any
to demonstrate; we so often remembering our dreams merely by occasions, which if
they had not occurred, we had never suspected we had dreamed that night.

9. Which Answer, as also the former, is applicable to Apoplexies, Catalepsies,
and whatever other Diseases partake of their nature, and witness how nimble the
Soul is to act upon the suppeditation of due Matter, and how Life and Sense
and Memory and Reason, and all return, upon return of the fitting temper of the
Spirits, suitable to that vital Congruity that then is predominant in the Soul.

10. And as for Madness, there are no Apprehensions so frantic but are
arguments of the Souls Immortality, not as they are frantic, but as
Apprehensions. For Matter cannot apprehend any thing, either wildly or soberly,
as I have already sufficiently demonstrated. And it is as irrational for a man
to conclude, that the depraved Operations of the Soul argue her Mortality, as
that the worser tempers, or figures, or whatever more contemptible
modifications there are of Matter, should argue its annihilation by the mere
power of Nature; which no man that understands himself will ever admit. The
Soul indeed is endued with several Faculties, and some of them very fatally
passive, such as those are that have the nearest commerce with Matter, and are
not so absolutely in her own power, but that her levity and mindlesness of the
divine light may bring her into subjection to them; as all are, in too sad a
sort, that are incarcerate in this terrestrial Body, but some have better luck
then other some in this wild and audacious ramble from a more secure state. Of
which Apostasy if there be some that are made more tragic examples then others
of their straggling from their sovereign Happiness, it is but a merciful
admonition of the danger we all have incurred, by being where we are; and very
few so well escaped, but that if they could examine their Desires, Designs, and
Transactions here, by that Truth they were once masters of, they would very
freely confess, that the mistakes and errors of their life are not inferior
to, but of worse consequence then, those of natural Fools and Madmen, whom all
either hoot at for their folly, or else lament their misery. And questionless
the Souls of Men, if they were once reduced to that sobriety they are capable
of, would be as much ashamed of such Desires and Notions they are now wholly
engaged in, as any madman, reduced to his right Senses, is of those freaks he
played when he was out of his wits.

11. But the variety of degrees, or kinds of depravation in the Intellective
faculties of the Soul, her Substance being indiscerpible, cannot at all argue
her Mortality, no more then the different modifications of Matter the
Annihilability thereof, as I have already intimated. Nor need a man trouble
himself how there should be such a Sympathy betwixt Body and Soul, when it is
so demonstrable that there is. For it is sufficient to consider, that it is
their immediate nature so to be by the will and ordinance of Him that has made
all things. And that if Matter has no Sense nor Cogitation it self, as we have
demonstrated it has not, it had been in vain, if God had not put forth into
Being that Order of immaterial Creatures which we call Souls, vitally unitable
with the Matter: Which therefore, according to the several modifications
thereof, will necessarily have a different effect upon the Soul, the Soul
abiding still as unperishable as the Matter that is more mutable then she. For
the Matter is dissipable, but she utterly indiscerpible.

CHAP. XV.
1. An Answer to the experiment of the Scolopendra cut into pieces. 2. And to
the flying of an headless Eagle over a barn, as also to that of the
Malefactors head biteing a Dog by the ear. 3. A superaddition of a difficulty
concerning Monsters born with two or more Heads and but one Body and Heart. 4.
A solution of the difficulty. 5. An answer touching the seldom appearing of
the Souls of the deceased: 6. As also concerning the fear of Death; 7. And a
down-bearing sense that sometimes so forcibly obtrudes upon us the belief of
the Souls Mortality. 8. Of the Tragical Pomp and dreadful Praeludes of Death,
with some corroborative Considerations against such sad spectacles. 9. That
there is nothing really sad and miserable in the Universe, unless to the wicked
and impious.

1. NOR do those Instances in the second Objection prove any thing to the
contrary, as if the Soul it self were really divisible. The most forcible
Example is that of the Scolopendra, the motion of the divided parts being so
quick and nimble, and so lasting. But it is easy to conceive, that the activity
of the Spirits in the Mechanical conformation of the pieces of that Insect,
till motion has dissipated them, will as necessarily make them run up and down,
as Gunpowder in a squib will cause its motion. And therefore the Soul of the
Scolopendra will be but in one of those Segments, and uncertain in which, but
likely according as the Segments be made. For cut a Wasps head off from the
Body, the Soul retires out of the head into the Body; but cut her in the wast,
leaving the upper part of the Body to the head, the Soul then retires into
that forepart of the Wasp. And therefore it is no wonder that the head being
cut off, the Body of the Wasp will fly and flutter so long, the Soul being
still in it, and happily conferring to the direction of the Spirits for motion,
not out of Sense, but from custom or nature: as we walk not thinking of it, or
play of the Lute though our mind be running on something else, as I have noted
before. But when the wast is left to the head, it is less wonder, for then the
Animal may not be destitute of sense and fancy, to conveigh the Spirits to move
the wings.

2. The former case will fit that of the headless Eagle that flew over the
Barn. But the man's head that caught the Dog by the ear would have more
difficulty in it (it not seeming so perfectly referrible to the latter case of
the Wasp) did not we consider how hard the teeth will set in a swoon. As this
Head therefore was gasping while the Dog was licking the blood thereof, his ear
chanced to dangle into the mouth of it, which closing together as the ear hung
into it, pinched it so fast that it could not fall off. Besides it is not
altogether improbable, especially considering that some men die upwards, and
some downwards, that the Soul may, as it happens, sometimes retire into the
Head, and sometimes into the Body, in these decollations, according as they are
more or less replenisht with Spirits, and by the lusty jumping of this Head, it
should seem it was very full of them. Many such things as these also may happen
by the activity of the Spirit of Nature, who, its like, may be as busy in the
ruins of Animals, while the Spirits last, as it is in the fluid rudiments of
them when they are generated. But the former answers being sufficient, it is
needless to enlarge our selves upon this new Theme.

3. To this second Objection might have been added such monstrous births, as
seem to imply the Perceptive part of the Soul divided actually into two or more
parts. For Aristotle seems expressly to affirm, De Generat. Animal. Lib. 4. Cap.
4. that that monstrous birth that has two hearts is two Animals, but that which
has but one heart is but one. From whence it will follow that there is but one
Soul also in that one-hearted Monster, though it have two or more heads; whence
it is also evident, that the Perceptive part of that one Soul must be actually
divided into two or more. This opinion of Aristotle Sennertus subscribes to,
and therefore conceives that that monstrous child that was borne at Emmaus, in
Theodosius his time, with two heads and two hearts, was two persons; but that
other borne Anno 1531. with two heads and but one heart, who lived till he was
a man, was but one person. Which he conceives appears the plainer, in that both
the heads professed their agreement perpetually to the same actions, in that
they had the same appetite, the same hunger and thirst, spoke alike, had the
same desire to lie with their wife, and of all other acts of exonerating
nature. But for that other that had two hearts, and was divided to the Navel,
there was not this identity of affection and desire, but sometimes one would
have a mind to a thing, and sometimes another, sometimes they would play with
one another, and sometimes fight. See Sennert. Epitom. Scient. Natural. Lib. 6.
Cap. 1.

4. But I answer, and first to Aristotle's authority, that he does not so
confidently assert, that every Monster that has but one heart is but one
Animal. For his words run thus; (...). Where he only speaks hypothetically,
not peremptorily, that the Heart is that part where the first Principle of life
is, and from which the rest of life in Soul or Body is to be derived. For
indeed he makes it elsewhere the seat of Common Sense, but that it is a mistake
we have already demonstrated, and himself seems not confident of his own
Opinion; and therefore we may with the less offense decline it, and affirm (and
that without all hesitancy) that a Monster is either one or more Animals
according to the number of the heads of it, and that there are as many distinct
Souls as there are heads in a monstrous Birth. But from the heads downwards the
Body being but one, and the heart but one, that there must needs be a wonderful
exact concord in the sense of affections in these heads, they having their
Blood and Spirits from one fountain, and one common seat of their passions and
desires. But questionless whenever one head winked, he could not then see by
the eyes of the other; or if one had pricked one of these heads, the other
would not have felt it: though whatever was inflicted below, it is likely they
both felt alike, both the Souls equally acting the Body of this Monster, but
the heads being actuated by them only in several. Which is a sufficient answer
to Sennertus.

5. The weakness of the third Objection is manifest, in that it takes away the
Existence of all Spirits, as well as the Souls of the deceased. Of whose Being
notwithstanding none can doubt that are not dotingly incredulous. We say
therefore that the Souls of men, being in the same condition that other Spirits
are, appear sometimes, though but seldom. The cause in both being, partly the
difficulty of bringing their Vehicles to an unnatural consistency, and partly
they having no occasion so to do, and lastly it being not permitted to them to
do as they please, or to be where they have a mind to be.

6. As for the Fear of Death, and that down-bearing sense that sometimes so
uncontroulably suggests to us that we are wholly mortal: To the first I answer,
that it is a necessary result of our union with the Body, and if we should
admit it one of the imperfections or infirmities we contract by being in this
state, it were a solid Answer. And therefore this fear and presage of ill in
Death is no argument that there is any ill in it, nor any more to be heeded
then the predictions of any fanatical fellow that will pretend to prophecy.
But besides this, it is fitting that there should be in us this fear and
abhorrency, to make us keep this station Providence has placed us in; otherwise
every little pet would invite us to pack our selves out of this World, and try
our fortunes in the other, and so leave the Earth to be inhabited only by
Beasts, whenas it is to be ordered and cultivated by Men.

7. To the second I answer, that such peremptory conclusions are nothing but
the impostures of Melancholy, or some other dull and fulsome distempers of
blood that corrupt the Imagination; but that Fancy proves nothing, by Axiom 4.
And that though the Soul enthroned in her Ethereal Vehicle be a very
magnificent thing, full of Divine Love, Majesty and Tranquillity; yet in this
present state she is inclogg'd and accloy'd with the foulness and darkness of
this Terrestrial Body, she is subject to many fears and jealousies, and other
disturbing passions, whose Objects though but a mockery, yet are a real
disquiet to her mind in this her Captivity and Imprisonment. Which condition
of hers is lively set out by that incomparable Poet and Platonist, AEneid. 6.
where, comparing that more free and pure state of our Souls in their celestial
or fiery Vehicles with their restraint in this earthly Dungeon, he makes this
short and true description of the whole matter. Igneus est ollis, vigor, and
coelestis origo
Seminibus; quantu^ non noxia corpora tardant,
Terrenique hebetant artus, moribundaque membra:
Hinc metuunt, cupiuntque, dolent, gaudentque, nec auras
Recipient, claust tenebris and carcere caeco.


To this sense, A fiery vigor from an heavenly source
Is in these seeds, so far as the dull force
Of noxious Bodies does not them retard,
In heavy earth and dying limbs imbar'd.
Hence, fooled with fears, foul lusts, sharp grief, vain joy,
In this dark Gaol they low and grovelling lie,
Nor with one glance of their oblivious mind
Look back to that free Air they left behind.
This is the sad estate of the more deeplylapsed Souls upon Earth; who are so
wholly mastered by the motions of the Body, that they are carried headlong into
an assent to all the suggestions and imaginations that it so confidently
obtrudes upon them; of which that of our mortality is not the weakest. But such
melancholy fancies, that would bear us down so peremptorily that we are
utterly extinct in death, are no more argument thereof, then those of them that
have been persuaded they were dead already, while they were alive; and
therefore would not eat, because they thought the dead never take any repast,
till they were cheated into an appetite, by seeing some of their friends
disguised in winding-sheets feed heartily at the table, whose example then they
thought fit to follow, and so were kept alive.

8. I cannot but confess that the Tragic pomp and preparation to dying, that
lays wast the operations of the mind, putting her into fits of dotage or
fury, making the very visage look ghastly and distracted, and at the best sadly
pale and consumed, as if Life and Soul were even almost quite extinct, cannot
but imprint strange impressions even upon the stoutest mind, and raise
suspicions that all is lost in so great a change. But the Knowing and Benign
Spirit though he may flow in tears at so dismal a Spectacle, yet it does not at
all suppress his hope and confidence of the Souls safe passage into the other
world; and is no otherwise moved then the more passionate Spectatours of some
cunningly-contrived Tragedy, where persons whose either Virtue, or misfortunes,
or both, have won the affection of the beholders, are at last seen wallowing
in their blood, and after some horrid groans and gasps, lie stretched stark dead
upon the stage: but being once drawn off, find themselves well and alive, and
are ready to taste a cup of wine with their friends in the attiring room, to
solace themselves really, after their fictitious pangs of death, and leave the
easy-natur'd multitude to indulge to their soft passions for an evil that never
befell them.

9. The fear and abhorrency therefore we have of Death, and the sorrow that
accompanies it, is no argument but that we may live after it, and are but due
affections for those that are to be spectatours of the great Tragick-Comedy of
the World; the whole plot whereof being contrived by infinite Wisdom and
Goodness, we cannot but surmise that the most sad representations are but a
show, but the delight real to such as are not wicked and impious; and that what
the ignorant call Evil in this Universe is but as the shadowy strokes in a fair
picture, or the mournful notes in Music, by which the beauty of the one is
more lively and express, and the melody of the other more pleasing and melting.

CHAP. XVI.
1. That that which we properly are is both Sensitive and Intellectual. 2. What
is the true notion of a Soul being One. 3. That if there be but One Soul in
the world, it is both Rational and Sensitive. 4. The most favorable
representation of their Opinion that hold but One. 5. A confutation of the
foregoing representation. 6. A Reply to the confutation. 7. An answer to the
Reply. 8. That the Soul of Man is not properly any Ray either of God or the
Soul of the World. 9. And yet if she were so, it would be no prejudice to her
Immortality: whence the folly of Pomponatius is noted. 10. A further
animadversion upon Pomponatius his folly, in admitting a certain number of
remote Intelligencies, and denying Particular Immaterial Substances in Men and
Brutes.

1. AS for the last Objection, or rather Subterfuge, of such as have no mind
to find their Souls immortal, pretending indeed they have none distinct from
that one Universal Soul of the World, whereby notwithstanding they acknowledge
that the operations we are conscious to our selves of, of Reason and other
Faculties, cannot be without one; we shall easily discover either the falsness
or unserviceableness of this conceit for their design, who would so fain slink
out of Being, after the mad freaks they have played in this Life. For it is
manifestly true, that a man is most properly that, whatever it is, that
animadverts in him; for that is such an operation that no Being but himself can
do it for him. And that which animadverts in us does not only perceive and
take notice of its Intellectual and Rational operations, but of all Sensations
whatsoever that we are conscious of, whether they terminate in our Body or on
some outward Object. From whence it is plain, that That which we are is both
Sensitive and Intellectual.

2. Now if we rightly consider what is comprehended in the true and usual
notion of the Unity of a Soul, it is very manifest that the Animadversive
thereof is but one, and that there is no Sensation nor Perception of any kind
in the Soul, but what is communicated to and perceived by the whole
Animadversive.

3. Which things being premised, it necessarily follows, that if there be but
one Soul in the World, that Soul is both Rational and Sensitive, and that
there cannot be any Pain, Pleasure or Speculation, in one man's Soul, but the
same would be in all, nay that a man cannot lash a Dog, or spur a Horse, but
himself would feel the smart of it: which is flatly against all experience, and
therefore palpably false. Of this wild Supposition I have spoken so fully in
my Poems, that I need add nothing here in this place, having sufficiently
confuted it there.

4. But not to cut them so very short, let us imagine the most favorable
contrivance of their opinion we can, and conceit that though this Soul of the
World be of it self every where alike, and that the Animadversive faculty is in
it all in like vigor; yet it being engaged in severally-tempered Bodies,
Animadversion is confined to that part of Matter only which it actuates, and
is stupid and unsensible of all other operations, whether Sensitive or
Intellectual, that are transacted by her without, in other persons: a thing
very hard to conceive, and quite repugnant to the Idea of the Unity of a Soul,
not to be conscious to her self of her own perceptions. But let it pass for a
possibility, and let us suppose that one part of the Soul of the World informs
one man, and another another, or at least some vital Ray there, yet
notwithstanding, this opinion will be encumbered with very harsh difficulties.
For if several parts of the Soul of the World inform several parts of the
Matter, when a man changes his place, he either tears one part of the Soul of
the World from another, or else changes Souls every step; and therefore it is a
wonder that he changes not his Wits too, and loses his Memory. Unless they will
say that every part of the Soul of the World, upon the application of a new
Body, acts just so in it as that part acted which it left, if there be no
change or alteration thereof: whence every part of the Soul of the World will
have the self-same Thoughts, Errors, Truths, Remembrances, Pains, Pleasures,
that the part had the Body newly left. So that a man shall always fancy it is
himself, wherever he goes, though this self be nothing but the Soul of the
World acting in such a particular Body, and retaining and renewing to her self
the Memory of all Accidents, Impressions, Motions and Cogitations, she had the
perception of in this particular piece of organized Matter. This is the most
advantageous representation of this Opinion that can possibly be excogitated.
But I leave it to those that love to amuse themselves in such mysteries, to try
if they can make any good sense of it.

5. And he that can fancy it as a thing possible, I would demand of him, upon
this supposition, who himself is; and he cannot deny but that he is a Being
Perceptive and Animadversive, which the Body is not, and therefore that himself
is not the Body; wherefore he is that in him which is properly called Soul: But
not its Operations, for the former reason; because they perceive nothing, but
the Soul perceives them in exerting them: nor the Faculties, for they perceive
not one another Operations; but that which is a man's Self perceives them all:
Wherefore he must say he is the Soul; and there being but one Soul in the
World, he must be forced to vaunt himself to be the Soul of the World. But this
boasting must suddenly fall again, if he but consider that the Soul of the
World will be every man's personal Ipseity as well as his; whence every one man
will be all men, and all men but one Individual man: which is a perfect
contradiction to all the Laws of Metaphysics and Logic.

6. But reminded of these inconveniences, he will pronounce more cautiously,
and affirm that he is not the Soul of the World at large, but only so far
forth as she expedites or exerts her self into the Sense and Remembrance of all
those Notions or Impresses that happen to her, wherever she is joined with his
Body; but that so soon as this Body of his is dissipated and dissolved, that
she will no longer raise any such determinate Thoughts or Senses that refer
to that Union, and that so the Memory of such Actions, Notions and Impressions,
that were held together in relation to a particular Body, being lost and laid
aside upon the failing of the Body to which they did refer, this Ipseity or
Personality which consisted mainly in this, does necessarily perish in death.
This certainly is that (if they know their own meaning) which many Libertines
would have, who are afraid to meet themselves in the other World, for fear they
should quarrel with themselves there for their transactions in this. And it is
the handsomest Hypothesis that they can frame in favor of themselves, and
far beyond that dull conceit, That there is nothing but mere Matter in the
World; which is infinitely more liable to confutation.

7. And yet this is too scant a covering to shelter them and secure them from
the sad after-claps they may justly suspect in the other life. For first, it is
necessary for them to confess that they have in this life as particular and
proper sense of Torment, of Pleasure, of Peace, and Pangs of Conscience, and of
other impressions, as if they had an individual Soul of their own distinct from
that of the World, and from every ones else; and that if there be any Demons
or Genii, as certainly there are, that it is so with them too. We have also
demonstrated, that all Sense and Perception is immediately excited in the Soul
by the Spirits; wherefore with what confidence can they promise themselves that
the death of this earthly Body will quite obliterate all the tracts of their
Being here on earth? whenas the subtiler ruins thereof, in all likelihood, may
determine the Thoughts of the Soul of the World to the same tenor as before,
and draw from her the memory of all the Transactions of this life, and make her
exercise her judgment upon them, and cause her to contrive the most vital
exhalations of the terrestrial Body into an aerial Vehicle, of like nature with
the ferment of these material rudiments of life, saved out of the ruins of
death. For any slight touch is enough to engage her to perfect the whole Scene,
and so a man shall be represented to himself and others in the other state,
whether he will or no; and have as distinct a personal Ipseity there as he had
in this life. Whence it is plain, that this false Hypothesis, That we are
nothing but the Soul of the World acting in our Bodies, will not serve their
turns at all that would have it so; nor secure them from future danger, though
it were admitted to be true. But I have demonstrated it false already, from the
notion of the Unity of a Soul. Of the truth of which Demonstration we shall be
the better assured, if we consider that the subtle Elements, which are the
immediate conveyers of Perceptions in our Souls, are continued throughout in
the Soul of the World, and insinuate into all living Creatures. So that the
Soul of the World will be necessarily informed in every one, what she thinks or
feels every where, if she be the only Soul that actuates every Animal upon
Earth.

8. That other conceit, of our Souls being a Vital Ray of the Soul of the
World, may gain much countenance by expressions in ancient Authors that seem to
favor the Opinion: as that of Epictetus, who says that the Souls of men are
(...). And Philo calls the Mind of Man, (...) and Trismegist, (...). All which
expressions make the Soul of man a Ray or Beam of the Soul of the World or of
God. But we are to take notice that they are but Metaphorical phrases, and that
what is understood thereby, is, that there is an emanation of a secondary
substance from the several parts of the Soul of the World, resembling the Rays
of the Sun. Which way of conception, though it be more easy then the other, yet
it has difficulties enough. For this Vital Ray must have some head from whence
it is stretched, and so the Body would be like a Bird in a string, which would
be drawn to a great length when one takes long voyages, suppose to the East or
West Indies. Or if you will not have it a linear Ray, but an Orb of particular
life; every such particular Orb must be hugely vast, that the Body may not
travel out of the reach of the Soul. Besides, this Orb will strike through
other Bodies as well as its own, and its own be in several parts of it; which
are such incongruities and inconcinnities as are very harsh and unpleasing to
our Rational faculties. Wherefore that notion is infinitely more neat and safe,
that proportions the Soul to the dimensions of the Body, and makes her
independent on any thing but the Will of her Creator; in which respect of
dependence she may be said to be a Ray of him, as the rest of the Creation
also; but in no other sense that I know of, unless of likeness and similitude,
she being the Image of God, as the Rays of Light are of the Sun.

9. But let every particular Soul be so many Rays of the Soul of the World,
what gain they by this, whenas these Rays may be as capable of all the several
congruities of life, as the Soul is in that sense we have described? and
therefore Personality, Memory and Conscience will as surely return or continue
in the other state, according to this Hypothesis, as the other more usual one.
Which also discovers the great folly of Pomponatius (and of as many as are of
the same leven with him) who indeed is so modest and judicious as not to deny
Apparitions, but attributes all to the influence of the Stars, or rather the
Intelligencies of the Celestial Orbs. For they giving life and animation to
brute Animals, why may they not also, upon occasion, animate and actuate the
Air into shape and form, even to the making of them speak and discourse one
shape with another? For so Pomponatius argues in his Book of the Immortality of
the Soul, from Aquinas his concession, that Angels and Souls separate may
figure the Air into shape, and speak through it; Quare igitur Intelligentiae
moventes corpora coelestia haec facere non possunt cum suis instrumentis quae
tot ac tanta possunt quae faciunt Psittacos, Picos, Corvos and Merulas, loqui?
And a little after, he plainly reasons from the power the Intelligencies have
of generating Animals, that it is not at all strange that they should raise
such kind of Apparitions as are recorded in History. But if these Celestial
Intelligencies be confined to their own Orbs, so as that no secondary Essence
reach these inferior Regions, it is impossible to conceive how they can
actuate the Matter here below. But if there be any such essential emanations
from them, whereby they actuate the Matter into these living Species we see in
the World, of Men and Brutes; nothing hinders but the same emanations
remaining, may actuate the Air when this earthly fabric fails, and retain the
memory of things transacted in this life, and that still our Personality will
be conserved as perfect and distinct as it was here.

10. But this conceit of Pomponatius is far more foolish then theirs that
make only one Anima Mundi that passes through all the Matter of the World, and
is present in every place, to do all feats that there are to be done. But to
acknowledge so many several Intellectual Beings as there be fancied Celestial
Orbs, and to scruple, or rather to seem confident, that there are not so many
particular Souls as there be Men here on Earth, is nothing but Humor and
Madness. For it is as rational to acknowledge eight hundred thousand Myriads of
Intellectual and Immaterial Beings, really distinct from one another, as eight;
and an infinite number, as but one, that could not create the Matter of the
World. For then two Substances, wholly independent on one another, would be
granted, as also the Infinite parts of Matter that have no dependence one on
the other. Why may not there be therefore infinite numbers of Spirits or Souls
that have as little dependence one on another, as well as there should be eight
Intelligencies? whenas the motions and operations of every Animal are a more
certain argument of an Immaterial Being residing there, then the motions of the
Heavens of any distinct Intelligencies in their Orbs, if they could be granted
to have any: And it is no stranger a thing to conceive an Infinite multitude of
Immaterial, as well as Material, Essences, independent on one another, then but
two, namely the Matter and the Soul of the World. But if there be so excellent
a principle existent as can create Beings, as certainly there is; we are still
the more assured that there are such multitudes of spiritual Essences,
surviving all the chances of this present life, as the most sober and knowing
men in all Ages have professed there are.

CHAP. XVII.
1. That the Author having safely conducted the Soul into her AErial
condition through the dangers of Death, might well be excused from attending
her any further. 2. What reasons urge him to consider what fates may befall her
afterward. 3. Three hazzards the Soul runs after this life, whereby she may
again become obnoxious to death, according to the opinion of some. 4. That the
aerial Genii are mortal, confirmed by three testimonies. 5. The one from the
Vision of Facius Cardanus, in which the Spirits that appeared to him professed
themselves mortal. 6. The time they stayed with him, and the matters they
disputed of. 7. What credit Hieronymus Cardanus gives to his Fathers Vision. 8.
The other testimony out of Plutarch, concerning the Death of the great God Pan.
9. The third and last of Hesiod, whose opinion Plutarch has polisht and
refined. 10. An Enumeration of the several Paradoxes contained in Facius
Cardanus his Vision. 11. What must be the sense of the third Paradox, if those
AErial Speculatours spoke as they thought. 12. Another Hypothesis to the same
purpose. 13. The craft of these Demons, in shuffling in poisonous error
amongst solid Truths. 14. What makes the story of the death of Pan less to the
present matter, with an addition of Demetrius his observations touching the
Sacred Islands near Britain. 15. That Hesiod his opinion is the most
unexceptionable, and that the harshness therein is but seeming, not real. 16.
That the Ethereal Vehicle instates the Soul in a condition of perfect
Immortality. 17. That there is no internal impediment to those that are
Heroically good, but that they may attain an everlasting happiness after Death.

1. WE have now, maugre all the oppositions and Objections made to the
contrary, safely conducted the Soul into the other state, and installed her
into the same condition with the AErial Genii. I might be very well excused, if
I took leave of her here, and committed her to that fortune that attends those
of the Invisible World: it being more seasonable for them that are there, to
meditate and prefigure in their minds all futurities belonging to them, then
for us that are on this side the passage. It is enough that I have
demonstrated, that neither the Essence nor Operations of the Soul are extinct
by Death; but that they either not intermit, or suddenly revive upon the
recovery of her aerie Body.

2. But seeing that those that take any pleasure at all in thinking of these
things, can seldom command the ranging of their thoughts within what compass
they please, and that it is obvious for them to doubt whether the Soul can be
secure of her permanency in life in the other world, (it implying no
contradiction, That her Vital Congruity, appropriate to this or that Element,
may either of it self expire, or that she may by some carelessness debilitate
one Congruity, and awaken another, in some measure, and so make her self
obnoxious to Fate;) we cannot but think it in a manner necessary to extricate
such difficulties as these, that we may not seem in this aftergame to loose all
we won in the former; and make men suspect that the Soul is not at all
immortal, if her Immortality will not secure her against all future fates.

3. To which she seems liable upon three accounts. The one we have named
already, and respects an intrinsecal Principle, the Periodical terms of her
Vital Congruity, or else the Levity and Miscarriage of her own Will. Which
obnoxiousness of hers is still more fully argued from what is affirmed of the
AErial Genii (whose companion and fellow-Citizen she is) whom sundry
Philosophers assert to be Mortal. The other two hazards she runs are from
without, to wit, the Conflagration of the World, and the Extinction of the Sun.

4. That the AErial Genii are mortal, three main Testimonies are alleged for
it. The Vision of Facius Cardanus, the Death of the great God Pan, in Plutarch,
and the Opinion of Hesiod. I will set them all down fully, as I find them, and
then answer to them. The Vision of Facius Cardanus is punctually recited by his
son Hieronymus in his De Subtilitate Lib. 19. in this manner.

5. That his Father Facius Cardanus, who confessed that he had the society of a
familiar Spirit for about thirty years together, told him this following Story
often when he was alive, and after his death he found the exact relation of it
committed to writing, which was this. The 13. day of August 1491. after I had
done my holy things, at the 20. hour of the day, there appeared to me, after
their usual manner, seven men clothed in silk garments, with cloaks after the
Greek mode, with purple stockins and crimson Cassocks, red and shining on their
breasts; nor were they all thus clad, but only two of them who were the chief.
On the ruddier and taller of these two other two waited, but the less and paler
had three attendants; so that they made up seven in all. They were about forty
years of age, but looked as if they had not reached thirty. When they were asked
who they were, they answered that they were Homines aerii, AErial Men, who are
born and die as we; but that their life is much longer then ours, as reaching
to 300. years. Being asked concerning the Immortality of our Souls, they
answered, Nihil quod cuique proprium esset superesse, That they were of a
nearer affinity with the Divi then we; but yet infinitely different from them:
and that their happiness or misery as much transcended ours, as ours does the
brute Beasts. That they knew all things that are hid, whether Moneys or Books.
And that the lowest sort of them were the Genii of the best and noblest men, as
the basest men are the trainers up of the best sort of Dogs. That the tenuity
of their Bodies was such, that they can do us neither good nor hurt, saving in
what they may be able to do by Specter and Terrors, and impartment of
Knowledge. That they were both public Professors in an Academy, and that he of
the lesser stature had 300. disciples, the other 200. Cardan's Father further
asking them why they would not reveal such treasures as they knew unto men;
they answered, that there was a special law against it, upon a very grievous
penalty.

6. These aerial Inhabitants stayed at least three hours with Facius Cardanus,
disputing and arguing of sundry things, amongst which one was the Original of
the World. The taller denied that God made the world ab aeterno: the lesser
affirmed that he so created it every moment, that if he should desist but one
moment, it would perish. Whereupon the other cited some things out of the
Disputations of Avenroes, which Book was not yet extant, and named several
other Treatises, part whereof are known, part not, which were all of Avenroes
his writing, and withal did openly profess himself to be an Avenroist.

7. The record of this Apparition Cardan found amongst his Fathers Papers, but
seems unwilling to determine whether it be a true history or a Fable, but
disputes against it in such a shuffling manner, as if he was persuaded it were
true, and had a mind that others should think it so. I am sure he most-what
steers his course in his Metaphysical adventures according to this Cynosura,
which is no obscure indication of his assent and belief.

8. That of the Death of the great God Pan, you may read in Plutarch in his De
defectu Oraculorum; where Philippus, for the proof of the Mortality of Demons,
recites a Story which he heard from one AEmilianus a Roman, and one that was
removed far enough from all either stupidity or vanity: How his Father
Epitherses being shipped for Italy, in the evening, near the Echinades, the wind
failed them; and their Ship being carried by an uncertain course upon the
Island Paxae, that most of the Passengers being waken, many of them drinking
merrily after Supper, there was a voice suddenly heard from the Island, which
called to Thamus by name, who was an Egyptian by birth, and the Pilot of the
Ship: which the Passengers much wondered at, few of them having taken notice of
the Pilots name before. He was twice called to before he gave any sign that he
attended to the voice, but after giving express attention, a clear and distinct
voice was heard from the Island, uttering these words, (...). The company was
much astonished at the hearing of the voice: and after much debate amongst
themselves, Thamus resolved that, if the wind blew fair, he would sail by and
say nothing; but if they were becalmed there, he would do his Message: and
therefore they being becalmed when they came to Palodes, neither wind nor tide
carrying them on, Thamus looking out of the poop of the Ship toward the shore,
delivered his Message, telling them that the great Pan was dead. Upon which was
suddenly heard as it were a joint groaning of a multitude together, mingled
with a murmurous admiration.

9. The opinion of Hesiod also is, that the Genii or Demons within a certain
period of years do die; but he attributes a considerable Longaevity to them,
to wit of nine thousand seven hundred and twenty years, which is the utmost
that any allow them, most men less. Plutarch, under the person of others, has
polisht this Opinion into a more curious and distinct dress: for out of the
mortality of the Demons, and the several ranks which Hesiod mentions of
Rational Beings, viz. (...), and (...), he has affixed a certain manner and law
of their passing out of one state into another, making them to change their
Elements as well as Dignities; (...), says he, (...). But other, he says,
(...), not having sufficient command of themselves, are again wrought down into
humane Bodies, to live there an evanid and obscure life, (...), as he phrases
it.

10. These are the most notable Testimonies for the Mortality of Demons that I
have met withal, and therefore the more worth our reviewing. That Vision of
Facius Cardanus, if it be not a Fable, contains many Paradoxes.

As first, That these AErial Genii are born at set times as well as we. Not
that any she- Demons are brought to bed of them, but that they seem to have a
beginning of their Existence, from which they may be reckoned to have
continued, some more years and some less. A thing unconceivable, unless we
should imagine that there is still a lapse or descent of Souls out of the
higher Regions of the Air into these lower, or that these that leave these
earthly Bodies pass into the number of the aerie Demons. As neither their
death can so well be understood, unless we should fancy that their Souls pass
into more pure Vehicles, or else descend into Terrestrial Bodies. For Cardan
himself acknowledges they perish not; which also is agreeable with his Opinion
of the Praeexistence of our Souls.

Secondly, That these AErial Genii live but about 300. years, which is against
He siod and the greatest number of the Platonists, unless they should speak of
that particular Order themselves were of; for it is likely there may be as much
difference in their ages, as there is in the ages of several kinds of Birds and
Beasts.

Thirdly, That our Souls are so far mortal, as that there is nothing proper
to us remaining after death.

Fourthly, That they were nearer allied to the Gods then we by far, and that
there was as much difference betwixt them and us, as there is betwixt us and
Beasts. Which they must understand then concerning the excellency of their
Vehicles, and the natural activity of them, not the preeminency of their
Intellectual Faculties. Or if they do, they must be understood of the better
sort of those AErial Spirits. Or if they mean it of all their Orders, it may be
a mistake out of pride: as those that are rich and powerful as well as
speculative amongst us, take it for granted that they are more judicious and
discerning then the poor and despicable, let them be never so wise.

Fifthly, That they know all secret things, whether hidden Books or Moneys:
which men might do too, if they could stand by concealedly from them that hide
them.

Sixthly, That the lowest sort of them were the Genii of the Noblest men, as
the baser sort of Men are the Keepers and Educators of the better kind of Dogs
and Horses. This clause of the Vision also is inveloped with obscurity, they
having not defined whether this meanness of condition of the Tutelar Genii be
to be understood in a Political or Physical sense; whether the meanness of rank
and power, or of natural wit and sagacity; in which many times the Groom
exceeds the young Gallant who assigns him to keep his Dogs and Horses.

Seventhly, That such is the thinness and lightness of their Bodies, that they
can do neither good nor hurt thereby, though they may send strange Sights and
Terrors, and communicate Knowledge; which then must be chiefly of such things
as belong to their aerial Region. For concerning matters in the Sea, the
Fishes, if they could speak, might inform men better then they. And for their
corporeal debility, it is uncertain whether they may not pretend it, to animate
their Confabulators to a more secure converse, or whether the thing be really
true in some kinds of them. For that it is not in all, may be evinced by that
Narration that Cardan a little after recites out of Erasmus, of the Devil that
carried a Witch into the Air, and set her on the top of a Chimney, giving her
a Pot, and bidding her turn the mouth downwards, which done the whole Town was
fired, and burnt down within the space of an hour. This happened April the 10.
Anno 1533. The Towns name was Schiltach, eight German miles distant from
Friburg. The Story is so well attested, and guarded with such unexceptionable
circumstances, that though Cardan love to show his wit in cavilling at most he
recites, yet he finds nothing at all to quarrel at in his.

Eighthly, That there are Students and Professors of Philosophy in the AErial
World, and are divided into Sects and Opinions there, as well as we are here.
Which cannot possibly be true, unless they set some value upon knowledge, and
are at an eager loss how to find it, and are fain to hew out their way by
arguing and reasoning as we do.

Ninthly and lastly, That they are reduced under a Political Government, and
are afraid of the infliction of punishment.

11. These are the main matters comprehended in Facius his Vision, which how
true they all are, would be too much trouble to determine. But one clause,
which is the third, I cannot let pass, it so nearly concerning the present
Subject, and seeming to intercept all hopes of the Souls Immortality. To speak
therefore to the sum of the whole business; we must either conceive these
aerial Philosophers to instruct Facius Cardanus as well as they could, they
being guilty of nothing but a forward pride, to offer themselves as dictating
Oracles to that doubtful Exorcist (for his son Cardan acknowledges that his
Father had a form of Conjuration that a Spaniard gave him at his death;) or
else we must suppose them to take the liberty of equivocating, if not of
downright lying. Now if they had a mind to inform Facius Cardanus of these
things directly as they themselves thought of them, it being altogether
unlikely but that there appeared to them, in their aerial Regions, such sights
as represented the persons of men here deceased, it is impossible that they
should think otherwise then as we have described their Opinion in the
foregoing Chapter, that hold there is but one Soul in the World, by which all
living Creatures are actuated. Which, though but a mere possibility, if so
much, yet some or other of these aerial Speculators may as well hold to it as
some do amongst us. For Pomponatius and others of the Avenroists are as
ridiculously pertinacious as they. And therefore these Avenroistical Demons
answered punctually according to the Conclusions of their own School, Nihil
proprium cuiquam superesse post mortem. For the Mind or Soul being a Substance
common to all, and now disunited from those Terrestrial Bodies which it
actuated in Plato, suppose, or Socrates, and these Bodies dead and dissipated,
and only the common Soul of the World surviving, there being nothing but this
Soul and these Bodies to make up Socrates and Plato; they conclude it is a
plain case, that nothing that is proper survives after death. And therefore,
though they see the representation of Socrates and Plato in the other World,
owning also their own personalities, with all the actions they did, and
accidents that befell them in this life; yet according to the sullen subtilties
and curiosities of their School, they may think and profess, that to speak
accurately and Philosophically it is none of them, there being no Substance
proper to them remaining after death, but only the Soul of the World, renewing
the thoughts to her self of what appertained to those parties in this life.

12. This is one Hypothesis consistent enough with the veracity of these
Demons; but there is also another, not at all impossible, viz. That the
Vehicles of the Souls of men departed are as invisible to this Order of the
Genii that confabulated with Facius Cardanus as that Order is to us: and that
therefore, though there be the appearances of the Ghosts of Men deceased to
them as well as to us; yet it being but for a time, it moves them no more then
our confirmed Epicureans in this world are moved thereby: especially it being
prone for them to think that they are nothing but some ludicrous spectacles
that the universal Soul of the World represents to her self and other
Spectatours, when, and how long a time she pleases, and the vaporous relics
of the dead body administer occasion. Now that the Vehicles of the Souls of men
departed this life, after they are come to a settled condition, may be far
thinner and more invisible then those of the forenamed Demons, without
committing any inconcinnity in Nature, may appear from hence: For the
excellency of the inward Spirit is not always according to the consistency of
the Element with which it does incorporate; otherwise those Fishes that are of
humane shape, and are at set times taken in the Indian Sea, should have an^
higher degree of Reason and Religion then we that live upon Earth, and have
bodies made of that Element. Whence nothing hinders but that the Spirit of Man
may be more noble then the Spirit of some of the aerial Demons. And Nature not
always running in Arithmetical, but also it Geometrical Progression, one
Remove it one may reach far above what is before it for the present in the
other degrees of Progression. As a creeping worm is above a cad-worm, and any
four-footed beasts above the birds, till they can use their legs as well as
they; but they are no sooner even with them, but they are straight far above
them, and cannot only go, but fly. As a Peasant is above an imprisoned
Prince, and has more command; but this Prince can be no sooner set free and
become even with the Peasant in his liberty, but he is infinitely above him.
And so it may be naturally with the Souls of men when they are freed from this
prison of the Body, their steps being made in Geometrical Progression, as soon
as they seem equal to that Order of Demons we speak of, they may mount far
above them in tenuity and subtilty of Body, and so become invisible to them;
and therefore leave them in a capacity of falsely surmising that they are not at
all, because they cannot see them.

13. But if they thought that there is either some particular Ray of the Soul
of the World, that belongs peculiarly suppose to Socrates or Plato, or that
they had proper Souls really distinct, then it is evident that they did either
equivocate or lie. Which their pride and scorn of mankind (they looking upon
us but as Beasts in comparison of themselves) might easily permit; they making
no more conscience to deceive us, then we do to put a dodge upon a dog, to
make our selves merry. But if they had a design to wind us into some dangerous
error, it is very likely that they would shuffle it in amongst many Truths,
that those Truths being examined, and found solid at the bottom, we might not
suspect any one of their dictates to be false. Wherefore this Vision being ill
meant, the poison intended was, that of the Souls Mortality; the dangerous
falseness of which opinion was to be covered by the mixture of others that are
true.

14. As for that Relation of AEmilianus, which he heard from his Father
Epitherses, it would come still more home to the purpose, if the conclusion of
the Philologers at Rome, after Thamus had been sent for, and averred the truth
thereof to Tiberius Caesar, could be thought authentic, namely, that this Pan,
the news of whose death Thamus told to the Demons at Palodes, was the Son of
Mercury and Penelope; for then it is plain that Pan was an humane Soul, and
therefore concerns the present question more nearly. But this Narration being
applicable to a more sacred and venerable Subject, it looses so much of its
force and fitness for the present use. That which Demetrius adds, concerning
certain Holy Islands near Britain, had been more fit in this regard. Whither
when Demetrius came, suddenly upon his arrival there happened a great
commotion of the air, mighty tempests and prodigious whirlwinds. After the
ceasing whereof, the Inhabitants pronounced, (...), That some of a nature more
then humane was dead. Upon which Plutarch, according to his usual Rhetoric,
descants after this manner, (...), i. e. As the lightning of a lamp brings no
grievance with it, but the extinction of it is offensive to many; sogreat
Souls, while they remain kindled into life, shine forth harmlesly and benignly,
but their extinction or corruption often stirs up winds and tempests, as in
this present example, and often infects the air with pestilential annoiances.

15. But the last Testimony is the most unexceptionable, though the least
pretending to be infallible, and seems to strike dead both ways. For whether
the Souls of men that go out of these earthly bodies be virtuous or vicious,
they must die to their AErial Vehicles. Which seems a sad story at first sight,
and as if Righteousness could not deliver from Death. But if it be more
carefully perused, the terror will be found only to concern the Wicked. For
the profoundest pitch of Death is the Descent into this Terrestrial Body, in
which, besides that we necessarily forget whatever is past, we do for the
present lead (...), a dark and obscure life, as Plutarch speaks, dragging this
weight of Earth along with us, as Prisoners and Malefactors do their heavy
shackles in their sordid and secluse confinements. But in our return back from
this state, Life is naturally more large to them that are prepared to make good
use of that advantage they have of their Aerie Vehicle. But if they be not
masters of themselves in that state, they will be fatally remanded back to
their former Prison in process of time; which is the most gross Death
imaginable. But for the Good and virtuous Souls, that after many Ages change
their AErial Vehicle for an Ethereal one, that is no Death to them, but an
higher ascent into life. And a man may as well say of an Infant, that has left
the dark Womb of his Mother, that this change of his is Death, as that a
Genius dies by leaving the gross Air, and emerging into that Vehicle of Light,
which they ordinarily call Ethereal or Celestial.

16. There may be therefore, by Axiom 36. a dangerous relapse out of the
AErial Vehicle into the Terrestrial, which is properly the Death of the Soul
that is thus retrograde. But for those that ever reach the Ethereal state, the
periods of life there are infinite; and though they may have their Perige's as
well as Apoge's, yet these Circuits being of so vast a compass, and their
Perige's so rare and short, and their return as certain to their former Apsis,
as that of the Celestial Bodies, and their athereal sense never leaving them
in their lowest touches toward the Earth; it is manifest that they have
arrived to that life that is justly styled Eternal.

17. Whence it is plain, that perseverance in Virtue, if no external Fate
hinder, will carry Man to an Immortal life. But whether those that be thus
Heroically good, be so by discipline and endeavor, or (...), by a special
favor and irresistible design of God, is not to be disputed in this place;
though it be at large discussed somewhere in the Dialogues of Plato. But in the
mean time we will not doubt to conclude, that there is no Internal impediment
to those that are highly and Heroically virtuous, but that, in process of time,
they may arrive to an everlasting security of Life and Happiness, after they
have left this earthly Body.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. The Conflagration of the World an Opinion of the Stoics. 2. Two ways of
destroying the World the Ancients have taken notice of, and especially that by
Fire. 3. That the Conflagration of the World, so far as it respects us, is to
be understood only of the burning of the Earth. 4. That the ends of the
Stoics Conflagration is competible only to the Earths burning. 5. An
acknowledgement that the Earth may be burnt, though the proof thereof be
impertinent to this place. 6. That the Conflagration thereof will prove very
fatal to the Souls of Wicked men and Demons. 7. Five several Opinions
concerning their state after the Conflagration; whereof the first is, That they
are quite destroyed by Fire. 8. The second, That they are annihilated by a
special act of Omnipotency. 9. The third, That they lie senseless in an eternal
Death. 10. The fourth, That they are in a perpetual furious and painful Dream.
11. The fifth and last, That they will revive again, and that the Earth and
Air will be inhabited by them. 12. That this last seems to be framed from the
fictitious (...) of the Stoics, who were very sorry Metaphysicians, and as ill
Naturallists. 13. An Animadversion upon a self-contradicting sentence of
Seneca. 14. The unintelligibleness of the state of the Souls of the Wicked
after the Conflagration. 15. That the Ethereal Inhabitants will be safe. And
what will then become of Good men and Demons on the Earth and in the Air. And
how they cannot be delivered but by a supernatural power.

1. AS for the External impediments, we shall now examine them, and see of what
force they will be, and whether they be at all. The former of which is the
Conflagration of the World. Which is an ancient Opinion, believed and
entertained, not only by Religious, but by Philosophers also, the Stoics
especially, who affirm that the Souls of Men do subsist indeed after Death,
but cannot continue any longer in being then to the Conflagration of the World.
But it is not so much material what they thought, as to consider what is the
condition indeed of the Souls of Men and Demons after that sad Fate.

2. Those that will not have the World eternal have found out two ways to
destroy it, (...) or (...), by Water or by Fire. Which, they say, does as
naturally happen in a vast Period of Time, which they call Annus magnus, as
Winter and Summer do in our ordinary year. Inundatio non secus quam Hyems,
quam AEstas lege Mundi venit. But for this (...), it not being so famous, nor
so frequently spoken of, nor so destructive, nor so likely to end the World as
the other way, nor belonging so properly to our enquiry, we shall let it pass.
The general Prognostic is concerning Fire now, not only of the Stoics, as
Zeno, Cleanthes, Chrysippus, Seneca; but of several also of different Sects, as
Heraclitus, Epicurus, Cicero, Pliny, Aristocles, Numenius, and sundry others.

3. But though there be so great and unanimous consent that the World shall be
burnt, yet they do not express themselves all alike in the business. Seneca's
vote is the most madly explicit of any, making the very Stars run and dash one
against another, and so set all on fire. But Posidonius and Panaetius had more
wit, who did not hold that (...) which the other Stoics did. For the
destroying of the Ethereal Regions by Fire is as foolish a fancy as the
sentencing of the Eele to be drowned, because the matter of the Ether is too
fine and subtle for Fire to rage in, it being indeed nothing but a pure. light
or fire it self. And yet this Ethereal Matter is infinitely the greatest
portion of the World. Wherefore the World cannot be said properly to be liable
to the destruction of Fire from any natural causes, as the Stoics would have
it. Which is demonstratively true upon Descartes his Principles, who makes
Fire nothing but the motion of certain little particles of Matter, and holds
that there is no more motion at one time in the World then at another; because
one part of the Matter cannot impress any agitation upon another, but it must
lose so much it self. This hideous noise therefore of the Conflagration of the
World must be restrained to the firing of the Earth only, so far as it
concerns us. For there is nothing else combustible in the Universe but the
Earth, and other Planets, and what Vapors and Exhalations arise from them.

4. This Conflagration therefore that Philosophers, Poets, Sibyls, and all have
filled the World with the fame of, is nothing but the burning of the Earth. And
the ends the Stoics pretend of their (...), may be competible to it, but not
to the burning of the Heavens or Ether at all; as any but meanly skilled in
Philosophy cannot but acknowledge. For their nature is so simple that they
cannot corrupt, and therefore want no renovation, as the Earth does. Nor do the
Inhabitants of those heavenly Regions defile themselves with any vice; or if
they do, they sink from their material station as well as moral, and fall
toward these terrestrial dreggs. And therefore that part of the happy (...)
Seneca speaks of, Omne animal ex integro generabitur, dabiturque terris homo
inscius scelerum, and melioribus auspiciis natus, will take no place with those
Ethereal Creatures.

5. We are willing then to be born down, by this common and loud cry of Fire
that must burn the World, into an acknowledgement that the Earth may within a
certain Period of time be burnt, with all those things that are upon it or near
it. But what concurse of natural causes may contribute to this dismal
spectacle, is not proper for me to dispute, especially in this place. I shall
only take a view of what sad effects this Conflagration may have upon the
Souls of Demons and Men. For that those those that have recovered their
Ethereal Vehicles are exempt from this fate, is evident, the remoteness of
their habitation securing them from both the rage and noisomness of these
sulphurous flames.

6. The most certain and most destractive execution that this Fire will do,
must be upon the unrecovered Souls of Wicked Men and Demons; those that are so
deeply sunk and drowned (...), that the very consistency of their Vehicles does
imprison them within the confines of this thick caliginous air. These Souls or
Spirits therefore that have so inextricably entangled themselves in the Fate of
this lower World, giving up all their Senses to the momentany pleasures of the
moist luxurious Principle, which is the very seat of Death, these, in the
mystical Philosophy of the Ancients, are the Nymphs, to whom though they allot
a long Series of years, yet they do not exempt them from mortality and fate.
And Demetrius in Plutarch pronounces expressly out of Hesiod, that their life
will be terminated with the Conflagration of the World, from what the Poet
intimates AEnigmatically, (...), -- (...)
(...).


7. But to leave these Poetical Riddles, and take a more serious and distinct
view of the condition of the Soul after the Conflagration of the Earth; we
shall find five several sorts of Opinions concerning it. The first hold, That
this unmerciful heat and fire will at last destroy and consume the Soul as well
as the Body. But this seems to me impossible, that any created Substance should
utterly destroy another Substance, so as to reduce it to nothing. For no part
of Matter, acting the most furiously upon another part thereof, does effect
that. It can only attenuate, dissipate and disperse the parts, and make them
invisible. But the Substance of the Soul is indissipable and indiscerpible, and
therefore remains entire, whatever becomes of the Body or Vehicle.

8. The second Opinion is, That after long and tedious torture in these flames,
the Soul by a special act of Omnipotency is annihilated. But, me thinks, this
is to put Providence too much to her shifts, as if God were so brought to a
plunge in his creating a Creature of it self immortal, that he must be fain to
uncreate it again, that is to say to annihilate it. Besides that that divine
Nemesis that lies within the compass of Philosophy, never supposes any such
forcible eruptions of the Deity into extraordinary effects, but that all things
are brought about by a wise and infallible or inevitable train of secondary
Causes, whether natural or free Agents.

9. The third therefore ^^ to avoid these absurdities, denies both absumption by
Fire and annihilation; but conceives, That tediousness and extremity of pain
makes the Soul at last, of her self, shrink from all commerce with Matter; the
immediate Principle of Union, which we call Vital Congruity, consisting of a
certain modification of the Body or Vehicle as well as of the Soul, which being
spoiled and lost, and the Soul thereby quite loosned from all sympathy with
Body or Matter, she becomes perfectly dead, and senseless to all things, by
Axiom 36. and, as they say, will so remain for ever. But this seems not so
rational; for, as Aristotle somewhere has it, (...). Wherefore so many entire
immaterial Substances would be continued in being to all Eternity to no end nor
purpose, notwithstanding they may be made use of, and actuate Matter again as
well as ever.

10. A fourth sort therefore of Speculators there is, who conceive that after
this solution of the Souls or Spirits of Wicked Men and Demons from their
Vehicles, That their pain is continued to them even in that separate state,
they falling into an unquiet sleep, full of furious tormenting Dreams, that act
as fiercely upon their Spirits, as the external Fire did upon their Bodies. But
others except against this Opinion as a very uncertain Conjecture, it supposing
that which to them seems not so sound, viz. That the Soul can act when it has
lost all vital Union with the Matter; which seems repugnant with that so
intimate and essential aptitude it has to be united therewith. And the Dreams
of the Soul in the Body are not transacted without the help of the Animal
Spirits in the Brain, they usually symbolizing with their temper. Whence they
conclude, that there is no certain ground to establish this Opinion upon.

11. The last therefore, to make all sure, that there may be no inconvenience
in admitting that the Souls or Spirits as well of evil Demons as wicked Men,
disjoined from their Vehicles by the force of that fatal Conflagration, may
subsist, have excogitated an odd and unexpected Hypothesis, That when this
firing of the World has done due execution upon that unfortunate Crew, and
tedious and direful torture has we aried their afficted Ghosts into an utter
recess from all Matter, and thereby into a profound sleep or death; that after
a long Series of years, when not only the fury of the Fire is utterly slaked,
but that vast Atmosphere of smoke and vapors, which was sent up during the
time of the Earths Conflagration, has returned back in copious showers of rain
(which will again make Seas and Rivers, will bind and consolidate the ground,
and, falling exceeding plentifully all over, make the soil pleasant and
fruitful, and the Air cool and wholesome) that Nature recovering thus to her
advantage, and becoming youthful again, and full of genital salt and moisture,
the Souls of all living Creatures belonging to these lower Regions of the Earth
and Air will awaken orderly in their proper places. The Seas and Rivers will
be again replenished with Fish; the Earth will send forth all manner of Fowls,
four-footed Beasts, and creeping things; and the Souls of Men also shall then
catch life from the more pure and balsamic parts of the Earth, and be clothed
again in terrestrial Bodies; and lastly, the AErial Genii, that Element
becoming again wholesome and vital, shall, in due order and time, awaken and
revive in the cool rorid Air. Which Expergeraction into life is accompanied,
say they, with propensions answerable to those resolutions they made with
themselves in those fiery torments, and with which they fell into their long
sleep.

12. But the whole Hypothesis seems to be framed out of that dream of the
Stoics, concerning the (...) or (...) of the World after the (...) or (...)
thereof. As if that of Seneca belonged to this case, Epist. 36. Mors, quam
pertimescimus ac recusamus, intermittit vitam, non eripit. Veniet iterum qui
nos in lucem reponet dies, quem multi recusarent, nisi oblitos reduceret. But
how coursly the Stoics Philosophize when they are once turned out of their
rode-way of moral Sentences, any one but moderately skilled in Nature and
Metaphysics may easily discern. For what Errors can be more gross then those
that they entertain of God, of the Soul, and of the Stars, they making the two
former Corporeal Substances, and feeding the latter with the Vapors of the
Earth, affirming that the Sun sups up the water of the great Ocean to quench
his thirst, but that the Moon drinks off the lesser Rivers and Brooks; which is
as true as that the Ass drunk up the Moon. Such conceits are more fit for
Anacreon in a drunken fit to stumble upon, who to invite his Companions to
tipple, composed that Catch, (...),
(...),
then for to be either found out or owned by a serious and sober Philosopher.
And yet Seneca mightily triumphs in this notion of foddering the Stars with the
thick foggs of the Earth, and declares his opinion with no mean strains of
eloquence: but I loving solid sense better then fine words, shall not take the
pains to recite them.

13. At what a pitch his understanding was set, may be easily discerned by my
last quotation, wherein there seems a palpable contradiction. Veniet iterum qui
nos in lucem reponet dies, quem multi recusarent, nisi oblitos reduceret. If
nos, how oblitos? If oblitos, how nos? For we are not we, unless we remember
that we are so. And if madmen may be said, and that truly, to be besides
themselves, or not to be themselves, because they have lost their wits;
certainly they will be far from being themselves that have quite lost the
Memory of themselves, but must be as if they had never been before. As
Lucretius has excellently well declared himself, De rerum natura Lib. 3. Nee,
si materiam nostram conlegerit aetas
Post obitu^, rursumque redegerit ut sita nunc est,
Atque iterum nobis fuerint data lumina vitae,
Pertineat quicquam tamen ad nos id quoque factum,
Interrupta semel cum sit retinentia nostri.
Where the Poet seems industriously to explode all the hopes of any benefit of
this Stoical (...), and to profess that he is as if he had never been, that
cannot remember he has ever been before. From whence it would follow, that
though the Souls of men should revive after the Conflagration of the World, yet
they have not escaped a perpetual and permanent death.

14. We see therefore how desperately undemonstrable the condition of the Soul
is after the Conflagration of the Earth, all these five Opinions being
accompanied with so much lubricity and uncertainty. And therefore they are to
be looked upon rather as some Night-landskap to feed our amused Melancholy,
then a clear and distinct draught of comprehensible Truth to inform our
Judgment.

15. All that we can be assured of is, that those Souls that have obtained
their ethereal Vehicles are out of the reach of that sad fate that follows
this Conflagration; and that the wicked Souls of Men and Demons will be
involved in it. But there are a middle sort betwixt these, concerning whom not
only curiosity but good will would make a man sollicitous. For it is possible,
that the Conflagration of the World may surprise many thousands of Souls, that
neither the course of Time, nor Nature, nor any higher Principle has wrought up
into an Ethereal Congruity of life, but yet may be very holy, innocent and
virtuous. Which we may easily believe, if we consider that these very Earthly
Bodies are not so great impediments to the goodness and sincerity of the Mind,
but that many, even in this life, have given great examples thereof. Nor can
that AErial state be less capable of, nor well be without, the good Genii, no
more then the Earth without good men, who are the most immediate Ministers of
the Goodness and Justice of God. But exemption from certain fates in the world
is not always entailed upon Innocence, but most ordinarily upon natural power.
And therefore there may be numbers of the good Genii, and of very holy and
innocuous Spirits of men departed, the consistency of whose Vehicles may be
such, that they can no more quit these aerial Regions, then we can fly into
them, that have heavy bodies, without wings. To say nothing of those virtuous
and pious men that may happily be then found alive, and so be liable to be
overtaken by this storm of fire. Undoubtedly, unless there appear, before the
approach of this fate, some visible (...) or Jupiter Sospitator, as the
heathens would call him, they must necessarily be involved in the ruin of the
wicked. Which would be a great eyesore in that exact and irreprehensible frame
of Providence, that all men promise to themselves who acknowledge that there is
a God. Wherefore according to the light of Reason, there must be some
supernatural means to rescue those innocuous and benign Spirits out of this
common calamity. But to describe the manner of it here how it must be done,
would be to entitle natural Light and Philosophy to greater abilities then they
are guilty of; and therefore that Subject must be reserved for its proper place.

CHAP. XIX.
1. That the Extinction of the Sun is no Panick fear, but may be rationally
suspected from the Records of History and grounds of Natural Philosophy. 2. The
sad Influence of this Extinction upon Man and Beast, and all the aerial Demons
imprisoned within their several Atmospheres in our Vortex. 3. That it will do
little or no damage to the Ethereal Inhabitants in reference to heat or
warmth. 4. Nor will they find much want of his light. 5. And if they did, they
may pass out of one Vortex into another, by the Privilege of their Ethereal
Vehicles; 6. And that without any labor or toil, and as maturely as they
please. 7. The vast incomprehensibleness of the tracts and compasses of the
ways of Providence. 8. A short Recapitulation of the whole Discourse. 9. An
Explication of the Persians two Principles of Light and Darkness, which they
called (...) and (...), and when and where the Principle of Light gets the full
victory. 10. That Philosophy, or something more sacred then Philosophy, is the
only Guide to a true (...).

1. THE last danger that threatens the separate Soul is the Extinction of the
Sun; which though it may seem a mere Panick fear at first sight, yet if the
matter be examined, there will appear no contemptible reasons that may induce
men to suspect that it may at last fall out, there been, at certain times, such
near offers in Nature toward this sad accident already. Pliny, though he
instances but in one example, yet speaks of it as a thing that several times
comes to pass. Fiunt, says he, prodigiosi and longiores solis defectus, qualis
occiso Dictatore Caesare, and Antoniano bello, totius anni pallore continuo.
The like happened in Justinians time, as Cedrenus writes; when, for a whole
year together, the Sun was of a very dim and duskish hue, as if he had been in
a perpetual Eclipse. And in the time of Irene the Empress it was so dark for
seventeen days together, that the ships lost their way on the sea, and were
ready to run against one another, as Theophanes relates. But the late accurate
discovery of the spots of the Sun by Shiner, and the appearing and disappearing
of fixed Stars, and the excursions of Comets into the remoter parts of our
Vortex, as also the very intrinsecal contexture of that admirable Philosophy of
Descartes, do argue it more then possible that, after some vast periods of
time, the Sun may be so inextricably inveloped by the Maculae that he is never
free from, that he may quite loose his light.

2. The Preambles of which Extinction will be very hideous, and intolerable to
all the Inhabitants of the Planets in our Vortex, if the Planets have then any
Inhabitants at all. For this defect of light and heat coming on by degrees,
must needs weary out poor mortals with heavy languishments, both for want of
the comfort of the usual warmth of the Sun, whereby the Bodies of men are
recreated, and also by reason of his inability to ripen the fruits of the
Soil; whence necessarily must follow Famine, Plagues, Sicknesses, and at
length an utter devastation and destruction of both Man and Beasts. Nor can the
AErial Demons escape free, but that the vital tie to their Vehicles necessarily
confining them to their several Atmospheres, they will be inevitably imprisoned
in more then Cimmerian darkness. For the Extinction of the Sun will put out the
light of all their Moons, and nothing but Ice, and Frost, and flakes of Snow,
and thick mists, as palpable as that of Egypt, will possess the Regions of
their habitation. Of which sad spectacle though those twinkling eyes of heaven,
the Stars, might be compassionate spectatours; yet they cannot send out one ray
of light to succor or visit them, their tender and remote beams not being able
to pierce, much less to dissipate, the clammy and stiff consistency of that
long and fatal Night.

3. Wherefore calling our mind off from so dismal a sight, let us place it upon
a more hopeful Object; and consider the condition of those Souls that have
arrived to their Ethereal Vehicle, and see how far this fate can take hold of
them. And it is plain at first sight, that they are out of the reach of this
misty dungeon, as being already mounted into the secure mansions of the purer
Ether. The worst that can be imagined of them is, that they may find
themselves in a condition something like that of ours when we walk out in a
clear, starlight, frosty night, which to them that are sound is rather a
pleasure then offense. And if we can bear it with some delight in these
Earthly Bodies, whose parts will grow hard and stiff for want of due heat, it
can prove nothing else but a new modification of tactual pleasure to those
Ethereal Inhabitants, whose bodies are not constipated as ours, but are
themselves a kind of agile light and fire. All that can be conceived is, that
the spherical particles of their Vehicles may stand a little more closely and
firmly together then usual, whence the triangular intervals being more
straight, the subtilest element will move something more quick in them, which
will raise a sense of greater vigor and alacrity then usual. So little
formidable is this fate to them in this regard.

4. But their light, you will say, will be obscured, the Sun being put out, whose
shining seems to concern the Gods as well as Men, as Homer would intimate,
(...).
But I answer, that that of Homer is chiefly to be understood of the AErial
Demons, not the Ethereal Deities, who can turn themselves into a pure actual
Light when they please. So that there is no fear but that their personal
converse will be as cheerful and distinct as before, white letters being as
legible upon black paper as black upon white. But this is to suppose them in
the dark, which they are not, but in a more soft and mild light, which is but a
change of pleasure, as it is to see the Moon shine fair into a room after the
putting out of the Candle. And certainly the contribution of the light of the
Stars is more to their quick and tender Senses, then the clearest Moonshine
night is to ours; though we should suppose them no nearer any Star then we are.
But such great changes as these may have their conveniences for such as
Providence will favor, as well as their inconveniences. And the Extinction of
our Sun may be the Augmentation of Light in some Star of a neighboring Vortex.
Which though it may not be able to pierce those Cimmerian Prisons I spoke of
before, yet it may give sufficient light to these Spirits that are free.
Besides that the Discerption and spoil of our Vortex, that will then happen,
will necessarily bring us very much nearer the Center of some other, whose Star
will administer sufficient light to the Ethereal Genii, though it be too weak
to relieve the AErial. And that so remote a distance from these central
Luminaries of the Vortices is consistent with the perfectest happiness, we may
discern partly, in that the Celestial Matter above Saturn, till the very marge
of the Vortex, is more strongly agitated then that betwixt him and the Sun, and
therefore has less need of the Suns beams to conserve its agility and
liquidity; and partly, in that those huge vast Regions of Aither would be lost,
and in vain in a manner, if they were not frequented by Ethereal Inhabitants,
which in all reason and likelihood are of the noblest kind, according to the
nature of their Element. And therefore all the Ethereal People may retire
thither upon such an exigency as this, and there rest secure in joy and
happiness, in these true Intermundia Deorum which Epicurus dreamed of.

5. Which we may easily admit, if we consider the grand Privileges of the
Ethereal Vehicle, wherein so great a power of the Soul is awakened, that she
can moderate the motion of the particles thereof as she pleases, by adding or
diminishing the degrees of agitation, Axiom 32. whereby she is also able to
temper the solidity thereof, and, according to this contemperation of her
Vehicle, to ascend or descend in the Vortex as she lists her self, and that
with a great variety of swiftness, according to her own pleasure. By the
improvement of which Privilege she may also, if she please, pass from one
Vortex into another, and receive the warmth of a new Vesta, so that no fate
imaginable shall be ever able to lay hold upon her.

6. Nor will this be any more labor to her, then sailing down the stream. For
she, having once fitted the agitation and solidity of her Vehicle for her
celestial voyage, will be as naturally carried whither she is bound, as a stone
goes downward, or the fire upward. So that there is no fear of any lassitude,
no more then by being rowed in a Boat, or carried in a Sedan. For the celestial
Matter that environs her Vehicle, works her upward or downward, toward the
Center or from the Center of a Vortex, at its own proper pains and charges.
Lastly, such is the tenuity and subtilty of the Senses of the Ethereal
Inhabitants, that their prevision and sagacity must be, beyond all conceit,
above that of ours, besides that there will be warnings and premonitions of
this future disaster, both many, and those very visible and continued, before
the Sun shall fail so far, as that they shall at all be concerned in his decay;
so that the least blast of misfortune shall never be able to blow upon them,
nor the least evil imaginable overtake them.

7. This is a small glance at the Mysteries of Providence, whose fetches are so
large, and Circuits so immense, that they may very well seem utterly
incomprehensible to the Incredulous and Idiots, who are exceeding prone to
think that all things will ever be as they are, and desire they should be so:
though it be as rude and irrational, as if one that comes into a Bad, and is
taken much with the first Dance he sees, would have none danced but that, or
have them move no further one from another then they did when he first came
into the room; whenas they are to trace nearer one another, or further off,
according to the measures of the Music, and the law of the Dance they are in.
And the whole Matter of the Universe, and all the parts thereof, are ever upon
Motion, and in such a Dance, as whose traces backwards and forwards take a vast
compass; and what seems to have made the longest stand, must again move,
according to the modulations and accents of that Music, that is indeed out of
the hearing of the acutest ears, but yet perceptible by the purest Minds and
the sharpest Wits. The truth whereof none would dare to oppose, if the breath
of the gainsayer could but tell its own story, and declare through how many
Stars and Vortices it has been strained, before the particles thereof met, to
be abused to the framing of so rash a contradiction.

8. We have now finished our whole Discourse, the summary result whereof is
this; That there is an incorporeal Substance, and that in Man, which we call
his Soul. That this Soul of his subsists and acts after the death of his Body,
and that usually first in an AErial Vehicle, as other Demons do; wherein she
is not quite exempt from fate, but is then perfect and secure, when she has
obtained her Ethereal one, she being then out of the reach of that evil
Principle, whose dominion is commensurable with misery and death. Which power
the Persian Magi termed Arimanius, and resembled him to Darkness, as the other
good Principle, which they called Oromazes, to Light, styling one by the name
of (...), the other by the name of (...).

9. Of which there can be no other meaning that will prove allowable, but an
adumbration of those two grand parts of Providence, the one working in the
Demoniacal, the other in the Divine Orders. Betwixt which natures there is
perpetually more or less strife and contest, both inwardly and outwardly. But
if Theopompus his prophecy be true in Plutarch, who was initiated into these
Arcana, the power of the Benign Principle will get the upper hand at last,
(...), etc. At length Hades or Arimanius will be left in the lurch, who so
strongly holds us captive, (...), and men shall then be perfectly happy,
needing no food, nor casting any shadow. For what shadow can that Body cast
that is a pure and transparent light, such as the Ethereal Vehicle is? And
therefore that Oracle is then fulfilled, when the Soul has ascended into that
condition we have already described, in which alone it is out of the reach of
Fate and Mortality.

10. This is the true (...), to speak according to the Persian Language, with
whose empty title Emperors and great Potentates of the Earth have been
ambitious to adorn their memory after death; but is so high a Privilege of the
Soul of Man, that mere Political virtues, as Plotinus calls them, can never
advance her to that pitch of Happiness. Either Philosophy, or something more
sacred then Philosophy, must be her Guide to so transcendent a condition. And
not being curious to dispute, whether the Pythagoreans ever arrived to it by
living according to the precepts of their Master, I shall notwithstanding with
confidence aver, that what they aimed at, is the sublimest felicity our
nature is capable of; and being the utmost Discovery this Treatise could
pretend to, I shall conclude all with a Distich of theirs (which I have
elsewhere taken notice of upon like occasion) it comprehending the furthest
scope, not only of their Philosophy, but of this present Discourse. (...),
(...).


To this sense, Who after death once reach th'aethereal Plain
Are straight made Gods, and never die again.


The Contents of the several Chapters contained in this Treatise.
BOOK I.
Chap. 1. 1. THE usefulness of the present Speculation for the understanding of
Providence, and the management of our lives for our greatest happiness; 2. For
the moderate bearing the death and disasters of our Friends; 3. For the
begetting true Magnanimity in us, 4. and Peace and Tranquillity of Mind. 5.
That so weighty a Theory is not to be handled perfunctorily. Page 1 Chap. 2. 1.
That the Souls Immortality is demonstrable, by the Authors method, to all but
mere Scepticks. 2. An Illustration of his First Axiom. 3. A confirmation and
example of the Second. 4. An explication of the Third. 5. An explication and
proof of the Fourth. 6. A proof of the Fifth. 7. Of the Sixth. 8. An example of
the Seventh. 9. A confirmation of the truth of the Eighth. 10. A demonstration
and example of the Ninth. 11. Penetrability the immediate property of
Incorporeal substance. 12. As also Indiscerpibility. 13. A proof and
illustration of the tenth Axiom. 4 Chap. 3. 1. The general notions of Body and
Spirit. 2. That the notion of Spirit is altogether as intelligible as that of
Body. 3. Whether there be any Substance of a mixed nature, betwixt Body and
Spirit. 16 Chap. 4. 1. That the notions of the several kinds of Immaterial
Beings have no Inconsistency nor Incongruity in them. 2. That the nature of God
is as intelligible as the nature of any Being whatsoever. 3. The true notion of
his Ubiquity, and how intelligible it is. 4. Of the union of the Divine
Essence. 5. Of his power of Creation. 20 Chap. 5. 1. The Definition belonging
to all Finite and Created Spirits. 2. Of Indiscerpibility, a symbolical
representation thereof. 3. An Objection answered against that representation.
24 Chap. 6. 1. Axioms that tend to the demonstrating how the Center or First
point of the Primary Substance of a Spirit may be Indiscerpible. 2. Several
others that demonstrate how the Secondary Substance of a Spirit may be
Indiscerpible. 3. An application of these Principles. 4. Of the union of the
Secondary Substance considered transversly. 5. That the notion of a Spirit has
less difficulty then that of Matter. 6. An answer to an Objection from the
Rational faculty. 7. Answers to Objections suggested from Fancy. 8. A more
compendious satisfaction concerning the notion of a Spirit. 29 Chap. 7. 1. Of
the Self-motion of a Spirit. 2. Of Self-penetration. 3. Of Self-contraction and
dilatation. 4. The power of penetrating of Matter. 5. The power of moving, 6.
And of altering the Matter. 42 Chap. 8. 1. Four main Species of Spirits. 2. How
they are to be defined. 3. The definition of a Seminal Form; 4. Of the Soul of
a Brute; 5. Of the Soul of a Man. 6. The difference betwixt the Soul of an
Angel and an humane Soul. 7. The definition of an Angelical Soul. 8. Of the
Platonical (...) and (...). 1. That Descartes his Demonstration of the
Existence of the Humane Soul does at least conclude the possibility of a
Spirit. 49 Chap. 9. 1. That it is of no small consequence to have proved the
Possibility of the Existence of a Spirit. 2. The necessity of examining Mr.
Hobbs his Reasons to the contrary. 3. The first Excerption out of Mr. Hobbs. 4.
The second Excerption. 5. The third. 6. The fourth. 7. The fifth. 8. The sixth.
9. The seventh. 10. The eighth and last Excerption. 55 Chap. 10. 1. An Answer
to the first Excerption. 2. To the second. 3. An Answer to the third. 4. To the
fourth Excerption. 5. An Answer to the fifth. 6. To the sixth. 7. To the
seventh. 8. An Answer to the eighth and last. 9. A brief Recapitulation of what
has been said hitherto. 64 Chap. 11. 1. Three grounds to prove the Existence of
an Immaterial Substance, whereof the first is fetched from the Nature of God. 2.
The second from the Phenomenon of Motion in the world. 3. That the Matter is
not self-moveable. 4. An Objection that the Matter may be part self-moved, part
not. 5. The first Answer to the Objection. 6. The second Answer. 7. Other
Evasions answered. 8. The Conclusion, That no Matter is self-moved, but that a
certain quantity of motion was impressed upon it at its first Creation by God.
75 Chap. 12. 1. That the Order and Nature of things in the Universe argue an
Essence Spiritual or Incorporeal. 2. The Evasion of this Argument. 3. A
preparation out of Mr. Hobbs to answer the Evasion. 4. The first Answer. 5. The
second Answer. 6. Mr. Hobbs his mistake, of making the Ignorance of Second
Causes the only Seed of Religion. 84 Chap. 13. 1. The last proof of
Incorporeal Substances from Apparitions. 2. The first Evasion of the force of
such Arguings. 3. An answer to that Evasion. 4. The second Evasion. 5. The
first kind of the second Evasion. 6. A description out of Virgil of that
Genius that suggests the dictates of the Epicurean Philosophy. 7. The more full
and refined sense of that Philosophy nowadays. 8. The great efficacy of the
Stars (which they suppose to consist of nothing but Motion and Matter) for
production of all manner of Creatures in the world. 89 Chap. 14. 1. That the
Splendour of the Celestial Bodies proves no Foresight nor Sovereignty that they
have over us. 2. That the Stars can have no knowledge of us, Mathematically
demonstrated. 3. The same Conclusion again demonstrated more familiarly. 4.
That the Stars cannot communicate Thoughts, neither with the Sun nor with one
another. 5. That the Sun has no knowledge of our affairs. 6. Principles laid
down for the inferring that Conclusion. 7. A demonstration that he cannot see
us. 8. That he can have no other kind of knowledge of us, nor of the frame of
any Animal on Earth. 9. That though the Sun had the knowledge of the right
frame of an Animal, he could not transmit it into Terrestrial matter. 10. An
Answer to that Instance of the Signature of the Foetus. 11, 12. Further Answers
thereto. 13. A short Increpation of the confident Exploders of Incorporeal
Substance out of the world. 97
BOOK II.
Chap. 1. 1. AN addition of more Axioms for the demonstrating that there is a
Spirit or Immaterial Substance in Man. 2. The Truth of the first of these
Axioms confirmed from the testimony of Mr. Hobbs. 3. The proof of the second
Axiom. 4. The proof of the third. 5. The confirmation of the fourth from the
testimony of Mr. Hobbs, as also from Reason. 6. An explication and proof of the
fifth. 7. A further proof thereof. 8. A third Argument of the Truth thereof. 9.
An Answer to an Evasion. 10. Another Evasion answered 11. A further Answer
thereto. 12. A third Answer. 13. A fourth Answer, wherein is mainly contained a
confirmation of the first Answer to the second Evasion. 14. The plainness of
the sixth Axiom. 15. The proof of the seventh. 109 Chap. 2. 1. That if Matter
be capable of Sense, Inanimate things are so too: And of Mr. Hobbs his wavering
in that point. 2. An Enumeration of several Faculties in us that Matter is
utterly incapable of. 3. That Matter in no kind of Temperature is capable of
Sense. 4. That no one point of Matter can be the Common Sensorium. 5. Nor a
multitude of such Points receiving singly the entire image of the Object. 6.
Nor yet receiving part part, and the whole the whole. 7. That Memory is
incompetible to Matter. 8. That the Matter is incapable of the notes of some
circumstances of the Object which we remembered. 9. That Matter cannot be the
seat of second Notions. 10. Mr. Hobbs his Evasion of the foregoing
Demonstration clearly confuted. 11. That the freedom of our Will evinces that
there is a Substance in us distinct from Matter. 12. That Mr. Hobbs therefore
acknowledges all our actions necessary. 123 Chap. 3. 1. Mr. Hobbs his Arguments
whereby he would prove all our actions necessitated. His first Argument. 2. His
second Argument. 3. His third Argument. 4. His fourth meant. 5. What must be the
meaning of these words, Nothing takes beginning from it self, in the first
Argument of Mr. Hobbs. 6. A fuller and more determinate explication of the
foregoing words; whose sense is evidently convinced to be, That no Essence of
it self can vary its modification. 7. That this is only said by Mr. Hobbs, not
proved, and a full confutation of his Assertion. 8. Mr. Hobbs imposed upon by
his own Sophistry. 9. That one part of this first Argument of his is
groundless, the other sophistical. 10. The plain proposal of his Argument,
whence appears more fully the weakness and sophistry thereof. 11. An answer to
his second Argument. 12. An answer to the third. 13. An answer to a difficulty
concerning the Truth and Falsehood of future Propositions. 14. An answer to Mr.
Hobbs his fourth Argument, which, though slighted by himself, is the strongest
of them all. 15. The difficulty of reconciling Free Will with Divine Prescience
and Prophecies. 16. That the faculty of Free Will is seldom put in use. 17.
That the use of it is properly in Moral conflict. 18. That the Soul is not
invincible there neither. 19. That Divine decrees either find fit Instruments
or make them. 20. That the more exact we make Divine Prescience, even to the
comprehension of any thing that implies no contradiction in it self to be
comprehended, the more clear it is that man's Will may be sometimes free: 21.
Which is sufficient to make good my last Argument against Mr. Hobbs. 137 Chap.
4. 1. An Enumeration of sundry Opinions concerning the Seat of Common Sense. 2.
Upon supposition that we are nothing but mere Matter, That the whole Body
cannot be the Common Sensorium; 3. Nor the Orifice of the Stomach; 4. Nor the
Heart; 5. Nor the Brain; 6. Nor the Membranes; 7. Nor the Septum lucidum; 8.
Nor Regius his small and perfectly solid Particle. 9. The probability of the
Conarion being the common Seat of Sense. 154 Chap. 5. 1. How Perception of
external Objects, Spontaneous Motion, Memory and Imagination, are pretended to
be performed by the Conarion, Spirits and Muscles, without a Soul. 2. That the
Conarion, devoid of a Soul, cannot be the common Percipient, demonstrated out
of Descartes himself. 3. That the Conarion, with the Spirits and organization
of the Parts of the Body, is not a sufficient Principle of Spontaneous motion,
without a Soul. 4. A description of the use of the Valvulae in the Nerves of
the Muscles for Spontaneous motion. 5. The insufficiency of this contrivance
for that purpose. 6. A further demonstration of the insufficiency thereof, from
whence is clearly evinced that Brutes have Souls. 7. That Memory cannot be
salved the way above described; 8. Nor Imagination. 9. A Distribution out of
Descartes of the Functions in us, some appertaining to the Body, and others to
the Soul. 10. The Authors Observations thereupon. 161 Chap. 6. 1. That no part
of the Spinal Marrow can be the Common Sensorium without a Soul in the Body. 2.
That the Animal Spirits are more likely to be that Common Percipient. 3. But
yet it is demonstrable they are not: 4. As not being so much as capable of
Sensation; 5. Nor of directing Motion into the Muscles; 6. Much less of
Imagination and rational Invention; 7. Nor of Memory. 8. An answer to an
Evasion. 9. The Authors reason, why he has confuted so particularly all the
Suppositions of the Seat of Common Sense, when few of them have been asserted
with the exclusion of a Soul. 173 Chap. 7. 1. His enquiry after the Seat of
Common Sense, upon supposition there is a Soul in the Body. 2. That there is
some particular part in the Body that is the Seat of Common Sense. 3. A general
division of their Opinions concerning the place of Common Sense. 4. That of
those that place it out of the Head there are two sorts. 5. The Invalidity of
Helmont 's reasons, whereby he would prove the Orifice of the Stomach to be the
principal Seat of the Soul. 6. An answer to Helmont 's stories for that
purpose. 7. A further confutation out of his own concessions. 8. Mr. Hobbs his
Opinion confuted, that makes the Heart the Seat of Common Sense. 9. A further
confutation thereof from Experience. 10. That the Common Sense is seated
somewhere in the Head. 11. A caution for the choice of the particular place
thereof. 12. That the whole Brain is not it; 13. Nor Regius his small solid
Particle; 14. Nor any external Membrane of the Brain, nor the Septum Lucidum.
15. The three most likely places. 16. Objections against Cartesius his Opinion
concerning the Conarion answered. 17. That the Conarion is not the Seat of
Common Sense; 18. Nor that part of the Spinal Marrow where the Nerves are
conceived to concur; but the Spirits in the fourth Ventricle of the Brain.
182 Chap. 8. 1. The first reason of his Opinion, the convenient Situation of
these Spirits. 2. The second, that the Spirits are the immediate instrument of
the Soul in all her functions. 3. The proof of the second Reason from the
general authority of Philosophers, and particularly of Hippocrates; 4. From our
Sympathizing with the changes of the Air; 5. From the celerity of Motion and
Cogitation; 6. From what is observed generally in the Generation of things; 7.
From Regius his experiment of a Snail in a glass; 8. From the running round of
Images in a Vertigo; 9. From the constitution of the Eye, and motion of the
Spirits there; 10. From the dependency of the actions of the Soul upon the
Body, whether in Meditation or corporeal Motion; 11. From the recovery of
Motion and Sense into a stupefied part; 12. And lastly from what is observed in
swooning fits, of paleness and sharpness of visage, etc. 13. The inference from
all this, That the Spirits in the fourth Ventricle are the seat of Common Sense
and that the main use of the Brain and Nerves is to preserve the Spirits. 198
Chap. 9. 1. Several Objections against Animal Spirits. 2. An Answer to the
first Objection touching the Porosity of the Nerves. 3. To the second and third
from the Extravasation of the Spirits and pituitous Excrements found in the
Brain. 4. To the fourth fetched from the incredible swiftness of motion in the
Spirits. 5. To the last from Ligation. 6. Undeniable Demonstrations that there
are Animal Spirits in the Ventricles of the Brain. 209 Chap. 10. 1. That the
Soul is not confined to the Common Sensorium. 2. The first Argument from the
Plastic power of the Soul. 3. Which is confirmed from the gradual dignity of
the Souls Faculties, of which this Plastic is the lowest; 4. External
Sensation the next; 5. After that Imagination, and then Reason. 6. The second
Argument from Passions and Sympathies in Animals. 7. An illustration of the
manner of natural Magic. 8. The third Argument from the Perception of Pain in
the exterior parts of the Body. 9. The fourth and last from the nature of
Sight. 215 Chap. 11. 1. That neither the Soul without the Spirits, nor the
Spirits without the presence of the Soul in the Organ, are sufficient causes of
Sensation. 2. A brief declaration how Sensation is made. 3. How Imagination. 4.
Of Reason and Memory, and whether there be any Marks in the Brain. 5. That the
Spirits are the immediate Instrument of the Soul in Memory also; and how Memory
arises; 6. As also Forgetfulness. 7. How spontaneous Motion is performed. 8.
How we walk, sing, and play, though thinking of something else. 9. That though
the Spirits be not alike fine every where. yet the Sensiferous Impression will
pass to the Common Sensorium. 10. That there is an Heterogeneity in the very
Soul her self; and what it is in her we call the Root, the Center, and the Eye;
and what the Rays and Branches. 11. That the sober and allowable Distribution
of her into Parts, is into Perceptive and Plastic. 226 Chap. 12. 1. An Answer
to an Objection, That our Arguments will as well prove the Immortality of the
Souls of Brutes, as of Men. 2. Another Objection inferring the Praeexistence of
Brutes Souls, and consequently of ours. 3. The first Answer to the Objection.
4. The second Answer consisting of four parts. 5. First, That the Hypothesis of
Praeexistence is more agreeable to Reason then any other Hypothesis. 6. And not
only so, but that it is very solid in it self. 7. That the Wisdom and
Goodness of God argue the truth thereof. 8. As also the face of Providence in
the World. 9. The second part of the second Answer, That the Praeexistence of
the Soul has the suffrage of all Philosophers in all Ages, that held it
Incorporeal. 10. That the Gymnosophists of Egypt, the Indian Brachmans, the
Persian Magi, and all the learned of the Jews were of this Opinion. 11. A
Catalogue of particular famous persons that held the same. 12. That Aristotle
was also of the same mind. 13. Another more clear place in Aristotle to this
purpose, with Sennertus his Interpretation. 14. An Answer to an Evasion of that
Interpretation. 15. The last and clearest place of all out of Aristotle's
Writings. 237 Chap. 13. 1. The third part of the second Answer, That the
forgetting of the former state is no good argument against the Souls
Praeexistence. 2. What are the chief causes of Forgetfulness. 3. That they all
conspire, and that in the highest degree, to destroy the memory of the other
state. 4. That Mischances and Diseases have quite taken away the Memory of
things here in this life. 5. That it is impossible for the Soul to remember her
former condition without a Miracle. 6. The fourth part of the second Answer,
That the entrance of a Praeexistent Soul into a Body is as intelligible as
either Creation or Traduction. 252 Chap. 14. 1. The knowledge of the difference
of Vehicles, and the Souls Union with them, necessary for the understanding how
she enters into this Earthly Body. 2. That though the name of Vehicle be not in
Aristotle, yet the thing is there. 3. A clearing of Aristotle's notion of the
Vehicle, out of the Philosophy of Descartes. 4 A full interpretation of his
Text. 5. That Aristotle makes only two Vehicles, Terrestrial and Ethereal;
which is more then sufficient to prove the Souls Oblivion of her former state.
6 That the ordinary Vehicle of the Soul after death is Air. 7. The duration of
the Soul in her several Vehicles. 8. That the Union of the Soul with her
Vehicle does not consist in Mechanical Congruity, but Vital. 9. In what Vital
congruity of the Matter consists. 10. In what Vital congruity of the Soul
consists, and how it changing, the Soul may be free from her aerie Vehicle,
without violent precipitation out of it. 11. Of the manner of the descent of
Souls into Earthly Bodies. 12. That there is so little absurdity in the
Praeexistence of Souls, that the concession thereof can be but a very small
prejudice to our Demonstrations of her Immortality. 257 Chap. 15. 1. What is
meant by the Separation of the Soul, with a confutation of Regius, who would
stop her in the dead Corpse. 2. An answer to those that profess themselves
puzzled how the Soul can get out of the Body. 3. That there is a threefold Vital
Congruity to be found in three several Subjects. 4. That this triple Congruity
is also competible to one Subject, viz. the Soul of Man. 5. That upon this
Hypothesis it is very intelligible how the Soul may leave the Body. 6. That her
Union with the aerial Vehicle may be very sudden, and as it were in a moment.
7. That the Soul is actually separate from the Body is to be proved either by
History or Reason. Examples of the former kind out of Pliny, Herodotus,
Ficinus. 8. Whether the Ecstasie of Witches prove an actual separation of the
Soul from the Body. 9. That this real separation of the Soul in Ecstasie is
very possible. 10. How the Soul may be loosned and leave the Body, and yet
return thither again. 11. That though Reason and Will cannot in this life
release the Soul from the Body, yet Passion may; and yet so that she may return
again. 12. The peculiar power of Desire for this purpose. 13. Of Cardans
Ecstasies, and the Ointment of Witches, and what truth there may be in their
Confessions. 267 Chap. 16. 1. That Souls departed communicate Dreams. 2.
Examples of Apparitions of Souls deceased. 3. Of Apparitions in fields where
pitched Battles have been fought; as also of those in Churchyards, and other
vaporous places. 4. That the Spissitude of the Air may well contribute to the
easiness of the appearing of Ghosts and Specter. 5. A further proof thereof
from sundry examples. 6. Of Marsilius Ficinus his appearing after death. 7.
With what sort of people such examples as these avail little. 8. Reasons to
persuade the unprejudiced that ordinarily those Apparitions that bear the shape
and person of the deceased, are indeed the Souls of them. 286 Chap. 17. 1. The
praeeminence of Arguments drawn from Reason above those from Story. 2. The
first step toward a Demonstration of Reason that the Soul acts out of her
Body, for that she is an immaterial Substance separable therefrom. 3. The
second, That the immediate instruments for Sense, Motion, and Organization of
the Body, are certain subtle and tenuious Spirits. 4. A comparison betwixt the
Soul in the Body and the AErial Genii. 5. Of the nature of Demons from the
account of Marcus the Eremite, and how the Soul is presently such, having once
left this Body. 6. An Objection concerning the Souls of Brutes: to which is
answered, First by way of concesson; 7. Secondly, by confuting the Arguments
for the former concession. 8. That there is no rational doubt at all of the
Humane Soul acting after death. 9. A further Argument of her activity out of
this Body, from her conflicts with it while she is in it. 10. As also from the
general hope and belief of all Nations, that they shall live after death. 297
Chap. 18. 1. That the Faculties of our Souls, and the nature of the immediate
instrument of them, the Spirits, do so nearly symbolize with those of Demons,
that it seems reasonable, if God did not on purpose hinder it, that they would
not fail to act out of this earthly Body. 2. Or if they would, his power and
wisdom could easily implant in their essence a double or triple Vital
Congruity, to make all sure. 3. A further demonstration of the present Truth
from the Veracity of God. 4. An Answer to an Objection against the foregoing
Argument. 5. Another Demonstration from His Justice. 6. An Answer to an
Objection. 7. An Answer to another Objection. 8. Another Argument from the
Justice of God. 9. An Objection answered. 10. An invincible Demonstration of
the Souls Immortality from the Divine Goodness. 11. A more particular
enforcement of that Argument, and who they are upon whom it will work least.
12. That the noblest and most virtuous Spirit is the most assurable of the
Souls Immortality. 311
BOOK III.
Chap. 1. 1. WHY the Author treats of the state of the Soul after Death, and in
what Method. 2. Arguments to prove that the Soul is ever united vitally with
some Matter or other. 3. Further Reasons to evince the same. 4. That the Soul
is capable of an aerie and ethereal Body, as well as a terrestrial. 5. That
she ordinarily passes out of an earthly into an aerial Vehicle first. 6. That
in her aerie Vehicle she is capable of Sense, Pleasure, and Pain. 7. That the
main power of the Soul over her aerial Vehicle is the direction of Motion in
the particles thereof. 8. That she may also add or diminish Motion in her
ethereal. 9. How the purity of the Vehicle confers to the quickness of Sense
and Knowledge. 10. Of the Souls power of changing the temper of her aerial
Vehicle; 11. As also the shape thereof. 12. The plainness of the last Axiom.
326 Chap. 2. 1. Of the Dimensions of the Soul considered barely in her self. 2.
Of the Figure of the Souls Dimensions. 3. Of the Heterogeneity of her Essence.
4. That there is an Heterogeneity in her Plastic part distinct from the
Perceptive. 5. Of the acting of this Plastic part in her framing of the
Vehicle. 6. The excellency of Descartes his Philosophy. 7. That the Vehicles
of Ghosts have as much of solid corporeal Substance in them as the Bodies of
Men. 8. The folly of the contrary Opinion evinced. 9. The advantage of the
Soul, for matter of Body, in the other state, above this. 340 Chap. 3. 1. That
the natural abode of the Soul after death is the Air. 2. That she cannot quit
the AErial Regions till the Ethereal Congruity of life be awakened in her. 3.
That all Souls are not in the same Region of the Air. 4. Cardans conceit of
placing all Demons in the upper Region. 5. The use of this conceit for the
showing the reason of their seldom appearing. 6. That this Phenomenon is
salved by a more rational Hypothesis. 7. A further confutation of Cardans
Opinion. 8. More tending to the same scope. 9. The Original of Cardans error
concerning the remote operations of Demons. 10. An Objection how Demons and
Souls separate can be in this lower Region, where Winds and Tempests are so
frequent. 11. A preparation to an Answer from the consideration of the nature
of the winds. 12. Particular Answers to the Objection. 13. A further Answer
from the nature of the Statick Faculty of the Soul. 14. Another from the
sudden power of actuating her Vehicle. 15. What incommodations she suffers
from hail, rain, etc. 350 Chap. 4. 1. That the Soul once having quitted this
earthly Body becomes a Demon. 2. Of the External Senses of the Soul separate,
their number and limits in the Vehicle. 3. Of Sight in a Vehicle organized and
unorganized. 4. How Demons and separate Souls hear and see at a vast Distance:
and whence it is that though they may so easily hear or see us, we may neither
see nor hear them. 5. That they have Hearing as well as Sight. 6. Of the Touch,
Smell, Taste, and Nourishment of Demons. 7. The external employment that the
Genii and Souls deceased may have out of the Body. 8. That the actions of
Separate Souls, in reference to us, are most-what conformable to their life
here on Earth. 9. What their entertainments are in reference to themselves. 10.
The distinction of orders of Demons from the places they most frequent. 364
Chap. 5. 1. That the Separate Soul spends not all her time in Solitude. 2. That
her converse with us seems more intelligible then that with the Genii. 3. How
the Genii may be visible one to another, though they be to us invisible. 4. Of
their approaches, and of the limits of their swiftness of motion: 5. And how
they far exceed us in celerity. 6. Of the figure or shape of their Vehicles,
and of their privacy, when they would be invisible. 7. That they cannot well
converse in a mere simple Orbicular form. 8. That they converse in humane
shape, at least the better sort of them. 9. Whether the shape they be in
proceed merely from the Imperium of their Will and Fancy, or is regulated by a
natural Character of the Plastic part of the Soul. 10. That the personal shape
of a Soul or Genius is partly from the Will, and partly from the Plastic
power. 11. That considering how the Soul organizes the Foetus in the Womb, and
moves our limbs at pleasure; it were a wonder if Spirits should not have such
command over their Vehicles as is believed. 12. A further Argument from an
excessive virtue some have given to Imagination. 376 Chap. 6. 1. More credible
Instances of the effects of Imagination. 2. A special and peculiar Instance in
Signatures of the Foetus. 3. That what Fienus grants, who has so cautiously
bounded the power of Fancy, is sufficient for the present purpose. 4. Examples
approved of by Fienus. 5. Certain Examples rejected by him, and yet approved of
by Fernelius and Sennertus. 6. Three not orious Stories of the power of the
Mothers Imagination on the Foetus, out of Helmont. 7. A conjectural inference
from those Stories, what influence the Spirit of Nature has in all Plastic
operations. 8. A further confirmation of the Conjecture from Signatures on the
Foetus. 9. An application thereof to the transfiguration of the Vehicles of
Demons. 387 Chap. 7. 1. Three notable Examples of Signatures, rejected by
Fienus: 2. And yet so far allowed for possible, as will fit our design. 3.
That Helmonts Cherry and Licetus his Crab-fish are shrewd Arguments that the
Soul of the World has to do with all Efformations of both Animals and Plants.
4. An Example of a most exact and lively Signature out of Kircher: 5. With his
judgment thereupon. 6. Another Example out of him of a Child with gray hairs.
7. An application of what has been said hitherto, concerning the Signatures of
the Foetus, to the transfiguration of the aerie Vehicles of separate Souls and
Demons. 8. Of their personal transformation visible to us. 398 Chap. 8. 1.
That the Better sort of Genii converse in Humane shape, the Baser sometimes in
Bestial. 2. How they are disposed to turn themselves into several Bestial
forms. 3. Of Psellus his (...), or Igneous splendours of Demons, how they are
made. 4. That the external beauty of the Genii is according to the degree of
the inward virtue of their minds. 5. That their aerial form need not be purely
transparent, but more finely opake, and colored. 6. That there is a
distinction of Masculine and Feminine Beauty in their personal figurations. 407
Chap. 9. 1. A general account of the mutual entertains of the Genii in the
other world. 2. Of their Philosophical and Political Conferences. 3. Of their
Religious Exercises. 4. Of the innocent Pastimes and Recreations of the better
sort of them. 5. A confirmation thereof from the Conventicles of Witches. 6.
Whether the purer Demons have their times of repast or no. 7. Whence the bad
Genii have their food. 8. Of the food and feastings of the better sort of
Genii. 414 Chap. 10. 1. How hard it is to define any thing concerning the
AErial or Ethereal Elysiums. 2. That there is Political Order and Laws amongst
these aerie Demons. 3. That this Chain of Government reaches down from the
highest Ethereal Powers through the Aerial to the very Inhabitants of the
Earth. 4. The great security we live in thereby. 5. How easily detectible and
punishable wicked Spirits are by those of their own Tribe. 6. Other reasons of
the security we find our selves in from the gross infestations of evil Spirits.
7. What kind of punishments the AErial Officers inflict upon their
Malefactors. 427 Chap. 11. 1. Three things to be considered before we come to
the moral condition of the Soul after death: namely, her Memory of transactions
in this life. 2. The peculiar feature and individual Character of her AErial
Vehicle. 3. The Retainment of the same Name. 4. How her ill deportment here
lays the train of her Misery hereafter. 5. The unspeakable torments of
Conscience worse then Death, and not to be avoided by dying. 6. Of the hideous
tortures of external sense on them, whose searedness of Conscience may seem to
make them incapable of her Lashes. 7. Of the state of the Souls of the more
innocent and conscientious Pagans. 8. Of the natural accruments of
After-happiness to the morally good in this life. 9. How the Soul enjoys her
actings or sufferings in this Life for an indispensable Cause, when she has
passed to the other. 10. That the reason is proportionably the same in things
of less consequence. 11. What mischief men may create to themselves in the
other World by their Zealous mistakes in this. 12. That though there were no
Memory after Death, yet the manner of our Life here may sow the seeds of the
Souls future happiness or misery. 435 Chap. 12. 1. What the Spirit of Nature
is. 2. Experiments that argue its real Existence; such as that of two strings
tuned Unisons. 3. Sympathetick Cures and Tortures. 4. The Sympathy betwixt the
Earthly and Astral Body. 5. Monstrous Births. 6. The Attraction of the
Loadstone and Roundness of the Sun and Stars. 449 Chap. 13. 1. That the Descent
of heavy Bodies argues the existence of the Spirit of Nature, because else they
would either hang in the Air as they are placed, 2. Or would be diverted from
a perpendicular as they fall near a Plate of Metal set slooping. 3. That the
endeavor of the Ether or Air from the Center to the Circumference is not the
cause of Gravity, against Mr. Hobbs. 4. A full confutation of Mr. Hobbs his
Opinion. 5. An ocular Demonstration of the absurd consequence thereof. 6. An
absolute Demonstration that Gravity cannot be the effect of mere Mechanical
powers. 7. The Latitude of the operations of the Spirit of Nature, how large
and where bounded. 8. The reason of its name. 9. Its grand office of
transmitting Souls into rightly prepared Matter. 458 Chap. 14. 1. Objections
against the Souls Immortality from her condition in Infancy, Old age, Sleep and
Sicknesses. 2. Other Objections taken from Experiments that seem to prove her
Discerpibility. 3. As also from the seldom appearing of the Souls of the
deceased; 4. And from our natural fear of Death. 5. A Subterfuge of the adverse
party, in supposing but one Soul common to all Creatures. 6. An Answer
concerning the Littleness of the Soul in Infancy: 7. As also concerning the
weakness of her Intellectuals then, and in Old age. 8. That Sleep does not at
all argue the Souls Mortality, but rather illustrate her Immortality. 9. An
Answer to the Objection from Apoplexies and Catalepsies: 10. As also to that
from Madness. 11. That the various depravations of her Intellectual Faculties
do no more argue her Mortality, then the worser Modifications of Matter its
natural Annihilability. And why God created Souls sympathizing with Matter. 471
Chap. 15. 1. An Answer to the experiment of the Scolopendra cut into pieces. 2.
And to the flying of an headless Eagle over a barn, as also to that of the
Malefactors head biting a Dog by the ear. 3. A superaddition of a difficulty
concerning Monsters born with two or more Heads and but one Body and Heart. 4.
A solution of the difficulty. 5. An Answer touching the seldom appearing of
the Souls of the deceased: 6. As also concerning the fear of Death; 7. And a
down-bearing sense that sometimes so forcibly obtrudes upon us the belief of
the Souls Mortality. 8. Of the Tragical Pomp and dreadful Praeludes of Death,
with some corroborative Considerations against such sad spectacles. 9. That
there is nothing really sad and miserable in the Universe, unless to the wicked
and impious. 481 Chap. 16. 1. That that which we properly are is both Sensitive
and Intellectual. 2. What is the true notion of a Soul being One. 3. That if
there be but One Soul in the World, it is both Rational and Sensitive. 4. The
most favorable representation of their Opinion that hold but One. 5. A
confutation of the foregoing representation. 6. A Reply to the confutation. 7.
An Answer to the Reply 8. That the Soul of Man is not properly any Ray either
of God or the Soul of the World. 9. And yet if she were so, it would be no
prejudice to her Immortality: whence the folly of Pomponatius is noted. 10. A
further animadversion upon Pomponatius his folly, in admitting a certain number
of remote Intelligencies, and denying Particular Immaterial Substances in Men
and Brutes. 491 Chap. 17. 1. That the Author having safely conducted the Soul
into her AErial condition through the dangers of Death, might well be excused
from attending her any further. 2. What reasons urge him to consider what fates
may befall her afterward. 3. Three hazzards the Soul runs after this life,
whereby she may again become obnoxious to death according to the opinion of
some. 4. That the aerial Genii are mortal, confirmed by three testimonies. 5.
The one from the Vision of Facius Cardanus, in which the Spirits that appeared
to him professed themselves mortal. 6. The time they stayed with him, and the
matters they disputed of. 7. What credit Hieronymus Cardanus gives to his
Fathers Vision. 8. The other testimony out of Plutarch, concerning the Death of
the great God Pan. 9. The third and last of Hesiod, whose opinion Plutarch has
polisht and refined. 10. An Enumeration of the several Paradoxes contained in
Facius Cardanus his Vision. 11. What must be the sense of the third Paradox, if
those AErial Speculators spoke as they thought. 12. Another Hypothesis to the
same purpose. 13. The craft of these Demons, in shuffling in poisonous Error
amongst solid Truths. 14. What makes the story of the death of Pan less to the
present matter, with an addition of Demetrius his observations touching the
Sacred Islands near Britain. 15. That Hesiod his opinion is the most
unexceptionable, and that the harshness therein is but seeming, not real. 16.
That the Ethereal Vehicle instates the Soul in a condition of perfect
Immortality. 17. That there is no internal impediment to those that are
Heroically good, but that they may attain an everlasting happiness after Death.
503 Chap. 18. 1. The Conflagration of the World an Opinion of the Stoics. 2.
Two ways of destroying the World the Ancients have taken notice of, and
especially that by Fire. 3. That the Conflagration of the World, so far as it
respects us, is to be understood only of the burning of the Earth. 4. That the
ends of the Stoics Conflagration are competible only to the Earths burning.
5. An acknowledgement that the Earth may be burnt, though the proof thereof be
impertinent to this place. 6. That the Conflagration thereof will prove very
fatal to the Souls of wicked Men and Demons. 7. Five several Opinions
concerning their state after the Conflagration; whereof the first is, That they
are quite destroyed by Fire. 8. The second, That they are annihilated by a
special act of Omnipotency. 9. The third, That they lie senseless in an eternal
Death. 10. The fourth, That they are in a perpetual furious and painful Dream.
11. The fifth and last, That they will revive again, and that the Earth and
Air will be inhabited by them. 12. That this last seems to be framed from the
fictitious (...) of the Stoics, who were very sorry Metaphysicians, and as ill
Naturalists. 13. An Animadversion upon a self-contradicting sentence of Seneca.
14. The unintelligibleness of the state of the Souls of the Wicked after the
Conflagration. 15. That the Ethereal Inhabitants will be safe. And what will
then become of Good men and Demons on the Earth and in the Air. And how they
cannot be delivered but by a supernatural power. 524 Chap. 19. 1. That the
Extinction of the Sun is no Panick fear, but may be rationally suspected from
the Records of History and grounds of Natural Philosophy. 2. The sad Influence
of this Extinction upon Man and Beast, and all the aerial Demons imprisoned
within their several Atmospheres in our Vortex. 3. That it will do little or
no damage to the Ethereal Inhabitants in reference to heat or warmth. 4. Nor
will they find much want of his light. 5. And if they did, they may pass out of
one Vortex into another, by the Privilege of their Ethereal Vehicles; 6. And
that without any labor or toil, and as maturely as they please. 7. The vast
incomprehensibleness of the tracts and compasses of the ways of Providence. 8.
A short Recapitulation of the whole Discourse. 9. An Explication of the
Persians two Principles of Light and Darkness, which they called (...) and
(...), and when and where the Principle of Light gets the full victory. 10.
That Philosophy, or something more sacred then Philosophy, is the only Guide
to a true (...). 538
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 222. l. 5. for Gamaitus, read Gamaieu's.

2^4. l. 10. for Tyc, r. Tie.

327. l. 2. for Immortality, r. Immorality.

458. l. 22. for stooping, r. slooping.

462. l. 13. for E F H, r. angle E F H.

488. l. 9. for inclogg'd, r. in, clogged.

521. l. 16. for lightning, r. lighting.

528. l. ult. dele those.


