A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church OF St. PAUL's, On May 29. 1699:
BEFORE The Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, ALDERMEN AND CITIZENS.

By THO. MORER, Rector of St. Anne, etc. Aldersgate.

LONDON, Printed for James Bonwicke, at the Hat and Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCIX.

Isaiah 1.26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning.


AS the great Work of this Holy Penman is Prophecy, so for the most part it is
about Spiritual Things; and his main Design is to speak of the long-desired
Revolution and Restoration of the Church under the Government of Messiah.

And this Subject he immediately enters upon in the beginning of the next
Chapter, Ver. 2, 3, 4. wherein he sets before us the Glories and Advantages of
that Constitution; the General Conflux of most Nations to this New Temple; the
Willingness of the People to learn and practice the Duties of Religion, and
readiness to invite their Neighbors to do so too; together with the Happiness
attending it, signified by the Peace, good Disposition, and sweet Temper, among
such Professors, whose Principles would direct them to lay aside all
Animosities, and not suffer them to War and quarrel with one another. And though
now under the Estate of Christianity, to which the Prophecy had an Eye, there
is not that Universal Silence of the Sword, and other Arms, as might be
expected, and was at that time when the Author of it was born, The Prince of
Peace; yet this is owing to Humane Frailty, and the violent Passions of Men,
which though in Obedience to the Gospel, we all renounce at our Baptism, yet they
generally overruled, and we submit to 'em. This, I say, is the great Work of
Isaiah, the Glory and Extent of the Empire and Religion of Messiah, in
opposition to the Jews, who were confined within narrow Bounds, and whose
Condition was for the most part Military and Unhappy, because of the frequent
Wars they were forced to engage in for the Defense of their Worship, and to
secure Conscience against the Insults of the Infidels.

Yet it is evident, according to the way of Holy Writ, (wherein there are many
Intermixtures of Religious and Worldly Matters) that he insists on a nearer
Subject in this Chapter, and directs his Discourse to the Jews with respect to
their Civil Capacity, as they made up a State or Nation, and as such to be
punished or prospered in a way suitable to their Polity; a Way that concerns
only this World, to which all these Appointments or Governments are limited,
though both Governors and Governed are apart to make another Account hereafter,
and Personally Answer for their present Actions or Counsels.

Here then in the first place he charges them, as a Nation, with many Sins of
frightful Gomplexion, Injustice, Violence, and Rebellion, Ver. 4.21, 22, 23.
The Ground of all which was a real Disbelief of what they professed; and
notwithstanding their fair Appearance and Pretensions of Holiness, yet plainly
they dissembled in what they said and did. They used Religion only for Secular
Ends, and put on this Sacred Veil to no other purpose then to cover their
Vices. They fasted, but it was for Strife and Debate, and to smile with the
Fist of Wickedness. They offered Incense, but it was Abomination. Ver. 14.
They spread forth their Hands, but Hands full of Blood. They prayed to God,
but like them in the Poet, to patronize their Villainies; And, as our Lord
speaks of the Pharisees, at the same time they devoured Widows Houses, and for
a show made Long Prayers. Luke 20.47.
All which proves, that either they believed no God at all; or, which is no
less Atheism, denied him to be what He is, All-knowing, Righteous and Pure;
Attributes, which being admitted, would quickly put a stop to all these
Religious Cheats. In a word, their Claim to the True Religion did but aggravate
their Wilful Abuse of it, and their Hypocrisy ripened both their Sins and
their Ruin; two things that commonly go together: And therefore, as in Ver. 7.
they had experience of this a little before, when their Country was desolate,
and their Cities burnt with fire -- meaning the Destruction wrought by the
Syrians in the preceding Reign. So we sind another Calamity threatened, V. 24.
Therefore says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the mighty one of Israel, Ah, I
will ease me of my Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies. Which was made
good in the Reign after by the Oppressions they groaned under, when the Princes
of Babylon became their Masters.

However God in Judgment remembered Mercy. And though their Sins called for this
Misery, and that their Provocations were so great, as to force him to afflict
them with the Assyrian Bondage; yet his Compassion was also great, and this sad
Message by the Prophet shall be close followed with a Promise of Comfort,
especially to the few Righteous among them, who, though involved in the general
Distress of their Country, as making all, both Good and Bad, one Civil Society,
yet they should be used only as Gold and Silver, which is not consumed, but
purified in the Fire; as this Captivity should make them better, and be
employed as a means to cleanse them of their Pollutions, or rather rid them of
those wicked Men, whose Sins brought that Vengeance on the Nation. And this is
what was intended by those Figurative Expressions in the Verse before, Ver. 25.
And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy Dross, and take
away all thy Tin. Which being done, then comes in the Deliverance, the Blessing
of my Text, And I will restore, etc. which was effected by Zerubbabel, who
recovered the City, and rebuilt the Temple.

For the better understanding of the Prophet, it is necessary to do Two things.

I. Examine what this Ancient Constitution was he refers to.

II. Wherein the Happiness consists in being restored to that Constitution.

I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the
beginning.

1. Let us examine what this Ancient Constitution was the Prophet points to, or
the means to make 'em happy. And in order to this, it will lie upon us to
consider a little the Importance or Signification of those Two Terms, Judges
and Counselors, the clearing of which will be serviceable to us.

(...). So the Septuagint. The first of which properly means one able to
discern and distinguish; who knows what is good and bad, right and wrong, and
the like; and has by Nature, Study, or long Experience so much Skill and
Judgment, that when any Point is laid before him, he can remove the
Perplexities, or matter of Doubts and Disputes which arise between contending
Parties, and show which side it is that deserves the Preference. And this being
the requisite Qualification of him who at any time is appointed to end
Controversies between Man and Man, he that has this Trust is called (...), a
Judge, that his Name might remember him of the Caution and Discretion he is to
use in all these Cases.

But here it is construed not so much a Word of Capacity, as of Pre-eminence and
Power: And though the Power supposes this Capacity, (and where it is otherwise,
they are in a very miserable Circumstance who are subject to that Power) yet we
are now to lay aside the Etymology and Grammar of (...), and take it as an
Order, and not a Faculty.

Being then restrained to the Government of Israel, to whom the Prophet speaks,
it appears from Josephus, that all the Princes and Rulers of that People, from
the Death of Joshua to the Election of K. Antio. l. 6. c. 6.
Saul, had this Name. All this time, says he, has been called the time of the
Judges. So the Book which contains the History of their Actions, is Entitled
(...), as in the Hebrew Shophetim. And in the Account of the several Reigns
therein recorded, it is said that such a one (...), Judged Israel at that time.

But we must go a little higher than this; for we find that even Moses himself
had the same Style in that Oration St. Stephen made the Jews just before his
Death, where, reciting the Passage in which Moses endeavored to reconcile two
of his Brethren, one of whom ill requited him for his Pains, demanding
peevishly, Who made him a Judge and a Ruler over them? This very Moses, says
the Martyr, whom they refused, saying, Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge, the
same did God send to be a Ruler, etc. Acts 7.35. -- It Is true, the Holy Man, or
at least St. Luke for him, uses another Greek word, and calls him (...), which
in sound varies, but has the same signification, and both are translated
Judge. And all the difference is, that (...) seems of larger extent, and
intends him a Person with ability to discern without determining the Subject;
whereas the latter word as a Species, is consined to Legal Causes about
Property or Criminal Actions. Though after all, there may be no more than a
gradation in the Terms, the one to hear and examine the Suit, and the other to
end it by Sentence. The first bespeaks his Skill, the last his Integrity. And
as (...) makes him a Judge, so (...) supposes him Righteous, and that he will
take special care to execute Justice without Prejudice, Partiality or Favor,
as Law and Conscience shall direct him. However both the words center in the
Supreme Magistrate: And although by Delegation or Commission the Trust is reposed
in some of the Subjects whose capacities will bear it, yet originally the Power
is lodged in the (...), as St. Stephen explains it, and the word denotes the
Sovereign Prince or Ruler, by whatever name we distinguish him, such as Moses,
Joshua, and their followers the Judges were who had Kingly Authority, Judges
17.6.
and sometimes the name, and as other Monarchs under God, governed the Children
of Israel. And to these the Text refers, as being the first to whom the Title
of Judges was given.

Long before this, indeed, the Patriarchs were as Absolute as any Emperor
after them. They were Kings, Priests and Judges: They had Life and Death in
their hands: They made War and Peace as they saw good; and acted Independently,
or without being awed by any humane Power above their own. And of this we have
a pregnant Instance in Abraham, who was going to Sacrifice his Son without any
open Reason, but that of his Will. He also armed his Servants, and fought and
beat the four Kings who had taken his Kinsman Prisoner, yet his Army consisted
of no more than Three hundred and eighteen Men: which, as it shows himself to
be no Mighty Potentate, yet beating his Enemies with these, it proves the other
four Princes weaker than He, who notwithstanding are called Kings and they had
routed five other Kings before. Plainly in those days, their Dominions were
small. The Patriarchs had no more Subjects than Servants and Children: And had
all the Heads of Families been as they were, so Righteous, so void of Ambition,
so little Covetous, so free from Revenge, and the like; those supposed
Combinations, or closing of lesser Familes to oppose the greater, and the final
Election of one among them to keep Peace among the whole, and give a timely
Check to any aspiring Spirit, who had otherwise grown too big for the Interest
and Safety of his Neighbors; this Politic Union, I say, had been kept out of
doors, and we had wanted no Authority but that of Fatherhood to govern us. But
Pride and Avarice, Violence and Licentiousness in some, attempting more
Elbow-room than others were willing to give 'em; this fright'ned former Ages
into the refuge of Associations, Covenants, Laws and Rulers; by the help of
which, the feeblest Arm might be able to wrestle with the strongest, the
meanest sort to cope with the greater, and every Man and Woman either protected
or relieved upon the Encroachments of these Intruders, who else were ready to
molest them.

Where the True Religion had no Influence, the Necessity was too visible to
engage Men to these Combinational Projects. And the Reason at last reached, not
only Private Families, but the Governments also themselves into which they were
united; one State being forward enough to devour another, as the particular
Houses, Clans and Tribes had attempted before. Which constrained even them to
part with their own Power, and by consent to entrust it with one common
Sovereign, to be secured against this Danger. Yet it went so slowly on, and
with so much Caution, that at the Trojan Wars Seven hundred Years at least
after Abraham, we have the Catalogue of a great number of Kings in that little
spot of Ground which made up Greece; all which were consulted and engaged in
that War, which lasted so long, because the Kings were many. In Egypt the
Monarchy was grown to a more Man-like Stature, as appears from the Holy
Records: And to that Crown the People of Israel were at length Subjected, even
in its more Arbitrary and Unreasonable Commands, without any Regiment or Laws
of their own, till the times of Moses, who was first their Deliverer, Deuteronomy.
33.5.
and then their King. So that here, as I said, me must needs date the Original
or Rise of their Government, when all the Families of the Patriarchs were
reduced under one Head, and submitted to Moses, as their universal Father,
Ruler and Judge.

The other word to be explained is Counselors -- thy Counselors as at the
beginning -- Counsel is Consultation, or Conference about some End, which being
agreed on, it proceeds to examine and debate the most likely means to it. A
Counselor is he, who being endowed with a Talent or Ability for this Work, is
called upon and required to serve in it. For I take it as a word of Office, in
its nature Ministerial, and a Man ought to have a Call before he assumes the
Style. Because, though he may be capable to propose wholesome Advice, he is no
Counselor until this capacity be brought in to act by his Warrant who gives
him leave to offer it with freedom. So that as good Counsel (for we take the
word in the best sense here) is deliberation about a good End, and the
contrivance of good Means: And as a Counselor never answers this Character but
while he pursues those two things without Self-regard in what he proposes; so
the Government cannot but be happy where the Relation is such as the Text gives
between Judges and Counselors; the one not venturing to act without previous
and solid Advice, and the other not daring to offer any Advice but what
Experience, Conscience and Honor declare to be serviceable to those Ends for
which it is demanded.

And such was the Government of Israel. For as Moses and Joshua were the first
Judges of this Kind, so the Counselors signify Aaron and his Successors in
the High Priesthood, by whose Pectoral, Vrim and Thummim, or some other way,
God was pleased to reveal his Will, and give them his Advice in arduous and
difficult Cases. And strictly speaking the first Government among the Jews was
purely a Theocracy; God was their King, and Moses and Aaron his Deputies, the
former in Civil, the last in Religious Matters, so early, so sacred and
relative was the Institution of the Crown and Mitre. And if the Precedence is
given the First, it is because the Church is within the State; and Men as they
make a Civil Body, are the Matter of all Government here, and their Actions
what the Laws are conversant about; so that He that is the Head of such a Body,
ought to be preferred, and bear the Rule, for the present convenience and
welfare of the Community. However, the others, as they also were the Ministers
of God, they were enabled to assist by their Counsel the Chief Magistrate; who
for want of their Advice, sometimes miscarried in their Affairs, as in the
Instances of Joshua's hasty League with the Gibeonites, Targum Jonath. on
Judges 11.39.
and Jeptha's dealing with his Daughter.

To these frequently were added Prophets Extraordinary, who reported the Divine
Pleasure in the most weighty Matters; and so this Prophecy of Isaiah was
fulfilled in Ezra, Nehemiah, Haggai and Zachary. But the Standing Commission
was that of the High Priest, and it was his Office to be a Counselor, as the
Office of a Prince to be a Judge.

Under the Kings afterward there were several others honored with the same
Style; 1 Chr. 27. 2 Chr. 10.
as Jonathan and Hushai were Counselors to David, the Old Men to King
Solomon, and others; and the Ministry of these may be serviceable to the State,
where care is taken not to depend too much on the Advice of Achitophel, and
that Rehoboam's Novices prevail not too much on the Prince's Ambition or
Easiness, to Enslave and Oppress the People. And thus for the First thing the
Constitution referred to -- I will restore thy Judges as at the first, etc.

Before I proceed to my Second Point, it concerns me to see, Whether the Notion
of the Sanhedrim does not contradict the Interpretation I have made on these
words. For if they are the Judges and Counselors here intended, as some are
apt to think, and of so great Figure as to Eclipse the Majesty of the Jewish
Princes to that degree, as to let them have no Influence or Authority, but what
they claimed as their Members, or within their number, then I have mistaken the
Meaning of Isaiah, and the Nature of the ancient Constitution of Israel; in the
return of which, the Prophet foretells their Happiness: And which, as I have
dated under the the Reigns of Moses, Joshua and the Judges, so I understand it
to be a Complete Monarchy, with as much Power or more than the Kings after them.

By the Sanhedrim, I mean the Senate of Seventy Two, So many stood up to have
the K. Sentenced.
(a fatal Number to our late Monarch) being Six out of every Tribe
indifferently chosen, to whom some Rabbis, and others on their Credit, have
given such an Exorbitant Power, as not only to affirm, That a King of Israel
could do nothing without them; but assert further, that they might de jure
Cite, Judge and Whip him, as they saw reason for it. And probably it had been
so in King David's time, if Achitophel's Success had been equal to his Wishes,
whom they make the President of such a Sanhedrim.

The truth is, several of the Jewish Writers, out of prejudice to the Roman and
other Monarchies under which they frequently groaned, have spoke big Words
about the Synedrial Authority in the Ages of their Fathers: But as they are
wanting in the solid Proofs and Examples of that Power they ever and anon
attribute to it, so their Discretion may be questioned to suggest such a method
of Government to be of Divine Appointment, as might be dangerous to those
Sovereign Princes in whose Cities and by whose Indulgence many of 'em flourish
and live.

But we depend not on this Argument; for we say, they are injurious to Truth,
as well as to their own and those Princes Interest: And whatever countenance
such a Form may have in other Countries, they have little reason to charge
their own with it, much less make God the Contriver and Founder.

It must be confessed, Exodus 18.21.
That Jethro persuaded his Son-in-Law Moses to substitute some other Judges to
hear inferior Causes; Numb. 11.16.
which he accordingly did, and God was pleased to approve and confirm the
Design. But the Reason of it is expressly set down in Scripture and Josephus,
Antiq. l. 3. c. 3.
not in the least to lessen Moses's Authority, but to give him some ease in the
execution of Justice, and lighten the Burden, as both the Writers call it. It
was morally impossible for Moses in Person to go through so many Controversies
and Disputes as daily came before him; so that it was necessary to appoint
these Deputies to assist him in the more trivial Suits, though what they did
may be reckoned his Acts, because done in a Subordinate way, and by Commission
from Him.

That this was so, cannot be well doubted, if we consider that Passage which
afterward fell out concerning Korah, Numb. 16.
Dathan and Abiram. It appears by this Conspiracy, that after the Election of
the Seventy Elders, Moses had the Sovereignty in his own hands, because their
Charge against him was, that He had made himself altogether a Prince over them
-- and they tell him and Aaron, V. 13.
You take too much upon you, and have lifted up your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord -- An Article that affected them no more than the rest
of the Sanhedrim, had Korah and his Fellows then discovered any such mighty
Consistory to partake of the Government in which it seems Moses would not admit
an Equal. What the Issue of this Rebellion was, that Chapter shows: One Schism
was punished with another, and the Earth divided and swallowed them up. So
that, how Arbitrary soever Moses was thought to be, yet it pleased God to
justify him with Miracle, and by a Plague immediately following, let the
People know whom they were to Obey as their Lord and Sovereign.

Josephus indeed informs us, That under Moses and his Disciple Joshua, who at
that time had the Empire and Army, the Nobility and other Worthy Men Ruled the
State. Antiq. l. 6. c. 6.
He means the One Office was Military the Other Civil; and so he speaks, (...),
He was their General. Yet in this Case, if the Nobility and Elders governed
independent of the Prince, how could this Author say, that after Joshua's
death, the People were without Government eighteen Years, till they found a
Valiant Just Man to Rule, who with his Successors were called Judges. This
proves their Power to decease with the Prince, or otherwise the Nation could
not be so many Years in an Anarchy or without any Government at all. Nor had
there been occasion to demand of Phineas, Ibid.
to whose Charge the Administration of Public Affairs should be committed, if
that Senate had the Power pretended, and could without any other Governor
Protect and Rule the Nation.

We often read in the Book of Judges, what a licentious and lawless Life the
People lead, during the several Interregnums or spaces of Time between the
Death of one Judge and the Choice of another: Not that they wanted Laws, but
there was not sufficient Power to force Obedience to them. Thus it is said,
that it came to pass when the Judge was dead, Chapter 2.9.
that they returned and corrupted themselves more than their Fathers in
following other Gods, to serve them, and bow down to them, they ceased not from
their own doings, Chapter 17.6.
nor from their stubborn way -- And again -- In those days there was no King in
Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes -- This was too
fully explained in the Sodomy of Gibeah, and Micah's Idolatry in the very Verse
before; which being the proper Subject for the Sanhedrim to work upon, as their
Republicans give out, and seems to be confirmed by that Saying of Christ, Luke
13.33.
that it could not be that a Prophet should perish out of Jerusalem -- the case
of false Doctrine and false Worship being the Points, that Court more
especially, took cognizance of.) If there had been, I say, all along from Moses
downwards, such a standing Authority among the Jews, how comes it to pass, we
find the Accounts of so much Irreligion and bad Morals in their days, so
inconsistent with the Notion of that Consistory, and the Influence it is
supposed to have had over Prince and People.

The great Instances of Prerogative and Majesty in making War, creating Judges,
and, which we might think the proper work of the Sanhedrim, the ordering of
Church Affairs, deposing ill Ministers, and the like; That all this was done
sometimes immediately by the Kings themselves, must be evident to any body who
will be at the pains to go through the History of those Princes in the Books of
Samuel, Kings and Chronicles. Nay, the very putting a Prophet to death, or
discharging him out of Prison, This also was the King's Act, as we see in the
Example of Zedekiah and Jeremiah; Jerem. 38.
and this without the Rebuke or Murmur of that Assembly, though then the King's
Circumstances were very low, and might have encouraged them to it.

And when we further add, That the Holy Book charges the King with the
execution of Justice, and punishes him for the Peoples Sins (which would be
very hard, if the Maleadministration or Mismanagement were not his own, or that
he had not sufficient Power to order things better.) All this is evidence, That
the terrible Notion of the Sanhedrim is such a Dream, as perhaps may frighten
him that has it, but is of no great Effect to move other People, or engage
them to believe it any thing else but the disorder and weakness of the
sleeper's Brain.

Yet we must allow, that in the last Ages of the Jews, after the Babylonish
Capitivity, this Court made some small Figure in that part of the World; and we
have a sad Testimony of it in their Behavior toward the Lord Christ; an
unparalleled piece of Barbarism and Cruelty; serviceable indeed to the Decrees
of God, and the Redemption of Mankind; but, which shows them to be Men without
the common Principles of Conscience and Honesty, in murdering a Just Person,
whom the President himself declared Innocent. But admit them such a Court in
those days, with that Plenary Power they boast of (which is difficult to prove,
and it is plain the Roman Deputies were at length above it) yet it is a good
Answer for us to say, that from the beginning it was not so -- and we are now
speaking of such Judges as were at the first, and such Counselors as were at
the beginning And though we should admit the Institution of the Seventy Two
under the Character of the latter (as probably some of them might be
Counselors and Ministers of State; and therefore Hebrew Writers say, That it
was one necessary qualification to recommend them, if they understood the
Languages, in order to be Interpreters to their Princes) yet that they were not
such Judges, as the first word supposes, and had no Power paramount to the
Kings of Israel, appears by what has been offered against this Objection. And
therefore taking it for granted that the Jewish Government was, as indeed it
was, Monarchial, we pass to the Second Thing: To show and describe the
Happiness this People were to have in the Restoration of that ancient
Constitution.

2. I will restore -- The Government referred to, being that of Moses and
Aaron, Joshua and the Judges, 'twill be requisite to lay before you, in little,
the Acts, Conduct and Behavior of those Princes, and let you see how they did
contribute to the Prosperity of their Subjects: And to begin with Moses. His
first care was to make good Laws, Civil and Religious, and see them impartially
executed. And what pains he took this way, we may partly read Exodus 18.13, etc.
-- And Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood by Moses from
morning unto the evening, and he made them know the Statutes of God and his
Laws -- And this he did with so much Application, that his Health was in great
danger by it; and therefore Raguel his Wife's Father, gave him the Advice
abovementioned, to appoint Commissioners for the decision of lesser Matters.

When at any time the Necessities of the People made them murmur in the
Wilderness, and gave 'em reason, as they thought, to Libel his Government; though
there was not the least shadow of ill Conduct on his side, yet his Meekness was
such, that he would not punish the Insolence, but remembering that their wants
extorted it from them, he not only forgave, but pitied and employed the
Interest he had with God, both to pardon and supply them. And his concern for
them and their Welfare was so remarkable, that when God was provoked to that
degree, as to resolve to destroy them for their Idolatry in his absence, hear
what the good Prince says; Oh this people have sinned a great sin, Exodus 32.32.
and have made them Gods of gold, yet now if thou will, forgive their sin, and
if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of the Book which thou have written -- such a
sense he had of their danger; so much a Father he was rather than a King:
Antiq. l. 4. ad sin.
A Person wise in his Counsels, and in the Execution of them never had his
equal: His Affections so much submitted to his Wisdom, that he seemed not to
have any, and that he knew only the names of those Passions which he perceived
to be active in other men -- So Josephus of him.

And as for his Disciple and Successor Joshua, what a Prince he was, appears
in that short Character given of him by the same Author; A Man exact in all
sorts of Virtue, incomparably Skilful in matters of Government, Valiant in War,
and Wise in Peace --

And let this be the sum of those two Reigns; That they brought the Jews from
the utmost degree of Streights and Slavery, to an admirable height of Riches
and Glory; And all this without any benefit to themselves, besides the
Conscience and Honor of having Governed well. This was all the Harvest they
reaped from so many Victories; This was the Reward of so much Sweat and Blood;
This the End of their Watchings and Cares; This the Portion of all the
Territories, Substance and Treasures taken from the Enemies: All which they
divided among the Tribes, and did it by Lot, to avoid the suspicion of
gratifying Favorites, or setting any mark of distinction on their natural or
immediate Families. No, all the People of Israel were equally their Subjects
and Children; all to be well provided for; all to be made Happy; all to have a
like share in the Success, that as far as in them lay, there might be no reason
for them to envy and curse one another.

After these followed Othinel, Ehud, Shamgar, Debora and Gideon, who as in
desperate Cases, they were invited to take the Government on them, so they
discharged the Trust as Men commissioned from Heaven; The Spirit of God came
upon them, and they judged Israel, and the Children of Israel prospered under
them -- Men so void of Ambition, that as they never attempted the Rule before
the Dangers of the Commonwealth, the Fears and Addresses of the People urged
them to it, and God commanded it: So when the Service was over (without any
Self-denying Ordinance of their Sanhedrim) like the worthy Roman, who made good
Isaiah's Prophecy, by turning his Sword to the Plow-share) they could have been
willing, had it been permitted, to retire to their private life, and Ruled as
Kings no longer. And of this Gideon is a Proof; who having so much obliged the
Nation by the Deliverance he had given them from the Hand of Midian, that
thereupon they proposed an Act of Settlement to six the Monarchy in him and his
Line, he refused and hindered it: So little mixture of Selfishness there was in
all he did, and so little would he better himself by the help he gave the
distressed People, or let his Generosity ask a Crown of 'em. I will not rule
over you, neither shall my Son rule over you, Judges 8.23.
the Lord shall rule over you -- And though Josephus tells us, that he did Rule
the Israelites for the space of forty Years; Antiq. l. 5. c. 8.
yet he says withal, that he labored to be dismissed the Government, but was
constrained to continue in it.

I will name but one more, and he was the last of them, I mean Samuel, whose
Government was so easy all his time, that he makes this Challenge: Behold,
says he, here I am, 1 Samuel 12.3.
witness against me before the Lord; whose Ox have I taken, or whom have I
defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I receive any bribe?
And they said, -- 4.
Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have thou taken ought of
any man's hand -- So little had he vexed or burdened them during his Government,
but followed those excellent Patterns set before him.

And if the Judges were such, we need not fear but the Counselors were like
them. Either such Men, whose Principles lead them to advance the Public Good,
or whose discretion would not offer at any other Advice than what was agreeable
to the Sovereign's Mind, who always studied and desired nothing more than the
Honor and Safety of the Nation.

So that the result is this: If it be a good Constitution where a Nation
flourishes; where its Territories are enlarged; where the Subjects are made
rich and formidable; where the People are secured from Oppression at home, and
from being a prey to Enemies abroad, put out all fear of being enslaved by
their own Prince or any Foreigner, then the Government of Israel we have been
hitherto describing, deserves that Character; and we have reason enough to
believe, the Prophet promised the Jews a Blessing in the Text, where he speaks
of a Restoration, and that God would give them such Judges as they had at
first, and such Counselors as they had in the beginning.

Thus I have done with the Two things I proposed for the Heads of my Discourse:
The Original Constitution of the Jews, and the Happiness of being restored to
it.

But what is this to us? The Civil Polity of that People concern us no more
than their Ecclesiastical: Both were Shadows, and we have seen their period.
And unless we had security that all Sovereign Princes would be as Faithful as
Moses, as Pious as David, or were as Wise or Peaceable as Solomon, unbiased by
any Motives but what administered to the Prosperity of a Nation committed to
their charge, we have no cogent Reason to take this Precedent, and to make our
selves Slaves to one Man's Pride and Ambition. The description of such a Ruler
Samuel gives -- 1 Samuel 11, to 19 -- and 'twill be some labor to sanctify it
into a Blessing.

Thus, or to this purpose, they argue against the best of Governments: But to
say somewhat to the Objections.

It Is true, the Government of Judea obliges not to an Imitation; yet I think it
may be safely said to redound much to the Credit of Monarchy, that the wise God
himself was pleased to begin it among his Favourite-people; and that Nature
taught, and Histories show it to be every where the only Government for above
half the Age of the World after the Creation. And though indeed in progress of
time some Republics intruded into Greece and other Places, yet it is
observable, that our great Redeemer the Lord Christ, seems to restore it at the
Incarnation, when there was nothing besides Monarchy over the whole Universe.
And it suffices that They admit the Constitution good, if the Men, set to
Govern, were suitable to it.

But, alas, Princes are subject to Appetites, Insirmities and Passions. And it
is not to be denied, for all this is humane Nature; There is no Theocracy now:
Princes are Men, and not Gods, and where are Men without Passions?

By the Influence of these therefore they may be tempted to Tyranny. Nor is it
unlikely, for we sometimes read of such a Tyrant over many Cities, and it was
sad for the Subject; But we read also of 30 Tyrants in one City, which was
worse, and it was a glorious Act in Thrasybulus to expel 'em.

Princes are Ambitious, and the greediness of their Favorites intolerable. But
is it not the same Case under other Governments, call them what you will? Every
Senator has his Ambition and his Favorites too. And surely the Charge must
be so much the more to feed and enrich so many. And where the Governors swell
to a great number, in proportion the Expense and Burden must be greater.

Kings are Touchy, and their Wrath like the roaring of a Lion -- And as they
have Power, so they cannot long want opportunities to exert that Power; and
their Revenge is sure and heavy. But then these dreadful Resentments reach very
few in comparison of those Places where the Rulers abound, and where it is
almost impossible for a Subject to escape, when there are so many Eyes to see
Faults, and so many Hands to punish them.

And of this the State of Venice is a sad Example, where even the better sort
of Citizens must resolve either to flee abroad, or be ruined at home, upon the
least offense given a Nobleman, or any in his Train; and sometimes perhaps,
when there is no other proof but bare suggestion to make the Sufferer guilty.
And in general, it is the common Observation of Travelers abroad, that they
seldom read Liberty writ over the Gate, but entering the City they find Slavery
within.

Yet the unthinking People swallow the Bait, and are greedy of the Purchase,
though they pay never so dear for it. Such is the itch of Ambition and Gain,
which though Objects at a vast distance, yet they all hope in time to reach them;
and then the use they put 'em to, is the very same with what Men design by the
other Commissions they take, which is not for the sake of the common Good, but
in order to make up a broken Fortune. And in the mean while, they bear the
Burdens laid upon them in expectation of their own turns, to oppress their
Fellow-Citizens, or Countrymen; the prospect of which is the sole comfort
these miserable wretches have to buoy 'em up under the weight of their own
Oppressions and Bondage.

This is indeed more properly in Popular Governments; yet in Oligarchy the
Motive has its place from the like Rotation or Circle of Succession in all the
beneficial Employments of the State, which is confessedly the rise of
particular Families; but how the Commonwealth suffers by it, is easily seen,
when we may discover in the Accounts, that besides the necessary Expenses of
the Public in Peace and War, vast Treasures are consumed to satisfy private
appetites, and make 'em amends for their patience so long.

But over and above that Inconvenience, what dangerous Consequences this Course
has, we may be able to guess, by remembering the Case of Alcibiades at Athens,
and some other Captains at Rome, who by the Custom of their Rotation being laid
aside, and their Commissions given to unexperienced Men, the Fleet of the first
and the Army of the last, were brought to great extremities, and at length
utterly lost, by an unseasonable Compliance with the Suffrages of the People.
It Is true, sometimes their Fears taught 'em more Wisdom, and they thought fit
to overlook this Custom in the frequent Consulships of Marius, John 18.40.
etc. But for the most part their Temper was that of the Multitude, who were
obstinate in their choice of Barrabbas before Jesus. Acts 19.32.
Or else all in hurly-burly, like them at Ephesus -- Some cried one thing, and
some another; for the Assembly was confused, and the most part knew not
wherefore they were come together --

Some cry one thing, and some another -- That Is another Misfortune all these
sorts of Governments are liable to. For Emulations, Jealousies and Envyings,
are natural to Men of equal Power. And from hence arise Factions and Parties,
who in all their Debates, do not so much weigh what is said, as who it was that
said it; and the Counsel is good or bad; not as it concerns the Public, but as
it suits their Affections and Interest, whose Industry can produce majority of
Votes, and whose great Reason is Number. This very thing was fatal to Carthage,
one of the mighty'st Commonwealths the Sun ever shined on; when the Malice of
Hanno's Faction so prevailed against Hannibal, as to force him back from Italy
for want of Supplies, choosing rather to sink their own City, than let that
brave Captain Subdue Rome to it. As it accordingly fell out, the Enemy
following their Conqueror home, and in the issue destroying Carthage and him.

These are Mischiefs a Monarch is not so much exposed to: And though he has
many, and probably different, Counsels offered him, yet still they are no more
than Counsels, which the Prince may take or let alone. Advisers may clash and
hate one another; but the Governor being one, if he cannot reconcile them, he
can reconcile what they propose to the Public good, at least so much of it as
will serve his present turn, without scaring their resentments who are of the
adverse Opinion, and who are Counselors, and not Dictators, as the Royal
Martyr makes the Expression.

I speak all this in pursuance of my Subject, and to show in some low degree,
That the Exceptions against Monarchy are in reality, but so many Props to
support it.

The great Proof of Divine Right I have not touched upon, nor will any further
mention it, then in the Monarchy of Israel; which being of God's appointment,
it may speak for it self, though not in the language of an Universal Law to
oblige every where to an Imitation. I acknowledge Magistracy, with St. Paul, to
be an Ordinance of Heaven, Romans 13.1.
and the Institution of it Sacred. But for the Model, I mean what Form to
express it in, I leave that to humane Prudence, and consider it with St. Peter,
1 Pet. 2.13.
the Creature of Man. And as it is made for the good of Men, who are the Matter
of Government, so it is left to Men to digest it to their convenience, and make
it answer the end of its Institution. And therefore a Subject at Venice, Genoa
or Holland, is under the same obligation of Obedience with him in France and
Spain, and he is to submit not only for Wrath, but Conscience Sake. If he
resists in any of those places, he resists the Ordinance of God; and they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation --

But as to what concerns our selves, we have that Form and that Happiness the
Text speaks of; and the Argument for it is the Prophet's, Original
Constitution, having our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
beginning. So that Prescription gives it the right, and it is the Blessing of
the Day to have it restored, and be put in the possession of it again.

(...) -- was the wholesome Advice of the Council of Nice to compose the Church
of God. Conc. Ni-Cen. Can. 6.
Custom is a solid Plea; a thing for the most part very Venerable and Sacred,
or at least esteemed so. We see the force of it in very trivial Instances, I
will not say seemingly Ridiculous; though possibly were our Fathers alive to give
the reason of 'em, we might discover 'em to be the Fruits of good Contrivance
and Wisdom; and as foolish as they appear, it might be in many cases more folly
to reject 'em.

We hold our Monarchy by this Tenure; and whether we take our selves for
Aborigines or Cadmean born; whether descended from Phaenicia or Troy, Rome or
Germany, or whatever other birth the Histories or Fancies of Men give us;
whether Saxons, Danes, Normans or Scots; whether before, under, or after the
Heptarchy; whether of the Line of Lancaster or York; whether before or after
the Union of this Island into the one Name of Great Britain; Fix us where you
will, we can find nothing but Monarchy among us, with those Helps and
Assistants of it the Text mentions and we now enjoy; and though we lose our
selves in point of Pedigree, yet the Evidence of this Government is so clear
and strong, that I may honestly apply what Isaiah says, That our Governors
are as at the first, and our Counselors as at the beginning.

I confess our late unhappy Times have left a Proof of the Uncertainty of
Humane Affairs, and told us, That there is nothing so Ancient, or so well
Settled, but what is exposed to Change and Violence. But to be silent in the
Novelty of such a bold Attempt to disturb the Throne, and Out Him who had it in
possession, what were the Effects of this Reformation? What were the fruits of
those things whereof we are now ashamed?

The Monarchy expiring, in how many Shapes, by a kind of a Pythagorean
Conveyance, was the Government seen; and after that Doctrine, suited to the
Nature of the Animal it appeared in: Sometimes a Body with many Heads, and
sometimes with none; and, which was Unnatural too, one while the Eye would say
to the Hand, I have no need of thee; and the Head to the Feet, I have no need
of you. 1 Cor. 12.21, 23.
And herein alone they closed with St. Paul's Allusion, That those Members of
the Body which were less honorable, upon these they bestowed more abundant
Honor, and the uncomely parts had more abundant comeliness.

The first Innovation was, to Vote the Bishops an Useless, nay Dangerous part
of the Upper House: And not long after, all the Lords became as Useless and
Dangerous as they. Nor did the Lower House stop here, for they were not pleased
with their own Members, but Secluded many of them; and after a while were all
of 'em requited in Specie, and sent home as a pack of Men (so it was told 'em)
who had arrogated to themselves, their Friends and Dependants, all the Honors,
Commands, and gainful Employments of the Kingdom. This was done by the Army;
and 'twas fair enough the Wheel should move on; and since what the Parliament
did was by their Swords, it was highly reasonable that in their turns they
should have some share in the common Prey. And as their Mace outweigh'd the
Scepter, so the Sword had the advantage of being sharper; and their Darling at
length could not endure that the Fools Bauble, as he called the Speaker's Mace
should pretend to stand in Competition with it. This was a sure Testimony of
the Divine Vengeance, to pay 'em in their own Coin, and let their Slaves serve
them, as they had served their Sovereign Master.

And now at last we are come to the sad Objection against Monarchy, I mean
Despotick or Absolute Power, when the Will is Law, and the Sword Executioner.
An Event not depending on Imagination and Fancy; but what was our real
Condition, and how many were forced to weep it in Tears and Blood? The common
Complaints were, Sequestrations, Free Quarter, Sacrilege, Consiscations,
Imprisonments, Executions, and other Instances of Oppression, as numberless as
their ways of Government, their Council of State, Council of War, High Courts
of Justice, Protectorship, Committee of Safety, Rump or Junto, with other Forms
under other Names. What could be expected from this variety of Interests, but
that the Nation must suffer to gratify their several Affections and Desires?
And how could it be thought, that an Usurper should thrust himself into Power,
and not be a Tyrant to be able to maintain it? And where can Tyranny be but
Misery will follow? And, What was both the reproach and aggravation of this
Misery; those Flies that sucked us, were but the offspring of Dirt and
Dunghils. Our Plague was like that of Egypt, the very Dust of the Earth crawled
upon us. The meanest of the People were our Rulers, and out of those Brambles
proceeded a Fire that consumed the Cedars of Lebanon.

Thus as to the State; and for the Church it was rent in pieces by manifold
Errors, Schisms and Heresies; not only tolerated, but embraced, defended and
imposed, to sink our Consciences as low as our Fortunes, and make our Condition
every way deplorable. Catalogus Errorum, Haresium and Blasphemiarum in Anglia
ab Ann, 1640. Arndii Lex.
I blush to think of the Number. But a Foreigner has published it. A Catalogue
of Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies in England, 1640 -- He reckons up no less
then one hundred and fourscore Heterodoxies in those days, when Holiness walked
the Streets with so much noise, and the Reformers made a show of making a
glorious Religion; as indeed they did, the same way as they made the Defender
of it a Glorious King, by sending both to Heaven. I am sorry a Protestant
should have any just Reason to write this Account; and that a Papist should be
able to argue from it, to disgrace the best constituted Church on the face of
the Earth, which was then under a severe Persecution, and gave no color for
any uncharitable Reflection.

But I take no delight in rubbing these Sores, which the Clemency of the
Government would heal for the future. And I am so far from Malice, or revenging
these Wrongs, that I read of Thrasybulus's Amnesty at Athens with high degrees
of Satisfaction; and think David never did a more generous Act, then when he
pardoned Shimei at his Restoration after the Rebellion of Absalom. An Act of
Indemnity and Oblivion is somewhat like the Conduct of God, who has power
enough to punish all his Enemies, but his Mercy will not let him. Yet as God,
so may we at the same time abhor and mention Sins, when we pity and pass by the
Men who did 'em. And as from them our Calamities came [ A Chaos of Confusion
and Hell of Miseries, as the unfortunate King called 'em] we may view and point
at them, as People after Shipwreck do, at a Rock where they miscarried, by way
of caution to themselves and others, not to split on that Rock again. And
surely I may do here, as in the Devotion and Service of the Day, set before our
selves and God the miserable Confusions we were lately under, in order to bless
him with the greater warmth, by being made sensible what it was we were
delivered from.

The Passover among the Jews was an Anniversary Festival appointed by Heaven
it self to remember the Egyptian Bondage, and the Peoples redemption out of it.
And their Meals at that time consisted of such Ingredients or Messes as
signified both; and therefore though the Bread was sweet, the Herbs were bitter.
So that Necessity required to say somewhat of the Nature and Causes of our
Troubles, that we might better reflect on what has been done for us, and be
thereupon induced to walk more carefully for the time to come.

By what has been said, we learn plainly, that the best of Governments is like
the most useful Element of Water; which keeping in its place and common course,
is pleasant and serviceable to us. It glides gently on without noise, or such
as pleases the Ear, and makes its Murmurs very agreeable. It refreshes and
feeds as it passes along, and is necessary many ways for Life and Diversion.
But once diverted and turned out, of its own Banks, it immediately becomes a
destructive Flood, and rushes forward in a muddy, impetuous Stream. It roars,
fumes, rages, drowns and overwhelms all before it: And notwithstanding in its
own Nature, and the Creators Design, it was made for manifold uses; yet now it
carries nothing but Mischief in its current; and, as the Scripture speaks, it
is no other than the Waters of Strife and Blood, until it be reduced to its old
Channel.

This Day reports that great Work done which has made it again Waters of
Comfort. The remembrance of it calls for Thanks; and that our Thanks may be the
more hearty, let me crave your patience for a few words more to represent our
Condition.

We have the happiest Constitution in the universal World. A Monarchy not more
Ancient than it is Safe. Wherein the Prince has as much Majesty and Power as
may satisfy one who would answer the Honor and Character of his Place, to be
the Basis of the Commonweal, (...)
a Father of his Country, and a Shepherd of his People. He has Figure enough
to make himself both feared and loved. He has Authority and Opportunities
sufficient to reward or punish his Subjects, as by their good or ill Actions
they shall deserve it of him. The Interest he has in a brave, rich People,
will make him honorable abroad; and he has many ways to gain our Affections,
and cause him to be dear to us at home. In a word, he wants nothing to render
him Great, but Power and Means to be a Tyrant; and that is a Style does not, nor
will ever suit an English King.

The Subjects are Free and Masters of Property, which the Prince can no more
Invade than we his Throne; the same Laws being the King's Prerogative and our
Protection. Privilegium regis and libertates Angliae.
We sit every Man under his own Vine, and own Fig Tree; and when we part with
any proportion of the Fruits, it must be with consent, and by virtue of Laws of
our own making.

And this we owe, as to the good Temper and good Principles of our Princes from
time to time; so also to the Vigilance and Care of our most August Assembly,
who have both Wisdom enough to be styled the King's Great Council, Magnum
consilium regis Angl.
and sufficient Authority to be Patriots to their Country: And on this account,
we do well to comply with the word of the Text, to call 'em (...), or, in the
language of our Constitution, Commune Consilium, because their Advice reaches
King and People, and they are the Copula and means of that mutual Understanding
and Affection which ought to be between them.

Whether the Reign of Edw. I. gave 'em the name of Parliament, I answer not,
but the Thing was in being many Ages before, as appears from King Sebert and
King Ina, by whom they are called Ancient Sages, and by their Advice the last
made his excellent Laws, and the first received his Baptism above eleven
hundred Years ago. And I believe, upon an industrious enquiry, we may advance
many Ages further, and there discover the gray Hairs of these Aldermen, as the
old Books call 'em.

Such is the Original State and Temper of our English Monarchy, where our
Judges and our Counselors keep together, and jointly endeavor to make the
Nation Happy. And if other Designs should at any time be in their Heads, they
become and are intended for Checks to one another.

And as we have our Moses and those Counselors in the State, so we have the
other Counselor of the Text, our Aaron, in the Temple; and in both we would
emblem Heaven where the Great Monarch sits, the God of all Power, and the God
of our Religion.

Our Doctrines are pure; our Ceremonies significant and few; and as the first
teaches us to be Good, so by the help of the other we are able to express it.
Our Principles lead us to submit to Government, in order to discharge
Conscience, and make our selves happy under it. And as all the Laws which
secure a State are sanctified at our Altars, so we have a double benefit by our
obedience to them; Prosperity here, and Glory in Heaven. Not to Injure another,
is the Substance of all those Laws: Which, as they tie our Hands, so they
restrain the greedy Desires of other People, and thereby we securely enjoy our
own. In short, the Sacred Truths recommended to us, are Holiness, Sobriety and
Love; and the Discipline among us is to no other End, than to press us to
embrace and practice them. There is no more Arbitrary Power in the Episcopal
Chair then in the Throne; yet we have Rules enough to contradict and discourage
Licentiousness and Anarchy; but so well tempered and so well applied with a
mixture of Zeal and Prudence, that there is no danger of an Inquisition,
however formed, whether after the Model of Geneva or Rome.

This is our Government, and this our Religion, which, during some ill Days,
was not only covered with Clouds of Darkness, but moreover loaded with Tempest
and Thunder. But the Sun of Righteousness has been strong enough to disperse
them. God in mercy has removed our Fears, and restored Light and a Serene Air
again. This Day is the Memorial of our Deliverance. And as on the one side we
yield God Praise for rescuing us from those great and apparent Dangers
wherewith we were encompassed, so on the other let us acknowledge it purely his
goodness that we were not given quite over as a prey unto them; and withal
beseech him still to continue such his Mercies toward us, that all the World
may know that he is our Restorer, our Savior and Deliverer.

And to engage him to this, let us further beg, That he would be pleased to
bestow upon us such a portion of his Grace, and the assistance of that Blessed
Spirit (the plentiful effusion of whose manifold Gifts we now commemorate) that
being thus delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies, we may make it our
business to serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our life; and henceforth deserve to be called, as in the words following my
Text, The City of Righteousness, the Faithful City.

This will settle the Church, and six the Throne; confirm our Liberty and
Peace; render us Happy now, and Blessed in Eternal Life and Glory above. To
which God in his infinite Goodness bring us all in his due time, through the
Intercession and Merits of Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and Holy
Ghost, be Honor and Glory World without End. Amen.

At St. Paul 's May 29. 1699.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
OF Public Baptism. A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the
Lord Mayor, and the Court of Aldermen, at Guild-Hall-Chapel, November. 20. 1692.
By Philip Stubs, M. A. Fellow of Wadham-College, Oxon. and Chaplain to the
Right Reverend Father in God, Robert Lord Bishop of Chichester. The Second
Edition, with a Postscript. Occasioned by a late Conference of the Lord
Bishop's of London with his City Clergy thereupon. Containing the Concurrent
Judgment of the Most Reverend Father in God, Dr. Tillotson, late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury; the Right Reverend Dr. Kidder, Dr. Stratford, Dr.
Gardener, Dr. Williams, Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, Chester, Lincoln,
Chichester, and others: Earnestly recommending that Catholic Usage to the
Clergy and Laity in their Visitation Charges, Advices, Sermons, etc. Price 4 d.

Printed for James Bonwicke, at the Hat and Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.


