The WISE Gospel-Preacher HIS Praise and Practice, Duty and Dignity, Opened in
a SERMON On ECCLES. 12.9.

By S. M. Minister of the Gospel.

Isa. 52.7. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him that brings
good tidings, that publishes peace, etc. Printed for the Author.

To that Congregation over whom the Lord has made me an Overseer; Increase of
Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
BRethren and Beloved in our Lord Jesus, these Sermons as they were preached
amongst you, even so was their Publication earnestly solicited by some of you,
at whose request I have yielded to that I designed not in their Preaching, nor
intended to have done long since that task was finished: But remembering I am
not only a Debtor to Jew and Gentile, but more especially to you also, not
only by one means, but by every means, to endeavor your furtherance in the
Faith, I judged my self obliged to help you with that Printed, which the Lord
gave you in Preaching: And I may safely say, so near as I could, your Eyes now
have only what once your Ears heard. As to you my Beloved, whose importunity
prevailed upon me to undertake this Work, know two Arguments prevailed upon me
to Answer your Request; The one, My Love toward you; the other, My desire of
your Spiritual and Eternal Welfare; and if my Labor of Love for your sakes may
providentially extend or reach to the advantage of any others that love the
Lord Jesus in sincerity, I therein shall and will rejoice. I need not here give
you any account of the Nature of this Treatise, you well know, it is to open
both the Wise-Preachers and the Wise-Hearers Work and Business; you know I need
the one, and I also judge you want not need sufficient to learn the other: As
to the Method it is and ought to be plain, as best becoming Gospel-Mysteries;
'twas Truth, not Humane Wisdom or Eloquence that I designed to manifest; and
surely should I thus have acted, I should have pulled down with one hand what I
was setting up with the other, and so should have been found a transgressor: As
to my often hinting of any thing minded in this Discourse, know the nearness of
the Phrases in the Text one to another constrained it, except I should have
broke the bounds, and dealt partially with the Text; and my thoughts are, that
Plenty may even conduce to Profit: And as for those Phrases, Titles, and
Denominations of Persons, which in this Discourse may seem unto any tender ear
to be plain, harsh, or reproachful to any, know this, I have warily considered
to fasten them only on persons really deserving such names; and although I have
herein followed the footsteps of the Saints and Penmen of the Scripture, yet
have I abated, rather than exceeded their practice; as is most evident, if you
consider of some expressions wherein how great or learned or seemingly pious
soever some sinners were, yet both Christ himself, and the Prophets and
Apostles, have spoken very home and hard against such Persons, stiling them
Hypocrites, Devils Children, Wolves, Dogs, Lions, Foxes, Vipers,
painted-Sepulchres, whited Walls, Princes of Sodom, Rulers of Gomorrah,
Adulterers, Adulteresses, and such like, as the Scripture witnesses; wherefore
marvel not at my freedom of expression to sinners of the same dye. And lastly,
My resolution was to avoid the reproof due to such as give flattering Titles
unto men; and as Elihu says, Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person;
neither let me give flattering titles unto men; for I know not to give
flattering titles; forin so doing my Maker would soon take me away, Job 32.21,
22. And further, If any suppose I have in this Discourse affected and
discovered a Spirit of singularity, and diversity of Opinion from the most of
even pious, judicious, and sober men of this Age. I Answer in uprightness,
'twas not affectedly but constrainedly done, and I suppose even such Objectors
will not deny, it is better differing from men, how wise soever, than from
Christ; and since all men know but in part, and Prophecy but in part, that may
be Christ's Truth which is not acknowledged or understood by many; is it not
written, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil; neither shall thou speak
in a cause, to decline after many, to wrest judgment, Exodus 23.2. and as Paul
says, I believed, therefore have I spoken, 2 Cor. 4.13. I shall willingly
receive better information, and then speedily change my present apprehension.
Lastly, If any Object against the largeness of this Tract; my Answer is, 'Twas
my desire to have prevented it, could I with fidelity and prudence have
effected it; and the truth is, I have denied my self, and slipped over some
Particulars, which might more largel have been insisted on, that this Exception
might have been spared: And now my dearly Beloved, whose importunity begat me
this labor, Let me now crave leave, before I conclude this Epistle, to request
a few things of you. First, My Brethren, if you meet with any Advantage,
Content, or Comfort, by perusing these Lines, pray give all the praise and
glory to God, whose hand alone has wrought it, and whose Spirit has revealed
it; and think often upon 1 Chronicles. 29.10, to 16. Secondly, Pray be not only
knowers of these Truths, but doers of the same. Oh, be not only so principled,
but so practicing; also let the height of Holiness in this Discourse
discovered, be your main business to attain, so shall I not want a good reward
for this my labor. Thirdly, Labor to train up and educate your Families in
this good knowledge of the Lord, and show them the good old way, wherein they
should walk with God, as Moses advises, Deuteronomy. 4.9.10. saying, Only take heed
to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which
thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy
life; but teach them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons: Especially the day that thou
stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather
me the people together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn
to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may
teach their Children, with 11, 19. Fourthly, Wonder not, neither be stumbled,
if you find these Truths evil spoken of, scorned, traduced; but remember, this
was to be expected in such a day as this. And, lastly, Forget not him that you
have prevailed upon, but in all your supplications remember me, and pray for
me, both night and day, that I may be faithful to the Death, that I may be
filled with the Spirit, that I may be abundant in the Work of the Lord, and
that my Labors may be acceptable and succesful among the Saints, that so I may
finish my course with joy, and not with grief, according to the Will of God.
And thus with my Prayers for you also, I commend you to God, and to the Word of
his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among
all them which are Sanctified.

Your Servant for Christ, STEPHEN MORE.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
ALthough there is nothing new or strange now to be presented to thy view; for,
as Solomon says, The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that
which is done, is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the
Sun: Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? It has been
already of old time, which was before us, Eccles. 1.9, 10. Wherefore let me
entreat thee peruse this Book for Truth, and not for Novelty, lest so doing,
thou lose thy labor, and reap no profit by thy pains: And if any shall meet
thee with their Outcry, crying, Take heed, for here are strange things
presented to your eyes; say No, for there is nothing new or strange under the
Sun: And if any thing here written be to any strange, I must take leave to tell
them, It Is because they know not the Scripture, and are strangers in Jerusalem,
and have not known the things that are come to pass there in these days, Luke
24.18. And if any should yet retort upon me as a troubler of Israel, or a
bringer forth of strange Things, or new Doctrines, to their ears, I will not
think it strange to be thus dealt with, for thus dealt their Fathers with the
Prophets and Apostles, in that first Book of Kings we find that thus Ahab said
to Elijah, Art thou he that troubles Israel? But he answered, I have not
troubled Israel, but thou and thy Father's House, in that ye have forsaken the
Commandments of the Lord, and have followed Baalim, verse. 17, 18. And thus was
holy Paul served, Acts 17. where you read, That certain Philosophers of the
Epicureans, and of the Stoics, encountered him; and some said, What will this
Babbler say? other some, He seems to be a setter forth of strange Godds;
because he preached unto them, Jesus, and the Resurrection: And they took him,
and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know what this new Doctrine
whereof thou speak is? for thou bring certain strange things to our ears;
we would know therefore what these things mean? verse. 18, 19, 20. Therefore if
such things befall me, I shall not be moved; for if thus they dealt with the
green Trees, marvel not they thus deal with the dry: Wherefore, Christian
Reader, notwithstanding such Outcries as these, which probably thou may
meet with, yet be pleased to read on, and consider what is said; and the Lord
give thee understanding in all things, that thou may search the Scriptures,
and try whether the things asserted for truth be so or no; for no more is
imposed upon your Faith, than what evidence of Scripture does demonstrate to be
the Faith of Jesus, and of his Elect; and if any Fathers in our Israel shall
say, To what purpose is this waste? Preachers doubtless know their Duty well
enough, it were well if others knew theirs better. I shall only Answer these
over-wise ones in the language of Job, No doubt but ye are the People, and
wisdom shall die with you, Chap. 12.2. Yet bear with me to show my Love to
Christ, and offer my Mite to you, remembering what Paul says, And if any man
think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1
Cor. 8.2. And if you know these things already, O how happy shall both you and
I be, when we shall be found doing the things we say we know, and are here
revealed: And as for others, (or our Hearers) know, so far as the Work called
for it, they are not forgotten; but remember, that the more fully, the Preacher
lives up to his Duty, the more the People will be furthered in their Duty,
Preachers being not only nominally called Stars and Shepherds, or Bishops and
Fathers, but also they ought virtully to be Lights in their Candlesticks,
Shepherds feeding of their Flocks, and Fathers laying up and laying out for
their Children, as the Lord teaches, saying, Ye are the Salt of the Earth; but
if the Salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted? Ye are the
Lights of the World; a City set upon a Hill which cannot be hid: Neither do men
light a Candle and put it under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick, and it gives
light unto all that are in the House. Let your Light so shine before men, that
they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat.
5.13, 14, 15, 16. But if notwithstanding what has been said by me, my Mothers
Children, and Elder Brethren will yet be angry with me; I will resolve not to
pass for Man's Day, or to be angry with them, or to return evil for evil, or
railing for revising, but pray for them, with holy Stephen, and cry, Lord, lay
not this sin to their charge, Acts 7.50.

My end and ground, both in Preaching and Printing these Sermons, was an inward
motion to follow the movings and workings of the Spirit upon my Soul, in
conformity to those I read of in 2 Pet. 1.21. where it is said, Holy Men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: It Is truth, as has been already
owned. When these Sermons were Preached, I thought not of Printing; but since
being called upon so to do, I judged it my duty, as one of Christ's living
Creatures, to walk straight forward whither the Spirit was to go, and not to
turn when going, Ezekiel. 1.12. As for my great unfitness, yea, exceeding great
unfitness for such a work, I profess I am not unsensible of it, neither shall
be ashamed to own it to any that shall object it; yet notwithstanding, since
God despises not the day of small things, and will accept of what a man has,
and not of what a man has not, wherefore I am resolved to be found faithful,
as becomes him that is a Steward, not forgetting what the Lord said to Ezekiel,
Son of Man, I have made thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel, therefore
hear the Word at my Mouth, and give them warning from me, Chap. 3.17. The Style
is low, and the Method plain, and the Argument somewhat bold and impartial;
wonder not at it, it being most like him that did it, even one who was resolved
to be one of Paul's Scholars in this Work; to wit, Not to come ^o you with
excellency of Speech, or of Wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God;
for I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, 1 Cor. 2.1, 2. Surely plainness will hurt or hinder none, though
elegancy and obscurity might, although it could have profited none, who-ever it
might have pleased. If any think due respect has not sufficiently been shown
to Superiors, let me say to such, my aim and utmost endeavor has been, not to
offend or overlook such, but to give unto Caesar the things which are Cesar's,
though to God the things that are God's: And this I have done, so far as I
might, without sin or flattery. Wherefore vouchsafe to peruse, soberly and
thoroughly, these lines; and know here is Milk for Babes, and stronger Meat for
stronger Ones. And let me tell you, God is now speaking to you, and saying to
you as of old, How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the
scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof;
behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto you, and make known my words unto you,
Prove. 1.22, 23. It Is now your day of Grace, Jesus Christ is wooing all his
People to come out of Babylon; but if ye will not hear, and fear, and repent
your selves, ye must be sure to partake of her judgment as well as of her sins,
Rev. 18.4. O! do not think Superstition, or Idolatry, or Will Worship, or men's
invention in God's Worship a small sin; but remember that dreadful word, Do we
provoke the Lord? are we stronger than he? (O no) be not deceived, God is not
mocked, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap, 1 Cor. 10.22.
Gal. 6.10. Wherefore do nothing partially in the matter of Religion; be not
circumspect about Doctrine, and careless about Discipline or Church ways; be
not strict for second-Table-Duties, and make no Conscience of first-Table-sins:
Neither make it all your holiness to mind Family Duties, but also look well to
your publick-Worship, or your walking with Jesus Christ in his Public Worship.

Such things as these, Christian Reader, are in this little Treatise presented
to thy view and consideration; be pleased to take nothing in the evil or worse
part, but as thou have all from love, so let thy love accept of all that
carries Christ's Image and Superscription upon it; and with thy Mantle of Love,
cover all thou meetest with of humane frailty: And if by all, or any thing
herein presented to thee, thou reapest any real benefit or profit, I request
you to give God all the glory, and say, Of him, and through him, and to him,
are all things, to whom be glory for ever; which is, and shall be, the earnest
prayer of him who is, and will remain thine to serve thee,

S. MORE.

The Contents.
Ecclesiastes 12.9. Moreover, Because the Preacher was wise, he still taught
the people knowledge: Yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order
many Proverbs, etc. THe words, in general, contain an account of an
Accomplished Preacher.

1. As to his Qualification. 2. As to his Work, Act, and Dispensation. 3. The
blessing and advantage of enjoying such Preachers.
But more particularly take notice of these things following:

1. A Preface in this word [Moreover]. 2. A Reason of what was done, [Because
the Preacher was wise]. 3. The Person spoken of; The Preacher. 4. That which is
related or declared concerning him, and that in these particulars: 1. The Act;
his constancy in Teaching, etc. 2. Perseverance in this Work; He still taught
the People Knowledge. 3. His wariness or circumspection in managing this great
Work: Yea, he gave good heed. 4. His diligence, industry, or laboriousness, He
sought; he did not catch up, or deliver any thing, but what he had sought out,
and found meet to be delivered. 5. We have his fidelity or perfection in
Preaching, he did set in order many Proverbs. He set in, not out of God's, or
due order, his Preachings or Proverbs; amplified in these Words; The Preacher
sought out acceptable words. But again, In the next place we have the Property
or Excellency of that which was Preached or Written; it was upright, even words
of Truth. 6. Lastly, We have the Use and Benefit of the properties of such
Preachings or Preachers; in these words, The words of the wise are as Goads and
Nails.

The Wise Gospel-Preacher's Praise and Practice.
ECCLES. 12.9, 10, 11. 9. Moreover, because the Preacher was Wise, he still
taught the People Knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in
order many Proverbs.

10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable Words, and that which was
written was upright, even words of Truth.

11. The words of the Wise are as Goads, and as Nails fastened by the Masters of
Assemblies, which are given by one Shepherd.


SOlomon the Wise is declared to be the Composer of this Book, and it may
probably be the last he wrote, the which I shall not positively determine, nor
whether these three Verses be his, because they seem more probable to have been
wrote by his Historian, or that hand which committed this Book to the Churches
Treasury, rather than by himself, and are part of the conclusion of this Book.
As to the Book it self, I shall say nothing, the words I have pitched upon,
having no dependence upon any thing that went before, unless to commend it, and
encourage to improve it; because both of the excellency of the Preacher, and of
that which was Writ or Preached. The words in general contain an account of an
Accomplished Preacher.

First, As to his Qualification. Secondly, As to his Work, Act, or
Dispensation. Thirdly, The Blessing and Advantage of enjoying such Preachers.
But more particularly take notice of these things in these Verses. 1. A Preface
in this word; Moreover. 2. A Reason of what was done; Because the Preacher was
Wise. 3. The Person spoken of; The Preacher. 4. That which is related or
declared concerning him, and that in these Particulars.

First, The Act; his constancy in teaching, etc.

Secondly, Perseverance in his Work; He still taught the People Knowledge. His
wariness or circumspection in managing this great Work; Yea, he gave good heed.

Thirdly, His Diligence, Industry, or Laboriousness; He sought out: He did not
catch up, or deliver any thing but what he had sought out, and found meet to be
delivered.

Fourthly, We have his Fidelity or Perfection in Preaching; He did set in order
many Proverbs: He set in, not out of God's, or due order, his Preachings or
Proverbs, amplified in these words; The Preacher sought out acceptable words.
But again, in the next place we have the Property or Excellency of that which
was preached or written, it was upright, Even words of Truth.

Lastly, We have the Use, and Benefit, or Properties of such Preaching and
Preachers in these words; The words of the Wise are as Goads, and Nails fastened
by the Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd.

I shall not trouble you with the opening or clearing of any obscurity in the
Text at this time; but refer that till afterward, where more conveniently I
may dispatch it; but shall proceed to some Doctrines, or Conclusions hence
observable. The first is taken from the first word, or Preface, Moreover. We
may take these words not only literally, as spoken of the Typical Solomon; but
as Prophetical, and pointing at a greater than Solomon, our Lord Jesus, That so
spoke as never man spoke, John 7.46. And also we might eye these words as
dogmatical, or instructing what every Wise Gospel-Preacher ought to be and do;
whence we may collect thus much.

Doct. 1. That the Lord is not sparing or scant in means of Grace to his Church
and People; but has provided, and does afford them one, and another means of
help, and advantage for Soul-Concernments.

God, as God, has in Mercy and Wisdom dealt with the Second Creation and state
of Grace, as with the first Creation. In Nature he has not made single Fruits,
Flowers, Plants, Grain, or Beasts, Birds, or Fishes, but innumerable in number,
and manifold in kind; even so great variety and plenty, that even the wisest of
Moralists or Naturalists scarce knew what need or end there is even of that
variety or plenty, unless to commend the Creator. Men are often times at a loss
how to improve, and not despise that plenty: Even so is it in spiritual and
supernatural things; Men are so fully provided of them, that they even surfeit
and are wanton under God's Divine Ordinances and Provisions of Grace, as once
Israel did of Manna; yet it seems good to God, to have moreovers, and to
minister himself in manifold wisdom to his People. To instance, thus God dealt
with Israel; he gave them not only Moses, but Aaron also; not only Sacrifice,
but Circumcision also; nor Circumcision only, but the Passover also; nor the
Tabernacle, but the Temple also; not only Priests and Levites, but Prophets
and Nazarites likewise: That so God might say as Isaiah 5. What could I have
done more for my Vineyard, which I have not done? And this Job tells you, Chap.
33.14, 15. So Solomon in the 9th of his Proverbs. Even so has he done under
the Gospel, not tying us to any one Way or Means, but affords us various Means
and Seasons. We have the Heaven and the Earth declaring his Glory and
Handywork, Psalm. 19. Also we have the Law and Statutes of God in his Scripture,
which is able to make the Man of God wise unto Salvation. We have also the Law
written in our hearts. We have Instruments without, and Instincts within. We
have the Word and Men without, and the Spirit within. We have Mercy and
Judgment, all whispering to us, Fear ye the Lord. So that we may truly say, God
as well as Man has his Moreovers. And we serve not a hard Master, nor is our
reproof and destruction less than sufficiently of our selves. Now the Grounds
and Reasons why God walks thus toward his People are briefly these.

Reas. 1. That the Glory of the Wisdom, Power, and Bounty of God might the more
gloriously appear, by the riches of his Liberality, and plenty of Provisions
afforded to his People, Prove. 16.4. Romans 2.4. Ephesians. 1.18, 19. Col. 1.27.

Reas. 2. God makes his Provisions to be very large and plentiful, affording us
moreovers, to the end that we might with the more ease and facility do his
Will, and attain the knowledge and enjoyment of Salvation; so Isa. 28.9, 10,
11, 12. and this the Apostle seems to eye, Acts 17.30, 31. And the Prophet
Micah, Chap. 6.6, 7, 8. Christ says, His Yoke is easy, and his Burden light;
because he affords light sufficient to see it with, and strength enough to do
what is required, and helps many to assist us; and rewards full, and rich
enough to quicken and encourage us. But again,

Reas. 3. The Lord does it to comply with our nature and frailty, which is not
so well satisfied, nor so effectually furthered or helped by one Way or Means,
as by diversity and variety, and therefore vouchsafes us his Moreovers, or
Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept.

Reas. 4. And lastly, It is to stop the Mouth and leave silent and inexcusable
all neglecters and despisers of Gospel Grace and Provisions; since God can say
to all such, What need I have done more than what I have done? This God pleads
for himself, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. and Luke 13.7, 8, 9.

The first Use is of Information.
By way of Improvement or Application briefly; let this first admonish us to
believe how inexcusable wicked and ungodly Men and Women are, who have God's
overpluses and moreovers; I mean, that living under the light of the Gospel
among the Saints, enjoy such means to better them, and change them; and yet
remain ignorant, profane, and ungodly. Will not all this present favor and
goodness of God to them, one day rise up in judgment against them, and be an
aggravation against them, as Paul says, Romans 2.3, 4, 5, 6. Oh! let such think
seriously and timely upon two Scriptures, and I shall say no more to this Use,
Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over
it; saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes;
compared with Heb. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. For it is impossible for those who were
once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the
World to come; if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance;
seeing they crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an
open shame. For the Earth which drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it,
and brings forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed receives blessing
from God: But that which bears Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and is nigh
unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

Secondly, Caution.
Secondly, Let it be a word of Caution to all of us, not to be wanton, and
despise, and slight God 's moreovers, or his overplus kindnesses, as I am
afraid too many do among Professors at this day; like wanton Israel, that
despised God's Manna, Numb. 11.4, 5, 6. calling it, light Bread, Chap. 21.5.
Even saying as Christ's Disciples, What need this waste? Matthew. 26.8. Like unto
many now-adayes that say, What need so much Preaching? Yea, What need of such
long Preaching? Is not shorter Preaching better Preaching? I beseech you take
heed of such thoughts, lest God takes away our plenty, and give us scarcity
enough: Oh let me persuade such wanton Christians to take the Counsel Peter
gives to Simon Magus; Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God if
perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee, Acts 8.22, 23. Oh
Friends! take heed of such thoughts, of such vain, yea, vile thoughts, for
surely we are not grown such quick Learners or good Scholars, or so soon taught
what the good and perfect Will of the Lord is, as to conclude, we need few
Preachers, or little Preaching. Neither is the Preaching of the Gospel such a
mean Excellency, as worth little more than to be despised; or has the Lord
Christ given Gifts to men in vain: Oh no; he that has given Gifts to many, not
to one, he well knew many Preachers were necessary, that by here a little, and
there a little, by Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, because the People
are so hard to learn, Isa. 28.9. Therefore the Lord has conferred upon the
Church diversity of Gifts, though they proceed from one Spirit: He has set in
his Church not only Teachers, but Prophets also; and dare we despise Prophets
or Prophesyings, and say, What need have we of these Ministrations? Has the
Lord given diversely, as to Degrees or Measures, to one three, to another five
Tallents, and shall he that has received the least, be thought unmeet to have
the freedom to improve his Measure for his Lords Honor, or his Brethrens
Advantage? or, where the Lord bestows a larger Measure, and his Servants are
faithful in the Stewardship thereof; dare any say the time is waste, and the
Message too long? Not remembering, that although he that can speak but five
words understandingly, must be accepted; yet he which can speak ten, must not
be muzled or restrained. Christ, and his Spirit, ought to be free; Wherefore
remember that saying of Paul, Let no man blame us in this abundance which is
administered by us, 2 Cor. 8.20. And to cure this evil, take this short
direction, Be more sensible of your want of the means of Grace, and more humble
spirited, truly hungring and thirsting after Gospel Ordinances.

Lastly, Let it be a word of Exhortation, If our Means and Provisions be
abundant, and redundant, let not our fruitfulness be short, lest what the Lord
Jesus said to Jerusalem, he say to us also, The Kingdom shall he taken from
you, and given to a People bringing forth the Fruit thereof, and he let out his
Vineyard to other Husbandmen, Matthew. 21.34, 41, 43. with Heb. 6.8. How dreadful
then will thy state and mine be, to enjoy much means of Grace, and to bring
forth none or little Fruit by it: Oh! consider this all you that forget God. So
much for the first Particular, or word in the Text, Moreover.

Now let us consider the next Particular, which contains the Reason of what the
Preacher said or did, that is in these words, Because the Preacher was Wise.

Before I go further, Three things need some clearing or Exposition.

First; How this suits with some other of Scripture-Expressions, for Solomon to
commend himself, or to say the Preacher was Wife, or Painful, yea, Useful also.

Secondly; What a Preacher is, or what this Preacher was.

Thirdly; What this Wisdom is that is here spoken of.

For the clearing of the first thing, Though this Book is Solomon's, and bears
his Name, and was by him Composed, yet is it not clear that this Copy, or these
Words, were his own: But as David and other Kings had their Scribes and Penmen
which did write for them, and wrote after them; even so might Solomon, and
doubtless had, as his Story in 1 Kings 4.3. compared with 2 Chronicles. 9.29. does
declare. And so though he did not, yet they well might set him forth. But
secondly, Although in moral respects, and at some time it is not fit for a man
to commend himself, yet in two respects a man may (especially a Preacher) so
do, and be innocent in so doing: First, in case of scandal, he may vindicate
himself from unjust aspersion and reproach: So Samuel did; the people had
clouded and eclipsed his worthy and innocent Government, 1 Samuel 8.4, 5.
therefore, Chap. 12. he vindicates himself. So also did Jeremiah, Chap. 15.10.

So Paul, in 2 Cor. 10.3, 7. so in Chap. 12. with that of Job 29. Secondly, In
furtherance of man's Work or Employment, a man may commend himself: So Paul
did, 2 Cor. 2. and it Gal. 1.12, to 19. with chap. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. An^ thus
Nehemiah acted, in chap. 5. from verse. 14 to the close of the Chapter. And thus
I conceive if Solomon did commit this to the Churches Treasury, from his own
Hand or Pen, in this latter sense he might humbly and innocently do it. B^^
possibly the stick or obscurity may be from the Translators so rendering the
Words; for if the words be thus read, this difficulty is easily avoided and the
sense preserved entire. Moreover, A Wis^ Preacher will still give good heed,
and so it speak Duty, and not Commendation.

Secondly, Let me a little open this Particular, What a Preacher is, or, this
Preacher was that here is spoken of. A Preacher is not only such as are under
Ministerial Unction, or calling in Office o^ Ministry. But a Preacher is any,
or every such Person or Disciple of Christ that has received Gifts of the
Spirit to profit withal, and is able to speak a word in due season to him that
is weary, for Edification, Exhortation, and Comfort; and the^^ in Scripture are
called Prophets, or Prophesying. Preachers, as in that of Genesis 20.7. 1 Cor.
12.28. And such a Prophetical or Prophesying. Preacher was Solomon, the
Preacher in my Text, and not an Official, Ordained, or Ministerial. Preacher,
for such were only at that time the Tribe of Levi, the High Priest, Priests,
and Prophets Extraordinary. But the Book tells us, this Preacher was by Office
a King, not a Priest; he was only a Prophet, or Membral Preacher, even such a
Preacher as that Church had many of, and any Brother or Member of that Church,
who was able, though not so able, might as freely and as lawfully preach as
Solomon, as that passage Acts 13.15. compared with Luke 4.16, 17. Ye men and
brethren, if you have any word of exhortation for the People, say on: And such
Preachers Moses and Paul allowed, Numb. 11.29. And Moses said, Enviest thou for
my sake? Would God that all the Lord's people were Prophets, and that the Lord
would put his Spirit upon them; compared with 1 Cor. 14.29, 31. Let the
Prophets speak, and let the other judge, for ye may all prophecy one by one,
that all may learn, and all may be comforted. Many other Testimonies may be
added, but because I shall speak to this more hereafter, let this at present
suffice.

The third thing to be cleared is, What this Wisdom is, or what is this Wisdom
that Solomon says the Preacher had, and what that Wisdom is that every
Preacher ought to have, that will thus wisely or profitably Preach. Wisdom, as
Solomon phraseth it, does not only excel Folly, Eccles. 2.13. but Wisdom also
excels Wit. Wit is a quickness or acuteness of the Understanding to catch or
apprehend things by. But Wisdom is that depth of Reason and Judgment, whereby
Apprehensions, Thoughts, Sciences, Purposes, and Businesses are begun and
completed, or are honorably, profitably, and regularly performed. A Fool may
have Wit, only a Wise Man can have Wisdom, or carry on his Design or Business
wisely.

But still the Question is, What Wisdom that is that is here treated of? or is
Preaching Wisdom, even that Wisdom without which a man cannot be competent or
profitable Preacher?

To which Question I Answer first, Negative^ It is neither Moral, Natural, or
acquired Wisdom as Languages, Tongues, Arts, or Sciences: The I not only
affirm, but shall also confirm; thou^ when all is done, no doubt, but so
saying, m^ make some marvel, and others be mad with me, (...) once the
Silver-Smiths were with Paul, when (...) cried down their Diana, by whom they
had a their Wealth, as have the Schoolmasters, Tutor Academists, Collegiats,
Parsons, Doctors, Pr^^lates, Popes, with all the residue of that crew (...)
Antichristian Clergymen. But I am learning not to fear the faces of men, or
respect these Persons, but make known the Truth as it is in Jesus remembering
what Zechariah says will be their portion, even every one to be ashamed of his
Vision Chap. 13. of that Book. But affirmatively, Answer, The reason why I
affirm that this Wis^dom before specified is not the Gospel-Wisdom, i^

First, Because God has not set this Ax or Hammer apart to do his or this work
with.

Secondly, It is but a carnal natural Weapon and is only fit for carnal,
natural, weak, and wordly Work. And for such purposes, thi^ Learning, Wisdom,
or Furniture is fit, or very useful; but no more fit for preaching, or a
Preacher in order to preaching, than a Sword is to cut one Bread with, or a
Plough to ride on, though for other uses both are profitable. But the Wisdom
absolutely necessary to preaching, or for a Preacher, is Divine Wisdom, which
descends from Above more immediately, and comes from the Father of Lights,
James 1.5, 17. and in Scripture is put in opposition to the Wisdom before
mentioned, 1 Cor. 1. from 17 downwards, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise,
and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is the Wise?
where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this World? Has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this World? etc. So chap. 2.1, 4, 7, 13. Brethren, when I
came to you, I came not with excellency of Speech, or of Wisdom, declaring unto
you the Testimony of God; and my Speech, and my preaching was not with enticing
words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of Power: Not the
Wisdom of this World, nor the Princes of this World, that come to naught, but
we speak the Wisdom of God, which God ordained before the World unto our glory.
Which things also we speak, not the words which man's wisdom teaches, but
which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual: The
natural man receives not these things, neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. And Peter tells us, that the Learned in the former
sense, but unlearned or illiterate in the latter sense, are the Novices which
do but wrest and pervert the Scripture, or the substance of all Scripture, 2
Pet. last, verse. 16. But more particularly, what this preaching Qualification
or Wisdom is, I shall hereafter, the Lord assisting, discover.

From the Person spoken of, and that which of him is spoken, let me note these
Observations.

Doct. 1. That Preaching by godly men, thereunto qualified, is God's Ordinance.

Secondly, From the kind of Preacher that Sol^mon here spoke of, note, this
Observation.

Doct. 2. That Prophetical Preaching or Pr^phesying, by Members or Brethren of
true Church^ by virtue of Gifts and Membership, without Mi^stry, is God's very
Ordinance. Else Solomon, ho^ wise soever, had sinfully preached.

Thirdly, Note, Doct. 3. That such, or many Brethren as have Gifts and
Abilities thus Preach, not only may, but are bound to Prea^ Else Solomon had
done more than his Duty, o^ what he was not bound to; which is vanity in (...)
to imagine, for he had not been wise in so doing.

Fourthly, Note, Doct. 4. That every Gospe^ Preacher ought to be wise; or that
Grace and Spiritual Wisdom are the only Requisites, and ^^ffi^ent for
Gospel-preaching, or Preachers.

To begin with the first of these, though the last of these is principally
designed; Note, The Preaching by Godly Men, thereunto qualified, is God
Ordinance. For the proof of this, take the^ Testimonies, Isa. 61.1. The Spirit
of the Lord God is upon me, because he has anointed me t^ Preach glad-tydings
to the Meek: He has sent (...) to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim
liberty (...) the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to the^ that are
bound, etc. Jonah 3.2. Arise, go un^^ Nineveh, that great City, and preach unto
it the Preaching that I bid thee. Mark 1.4. Joh^ preached the Baptism of
Repentance for the remission of sins; with chap. 3.14. He ordained twelve that
they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach. Acts
5.42. And daily in the Temple, and in every House, they cease^ not to Teach and
Preach Jesus Christ; and chap. 10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the
People; with Romans 10.15. How can they Preach except they be sent? Many other
Scriptures would give testimony to this, were not this that is offered
sufficient. But a little further, to clear this by Argument or Reason, since
this, as every Truth, has its Opposition or Opposers.

Reas. 1. Had not this been God's Ordinance, that the Word by Men should be
Preached or Revealed unto men, the best of men would never have been found so
often, even in all Ages, transgressing against the God of men, through
preaching unto men; but the best of men have preached unto men. The Scripture
shows us this in Noah's time, in that he was called a Preacher of
Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. The like is said of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. where
Abraham's Teaching or Preaching, in and to his Household, is made the reason of
God's Preaching or Declaring to him the destruction of Sodom. The like we have
in chap. 49.1, 2. So Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.1, 2. with v. 19. compared also; you have
it chap. 32.1. So did David, Psalm. 40.9, 10. So Solomon, you have it in the
Text. So Samuel in his first Book, chap. 12.23. So in 2 Chronicles. 17.7, and 9
compared. And thus did the New Testament Converts and Disciples practice, Acts
8.4. Therefore I conclude, that Preaching is, and ever was, acknowledged God's
Ordinance.

Reas. 2. Had not Preaching been God's Ordinance, though godly men might have
mistook their Duty, yet the Lord Jesus Christ would doubtless not have
preached. But the Lord Jesus Christ was a Preacher, and did frequently preach;
therefore Preaching is God's Ordinance. That the Lord Jesus Preached, is most
evident, Mark 1.14. with Luke 8.1. After John was put in Prison, Jesus came
into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God. He went Preaching,
and showing the glad-tydings of the Kingdom of God; and the Twelve were with
him.

Reas. 3. That which not only Holy Men have approvedly done, and the Lord
Jesus himself likewise did, but that which even Angels did teach and commanded
the Saints to do, that must need^ be owned to be an Ordinance, as appears Luke
1.26, to 37. Luke 2.10, 11. Rev. 14.6. I sa^ another Angel fly in the midst of
Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to Preach unto them that dwel^ on the
Earth, etc.

Reas. 4. That which God has in all Ages most abundantly fitted some men for,
must need^ be his Ordinance: But God has in all Ages fitted some men for
Preaching-Work; therefore Preaching-Work is God's Ordinance. The proof of this
lies most apparent in the first Argument, and is confirmed further to us, Psalm.
68.11. The Lord gave the Word, great was the Company of them that published it;
compared with Ephesians. 4.8, 12. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high,
he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men: For the Perfecting of the
Saints, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ.
Yea, he that says, No man lights a Candle in vain, or to put it under a
Bushel; Would not himself light so many Preaching-Candles, or make so many
Preachers in vain, if Preaching were not his Ordinance.

Reas. 5. Satan and sinners would never have so opposed Preaching, had not
Satan known that Preaching was God's Ordinance: Satan opposes not sin, no not
the grossest wickedness; but the purest and the most powerful Preachers and
Preaching he has always most eagerly opposed; witness Micah, Zechariah,
Jeremiah, Peter, Paul, Stephen: And which of Christ's eminentest Preachers has
he not persecuted? witness Acts 13.49, 50. And the Word of the Lord was
published throughout all the Regions; but the Jews stirred up the devout and
honorable Women, and the chief Men of the City, and raised persecution against
Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their Coasts; compared with Acts
17. and Rev. 11. Yea, our own Times witness this, how much the design of the
Devil and his Creatures is to obstruct and hinder the Spiritual Preaching of
the Gospel: Like the Men Paul speaks of 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16. Who both killed the
Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, forbidding us to
speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their sins; for the
Wrath is come upon them to the utmost.

Reas. 6. I might add that which not only good Men have both practiced, and
been persecuted for; yea, both the Lord himself, and Angels have practiced and
Preached to us, as our Work, that must needs be God's Ordinance; but this both
Christ and his Apostles have taught and enjoined us: Therefore to Preach is
their Duty, as they are able to Preach. Mat. 28.19. Go, and teach all Nations;
with 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the Wor^ be instant in season, out of season, reprove,
rebuk^ exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrine, w^^ 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.

First Use of Reproof.
But now by way of Application, this may ser^^ for conviction or confutation of
all such sensua^ sinful, anti-scriptural men, as deny the Preaching of the
Gospel to be God's, or a Divine Ordinance but men's device and design to advance
their h^nour or profit in the World. Do not some, the would not be thought to
be small Fools; spurn (...) Preaching as needless, uncertain, men's pride? (...)
not men say, What can the Preachers tell us, b^ what they have told us, and
what we know a ready? Nay, are there not some, even too many whose pride will
not suffer them to own the Preaching of the Word? To these let me spea^^ that
word of Solomon, Prove. 1.22. How long, simple ones, will ye love simplicity?
and ye scorne^ delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? (...) that such
that presume to question this undoubte^ Truth of God, Preaching, even by men
thereu^to qualified, to be God's Ordinance; because me that Preach are not, nor
ought to pretend to be in fallible, would but consider this; Are none sit (...)
Preach to you fallible, ignorant, shallow things, i^ things of Religion, but
who are infallible? Di^ not Paul, that great Light, say, That he knew b^^ in
part, and prophesied but in part? Yet was admitted to be a Preacher in full, or
a Preacher full worth hearing. What these say, argues no more against
Preaching, than for a Scholar to say, M^ Master is not a Scribe or Teacher in
perfection therefore I will not learn of him; yet may he be very able to teach
the Scholar that he has not yet learned. Even so may an imperfect Preacher be
very sufficient to teach an imperfect Christian.

Secondly, Though the best of Preachers are, or may be, in some things
fallible, much of what Spiritual Preachers teach is infallible; and you Hearers
prove all things, refuse nothing, but hold fast only that which is good.

And thirdly, Though Preachers preach proudly, or may so do, yet hear
Gospel-Preachers humbly, and the defect will be theirs, not yours. Else it will
evidence pride in you not to hear such whom Christ appoints that you should
hear; Matthew. 23.2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair; All
therefore that they bid you observe, that observe and do, etc.

Fourthly, Are they covetous of your Wealth? be you never the less covetous,
yea, more covetous of Christ's Treasury in their earthen Vessels; and remember
Solomon's Counsel, Buy the Truth, and sell it not; also Wisdom, Instruction,
and Understanding, Prove. 23.23. And in so doing, you shall at most but do as
every wise Merchant-man ought to do, when he had found one Pearl of great
price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it, Mat. 13.46.

Fifthly, Do you know aforehand what your Preachers will or can tell you,
which is more than you know yet? Hear then, for if they can tell you no new
things, they can tell what you should do with old things. If they can tell you
no new things, they can tell you what you should do with old Truths, which you
say you know: And (...) arguing of yours, proves you have not yet learn even to
practice what you know of God; for (...) the knowers, but the doers of the Law
shall be ^^stified, Romans 2.13. And remember what Pe^. says, in 2 Pet. 1.12,
13. Wherefore I will not negligent to put you always in remembrance of the
things, though you know them, and be establish in the present Truth: Yea, I
think it meet, as l^^ as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir up your p^^ minds, by
putting you in remembrance. Oh the^^fore receive and consider this reproof,
Psalm. 4. H^ long, ye Sons of Men, will ye turn my Glory i^ shame? How long will
ye love vanity, and foll^^ leasing, or lying Arguments? And consider wh^ the
Lord says to such as you are; O Generation see the Word of the Lord; Have I
been a Wilde^ness unto Israel? a Land of darkness? Wheref^^ say my People, We
are Lords, we will come no m^ unto thee? Jer. 2.31. And to conclude the Use,
think upon that Scripture, Psalm. 50.22. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest
he tear you (...) pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

Second Use of Reproof.
This reproves such as own Preaching, yet oppose it; and these are not mean
illiterate, but glittering, potent, even learned Enemies of the preaching of
the Gospel; a Generation that are pure i^ their own eyes, but are not washed
from their own filthiness, Prove. 30.12. These are such that deal with
Preachers, and Gospel-Preaching, as once he did with Jeremiah, of whom we read
chapter 32.3. where we have it, that Zedekiah, King of Judah, had shut him up,
saying, Wherefore dos^ thou prophecy, and say, Thus says the Lord? Sinners
cannot endure that God's Ministers should say, Thus says the Lord. Thus dealt
those with Amos, which said, O thou Seer, go flee thy way into the Land of
Judah, and there eat Bread, and Prophecy, but Prophecy no more at Bethel, for
it is the King's Chapel, and it is the King's Court, Amos 7.12, 13. Oh that
such Gospel-Opposers would but consider the two last Verses of this Chapter,
and tremble, and not any more oppose and persecute the Gospel, and the faithful
Preachers thereof. It is neither men's greatness in Authority, or excellency of
Parts, will secure them from God's dreadful displeasure, except they repent. Oh
how great is their sin, and how inexcusable will they one day be, that pretend
love to Christ, and friendship to the Gospel, yet forbid the pure preaching
thereof! These are sinners of a double die, and it were well that they would
all view and consider what Paul says concerning them, 1 These. 2.16. Forbidding
us to Preach to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their sins
allway; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. This is not only a
crying, but a filling sin. Sure, the sins of the Romish Prelates and Powers, is
full near the uttermost, that have so long persecuted, forbidding God's
faithful Laborers to Preach the Gospel of Christ. I shall only offer one
Scripture to such men's consideration, and so leave them under this reproof,
Isa. 30.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Now go, write it before them in a Table, and note
it in a Book, that it may be for time to come, for ever and for ever; That this
is a rebellious People, lying Children, Children that will not hear the Law of
the Lord: Which say to the Seers, See not; and to the Prophets, Prophecy not
unto us right things; speak to us smooth things, prophecy deceits; get ye out
of the way, turn aside out of the path; cause the holy One of Israel to cease
from before us. Therefore thus says the holy One of Israel, Because ye despise
this Word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon: Therefore
this inquity shall be unto you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a
high Wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant, and he shall break it
as the breaking of (...) Potters Vessel that is broken in pieces, he shall not
spare, so that there shall not be found, in the burstings of it, a shread to
take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the Pit.

Third Use of Reproof.
A third Use of Reproof, from this consideration, that Preaching of the Word is
God's Ordinance, shall be, to reprove all such Preachers of the Gospel, as
though not forbidden of men, yet forbid themselves, and neglect this so great a
Work, and Ordinance, as the Preaching of the Gospel. Such idle Drones among the
Bees, had need consider that word 1 Cor. 9.16. For though I Preach the Gospel,
I have nothing to glory of, for necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is unto me
if I Preach not the Gospel: and woe will be unto such as are able, and may, but
do not preach the Gospel. Yea, though men did forbid, yet woe unto him that
will be forbidden by any sort of men, and does not faithfully and fully preach
the Gospel. Such sleepy, idle, timorous, or unprofitable Preachers, that do not
as the good Preacher did in my Text, and every good Preacher in the World ought
to do, that is, To give good heed, and diligently set in order Parables.

But I shall not enlarge upon these men's Repoof; hoping that a word to the Wise
will be sufficient, which every Preacher (as my Text implies) ought to be. But
to them, or so many Preachers of the Everlasting Gospel as are otherwise
spirited, I would commend a Scripture or two to their consideration. The first
is, Woe to the idol Shepherd, that leaves the Flock, the Sword shall be upon
his arm, and upon his right eye; his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right
eye utterly darkened: But why, O Lord? Mark, Because he has not visited those
that be cut off, neither does seek the young Ones, nor heal that which is
broken, nor feed that which stands still, but does eat the flesh of the fat,
and tear their claws in pieces, Zach. 11.16, 17. with Ezekiel. 13.4, 5. O Israel!
thy Prophets are as the Foxes in the Deserts; yea, have not gone up into the
Gaps, neither made up the Hedge for the House of Israel, to stand in the Battle
in the Day of the Lord; therefore hear what the Lord says, verse. 9. They shall
not be in the Assemblies of my People, neither shall they be written in the
writing of the House of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord.

Fourth Use of Reproof.
But a fourth Use of Reproof is to such, and so many as own and acknowledge the
preaching of the Gospel to be the Lord's Ordinance, and yet make not due and
suitable improvement of it. God will one day say to these, without repentance,
as to those of old; Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and
with their lips, do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me, and
their fear to me is taught by the precepts of men: Therefore behold, I will
proceed to do a mavelous work, and a wonder; for the wisdom of the wise men
shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent men shall be hid, Isa.
29.13, 14. There are two sorts of persons to whom this Reproof belongs:

First, Such as are careless in hearing the Word Preached.

Secondly, Such as are careless of doing of that, which by the preaching of the
Word they are taught they ought to do, as well as know.

And I fear, how many soever there may be found under the first Reproof, or of
the first sort, there are yet many more of the latter sort, even forgetful
Hearers, deceiving their own souls, Jam. 1.22, 25. First, Such sleepy, worldly,
carnal, idle persons, that seldom can find time, and as seldom find an heart to
come to hearing of the Word preached; though God bring it even to the doors,
yet they can scarce move their feet over the threshold to come to it; but cry
out, What need so much expense of time, or attendance upon Preaching? or else
complement over their neglect, as those did that were invited to the Feast;
make light of these opportunities or invitations, and cry, Pray you have me
excused, I have bought a piece of Ground, and I must needs go see it. And
another, I have bought Oxen, and I must needs go prove them. And a third sort,
I have married a Wife, and therefore I cannot come, Luke 14.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
But will these excuses serve to leave such men excusable, that neglect or omit
to come to the hearing of the Gospel. Oh no! mark the close of these Neglecters
work; When the King heard hereof, he was wroth, and he sent forth his Armies,
and destroyed those Murderers, and burnt up their City, Mat. 22.7. And
therefore remember, If the Gospel be hid, it is only hid this day to such as
perish, 2 Cor. 4.3.

Fifth Use of Reproof.
But lastly, and mostly, This Doctrine reproves all such, how great Hearers
soever, as are at highest but Hearers, not Doers of that they hear. Though it
is good to hear, yet it is not good to hear and not to practice; it is bad not
to hear, but is worse not to practice. That Servant must be beaten with many
stripes, that knows his Master's Will and does it not, Luke 12.47. Not the
knowers, but the doers of the Word shall be blessed, John 13.17. Oh! let such
perverters of this so great and blessed an Ordinance, as is the Preaching of
the Gospel, Consider, God will one day come, and call for an account of all the
Sermons you have heard, and see what Fruit you bring forth, whether Fruit to
Him or to your selves: And then will he deal with unfruitful Vines, barren
Fig Trees, and unpractical Hearers, as with those we read of Isa. 5.5, 6. Hos.
10.1, 2, 3. with Heb. 6.7, 8. Oh! it is no small sin, and shall have no small
punishment to be an unpractical Hearer of the Word, and perverter of this so
great an Ordinance.

But this may suffice for that first Use, to wit, a Use of Reproof.

The second Use is of Vindication.
The next Use of this Point, shall be for Vindication or Justification of all
such as are faithful, painful, diligent Preachers of the Gospel; who because
Preaching of the Word is God's Ordinance, do Preach in season and out of season
whoever forbids or says to the contrary; saying as once Peter and John did,
Whether it be right is the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God,
judge ye: For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, Acts
4.19, 20. Where men have not sufficient power to command, it can be no sin
there not to be obedient So here, these knew neither this Council, nor any were
from God entrusted with any such power, as to forbid or hinder the Preaching of
the Word* therefore such Commands neither ought or need to be obeyed. Even so
at this day, should the able Spiritual Preachers of the Word hold their peace,
because men, even any sort of men, forbid them, or command them so to do; the
very Stones in the Street, and the very Ashes of these Apostles, might cry out
against them, and say in the words of the Text; Whether it is right to obey God
or Man, judge ye. Oh! it will one day be dreadful, preferring Man's Commands
before God's Commands, when God shall visit for this holding the Truth in
unrighteousness, according to that expression, Son of Man, I have set thee a
Watchman unto the House of Israel, therefore hear the Word at my Mouth, and
give them warning from me; When I say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die,
and thou give him not warning, nor speak to the wicked: Oh! mark it, Nor
speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life, the same
wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand,
Ezekiel. 3.17. Oh! is not this a terrible word to all silenced Preachers this day,
that have learned to be silent at the word of a man, and let the wicked go
without warning from them, forgetting what God says, Who art thou that thou
should be afraid of a Man, and the Son of Man, that shall be made grass, and
forgettest the Lord thy Maker? Isa. 5.12, 13. Therefore let such be this day
cleared, and acquitted, as innocent, and approved with the Lord, as have not in
such a day as this made the Commands of God of none effect through men's
traditions, but, like Levi, have said to their Father and Mother, I have not
seen him, neither did he acknowledge his Brethren, nor knew his own Children;
for they have observed thy Word, and kept thy Covenant, Deuteronomy. 33.8. Oh!
whenever you hear those Standard-bearers taxed, who have not fainted nor
feared in such a day as this, but have humbly said, Shall such a man as I flee?
Shall such a man as I, whom Jesus Christ has anointed and called to Preach the
Gospel, shall I be dumb and silent? I will not, I may not, I dare not be
silent. Oh! vindicate these, and when railed upon for faction, folly, and
disobedience to Authority, pride, passion, and the like; Oh! then say as of
old, David in a like case said, Is there not a cause? 1 Samuel 17.29. And you
Worthies of Israel, be encouraged from the Word of the Lord, Thou therefore
gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I command thee; be
not dismayed at their faces, lest I confou^ thee before them, Jer. 1.17. So
much for this Use

The third Use is of Exhortation.
A third and last Use is for Exhortation; First To Preachers, who are entrusted
with this great Ordinance, and have this Word of Life in these earthen Vessels.
Be faithful in the improvement of this great Ordinance.

Secondly, Let it speak, before we part, a parting word or two to you that are
Hearers. If th^preaching of the Word be God's holy and preciou^ Ordinance, then
be exhorted both to hear, and no^ to despise him that speaks on Earth, nor
neglect so great Salvation, and also be exhorted to tak^ heed how you hear.

First, Let the Preachers of the Gospel, I mean Christ's Spiritual Preachers,
not Man's empty ordained Preachers, who are crept into Ministry for a morsel of
bread; I say, to you that are Christ's Witnesses and Preachers, preach the
Word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove, exhor^ with all
long-suffering and gentleness; because Preaching is God's Ordinance, and such
bright Lights were not intended to be lighted in vain; it is our Lord's own
expression, Mat. 5. Men do not light their Candles to put under a Bushel: Then
let not glorious Lights be lighted in vain, but be diligent and laborious in
this sin-condemning and Soul-saving Ordinance, remembering what Paul faith, 1
Cor. 4.2. Moreover, it is required in a^ Steward, that he be found faithful; it
will one day be required: Therefore in this day be faithful, lest he that has
given us Talents, which we have not hearts and wisdom to improve, do, to our
shame and loss, recall them, and take them from us, and give them to him that
has improved, Matthew. 25.28, 29, 30. But because I shall have occasion to speak
more to this hereafter in another Particular, I shall say no more to this part
or branch of this Use at this time, but speak a few words to the second branch,
which is;

If Hearing be God's and not Man's Ordinance, then be exhorted, you that are or
should be Hearers, to take heed how you hear, for God takes notice of you, both
at Hearing, and when you omit and needlessly neglect to hear; for he will not
let his Name or Ordinances be taken in vain; Exodus 20.7. Remember that Text,
Eccles. 5.1. Take heed to thy foot, when thou go to the House of God, and be
more ready to hear, than to offer the Sacrifice of Fools, for they consider not
that they do evil. Men and Women must not think it is hearing of men, but
hearing of God by men, or through men, it is not Man's Word, or Ordinance, but
God's; therefore take heed, slight it not, dally not with it, the God of this
most sacred Ordinance will not bear it at your hands: Hearken what God says, 2 Chronicles. 24.19. Yet he sent unto them Prophets to bring them again unto the Lord,
and they testified against them, but they would not give ear, and the Spirit of
the Lord came upon Zachariah the Son of Jehoiada the Priest, which stood above
the People, and said unto them, Thus says God, Why transgress ye the
Commandment of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the
Lord, he has also forsaken you: Compare with this, what you have Mat. 23.34,
3^ 39. and then consider, if there be not need to receive this Exhortation, to
take heed how you hear* Oh! be not sleepy, proud, unbelieving, forgetful,
unthankful, or unfruitful hearers of the Wor^ of God; for if the Lord Jesus,
when he brough^ forth but barley Bread, and small Fishes, said Gather up the
Fragments, and let nothing be lost do you think then he will let such precious
Brea^ of Life, which none but the Son of Man can giv^ you, be lost? John 6.12.

Therefore to conclude, Take heed that you despise not him that speaks from
Heaven, in the Ministry of the Word. Consider it, and se^ that you refuse not
him that speaks; For if the escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth
much more shall not we escape, if we turn aw^ from him that speaks from
Heaven, Heb. 12.25. Oh therefore be swift to hear, though slow to speak against
what you hear; and let every one that has ears to hear, hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches, Jam. 5.19. with Rev. 2.7. Thu^ much for this first
Observation.

Doct. 2. That which I noted from the opening of the words, was, That
Prophetical Preaching, or Prophesying by Saints, or Brethren, by virtue of
Gifts, and Membership, without Office or Ministry conferred upon them, is God's
very Ordinance, and a lawful way of Preaching. Else Solomon, how wise soever,
had sinfully Preached.

For the clearing of this Truth, consider first what the Scripture speaks to
this point. First, Moses that well understood the Mind of God, was thus minded,
when he spoke these words, Enviest thou for my sake? Would God that all the
Lord's people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them,
Numb. 11.29. Two things among others we may note here.

First, That Moses did no^ envy or disallow the Prophesying or Preaching of any
that the Lord had made able; and therefore puts by the envy and ignorance of
those that did, with this reply; Enviest thou for my sake? as if he had said,
you do evilly and sinfully in so doing.

Secondly, Observe Moses, how faithful soever in the House of God, and against
Usurpations and Innovations in the Church, yet allows and approves that any
one, and every such one that the Lord should put his Spirit upon and make able,
might this do; even Prophecy or Preach. I would all the Lord's People were
Prophets, could, and would Preach, for I shall not forbid them.

Object. 1. But if any shall Object, and say, This is not to the thing in hand;
For, first, these were eminent Elders and Officers, or Rulers among the people,
and not private persons, or ordinary Members of the Church.

I Answer, Though it be granted that these were such, even part of the seventy,
yet note, they were not preaching Elders. Secondly, Neither preached they
because such or such, but because they had the Spirit, and that moved, and also
filled them with matter, and gave them utterance. Thirdly, Neither was this
separation or pouring out of the Spirit mentioned verse. 17. the Spirit of
Preaching, Gifts, or Qualifications, but the Spirit of Rule and Government, as
is most clear, by considering what is offered, 'twas a portion of Moses Spirit
to assist Moses, not in Preaching, but in R^ling and Governing.

Object. 2. But if any shall object to this testimony, That it proves not the
thing for which it brought, because this was extraordinary prophesying, and
these were immediate Prophets, and not ^^dinary, or such as the Doctrine
intends.

I answer, True it is, these were extraordinar^ Persons, but whether their
Prophesying in the place spoken of were extraordinary Preaching o^ Prophesying,
does not appear in this, or any other place that I know of, although I
acknowled^ there is such a kind of Prophesying: But howeve^ this is clear from
this place, That as many as t^^ Lord will spirit, or qualify, for one or other
sort^ Preaching, may, and ought to Preach: Else Mos^ had wished too much, and
not answered the ca^^ propounded; but this may serve, for this Object on.

But take a second VVitness, which you ha^^ 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9, 10. where you
find Jeh^shaphat sent out his Princes, as well as his Priest and Levites, to
Teach in the Cities of Judah, an^ the success was very glorious.

But take a third VVitness, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11 where we have the Apostle, not only
allowing but also provoking and enjoining every man the fears the Lord, to be
a good Steward of the manifold Grace of God; and he that has receive that Gift
of speaking a word in season, is to minister, and to speak according to that
ability Go^ gives.

Take but one more, 1 Cor. 14.29, 31. when the Apostle allows, and directs all
the Prophets or prophesying Brethren in the Church, to Prophefie: Yea, he
asserts the truth of this Doctrine, and justifies this for a lawful and
laudable practice, for so many in the Churches of the Saints, as have preaching
Gifts to Preach, saying, You may all prophecy one by one; and let the Prophets
prophecy, and let no man forbid, or envy it: And thus the Preacher in my Text
preached, as a Prophet, or Member of the Church, not officially, or as a
Minister ordained unto this Work of Preaching, is clear. For by Office he was a
King, not a Preacher; such were the high Priests and Levites only; but our
Preacher was a Membral Preacher, or one exercising his Gifts according to his
Liberty and Duty. Yea, our Lord Jesus, who preached in the Jewish Synagogue,
and was allowed so to do; thus he preached in the account of the Congregation,
not by virtue of that anointing by which he was Christ, and Lord: For though he
were so, yet they knew it not, nor allowed it; they only gave him the liberty
and privilege of other Members of the Church: Such a privilege was given to
Paul and the rest of his Companions, Acts 13.15. when they said, Ye Men and
Brethren, if you have any word of Exhortation for the people, say on. By all
which we may see this Doctrine witnessed unto, and confirmed, beyond danger of
any grounded or sober denial; to wit, that every one that has received the
Spirit, and Gifts for Preaching, may, yea ought to Preach and Exercise them.
But let me give you a few Reasons or Arguments to enforce this.

Reas. 1. Else many should have Gifts and Talents for Preaching-work in vain;
but the Scripture tells us, God made nothing in vain, in t^^ first or natural
Creation: Even so the Lord Je^^^ in the new Creation, has dispensed nothing
vain, but for use and profit; as we find it express^ in Ephesians. 4.12. It is the
edifying of the Bo^^ which is his end, in giving Prophets as well as ^^nisters
to the Church: But what edification of the Church have from such men's Gifts,
althoug^ they have sufficient Gifts to edify the Church, y^ have no liberty so
to do; unless, as our Oppos^^^ would have it, they will undertake Ministry an^
Ordination, which many that are sufficiently qulified for prophetical Actions,
are not sufficient qualified for ministerial Employments.

Reas. 2. What we are bound to pray for t^ enjoying of, that we are to promote
the attain^^ of: But we are to pray that the Lord's Har^^ may not want
Laborers; therefore we are, if (...) abled so to be, even to be found
laboring, (...) loytering in the Lord's Vineyard. That we a^ thus to pray, you
find Luke 10.2. with Matt^ 9.37, 38. The Harvest is truly great, but t^^
Laborers are few: Pray ye therefore the Lord the Harvest, that he would send
forth Labour^^^ into his Harvest. Therefore all such as are able^^ Labor,
should go into the Harvest, and there labor in the Word and Doctrine, and not
be idl^ and only pray that the Laborers should be sent.

Reas. 3. If not preaching, when able to Preach be a thing that God will punish
for; then surely (...) must be lawful for who-ever is able to Preach, t^ be
found even so doing: But that such as have Gis^^ and do not use and exercise
them in Preaching shall be punished, if not found Preaching, is mo^^ clear:
Therefore for all such to Preach as are able, must needs be lawful. That this
is so, examine these Scriptures, Matthew. 24.45. Who then is a faithful and wise
Servant, whom the Lord has made Ruler over his Household, to give them meat in
due season: But if that evil Servant shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth
his coming, and eat and drink with the Drunken; The Lord of that Servant shall
come in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint
him his portion with Hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
The like we have in chap. 25. where you have the sad judgment of the
unprofitable Servant, that though he had not Talents, yet one small Gift or
Talent; Cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Take but one more; Necessity (says Paul) is
laid upon me, and woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16.

Reas. 4. This is God's way though not Man's, to fit Persons for Ministerial
Employments: Therefore to Preach without Ministry in order to a qualification
or fitness for Ministry, must needs be lawful and approved. That this is God's
way of preparing men for Ministerial Dignity, is most clear, Acts 1.21, 22.
where Peter tells the Church, That of those men that have companied with us all
the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out amongst us, must one be ordained
to be a witness with us of his Resurrection; And this is that favor which the
Lord promised in that Parable that he spoke concerning the Talents; That unto
every one that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance. Now this is
the way to attain honorable Employment in the Ministry, to be sound faithful
and fruitful in the work of Prophecy. Having proved and cleared the Point, let
me now make some Application.

The first Use is of Vindication.
The first shall be for Information or Vindication of all such Persons or
Churches, which suitable to this Doctrine, thus practice, and thus do, even
improve and exercise what Gift or Gifts the Lord has entrusted them with for
Preaching-work; freely, willingly, faithfully, and humbly, as they have
opportunity in public Assemblies, and Church-Fellowships, though they be
neither Prophets nor Prophets Sons; that is, neither educated in humane
litteral Arts, nor called or admitted into any Office of Ministry, yet do
Preach as the Spirit gives them utterance: I say, according to what has been
proved and opened in the Doctrine, That the way and work of such is lawful; for
ye may all, that fear the Lord, and are able, Prophecy one by one, Women only
excepted: I say, not only he that has five Talents, but he that has but one
Talent, may publicly by Preaching improve it. Mark, I say not as some would
have it, that he that has no Talent may Preach, but every one only that sears
the Lord, and has some sufficient degree or measure of Gifts for so doing;
Even he I do assert may and ought to Preach as he has opportunity, and let the
Prophets judge, 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. Therefore know and consider this day, ye
Rabbis of the World, ye learned, separated, and anointed Sons of Levi, I mean
you Clergymen, who are, or would be, the sole ingrossers and monopolizers of
all Preaching-work in your own hands, as the alone Sons Eli; reproaching and
condemning the Preaching of the Gospel by Illiterate or Mechanic men, Laymen,
or Tradesmen, as you please to call them, as not only foolish and disorderly,
but an incroachment and usurpation upon the Priest's Office, even the Sin of
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; never remembering, as you ought, what the Lord says,
Have you never read, Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou have
perfected praise, Matthew. 21.16.

But since this Doctrine, if not too dark, is notwithstanding derogatory to the
honor, reputation, and profit of the Learned Preachers of this day, I shall a
little consider of their learned, but misapplyed Objections.

Object. 1. How can the Preaching of the Brethren, or private Christians, in or
unto the Church, be paralleled with the Act of those in that of Numb. 16. those
reproached Ministry, even God's faithful Ministers, Moses and Aaron, crying
out, You take too much upon you, verse. 3, 4. but so do not the Prophesying
Ones, they own Christ's Ministers and Official Ones, and their Preaching and
Administrations to be of Christ, and not too much for such alone to be
ministerially exercised in; and so did not those.

Secondly, These were Ministers, but not content with their own Function or
Ministry, they aspired to another higher, even Aaron and Moses 's Ministry, as
appears verse. 9, 10, 11. But the Prophets that pretend to a liberty to Preach,
neither pretend or affirm that every Preacher is an Official or Ordain^
Minister of the Lord Jesus; neither do they aspi^ to equality or superiority
with or above others (...) Christ's Ministering Ones, but acknowledge they a^
neither the one nor the other of Christ's Gospel Ministry, but Members in
particular.

But thirdly, Note, There is no agreement be tween the design of those men, and
the work of the^^ men I plead for, their design was sacrificing or offering
Incense, the work only of Aaron, and hi^ Sons, 'twas Censering, not Preaching,
as is cle^^ verse. 15, 16, 17, 18. But the highest of those me^ or this
Doctrines design, is Preaching, not offering or performing Ministerial
Function, but priva^ Men's and Brethrens liberty, as has been prove from that
passage, Ye may all prophecy or Pread one by one. To as little purpose will
that Text answer our Clergy-mens design and errant for which they improve, as
this Numb. 16. I mean th^^ 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every Man abide in the sam^ Calling
wherein he was called.

This might, if it had been written at that time have been applied aptly by
Moses in the busines^ he had in hand; but what is all this against the
lawfulness of private Christians Preaching. Preaching, though an excellent
Work, is no peculiar Calling, but may be performed by Persons of another
Calling; neither do such as assert our practice i^ this way of Preaching,
depart from their Callings, or not abide therein, though this is no
satisfaction to their Adversaries: therefore these feeble Objections will not
suffice to rational Christians enlightened in this Doctrine, as sufficient to
oppose this way of Preaching. Therefore know and consider this day what I shall
affirm, till you can more substantially oppose it; to wit, That it is lawful
and laudable, a Liberty, yea, a Duty incumbent upon every Man that fears the
Lord, and has received the Gift, to speak a word in due season for
Edification, Exhortation, and Comfort, to use and exercise the Gifts he has
received of the Lord in Prophesying or Preaching in the Congregation, That all
may learn, and all may be edified, 1 Cor. 14.31. Therefore not only may
Pastors, or Teachers, but any Brother of the Church that is qualified, whether
Young or Old, Servant or Master, Son or Father, Rich or Poor, Learned or
Unlearned, of what Employment or Calling soever, whether Miller or Merchant,
Innkeeper or Shoop-keeper, Brick-layer or Tailor, Cobbler or Shoo-maker, one or
other lawful Employment, For ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.8. Thus
much for this Use.

The second Use is for Exhortation.
But a second Use, and the all that I shall make of this Doctrine, is, That if
Prophesying or Preaching of Brethren, or such as have not received any Office
or Ministry from Christ, be an Ordinance of Christ, and the duty of such as
have received Gifts for Preaching to Preach. Then two things from hence I may
add,

First, A word of Exhortation to all the Churches of the Saints, to allow,
admit, and encourage the Gifted-Brethren in this Work and Business of
Preaching. Oh! be not so like to Antichrist and his Synagogue, as to forbid
this liberty of the Saints, which Christ has so dearly purchased with his most
precious Blood. Consider what the Lord says to those Disciples of his, who
told him, That they saw one casting out Devils in his Name, which followed him
not, and they forbad him; but Mar^ the Answer of Christ, Forbid him not, Mark
9.38, 39. Will not Christ have such forbad that follow not him, or his
Disciples, and will you my Brethren forbid such as follow the Lamb, (yea, and
follow you too) because not Ministers as you are, or competent or equal in
Gifts with you? My Brethren, I beseech you do not this wickedness, it smells of
Rome, of an Antichristian spirit; but think what the Lord says, He that is not
with me, is against me; and he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad,
Mat. 12.30. You that will not join issue with Christ in furthering and
permitting such to Preach whom Christ allows to Preach, you, even all you, who
ever you be, how Wise, and Learned, and Pious soever, yet are you against
Christ, and for Antichrist; Enemies to Preaching, though never so great
Preachers; and it were well you would please to suffer me to commend two
Scriptures to your serious consideration. The first is that of the Apostle, Be
of the same mind one toward another; mind not high things, but condescend to
men of low degree, or estate: Be not wise in your own conceits, Romans 12.16. The
second Scripture is that of Peter, Feed the Flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof; not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
Lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but
being Ensamples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.

But secondly, Let this be a second Branch of this Use to exhort all such, even
such, or so many as have received but one Talent, or the least dogree of real
competency or fitness, though neither Prophets or Prophets Sons, but of the
meanest or most contemptible condition or Calling amongst men to Preach, and
that in season and out of season. O remember it is your duty, your Privilege,
you may preach all one by one; you are not only made Kings, but Priests; and
this Priestly Act you, yea, any Gifted Believer may perform, Rev. 1.6. Beloved,
Preaching is God's Ordinance, his Peoples Blessing, and your Duty. O therefore!
Preach as well as Pray continually, and forget not that exhortation, As every
Man has received the Gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good
stewards of the manifold Grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. Brethren, let not your
fellow Spies discourage you, by telling you of the Sacredness, Excellency, and
difficulty of Preaching; But as every man has received, so minister the same,
as of the ability God gives, that in all things God may be glorified, 1 Pet.
4.11. Remembering, for your encouragement, two Scriptures, 2 Cor. 8.12. For if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted, according to that a man has,
and not according to that a man has not. Secondly, Think on these words of
Christ, For unto every one that has, shall be given, and he shall have
abundance; but from him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he
has, Mat. 25.29. Therefore quench not the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. But what the
Disciple said, I may say to you, The Lord has need of it, Luke 19.34. The
Souls of Sinners call for your Labors; yea, the wants of your dear Brethren
call for your words of Exhortation, Edification, and Comfort; therefore, be not
wanting in the practice of this Ordinance, even this great Ordinance of
Preaching the Gospel. Therefore, my Brethren, be steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord; for a^ much as you know your Labor is not
in vain in the Lord.

Thirdly, Let this Doctrine exhort and quicken you that have ears to hear what
the Spirit says to the Churches. Take heed that you despise not prophesying, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Christians, despise not Christ's day of small things, Since out of
the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, he will ordain strength, because of the
enemy and avenger, Psalm. 8.2. compared with Matthew. 21. Say not in your hearts
as once Nathaniel did; Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? John 1.46. But
take heed you despise not him that speaks on Earth, lest that sad word be
your word, For with stammering lips, and another tongue, will he speak to this
People. Read that Chapter at your leisure, and you shall see how dreadful God
speaks to despisers of this Ordinance of Preaching, though by mean and
outwardly contemptible Instruments: My Beloved, know God oft-times hangs great
Blessings at the end of small Wyers. How great a victory did God give Israel by
that Barley Cake, as Gideon is called, Judge. 7.13, 14, 15, 16. As also how
great a Blessing did Naaman the Syrian receive, by hearing the Voice of his
Servants, 2 Kings 5. Yea, how great advantage did this very Ordinance bring to
the Jews and Greeks, when the scattered Saints and Brethren went up and down,
Preaching and Prophesying, Acts 11.19, 20, 21. Therefore despise not
Prophesying, I mean Preaching, by Brethren that are gifted thereunto, although
not Ministers or Officers in the Churches. So much for this second Doctrine.

I should now come to speak to the third Point, or Doctrine, which is,

Doct. 3. That if Preaching be God's Ordinance, and Prophesying and Preaching
by Men of Grace and Gifts, though no Ministers, or Ordained Persons, may
lawfully Preach; then such as are Prophets, though no Ministers or Officers of
the Church, not only may, but ought to Preach.

But because I have spoke something to this in the close of the second
Doctrine, I shall say no more to this, but proceed to the fourth and last
Doctrine upon this Head, which is drawn from the Description of the
qualification of this Prophetical Preacher Solomon; to wit, That he was Wise,
as you have it in the Text, Moreover, because the Preacher was Wise. Whence
take this Observation, to wit,

Doct. 4. That every Gospel preacher ought to be truly wise, or that Grace and
Spiritual Wisdom are the true and only, and sufficient Requisites or
sufficiency for Gospel-preaching.

Let me, in the carrying on this Work, first clear this Point, and show what
this Wisdom, which every Preacher ought to have, is.

2ly, Give the Reasons why what is affirmed to be the Wisdom required, is that
which is affirmed.

And 3ly, Resolve some Objections.

And lastly, Make Application of the Point.

First, Take some Witnesses that Gospel-Preachers ought to be Wise. This the
Lord tells us (...) that qualification, that all such ought to have a^ draw
near him in any peculiar or especial way o^ service or ministration, as you
have it laid dow^ by Moses, in that saying, Take you wise men, ye understanding
and known men among your Tribes, an^ I will make them Rulers over you. And man
what is further said; And ye answered me, an^ said, The thing which thou have
spoken, is good for us to do; So I took wise men, and known, eve^ the chief of
your Tribes, and made them Heads ov^ you; this is God's and Moses way for the
serving of Israel, Deuteronomy. 1.13, 14, 15. Again, tak^ that place, Prove. 15.2.
where you have this expression, The Tongue of the Wise uses knowledge a right;
but the mouth of Fools pours out foolishness. Oh mark! it is the wise tongue
that will Preach or use Knowledge aright; compare thi^ with what we have Verse.
7. The lips of the Wis^ disperse Knowledge, but the heart of the Foolish does
not so; It is wise lips either can or ought to Preach, or dispense Divine
Knowledge. Again, take that Passage of our Lord Jesus, where he tell us what
every Scribe or Teacher in Israel should be, one instructed unto the Kingdom of
Heaven, like unto a man that is a Householder, that brings ou^ of his Treasury
things both new and old. Oh! this is the good Scribe or Preacher, Mat. 13.52.
the like you have Matthew. 10.16. with Prove. 1.5, 6. further you have this
confirmed, That a Preacher or Director of others should be wise; Eccl. 1.10.
for he that sends a Message by the hand of a Fool, cutteth off the feet, and
drinks damage: The legs of the Iame are not equal; even so is a Parable in
the mouth of fools, Prove. 26.6, 7. By all which, with many Testimonies more
that might have been offered, you have this Truth confirmed, That every
Gospel-Preacher ought to be wise.

Now I come to open the Point, and show you what it is to be Wise, or what that
Wisdom is that every Gospel-Preacher ought to have. I told you in the opening
of the words, by way of Negation, that the Wisdom spoken of in the Text, was
neither natural, moral, or acquired Wisdom, as Languages, Tongues, Arts, or
Sciences; but a more sublime and transcendent Wisdom. I told you, God had not
set this Ax or Hammer apart to do his or this Work with; these Tools are
strangers to any Divine designment for such an end, being neither appointed or
required in Scripture. I told you secondly, This Wisdom is but a carnal or
natural Weapon, and is only meet for carnal, natural, weak, and worldly work;
and for such purposes this Learning or Wisdom is very fit and useful, but no
more apt or necessary essentially for Preachers, or Preaching, than a Sword is
to cut ones Beard with, or a Plough to ride a Journey on: But the Wisdom
absolutely necessary for Preaching, or a Preacher, is Divine Wisdom, as I told
you, which descends from Above more immediately, and comes from the Father of
Lights; and this is that true Wisdom which is put in opposition to the Wisdom
before mentioned, 1 Cor. 1.17. where the Apostle says, Christ sent him not to
Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel; not with wisdom of words, lest the Cross of
Christ should be of none effect: Mark, it is worldly Wisdom, or the wisdom of
words, makes Christ's Cross to be made ineffectual; this is the likelyest good
worldly Wisdom will do in Preaching. The same thoughts was the Apostle Peter
of, censuring humane Wisdom, tha^ it might, and did furnish men to pervert, but
no^ Preach the Gospel, where he says, As also in a his Epistles, speaking in
them of these things, i^ which are some things hard to be understood, which
they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest, as the^ do also the other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction: Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing you know
these things before, beware lest you also being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your ow^ stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3.16, 17. Now if you would know
who these unlearned and unstable wreste^ and perverters of Paul, and of all
Scriptures are Peter tells us not men wanting Arts and Languages such knew
these things, as you have it, seeing y^^ know these things; but they he
describes and call unlearned, are those he mentions in the second Chapter of
this Epistle, whom he calls false Prophets, and false Teachers. Note, It is not
the unlearned Hearers, but the learned Preachers that are the perverters and
deceivers of the People, through mistaking Paul's Writings, and other
Scriptures.

These are the Men the Church and the World are only beholden to, for privily
bringing in damnable Heresies, and causing the Truth of God to be evil spoken
of, Verse. 1, 2. These are the Brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed,
speaking evil of the things they understand not, even the Saints and the
Scripture, and the ways of God, Verse. 12. These learned Prophets are the Wel^
without water, and the Clouds carried with a Tempest, verse. 17. These are the
men that Speak great swelling words of vanity, and allure through the lusts of
the flesh, through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who
live in Error. So that we may boldly conclude, That Humane Learning and
Wisdom, is neither Prophets nor Preachers wisdom, or fit furniture for such
work. But because I foresee that Demetrius, and his learned Crafts-men will
make no small stir about this Doctrine concerning Humane Learning, I shall lay
down some Arguments to back and confirm what has been said.

Arg. 1. If Humane Wisdom or Learning be essential to qualify a Preacher for
preaching, then the Scripture Rule concerning a Preachers-qualification is
imperfect and obscure, which is sinful to imagine; because it neither
requires, or provideth for such low, earthly-membring Qualifications, as
Tongues and Sciences, which teaches Preachers not to preach without it: What
the Scripture requires as a Preachers Qualification, you may read 1 Acts 4.5.
It is the promise of the Father, expounded verse. 5. to be the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost; So 1 Timoth. 2.2, to the 7.2 Tim. 2.2. and 15. with Chap. 3.14, 15,
16, 17.

Arg. 2. If Humane Learning, or Wisdom be the Preachers Wisdom, then the best
of Preachers have slighted and neglected the main, or grand Qualification, 1
Corin. 2.1. And I, Brethren, when I came unto you, I came not unto you with
excellency of Speech, or of Wisdom declaring unto you the testimonies of God:
And Paul gives the reason of his so doing: For I determine not to know any
thing among you, save Jesus Christ, Verse. 2. and again says he, My Speech, and
my Preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration
of the Spirit, and of power, verse. 4. yet Paul would have the Rabbis, and
Sticklers for enticing words, and man's wisdom know, That his illiterate
Preaching, was perfectly accomplished Preaching; Howbeit we speak wisdom among
those that be perfect, yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of
this world, that come (...) naught, verse. 6. Take but one place more, Act.
4.13. Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they
were unlearned, and ignorant men, they marvelled: mark, these marvelous
Preachers had preached most publicly, and resolved still to preach as
publicly, yet neither had this Wisdom or Learning, but were ignorant and
unlearned, and resolved so to remain. Therefore clear it is, this wisdom is
not Preachers wisdom, else these great Preachers could not have wanted it; or
which is all one, if they had it, (...) improving it about this great work,
which some say does so fit men for it; Therefore this Wisdom in Controversy
cannot be Preachers wisdom.

Thirdly, Take this Argument to prove that Humane Learning is not the Preachers
Wisdom, because then many both allowed, and enjoined to Preach, would be found
unable to preach, through want of this furniture or wisdom: as many o^ the
Prophets, or prophesying Members of the Church, who though they have the gifts
of the Spirit, and have passed through the New-birth^ yet have never attained
this Wisdom, or sat at Gamaliel's Feet; But such may be allowed of as
competent Preachers, as I have largely proved in the Second Doctrine.

Arg. 4. The consideration of who is the Spring of Gospel-preaching, will make
it necessarily appear that humane Wisdom is not the Preachers Wisdom, but the
Lord Jesus, and not man's how learned soever, Ephesians. 4.7, to 15. Unto every one
of us is given Grace, according to the measure of the Gift of Christ, and so
forward, compared with Rev. 19.10. which says, The Testimony of Jesus is the
Spirit of Prophecy.

Arg. 5. Take this Argument, why I affirm that the Wisdom that the
Gospel-Preacher ought to have, is not humane Learning or Wisdom, because the
Gospel is that which is to be Preached, not humane Wisdom or Excellency, nor
the Gospel in a way of humane Wisdom or Excellency: Nay, the Gospel is in the
very nature thereof contrary to humane Excellency, being plain and simple,
though most holy and pure in the Nature and Administrations thereof, therefore
needs not Arts or Sciences to comprehend or reveal it: Nay, the Apostle seems
to imply, that Learning mixed with, or used in the Preaching of the Gospel,
does but corrupt, or sophisticate, and adulterate it, as the Fly does the
Apothecaries Box of Ointment, Eccl. 10.1. 2 Cor. 2.17. But to proceed,

Arg. 6. Take this Argument; The Subjects or Persons to whom the Gospel is to
be preached or predicated, are not the Orators, Wise, and Excellent of Wit; but
the Simple, the Vulgar, the Mean and Contemptible, according to that word, Mat.
11.5. The poor have the Gospel preached (...) them, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. And
Christ said That he was anointed to Preach the Gospel to (...) poor: Therefore
they need not learned, that (...) humanely learned Preachers, but spiritual w^^
Physicians: What need Frenchmen to speak them that only understand English? Or
need Man Geometry or Mathematick, Logic or R^torick, to Preach to Men and
Women of no h^^ mane Understanding? Only God has promis^ to teach them so much
spirituality as conce^^ their Souls: But as to this glorious literature, (...)
but as the gilded Trappings upon an Ass to man him to be respected.

Arg. 7. To require or enjoin humane Lear^ing or Wisdom, as necessary or
essential to eve^ Gospel-Preacher, is to require that for a requi^^ which is
directly contrary to the main end of G^spel-Preaching; which is to Preach
Christ, and Knowledge unto the People, and not to Preach (...) Preacher or his
Knowledge into the People; (...) great end of Gospel-Preaching, is not to Prea^
forth, or declare man's breeding or learning in the People; or to show the
Preachers excellency (...) humane things, or excellencies, or breeding up m^ in
worldly or humane Knowledge; but to t^ men from Darkness to Light, and from the
P^^ of Satan into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of G^ and to edify and
build up such as are converted the Knowledge and Grace of our Lord Je^^ Christ.

Arg. 8. If the Church, even every unlearne^ Church in humane Learning must
judge and (...) the Prophets, then certainly this must not be (...) Preaching
excellency and qualification, of which they have no share, nor can pass any
competent judgment but they must try them, as you have it, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove
all things, hold fast that which is good; compared with 1 John 4.1. Beloved,
believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God; because
many false prophets are gone out into the World; Therefore this Learning cannot
be the Preaching qualification.

Arg. 9. And lastly: What need of these Arts, Logic, Grammar, or Rhetoric,
for opening of Moses and the Prophets, or proving that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh? Oh! bring better proof for Universities and Colleges, or else never
plead for these impure puddles, and streams of impure waters for Preaching the
Gospel.

But since this Truth and Argument lies so cross to some men's Interest, and
other men's Understanding, I shall willingly consider of such Objections as I
have met with, and endeavor to try their strength, and try whether their
strength, or the power of this Doctrine will prevail; and be pleased to excuse
me if I enlarge upon this Head, since this Doctrine is so hotly, yea, so
seemingly Scripturally opposed. Therefore I shall take the more pains to clear
to your Understandings and Consciences, that the Learning and Wisdom which a
Gospel-preacher needs for Gospel-preaching is not acquired humane Learning, or
Wisdom, but is Spiritual and Divine; for a man without Spiritual Wisdom, though
a Scholar, and furnished with all Arts and Sciences, is but like a Crow made
outwardly gay with other Birds Feathers, yet underneath he is a Crow still for
all his outward bravery. Therefore be pleased to consider of a few Scriptures,
and weigh the scope and tendency of them as that first, when the Lord promises
to do great things for the conversion of sinners, and lifting (...) of the
Kingdom, where he tells us who shall b^ the Ambassadors and Preachers in that
Work Not the Wise, with this beggarly wisdom of the flesh, but a quite contrary
Generation, to wit, the foolish and the simple, even Babes and Suckling Isa.
29.9, to 21. where we have these things offered; first, That in the days of
the Gospel-e^altation, when Lebanon the true Church shall be come a real
fruitful Field, and the false Church (...) Lebanon of foolish Virgins or
Professors, shall (...) turned into a Forest; then shall this be fulfilled
God's Book shall not be read to the People by the^ learned Ones, for they shall
say and confess, (...) well as the unlearned, I cannot read no more th^^ the
unconverted People or Multitude, and the shall not be the care of idle Ones, or
by accident but by the great design of God to glorify himself another way, as
he says, I will do a marvellou^ work, and a wonder, for I will turn the wisdom
(...) your prudent men backwards, and the meek in the Earth shall increase
their joy, or divine knowledge and have my Vision opened to them, and by them
verse. 18, 19. therefore humane Wisdom an^ Knowledge is not a Tool fit for this
Work.

Object. 1. But it is Objected, This was spoken of the Jews and Priests of that
time, and concer^ not us.

To which I Answer, Grant that it were spoken of that Age first, yet not of
them only; for it appears to the Spiritual, Wise, and truly Learned, to be
spoken of the way of God's dealing under the Man of Sin in the end of his
days, as appears verse. 20, 21. when the Lord says, The terrible one is
brought to naught, and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity
are cut off etc. That make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for
him that reproves in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of naught.

How truly these things are accomplished by the Man of Sin, is most evident;
therefore you may see, how clearly the former words concern his learned Clergy,
will e're long be manifest; and it is most clear, these Words or Prophesies are
to be accomplished in that day when the Church shall be most fruitful; but that
is not in the day of the Jews apostasy or defection: but this Glory is a
reserved Glory for that day, when the Kingdoms of this World shall become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and he shall reign for ever-more, even that good Day
which is coming upon us.

But again, let any one show me that the way of the Lord here spoken of is
changed, and that now our Lord Jesus Christ has sanctified Wisdom and Learning
for Preaching-work, and is become reconciled to it, then they will say
something to the Point that they contend for: But the Scriptures of the New
Testament know no such reconciliation, as appears Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee, O
Father, thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them to Babes, Luke 10.21. compared with 1 Cor. 1.20, 21. Where is the Wise?
where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this World? Has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this World? For after that, in the wisdom of God, the
World by wisdom knew not Go^ it pleased God, by the foolishness of Preaching,
(...) save them that believe; and verse. 19. it is written I will destroy the
wisdom of the Wise, and will bri^^ to nothing the understanding of the prudent;
wi^^ chap. 2.1. And I Brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of
speech, or of wisdom declaring unto you the Testimony of God. When we have Paul
answerably practicing and vindication his so doing; wherefore if by any other
groun^ more helpful to them, than what they have offered, they be able to prove
that the Lord Christ ha^^ taken their blunt Tools into favor, I desire the to
declare it.

But again, consider that passage of Zachari^ 13. concerning this learned
Generation of the Man of Sin's Clergymen, it is said, In that (...) they shall
voluntarily be ashamed, every one of (...) Vision; I hope not of Christ's, or
the Gospe^ Vision, but of the learned Vision, Education, and Trade of
Preaching; which is most clear, both with reference to the rise of this way of
Preaching, and also the matter of this Preaching; and lastly, the end of it.
All that is there said, relate to the Preaching or Prophesying of our Times,
and not of the Jews Time, they having no such Trade in fashion as an
Artificial-Clergy, they having only the Tribe of Levi Prophets, and Nazarites:
Neither would Tongues, Languages, Arts, or Sciences, help to Preach in that
day, when only or primarily Prophecy and Ceremony were to be Preached.
Therefore this Prophecy relates principally to our Time, as a Prophecy of the
Prophets or Clergymen of the Man of Sin, and I shall pray, Come Lord Jesus,
and make haste to shame these Prophets.

But again, I pray consider, when Paul directs to the choice of Ministers, I
mean, Preaching-Ministers, he does not once name or remember this great Diana,
I mean, humane Learning, but lays down Rules for choice without this
expedient, 1 Timothy 3.

Object. 2. But possibly some may say, Is it not there said, Let not him that
is chosen be a Novice? and is not that as much as to say, unlearned, or
unskilful in learning?

To which I Answre, (...) but our learned Tribe Novices? God forbid they should
think so, or the Lord's Peoples Portion be no better, for then none besides the
Learned should have been capable of choice; but Paul acknowledges that the
Corinths were wise, not only their Ministers, but they, 1 Cor. 1.4, 5. with
Epist. 2.11.19. But to Answer this more fully; Paul intends only a young,
unskilful, unexperienced Christian, and not a young Grammarian or Logician; for
he may be as proud as any that has most skill in Arts; as many Instances show:
and this is the reason laid down by the Apostle, why he must not be a Novice,
lest he be pussed up with pride; and surely if the learning here meant be
Oxford and Cambridge, I mean of the Schools; Paul it seems knew men were very
quick to know what learning he meant, since Scripture and himself knew another
Learning better, which the Scriptures show as I have offered; or else he
foresaw men would, as at this day, idolize and dote upon these painted
Feathers; wherefore he says, if any thing, but very little for this
University-breeding, cried up as so absolutely necessary for Preaching,
although the Scriptures know nothing of it.

Object. 3. But some may say, Are not the Schools of the Prophets mentioned in
Scripture, as in the place 2 Kings 22.14? Is it not said, that Huldah the
Prophetess dwelt in a College? and had not the Prophets peculiar places of
residence and habitation; wherein, as in Universities or Nurseries of Learning,
they studied and improved themselves in order to Preaching or Prophesying, as
we real 2 Kings 2.3, 5. (...) Acts 19.9. If there were any more of these (...),
I should have considered them also, but so many have only come to my knowledge.

To all those Scriptures I Answer, they do not in the least oppose the Truth I
have asserted, that not Humane but Spiritual Wisdom fits for Preaching the
Gospel of Christ. For grant that these places intended Colleges and
Universities, and such like places, yet it follows not that these were places
employed or improved for Trayning, or preparing Persons for Gospel-preaching;
for it does not appear that any Gospel-preachers issued forth from thence.

And secondly, The Prophets and Prophetesses we read of, were extraordinary
Prophets, and not such Preachers or Prophets as the Doctrine intends and speaks
of; but if Schools and Universities will fit us to be such Prophets as can
declare things to come from the Lord, then let us all, that fear the Lord, go
to these Schools that we may learn thus to Prophecy. But this is not a
mediate, but an immediate Gift, either by Dreams, Visions, or Oracles.

And thirdly, For Tyrannus his School, mentioned in the forecited Acts 19.
nothing is there declared concerning what he taught, nor whom he taught, but
most probable it was not Gospel-knowledge; and infallible it is, it was not how
men might be qualified for Preaching; for this was not permitted or allowed any
open Schools in that place at that day, as appears by the contradiction Paul
there met withal; and how needless had it been to a learned Hebrew or Greek,
since that was their Mother Tongue, many of them being Jews and Greeks, as
verse. 10. declares; but Tyrannus was allowed to teach in his School, wherefore
it is probable he taught nothing of this sort of Knowledge.

Object. 4. Some do Object and say, How can a Preacher know that the Scripture
is rightly translated, that knows not the Original?

I Answer, By the same way and means that the unlearned People of the Lord come
to know it; and it concerns them, and is necessary for them to know, though I
say not of the same necessity. For if they be not assured that the Scriptures,
as translated, are rightly translated; what shall they build their Faith on,
except on their learned Leaders, and Translators honesty and ability? and this
is to pin their Faith in a business of most weight and concernment, on the
Priests sleeve; and this is but to believe as the Church believes, and so the
blind leading the blind, they may both fall into the Ditch.

Secondly, I Answer, It is not by knowing Arts and Sciences, or Languages,
Preachers or People, can come to be assured that the Scriptures are the Word of
God, and rightly translated; but by the humble, sanctified, and diligent
searching into, and studying of the Scriptures; it is by comparing things
spiritually together, as the Apostle tells us, saying, Which things also we
speak, not in the words which Man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.13. I say, by the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus must we, nay, may we know the Power and Spirit, Truth
and Purity of the Scriptures; and it is the Godly judicious, Spiritual
Christian, best knows how aptly or corruptly they are translated.

And thirdly, I Answer, Grant this were so, which I do not grant, yet this
Learning and Excellency is more requisite and essential to a Translator,
Examiner or Corrector of translated Copies, than to a Gospel-preacher.

But lastly, Since so many thousand Learned, as well as Godly, have sealed the
Truth of the Scriptures Purity, and Divine Authority, notwithstanding all its
humane Imperfections in Translation; therefore we need not now, or continually
University-Learning to do that Work which is already sufficiently done to our
hands.

Object. 5. Some do Object and say, How can the Scripture be interpreted in
dark passages without this help?

I Answer, As a Lanthorn without a Candle will no way help to show a man his
way, though a Candle without a Lanthorn may, no more can this dark Lanthorn of
humane Learning and Languages, without the Candle of the Lord, as too abundant
experience has witnessed; but that Candle singly can and does. Miserable
Experience shows what Interpreters the Schoolmen and Fathers have been; and
yet are even the Fathers of well-nigh all the Individual Errors in Judgment and
Practice in the European World. The Devil and the Learned may be admired for
them, if for any thing; but take some Scriptures for proof of so weighty a
Point, when our Lord comes to show how Ministers and Interpreters of Scripture
shall be furnished for this Work, he says, When the Spirit of Truth is come,
he will guide you into all Truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he shall show you things to
come, John 16.13. The like Testimony gives Paul, But we speak the wisdom of God
in a Mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the World unto
our Glory, which none of the Princes of this World knew; for had they known it,
they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. But some may
say, How came the Preachers of the Gospel in that day to this Wisdom? Not from
Universities or humane Learning, but from the Grace and Spirit of God, as you
have it; But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit
searches all things, mark it, yea, the deep things of God, verse. 10. And this
Paul proves, verse. 11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of a man which is in him? Even so the things of God knows no man, but
the Spirit of God; this is further witnessed unto verse. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

Object. 6. May some say, How shall a Preacher be able to withstand or confute
gainsayers without learning? For every one that is a Scholar, and subtle, will
sophisticate, and use fallacies, and wrest the Scriptures and his Arguments
from him, if he be not a Scholar.

Now Beloved, I pray you do but consider what is said in this Objection, and
you have here discovered the learned Man's Excellency, it is to sophisticate
and deal fallaciously with the Simple and the Truth. Beloved, take heed of them
as such who have learned the skill to deceive the simple. But yet a little
further to Answer this seemingly so weighty an Objection. Know God's way, or
the right way for a Preacher to answer Gainsayers, is to have the Word of God
dwell richly in him in all wisdom, that out of that Library or good Treasure,
he may be able to convince them of the contrary part. Thus Paul taught,
injoyning Preachers to hold fast the faithful Word, as he has been taught,
that he may be able, by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince the
Gainsayers, Tit. 1.9, 10. the like you have in 2 Timothy 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Object. 7. Some may say, This is to subject Preachers, and Preaching to
contempt and scorn: For if Preachers need not be learned, who will not be a
Preacher? Who more bold than the ignorant, or men of ignorance? And who will
reverence Preaching or Preachers, if it be so easy and common a work for any
man that is unlearned? Will it not be very simple, and mean Preaching, if
Preachers want Breeding, Arts, Languages, and Sciences, to garnish and dress
out their Preaching, with Lively and Apt Similes, Rhetorical and Elegant Words?

To all which I thus Answer, in the fear of the Lord.

First, It is never the more easy, but much more the harder for any to Preach,
whilst we affirm no humane Acquirements, but supernatural Seize, that
fits or qualifies Persons for Preaching.

Secondly, If all, or any seek, or undertake to Preach, it follows not that all
shall or can Preach: No, there are many Learned, yea, and unlearned Intruders
upon Preaching, which do not, nor can Preach; for all they rush or run upon the
work; for it is written, A man can receive nothing, that is no such Gift,
except it be given him from Above, John 3.27. And says Paul, How can one
Preach except he be sent?

And thirdly, Though this unnecessary Tool be laid aside, yet are there many
other helps, which every Preacher must have, both Natural and Divine, which
every man has not, no not every Godly Man, nor can attain to; therefore to be
an Accomplished-Preacher is not so easy, though it matters not how easy.

But fourthly, If it be said, Who then will reverence Preaching or Preachers?

I Answer, Though an undue reverence is not to be sought or desired, and every
able Preacher is truly and most eminently worthy of reverence; yet when the
Love of God, and the Work of God lies warm upon the Preachers heart; then the
main business of a Gospel-Preacher will be to get Christ, not himself,
reverenced: For we Preach not our selves, but the Lord Jesus, and our selves
your Servants for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 4.5. And let me tell you, as David said
to Michael, 2 Samuel 6. Even of the Handmaids shall such be had into honor,
whilst the proud Locusts of the bottomless Pit despise them. I say, Every such
Soul that is Preached to, will reverence that lip which has spoken Christ to
his heart, as hereafter may more appear; but if the blind cannot, yet the
seeing eye will reverence such Preaching, and that the more, because it is
plain and simple.

But lastly, Whereas they tell us that Preaching will be very mean and simple
if the Preachers be unlearned, and want Arts, Sciences, Rhetoric, and Logic,
to help them to apt Expressions, Similies, to set forth Heavenly things by. I
Answer, No, if men be wise that Preach, it will not be simple Preaching. If
Preachers be dayes-men, or men of experience in Christ's Gospel, and Satan's
Wiles; for if the Spirit of God can help the unlearned to words sufficient to
speak to God in Prayer; surely he is much more able to help the unlearned
Preacher to sufficiency of words, to speak to the Satisfaction and Advantage of
unlearned, simple, sinful, earthly, ignorant Men and Women, yea, Babes and
Sucklings; therefore no need to serve an Apprentiship for Words at the Schools.
Thus I have Answered this Objection.

Object. 8. Some may say, If Preachers be not Scholars and Artists, there are
many things in the Scripture which they cannot resolve or explain, at the
weights of the Sanctuary of old, and Places and Countries, as where they lie,
and in what Continent, Situation, Latitude and Distance one from another, etc.

To which I Answer, This is but superfluous or unnecessary Knowledge, which
every Gospel-Preacher may honorably be without. And if a Preacher cannot
attain it without humane Learning, he may Preach as truly and as profitably
Christ's Mystery and Man's Duty from such Scriptures, as if he could resolve
such Riddles, or unnecessary Questions. For could not Ezckiel, Amos, and the
Prophets prophecy against Egypt, Tyrus, Moab, Babylon, and the rest of the
Heathen-Countries, as well as if they knew their Longitude or Latitude? Yes
doubtless, as clearly as other-ways, for that did not concern them, but only to
denounce the Judgments of God against them; other knowledge of Places is only
or mostly necessary for such as are Travelers or Historiographers, who else
may miss their way, or mar their Work; but it is not so with a Preacher, it is
enough for such to Preach that Babylon shall fall, because she has sinned, and
that Nineveh repented, and therefore was spared; wheresoever the one or the
other Country is, and that whatsoever Country or People soever they be that
sin against the most High, and do not repent, shall also perish first or last;
yea, even England, though we know where it lies, without repentance, must
doubtless perish.

Object. 9. May not some say to me, Does not Solomon the Wise, even the
Preacher in my Text say, Prove. 1.22. It is fools only that hate or slight
Knowledge; so it is only unlearned, ignorant, mechanics, that speak thus
slightly and contemptibly of Learning and Knowledge? Is not every thing
beautiful in its season.

I Answer, It is not to hate Knowledge, to cry up the Spirit's Teaching, and
the Scriptures Wisdom, the best of Learning; and to cry down this empty,
dangerous, smoaky, humane Learning; I say, it is not slighting or despising
Learning, to distinguish and difference it from Spiritual and Heavenly
Knowledge; to teach, that humane Learning, such as the difference is about, is
not necessary or helpful for Preaching, does neither deny or imply that
Learning is useful or less than a Gift of God, and useful as other natural
Gifts and Excellencies are. Is that Plant good for nothing which is not good
for food, or delightful to smell on? Oh no, for it may be good and profitable
for Physic: Even so is Learning, even this Learning in Controversy, to teach
men Civil and Political Government, or fit men for Magistracy, but dangerous
for Gospel-Preachers; good for Physicians, Lawyers, Historians, Navigators,
Surveyors of Land, and the like, but needless for Preaching; good for
Travelers, Merchants, Soldiers, and the like, but not for Home-dwellers or
Churchmen; doubtless there are many lawful and laudable uses for humane
Learning, though this be spared; therefore I hope none will say I despise it,
though I affirm it ought not to be enjoined or imposed as essentially necessary
for Gospel-Preaching.

And thus I have endeavored to Answer all such Objections as I have met with,
that are brought against that which has been offered; to wit, that humane,
natural, or artificial Wisdom or Learning is not the Gospel-Preachers Wisdom
mentioned in the Text, or that which will fit a man to be a Gospel-Preacher, or
qualify unto Wise and Gospel-preaching in the Negative.

Let me in the Affirmative now declare what this Wisdom is which every
Gospel-Preacher ought to have, and cannot be competently qualified unto
Preaching without it; it is the saving, sanctifying Grace of God, and Spiritual
Gifts, and assistance of the Spirit of God: This Divine Wisdom is Essential
Wisdom for a Preacher; and having this Wisdom, though without other Wisdom, a
Preacher may be sufficiently accomplished unto Preaching.

For the better clearing of this, I shall more particularly open, wherein
Preaching-Wisdom lies in three things.

First, That the Preacher be enriched with the Wisdom of Grace, or the fear of
the Lord, which is the beginning of Wisdom, and a good understanding have all
they that do thereafter, Prove. 1.7. Psalm. 119.10. To be spiritually Wise, is to
be seasoned with Salt of Grace, to be instated in Covenant with the Lord Jesus,
who of God is made unto us Wisdom as well as Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.
Though every gracious Person is not a Preacher, yet he, who-ever he be, that
undertakes to Preach, cannot be wise enough to be Christ's Preacher, that is
not Holy, and Sanctified in Jesus Christ; this the Lord seems to prove to
Jeremiah 1.5. Before I formed thee in the Belly, I knew thee, and before thou
came out of the Womb, I sanctified thee, and ordained thee a Prophet unto the
Nations. Mark, God lays the Foundation of Prophecy or Preaching, in electing
Love, and sanctifying of the Heart; not education of Learning, or excellency in
Brain. Thus the Lord Jesus dealt with Paul to qualify him for Preaching, Gal.
1.15, 16. It pleased God, who separated (...) from my Mothers Womb, and called
me by h^ Grace to reveal his Son in me, that I might Preac^ him among the
Heathen; immediately I conferr^ not with flesh or blood: neither went I up to
Jerus^lem, to them which were Apostles before me, and^ So 2 Timothy 1.5, 6. with
chap. 3.14, 15.

But secondly, Preaching-Wisdom, or the Gospel-preaching-Wisdom, consists in
having much and plentiful experience of the way of God's dealing with poor
Souls, when he delivers them out (...) sin, and brings them into a state of
Grace. Ever^ wise Preacher, or skilful Workman, that neede^ not be ashamed,
ought to have clear and plentiful acquaintance with Satan's Wiles, Temptations,
an^ Delusions, and with all the Concernments of a po^^ sinning, sinking,
sorrowing Soul, and therefore ought not to be a Novice in the dealings or out
goings of God with poor Creatures. He is (...) Preach from Experience, not for
Experience, a Merchants that travel to the Indies, or the Antichristian Priests
of the World do. A Gospel-Preacher, should be able to say, as John says i^ his
first Epistle, Chap. 1. verse. 1. That which was from the beginning, which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and
our hands have handled of the Word (...) Life, that declare we unto you, v. 3.
So says Paul, (...) are not ignorant of his wiles and devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. He
that Preaches without or beyond Experience, is like a man that tells one his
way to a Place or Country he never saw, he must do it very rawly and
uncertainly: Even so it is in this case; He that is to guide others in their
way to Heaven, ought to have gone it before himself, or else he will prove an
uncertain Guide to others.

Thirdly, and lastly, Every Gospel-Preacher's Wisdom, should lie in having rich
and plentiful acquaintance with the Scripture; not only, or so much in the
Letter, as in the Sense, Scope, Doctrine, and real Interpretation of the Word:
And if these things be in a Preacher, and abound with continual Prayer, and
uninterrupted fellowship of the Spirit of Grace, he shall neither be barren nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, 2 Pet. 1.8.

And thus having proved and opened this Doctrine, to wit, That every
Gospel-Preacher ought to be wise, that is, spiritually Wise; I shall proceed to
make some Application of the Point.

The first Use is of Information.
First, Let it be a word of Instruction or Information; first, To show us how
unwise such Preachers are, and how unfit to be Preachers unto others, who are
so unwise, as to oppose and deny this Doctrine, That Grace, and Spiritual
Gifts, or Wisdom, is sufficient and essential to a Preacher. Nothing shames,
and truly clouds the honor and reputation of persons pretending to worth and
judgment, more than to be ignorant or deceived in or about their own Callings
or Employments. For a Philosopher to mistake in the Nature of Philosophy, or a
General of an Army to be ignorant of the very Theory or Discipline of War; Is
it not a great shame? It is no less shameful for the Tr^^^ of Levi, the Princes
and Fathers of the Church the Popes and Prelates of our day, to be such
^^staken deceived Doves, as to be ignorant, and (...) madly confident in
bewraying their Egyptian blindness, concerning their professed Art at Trade,
Preaching, and the right qualifications (...) Preachers, although they get all
their great Weal^^ by Preaching, or Appendixes thereunto; as (...)
Universities, Courts, Pulpits, and learned V^lumes, to assert this blind and
Anti-scriptual Conclusion, that Humane-Breeding, University-Lear^ing, Languages
and Sciences, are essential Quali^cations, such, as without which no man can
(...) ought to meddle with Gospel-Preaching, contra^^ to what has largely been
proved: May I not s^berly say of these great Rabies of our Day, wh^ the Apostle
says Romans 1.22. Professing to be wis^^ they became fools? Surely even so has
God (...) fooled this wise Generation, and discovered, th^^ our World has many
grave and gay Fools: Eve^ many more then wear motly-Coats, even most (...) the
Professors of Divinity, as they please to sti^^ themselves, our Grave and
Orthodox Roman Clergy.

I say, This Generation, how lofty soever their eyes are, are not washed from
their filthiness, (...) not of being sordidly ignorant what scripturally will
qualify sufficiently, and essentially un^^ Preaching-Imployment, Prove. 30.12,
13. Nay, so ignorant are they of a Preacher's Qualification, that some, and
they no small men amongst that Tribe, have openly declared, That without a
Miracle, it is impossible to be a sufficient Preacher to Preach the Gospel of
Christ, without having sat at the feet of Gamaliel, or be brought up in an
University, as if it were not possible with God, even without any Miracle, to
kill Goliath by the hand of little David, when the Sons of Mars stand by and can
do nothing: Even so this Clergy would persuade us, God's little David's,
Spiritual and Experienced Christians, cannot Preach, except armed with an
University-burthen upon their backs. Though God has most abundantly, by
innumerable Instances, disproved this Fallacy, yet once more let me rebuke the
madness, and make manifest the folly of these Prophets, even those learned, but
ignorant false-Prophets, who assert: That Humane Learning only can qualify
unto this end; Yea, that it alone, without saving-Grace, and the Fellowship of
the Spirit of God, can make sufficient Ministers to go forth and Preach the
Gospel to Children of Men, especially if a Bishop do but Ordain them, and say,
Receive the Holy Ghost, as plentiful experience witnesses, and their Canons
and Book of Ordination of Priests and Deacons declares, where the
Scripture-Qualifications are left out, and others set up.

Well, to conclude this Use, let these Prophets, that fill the World with
Priests and Preachers of Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat's Order, of whom we read 1
Kings 12.31. And he made Priests of the lowest and basest of the People, which
were not of the Sons of Levi. But let these hear what the Lord says to them
that have apostatised from the right way; These mad Prophets, these Wells
without water, these Clouds carried with a tempest, 2 Pet. 2.15, 16, 17. Even
thus says the Lord God, Woe unto the foolish prophets, that follow their own
spirit, and have seen nothing, Ezekiel. 13.3.

The second Use is for Reproof.
Secondly, This might reprove the darkness and delusion that is crept into, and
seized on too many godly, sober, well-meaning Christians and Professors, that
have dwelt so long in Egypt; they can swear by the Life of Pharaoh, that is,
ha^^ traded too long with Antichrist's Clergy; men that now they dare even
swear to the truth of it, tha^ no man but a Scholar of that sort they intend,
either can or ought to meddle with Preaching, saying, Let every one keep in his
own Calling, and (...) go beyond his last; forgetting that the Lord has said,
Ye may all Prophecy one by one, 1 Cor. 14.31. And that by the alone study of
the Scriptures. The Man of God may be thoroughly furnished u^^^ every good Word
and Work, 2 Timothy 3.17. Oh let me beseech you, Have not men's Persons and Part so
in admiration, as to plead for Baal, and call Good, Evil; and Evil, Good,
speaking evil of things you know not; but search the Scripture diligently and
humbly, and you will find other qualifications, appointed as necessary and
sufficient for Preaching without that, I have so opposed; unless the smoke of
the Bottomless-Pit has put out your eyes, Rev. 9. Oh my Brethren! all you that
fear the Lord, be more Scripturally-wise and Learned your selves, and then you
will easily and plainly see the vanity, ignorance and emptiness of your
supposed Orthodox Teachers; but I shall spar^ you, as being rather led than
Leaders of your selves, seeing in this Point with other men's eyes. All I shall
further do for you, is to pray for you, as sometime Elisha prayed for his
Servants, saying, Lord, I pray thee open his eyes, that he may see, and the
Lord opened his eyes, and he saw the Mountains full of Horses and Chariots of
fire round about Elisha, 2 Kings 6.17. Even so say I, for all the Saints, who
are contrary minded to this Gospel Truth; Lord open the eyes of thy dear
Children, my dissenting Brethren to see by thy Light, even the Light of
Scripture, that Grace-saving, Sanctifying-Grace, and the Gifts and fellowship
of the Spirit, without Humane or University Preparations, are truly, fully,
most abundantly sufficient to make Christ's Gospel-Preachers wise enough for
Soul-conversion, and the edification of the Body in love. And thus much for the
second Use, I now come to a Third.

The third Use is of Information.
Thirdly, Thus may I inform, whence the Romish and Learned Clergymen of our
day, do so blaspheme and oppose the Spirits-Teaching; it is surely because of
their ignorance and sinful interest. This was the reason why Zedechiah, Son of
Chenaanah, went near and smote Micaiah on the cheek, 1 Kings 22.24. This also
was the cause why Sanbalat and Tobiah, and their Companions, did so reproach
good Nehemiah, and obstruct the Work of the Temple, Nehem. 2.19. with chap.
6.1, 2. And the same reason there was, why the Priests and Captains of the
Temple, and the Sadducees came and opposed and persecuted the Apostles, Acts
4.1, 2. And even at this very day the same reason is, why the Priests and
Prelates of our day do so exclaim and reproach the Spirits, teaching, and the
Spiritual-Ministers teaching. It is their own interest of profit, and ignorance
of Truth, and right way of fitting men for Preaching: though they are ignorant
of God's Will in this thing, yet are they well acquainted, that i^ this kind of
Truth, and these sort of Preachers, go up, their Trade, Honor, and Profits
will soon go down; according to that saying, The Fruits which thy Soul lusts
after, are departed from thee, and all things which are dainty and goodly, are
departed from thee, and thou shall find them no more at all, Rev. 18.14. And
this is the reason why these covetous Clergymen do so cry out against this way
of Preaching by men spiritually wise, but otherwise illiterate and unlearned,
because such Preachers, if allowed, will soon cloud their Glory, and eclips
their Credit, and humble their Pride, and hinder their Markets; and who then
can wonder that these so reproach the true Gospel-Preachers; they must
blaspheme and gnaw their tongues for pain; therefore it is not to be wondered
at, as long as this Antichristian-Priesthood endures, as we have it Rev.
11.10. There can be no joy to them that dwell thus in, or upon earthly Things,
Orders, Riches, Credit, and Authority: You may as well look for Peace from
Hell, as from the Learned Romish-Priesthood, Rev. 12.17. Therefore cease
marvelling, that the Pope's Clergy do so vilify and reproach Christ's Gospel
Spiritually-wise Preachers, stiling them, proud, busybodies in other men's
business, self-willed, presumptuous, ignorant, factious, enemies to Caesar, and
what not? that may render them odious, dealing with Christ's Ministers, and
faithful Preachers, as formerly their Forefathers dealt with that faithful
Witness and Martyr of the Lord Jesus John Huss; who when they burned him, clad
him in strange Garments, painting Images of Devils upon him to make him odious
to the People; as you have it recorded in the Book of Martyrs.

But to close this Use, Let all Christ's faithful Servants and Preachers,
remember what the Lord Christ says, Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye, when men
shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely for my sake: Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.
And if men of this breeding do scoff and deride you for this Preaching; say as
David, If I be vile, I will be yet more vile, etc.

The next Use I shall make of this Point, shall be for Caution or Counsel.

The first Use is of Caution.
First, To all the Churches of Jesus Christ to consider, That if every
Gospel-Preacher ought to be wise, and none may Preach but such who are
Spiritual-wise, then take heed in your choice, and calling of men to Preach,
that you observe this Rule, to Elect, Ordain, and Appoint to the Work of
Preaching such; have eye to this Rule. And as Moses said to Israel, let me
now-say to you the Churches of the Saints; Look you out wise and Spiritually
understanding men, and appoint them to the Work of Preaching. Entrust no
Spiritual Fools with so weighty and honorable a Work, remembering God has no
pleasure in Fools, Eccles. 5.4. Fools, or unwise-Preachers, will Preach but
foolishly, and his people can have little Soul-advantage, or few sinners be
converted, or the Lord Jesus little glory from, or by, such Preachers;
Preaching is too weighty and difficult a Work for ignorant, unwise, Carnal,
ungifted persons to accomplish; therefore take the Counsel given Acts 6.3.
Wherefore Brethren, look out men for this Work, full of the Holy Ghost and
wisdom, and them only appoint unto this business; dishonor not Preaching, by
sending dishonorable Preachers about Preaching Employment; and mistake not the
Rule by which you should judge who is wise and fit to make a Preacher: Judge
not according to appearance, or man's judgment, but remember what God said to
Samuel in the like case; Look not on his countenance, or on the height of his
stature, because I have refused him; for the Lord sees not as man sees; for
man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. Beloved, in this business of judging who is fit to be admitted and
allowed to Preach, consult not with flesh and blood, with the carnal, wise, and
learned Rabies of the day, lest like Samuel, you be mistaken in your judgment,
and call him God's Anointed, when the Lord says, This is not the man; but
consult the Record and Charter of the New Testament, and see whom that Word
calls Wise, and a man fit to Preach the Gospel; and as has been demonstrated,
you shall find the Wisdom which comes from Above, from the Father of Lights, is
the only Wisdom that can fit persons unto Preaching. Grace, and Gifts of the
Spirit of God, are best qualifications for a Preacher, as appears Acts 1.4, 5.
He will make the best Preacher which has most Grace and Gifts of the Spirit.
Therefore take heed to this business, I beseech you Brethren, who are Christ's
Porters, see that no foolish, idle, or unholy Shepherds enter in at Christ's
Doors, or be his Peoples Pastors; for if there do, the sin and guilt, yea, and
punishment also of such Preaching, will lie at your doors, John 10.3.

Object. But methinks I hear some Object and say, This is preposterous,
erroneous, and dangerous, to make Preachers to depend and spring from the
Congregations Approbation and Mission; This were to make Ministers or Preachers
depend upon the People; whereas, is it not better for Congregations to spring
from, and depend upon the Ministry, or the Preachers and Dispensers of the Word?

I Answer, This Objection smells strong of Rome, who-ever be the Objectors, and
is calculated for the Interest of the Clergy, to maintain their Pride,
Authority, and Avarice, and therefore may the rather be suspected to be
Anti-scriptural, or of no great strength to withstand.

Therefore first, Though these suggest this to be preposterous, as if we would
put the Cart to draw the Horses, and not the Horses to draw the Cart: My Answer
is, Natural and Divine Reason would judge the contrary; were it not
preposterous that Servants should judge and choose their Masters; but Masters
that are to have their service, and provide them their maintenance, should be
judged unmeet to question or judge their ability. Is not the House-holder more
honorable than his Household-Servants, and the House before the
Household-Servants? Even so in the Church of Christ? Must Preachers and
Ministers be the Churches, as well as Christ's Servants; and shall not the
Church be concluded honorable and wise enough to judge of the ability of her
own Servants? Only they must judge whether the Church or Congregation is fit
for their Profit or Honor. God forbid: Must the Church maintain them, yet not
call them to their work, and be allowed to judge of them? Yea, the Church must
try their Ministers, and yet shall they not be equal or superior to them,
proved 1 John 4.1.

Secondly, This is not erroneous, but most constaint, and agreeable to
Scripture, and then it matters not what it is contrary to, or who calls it
Error. But that this is agreeable to Scripture, take Acts the first into
consideration, where Peter standing up in the midst of one hundred and twenty
Disciples, says; Of these men that have companied with us all the time that
the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, must one be chosen, or ordained, to be
a witness with us of his Resurrection; and they meaning the hundred and twenty,
not the eleven; appointed two, Josephus called Barsabas, who was surnamed
Justus, and Matthias, verse. 15, 21, 22, 23. with chap. 18. from 24 to 28. Truth
it is, this way of trying and sending forth, and judging of the Preacher's
Gifts, and fitness for Gospel-Preaching, is an erring from the Canon of the
Romish-Church, and their Book of Ordination of Priests and Deacons; but is no
erring from the Can^on of the New Testament, as has been cleared. And,

Thirdly, Whereas they say this Doctrine is dangerous; give me leave to say
thereto, Truth is not endangered by trial, or good commodity by being searched
into. The wiser, and more Spiritual Preachers are, the less danger of their
corrupting the Scriptures, or ensnaring the people. If the Objectors intend the
danger lies in this, That the ignorant People or Multitude of Believers being
entrusted with this business, will choose simple and unwise Preachers.

I Answer briefly, Their Rule in this business, prevents this Objection; For
they must be wise that ought to be admitted to Preach; and the Church must not
only be simple and ignorant, but undutiful and disobedient to Christ's
commands, or else this danger is avoided. And though Babylons Builders are
blind in this matter, yet Christ's Church is wise, and seeing, and the
Spiritual Man discerns all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. And so much
for this Objection.

The second Use is of Caution.
Secondly, Let this Use be a word of Caution to all such as either design, or
are already engaged in Preaching-work. Look to this Doctrine, That you are in
God's, as well as his Peoples account, wise, truly wise, richly wise, with the
Spiritual, Heavenly, Gospel-wisdom. Oh Beloved! undertake not this weighty,
glorious, honorable Work, or employment of Preaching, without suitable aptness
and fitness thereunto. Run not before Jesus Christ sends you, remembering Romans
10.15. How can they Preach except they be sent (...) Take not this honor, this
undue honor to your selves to be judges of your sufficiency. For it is written
Heb. 5.14. No man takes this honor t^ himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron; Be of the temper and spirit of Jeremiah, have lo^ thoughts of
your selves and abilities, and uprightly say as he did, Ah, Lord God, behold, I
cannot speak, for I am a Child, Jer. 1.6. And with Moses say, Oh, my Lord, I am
not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken to thy Servant;
but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue, Exodus 4. Oh you Beloved, to whom
I am now speaking in this Use, be mindful of that word, Eccles. 5.2. Be not
rash with thy Mouth, and let not thy Heart be hasty to utter any thing before
God; for God is in Heaven, therefore let thy words be few. It Is Soul-work you
are to do, therefore be wise; it is Christ's Work, therefore be wise; it is
honorable Work, therefore be wise; it is hard Work, very difficult Work,
therefore be wise: For who is sufficient for these things? it is dangerous Work,
yea, most dangerous of all Work: If we do this deceitfully, or negligently, or
foolishly, think on that word Eccles. 5.6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy
flesh to sin, neither say thou, it was an error: Wherefore should God be angry
at thy voice, and destroy the work of thy hands? Oh remember Ezekiel. 3.17, 18. If
thou warn not the wicked from his wicked way, the same wicked man shall surely
die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand. Be therefore
wise, truly wise, Heavenly wise, spiritually wise, richly wise, in all the
revealed wisdom of God; for God has said, He will be sanctified in them that
draw nigh him, and before all the people he will be glorified, Numb. 10.3.

But that you may be wise, take these few Directions and helps, as sufficient
for the attainment of Preachers-wisdom.

Direct. 1. First, and above all, Be much in Communion with God by Prayer for
wisdom, for every good and perfect Gift, comes down from the Father of Lights;
and your way to have it, is by Prayer: So says James, If any man lack wisdom,
let him ask of God, who gives liberally, and upbraideth not, chap. 1.5.
Beloved, all we that Preach, and all ye that desire this great Work of
Breaching, we do all of us lack wisdom, yea, very much lack wisdom; therefore
pray, Oh pray, abundantly for wisdom, that we may receive it: Thus did Solomon,
and pleased God, and obtained his request, 1 Kings 3.7, 8, 9. And this, Paul
the great Apostle of the Gentiles, desired the Thessalonian-Church do do for
him; even to pray, that the Word of the Lord might have free course, and be
glorified by him and his Companions. On Brethren, and Beloved, pray much and
fervently for your selves, and beg also the constant fervent Prayers of all the
Saints, and Churches of the Saints, that you, and all that labor in the Word
and Doctrine, may be truly, richly, Spiritually wise.

Direct. 2. Secondly, Would you be Spiritually wise? Be diligent, painful, and
abundant in the study and searching into the Scriptures, for this is able,
only able, of outward helps, to make the Man of God wise, even thoroughly wise,
unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. with 1 Timothy 4.15, 16. Meditate on these things,
give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all; continue in
them, that thou may save thy self, and them that hear. Oh my dear Brethren
and Friends! this is a Preachers study and work, to search and study the
Scriptures; not Fathers, Commentators, or Schoolmen, as his business, this is
but a by-study; it is Scripture-study, even the Old and New Testament, which is
our great business, even our all to study, for it is Scripture and Gospel that
you must Preach, not Books, nor men's Opinions; therefore study the Scripture
diligently and humbly.

Direct. 3. Thirdly, Be very much in the practice of Godliness; walk much with
God if you would be wise, and know much of the mind of God. Thus God acted
toward Abraham, Genesis 18.17. He would not hide his Counsel from him, because he
was Godly, and would command and reach his Family the fear of the Lord; so in
Danel's case. So our Lord also promises, John 7.17. saying, If any man will do
his Will, he shall know the Doctrine whether it be of God.

Direct. 4. Fourthly, Be much in Communion with Saints: for with the
well-advised is wisdom, therefore if Preachers would be wise, they must walk
in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the Righteous, Prove. 2.20. Paul
sat at the feet of Gamaliel, and thus Apollos became wise through converse with
Aquila and Priscilla; and thus Mary may be said to become wise, by sitting at
the feet of our Lord Jesus, Acts 22.3. with chap. 18.25, 26. and Luke 10.25. So
that if a Preacher desire to be wise, his way is to hold and maintain much
Christian-fellowship and Communion with the Saints, even with the wisest and
most experienced among them. This may serve for direction in this matter;
therefore I beseech you that are Gospel-Preachers, to strive to be wise by the
exercise of all holy Means; for by so doing, you may obtain to be such
Preachers, of whom it may be said, Moreover, because the Preacher was wise, he
still taught the People knowledge.

And this shall suffice for the first Branch of this Verse, concerning what the
Preacher was, and his qualification; I come now to the second Branch of the
Text, which contains the first part of the wise Preachers Act or Work, He still
taught the People knowledge.

First, These words contain either the Preacher's persistency, or going on with
his Work: Or,

Secondly, His proficiency, or ripening at, or in his Work; He still taught the
people knowledge: Not as one that was at a stand, or height, but as one that
grew and proceeded higher and higher in the measures of his Divine Seize;
He still taught the people higher knowledge, or more profound Mysteries; and
this the after-words seem to declare.

I shall first take this word still, as it gives forth the Preacher's fixation,
duration, and continuation at his Work: He did not tire, or wax weary of his
Employment, but he still went on teaching the People. Whence,

Doct. 5. Take this Doctrine or Conclusion; That every wise Preacher ought to
persist, and continue, or go on with his Work of Preaching to the People: He
still taught the people knowledge.

This is that frame of Spirit the Lord seems to enjoin and expect at the hands
of his Servants, as the passage seems to imply, Cursed be the man the does the
Work of the Lord deceitfully, or as the Margin has it, negligently, Jer. 4.8,
10. the li^^ we have chap. 17.16. where Jeremiah tells the Lord, I have not
hastened from being a Pastor to f^low thee: Thus Jesus Christ practiced, Luke
8.^. He went, says the Text, throughout every City an Village, Preaching and
showing the glad-tydings (...) the Kingdom of God: And this you have from the
Lord, given forth Luke 9.60. where Jesus says* No man having put his hand to
the Plow, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God. The likewise was
Paul's practice, as he tells the Chur^^ of Ephesus; Therefore watch and
remember, that fr^^ the space of three years, he ceased not to warn eve^ one of
them, night and day, with tears, Acts 2^.31. To name but one place more, for
the pro^^ of the Doctrine, that every wise, holy, Gospel Preacher, once called
to that Work, ought to persevere and continue diligent therein, as you have it,
He still taught the people knowledge. The other passage I shall quote, is in 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. where Paul directs Timothy, saying, Till (...) come,
give attendance to Reading, to Exhortaties, to Doctrine: Neglect not the Gift
that is in the^ which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery. Meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to
them, that thy profiting may appear to all. Take heed unto thy self, and unto
the Doctrine; continue in them; for in d^ing this, thou shall both save thy
self, and them that hear thee.

But a little further to open this, Let me give you some Reasons or Arguments
to clear this to be a Truth, That every Preacher ought diligently to persist in
Preaching.

Reas. 1. First, Because if the Preacher's opportunity be continued, his
diligence and painfulness in Preaching ought also to be continued; for not only
Gifts and Grace are Talents to be faithfully and diligently improved, but Time
also is a Talent to be improved, and that as conscionably and diligently by
Preachers, as by any men. That Time and Opportunities are to be husbanded and
improved, take Christ's own words upon this very occasion; when his Disciples
would have persuaded him to have desisted from Preaching for fear of the Jews;
a plausible Argument to avoid persecution; but mark Christ's Answer, Are there
not twelve hours in the day? John 13.9. Daytime is given us for day-work and
walks, not to idle and loyter in. This the Ruler of the Synagogue well
understood, though misapplyed, when he said to the people, There are six days
in the which men ought to work, Luke 13.14. Therefore, if Jesus Christ allow a
Preacher lifetime, health and opportunity, he ought to trade with that Talent,
and improve that Opportunity, as the Apostle Paul witnesses, saying, As we
have opportunity, let us do good unto all, Gal. 6.10.

Reas. 2. Secondly, Preachers should still persist and persevere in Preaching
and Teaching the People Knowledge, because the people still need knowledge: and
it is the peoples ignorance that calls for Preaching; therefore while the
people are short and wanting in knowledge, the wise Preacher must not beshort
or wanting in Preaching, but stil^ teach the people knowledge. This our Lord
declares, he eyed in giving of Preaching-ministrations to the Church, even the
supply of the Churches need, that the need of the Church should be removed, by
being supplied, as you find Ephesians. 4. from 11, to 16. where the Apostle tells
us, That the Lord Jesus, when he gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
and Teachers, he gave then to the Church, and Gifts to them for the perfecting
of the Saints. Note, It was not only to convert and beget Saints, but to
perfect the state and grace of such as were through Preaching savingly
begotten; and verse. 13. the Apostle tells us again, That Preaching-Ministers
are given to lay o^^ themselves, until the Saints come to a perfect measure,
and stature, in Faith and Knowledge, even beyond danger of being like Children
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine. Now if these
be the ends of Preachers, given and gifted by Jesus Christ; then until the
Saints be come to this stature, and full measure, in the Grace and Knowledge of
Jesus Christ, every wise Preacher ought to continue still to teach the people
knowledge.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, Every wise and Gospel-Preacher, ought to persevere and go on
in teaching of the people; because, that which he has to Preach or Declare to
the People from the Lord, is not soon Preached or Declared; therefore he had
great need to attend diligently and continually upon this thing; even still to
teach the people knowledge: For as their ignorance is not soon removed, so is
not the whole Truth of God soon preached. It will be long, yea, very long, e're
the wisest of Preachers can either know or declare the whole Counsel of God to
his People. Now the whole Counsel of God is to be declared, as appears Acts
20.26, 27, 28. The Commands of the Lord are exceeding broad, and the Truths of
the Gospel very many. It Is not a little time spent in Preaching will serve to
reveal them; Preachers may begin to Preach as young as Timothy, and die as old
as Paul the Aged, and yet be behind-hand in this Work; and therefore had need
doubtless to be Preaching in season and out of season; yea, to be instant in
Preaching, that is, without unnecessary intermission, 2 Timothy 4.2.

This is the third Argument why every wise Gospel-Preacher should still teach
the People knowledge.

Reas. 4. And lastly, Those whose work is to Preach to others, ought not to be
idle or negligent in the work of their Callings; such ought not to be idle or
negligent, working in their own Callings. But every wise Preacher has this for
his Work among other things, to teach the people of God, not only to remember,
to keep holy the Sabbath day; but also to remember, that six days they labor
and do all that they have to do, Exodus 20. Therefore every wise and honest
Preacher, ought to remember himself; Six days shall thou labor, and not do
this Work of the Lord deceitfully: but as Paul teaches Timothy, when he says,
But watch thou in all things, endure affliction, do the work of an Evangelist,
make full proof of thy Ministry, 2 Timothy 4.5. Wherefore what a sin and a shame
is it for a Preacher to say to the people; Be not idle or slothful in business,
and yet he himself be idle in Preaching? Such had need to read and consider
that place Romans 2. from 17 to 24. And therefore I conclude, Every wise Preacher
ought diligently and continually to Preach, as did the Preacher mentioned in
the Text; He still taught the People knowledge.

Application; Now by way of Application; This serves for a full word of Reproof
to all idle, lazy, negligent Preachers of the Word of God, by whatever Name or
Title dignified or distinguished, who-ever they are, or wherever they be, let
this Doctrine reprove them; for if every wise Preacher ought still to teach the
people knowledge, and to persevere and persist in the Work of Preaching; this
looks wishly, and reproves loudly, all such Preachers or Idlers, that stand in
the place or room of Preachers, and Preach not diligently, frequently, and
continually. The Lord complain^ of these, or such like, in Ezekiel. 13.4, 5: O
Israel, thy Prophets are like the Foxes in the Deserts: Yea, have not gone up
into the Gaps, neither made up the Hedge for the House of Israel, to stand it
the battle in the day of the Lord.

How many such Foxes or Prophets are there in England at this day, which have
not gone up as they ought to do in the Gaps, to stop God's Wrath from breaking
forth upon poor sinners, or to help sinful Souls to know how to stand guiltless
and secure in the day of the Lord's fierce anger? Have we not too many
Preachers, that account Preaching a by-work; and accordingly Preach seldom,
even when they please, as well as how they please? If so they be but Preachers,
and Preach at all, though never, or not at all, but when constraint, or
covetousness constrains or induces them, they will, it may be, Preach as much
as Law, not Gospel, requires, or as much as their profit provokes or calls
them to, but no more. These are none of the wise Preachers in my Text spoken
of, that still teach the people knowledge; no, these are such of the foolish
preachers or prophets, mentioned in the forecited Ezekiel. 13.3. Let these idle,
lazy, sleepy Drones, not wise Preachers, though pretenders thereunto, hear the
reproof which the Lord gives them, Isa. 56. His Watchmen are blind, they are
all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, and cannot bark, sleeping, lying down,
loving to slumber: Yea, they are greedy dogs, which can never have enough; they
are Shepherds that cannot understand, they all look to their own way, every one
for his gain from his quarter. Come ye, say they, we will fetch Wine, and we
will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and
much more abundant, verse. 10, 11, 12.

How like to these Watchmen of Israel are too many Watchmen or Preachers in
England, Lordly Preachers, and Learned Preachers, Cathedral Preachers, and
Popish Preachers, is but too well known to as many as know any thing of the
state of England.

We may say of England this day, as was said of Israel, Hos. 7.6. Their Baker
sleeps all night; and the height of this sin lies in this, That England's
Preachers, not only do not, and cannot Preach, but also teach and maintain,
That they ought not, or need not Preach often, or frequently, Lording, and
Reading of Forms of Prayers is more their business than Preaching, or most to
be minded. Nay, have they not gone higher than most scandalously and
unconscionably to omit, and neglect this blessed Work of Preaching, but also to
make their sin out of measure sinful, they forbid, and command such as both can
Preach and would Preach, that they should not Preach, or so much and so often
Preach as they ought to do? such enemies to the Gospel-preaching and
prosperity, may read their doom and name, in Mat. 23.13. But, woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, Hyppocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
against men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that are
entering to go in. Oh think of this ye Preaching-men that forget God, lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you, Psalm. 50. last. Let me
tell you, non-Preaching Preachers, as your sin is out of measure sinful, so
will one day your condition be out of measure woeful; as Paul says, Necessity
is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I Preach not the Gospel. Not to Preach, when
engaged, called, and enabled to Preach, will make woe enough for such Preachers
as feed not the Flock, but themselves, as you have it Ezekiel. 34.28. Son of man,
prophecy against the Shepherds of Israel; prophecy, and say unto them, Thus
says the Lord unto the Shepherds; Woe be unto the Shepherds of Israel, that do
feed them; should not the Shepherd feed the Flock? But now, idle, non-Preaching
Preachers or Shepherds, hear your doom at large; Thus says the Lord God,
Behold, I am against the Shepherds, and I will require my Flock at their hand,
and cause them to cease from feeding the Flock; neither shall the Shepherds
feed themselves any more, for I will deliver my Flock from their mouth, that
they may not be meat for them: And therefore thus says the Lord God; Behold I,
even I will judge between the fat Cattle and the lean Cattle, because ye have
thrust with the side, and pushed with the shoulder, and pushed all the diseased
with your horns, till you have scattered them abroad: Therefore will I save my
Flock, and they shall be no more for a prey, and I will judge between Cattle
and Cattle. Not to Preach, when enabled to Preach, is to quench the Spirit, and
that is no small sin; It Is to be unfaithful, and hide God's Talents in the
Earth; It is to starve Souls, yea, as much as in you lies, to damn Souls, by
withholding the means of Salvation from them; It Is to multiply transgressors,
and transgressions both, and under a Cloak of Sanctity; and all this committed
knowingly, not ignorantly. Therefore woeful will be the state of all tired,
idle, dumb Preachers, that withold the Truth in unrighteousness. Solomon's
Proverb will be your Portion, He that withholds Corn, the people shall curse
him, Prove. 11.26. If such as withold bodily Bread, or Corn, are worthy of the
peoples curse, What Curse or bitter Anathema Maranatha must these with-holders
of God's Corn, and his Peoples Souls-bread from being given forth in due
season, be thought worthy of?

But to close; Know, and consider, though men should keep their Curses from
you, yet God will not hold such high-handed sinners as you are guiltless, whom
I have been reproving of, as appears Jer. 23. Woe be unto the Pastors that
destroy and scatter the Sheep of my pasture, says the Lord. Therefore thus
says the Lord God of Israel, against the Pastors that feed my people; Ye have
scattered my Flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them, behold, I
will visit upon you the evil of your doings, says the Lord, verse. 1, 2. Thus
much for this first Use of Reproof.

The second Use is of Exhortation.
Secondly, This may be for Exhortation to all such as are wise Preachers, and
are called to the Work of Preaching. Be exhorted still, teach the people
knowledge, go on to your and their perfection, and do not begin a good Work in
the World, and in the hearts of the Children of God, and then leave it
unwatched over, or unwatered, but still be teaching the people knowledge. I
remember this is made a note of folly in the Ostrich, That she leaves her Eggs
in the Earth, and warmeth them, in the dust, and forgets that the foot may
crush them, or that the wild Beasts may break them. She is hardened against her
young ones, as though they were not hers. Her labor is in vain, without fear,
because God has deprived her of wisdom, neither has he imparted to her
understanding, Job 39.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Oh! you that Preach the
Gospel-Wisdom, and either are, or would be, counted wise Preachers, be exhorted
not to be like the Ostrich; leave not your Eggs in the Dust, nor to a foot that
will crush them, but look well to your Seed sown, and secure your Conceptions;
and lose not or endanger your labors, but watch and pray, that you fall not
into temptations, but still teach the people knowledge. If you decline to teach
the people knowledge, the Devil and his Brokers will still teach your people
error and folly, as you have it Mat. 13.25. But while men slept, his enemy
came, and sowed Tares among the Wheat, and went his way.

Now will not this grieve a wife Preacher, that sincerely Preaches for the good
of the people, that through his negligence, ease, and idleness, that not still
teaching the people knowledge, the people should be all overgrown with Tares
and Errors? Therefore my dear Brethren, who labor in the Word and Doctrine,
still teach your people knowledge. The good Husbandman went to Plow last
season, and will not forbear and lose this season; and the good Merchant-man
ventures to Sea his Goods in one Ship and another, to one part of the World,
and another in another season; so should a wise Preacher plow up the
fallow-Ground this year, and the next send out his Commodity to this and the
other good Port, in one and another good Ship; take Freight, send thy Winter
and thy Summer-Adventures; remembering Eccles. 11.4, 5, 6. Oh! he that observes
the Wind, shall not sow; and he that observes the Wind, shall not reap. As
thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the Bones do grow in
the Womb of her that is with Child; even so thou know not the Works of God,
who makes all. In the morning sow thy Seed, and in the evening withold not
thy hand, for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or
whether they both shall be of like good.

Oh therefore be exhorted, who are wise Preachers, still to teach the people
knowledge: And to this Work, let me give you a few Motives still to teach the
people knowledge. For,

Motive 1. First. It will much argue and evidence your love and affection to
the Lord Jesus, that you love his Flock, and feed his Lambs, John 21.14. It Is
the greatest evidence of love to Christ, and to the Lambs of Christ, to be
diligently and constantly teaching and feeding the Flock of God with the Word
of Knowledge. And if there be any Preacher that would have, or carry, a black
and visible badge, of neither loving Christ, nor Saints, then, and not else,
forbear to teach the people knowledge.

Motive 2. Secondly, Let this move Preachers, even every wise Preacher, still
to teach the people knowledge; Because, the more you teach others, the more
Jesus Christ will teach you. If you would have much of the Teachings of the
Lord Jesus, be much in the teaching of them that are Christ's; For he that
waters, shall be watered; and he that disperseth abroad, and gives to the
poor, his Righteousness remains for ever, Prove. 11.25. with 2 Cor. 9.9. Now
consider, not only the people need to be Preached unto by you, but you and I
have great, even abundant need to have Jesus Christ Preach unto us; therefore
still teach the people knowledge.

Motive 3. Thirdly, Still teach the people knowledge, because, it is most
honorable to be most diligent in this Work; and honor is much taking in these
days, when every one seeks the Rulers favor. Now this is the Preacher's way
to honor, by diligent Preaching; as skill comes by diligence, so honor, and
deserved reputation, comes by frequent and painful Preaching. Look how Solomon
commends the diligent Woman, Prove. last. verse. last. Even so shall the diligent
Preacher be commended also, Prove. 11.30. He that wins Souls is wise; with
chap. 22.22. See thou a man that is diligent in his business, he shall stand
before Kings, he shall not stand before mean men. Therefore though we may not
seek the honor that comes of men, yet we may seek that which comes of God,
John 5.44. Oh! How beautiful are the feet of them that Preach the Gospel of
Peace, and bring glad-tydings of good things, Romans 10.15.

Motive 4. Fourthly, My dear Brethren, it will be very comfortable, in a dying
hour, to have Preached diligently in the days of Life; And when have we so
much need of comfort as in dying hours? When will sin, guilt, shame, and scorn,
lie so heavy upon us, as in a dying hour? Therefore still teach the people
knowledge, that God may still continue your comforts, and cause your comforts
to abound in dying hours. Thus should a wise Preacher strive to Preach, that
with Samuel he may look a dying hour, with joy, in the face, 1 Samuel 12.2, 3, 5.
So Paul comforted himself in the day of his departing, because he had finished
his course, and made full proof of his Ministry, 2 Timothy 4.5, 6, 7, 8. therefore
still teach the people knowledge: Yea, our Lord Jesus uses this as a means to
support him under the sting of Death, by this Consideration; That he had
finished the Work his Father committed him to do, in John 17.4, 5. where our
Lord says, I have glorified thee on earth; I have finished the Work thou
gave me to do: And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thy own self. O! here
is the way for a Preacher to find assured comfort in a day of Death, that he
has finished his Work in a day of Life; and still taught the people knowledge.
O! therefore, ye that are appointed to be Lights to men in a dark World; let
not, I beseech you, your Light be put under a Bushel, or at best, but shine in
a dark Lanthorn; but receive this Exhortation, and let me leave it as universal
advice, for every Preacher that has ears to hear what the Spirit says, to
hear and receive, even still to teach the people knowledge, Rev. 6.7. So much
for this fifth Doctrine.

I should come now to a second particular, offered from this first Act of the
wise Preacher, That he still taught the people knowledge; that is, He went
forward, and made progression in Preaching; He did not stick or remain upon
first Principles, but rose higher and higher in his Preaching, he still taught
the people knowledge; that is, higher measures and degrees of knowledge: As he
was wisely diligent, so was he wisely proceeding and going forward, from step
to step, in the degrees and measures of his Knowledge and Preaching. The Point
of Doctrine hence is;

Doct. That wise Preachers are prospering or thriving Preachers.

They are not only diligent and constant Preachers, but also they are growing
Preachers; he still taught the people knowledge, that is, more and higher
knowledge. This was shadowed out in the Waters of the Sanctuary, which rose
first to the Ancles, then to the Knees, then to the Loins, afterward to a River
that could not be passed over: Even so do Preaching Qualifications, in a wise
and painful Preacher; who, as Paul says, when in their Childhood, or first
entrance, may speak like Children, and act like Children; yet when they grow up
to be men, they will Speak, Preach, and Act like men, 1 Cor. 13.11. This is
that which is promised Psalm. 1. where David tells us, The blessedness of the
man that walks not in the way of the ungodly, but his delight is in the Law
of the Lord, and in that Law does he meditate day and night, he shall be like a
Tree planted by the Rivers of Water, that brings forth his Fruit in season;
His leaf shall not wither, but whatsoever he does shall prosper. This is the
blessing, of not only the Godly Christian, but especially of the truly wise,
and Godly Preacher, he shall grow and flourish. The like promise we have in
Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14, 15. where the Psalmist tells us, how it will fare with
Righteous and Wise Preachers; They shall flourish like the Palm Tree, and grow
like the Cedar in Lebanon: Those that be plauted in the House of the Lord,
shall flourish in the Court of our God; they shall bring forth fruit in old
age; they shall be fat and flourishing; to show that the Lord is upright. This
also Paul implies, in that saying of his to Timothy, 1 Epist. 4.15. That thy
profiting may appear to all men.

Thus we see the Point a little confirmed; but because this Truth has in part
already been spoken to, and will necessarily fall under consideration in
another place; I shall say no more to the proof of this, but only make one Use
from it, and that is for encouragement to all wise and painful Preachers.

The fourth Use is of Encouragement.
Know assuredly, the Lord will bless your Seed, and the fruit of your increase.
You may reckon your selves Children, that cannot speak in the Name of the Lord;
but the Lord has told you, He will be with you, and make you as a defenced
City, and an Iron Pillar, and a Brazen Wall, Jer. 1.6, 7. compared with verse.
18. Oh! be encouraged to be sound faithful and diligent; for though you may go
out to Preach, as Jacob went forth from his Fathers House, when he said, With
my staff I passed over this Jordan, but now I am become two Bands, Genesis 32.10.
Even so you faithful Preachers shall have a time to say to the Glory of
Free Grace, I am become two Bands. The Lord has promised, That his Spirit
shall lead you, not only unto Truth, but from Truth to Truth, till you are
guided into all Truth, John 16.13. Therefore be encouraged to persist and go on
in Preaching the Word in season and out of season; for the Lord is with you,
and he will uphold your goings in his Paths. Oh Beloved, be neither discouraged
at your own weakness, nor your many discouragements, for the Righteous shall
flourish like the Palm; therefore still teach the people knowledge, guide them
by the skilfulness of the Lord's hand upon you, from Truth to Truth, from first
Principles to higher, and more ennobling Conclusions. Be not Children in your
knowledge, but go on toward perfection, as good Ministers of Jesus Christ;
Preachers that receive freely or largely of the Spirit, should give forth as
freely, and still teach the people knowledge. As Preachers grow in knowledge,
they should seek that the people might grow in knowledge; also as waters of
knowledge flow into them, so should they flow forth unto the people: for as
your day is, so shall your strength be; Jesus Christ has promised to be with
you always in such work, Matthew. 28. And to conclude, take the Counsel of
Solomon, Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy
might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the
Grave, whither thou go.

You laboring Ones in this Work of the Lord, feed on that Promise Mat. 13.12.
For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance.

And to close, take that good word 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore, my beloved
Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the
Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

I now come to the next particular in the Text, which is the Matter which the
Preacher preached; that is, Knowledge: He still taught the people Knowledge; it
was knowledge the Preacher taught. He Preached not to make himself known, or
his knowledge known, but to make the people know; for he still taught the
people knowledge.

One Question may from hence be asked, and that is, What Knowledge is?

Or, secondly, What knowledge this is the wise Preacher taught the people.

To speak a little to the first Query; What knowledge is? It is the opposite to
ignorance, and consists in the enlightening or informing the Understanding,
either concerning the Author, or the Nature of things, or the End and Use of
things. I say, knowledge is an enriching excellency, enabling men to make true
judgment concerning things. He that is destitute of knowledge, knows not how to
discern things, or to difference one thing from an other. But I shall not
enlarge here, though I might add there is a double sort of knowledge, Natural,
and Supernatural; or the knowledge of things or objects Divine and Heavenly, or
the knowledge of things or objects Natural. This Supernatural knowledge
consists either in the knowledge of God or his Will, or the knowledge of our
selves or others.

But secondly, It may be inquired, What this knowledge in particular is which
the Preacher taught the people, spoken of in the Text?

I Answer, Not humane knowledge, or understanding, and skill in worldly things;
but it is knowledge of Divine things, or Heavenly things: More particularly it
may be distinguished into the knowledge of God, as in Himself, Attributes, and
Word. Considered secondly, It consists in the knowledge of our Spiritual
Estates and Duties; And under these two Heads, I humbly conceive all that
Heavenly knowledge which a Preacher ought to give-diligence to teach the people
the knowledge of may be comprised.

Thus having a little removed the scruple concerning knowledge, what it is, and
what that knowledge is Preachers ought to teach the people, we may note this
point of Doctrine.

Doct. 6. To wit, That every wise Preacher ought to teach the people the
knowledge of Spiritual things; or, that every wise Preacher ought to teach the
people how they may know spiritual things, or be knowing in spiritual things.

This the Preacher, the wise Preacher in the Text did, and this every wise and
Gospel-Preacher ought to do.

Again, the knowledge which a wise Preacher ought to teach and impart to the
people, it is the knowledge of God, and things appertaining to God: Or,
secondly, the knowledge of our selves, and things belonging to our selves.

But let me a little clear and prove the point to you, That every wise Preacher
ought to teach the people Heavenly knowledge, or the knowledge of God, and of
themselves.

For proof of this, take that passage Exodus 24.12. where the Lord commands
Moses and Aaron to teach the people knowledge: So Moses tells us what Levi
should and ought to do for God's people, Even teach Jacob God's Judgments, and
Israel his Law, Deuteronomy. 33.10. This Samuel well understood, 2 Samuel 12.23. But I
will teach you the good and the right way. This also was Ezra's practice, for
says the Text, Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the Law of the Lord, and to
do it, and to teach in Israel Statutes and Judgments. Oh! here is a good
Minister indeed, that prepares his heart to teach the people, both by his Life,
and doing the Will of God; and also by teaching and instructing them in the
knowledge of the Law of God. This also was the good Levites practice, in 2
Chro. 30.22. That they taught Israel the good knowledge of the Lord. This is
that the Lord by Malachi declares he expects at the hands of his Priests, chap.
2.7. where he says, The Priests Lips should, or ought to keep knowledge; and
they, meaning the people, should seek the Law at his mouth. But to trouble you
with no more Quotations, to prove this clear Truth; that every wise Preacher
ought still to teach the people knowledge. The good knowledge of God, is that
which every good Preacher ought to impart to the people; I will therefore only
add this one more, where we may hear what the Lord says to such Preachers as
do not teach the people knowledge. Woe, says he, unto you Lawyers, for ye have
taken away the Key of Knowledge, etc. Luke 7.52. The Pharisees and Lawyers of
that day, had great thoughts of their knowledge and abilities; but says
Christ, We unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away, or withheld the Key of
Knowledge from the people. Oh Friends, it is woeful and unworthy to withold
knowledge from the people, if we have knowledge to impart to the people.

The second thing I shall do, is to demonstrate, by Argument or Reason, that
this is Truth, to wit, That every wise Preacher ought to teach and impart
knowledge to the people; and that for these Reasons.

Reas^. 1. First, Because that is the end, the main end, the very end of their
Knowledge. Christ imparts Gifts and Grace to Preachers, yea, makes Preachers
upon this account, that they should teach, instruct, and inform the people.
This the Scripture largely gives an account of, as in Ephesians. 4.12, 13. For the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ; till we all come to the unity of the Faith, in the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man.

Mark, The Preacher has the Office of Ministry, and the Gifts of Ministry, or
Gifts to minister with as a Minister; all for the people, and that also for
their Edifying, Unity, Knowledge, and Perfection; therefore they ought to
design this for their Business, Not to know for themselves only, but
principally to make the people knowing and wise in the knowledge of Christ. Now
if this be the end of Preachers, certainly every thing should answer its end,
or else it is Made, Created and Ordained in vain: But surely Preachers were not
ordained in vain, but to teach the people knowledge; they are the peoples eyes,
not their own only; they are the peoples Stewards, and therefore what
Stewardship or Talent soever they have, they ought to improve them for the
people, who are the final end, next to Christ's Glory, of all their
Seize. This also we have given us in 1 Cor. 4.2. It is required, in
Stewards, that a man be found faithful; and Luke 22.32. When thou art
converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

Reas. 2. Secondly, The Preachers ought to Preach the people into knowledge,
because this is that the Preachers profess to do for the people; And are not
Preachers bound to what they pretend and profess? that is, to teach the people
knowledge. Certainly, of all men under Heaven, they are most bound to do what
they profess, because they reach other men so to do.

Secondly, Because they profess to know above the rate of others; and is it not
a shame for them to perform less than other men?

And thirdly, They profess this to be their Conscience, and to be conscious of
doing it; and is it not then both shameful and sinful unconscionably to neglect
it? Should a Physician pretend to help and cure such as come to him in their
sickness, and should not regard to inquire into their Diseases, nor regard to
consult their good, or direct their Patients what to do? Would we not
groundedly say, He were both idle and dishonest? Even so are all those
Preachers that pretend to promote the peoples good and understanding in the
Mystery of Christ, and do not.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, This is that the people do, or ought to expect at their
hands; Namely, That they should teach them the good knowledge of God; and
therefore this they ought to design, They should teach them the good knowledge
of God; and they should not only design it, but labor aster it: What was that
which Cornelius and his Friends came together about, and he sent to Peter for,
but this, That he might make them know what was the mind of God, Acts 10.33?
The people expect not that you should fight for them, or trade and traffic for
them, but only that you should instruct them in the Mysteries of Christ, and do
all you can to make them know the Truth as it is in Jesus; and of all men under
Heaven, your Preachers are the most unconscionable deceivers and cheats, that
neglect thus to do, and abuse the people by keeping them in ignorance.

Reas. 4. And lastly, Wise Preachers are not only bound thus to do, because
made Preachers for this end, and such who have professed, and are expected thus
to do; but lastly, are able thus to do also; therefore ought to be found
likewise faithful Servants, thus doing, Mat. 24.45. I say, Every wise Preacher
is able to teach the people the good knowledge of God: I do not say, Every
Preacher, or every one that is called a Preacher, or so calls himself, but I
say, every one that God owns for a Preacher, and is truly a wise or spiritual
Preacher, is able to teach the people, and ought so to do; as John says, That
which we have seen and heard, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life,
declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us, 1 John 1.3.

Mark, What every wise Preacher can, and does do, even declare the things of
God, or the knowledge of Jesus Christ to the people; and he can and does
endeavor that the people may be brought into the fellowship and enjoyment of
their knowledge. Those are foolish Preachers, Lords over God's Heritage, evil
Servants, and Self-seekers, that ingross knowledge for themselves, and design
not the peoples knowledge, as one main end of all that knowledge they enjoy or
design to be made partakers of.

And thus much for the clearing of this Doctrine, That it is the duty of every
wise Gospel-Preacher, to make the people wise and knowing in the Mystery of
Christ. Now to come to the Application.

The first Use is of Information.
If this be Preachers Business and Duty to teach the people knowledge; then
this informs us how unwise and foolish Romish Preachers are, even the Pope and
his Prelates, and Clergy, who are so unwise and ignorant of Gospel Truths and
Principles, that they not only neglect and oppose this practice, but teach and
maintain, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, and that knowledge is
enough for the Priests, and the people must hang their Knowledge and Faith upon
their Priests Sleeves; and that it is sufficient for the people to do that the
Priest commands; and believe as the Church believes. But this is to endanger
the people to Hell with great Company, rather than to be saved by the Faith of
the Church.

I shall not say much to this Generation of Vipers, these idle Shepherds, these
blind Guides, leaders of the blind World; only let such know, we shall not need
to say they are foolish Shepherds, and Peter's unlearned ones, and none of
Solomon's wise Preachers; their own Works and Words are sufficient to make
their madness manifest to all wise men, or spiritual Believers; seeing what
every wise Preacher does, and ought to do, is even to teach the people
knowledge, which they neither do, nor judge they ought to do. This shall
suffice for this first Use.

The second Use is of Exhortation.
Let this serve for matter of Exhortation to all Gospel-Preachers, to make this
their main business, to show themselves truly wise and able Preachers, even
Workmen that need not be ashamed, by teaching the people Knowledge. God has
given you Talents for this very purpose, and the peoples wants and expectations
call loudly for this; namely, that you should be their Lights, and Teachers of
them as your Scholars and Children; therefore intend and attend this as your
great Work and Business, in, or by Preaching, to make the people wise and more
knowing, in the saving and sanctified Knowledge of the Lord Jesus.

Beloved Brethren, this is your and my Business, let us give all diligence to
add and contribute more and more to the peoples knowledge, doing as Paul, Not
seeking our own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved, 1 Cor.
10.33. Though wise Preachers must acquire knowledge first for themselves, that
they may wisely Preach, or be wise for Preaching: Yet having obtained knowledge
in themselves, they must disperse knowledge to their people, and lay out all
their endeavors, that the people may know what they know: This Paul did make
his business, to make the Ephesians to understand his knowledge in the Mystery
of Christ. Ephesians. 3.4. When you read, you may understand my knowledge in the
mystery of Christ.

Mark, Paul is not content that he understand, but he Writes and Preaches, to
make others understand his knowledge in Christ's Mysteries; not that his aim
was to make them understand or know that he had knowledge or understanding to
admire or depend upon him, but that they might know, in and for themselves,
what he knew in himself, and for them he labored, that the people should know
and understand what of Christ he understood; and this seems to be his meaning,
by what we find in verse. 8, 9. where Paul says, That unto him, less than the
least of all Saints, is this Grace given, That I should Preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ. But mark the end for which Paul,
and every Gospel-Preacher, should Preach the unsearchable riches of Christ;
namely, to let all men see this is the end of Preaching, the peoples Seeing. Oh
Preach, Seeing or Divine eyesight into the people, infuse or distill your
knowledge, or Christ's knowledge into the people, that you may be rightly
called, as the Prophets were of old time, even Seers from seeing, and showing
the mind of God to the people, 1 Samuel 9.9. Beloved, cause the Scales of
Ignorance to fall from the eyes of the blind and ignorant people. Pity the
people, and show your burning love to Christ, by enlightening dark minds in the
true knowledge of the Lord Jesus; in striving to promote and enlarge the
peoples knowledge, help the people to come to this necessary knowledge, the
knowledge of themselves. The want of this knowledge, is the cause of the great
profaneness, security, and presumption that abounds in the World, men's gross
ignorance of themselves; men want true and sufficient acquaintance of
themselves; of their sinful, miserable, lost estate by Nature.

Oh! cause all men in their first Principle, and unconverted Estate, to know
they are in a damnable and miserable condition; there is but one step between
them and Hell, For God is angry with the wicked all the day long, (or every
day) Psalm. 7.11. Make them know there is none good in his natural condition;
there is none good, no not one that does good, no not one among all the
multitude of unconverted Men and Women, for all are under sin, both Jews and
Gentiles, Romans 3.9, 12.

Awaken men's Consciences that are asleep, to know and consider the danger of a
sinful, Christless condition; yea, make not only Publicans and Sinners know
this to be their miserable estate, but make Pharisees, and morally righteous
Ones, to know this to be also their misery; and that except they be born again
of Water, and of the Spirit, they can never enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh.
3.5.

It Is not only Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, and Scoffers, cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, but also the lostiest pieces of Nature, that are but
in a state of Nature, as it is written, Except your righteousness exceeds the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 5.20. Oh! let such understand, that though such persons actings
Christ may love, yet oft-times he loves not the principle of their obedience,
nor will save their Souls, as is hinted Mark 10.21, 22, 23. Man's good Nature,
is bad Nature with God, and such men are as fit and fair for Hell, as the worst
Natures, and vilest of men, as Christ says, Mat. 21.31. Preach to men the
knowledge of themselves, and their undone condition, without the Lord Jesus and
his Righteousness; put them often in mind of that Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having
a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof; from such turn away. Forms
of Godliness, or Worship, will no more help a sinful Creature to Heaven, than
Food or Physic can give a dead man life, or strength, or empty dishes satisfy
a hungry stomach. Though Rome say otherwise, that bare Forms will save sinful
Souls; as a little Water, Oil, Cream, etc. used in Baptism, will save the
Infant from damnation, and make it regenerate, and a Child of God; and that
every one that receives their idol Host in the Mass, receives infallibly Jesus
Christ; and so in other particulars. But you that are wise Preachers, teach
your people knowledge, and make them understand, That without holiness no man
shall see God, Heb. 12.14. Without forms men may go to Heaven, though never
Baptized, and though they have never received the Supper of the Lord; but none
without holiness. Doing of those things, whilst in a state of Nature, is not
Holiness; for the heart may be as unholy after as before, yea, in the very Act
of Communion in the Ordinances, as Judas, Mat. 26.20, 23. Isa. 1.11, to 16.
with that excellent place, Gal. 6.15. Therefore Preach men into the
understanding and knowledge of their own vileness and weakness, and unbottom
men from leaning or depending on their moral or legal Righteousness; make them
know this was that Rock on which the Jews were split, and dropped into Hell.
Wherefore because they sought it not (meaning Righteousness) by Faith, but as
it ware, by the Works of the Law, Romans 9.32.

But again, You that are wise Preachers, Preach the people into the knowledge
of God, as well as into the knowledge of themselves; make them to understand
the knowledge of God, as just, and as merciful. Oh let sinners know God is
Just, Holy, and Righteous, And will by no means, or not at all clear the
guilty, or acquit the wicked, Nahum. 1.3. Cause the deceived Multitude to know
the Just and Holy Nature of God, that they may not flatter and deceive
themselves, with hopes and thoughts of happiness in a sinful state, and ways
of wickedness, because God is merciful and gracious; for he is also equally
written to be Just and Holy, and a God visiting the iniquity of the Fathers
upon the Children, and upon their Childrens Children, unto the third and fourth
Generation, Exodus 34.7. Oh beloved, Cause ignorant Souls to know and consider
if God be just as well as merciful, that they must also be righteous and holy,
or else God's justice will not spare them, but condemn them to all eternity,
unless they believe on the Name of the Lord Jesus. Oh! cause sinners to know
the Justice of God, and how impossible it is to walk on in wickedness and
disobedience to the Mind of God, and Righteousness of the Gospel, and be happy,
by causing them to know the sense of that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. And it
come to pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in
his heart; saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imaginations of my
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not spare him, but then the
anger of the Lord, and his jealousy, shall smoke against that man, and all the
curses that are written in this Book, shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall
blot out his name from under Heaven.

Brethren, when you have done this, make them know, that are bitten with fiery
Serpents, that God has provided a ransom for wounded sinners; and as Moses
lifted up the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness, so lift up the Lord Jesus
Christ in the Preaching of the Gospel: show all wounded and undone sinners the
way of healing, by the alone Righteousness and Satisfaction of the Lord Jesus;
make them know, when wounded in Conscience, and undone in themselves, that then
if they come sinners, with their sin and misery upon them, without any
Righteousness, Qualifications, Preparations, or Performances, only as sinners,
with Ropes about their Necks, weary and heavy laden, he will ease them, and
they shall find rest to their Souls; and this without money, or moneys worth;
without regard to their humiliation, repentance, reformation, and amendment of
life. Oh, make them understand the free Grace of God to the vilest of returning
sinners, make them to know the new and unchangeable Covenant of God with his
people, even the Covenant of freest Grace to pardon, in pardoning all sinners,
past, present, and to come, and never to alter or change the state and
happiness of such Souls to all eternity, Jer. 31.31, 32.

Oh be exhorted, all you that are and would be accounted wise Preachers, thus
to Preach to your people, and teach them this good knowledge of God, both as
just to all not in Christ, and merciful to all in Christ, how vile and
miserable soever in themselves; and thus to do, is to teach the people
knowledge aright. Oh Brethren, you Nurses of the Children of God, draw out the
Breasts of your Consolation, and give the little ones of Christ nourishment;
nourish them with the Word of knowledge; and having begotten them to Christ, do
not starve those you have begotten to Christ, as bad Nurses do many times their
Children; but having begun a good work in any, perfect it to the day of Christ;
be Epaphrases, always laboring, that the Saints may always stand perfect and
complete in all the Will of God, Col. 4.12.

Objection; But some may possibly say to me, Is it in the Preachers power, how
wise soever, to teach or infuse knowledge into the people? Is not this the
peculiar prerogative of Jesus Christ, to be eyes to the blind, and to give
understanding to the simple? And does not Paul say, He may plant, and Apollo
water, but God must give the increase, Prove. 8.14, 20. 1 Cor. 3.6. And
therefore why do you urge it on the Preacher, as his Work and Duty, to distill
and infuse knowledge into the people, as if it were in his power to teach the
people to know.

Answer; To this I Answer, Doubtless, and beyond a peradventure, it is in every
wise Preachers power to do his duty, which is thus to lay out himself to the
utmost, that the people may know.

And secondly, Every wise Preacher, and the most of Preachers, though wise,
might do more at this work than they do.

But 3ly, Though without Divine concurrence and presence with them in the Work,
their Work will produce little; yet if they work not diligently at this work,
very little advantage can be expected: But if they be faithful and painful,
they may, yea, shall do much through him that strengthens them, and has
promised to be with them in their way. They are in God's way, and in God's way
God will be found, as he has said Exodus 4.12. with Mat. 28.20.

Lastly, Wise Preachers should still teach the people knowledge; for though
they know, they without God cannot teach the people knowledge; yet God can by
them teach his people knowledge, even then when they think they can do least
for the people.

Therefore to conclude the Answer of this Objection, Let us that Preach the
Gospel, consider that of Solomon, Eccles. 11.6. In the morning sow thy Seed,
and in the evening withold not thy hand, for thou know not whether shall
prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.
Therefore you who are Spiritually-wise Preachers of the Gospel, be prevailed
upon, to make the peoples knowing, your main business and work in Preaching;
like Paul, that great Preacher of the Gentiles, whose work was to teach all men
in or unto all wisdom, that he might present all men perfect in Christ Jesus:
Whereunto, says he, I also labor, striving, according to his working, which
works in me mightily, Col. 1.28, 29. And to conclude this Use; Let as many as
be perfect, be thus minded, Phil. 3.15.

The third Use is for Direction.
The next Use or Improvement I shall make of this Point, is for Direction to
such Preachers as faithfully endeavor thus to do.

First, Would you teach your people Knowledge, or make your Hearers knowing in
the Knowledge of Christ; Then let me beseech you to Preach humbly, for a proud
Preacher is not likely to become a profitable Preacher. This was the frame of
Spirit Paul went forth Preaching the Gospel with, Acts 20.19. Serving the Lord
in all humility, in that Work. A proud Preacher will more strive to Preach out
himself unto the people, than the saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ into the
people. A proud Preacher will be too high to stoop or condescend to the
weakness of the capacities of the People; as the proud in heart will not
receive Commandments, even so the proud in heart will not teach Commandments.
It Is too hard for such to teach Knowledge, or for the people by such to be
taught Knowledge: Such Preachers as desire to be profitable Preachers unto
others, must learn of that wonderful Preacher the Lord Jesus, to be meek and
lowly of heart, Mat. 11.29. and do as Paul advises, Romans 12.16. Not to mind
high things, but to condescend to men of low estate. To which I may add what he
writes to the Bishops and Deacons of Philippi, saying, Let nothing be done
through strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem others
better than themselves. Look not every one on his own things, but every man
also on the things of others, Phil. 2.3, 4.

Secondly, Would you Preach profitably, and cause the people to get Knowledge;
then labor to Preach plainly. It Is plain Preaching will only prove
profitable-Preaching. This Paul seems to mind, in 1 Cor. 14. as the very scope
of that Chapter, to provoke Preachers to Preach plainly within, not above the
understanding of the People. Asserting, that if a Preacher preach never so
rarely; yet if he preach above the understanding of the people, he shall be but
as a Barbarian to the people, and not beneficial to them at all. Plainness and
Pureness are the two great excellencies of Preaching; and as ever a
Gospel-Preaches would be found a profitable Preacher, let him become a plain
Preacher. Though high Strains, hard Notions, and obscure or hidden Expressions
may most commend amongst men, yet plainness and profitableness will most
commend to God, and be most acceptable and advantageous to those that are
perfect and prudent. Oh therefore Brethren, all you that Preach the Gospel, so
Preach as Paul did, as you have it 1 Cor. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. compared with 2 Cor.
3.12. as ever you intend to teach your people Knowledge.

Thirdly, If you would distill or infuse your Knowledge into the people, do not
only Preach to the people, but live out that you Preach before the people; be
not only an Audible but a Visible word to the people. How shall the people
learn that from our lips, which they cannot learn from out lives! This made the
Scribes and Pharisees, the great Preachers of that day, they could do no good
to the people, but as blind Leaders, led the people blindly into the Ditch; was
it not from hence, because they say and do not? Mat. 23.3. with that of Jer.
23.18, 22. Oh, as ever you would be profitable Preachers to others, be not
unprofitable Preachers to your selves, practice what you Preach, if ever you
mean to profit others by that you Preach. Nothing more dulls and blunts the
edge of Preaching, than not living out the life of Preaching; therefore let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16.

Fourthly, And especially, Water all your Preaching with Praying, if ever you
would reap the fruit of your Preaching. Oh! my beloved Brethren, Would you
profit your people much by Preaching, then water your people much by Praying;
let the best Seed that can be sown, be sown into the best ground that can be,
yet if showers be withheld, a fruitful crop will never be obtained: Even so
here, the best Sermons will be but lost Sermons, unless they are watered
Sermons. Oh therefore, water your Sermons by Prayers; do not only pray for a
Sermon, but for a blessing upon that Sermon; pray not only publicly, but
privately for a blessing upon your Labors; lose not your Sermons through
shortness, or wantingness in praying performances. This was Paul's way to get
Knowledge to be the blessing of the Ephesians, Philippians, and Colossians, as
you may see at large in the first Chapters of those Epistles.

Therefore to conclude these Directions, Watch and pray that the Enemy steal
not your Seed, or Christ's Seed rather, away out of the minds and
understandings of the people. If any shall say, This is no more then we knew
before: yet let me, as once Peter did, tell you, I think it meet, as long as I
am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance of those
things, though you know them, and be established in the present truth, 2 Pet.
1.12.

The fourth Use is a word of Exhortation to the People.
The fourth Use shall be a word to the people enjoying wise Preachers, that
thus labor among you. Let it be a word of Exhortation to all such to take the
Apostle's counsel, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. We beseech you Brethren, to know them
that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and
esteem them very highly for their work sake. Such are truly wise Preachers;
yea, such are painful Preachers, and therefore ought to be honored Preachers;
such are profitable Preachers, therefore worthy to be honored Preachers;
Therefore esteem highly them that are such. I do not mean to provoke you only
so to honor, or esteem, as to approve, commend, or encourage such in their
Labors; but especially honor these, by submitting and subjecting your selves,
yea, your Souls to their Doctrine; by living and acting, according to their
teaching, who teach according to the form of found Doctrine contained in the
Scriptures.

Oh my dear Friends, this is the greatest honor, esteem, and encouragement you
can possibly bestow upon painful Preachers; thus says the Apostle John, in 3
Epist. 3, 4. I rejoiced greatly when the Brethren came and testified of the
truth that is in thee, even as thou walkedst in the truth; I have no greater
joy, then to hear that my Children walk in truth, or according to truth. The
like says Paul in that forecited 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20. For what is our hope, or
joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus
at his coming? For ye are our Glory and Joy. But what was the reason of this
exceeding Joy, you have it declared in the first Chapter. We give thanks to God
always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers; remembering, without
ceasing, your work of faith, and labor of love, and patience of hope, etc. For
our Gospel came not unto you in Word only, but also in Power, and in the Holy
Ghost, and in much assurance, as ye know what manner of men we were among you
for your sake; and ye became followers of us and of the Lord, having received
the Word in much affliction, with joy in the Holy Ghost: So that ye were
ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia; For from you sounded out
the Word of the Lord, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place
your Faith to Godward is spread abroad, so that we need not to speak any thing.

This, Beloved, is the honor, esteem, encouragement, and rejoicing, wise and
Spiritual Preachers most desire; that you that hear them, should be wise, truly
wise, holy, diligent, fruitful Hearers. There is nothing so much discourages,
grieves, and dishonours wise Preachers, as to find their Hearers unwise, idle,
unthankful, unfruitful, and unholy; this grieves them to the heart when they
run in vain, and labor in vain, as you have his expression Phil. 2.16. Oh,
grieve not the Spirit of God, nor the Spirit of your Preachers, by quenching
the Spirit, and despising Prophecy, as too many do. If it be a sin to neglect
Preaching, and not to teach the people Knowledge, as I have largely proved;
yea, if it be not only a neglect, but a most unconscionable neglect not to
teach the people Knowledge. Let me then tell proud, carnal, unbelieving,
negligent, forgetful, disobedient, unfruitful Hearers, it is not only a sin, but
a complicated sin; yea, it is not infirmity, but most unconscionable dealing
with the Lord Jesus, your painful Preachers, and your own Souls. Therefore look
well to it, for God will not bear it, nor hold such sinners guiltless that thus
take his Name in vain, and turn his Grace into wantonness.

I beseech you think seriously of a Text or two, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16, 17. And
the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them by his Messengers, rising up
betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dewlling place: But they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his Words,
and misused his Prophets, until the Wrath of the Lord arose against his people,
till there was no remedy. Therefore he brought upon them the King of the
Caldees, who slew their young men with the Sword in the House of their
Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young Man, or Maiden, old Man, or him
that stooped for Age; he gave them all into his hand.

Oh, mark how dreadful a sin it is to be a despiser, or an opposer of
Preachers! you may read the hainousness of the sin, in the dreadfulness of the
judgment.

Take one place more, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. With all deceiveableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received not the love of the
Truth, that they might be saved.

Oh mark it, you that do, or might, if the fault be not your own, enjoy good
Preachers, and pure Preaching, and will not, may, and care not for it; God will
send you Preachers sad, or bad enough, that shall only deceive and delude you,
and for this very cause; Even because, says the Apostle, God will send them
strong delusions that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned
that believed not through the Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

Oh think seriously of this, you sinful, proud, unthankful, forgetful, or
unfruitful Hearers: God will not always strive with you, or wait upon you, or
continue the Preaching of the Gospel among you. Therefore provoke not the Lord
to jealousy, by neglecting and perverting of his Ordinances.

But to close this Use, let me give you two or three Directions how to answer
this Use.

First, Is this yet true acquaintance with the greatness and grossness of
ignorance, and especially of your own ignorance in particular? Pride makes men
think they see, and despise the ignorance and simplicity of others; but it is
ignorance and blindness that makes poor and proud Souls like their own
ignorance. Therefore if you would be found the Friends and Preservers of
Knowledge, learn to know your own ignorance in the things of Jesus Christ. Yea,
consider how dishonorable and truly reproachful it is for a Professor, or a
Christian, to be an ignorant person; it is as reproachful, as for a Guide to be
blind, or a Ruler to be clad in Rags; than which, what is more dishonorable? A
Fool, in Civil or Natural things, is counted a dishonor to a Family, and a
burdensome Relation; even such are foolish Christians, or persons ignorant in
the Mysteries and Knowledge of Jesus Christ. Now that the most, yea, the best
of Professors are too ignorant, take two Texts, 1 Cor. 13.9. For we know but in
part, and prophecy but in part; therefore let none, how wise soever, think
themselves wise enough; but it is these thoughts keeps many Hearers from being
wise; Jer. 8.8. How do you say we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us,
and we will come no more unto the, Chap. 2.31. Therefore, as the cure of this
Disease in the first place, remember what Paul writes for this purpose, 1 Cor.
8.2. If any man thinks that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know. Again;

Secondly, Take this Direction if you would be a knowing people, be found a
doing people, faithfully and humbly doing what you know of Jesus Christ. This
is the way to know more and much of Jesus Christ, to be practical Christians;
Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know (that is, we shall then know what we knew not
before, when or how) if we follow on to know the Lord; and in John 7.17. If any
man will do his Will, he shall know that the Doctrine is of God.

Thirdly, Be diligent about this business of Knowledge; if ever thou would
know, as James says, Let not a wavering-minded man think he shall receive any
thing; even so say I, Let not the slothful, or the idle Christian, think he
shall receive, or ever attain Knowledge with such a frame of Spirit. With what
sloth and idleness, neglectfulness and forgetfulness do too many Professors
pursue Knowledge? Therefore be not slothful in business of this nature, but be
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, Romans 12.11.

Fourthly, Hold much and close communion with knowing, wise, and holy Persons:
This made Apollos become more wise and knowing, even his communion with Aquila,
Acts 18. And this Solomon teaches us, Prove. 13.20. telling us, That he that
walks with wise men, shall be wise; but a companion of fools shall be
destroyed.

But lastly, If you would become a knowing people in the Knowledge of God, be a
praying people; Prayer must relieve both Preacher, and the preached to, in this
thing; Oh therefore be much in Prayer. This was David's practice, Psalm. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. And to
close, remember what James says, chap. 1.4. If any of you lack wisdom, let him
ask it of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth none, and it
shall be given. Thus much for this Point.

Now to proceed in the Text, it is added; Yea, he gave good heed. This is the
next piece of the description of a wise Preacher, he gave good heed. From hence
observe;

Doct. 7. That he Preached not rashly, but heedfully.

It Is folly to be slight or rash in any business, but especially in God's
Matters, or in the Matters of Preaching; Yea, he gave good heed; it is good to
Preach heedfully. As Preaching is honorable Work, so it is to be honorably
performed; as it is weighty and difficult Work, even so ought Preachers warily
and heedfully to perform and pursue it. This we find imposed upon Elders or
Preachers, Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves; so in 1 Timothy 4.16.
Take heed unto thy self, and to thy Doctrine. Preaching-Work ought to be
heedfully, yea most heedfully performed.

Question; But it may be demanded, What is that which a Preacher ought thus
heedfully to mind?

In general I Answer, It is his Preaching. This is clear in the Text, by that
which is added, -- and sought out, and set in order many Proverbs; It was the
setting in order of Parables the Preacher gave good heed unto.

But more particularly to Answer this Query; First, He ought to give good heed
to the observing what the present state and need of the people calls for; for
he is by Preaching, to feed the people with food seasonable and convenient for
them: I do not say, That he is to eye or answer the wanton expectations of the
Hearer, but the present necessity and need of the Hearer. This is laid down
Mat. 24.45. Who then is a wise and faithful Servant to give them meat in due
season? A wise Preacher must oversee the state of the Flock, in this regard, to
know what they are, and what they want at the present, that he may by Doctrine
give every one, not some, but every one his meat in due season. Sinners, and
unconverted Souls in a Congregation, must be heedfully provided for; and the
Saints and Children of God in the Assembly, must much less be neglected; the
minds of the ignorant must be enlightened, and the mouth of the Adversary must
be stopped. The Faith of the doubting must be strengthened, and the Faith of
the established secured. The troubled Conscience must be comforted, and the
Conscience of the sleepy and secure awakned. This is now to give good heed how
we Preach, thus wisely to mind and consider them we Preach to.

Secondly, For a Preacher to give good heed how he Preachers, is needfully to
observe or consider the present Vision of the Lord, or what the Spirit of the
Lord at present lays warm and fresh in upon his heart to deliver as his
present Message, and seasonable to the people. That Message which is very
lawful and seasonable to deliver to the people at one time, is neither
seasonable nor lawful to deliver at another time. There is a time, and but a
time, that is seasonable for any thing; so there is a time, and but a time,
when some Truths are seasonable. Therefore this is that Preachers should
heedfully mind, the teaching, moving, and turning of their Spirits, this or
that way, by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus; and give up themselves to the
manuduction of that Spirit. Thus did the living Creatures, Ezekiel. 1.12. And they
went every one straight forward; whither the Spirit was to go they went, and
they turned not when they went. This is Preacher's motion, and thus to move, is
heedfully to Preach. Thus did Isaiah, that good Watchman, Chap. 21.7, 8. He
hearkened diligently with much heed; and he cried, a Lion; My Lord, I stand
continually upon the Watchtower in the day time, and I am set in my Ward whole
nights. But again;

Thirdly, Heedfully to Preach, is heedfully to observe our scope and end in
Preaching. As in some respects the end may be said to crown all, even so may I
say of Preaching. If ends be not right and honorable, it will spoil all, as
the dead Fly does the Apothecaries precious Ointment. A Preacher cannot think
to do much good by Preaching, that has low or poor aims or ends in Preaching.
The goodness of the Work does not argue the goodness of a Man's Aims or Ends in
Preaching: But if ever Preachers would do good at Preaching, let them heedfully
mind their Ends. When Ends are right, God usually blesses; but when Ends are
naught and low, God usually blasts; as you have it Haggi 1.6, to 11. compared
with Zech. 7.5, 6. where the Lord renders the reason of all the blasts or
disappointments they met with, was, Because of the corruptness of their ends.
Had not sinful self lay at the bottom of the sacrificing, and fasting, and
calling upon his Name, they should have had a Blessing; but this withheld it
from them: Self-endedness at Preaching, is heedless and fruitless Preaching,
God will not bless, with any great success, such Preaching: therefore Preach
heedfully or well-minding that your ends be holy, and pure, even the glorifying
God, and the profiting the Souls of the people. In discharge of Duty, these are
right Ends, and not to Preach for Applause, Credit, or much less Merchandise.
But again;

Fourthly, Preachers should heedfully; yea, give good heed (as in the Text) to
the Matter of their Preaching, and not rashly say, the Lord says. They must
Search the Scripture, as well as Preach the Scripture, remembering David, Psalm.
39. I said, I will take heed to my ways that I sin not with my tongue; and
what Solomon says, Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say
before the Angel it was a sin, Eccles. 5.6. But this I must speak more to on
another particular, and therefore shall come to the Reasons of the Point that
Preachers had need to give good heed to what they Preach.

Reas. 1. First, Because if they Preach heedlesly, Christ will mind it
heedfully. It Is dangerous Preaching heedlesly in the ears of heedful Hearers,
but especially in the ears of Jesus Christ, whose eyes are like a flame of
fire, and observes all our deportments in his Concernments. If he hear us
Preach heedlesly, he will set this sin in order before us, though he seem to
overlook it, and we think he has forgotten it. Carelessness and rashness in
the Ministry of the Lord's Word, meets with swiftest Observation, and severest
Chastisments: Therefore take heed, and be holy, ye that bear the Vessels of the
Lord, remembering the case of Nadab and Abihu, Levit, 10. and of Vzzah, 2 Samuel
6.6, 7.

Reas. 2. Secondly, The reason of Preachers heedfulness is this, The Observance
of men. Are the Hearers, Sinners, and the worst of Hearers? they will and do
observe the best of Preachers, and lie, as it were, in wait to entrap and catch
them, or entangle them in their talk or Preaching. Such as can observe little
of the Marrow of Preaching, or a Sermon, will be able enough to observe all the
Mistakes or Errata's of a Sermon: Therefore take away occasion from them that
seek it, as Paul did, 2 Cor. 11.12.

But again, 2ly, Let Preachers preach heedfully, because of Saints; their eyes
are upon you, and their ears open to you, and they are taught of God to know
all things, and as Spiritual men judge all things, and have senses exercised;
and, like these noble Bereans, will try all things: Therefore, O therefore,
Preach with good heed, and Preach only good things for their Knowledge.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, Preachers had need Preach heedfully, because that which they
Preach is hard and difficult to Preach. Preaching is not easy Work, it is hard
Work, it is curious Work, it needs much wariness, wisdom, and circumspection, to
draw Water out of these Wells of Salvation, and to fetch Gold out of these
Mines of Divine Wisdom; therefore ought they to give good heed to Preaching.

Reas. 4. And lastly, Preachers should give good heed how they Preach, because
of the worth and excellency of what they Preach. Though men care not how they
scatter their dross, yet they are very careful what they do with their refined
Gold. Though the Husbandman passes not what he does with his Chaff, yet he is
very careful what he does with his Seed-corn. Even so should it be with
Preachers, they should be very heedful where they Sow, and how they bestow
their principal Wheat. Oh! Sow not upon the Rocks, nor on the Highway side,
but on good Ground; and carefully look to your Seed, to Christ's Seed; it is
too choice to sustain any loss; Oh therefore, heedfully Preach, that you lose
not your labor, nor your reward.

Thus much for the Reasons of this Point; now to close this Head with a word or
two of Application.

First of Reproof.
Application; First, If Preachers ought to give good heed how they Preach, then
this ministers a word of Reproof to such as are heedless Preachers, that think
it is an easy facile Work to dispense and propagate Truth; surely such do not
remember the weightiness of Preaching, so they can but Preach pleasingly to
men, profitably to themselves, and securely in respect of others; they think it
is enough, never applying themselves to over-see or consider the state of the
Flock, the various state of their Hearers, the avoiding of their Enemies, the
Salvation of Sinners, and the perfecting of the Saints, by an acute, exact,
circumspect, thorough search and enquiry after Gospel Truths, that they might
Speak and Preach as the Oracles of God. Well, I shall not stand upon this, only
be minding these of that sad word; Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord
negligently: And let these Preachers know, what God has threatened to all
slight Preachers, by the Prophet Jeremiah, saying, Therefore I am full of the
fury of the Lord; I am weary with holding in; I will pour it out upon the
children abroad, and upon the Assembly of young men together; for even the
Husband with the Wife shall be taken, the Aged with him that is full of days;
And their Houses shall be turned unto others, with their Fields and Wives
together; for I will stretch out my hand upon the Inhabitants of the Land,
says the Lord: For from the least of them, even unto the greatest of them,
every one of them is given to covetousness; and from the Prophet even unto the
Priest, every one deals falsely. They have healed also the hurt of the
Daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace,
Jer. 6.11, 12, 13, 14.

Note; And so I conclude this Use, It Is a dangerous and a destructive evil, to
be a sleighty Prophet or Preacher.

The second Use is of Exhortation.
Secondly, Let this exhort all wise Gospel-Preachers to remember the Text, and
also give good heed to the Work of Preaching: It Is not only honorable, but
difficult, likewise it is high, it is hard; Oh therefore give good heed to this
Work of Preaching. It Is not man's Work, or a Work performed so much for men, as
for God. It Is Soul-Work; as you love Souls, or have a value of immortal Souls,
take heed to your selves in this Work, this blessed Work of Preaching. Oh be
intent upon this thing, to seek the profit of many that they may be saved. Oh
Speak or Preach as Paul words it, as you ought to speak, Ephesians. 6.20. study
Scripture, study Men, listen to the Spirit, follow its Guidance, give your
selves up to this Work, taking Solomon's Counsel, Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thy
hand finds to do, do it with all thy might. Oh strive mightily, to be
spiritually exact, and perfect Preachers. Oh remember, It is required of a
Steward, that he be found faithful, 1 Cor. 4.2. Therefore let me beseech you,
Men, Brethren, and Fathers, even all you that are Christ's Stewards, and
Gospel-Preachers, give good heed to this thing, that you may give up your
account with joy, and not with grief of heart.

The third Use is of Vindication.
Thirdly, Let this Doctrine vindicate such Preachers as give good heed in
Preaching, so to Preach, that they may approve themselves good Workmen, even
Workmen that need not be ashamed, dividing the Word aright; such as Preach not
as pleasing men, but as pleasing God, which tries the hearts, 1 Thessalonians. 2.4.

I say, This Truth now cleared, will acquit and justify all such sober,
serious, exquisite, faithful, painful, wise Preachers, which give good heed,
and apply themselves to be Physicians of Value, such as endeavor both to sound
their own, and the peoples hearts, and to see that they Preach as the Spirit
gives them utterance and guidance, Acts 2.4. Such Preachers as seek not yours,
but you, that your Souls may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. I say, Let
this justify the exactness and diligence of those, that in the dividing of the
Word, make it their business to divide it aright, and to omit, nor lose nothing
of all the Riches of such Scriptures, as the Spirit of the Lord opens to them;
but endeavor to make full proof of their Ministry, in a ministration of the
All committed to their trust, following that Direction of our Lord, Gather up
the Fragments that nothing be lost, John 6.12. So these painful and laborious
Bees move from Flower to Flower, that is, from Text to Text, and from Syllable
to Syllable, that they may help you to Honey, that by Line upon Line, and
Precept upon Precept, here a little and there a little, seek to impart to you
the whole Counsel of God; I say, Let such Preachers be justified, and not
taxed, as at this day, by some who make use of that saying, What need this
waste? Mat. 26.8. What need this curiousness, this tediousness, so much
dwelling upon a Text?

Why, let this serve to Answer such; Is there not a cause, when it is required
of a Steward to be sound faithful? And this is faithful dealing with Jesus
Christ and his Word, to let nothing be lost.

But again, secondly, If your Preachers, wise Preachers, do give good heed, and
consider the state of the Flock, and whereof they have need, and do deal home
and plainly with your Consciences in all faithfulness, not sparing any man, or
flattering any man, or pleasing any man, but dealing faithfully with all men,
as approving themselves to God. Why then consider, I pray you, It is required
of Stewards to be faithful, and such are Stewards even of the manisold Grace of
God; and therefore it is required of them that they be faithful. Oh, let this
justify all wise, holy, humble, diligent, painful, faithful Preachers, that
seek to turn many from their iniquity; that give good heed, and all diligence
so to Preach, that they may declare that they have renounced the hidden things
of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, not handling the Word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the Truth, Commending our selves to every
man's Conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2.

And so much for this Use and this Point.

I now come to the next Word and Work of a wise Preacher, that is, He sought
out.

This is the next Work; and to search or seek out: A good or a wise Preacher,
does not only give out, and not keep in any thing of all that good Knowledge,
or Will of the Lord Jesus made out to his Soul; But further he seeks or
searches out after more of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ to be further imparted
to him; in what is in part known by him, or in what as yet of Christ is not
manifest, but hid from him and them, and may be imparted to them: For the
choicest, or most comprehending Servant, or Preacher of the Lord Jesus, knows
but in part, and prophesies but in part, and therefore had need to search,
enquire, or hunt after that of the mind of Christ yet behind, or unknown of
him, and which may, for ought he knows, be made manifest to him.

Three things I suppose this Phrase may import.

First, To examine and receive things already viewed or known.

Secondly, To clear and discharge what we know, from whatever Objections or
Cavils might be brought against what we know, or conceive we know.

Thirdly, To seek out, is to endeavor to get either fresh Visions of God in
our Souls, or further and exacter insight into such Visions of God as already
we have received.

All this seems clearly employed in this Act of the wise Preacher, as is most
clear, by considering the next word, And set in order, or in their due order,
many Proverbs. The Work of the truly, or spiritually wise Preacher, is to
search, or seek after; or search, or seek into the knowledge of wha^ is known,
or should be known, or may be known. This is the Trade of God's Commands, in
order to a Preacher's Duty.

Doct. 8. The Doctrine hence may be this; That the wise Preacher's Work, is not
an easy, but an hard task, to attain the comprehension or full understanding
requisite to be found in every Minister of Christ.

His life is a continued act of seeking, or enquiring after fuller discoveries
of the mind of Christ. This is plainly employed in this phrase; he sought out,
or sought after, or sought into the way of setting Parables in order.

To clear up this Point, two things need proving; First, That the Preacher's
Task or Duty, is an hard Task or Duty. Secondly, His life is a continued Act of
learning the mind of Christ. As he does not do all at once he has to do for
Christ, neither does he searn all at any one season he has to learn from Jesus
Christ: He is always doing, and always learning, until he dies. Therefore is
the Preacher's Work hard Work. This Moses well understood, Exodus 3d, 4th, and
6th Chapters. This Jeremiah also apprehended in his first Chapter; And this
Paul concludes concerning his Ministry, 1 Cor. 16.15. But not to heap up
testimonies for a thing so clear; Consider this, namely what the Preacher's
Work is resembled to:

First It Is called a Warfare, or they are resembled to valiant Soldiers; and a
Soldier's life is a l^fe of hazard and hardship, even so is the Preachers.

Secondly, It Is styled a Watchm^^'s life, and to be a good Watchman, is a hard
life, and laborious.

Thirdly, He is called a Shepherd, and that is no easy life.

Fourthly, They are called Husbandmen, and Laborers, and Builders; all which
prove Preaching to be a hard Work.

But to make this more clear; consider, it is a Trade or Business that is
always carrying on, I had almost said night and day; and therefore sure it can
be no easy, but hard Work, because it is perpetual Work. But such is the
Preacher's Work, He must not only be always preaching, but always learning,
yea, learning while teaching, in looking after the Mind of Christ: His Work is
never done, always doing, running on more and more after fresh and fuller
discoveries of the Will of God. It Is an every day, yea, night and day study of
the Word and Ways of God; he sought out; it is opened to us in Prove. 2.1, 2, 3,
4. It Is a Work a man must cry for; seek for, yea, ^^g for, and hunt for, that
intends to find it; compared with Job 3.21.

Take one passage more, where good and wise Preachers may be resembled to
Servants, and the Hand maids David speaks of, Psalm. 123.2. Or to the good
Woman, perceiving that her Merchandising Commodity is good, therefore her
Candle goes not out by night. From all which may easily be gathered, what a
hard and difficult, constant and painful life and labor, the wise Preacher's
labor and life is.

Thus much for the proof of the Proposition. Let me now give you some Arguments
to evince this, That Preachers Work is hard labor, and continual employment.

Arg. 1. First, This must needs be thus, because of the matter of Preaching,
which is the Mind and Will of Christ contained in the Scriptures. Now this Word
of Scripture, is like deep, yea, very deep waters; it is hard to get the golden
precious Truths, and Counsels of Christ, contained in the bottom or body of
Scripture, forth of them. The Word of God is perfect and sufficient, but not so
plain and obvious, that without much study and search, the whole Counsel or
Will of God contained therein will be attained. In the Word lies contained the
manifold wisdom of God; but it is hard to find out the sum and variety thereof
without much diligence. This Solomon implies, when he says, Counsel in the
heart of man is like deep waters; but a man of understanding will dra^ it out,
Prove. 29.5. Now if that Wisdom or Counsel which is in the heart of wise men is
like deep waters, and it requires wisdom and labor too for the drawing it out;
Oh, how much more does it require the wisest Preachers wisdom and pains to dive
into the Counsels of Christ, contained and centered in these most deep Wells of
Salvation, or Waters of the Sanctuary, the Word of God! Yea, doubtless our
experience witnesses to it, and we daily find all Truth is in the Scripture
contained; yet can we hardly draw out or comprehend so much of Truth, as is
essentially requisite for our selves, and such as we preach to. This David
witnesses, when he says, Thy Righteousness is like the great Mountains, and
thy Judgments are a great deep, Psalm. 36.6. Now if the Judgments, Statutes,
Truths, Ordinances of Christ, all which the Preacher is to reveal, and declare
to the People, be such a great Deep, and so hard to fathom; Oh, how hard then
is his work that is a wise Preacher, he may well be searching out and after
this Will of God, and conclude, who is sufficient for these things? But again;

Arg. 2. Secondly, As the matter of their Preaching is high, and hard to
attain; even so the Work must needs be hard in respect of themselves. They are
dull and hard of Learning in what they must deliver out. Oh! if a Preachers
Lesson be hard, and he as hard to learn any Lesson; sure their task must needs
be a hard task: But that the best of Preachers are bad and dull Learners is
most evident, both by Scripture and plentiful experience; as in that glorious
Saint and Preacher Job. How much pains did God take with Job from his
Conversion, even till old age, and yet but in God's account a small shallow
Scholar; notwithstanding all God's pains in correcting of him, yet says God,
Who is it that darkneth counsel by words without knowledge? Job 38.2. Yea, God
makes Job plead guilty to this Indictment, Chap. 40.3, 4 5. with 42. And surely
such Preachers are not Jobs, but proud Pharisees, who will, or dare say, or
think otherwise of themselves. Such dull, bad, learners of the Mind of God,
were Job's three Friends, Chap. 42.7. Yea, such were Christ's Disciples and
Apostles, those Master-Preachers, those Foundation-Layers; Luke 24.25. O Fools,
and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Oh Beloved! if
Preachers have hard and many Lessons to learn, and are exceeding dull and
incapacious of learning; yea, such that have neither head, heart, nor will to
learn. O sure their work is hard, and they need be early and late seeking and
searching out these acceptable words.

Arg. 3. Thirdly, Preaching-Work is hard Work, because of such to whom we
preach. It Is hard to find out what words they want, and it is not wisdom to
preach such words as are not wanting, or at present necessary. For though
every, and any word that is or can be preached, is pure and perfect, yet not at
all times, seasonable or profitable; you know whose rule it is, All things are
lawful, but all things are not expedient, 1 Cor. 6.12. Though every Truth not
only may, but ought to be preached, yet not at all times, or to all sorts of
Hearers. There is a peculiar or apt time for every purpose under the Sun.

Now the wisdom of the Preacher is to know how to time his Word or Doctrine to
the present wants and necessities of the people, and this is very hard, and
requires searching out of the peoples wants.

Secondly, This makes the Preachers Work hard, how wise a Preacher soever he
be, to find out, not only their wants, but also how to apply that which is
intended for them, to be received or accepted by them; even God's own People
are a wayward and indisposed People, or Children, to the receiving of Spiritual
Food or Physic; and it is a great piece of Heavenly skill, and hard to attain.
Paul himself writes it as a great piece of Heavenly Craft, 2 Cor. 12.16.

But, thirdly, grant a Preacher has wisely gone these steps, yet he must still
be seeking out how to preserve and water the Seed he has been admitted to Sow,
that he lose not the things that he has wrought; for it is the part of a
foolish Preacher to preach, and preach much, and not regard what becomes of his
Labors. It Is to be like the foolish Ostrich mentioned Job 39.13, 14, 15, 16.
Now this Act makes the Preacher's Act hard work to water and watch his Seed
sown, that he lose not his labor; therefore his work is hard work.

Arg. 4. And lastly, The Preacher's task is very hard, because of that great
opposition and difficulty, which Preachers and preaching-work must and does
meet withal; that work how easy soever in it self, yet if it cannot be
performed without much opposition, is then and thereby become hard work, even
thus is preaching become hard work, because with much hardship, labor, and
difficulty, it must be performed: Satan and Sinners, yea, even Saints
themselves, make the Preacher's Work hard, yea, very hard and troublesome by
their opposition. Look how the Enemies of the Jews withstood the building of
the Temple; even so does Satan hinder the building of the Spiritual Temple, or
preaching of the Gospel; So Paul words it, 1 Thessalonians. 2.18. Thus he made the
preaching of the Gospel decline from Jerusalem, Acts 8.1. with Acts 13.50. And
although the preaching of the Word must not be hindered or declined because of
Persecution, yet is Persecution a means to make Preachers look about them, and
their work to be hard to them.

And again, The Preacher's task is made very hard by the opposition of false
Teachers, which oppose the Truth of the Gospel; and who, as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do they also resist the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.8. These constrain
the wisest of Preachers to seek out how to preach, that such may not gainsay
the Truth; or at least, that their folly may be made manifest to all men of
sober minds; and this is hard work. How hard was Paul's work made to cut off
occasion from them, that sought occasion, when he is to preach Justification by
Faith only, without the Works of the Law? How did the Jewish Teachers oppose
him? Acts 21.27, 28, 29, 30. When he teaches the Doctrine of Free Grace for the
worst of sinners, notwithstanding the greatest of sins, is he not slandered as
if he taught liberty to sin? Romans 3.8. If he teach the cessation of the Law, as
to life, How is his preaching opposed and slandred? 1 Timothy 1.6, 7. So when he
preaches down legal Ceremonies, as Circumcision, and Mears, Drinks, Holy Days,
New Mons, and Sabbaths: What labor is Paul forced to use to defend this
Doctrine against those Philosophers and Deceivers? Gal. 6.11, 12, 13. with Col.
2.8, 16, 17. downwards to the close of that Chapter.

Again, when the Apostles preach the Kingly Power of the Lord Jesus Christ in
his own Kingdom and Church, how are they opposed? Acts 3. with Chap. 17. Now
the silencing, answering, and preventing the designs of Satan, and his
Instruments, slandering and opposing the Truth, makes the Preachers of the
Gospel much labor to seek out how to defend and establish the truth of the
Gospel.

But lastly, Preachers work is made laborious, and hard, by the subtilty,
evasions, glosses, excuses, colors, and pretenses, which poor sinners strive
to hide themselves under, and to evade the power of the Word brought against
them. This makes the Preacher's labor very hard; so to Preach, that every Soul
may be brought under the power of it, and every mouth may be stopped: By the
doing of this Work, also by preaching among Saints, how much opposition do the
Preachers of the Gospel procure by it? as is clear 1 Cor. 4.14. to the end of
the Chapter; so in 2 Cor. 12 and 13 Chapters: By all which it will appear, that
the Preacher had need, yea, great need, to seek and search out Arguments to
support, encourage, and uphold himself in the doing of his duty, and to deliver
the Gospel from being perverted and made of no use, by the many designs and
devices of Enemies and Friends.

Thus much for the clearing of the Point, to wit, That every wise
Gospel-preacher's Work is not easy, but very hard, to seek after the
attainment and comprehension of understanding requisite to be found in every
Minister of the Lord Jesus.

Now by way of Application. First, If it be thus, it informs us and instructs
us in two Particulars.

The first Use is of Instruction.
First, How ignorant and mistaken such men's thoughts and principles are, as
report and imagine that Preaching is easy work, and the Preacher's Life is an
idle Life or Calling. It appears to me, as these never had the honor to be
called to this Work, so these little know what Gospel-preaching is; but like
Peter's natural bruit-beasts, Speak evil of things and persons they know not, 2
Pet. 2.12. Surely these never read, or never considered what Paul found
Preaching to be, that thus speak contemptuously and foolishly of it, 2 Cor.
6.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Can that be slight, easy, idle Work, which is Night
and Day-Work, which is Soul and Body-Work; that must be done faithfully,
wisely, in season, and out of season? Sure the ignorance, pride, and unbelief
of such is very great. I shall say no more to such deceived Souls but only
this, Consider what has been upon this Doctrine offered, and read the Rules
and Directions Paul gives to Timothy about Preaching; and then tell me whether
it be an easy, much less an idle trifling employment, yea or no?

The second Use is of Instruction.
But secondly, If Preaching be such an hard Work, or Task, and Labor, to
perform it wisely and spiritually; Then this acquaints us what unwise and idle
sinful Preachers such are as pretend to Preaching, yet take no pains in the
performance of this Work, but trifle and idle in this weighty and honorable
Employment. Such may do well to bethink themselves, it is required of Stewards,
that they be faithful; and remember what God has said, He will not hold such
guiltless as take his Name in vain. Let such idle careless Shepherds, as
pretend to be Gospel-Preachers, wise and honorable Preachers, view that word
Ezekiel. 34. with Zech. 11.17. Woe to the idol Shepherd that leaves the Flock; the
Sword shall be upon his Arm, and upon his right Eye; his Arm shall be clean
dried up, and his right Eye shall be utterly darkened.

Such worthless Preachers are like the evil Spies we read of Numb. 13.32. which
brought up an evil report upon the good Land of Promise; so these bring up an
evil report upon the good Word and Ordinance of God, the preaching of the
Gospel, by their light, idle, careless, carnal, and unprofitable preaching of
the Word; because they seek not out, nor search after the setting of Parables
or Gospel. Mysteries aright; neither take pains to consider what the Peoples
wants are to supply them; nor what the Peoples ignorance or error is, to avoid
it, and deliver the preaching of the Gospel from their mistakings, pervertings;
or avoiding, by Armor on the right hand and on the left, leaving the People
under such generalities, as that they can deceive and flatter themselves, that
their condition is good, and the Promises belong to them, though they are in
the Gall of Bitterness, and the Bond of Iniquity; a form of Godliness, without
the power of it, not making it their business, to take away the Cloaks and
Shifts, Pleas and Excuses, Pretenses and Fig Leaves, under which poor sinners
shelter and hide themselves from the force of their Preaching, and the wrath of
God, although they walk on in the stubbornness of their hearts, and add
drunkenness to thirst, and cry, God will spare, Deuteronomy. 29.19.

I say no more to these dumb idle Shepherds, or Preachers of our day, that by
thus doing, cause their, or rather Christ's good Commodity, to be evil spoken
of. But O that they would remember that saying of the Lord to their Brethren,
the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.22, 29, 30. I say, Remember, those that honor God
shall be honored of him; but they that despise him, shall be lightly esteemed
of him. And woe to that Preacher that God esteems lightly of.

I shall say no more to these, who-ever they be, Prelates or Pesants, Doctors
or Dunces, Batchelors or Novices in Divinity, for the pure preaching of the
Gospel, who like unwise and foolish Shepherds and Preachers, lightly or
flightly preach; only hear and consider that Scripture, Mal. 1.6. Woe unto you,
O Priests, that despise my Name; and ye say, Wherein have we despised thy Name?
Yea, offer polluted Bread upon my Altar, and ye say, Wherein have we polluted
it? In that ye say, The Table of the Lord is contemptible: And if ye offer the
blind for Sacrifice, Is it not evil? And if ye offer the lame and the sick, Is
it not evil? But cursed be the Deceiver that has in his Flock a Male, and
voweth, and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King,
says the Lord of Hosts.

The third Use is of Exhortation.
But again, The next Use I shall make of this Point, is for Exhortation, (in
two Branches) and that to two sorts of persons.

First, Such as Preach the Gospel.

Secondly, To such who hear the Gospel preached.

The first Branch.
First, Let me presume to speak a few words to all such as fear the Lord, and
preach the Gospel of our Lord Jesus; first, Be exhorted so to Preach, or make
manifest the Gospel, as it ought to be preached or made manifest, as Paul words
it, Col. 4.3, 4. Oh! as wise Preachers, and not unwise, seek and search after
the mind of Christ, contained in the Proverbs, Problems, or Word of Christ. Oh!
hunt as Hunts-men do for Game; follow it hard, and follow it close, through
thick and through thin, through Briars and through Thorns, as such who are
resolved not to lose their time, and labor or desire, if it be possible. Even
so let every wise Gospel-Preacher endeavor to preach the Gospel, as striving
not to lose his labor; so Preaching, that he may reap the Harvest or Blessing
of his preaching; and not only preach, but so preach, as every wise Preacher
ought to preach; not only unto men, or unto men's ears, but unto men's ears, and
into men's hearts also, if possible. Thus Paul preached to the Galatians,
traveling in Soul for the good of their Souls, until Christ was formed in them.

Oh Beloved! study not only to preach Notions unto the People, so much as to
preach Motions into the People, that Christ may be formed in them. Oh! study
Soul-convincing, and Soul-converting Doctrine, striving and designing that all
your Hearers may be delivered into the form of that Doctrine, which from
Christ, by you, is to them delivered. Oh! this will cause you, not only to have
matter of Peace, but of Joy and Thanksgiving also with Paul, Romans 6.17. It is
easier to seek out, and find out a Sermon to preach unto the People, than to
find out this skill and wisdom, how to be able to distill or preach a Sermon
into the People; for if God, that gives us a Door, yea, an open Door of
Utterance unto the People, do not also graciously give us a Door, an open Door
of Entrance into the People; also our Preaching will be vain and lost
Preaching, as to the People to whom we Preach; no good will be done, the People
will be undone rather by us, for the better the Preacher is, and the more he
preaches, and the People not the better, but the worse; the more dangerous is
that peoples case and condition, and the greater will be their damnation. Woe to
thee Capernaum, which art exalted to Heaven, thou shall be brought down to
Hell; For if the mighty Works which have been done in thee, had been done in
Sodom, it would have remained till this day: But I say, It shall be more
tolerable for the Land of Sodom, in the Day of Judgment, than for thee, Mat.
11.23.24. Oh therefore, as the High Priests of old bare the Children of Isreal's
Names upon their Breasts, even so let all wise Preachers carry their Hearers
upon their Hearts, that God would make their labor of love useful, and not a
savor of death unto death, unto any of them.

But again, Let me persuade and exhort such as Preach, to seek that they may
first be preached to, and that doubly.

Get thy Soul, first, preached into Christ, before ever thou go to preach
Christ unto any.

Secondly, Get the mind of Christ preached unto thy Soul, before thou go
about to preach the mind of Christ to any Soul; remembering what is written, How
can they preach except they be sent? Romans 10.15. Oh Preachers! seek before
ever, or whenever you go to preach to others, to get Christ to preach forth
his blessed Truth; to the which he would that day have preached forth by thee
to others: For how can one receive any thing, except it be given him from
Above, or from Heaven, Joh. 3.27. Oh seek, and search out diligently what
Message is most meet for the People; and what Message Christ would have thee
now hand forth to the People; for it is not every Message, but present Message,
is a meet Message to be delivered to the People: This we have hinted in the
Description of the wise Scribe, that he brings forth of his Treasury things new
and old, things suitable and necessary for present concernment, Mat. 13.52. The
Peoples present need, should be every wise Preacher's business to supply, and
that in the first place. Oh search, as after the Peoples Lessons, so after the
Peoples profiting; be not foolish Seedsmen as to sow your Seed, yea, Christ's
principal immortal Seed of the Word, and never look after it; be not like the
World's Sons of Levi, that only preach, to preach themselves into the People,
and the Peoples Money into their Pockets; and having performed as much of this
as Law requires, and will effect their end, they never care what becomes of
their preaching. Oh, pray over your preaching, yea, pray after your preaching,
that God would bless your preaching; and add the upper, as the nether Springs
to your preaching, and not let you run and labor in vain. Search after the
profiting of your Hearers, and see how the Seed sown makes increase, in some
thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundred fold, Mark 4.8.

But again, Let me once more exhort wise Preachers to seek out the deep things
of God, contained in the Mysteries of the Gospel, or manifold wisdom of God.
Oh! be not blind Leaders of the blind World, lest you and they fall into the
Ditch; search and study the Scriptures, which are able to make the Preacher, or
the Man of God, perfect, or thoroughly furnished unto preaching. Knowledge,
Gospel-Knowledge, is deep Waters: Apply your diligence to draw it out of the
Wells of Salvation.

But lastly, Suffer me to add one word of Exhortation more; Search and see
there be no root of Gall or Wormwood springing up to trouble you in your Work;
I mean, see that the mouths of gainsayers, and such as oppose your preaching,
or slander your good Conversation, be silenced, that they which speak evil of
you may be ashamed. The better and more wisely any Preacher preaches, the more
will be his opposition, and therefore his wisdom should be, to take away
occasion from such as seek occasion, that they of the contrary part may be
ashamed. Oh seek to preach preventingly, that whosoever be Hearers, they may
not find any occasion against you, save only in the matter of your God. Strive
to countermine Satan and Sinners, that whilst you are sowing precious Seed,
will not spare to sow the Tares. Therefore strive so to preach, as to leave
them no place or advantage for the Tares; yea, seek especially so to preach, as
the Children that come to you for Bread may not meet with Stones, or suppose
you give them Serpents for Fishes; I mean, Fancies and Errors, instead of
wholesome Food or Gospel Truths. Oh! preach plainly, preach purely, preach
powerfully, preach plentifully, preach wisely or warily, lest you offend one of
those little Ones, or so much as give them any show or appearance of exception
o^ stumbling; nay, let them not have so much as subterfuge, evasion, shift, or
project, to put by the force and scope of your preaching, or to hide themselves
under from obeying the Truth; but let every Soul be without excuse in the day
of Christ; and this is to be a wise Preacher, and to seek out and set in order
many Proverbs and Parables. So much for this first Branch of the Exhortation.

The second Branch of Exhortation.
But secondly, Let me make from hence one word of Exhortation to such as are
Hearers. If the Preachers must seek, hunt, and search after the mind of Christ
to deliver it unto you, then do not you less, than seek, hunt and search after
the comprehending and understanding what you hear. Take Christ's Counsel, Luke
8.18. Take heed therefore how you hear. Oh! if Preachers must be wise
Preachers, be not you foolish or unwise Hearers; if they must be painful and
careful Preachers, be you not slothful careless Hearers; if they must be
watchful Preachers, I pray be not you sleepy Hearers: For if they must give a
severe account how they Preach, think not but you Hearers must give a strict
account how you hear; for it is written, God will deal with the Scholar as with
the Master, Isa. 24.2.

Oh, my Beloved, did Preachers know truly and sufficiently the weight, want,
and worth of preaching, they would doutbless take more heed how they preach;
even so would you Hearers, did you but consider the worth, want, and necessity
of preaching, you would be more attentive, watchful, thankful, constant,
fruitful Hearers: As negligent, careless, idle Preachers little know, or
consider the worth, or the price, or the misery of Souls which are lost for
want of wise and careful preaching; no more do you idle, sleepy, forgetful,
unfruitful Hearers, know or consider the worth or price of your immortal Souls,
nor the danger of your eternal condition, if you obey not the Gospel.

Oh Beloved! take heed to your selves, and to your feet, when you go to
Hearing; and if you have any respect for the Lord Jesus, value of the Gospel,
love to your Preachers, or regard or pity to your own Souls, do not thus evilly
requite the Lord, your Laborers, yea, your own Souls, a^ to be unworthy,
careless, heedless, mindless, heartless, fruitless Hearers of the Gospel; which
with so much wisdom and wariness ought to be preached to you. Should a most
choice Physician take pity of a poor dying Patient, and sit down, and turn over
all his Experiences, and take the greatest ca^^ he can to consider his Patients
condition, and prescribe a Potion most suitable, most safe and profitable for
his Patient; and then his Patient should either refuse to accept it, and
neglect to read it, and resolve never to improve it; would not you say, This
was a most unwise, unworthy, and ungrateful Person, to deal thus unworthily
with his loving Friend and faithful Physician. Oh my Beloved! know and consider
this day, such, even such, are all such unwise, unworthy Hearers, a^ when their
loving, wise, and faithful Preache^^ have been diligently examining and
considering their Souls case and condition; and having sound^ not only their
Disease, but their infallible Remedy, when they come and bring it unto you by
the preaching of the Gospel, and you Hearers, with one consent slight it and
neglect it; one saying, He will not put himself or Family to the trouble to
come out of doors to hear it; another, he will come, but it is to sleep; a
third, but it is to carp and cavil at it through his own faults, and instead of
watching his own heart, he watches for the Preachers halting; a fourth may come
and hear, but carelessly, more minding his ease, and his dressed, and his company,
than the Sermon or his duty; a fifth may hear, but forget; a sixth, but not
believe, but dispute what he hears; and a feventh, though he hears, and
understands, and remembers, yet comes prepared and resolved to be Sermon proof,
and not obey what he hears, say the Preacher what he pleases.

Oh my Beloved! are not all these unthankful, and unworthy Hearers of the Word,
and such as give both God and Men occasion to be weary of them, and to shake
off the dust of their feet against them, and say, Since by this doing you judge
your selves unworthy of the Gospel, Lo, we turn to the Gentiles, Acts 13.46.

I have done now with this Use, and shall con^ude both this Doctrine and this
Exhortation, with two Scriptures; one is that James 1.19, with (...) Wherefore,
my beloved Brethren, let every man (...) swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to
wrath; being doers of the Word, and not Hears only, decerving your own Souls,
or your own selves. The other passage is Ephesians. 5.15, 16. See then, I say,
Preacher and Hearer, see to it, that you walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Thus much for this
particular.

I now proceed to the next, which are these, And set in order many Proverbs or
Parables.

These words contain another description of the wise Preacher's Work, that is,
To endeavor to set in order many Proverbs.

Two things need a little clearing.

First, What is meant by a Proverb.

Secondly, What it is to set Proverbs in order.

Proverbs, I suppose, either are to be taken literally and strictly; or,
secondly, more largely and figuratively. Literally, by Proverbs, are intended
any pithy, short, witty, or significant kind of Expression. Thus we have the
word used, Prove. 1.6. To understand a Proverb, and the interpretation; the
words of the wise, and their dark sayings. Proverbs, as strictly considered,
are witty, wise, dark, and short Sayings; and if we look upon some few of these
Preachers Proverbs, you shall find all this in them; as to instance Chap.
20.17. with verse. 30. and a multitude besides. But although this Preacher's way
and wisdom led him this way thus to declare his wisdom, and give forth himself;
yet we must take heed of tying all Preachers to this way, or in this sense to
speak, or give forth Proverbs; but to speak or set forth Proverbs in a more
large and general signification, that is, wise Preachers should give forth
wisdom and knowledge to the people, though not in the way or form of a Proverb
strictly considered. He ought to make the People, with himself, to understand
the Nature, Order, Sense, and right use of Divine-Things, Knowledge, or the
Word of God; and this is that the wise Preacher here intends or speaks of; and
this indeed is the Preacher's work and wisdom, to set forth the Proverbs of
Scripture in order, or to unvail or declare their true Scope, Use, and
Excellency.

The ninth Doctrine.
The observation we may hence learn, is, That every wise competent Preacher,
ought with all diligence endeavor to comprehend, and cause others to
comprehend the Wisdom, Sense, and Order of the Scripture. This is every
Gospel-Preacher's Trade and Business.

Two Acts or Particulars the Doctrine includes.

First, With Relation to the Preacher.

Secondly With reference to the Preacher's Charge or Flock.

First; In reference to himself: He is most diligently to design and endeavor
to understand and comprehend the Mind and Will of God contained in the Word.
This is, To set Proverbs, or God's dark Sayings or Truths in order as to
himself.

Secondly; In reference unto the People: His Duty, says this Doctrine, is to
help them to understand what he comprehends of the Proverbs of God, or meaning
of the Scripture; for as he neither is a Preacher for himself, much less
preaches to himself; no more ought he to know, understand, or comprehend the
Proverbs or Mysteries of Truth for himself only, but for the People as well as
for himself. That this is so, consider a few Scriptures, Nehem. 8.7, 8. you
shall find Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodijah,
Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Palaiah, and the Levites, caused the
people to understand the Law; and the people stood in their places: They read
in the Book of the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them
to understand the reading. Here we have a large account of the Work and Design
of wise Preachers, and good Ministers, it is to set Proverbs in order, or to
clear and make known the sense of Scripture to the people; and v. 13. it is
said, That the People rejoiced at this enjoyment.

But again, Solomon tells us, That the Wisdom of the prudent is to understand
his way, but the folly of fools is deceit, Prove. 14.8. Whence mark, A wise or
prudent Person, (such every Gospel-preacher ought to be) his work is to
understand his way; that is, his way of preaching, how to give the true sense
of God's Word to his People, that is, setting Proverbs in order; the contrary
of this was that God complained of in the false Prophets, or foolish Preachers
of Israel; saying, His Watchmen are blind; they are all ignorant, they are all
dumb Dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber: Yea, they
are greedy Dogs, which can never have enough, and they are Shepherds that
cannot understand, etc. Isa. 56.10, 11. Mark it well, They are foolish
Shepherds, or unwise Preachers, that cannot understand the Mind of the Lord,
and know not how to set his Parables and Proverbs in order; the like you have
Jer. 9.12. Who is the wise Man that may understand this? and who is he to whom
the mouth of the Lord has spoken that he may declare it? Take that of Prove.
22. where you have Solomon the wise Preacher both doing this Work, and teaching
wise Preachers also to do this work, when he says, Have I not written unto
thee excellent things in counsels and in knowledge, that I might make thee to
know the certainty of the words of truth, that thou might answer the words
of truth to those that send unto thee? verse. 20.21. also Chap. 10.31, 32. The
mouth of the just brings forth wisdom, and the lips of the righteous knows
what is acceptable. Take that also of Luke 1.1, 2, 3, 4. Forasmuch as many have
taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which are
most surely believed among us, even as they delivered them unto us, which from
the beginning were eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word: It seemed good to
me also, having had perfect understanding of things from the very first, to
write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou might know
the certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed. To name no
more, take Paul's charge and direction to Timothy, Till I come, give attendance
to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine; meditate on these things; give thy
self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15. I
should now give you the Reasons of the Point, I shall only name them at
present.

Reason 1.
First; Every wise Preacher should thus do, because this is no more than they
all profess to do; and what men profess to do, that lawfully may be done, that
they ought to do; therefore thus wise Preachers not only may, but must do.

Reason 2.
Secondly; This is that which wise and pious People warrantably promise
themselves will be done for them, by such as preach to them; and therefore
ought not to be denied unto them, nor can without sin be withheld from them.

Reason 3.
Thirdly; If this be not done, how shall the People know what they have to do?
how shall the People prepare themselves to duty, if duty be not made plain to
them, or the Parable set in order before them? If Doctrine be not clear,
Practice must be doubtful; as Paul expresses, If the Trumpet give an uncertain
sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battle? 1 Cor. 14 8.

Reason 4.
Fourthly; If Preachers do not make it their business to set Proverbs, or God's
Word, in order, or in due order; nothing is more certain than this, That they
will set them out of order: but let such that so do, think of that passage,
what the Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee,
and against thy two Friends; for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is
right, Job 42.7. Oh, what a dreadful thing is it for God to be angry with a
Preacher; view that of Numb. 10.1, 2. with that of 2 Samuel 6.7.

Reason 5.
Lastly; This is that which wise Preachers may do, if they will but spiritually
make it their business so to do, and therefore are without all excuse if this
they do not; for it is written, He makes his Ministers a flame of fire, Heb.
1.7.

But I told you, I should only name the Reasons and come to Application; in the
which I shall also be the briefer, because I have formerly had occasion, as you
may remember, to speak to the substance of this Doctrine; all I intend, I shall
comprize in a few serious words of Exhortation to all that are, or would be
esteemed wise and Gospel-Preachers.

Use of Exhortation.
Oh, let such remember, and never forget, it is their Duty and Business to set
God's Proverbs in order; that is, in God's, or Gospel Order, that he that runs
may read the Visions of God in the Scripture. Oh, let us not be like the
foolish Preachers which the Lord reproves by the Prophet, saying, Seameth it a
small thing to you, to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread down
with your foot the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk of the deep
waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet? And as for my flock, they
eat that which you have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye
have fouled with your feet. Therefore, behold, says the Lord, I will judge
you, Ezekiel. 34.18, 19, 20.

I beseech you, dear Brethren, let it be our Work and Business to do what the
Prophet was commanded to do, when the Lord answered and said, Write the Vision,
and make it plain upon Tables, that he that runs may read it, Habak. 2.2.
Oh, let it be our main business, not only to know that the Lord has Proverbs,
and that our Lord Jesus spoke nothing without a Parable, Mat. 13.34. that is,
little without a Parable: I say, This is not so much our business, as to
comprehend and understand how to set these Parables in order, in due order, in
their own order. Oh, this is necessary and becoming wise Preachers thus to do,
and not to set Proverbs out of order, into their own or other men's order,
laboring more in Preaching to keep close to their own or other men's sense and
order in opening the Scripture, than unto Christ's and the Scriptures order. It
matters not what Commentary, or Comment^ or, we decline or contradict, so we
harmonize the Scripture, and agree with the Original, Sense, and Scope thereof:
Let such as preach, and would preach wisely and approvedly, b^onfult the Sense
and Interpretation of Text, as well as Observation or Application of Text. For
how can the Observation be true or natural, or the Application forcible and
strong, if the Interpretation be wrong? Oh, ta^e heed of wronging Proverbs, by
knocking Proverbs, even God's Proverbs, out of order; and lie, and say not the
truth, when you say the Lord says it, or the Lord's Word teaches it; and the
Lord has not said it, neither does his Word reach it. Oh, think frequently of
that word, Behold, I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that use their
tongues, and say, The Lord says it, Jer. 23.31. Think it not wisdom or
excellency, to darken, vail, or lobscure the Scripture, or the Proverbs
thereof; but to unvail or enlighten the Scripture; that is, make its real Light
appear: lest by so doing, we not only contract to our selves our own, but the
sins of other men also, even the sin and right to the punishment of as many as
have received and believed our dreams for the Visions of the Lord. It Is more
than we can well bear, our own guilt, and the chastisements of our own sins and
errors: But O! how intolerable and heavy may it prove to us, to bear the guilt
or punishment of the many deceived and corrupted by us. The greatest of
Preachers and Writers, without conformity to this Doctrine, lie in greatest
danger, as being the greatest of Deceivers.

But I shall say no more to this Use or Doctrine, save only a closing word,
because I am speaking to the wise, and a word to the wise may suffice: and
truly such as are otherwise, it is not the many words will do any good, as
Solomon tells us; Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among wheat
with a pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him, Prove. 27.22.
Wherefore, my Brethren, let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus
minded; and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this
unto you, Philippians 3.15. And so I come to the next verse, or next words of
the Text; though I might offer another Observation from the number of Proverbs,
the wise Preacher set in order; it is many, or the All of the many Proverbs that
are in the Scripture.

We might note, Wise Preachers are fruitful Preachers, not barren, lean, or dry
Preachers, that can only interpret some one or other single Proverb; but can
set in order the many or manifold Proverbs in the Scripture; but I shall rather
proceed and hasten to a close.

As this Scripture is Prophetical, and looks toward the truly wise, or
transcendently wise Preacher, our Lord Jesus, that greater than Solomon, we
might note diverse things, but this I now shall want time for; you find in verse.
10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words; and that which was
written was upright, even words of truth.

In general, This Verse gives us account of what the Preacher sought, even
acceptable words; and this is the second thing he sought, as this verse
compared with the former acquaints us.

But more particularly, In the Verse we have two things.

First; An account of what the Preacher sought to find out, even acceptable
words.

Secondly; The excellency or property of those acceptable words, in these
words, and that which was written, was upright, even words of truth, or
according to truth; not only upright, but also words of truth.

To begin with the first of these; The Preacher sought to find out acceptable
words. This is every wise Preacher's Work, to seek how to find out acceptable
words, or how to make his words acceptable.

For the improvement of these words, one question is necessary to be resolved,
to wit, What acceptable words are, or such acceptable words are which Preachers
ought to seek out?

I Answer; First, Negatively, Not flattering words, or deceitful words, though
sometimes such words Preachers seek out, and the People account them
acceptable; as in that passage of the false Prophets, who knowing the affection
of the King to be for War, finds out acceptable, but deceitful words; who said,
with one consent, Go up, for the Lord shall deliver it into the hands of the
King, 1 Kings 22.6. But you find these were neither upright words, nor words of
truth, but of deceit and falsehood, as the consequent declared it; but the words
the wise Preacher sought to find out, as acceptable to the People, were
upright, even words of truth.

But secondly, Affirmatively; I say, Acceptable words, which wise Preachers
should or do seek to find out, are words meet to be accepted from him that
preaches, by them to whom he preaches; and so is every word of truth in the
general, though some words more especially; as Paul implies in that expression,
This is a saying worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
World to save sinners, of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Thirdly, Acceptable words, imply words which God accepts, and therefore should
be acceptable with the People; Though the People do not accept them, yet they
may be accepted of God. Such were Mieaiah's words to the King, when he said, I
saw all Israel scattered upon the Hills, as Sheep that have no Shepherd; and
the Lord said, These have no Master, let them return every man to his House in
peace, 1 Kings 22.17.

Fourthly, Acceptable words, imply sometimes such words as are not only words
of truth in themselves, and so acceptable to God, but words accepted with the
People, and so acceptable in all respects. Such were Philip's words to the
Eunuch, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou may, Acts 8.37. The
former of these cannot be wanting in an acceptable word, the latter may, and
yet the words be acceptable; as in that of Jeremiah, when he told the King of
Judah, Behold, Pharaohs Army which is come forth to help you, shall return to
Egypt into their own Land, and the Caldeans shall come again, and fight against
this City, and take it, and burn it with fire, Jer. 37.7, 8. But though these
words were acceptable, or truth in themselves, and so to the Lord, and should
have been so to them, as being profitable to them: Yet for all this they were
unacceptable to them, as is manifest verse. 15. Wherefore the Princes were wroth
with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in Prison.

This may suffice for the Answer of this great Question: What acceptable words
are? Let me now raise this Observation or Conclusion.

The tenth Doctrine.
That the wisdom and work of wise Preachers, is, and ought to be, to preach
acceptable words, or acceptably.

I shall the briefer pass through this Doctrine, because I have had occasion
already to speak to the main things in it contained. Wherefore for the proof of
what has been asserted, to wit, That every wise Preacher's wisdom and work, is
to preach acceptable words, or acceptably; Consider, This is Paul's charge, not
to Timothy only, but in him to all Preachers, to preach acceptable words, as
you have it in the following words of the Text, words of Truth: Hold fast the
form of sound words which thou have heard from me, 2 Timothy 1.13. So to Titus,
speaking what Preachers or Elders of Churches should be, he says, They should
be men able, by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince gainsayers, Tit.
1.9. so Chap. 2.1. Speak thou the thing which becomes sound Doctrine; and once
more you have it given in charge among other Directions, Sound speech that
cannot be condemned; that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed,
having no evil thing to say of you, verse. 8. And this Paul begs the Prayers of
Saints to God for him in this behalf, That he might not only Speak, or Preach,
but so Speak or Preach as he ought to do, Ephesians. 6.20. with Col. 4.4.

But may not some say; How does it appear all this while, that preaching sound
words, is preaching acceptable words?

However I shall grant, That to unsound hearts, unsound words are and may be
most acceptable, as we read where the People spoke to the Prophet, saying,
Prophecy not unto us right things; speak unto us smooth things, prophecy
deceits, Isa. 30.10. Yet sound Hearts, or gracious Hearers, they count no words
acceptably spoken, or worthy their acceptance, but sound and wholesome words;
as we read of the Church of Ephesus, that they hated the Deeds, or the Doctrine
of the Nicholaitans, which the Lord also hated, Rev. 2.6.

In the opening of this term, acceptable words, I told you it employed words of
truth; which, and which only, ought of honest and wise Hearers to be accepted.
Therefore to preach sound words, or words of Truth, is to preach acceptable
words; being such words which only should be preached, and are always worthy
of all men's acceptance. And doubtless, this among other things Paul also
intended in that phrase, to speak as he ought; that is, only and always Truth,
or the lively Oracles of God; not but that Preachers have other things to mind,
that their words may be acceptable words.

So, secondly; Seasonable words are, or ought to be accounted acceptable words:
Therefore Solomon, speaking of seasonable words, says, A word spoken in due
season, how good is it? or, how acceptable is it? Prove. 15.23. Now, a word may
be fitly said to be seasonable or seasonably spoken, either in reference to
God's account, or the peoples concernments. First, In reference to God's, when
God's Cause and Honor calls for our speaking, then to speak such words as may
most conduce to the Cause and Case in hand, is to speak acceptable or
seasonable words, such as wise Preachers ought to seek out, and speak out. Such
were Mordecai's words to Hester, when he declared to her the state of the Jews,
and charged her, That she should go in unto the King to make supplication to
him, and to make request before him for her People, Chap. 4.8. And when she
seems to be backward to entertain these words, verse. 10, 11. Mordecai doubles
former seasonable words, as becomes wise Preachers so to do, and tells her,
Think not that thou shall escape in the Kings House, more than all the Jews:
For if thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall their
enlargement arise from another place, but thou and thy Fathers House shall be
destroyed, verse. 13, 14. The like seasonable were the words of Elijah, both to
the King and to the People, when he told the King, I have not troubled Israel,
but thou and thy Fathers House, in that ye have forsaken the Commandments of
the Lord, and ye have followed. Baalim; and to the People, when he said, How
long halt ye between two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal,
then follow him, 1 Kings 18.18, 21. And such were Paul's words to the
Athenians, when he saw them so given to Idolatry, Acts 17.16, to the close of
that Chapter.

And by the way note, That oft-times God, in a wonderful manner, stirs-up the
Spirits of his Servants to be speaking such acceptable words as are timous and
most seasonable, in order to present work, as in the instances cited, with many
more may easily appear.

But secondly, Words may then be counted seasonable and acceptable, when most
suitable to, or suiting with the Peoples present Case, State, and Necessities.
The work of wise Preachers should be, to suit their words to such occasions,
when a People are secure, settled in sin and sinful ways; then awakening,
quickening, reproving words are most seasonable, and to God most acceptable when
spoken, and should be so to the People. Such were John's words to the sinful
Jews, when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his Baptism, he
said unto them, O generation of Vipers, who has warned you to fly from the
wrath to come? bring forth therefore fruit meet for repentance; and think not
to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father. When the Peoples case
is trouble and sorrow for sin, then comforting words are seasonable and
acceptable words. This the Lord himself teaches, saying, Speak ye comfortably
to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, Isa. 40.1, 2.
And in obedience hereunto, when Peter saw that the People were pricked at their
hearts, he said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name
of Jesus Christ, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; for the
promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are after off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call, Acts 2.38, 39. When the People are
ignorant of Truths necessary, or in some sense of necessity to be at present
known; Now it is wise Preachers work, to seek out seasonable and acceptable
words of information, for the removing the peoples ignorance. Thus Peter did in
that forecited Acts 2.14, 15. And thus did those wise ones Aquila and
Priscilla deal with Apollos, Acts 18.24, 25, 26.

To name no more Instances of this kind, When words may truly be seasonable and
acceptable, or both; I say, when we see the Peoples sin openly, and dangerous
to the insnaring and indangering of others, then it is most seasonable to step
in with reproving words. Thus Paul dealt with Peter, Gal. 2.12, 13, 14. And
with the same spirit we find him acting against Elimas the Sorcerer, when he
sought to turn away the Deputy from the Faith, Acts 13.9, 10, 11.

Thus much may suffice for the proving and opening the Point; let me now give
you two or three Reasons or Arguments why this must needs be a Truth.

Reason 1.
First; Because it is then only, Preachers can be said in preaching to preach,
or in doing the work of preaching to preach, when we preach acceptably, or
speak seasonable words. All other preaching is foolish preaching, or for the
present but lost preaching. But again;

Reason 2.
Secondly; Such Preachers and Preaching, are only acceptable to God, as such
only should be to wise Hearers, as the Lord seems to imply in that expression
of the Prophet, He that has a Dream, let him tell a Dream; and he that has my
Word, let him speak my Word faithfully. What is the Chaff to the Wheat? says
the Lord, Jer. 23.28.

Reason 3.
Lastly; Preachers ought to seek out acceptable words, because such preaching
will only answer our engagements and pretentions both to God and Man: Our
engagement, who preach, is like our Lord Christ, who said, I came from Heaven,
not to do my own Will, but the Will of him that sent me, John 6.38. And no
Preacher is so foolish or unwise a Preacher, as to pretend less than thus to
do; wherefore let as many as preach be so wise and honest to do what they
pretend to do, and as Paul says, Not to preach themselves, but Christ Jesus
the Lord; and themselves Servants for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5.

I proceed now to the Application, because I promised to be short.

Use of Reproof.
The first Use may be for a word of Reproof to as many Preachers that are not
so wise as to make this their work, to seek out acceptable seasonable words,
even sound words, or words of truth and uprightness. Oh, how many foolish,
careless, and unconscionable Preachers there are, that neither study the
Scriptures to find out sounds words, nor consult with God, or with the People,
to know what may be an acceptable word, or a word spoken in due season, either
in reference to what God is a doing, or the People are wanting in. These may
more aptly be styled foolish than wise Preachers, who more study humane than
divine Writ; and consult the mind of men, especially great men, rather than the
mind of God; and their own gain and interest, more than the Peoples profit.

All I shall further say to these is, As their sin is great against God and the
Souls of the People; even so, without repentance, and more wisdom, their
judgment will be heavy, and their damnation slumbers not. Let such think
seriously of that saying of Peter, But these, as natural bruit beasts, made to
be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things they understand not, and shall
utterly perish in their own corruption, 2 Pet. 2.12. But to be brief.

Secondly, For Exhortation.
Secondly, This shall serve for a word of Exhortation, and that to two sorts of
Persons.

First; To such as Preach.

Secondly; To such as Hear.

First; Let me exhort and provoke all you that are wise Gospel. Preachers, to
remember this word; Seek out acceptable words, even words of Truth; and let
that which is written be upright. Oh, suffer me to beseech you to seek out
seasonable words, both upon God's and his Peoples account. Oh, consider what
Generation-work God has in hand in your day, in the present day, and give it
your word, as Nehemiah did in his day, Chap. 2. verse. 3. In times of abounding
of iniquity, Lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, cry aloud, spare not, show the
people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sin, Isa. 58.1. And
take that encouraging word and charge you have given to the Prophet Jeremiah,
Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them all that I
command thee, and be not dismayed at their faces, Jer. 1.17. Oh, my Brethren,
be prevailed upon to make it your main business, next to the looking after your
own Vines, to look after acceptable words for the People. Oh, search out the
cause you know not, and see what your and Christ's Sheep want, and Preach words
seasonable, or in due season. Oh Beloved, be not knowers but doers of the Word,
not deceiving your own Souls: This will bring much honor to Christ, and you
will then so do your work, as to have joy, and not grief, in the great day of
Jesus Christ.

Secondly; Let me exhort you that are Hearers, to suffer a word of Exhortation,
not only from me, but from your Preachers also, which enjoy wise and painful
Preachers, that make it their business to seek out acceptable words for you.
Oh, esteem such highly for their work sake, and their work for Christ's sake.
Oh, slight not such words as cost them so dear, or so much, to find out for
your use. Oh, sin not against such words as are seasonable, and should be to
you acceptable. Suffer your Preachers to deal home and plainly with you; it is
their duty, and their love to Christ and you, make their work easy; take their
labor of love kindly, despise not, pervert not prophesyings of such as seek
out acceptable words; and whatever they speak is words of Truth, and of
uprightness. If necessity be laid upon them to seek out acceptable words, do
not think you are at liberty, whether you will receive or refuse them. Nay,
think of that dreadful word, Lo, when this comes to pass, then shall they know
that a Prophet has been among you, Ezekiel. 33.33. The great God that made
nothing in vain, has not made wise Preachers in vain, or that you should turn
a deaf ear, or a rebellious heart toward them. They must sift, hunt, and
search out acceptable words for you; and you ought to receive them with all
readiness of mind, and take heed that they lose not through you the things
which they have wrought. Oh believe it, your spiritual wise Preachers do bring
you acceptable words, meat in due season, and therefore let him that has ears,
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

And lastly; If Preachers must seek out acceptable words for the People, then
let their acceptable words be acceptably entertained of you: As Daniel said to
the King, so let me say to all you to whom this Truth shall come, Let my
Counsel be acceptable to you, and break off your sins by Righteousness, and
your iniquities by showing of mercy, Dan. 4.27. I mean, your sins against wise
Preachers, and their acceptable words from Jesus Christ.

Thus much for this Word and this Point. I proceed now from the Preacher's Work
to the Preacher's Commendation; And that which was written was upright, even
words of Truth.

The eleventh Doctrine.
Whence I might observe, That as wise Preachers are wary and painful Preachers,
and search and seek out acceptable and seasonable words for their People; so a
pious and deserving People will not be wanting to give, or afford them and
their preaching, due and deserved encouragement and commendation, as might
easily be made to appear.

But remembering what Solomon the Preacher has writ in this case, Prove. 27.2.
Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine
own lips.

I shall forbear to proceed any further, and shall now consider the words,
without relation to the Preacher, as they hint forth the commendation of
uprightness and truth, not only in the Preacher's Spirit and Work, but in every
Man's Spirit and Conversation.

The twelfth Doctrine.
And the Observation may be this, That a Spirit of Truth and uprightness, is an
excellent frame of Spirit in all that profess the Name of Christ.

I shall not need to spend time about the opening or discovering what Truth and
Uprightness is, because among such who enjoy wise Preachers, this is much
discoursed of amongst wise and gracious Persons; this is well known, if not
better known than practiced. Therefore I shall briefly give you the proofs of
the Point, and then come to improve it.

That this frame of Spirit and walking is lovely and excellent, take the
witness of a stranger in Israel concerning David, when he told him, Surely as
the Lord lives, thou have been upright, and thy going out, and thy coming in
with me in the Host, is good in my sight; for I have not found evil in thee,
since the day of thy coming unto me, to this day, 1 Samuel 29.6. Take also
David's own testimony, when he sings forth the excellency of his Spirit,
saying, I was also upright before him, and have kept my self from mine
iniquity, 2 Samuel 22.24. But setting aside Man's testimony to this Truth, take
the Lord's own testimony concerning Job; And the Lord said unto Satan, Have
thou considered my Servant Job? there is none like him in the earth, a perfect
and upright man, Chap. 1.8. The like honorable acknowledgement does our Lord
give of Nathaniel, saying, Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
guile, John 1.47. And Solomon tells us, Such as are upright in their way, are
the Lord's delight, or his delightful ones, Prove. 11.20.

But this may suffice for the proof of the Point, though manifold Texts might
have been produced for the further demonstrating this, had it been necessary.

Let me now give you some Arguments to clear this Observation, That truth and
uprightness in the Spirit, renders such Spirits excellent.

Argument 1.
First; Because this is the frame of God's Spirit or Being, therefore to be
like God in being, must needs render us excellent in being. That God is thus
in his Being, take that saying for it, Good and upright is the Lord, Psalm.
25.8. Also that of Isaiah, Oh, thou most upright, do weigh the path of the
Just, Isa. 26.7. Now to have our Spirits according to the frame of God's
Spirit, is the most excellent frame that can be imagined. But again;

Argument 2.
Secondly; This must needs be a most excellent frame, because the contrary
frame of Spirit is the most dishonorable and unlovely frame that can be. It Is
said of Satan, That he is transformed into an Angel of Light: This is the
emphasis or height of his iniquity, he is not upright, he is not as he seems to
be, he is really an Angel of darkness, and pretends to be an Angel of Light, 2
Cor. 11.14. Therefore when our Lord would set forth the vileness and
unworthiness of the Spirit of the Jews, he tells them, They are of their Father
the Devil, and the lusts of your Father you will do, John 8.44. And no Spirit
is so disowned and detested of God, as the Spirit of Hypocrisy; Woe unto
Hypocrites, Math. 23.27. read that place at your leisure. Therefore to be of
the contrary Spirit to Hypocrisy, must needs be excellent; that is, to be
upright in Spirit. But again;

Argument 3.
Thirdly; It Is that frame begun in us here, which will be our frame perfectly
in the state of Glory. Now to be in such a frame here, as we shall be in glory,
must needs be a glorious and excellent frame. When the Disciples saw Christ
transfigured, That his Face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white as
the Light, Mat. 17.2. Even so, how glorious are such Souls as are transfigured
into the Image of Christ, even this image of Truth, and uprightness of Spirit?
Such are the most excellent in their Generation. But again;

Argument 4.
Lastly; This can be no other than a Truth, which both Heaven and Earth bear
witness to; but that this is excellent, even truth and uprightness, in
whom-soever it be found, we have heard the testimony of Heaven and of the
Scripture; and if we enquire of all sorts of men under the Heavens, they will
all seal to this Truth, that Men and Women, of honest Spirits, are most
desirable and excellent Persons both to dwell with and converse with.

Therefore seeing this Doctrine knows no Adversaries as to the acknowledgment
thereof, I shall cease any further demonstration, and come to Application;
wherein I shall speak something by way of Information, something of
Exhortation, and then give some Motives.

Use of Information.
The first Use I shall make of this Point, is to present you with a word of
Information, and that is, Whence it comes to pass that the Preachers and People
of the Lord are no more valued and esteemed than they are this day? It Is,
because they have no more of this excellent Spirit in them, this Spirit of
Truth and of Uprightness. I do not say this is the only reason, or that there
is no other reason, but I say it again, amongst other Reasons, this is one
grand one: They say, Professors want Truth and Uprightness; talk of Heaven, and
of Love, and of Bounty and Patience, yet love the World, and pursue the World,
and keep the World as much as any; love few but themselves, and Men of their
own Principles, judging all that believe not as they believe, and practice as
they practice. They are as miserable and impatient, or forward upon every
slight occasion, as any other men. Therefore men are apt to think that all is
not true they say, and that they speak not as they think, but are deceitful,
mere words and shows. Oh my dear Friends! I wish that this were altogether
groundless, and that there were not too much truth or ground for this complaint.

But Sirs, take notice how the want of visibility and activity in this frame of
Spirit, causes our good commodity to be evil spoken of; therefore let it be
our wisdom and business, to take away occasion from them that seek occasion,
and take heed that we open not the mouths of the uncircumcised Philistines, to
rejoice or blaspheme. Let Professors know what they can, and talk what they
will, 'twil signify little, unless they walk also in this Spirit of Truth and
Uprightness.

Use of Exhortation.
But secondly, and especially, Let this be matter of Exhortation to us all,
even as many as fear the Lord, both Preachers and Hearers, to labor for, and
walk in a Spirit of Truth and Uprightness. This we have seen is a most
excellent choice frame of Spirit, in the esteem both of God and Man. Oh
therefore, labor to attain such a frame of Spirit; For naturally our Spirits
are otherwise in the frames of them; for what the Prophet once said, is still
truth, Every one is an hypocrite, and an evil doer, and every mouth speaks
folly or falsehood, Isa. 9.17. It Is Mortification of earthly Members, and
Sanctification of the Spirit, must make us Men or Women of this frame of
Spirit; for naturally we are born of another temper, and you who know what
Mortification is, know it is not easy work to mortify the deeds of the flesh;
but be it what it may be, yet be prevealed upon, in the fear of the Lord, to
set upon this duty, even to get our Spirits into this frame, even into this
good frame; and if it will cost us the plucking out of our right eyes, or
cutting off our right hands, yet subscribe to it.

And first, Let me freely tender this word of Exhortation to us that are
Preachers, and should be wise Preachers, seeking out acceptable words; and that
which by us is at any time preached and written upon the heart of the People,
should be upright, even words of truth. Let us be a living Word, as well as a
speaking Word; let our lips and our lives join together, and speak one thing,
even Holiness to Jehovah. Oh, let not us reprove sin in others, and allow or
indulge it in our selves. What is that but downright dissimulation? Oh, let us
not commend Patience, and be impatient; and Humility, and be Sons of Pride our
selves. This is not to walk with the foot of uprightness according to the
Gospel; This is not to be a wise, but an unwise Preacher, if not a proud
Pharisee, and a very Hypocrite. Wherefore, if a Preacher, be under such
temptations; as to pretend Christ, and preach Self; and to seek Christ, and
seek mostly Self; as to cry down all sin, and yet live in cried down sins; to
commend Grace and Virtue, and yet live short in Grace, and empty of Virtue;
placing thy excellency and piety in seeming so, and saying so, and in washing
the outside, neglecting the inside; make broad the Phylacteries, and enlarging
the borders of your Garments, that is, in using singular or peculiar
restraints, and modes of Gesture and Vesture, from other sober and pious
Persons. Oh, know it is not marring of our Beards or Locks, and having our
Cloaks long, and our Girdles strait, that can or will prove us wise Preachers,
or men of this excellent Spirit of Uprightness and Truth. Oh no! we may be
Fools and Hypocrites for all this; and therefore it nearly stands us upon to do
as that great Preacher and Apostle of the Gentiles did; Even to keep under (or
beat black and blew) our body, and bring it into subjection, lest (O mark it)
that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a
castaway, 1 Cor. 9.27. And answer all temptations to contrary-mindedness or
contrary-spiritedness to this Doctrine and frame of Spirit, as good Nehemiah
did, saying, Shall such a man as I flee? Who being as I am, would desist? Chap.
6.11. So let us. Who that is as I am, a Man, Ah more than a Man, a Christian;
yea more than a Christian, a Preacher to Christians, that would seek great
things for himself, under pretense of seeking great things for Christ? Oh, who
that were a Preacher as I, and preached down Covetousness, Idleness,
Earthly-mindedness in others, would live in these things himself? Oh no, my
Soul, I will not, I dare not, lest I be not found a wise, but an unwise
Preacher, and that which by me is written or preached, be not words of Truth
and Uprightness. And in the Close, whatever I may be to others, I be to my
self a castaway. O therefore, let Preachers especially receive and improve
this Exhortation, and see that our conversation be only as becomes the Gospel,
Phil. 1.27. And to close up this Head of Exhortation, Let as many as are and
would be found wise Preachers, be persuaded to think often and deeply of that
Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. Therefore, seeing we have this Ministry, as we have
received Mercy, we faint not, but have renounced the hidden things of
dishonesty; not walking in craftiness, nor handling the Word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every
man's Conscience in the sight of God.

Having thus tendered my Mite to Preachers, let me now be your Exhorter that are
Hearers; Men and Women fearing the Lord, Oh, let this be your frame of Spirit,
be like your Father Jacob, of a plain Spirit; who has his commendation in his
youth, that he was a plain man, Genesis 25.27. Oh, such let us that fear the Lord
be, let our inside be manifest by our outside; let our Words and our Works
agree; our professions both to God and Man, and our performances agree and
correspond together; let our Light and our Life agree, our public and private
walking agree; so showing forth, that we are Israelites indeed, in whom there
is no guile. Even the Epistle of Christ, written not with Ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God; not in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the
heart, as we have it 2 Cor. 3.3. Oh, it is living forth this Doctrine, will
speak us forth clearly to be Christians, or the Epistles of Christ, when we
have such frames of Spirit as are thoroughly seasoned with Uprightness and
Truth. Christians, look to your frame of Spirit; Hypocrites can look to their
Words and Speeches. Look you to your Hearts, good Words and good Works
Hypocrites have for God; it is Saints only have good Hearts for God. Oh, look
well to your Spirits, how the frame stands bent, whether for Truth and
Uprightness, or for Falsehood and Hypocrisy; and forget not that word Mal.
2.15. Take heed to your Spirits: Oh, dress your Spirits with Truth and
Uprightness, for the dress of the Soul goes further with God, than all the
dresses of the Body with men can do; as Peter informs us, where he advises
Women, Not to let their adorning be outward adorning, but let it be the hidden
man of the heart in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek
and quiet Spirit, which in the fight of God is of great price, 1 Pet. 3.3, 4.
Oh my Brethren, look mostly after the dress and adorning of your Spirits, for
God is not only a Spirit, but converseth most with the Spirits, and most
delights in the well ordering and composure of the Spirit. Wherefore seeing the
delight and sacrifice of God, is a broken and a contrite Spirit; give unto God
a plain Spirit of Truth and Uprightness, knowing that our God loves Uprightness.

And to quicken us to the acceptance of this Exhortation, let me give you and
my self a few Motives and Encouragements to induce us to be of this blessed
frame of Spirit.

Motive 1.
First; This is the ready way to have God manifest his love abundantly to us,
when he finds such a frame of Spirit in us, as we have it Psalm. 11.7. For the
righteous Lord loves righteousness, his Countenance does behold the upright;
that is, favorably, or as one that God loves and respects. Oh, with what
favorable respect did God behold upright Abraham, and upright Job, not only to
approve them, but also to reward them or privilege them; as we find in that
story of Abraham's offering up of Isaac; whereby was manifested his
uprightness, and God acknowledges it Genesis 22.12. And when God saw that Abraham
had such a frame of Spirit, God does not only give him his Isaac from the dead,
but tells him also, By my self have I sworn, says the Lord; for because thou
have done this thing, and have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son, thine
Isaac, that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply
thy Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand that is upon the Seashore;
and thy Seed shall possess the gate of his enemies, verse. 16, 17. And lest this
should not be enough, hear further what God promises him in the next Verse,
saying, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed; and all,
because he was upright, and in uprightness obeyed the Voice of God. Oh, see
what favor God bears to upright Men and Women, as in Job, and David, and Paul,
and others, might be largely manifested.

Secondly; Consider, this is an encouragement, or an heart-strengthening frame
of Spirit. Oh, how wonderfully will uprightness strengthen unto Truth;
according to that of Solomon, The Lord is strength to the upright, Prove. 10.29.
How did Daniel's uprightness give him humble and holy boldness in the day of
his trouble? as appears by his expression to the King, Then said Daniel unto
the King, Live for ever; my God has sent his Angels, and has shut the Lions
mouths that they have not hurt me; forasmuch as before him innocence was found
in me, and also before thee have I done no hurt, Dan. 6.21, 22. But on the
contrary, How does the want of uprightness cause hearttrembling and weakness?
as you may see in that story of Haman, Hest. 7.6, 7, 8. Oh therefore, get and
maintain such a frame of Spirit, as will cause and maintain in our Souls, a
truly wellgrounded confidence and boldness to look God and Man in the face
withal, without blushing in any season. But again;

Thirdly; To move us to make it our business to get and maintain our Spirits in
such a frame; consider, It Is a frame so desirable and lovely, that not only God
and all good men love this frame of heart, but all men, even the vilest of men,
approve of this in others, though they may be wanting in it themselves; and
this is the Apostles Argument, Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things, Phil. 4.8. But again;

Fourthly; Take this for encouragement toward pressing after such a frame of
Spirit: A deceitful Spirit is a vain Spirit, that goes about to deceive, or go
beyond God or Man, by frauds, by guiles, and deceits; nay, deceives himself;
it is like clothing our selves with Fig Leaves, or hiding our heads under the
Spider's Web; it is vain work, as the Lord tells us, Isa. 29.15, 16, 17. There
is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, and hid, that shall not be
known, Mat. 10.26. For the folly of fools is deceit, Prove. 14.8. For their
folly shall be made manifest to all men, 2 Timothy 3.9.

Fifthly, and lastly; To hasten, consider but the danger of a contrary frame of
Spirit to this Doctrine; and if former Motives cannot induce and move us to
this frame, yet peradventure this lower Motive of self-conveniency and
concernment may. Though God is a resolved enemy against all sorts of sin and
sinners, yet especially is he resolved to show himself most quick and severe
against persons of this frame. God has said it, and will make it good; Bloody
and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 53.23. Hypocrites,
of all men, must have their woes, and no portion of woe is sufficient for their
punishment short of the Devils, weeping and gnashing of teeth, which must be
the portion of Devils, and of Hypocrites, Mat. 24.51. compared with Chap. 25.41.

Take but an instance or two of this, of two great men in their day; the one a
King, and a choice one, but found playing the Hypocrite; the other a Bishop, or
an Apostle, but a bad one, and an Hypocrite. And behold how severe and quick
God is in punishing both the one and the other. The one is David, who playing
not only the Murderer and Adulterer, but the unworthy Hypocrite with Vriah;
pretending kindness, but contriving and effecting his death. How home does God
deal with this good man! now therefore the Sword shall never depart from thy
House: And if this were too light a punishment for secret but detestible
iniquity and hypocrisy, God adds, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee
out of thine own house. I will take thy Wives before thine eyes and give them
unto thy Neighbor, and he shall lie with thy Wives in the sight of the Sun;
The story you have at large in 2 Samuel 11 and 12 Chapters.

The other is Judas, one of the Twelve, that played the Hypocrite and Traitor
with his Master, as you all know; And what became of him? No sooner is his
hypocritical Act performed, but he departed and went and hanged himself. Being
a Preacher, could not preserve himself from bursting asunder, and all his
Bowels gushing forth. Preachers of all Persons are in most danger, if found
playing the Hypocrites, as God tells us Psalm. 50.21. These things have thou
done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest I were altogethor such a one as thy
self; but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thine eyes. Now
consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none
to deliver you, verse. 22.

Therefore to close up this Use, and this Point; Let it be the care and labor
of the Souls of all wise Preachers, to share in the Commendation given to
Christ by the Herodians, who said, Master, we know that thou art true, and
teach the way of God in truth; neither carest thou for any mar, for thou
regardest not the persons of men, Matthew. 22.16.

And to you Hearers, that are wise Hea^ers of the Word of God, take that
counsel of Zechariah, These are the things ye shall do; speak ye every man
truth to his Neighbor; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates;
and let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his Neighbor, and love
no false Oath: for all these are things that I hate, says the Lord, Zech.
8.16, 17.

Thus I have briefly finished this Point, and this Verse, because I am not
willing to detain you any longer.

I shall proceed to the next Verse and Words in the Text, Verse. 11. The words
of the wise are as Goads, and as Nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies,
which are given from one Shepherd.

This is the close of this Argument, and of the Text, and is the third
Particular asserted concerning all wise Preachers in the 9th Verse; we have his
pains and diligence mentioned in the 10th Verse; we have his Doctrine
vindicated; and in this Verse we have the Original and Advantage of such
Preachers and Preaching declared; The words of the wise are as Goads, and as
Nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd.

In which words generally we may observe two things.

First; The Nature and Property of wise Words, or the words of the Wise; They
are as Goads, and as Nails fastened by Masters of Assembles.

Secondly; We have presented to us the Rise and Original both of such Preachers
and Preachings, they are given from one Shepherd.

In the first we have also two Particulars; first, The Persons spoken of, only
the Wise, and the Words, or the Words of the Wise. Secondly, That where-unto
the Wise and their Words are resembled, and that is Goads and Nails.

In the second general we have also two Particulars; First, The Person or
Spring from whom wise Preachers and wise Words come; that is, from the one
Shepherd. Secondly; Note how they come from the one Shepherd voluntarily,
freely they are given from one Shepperd.

Let me briefly open or explicate the Text.

Explication.
First; What are those Goads and Nails to which the words of the Wise are
resembled? A Goad seems to be that usual and necessary Instrument which
Neat-herds or Drovers use about Oxen, at labor and in travel; such we read of
Judges 3.31. and in 1 Samuel 13.21. Nails are either such as were used to fasten
Tents, and the Tabernacle with, or other Habitations and things withal. Such
was that Nail Jael took to kill Sisera with, Judges 4.21. Masters of
Assemblies, or Masters of Companies, or Master-workmen in all Occupations. Some
are choicer Workmen than others; one Shepherd, or the great and chief Shepherd
is our Lord Jesus Christ.

The drift of these words, are only to imply the choiceness and usefulness of
Wise-Preachers and Wise-Preaching. They and their Work are as perfect, useful,
and necessary, as the choicest Artists and their Works: Such being as necessary
and useful in Spirituals, as any other things can be in Humane Cases and
Concernments.

From the words thus opened, diverse Observations or Doctrines might be raised;
as from the Persons and work here spoken of, The Words of the Wise, We may note;

Doctrine 1. That it it is not any Preacher or Preaching, but only the wise
Preacher and wise Preaching that is the Peoples Blessing and Advantage; such
only will prove like to Goads and Nails.

The second, From the Comparison; as Goads and Nails, which are not only good
and exact in their Nature and Kind, but needful and necessary in their Use;
from which I might note;

Doctrine 2. That wise Preachers and Preaching are very necessary and needful
for the People.

Thirdly, From the ground and occasion of Goads and Nails, which are not only
good, but also to quicken and fasten. From whence we may note;

Doctrine 3. That the best of Saints need quickening and settling, which are the
ends of Goads and Nails.

Fourthly, From the manner of attaining these, Note;

Doctrine 4. Either to be wise Preachers, and capable to give wise words, or to
be a People so privileged, as to have wise Preachers, and wise Words, is a
free gift of God; as it is said in the Text, which are given from one Shepherd.

Doctrine 5. Lastly; Note, All divine Ministries and Ministrations come from
the Lord Jesus, that one Shepherd, or that original Shepherd.

For brevity sake I shall only insist upon two Observations, into which I shall
draw the substance of all the rest.

The first is this, That wise and spiritual Preachers and their words are very
useful, and necessary for the spiritual service and benefit of God's People, as
the things mentioned, or the choicest things in Nature are or can be for
natural ends and purposes.

The second Conclusion is this, That all Divine Ministries and Ministrations,
spring from the alone Will and Wisdom of the Lord Jesus, that one Shepherd, and
are freely given for the advantage of his People, as we have it in the Text,
which are given from one Shepherd, (or from the one Shepherd.)

To begin with the first of these, to wit, That wise and spiritual Preachers
and their words are very useful, and necessary for the spiritual service and
benefit of God's People, as either the things mentioned, or the choicest things
in Nature are or can be for natural ends or purposes.

The truth of this Conclusion shines evidently in Scripture; as in that of
Solomon, A word fitly spoken, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver; As
an ear-ring of Gold, and an Ornament of fine Gold, so is a wise reprover upon
an obedient ear; or, as the cold of Snow in the time of Harvest, so is a
faithful Messenger to them that send him, for he refreshes the Soul of his
Masters, Prove. 25.11, 12, 13. Hear also what the Apostle says, How then shall
they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in
him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher?
Oh, see the great necessity and utility of a wise Preacher. But lest this were
not enough, he adds from the Prophet, as it is written, How beautiful are the
feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good
things? Romans 10.14, 15.

To trouble you with no more, take that Ephesians. 4. where we find the End and Use
of wise Preachers; it is for perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry, for edifying of the Body of Christ; that we henceforth be no more
Children cossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by
the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
verse. 12, 14. Two or three things in the Text clear this sufficiently.

Reason 1.

First; The Appellation put upon Preachers, (I mean, only wise and profitable
Preachers) they are styled wise; and that is, as honorable to the Preacher, so
also profitable to the People. For as that Peoples loss is great whose Preacher
is a Fool; even so that Peoples gain is much whose Preacher is wise, unless
themselves be in fault. This our Preacher gives us, saying, The labor of the
foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knows not how to go to the
City. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in the
morning. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, and thy
Princes eat in due season, for strength and not for drunkenness, Eccles. 10.15,
16, 17.

Secondly; They are styled Masters of Assemblies or Societies, which is a title
and place of honor. Now as it is Preachers honor thus to be accounted, so it
is the Peoples blessing and advantage have such Master-Workmen to be their
Servants, that can wisely and profitably serve them. That this is Preacher's
honor, (who are wise to be styled Master-Workmen in God's Israel, take a Text
or two: Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in
truth, Mat. 22.16. with 3 John 10. Therefore to have such Workmen, must needs
be the Peoples blessing and advantage.

Objection.

But some may Object and say, Is it not written, But the Anointing which ye
have received of him, abides in you; and ye need not that any man teach you,
but as the same Anointing teaches you of all things, 1 John 2.27?

Answer.

To which I Answer, first, The Scripture no where really contradicts it self
any where, but agrees with it self every where, and only so ought to be
expounded. Therefore this of John must not contradict those of Paul which have
been cited; which it would, if this were admitted to be the sense, That
sanctified or anointed Persons need not the teachings of any man, (no though
the wisest of men.) Which what can be more contrary to this; How shall they
hear without a Preacher? But let us take great heed of making Scripture so much
as seem to fight with it self.

But, secondly; to what has been Objected, I Answer, The word [need not] may
be taken comparatively, not absolutely or positively; not no need at all, but
not that need ye once had, and all have, that have not your anointing; such as
are partakers of the Unction of the Holy Ghost in a work of conversion, have
not afterward such need of any to teach them as once they had, because now
under the teachings of that Anointing.

Nor, thirdly, have they such a degree of need, as such have who are yet
without this Unction, and are unregenerate. They mostly need teaching who are
unregenerate, how much soever taught with other teaching.

But, fourthly; Consult the place, and the scope is not to put by the preaching
of wise, but of seducing Preachers, as appears verse. 26. These things have I
written unto you, concerning them which seduce you. Now though they had no need
of the teachings of such as would seduce them, yet it follows not that they had
no need of the teachings of such who would not seduce them.

Fifthly; Consider, that though those who lived under the Apostles teaching,
had not such need of teaching, as such who wanted that teaching, yet that they
wanted no teaching does not follow.

And, lastly; Take this for Answer, Such as have received the Anointing spoken
of, though they never enjoy afterward any humane or instrumental teaching, yet
shall be taught by the Anointing, provided it be God's providence, not the
improvidence which keeps other means of teaching from them. In extraordinary
cases, God can and will work without means. In ordinary cases God will work by
means, and ties us to attend upon him in the use of means; and thus, Faith
comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.17. And so much for
Answer of this Objection.

But now to return to the confirming of this Doctrine. As their Titles, so the
Acts assigned to them by the Text, and which ought to be performed of them, (or
at least designed by them) that is, to be as Goads and Nails in the sense given
upon the place: They are Leaders, Conductors, or Guides of the Flock of Jesus
Christ. And how unskilful are the choicest Sheep to lead and conduct themselves
aright in their way or journey? Any Pastor as well as their proper Pastor,
shall become their Pastor, if not conducted and guided by wise and skilful
Leaders or Overseers. Therefore says the Psalmist, He chose David also his
Servant, and took him from the Sheep-folds, from following the Ewes great with
young, he brought him to feed Jacob his People, and Israel his Inheritance: So
he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and guided them by the
skilfulness of his hands, Psalm. 78.70, 71, 72.

But again, Wise Preachers are not only necessary, because Master-Workmen, and
so Skilful, and Guides, and Leaders of the Flock, and so useful; But,

Thirdly, They are resembled to Goads and Nails: and how necessary are they?
the use of Goads are to excite, and quicken dull and slothful Cattle to go
forward; and of such use is the wise Preacher, both toward Sinners and Saints:
And thus practiced Holy Peter, who says, This second Epistle (beloved) I now
write unto you, in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance;
that ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the Holy
Prophets, and of the Commandments of us the Apostles of the Lord and Savior, 2
Pet. 3.1, 2. And the need the Church has of such Workmen, the Prophet Isaiah
tells us, saying, There is none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up
himself to take hold of thee, Isa. 64.7.

But, Lastly; To set out the worth and need of wise Preachers, and their words,
they are resembled to Nails; alluding, as I suppose, to the fixing, stablishing
Nails of the Tabernacle; which how glorious a contrivance and workmanship
soever in it self, yet would have been of little luster, small use, and short
continuance, if it had not enjoyed these Stakes, Pins, or Nails, to fix and
fasten it, as in a sure place, Isa. 22.23, 24, 25. In like manner, O how
mutable, unsettled, and like unfixed and wandering Meteors would the World and
the People of God be, were they without these sure hold-fasts, these divine
Nails and Pins, as witnesses Moses, where he says, For I know that after my
death ye will utterly corrupt your selves, and turn aside from the way which I
have commanded you, Deuteronomy. 31.29. Which Prophesy was fulfilled, Judges 2.10, 11.

But this may suffice to confirm and clear this Doctrine, That wise and
Spiritual-Preachers, and their words, are very useful and necessary for the
spiritual benefit and service of God's People; as the things mentioned, or the
choicest things in Nature can be for natural use or service. Let me now come to
the Application hereof.

The first Use is of Information.
The first Use shall be for Information: If wise Preachers, and their words, be
such choice blessings to that People which enjoy them; then how mistaken are
such as think otherwise of them, as burdensome and unprofitable persons, such
as there is little or no need of; and they can live well enough without knowing
so much as others, or that which others can tell them, and have Grace and Light
within, and need not such to guide them, and are wise enough to know the things
of their own concernment, and therefore need not others to teach them. All that
I shall say to these is, what the Lord said by Moses; O that they were wise,
that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end, Deuteronomy.
32.29. To which I add, Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight, Isa. 5.21.

And, Lastly; Let these hear the Word of the Lord; How do you say we are wise,
and the Law of the Lord is with us. Lo, certainly in vain made he it; the Pen
of the Scribes is in vain, the wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and
taken; Lo, they have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them,
Jer. 8.8, 9.

Exhortation.
But, Secondly; This Doctrine affords us a double word of Exhortation. First,
To such as are or ought to be wise Preachers.

First; As Goads, and as Nails, and as Masters of Assembles: Let your Light so
shine before men, that they may see your good Works, (as well as hear your good
Words). Thus Paul did, saying, Be ye followers of us, as we are of Christ. For
we have given you an Example, that so doing you should feed the Flock, 1 Cor.
11.1. and Acts 20. O, let us that preach to others, preach to our selves, to be
like what we are resembled to, even Goads, and Nails, and Masters of
Assemblies, (though under that great Shepherd the Lord Jesus) as Peter tells
us, as not being Lords, but skilful Master-workmen, quickening and exciting the
Flock to love and good Works. And for this end take we care of two things.

First; Be shining Examples in the practice of whatever light of Doctrine we
hold forth to others; Practice in our selves is best preaching unto others.

But, Secondly; Since we are resembled to such useful necessary things, let us,
as Leaders of the Flock, both know and take care of the state of the Flock,
quickening and provoking such as are backward, dull, and wanting, both by
encouragement and reprehension, as the Peoples case requires; imitating Holy
Peter, who resolved, so long as he was in this Tabernacle, to stir the People
up, by putting them in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.13. That so the state of Jerusalem
may be a quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, nor one
of the Stakes thereof ever be removed, neither any of the Cords thereof be
broken, Isa. 30.20.

Exhortation 2.
But, Secondly; Let me now offer a word of Exhortation to you that are Hearers,
which is: If wise Preachers should be like goads, and nails, and masters of
Assemblies; then let me persuade you to suffer them so to be unto you, suffer
them to oversee your state, and to deal wisely, and faithfully with you,
quickening, and exciting you, rebuking, and reproving you, when your Condition
calls for it, and let them stablish, strengthen, settle you, according to their
Duty, as Joshua, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Paul, and other Master-workmen did, as you
may read, Josh. 23. with Ezra 10. and Nehemiah 5. with Acts 20. And consider,
although this is the Preachers Duty thus to do, yet is this more than many
Hearers and Church Members can bear, either to be observed, rebuked, quickened,
or fixed in their places, to their work and duty: But are rather like those
Psalm 2. who say, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast their cords from
us; or like those that said, Our tongues are our own, who shall control us?
Psalm. 12. And how then can a Preacher, how wise, how diligent, how zealous, how
faithful, how loving, how watchful soever, do his Duty, to be as goads and as
nails, when the People cannot submit to him, but are like those the Lord
complains of, saying, Let no man strive, or reprove another; for this people
are as they that strive with the Priest, Hos. 4.4. O therefore let me exhort
you, that are wise Hearers, and enjoy wise Preachers, accept of the Counsel
given, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves: For they
watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you, Heb. 13.17. But
again,

Lastly; If wise Preachers be such great Blessings, such useful, necessary
enjoyments (even almost of necessity to be enjoyed) then all you that enjoy
such Blessings, bless God abundantly for them, and be a blessing to them, by
accepting them, and their Labors, by obeying, and submitting to them, and
their Doctrine. Be enlightened by their enlightening words, and quickened by
their quickening words, and fixed by their fixing, stablishing words, and
Arguments. Not being wavering-minded ones, carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, or cunning craftiness of men, Heb. 13.9. Ephesians. 4 4. But suffer your
Preachers to say, as Job did, When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and
when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me: I was eyes to the blind, and feet
was I to the lame; I was a Father to the poor, and the Cause which I knew not,
I searched out. I brake the Jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his
teeth, Job 29.11, 15, 16, 17. and so much for this Doctrine.

One thing more I shall speak to, and so conclude the Text, which is this;

The Fourteenth Doctrine.
That all Ministries and Ministrations spring from the alone will, and wisdom
of the Lord Jesus, that one Shepherd, and are freely given for the advantage of
his people; As we have it in the Text, Which are given from one Shephard.

Take for the proof hereof these Testimonies, Wisdom has builded her house,
she has hewed out her seven Pillars; she has killed her beasts, she has
mingled her wine, she has also furnished her Table, she has sent forth her
Maidens, etc. Prove. 9.1, 2, 3. But again hear what John says, All things were
made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made, John 1.3.
and Paul tells us, Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom
be glory for ever, Amen, Romans 11.36. And again he tells us, God has set some
in the Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that
are Miracles, then Gifts in Healing, helps in Government, diversity in Tongues,
1 Cor. 14.28. This may suffice for the proof of this point, That all Ministers,
Ministries, Ministrations which are divine and evangelical, must and do come
from the alone good will and wisdom of the Lord Jesus, and are freely given
for the good of his People.

But for the better opening of this Doctrine, let me explain these few things,
(1.) What I mean by Ministers, Ministries, and Ministrations. (2.) How they
spring from the alone good will and wisdom of the Lord Jesus. (3.) In what
sense I intend they are freely given. (4.) and lastly, why I say freely given,
for the good of his Church and People.

First, Let me speak to the first; By Ministers, I mean all, and only all such
persons, as are in the Church of Christ, admitted into Ministry, or Office in
the Church; and so are disterenced, and distinguished from the Memoral part
thereof, or such who are only Members therein: I speak not here of Ministers,
or Officers Civil, or belonging to the Commonwealth, nor of Antichristian, or
National Ministers; but only of such as are, or pretend to be Christ's
Ministers: I say all these must spring from him, Whom God has made both Lord
and Christ, and holds the seven stars in his right hand, Act. 2.36. with
Revel. 2.1. By Ministries, I mean not Officers but Offices, or those
Institutions and Appointments for making of Ministers.

Secondly, These also spring from the Headship, Authority, Will, and Wisdom of
the Lord Jesus only. It is not allowable in any Kingdom, Free State, or
Commonwealth, that any but the Head and Supreme Power thereof, should assume
the appointing or making Offices or Ministries therein. Even so none save the
Lord Jesus is allowed to institute and appoint what Offices and Ministries
shall be in the Church, that is, in his Church and Kingdom. For although the
Father has given all Authority and Power to the Son, to appoint Ministries for
his Church, yet has not the Son given or committed any such power, as to
institute or appoint any Office or Ministry in the Church to any sort of
Persons under the Sun; but has written, Thou shall not make, Exodus 20. And
this was the great sin of Jeroboam, that he made Priests, 1 Kings 12.31.

But, Thirdly; Let me open what I mean or intend by a Ministration, or by
Ministrations; to wit, such Acts or Works as Persons made Officers over the
Church of God are to perform, in, and for the Church of God. Now, I say, that
as none can appoint Christ a Minister, or determine by what Ministry he shall
be served but himself, no more can or ought any but the Lord from Heaven,
heavenly to appoint what Work or Ministration these shall perform to Christ,
but the true Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end of all things, Rev. 22.13.
But as all Ministries come from him, even so from him must proceed all
Gospel-Ministration or Performances. But again, when I say in the Doctrine,
that they spring from the alone good Will and Wisdom of the Lord Jesus, I
intend not to exclude God considered as the Father, who is God over all,
blessed for ever-more; but only I would exclude all the Children of men from
having any part or portion in the begetting or giving being to any Gospel
Ministry or Ministration: This under the Father proceeds from the Lord Jesus
Christ, who when he ascended up on high, gave Gifts unto Men for the Work of
the Ministry, Ephesians. 4. 'Twas good Will, none could have constrained him so to
have done; and 'twas his own Wisdom, without the wisdom of the flesh, contrived
and concluded the mode and manner of his own Service, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. with
Acts the first, abundantly declare. And further, when I say Ministers,
Ministries, and Ministrations are freely given, I intend, that as the Church
had never been purchased by Christ, but that he freely gave himself for it; so
no more had the Church ever attained, or enjoyed, any Ministry, or Institution,
and Appointment about Gospel Ministers, and Gospel-Ministrations, but only
through the good Will and good Pleasure of him that dwelt in the Bush, (for
indeed all Institutions spring only from the Will and Pleasure of the
Institutor) as not being moral, but instituted Beeings. Further, I mean, no man
can come to be one of Christ's Ministers, but by the free will of Christ. He
can neither attain Grace or Gifts to qualify and fit him, nor choice into any
Ministry under Christ, but by the free will and good-pleasure of Christ, as
Paul acknowledges, saying, Whereof I was made a Minister, according to the
Gift of the Grace of God given unto me by the effectual working of his power,
Ephesians. 3.7, 8. And as to Choice, Solomon tells us, The Lot is cast into the
Lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord, Prove. 16.33. But
further, I mean by this Expression freely of the Lord, that when such a People
attain such a Ministry, and such a Minister such a Congregation, this is, or
ought to be, of the Lord.

And, Lastly; When I tie up all Ministries, Ministrations, or Ministers, only
to the Church and People of God, as given and provided for them; I mean,
exclusively. They are neither instituted nor appointed for the use and service
of the World, but of the Church and Elect of God; further then accidentally,
and by way of redundancy, as Paul tells us, in 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. I say further,
then accidentally: It Is Childrens Bread, and ought not to be given to Dogs,
Mat. 15.26. Thus much for Explication.

Let me now confirm this by Argument or Reason; to wit, that all Ministers,
Ministries, and Ministrations, meet to be owned for Christ's, or Evangelical,
do all spring from the alone Will and Authority of the Lord Jesus, and are
freely given for the service of himself and People.

Reason 1.
First; This must needs be thus, because it is said of Christ, That God has
highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name; That at the
Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth,
and things under the Earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. But this
could not be affirmed of Christ, if he had not this Privilege and Prerogative,
which Princes on Earth are not denied, even to give a being to his own
Ministers and their Ministrations. That this Privilege earthly Powers have
assumed and been allowed; witness Pharaoh, Genesis 41.38, 39, 40, 41. The like we
read done by Solomon, 1 Kings 2.35. Thus did Ahasuerus, Hester, 10.2, 3. And
the like did Darius, Dan. 6.1, 2. with many others that might be produced. And
shall not the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, be allowed the same privilege
which other subordinate and inferior Princes are allowed, even to institute,
nominate, and appoint his own Servants, or Ministers, and their Ministrations?
Yes doubtless, for as the Text alleged tells us, He is exalted to a Name above
every Name; and David speaking of the Lord Christ, tells us, This must be his
privilege, That God the Father will make him his first born higher than the
Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. Therefore this Prerogative must needs be
allowed him.

Reason 2.
Secondly; I conclude, this must be the Prerogative of Christ, to give the Rise
and Being to his own Ministers, and their Ministrations, because none of the
Children of men are wise enough for so great and glorious an undertaking; Paul
speaking but of the accomplishment of the Work of one of Christ's Ministers,
says, and who is sufficient for these things? Then surely, much less
sufficient to institute a Frame and Constitution for Ministers and
Ministrations, which requires a greater capacity or sufficiency then the
former; wherefore John tells us, No man in Heaven, nor in Earth, neither under
the Earth, was able to open this Book, neither to look thereon, Rev. 5.3, 4.
Wherefore this concern must be let alone to him, to whom of right it does
appertain, even to the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, our Lord Jesus, for he only
is worthy and capable thereof, as we read verse. 5. compared with verse. 9. But
to proceed.

Reason 3.
Thirdly; This must needs be the peculiar Prerogative of Christ, to appoint his
own Ministers, and Worship, or Service, because it is his own; it is for himself,
it is for his own Church and Kingdom; and who shall appoint him Servants, or
impose Servants and Services upon him? It stands not with his honor or
faithfulness to admit it. But again;

Reason 4.
Lastly; Ministries and Ministrations Spiritual, Ecclesiastical, appertaining
to the Kingdom of Christ, must spring from the Free Will and Royal-Pleasure of
the Lord Christ; because that as it stands not with his Honor, Greatness,
Wisdom, and Goodness to commit this concern into the hands of Angels or Men,
being below true fitness or capacity for the work; so neither can any created
Power snatch Authority, or exercise Power of imposing Ministers and
Ministrations upon him against his Royal Will and Pleasure; and if they but
attempt to do it, let them look to it, for he will one day dash them in pieces
like a Potters Vessel, Ps. 2. And however the Sons of men may attempt to
incroach this Power and Privilege of the Lord Jesus into their hands; yet let
me say to these as the Prophet in a like case did, What is the Chaff to the
Wheat, says the Lord? Jer. 23.28. Even so, what is the Will or Power of Man,
to the Will and Power of the Lord Jesus, that he should oppose him, or impose
upon him? It Is truth, Man may impose upon the Son of Man; but who can impose
upon the Son of God? Sampson and Peter were both imposed upon, and carried
whither they would not; but none can impose any thing upon Christ against his
will, for he will, and can, refuse to drink such Gall and Vinegar, however they
be that offer it to him. Therefore it remains most clear and visible from all
that has been offered, That this is the alone Glory and Prerogative of the
Lord Jesus, to be the Spring and Fountaneous cause of all Ministries,
Ministers, and Ministrations belonging to his own Church, upon whom he freely
bestowed them.

Thus much for the confirming and clearing of the Doctrine; I come now to the
Application of this great Point.

Use of Information.
First; This serves for Information in two or three Particulars.

First, It informs us how much such are mistaken, that conceive and affirm that
it is left free and arbitrary to States and Princes to judge and conclude, what
Ministry and Ministration the People of God should enjoy in their Dominions;
whereas in truth it nothing at all appertains to them, but only to the Lord
Jesus to appoint and determine what kind of Ministers and Ministrations his
People shall fall under; as the Arguments before alleged do manifest. Men
have liberty and freedom to judge and determine for themselves, but no power to
impose or determine for others; as Paul says, Who art thou, O man, that
judge another Man's Servant? to his own Master he stands or falls; yea,
he shall be holden up; for God is able to make him to stand, Romans 14.4. But
again, to proceed;

Secondly, This informs us how far that assertion is from being a
Scripture-Truth, which maintains, That Ministries and Ministrations depend upon
the Christian Magistrate for confirmation; whereas indeed it depends upon the
good will and pleasure of none of the Sons of Men, but only upon the Son of
God, who is Lord of all things. I suppose in this case, I may say with truth,
what Korah and his Accomplices said with falsehood, Ye take too much upon you,
who-ever you are that thus affirm and practice, Numb. 16.3.

Thirdly, This acquaints us, that such Ministers, and Ministries, and
Ministrations, that spring not from the Will, Wisdom, and Authority of the Lord
Jesus, are none of his Ministers, Ministries, or Ministrations, but Man's,
either their own or other men's creation or creating; Let them be dignified or
distinguished by what Names or Titles soever, even from the Pope to the
Parator: and if such will not be called Antichristian Ministers, yet must they
suffer me to call them Man's Minister^, and let all such Ministers of Man, and
of the Will of Man, hear their doom; Mine hand shall be upon the Prophets that
see vanity and divine lies; they shall not be in the Assembly of my People,
neither shall they be written in the House of Israel, neither shall they enter
into the Land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am the Lord God, Zech. 13.9.
Further this informs us, That all such Ministrations as spring not from the
Lord Jesus, neither are instituted by him, nor found in the Writings of the New
Testament, are none of Christ's Ordinances, but men's sinful inventions and
superstition, concerning which our Lord long time since gave his Judgment,
saying, But in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the Commandments
of men, Mat. 15.9.

Fourthly, and Lastly; This acquaints us, That the Innovation, or bringing into
the Church of God such Ministers and Ministrations as our Lord Jesus Christ
never instituted, neither spring from, nor depend upon him, is no small, but a
magnified Transgression. If it be Treason against a King for any in his
Dominion to introduce Offices, Officers, Laws and Ordinances, without his
consent. O! what high Treason is it against our Sovereign Lord King Jesus, the
King, or Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. I say, What Treason is it
for any man, or number of men, to make and appoint Ministers and Ordinances in
his Church and Kingdom without him! Let all such Traitors against the Lord
Jesus think seriously on two or three Texts of Scripture I shall commend unto
them; one is that of Isaiah, Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people
draw near me with their mouths, and with their lips do honor me, but have
removed their hearts far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the
precepts of men: Therefore behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous work
amongst this people, even a mavelous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of
their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shall
be hid, Chap. 29.13, 14. Again, think on that passage of Ezekiel; And he said
to me, Son of man, the place of my Throne, and the place of the soles of my
feet, I will dwell in the midst of the Children of Israel for ever, and my holy
Name shall the Children of Israel no more defile, neither they, nor their Kings
in their high places; in their setting of their Thresholds by my Thresholds,
and their Posts by my Posts, and the Wall between me and them, they have even
defiled my holy Name by their abominations they have committed; wherefore I
have consumed them in my anger, Chap. 43.7, 8. So much for this first Use, or
for Information.

The second Use is Vindication or Justification.
A second Use of this Point may be for Vindication or Justification of all such
Gospel Ministers and Ministrations as proceed from the Will and Authority of
our Lord Jesus Christ, manifest by his Word to be Divine and Warrantable,
notwithstanding they are unapproved by humane Authority, (nay though they
should be by them forbidden); my Reason is this; If such Ministries, Ministers,
and Ministrations, be given and allowed by the Lord Jesus, whom alone God the
Father has entrusted with these Affairs; then they have Allowance and
Approbation from him, whose Allowance and Approbation is only essential and
sufficient for their Encouragement and Vindication; and it very little matters,
as to their Justification, whether such persons which are unconcerned in this
Affair, do approve or disapprove, while the Lord, though not man, has approved
them. This the Lord told Ezekiel, Chap. 2. And he said unto me, Son of man, I
send thee to the Children of Israel, to a rebellious Nation, that has rebelled
against me; and their Fathers have transgressed against me unto this very day;
For they are impudent Children, and stiff-hearted; I do send thee unto them,
and thou shall speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear, Verse. 2, 3, with 5, 7.

To the Vindication of a Minister in his Work, it little matters whether men of
what rank or degree soever they be, do allow, permit, or discourage him, whilst
his Lord and Master has but sent and commissionated him, he need not much be
troubled with the prohibitions and oppositions of his fellow Servants: Nay, if
he will not be rebellious like them, he must go on his Errand, and neither fear
them, or be prohibited by them, but remember what is further added in that
passage of Ezekiel, But thou, Son of Man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not
thou rebellious, like that rebellious house, open thy mouth, and eat that I
give thee, verse. 8. And therefore Christ's Gospel Ministers may warrantably
answer any that inquire, by what Authority do you thus Administer? Be it known
unto you, that by the alone Name and Authority of the Lord Jesus, we thus
administer; and if any of their Mothers Children should be angry with them, and
threaten them with their thorney Arguments of persecution and affliction, they
may, as others have done before them, say, O Nebuchadnezzar, We are not careful
to answer thee in this matter, Dan. 3.16. with Acts 4.

Query.

But some may say, How shall a State or People know who are such Ministers, and
what are such Ministrations as are truly Christ's, and arise from him, minister
to him, and depend upon him?

Answer.

I Answer, By doing that which God enjoined all the Kings of Israel to do, in
Deuteronomy. 17. And it shall be, when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that
he shall write him a Copy of the Law in a Book, out of that which is before the
Priests, the Levites; And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all
the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all
the words of this Law, and these Statutes, to do them, verse. 18, 19. By thus
doing, by Reading, and Learning what God has written in his Book of the
Scriptures may they come to know, who are the true Spiritual Gospel Ministers
of the Lord Jesus. Thus did that great Reformer Nehemiah, when he would know
who were the Lord's true Priests and Ministers; He searched into the Register,
and such of the Priests as could not produce and show their Genealogy, he put,
as polluted, from the Priesthood, Chap. 7.64, 65.

Therefore if any profess themselves Ministers of the Lord Jesus, and you would
know whether they be Christ's, or Antichrist's Ministers; ask for their
Genealogy, and let them show their Line from Judah, not from Levi; I mean, from
Christ, and not from Men, whether Pope or Presbyter; for our Lord took care of
this Concern, when he spent forty days with his Disciples in settling the
Things of his Kingdom, Acts 1.3. And before he ascended upon High, he gave
Gifts unto Men for the Work of the Ministry; some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, some Teachers, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. But we read not of
any Pope, or Vicar General; no Cardinals, Archbishops, Lord-Bishops, Friars,
Monks, Deans, Doctors, Batchellors, Parsons, Curates, or the residue of these
Locusts; these never came into the World by Christ's Charter, or Deed of Gift,
made over to the Church before his Ascension. No, no, these came in the back
way, through the opening of the bottomless Pit, Rev. 9.1, 2, 3. That wisdom of
the Father, even our Lord Jesus, who builed his House, killed his Fatlings,
also provided his own Maidens, or Virgin-Servants, which are but few, yet not
too few to do all his Work. As his House stands upon seven Pillars, even so he
provided but seven sorts of Ministers, or Ministries, besides the Widows,
those helps to Government, as the New Testament testifies: and an Old Testament
Inistitution, can give no being to a New Testament Ministration; and in all
the Records of Christ's Acts and Institutions, we read not of any other
Ministry ordained for the Church than the Ministry of Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, which three were extraordinary and temporary, and are ceased, and
there remains only now to be enjoyed the Ministry of Pastor, Teacher, Elder,
and Deacon; with the forenamed helps to Government, as sufficient to all Ends
and Purposes in Christ's Kingdom; and of these we read Romans 12. Having then
Gifts, differing according to the Grace given to us, whether Prophecy, let us
prophecy according to the proportion of Faith or Ministry. Let us wait on our
Ministry; he that teaches, on Teaching; he that exhorts, on Exhortation; he
that gives, let him do it with simplicity; he that rules, with diligence,
Verse. 6, 7, 8. Now such who have neither Name nor Nature of these Ministries,
can be none of Christ's, but Man's, or Antichrist's.

But again, ask all such who pretend to be Ministers of Christ, by what Door or
Way they came into the Ministry. For they, who ever they be, that come not in
by Christ's Door into his Sheepfold, are Thieves and Robbers, John 10.1. Now
Christ's way for men to become his Ministers, is by, first, joining and
accompanying themselves with the Church or Congregation, whose Ministers they
are to be; as appears by Acts 1.21. where we read Peter tells the Church, That
of these men that have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went
in and out among us, beginning from the Baptism of John, unto the same day that
he was taken up from among us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of
his Resurrection, Verse. 22. And thus they chose Ministers, Acts 6. according to
Apostolical Direction, who said, Wherefore Brethren, look you out from among
your selves seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost, and Wisdom,
whom we may appoint to this business, verse. 4.

Again, ask those who profess themselves Christ's Ministers, Who put them into
their Ministry, the Church, or any particular sort of men distinct from the
Congregation, whose Ministers they are? For none but the Church (I mean, a
particular Church) can make a Man a Minister of any of Christ's particular
Churches, or Golden Candlesticks; It was the Church, not the Apostles, chose,
accepted, and admitted those into the Office of Deaconship, which we read of
Act. 6.5, 6. And they chose Steven, a man full of Faith, and of the Holy Ghost,
and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenos, and Nicolas a
Proselyte of Antioch, whom they set before the Apostles. And if the Churches of
Christ should not have this power, to give the Being and Ordination to their
own Servants and Ministers, without dependence on others, then should the power
and privileges of Christ's Churches, be less than of civil Corporations, or
private Families, which were absurd to imagine. Not to grant this to every
individual and particular Church and Congregation, were to maintain, That
Christ's Churches are in Bondage, and not Free States, or Politic Bodies,
which were derogatory both to Christ and to his Church.

Further, either the Church, or persons less than the Church, must make
Ministers; but the Text tells us, The lesser must be blessed of the greater.
Therefore every Church of Christ, and not any distinct sort of Persons
therefrom must make Ministers for themselves. Heb. 7.7. we read, And without
all contradiction, the less is blessed of the greater, yea, and subjected to
the greater, even every Gospel-Minister to his Congregation, who may not only,
when occasion requires, say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry thou have
received of the Lord, to fulfill it, Col. 4.17. But likewise if Archippus will
not here reform, and obey them; as they gave him admittance into their
Fellowship, and into his Ministry, they also may take from him both the one and
the other; and let him be unto them as an Heathen and a Publican, Mat. 18.17.

Again, ask these what Ministers of Christ they are? Apostles, Evangelists, and
extraordinary Prophets they cannot be, who-ever they be, for they ceased with
Foundation-work, and Days; and as they were raised up, and filled with Gifts
and Grace, suiting such who were to lay the Foundation of Faith,
Church-Worship, Ministry and Ministrations, according to commission from
Christ, Mat. 28.19, 20. So they were to be but twelve in number, as Acts 1.
with Rev. 21. where it is said, And the Wall of the City had twelve
Foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, Verse.
14. The last Vision John saw, and the most glorious City that upon Earth the
Saints shall ever see, will have but twelve Apostles names in the Foundation
thereof; wherefore try them that say they are Apostles, and they will be found
liars, Rev. 2.2. And for Evangelists to assist Apostles in writing Scripture,
and such like Services, there being now no Apostles to assist, or Scripture to
write or fill up, there is no need of these, as no way to attain these, for all
these extraordinary Officers came not into the Church by the Door or Way that
ordinary Ministers or Officers do, but by a more immediate way from Heaven; as
Paul witnesses, Gal. 1.1. Paul an Apostle, not by man, nor of man, but by
Jesus Christ, and God the Father who raised him from the dead. And for
extraordinary Prophets, as we have none, so all that are acquainted with the
Scripture, know they were immediately made Prophets by the Lord: All therefore
that say they are Christ's Gospel Ministers, must profess or acknowledge
themselves to be either Pastors, or Teachers, or Elders, or Deacons and
Deaconnesses.

Now he that is a Pastor, cannot at the same time be a Teacher, that is, an
official Teacher, whose Work and Office is distinct, as well as his name from
the Pastor, and the Elder or Ruler is distinct in Name and Work from both the
former, and the Deacon from all the rest, as the formentioned Scriptures
declare.

Now if they have neither Name, nor Gifts of Christ's Ministers, then can they
be none of Christ's but another sort of Ministers: I do not say that a bare
assuming, or owning a Man's self to be a Pastor, or Teacher, or Elder, will
prove him one of Christ's Ministers; but try what men are called into the
Office and Ministry of.

Objection.

And if any should Object and say, But are not these common names, viz.
Pastors, Elders, Teachers, Bishops, and the like?

Answer.

I Answer, In a common acceptance and use of the term they are, and may be so
improved; but yet these names, are properly the names of Christ's distinct and
peculiar Ministers; and answerable to their proportionableness thereunto are
they to be chosen into that very Ministry they are mostly fitted and adapted
for: As he whose Gift and Spirit mostly disposes him to Exhortation and
Application of Principles, received and believed, ought to be chosen into the
Pastor's Office; and he whose Gifts and Qualification bends most to Expound,
Interpret, and open the sense and meaning of the Word, is meetest to be chosen
into the Office of a Teacher; and so he that is wise, zealous, grave, vigilant,
and most disposed to see the Churches Affairs done decently, and in order, is
most meet for the Office of ^uling-Elder, or Governor in the Church of Christ:
And he that is most inclined to mercy, kindness, charity, bountifulness,
liberality, and giving, is meetest of all the Church for the Office of
Deaconship in the Church. For as Adam called every thing by its proper name;
even so would the Second Adam have his Ministers called by their proper, not
improper names; from their fitness and sutableness to their Work chosen, and
called either Pastors, Teachers, Elders, or Deacons.

But, lastly; Would you know whether Persons pretending to be Christ's
Ministers be so or no? ask them whose Servants they are, and whom they obey,
Christ and his Will, or Man and his Will? For you know who said it, His
Servants ye are, to whom ye yield your selves obedient, Romans 6.16. Now try
whose Will and Mind Ministers obey, Christ's or Man's; whose Word they walk by,
Christ's or Man's; whose Worship they offer up, Christ's or Man's; For by their
Fruits, says our Lord, you shall know whether men are true or false Prophets,
Mat. 7.15, 16. Christ's Ministers offer no strange Fire, nor make any
composition to anoint God's Kings, Priests, or Prophets with, but according to
divine Direction and Institution; remembering that word, See that thou make
all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the Mount, Heb. 8.8.
compared with Exodus 25.40. Christ's Ministers are to administer according to
Christ's appointment, not Man's, for they are His and not Man's Servants, and
therefore must teach themselves and the People to observe all things that
Christ has commanded, and nothing which he has not commanded to be observed
or taught; Dare they observe or teach others to observe, as our Lord teaches,
Mat. 28.20. and Paul practiced, 1 Cor. 11.23. saying, That which I received of
the Lord, that delivered I also unto you, and nothing else?

Christ's Ministers are not to seek what to do in the Administration of their
Office, but have all things plainly written in the Tables of the Scripture,
that he which runs may read his Duty; their Rule, is Scripture; their Help,
the Spirit; their Work, Christ's instituted Will and Worship; and their Ability
and Sufficiency, the Grace and Gifts of the Spirit, and their Wages only the
good Will of Christ's People, among whom they Iabour, they need not any man to
teach them, but as that Anointing teaches them all things; they can Pray
without a Prayer Book, and Preach without Common-Places, or the help of
Commentators, and Administer Sacraments and Censures without a Directory or
Book of Canons of Man's making, being thoroughly made wise, and sufficiently
furnished unto every good and Gospel-Work, by Grace and Scripture, without any
of Readiness Armor; they need no Garments of Distinction, nor shows of Piety, or
Purity, or Gravity without Substance. Neither want they any vain unwarrantable
Ceremonies or Gestures of Man's devising, to make their Administrations appear
beautiful, and prove edifying; and yet all their things to be done decently,
and according to due or Gospel order.

Now if thus you please to try, and prove, or measure Christ's professed
Ministers, and their Ministrations, by the Golden Reed of the Scripture, you
may certainly know who they are, that say they are Apostles and are not, but do
lie, and as polluted; let all such be put from the Priesthood.

It Is these Wise-Preachers, and Gospel Ministers that I only assert, spring
from the good Will of Christ, and appertain to Christ; the rest are but
Apocrypha-Writing, and as groundless and useless, meet to be of all that belong
to Christ the Lord rejected.

And this I suppose may be sufficient for Gospel Ministers, and the
Ministrations Vindication, against any that shall dare to traduce or slander
them as Incroachers and Intruders into other men's Work, and none of Christ's
Ministers, but a sort of Factious, Schismatical and Heretical Persons,
disobedient, and turbulent or troublesome to the Government.

Yet let what has been said be but weighed and considered, and it will appear,
that they are given forth from the one great Shepherd of the Sheepfold. And, O
how beautiful are the feet of such who bring glad tidings of peace!

So much for this Use, in which I have been the larger, because of the weight
and consequence of these things.

The third Use is for Exhortation.
The third, and I suppose the last Use I shall make of this Doctrine, is for
Exhortation.

First; To such as are Christ's Ministers.

Secondly; To all you that are Christ's Churches and Servants.

First; Let me beseech and exhort you all, Fathers and Brethren, that are
Gospel Ministers under the Lord Jesus: If your Office and Ministry be given and
derived from the Lord Jesus; O then, as that great Preacher of the Gospel to
the Gentiles, Paul, said, Let us magnify our Office, Romans 11.13. Even by so
doing, as he did, by laboring, if by any means we may provoke to emulation
them that are our flesh, and might save some of them. O let us who are
Christ's, serve the great design of Christ; and let not us, as some do, serve
our own Bellies, and not the Lord Jesus, Romans 16.18. O, if not only our
Ministry be of Christ, and from Christ, but a Ministry for Christ. O then, be
exhorted to make it our great and main business, to seek not our own things or
glory, but the things of our Lord Jesus, and his great glory, to whom belongs
all honor, and glory, and blessing, for ever and ever, Amen. If we have his
glory as great in our eye, then let our great business be, to get or procure
his glory, as our Lord tells us he did before us, John 8.50. I seek not my own
glory; yea, our blessed Lord makes it a Character of a true Minister, that he
is thus minded, telling us, He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory;
but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no
unrighteousness in him, John 7.18. Servants must not so much, whilst Servants,
promote their own Interest and Credit as their Lord and Masters; even no more
should we promote our own Glory or Interest in the World but Christ's.

Secondly; Let me Exhort you my Brethren, if you are Christ's Ministers, and
spring from him, then pray you approve your selves to him; remember how you
have received, and be faithful in your ministration to him. Let us not forger
that saying; Behold, I send an Angel before them to keep them in the way, and
to bring them to the place that I have prepared: But beware of him, and obey
his V^^ce, and provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions; for
my Name is in him, Exodus 23.20, 21. O consider, he will not spare Levites,
Priests, nor Ministers of the House of Israel no more, no nor so much as others
of the House of Jacob: You know what is written, Then Moses said unto Aaron,
This is it the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh
me, and before all the People I will be glorified, Levit. 10.3. Wherefore let
us be faithful Stewards of the manifold Mysteries of God; let not us neglest
Christ's Work, nor corrupt his Work. Cursed is and shall he be that does the
Work of the Lord negligently, which is deceitfully; not doing as many which
corrupt the Word of God; but of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God
speak we in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.17.

But to come nearer, Let me humbly offer a few things, which I would desire all
that are Christ's Ministers to take special care of.

First; Consult often your Commission, ponder your instruction for
Ministration, and do not be a stranger to the Weight and Duty of your Ministry.
If the Kingly Ministry had need daily to be Looking or Reading in the Book of
the Law, what his Office and Duty toward God and the People is; as from that
passage of Deuteronomy was declared; certainly even so have Christ's Priestly
Ministers much more need to study the Scripture, which are Christ's Book of
Ordination that we may know how we ought to behave our selves in the House of
God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth; 1 Timothy 3.15. Study to know our o^^
Ministry, and our own proper and peculiar Work. It Is, I fear, a cause of the
wantingness of many, even Gospel Ministers, That they are too much ignorant of
this thing, even the Nature, Property, and Duty of their Office and Ministry;
like persons newly entered into the World, or the Affairs thereof; make more
haste to get into, than wisely to consider their Duty therein. Even so I fear
is it with too many of us Preachers or Ministers of the Lord Jesus; They make
more haste to be Christ's Ministers, than to consult the great Duty of that
Office and Ministry.

But, Secondly; Let me offer this sense; We are Christ's Ministry or Ministers,
and the Treasure in our Earthen Vessels is his, and none of ours: Then let us
be careful of giving away any of Christ's our Sovereigns Right and Privileges,
who ever they be that demand it. Be like Moses and Israel, who would not part
with, nor leave in Egypt any thing of God's Portion, as we read in that passage
Exodus 9.16. There shall not an Hoos be left behind us. And thus did Israel deal
with the Kings of Canaan; So whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive out before
us, them will we possess, Judge 11.24. Even so, give not away to any the right
of your Sovereign Lord King Jesus, whose Ministers we are; divide not the
living Child to please the Harlot; I mean, mingle not Christ's and Antichrist's
Ordinances together; Plow not with an Ox and an Ass together; nor wear
Linsey-Woolsey Garments, but remember, it is written, Thou shall not sow thy
Vineyard with diverse Seeds, (much less may we sow God's Vineyard with diverse
Seeds) Deuteronomy. 22.9, 10, 11. For the Ark and Dagon, Christ our Lord, and Belial
cannot agree together, 1 Samuel 5.3, 4. with 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. But remember, the
Lord our God is a Jealous God, and he will not hold him guiltless that takes
his Name in vain. Though there are some whose Prudence, Moderation, and Zeal to
Preaching, will permit them to do otherwise, namely, to mingle the Holy Seed,
and do that they otherwise would not do; namely, to conform to men, that they
may preach Christ to the People, Administer Prayer and Sacraments by a formal
Service Book; Baptize all Children, even the Seed of the Adulterer and the
Adulteress; though God of old said, Such Seed shall not enter into the
Congregation of the Lord! to the tenth Generation, Deuteronomy. 23.2. Nay more, if all
this was too little, they rather then stand out, will spread the Lord's Table
for that Troop, which his Soul abhors, even a People that neither have nor can
examine themselves, or discern the Lord's Body; yet these must be Communicants,
and pay for it, or else be Excommunicants.

Yea, to make the measure full, they dare meddle with Civil Actions, and
deceive the People, as if to Marry and Bury the Dead, were part of the
Administrations committed by Jesus Christ into the hand of his Ministers; then
which nothing is more false: For if it were unfit for some of Christ's
Ministers to tend the Tables of the Living, it is much more unmeet for any of
Christ's Ministers to tend the Dead, or intermmeddle with Civil Concerns, and
Marry the living; but these pass for pious, sober, peaceable men; but let them
remember, who said, of two evils, they must choose the least. It Is not to be
taken of sins, of clear and real sins; for here we must choose nor take neither;
for it is written, Thou shall not do evil that good may come thereof; for if we
do, damnation is just, Romans 3.18. It Is not wisdom, but folly to conform against
Conscience to man's Inventions, though to preach the Gospel. 'Twere better to
say with Paul, If I must sin, and unwillingly, and against Knowledge Conform
that I may Preach, I will choose rather never to Preach, than to Conform and so
to Preach. These sober men, are unsober men, wise beyond sobriety of Scripture,
and drunken with the intoxicating Wine of the Whore of Rome's Cup, that thus
stagger and reel up and down from one thing to another, even to whatsoever is
uppermost in their days.

Whether the men that thus do, be pious, I shall not determine; only this I
may safely conclude; Such men's practices, which we have hinted, are not pious
practices, but impious and ungodly, as not being warranted and founded upon the
Word of God.

Lastly; 'Twere well if this Zeal of theirs for Preaching be not but a blind
Zeal, and a bad Zeal, a Zeal rather to preach out themselves, and preach in
themselves, than to preach out Christ to or into the People. But because I hope
this Leaven of the Scribes and Pharisees, neither has, nor shall leaven many
of you, that are wise, even Spiritually-wise Preachers, I shall add no more to
this but that word of Peter, Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray
God if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee, Acts 8.22. O
Conforming Ministers, if possible, repent of this your wicked conformity; and
you, my dearly Beloved, who have yet escaped the corruption that is in the
World through lust; O, take you heed lest you also be led away with the
dissimulations of such.

But once more, If you are Christ's Ministers, and derive Office and
Administration from him, then let me entreat you to provide for the Cross, and
be neither afraid nor ashamed of it; for if they of the World called the Master
of the House Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his Household?
Mat. 10.25. Think not much, in such a day as this is, to be evil spoken of,
traduced and slandered, knowing that these afflictions are already accomplished
in your Brethren, and the best of Christ's Ministers have met with no better
usage from the men of the Throne of Iniquity, as Paul witnesses, saying, I
think that God has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to
death; for we are made a spectacle unto the World, and to Angels, and to Men:
We are Fools for Christ's sake; we are weak, we are despised: Even unto this
very hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have
no certain dwelling places, and labor, working with our hands: Being reviled,
we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat: We are
made as the filth of the World, and are the offscouring of all things unto
this day, 1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. O start not from your Ministry or
Ministrations of the holy things of Christ, because of such things as these;
knowing, that in and from the World you must have persecution, if you be the
Ministers of the Lord Jesus, John 16.33. But say with Paul, None of these
things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might
finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God, Acts 20.24.

And, Lastly; Let me offer this to your consideration that are the Ministers of
Christ; Be professed and resolved Enemies to the Ministers and Ministrations of
Antichrist; take part with Christ, and follow him upon white Horses, clothed in
fine linen, white and clean, Rev. 19.14. Say not a confederacy to all them to
whom this people shall say a confederacy, Isa. 8.12. But remember that charge,
Put you selves in array against Babylon round about; all ye that bend the Bow,
shoot at her, spare no Arrows, for she has sinned against the Lord, Jer.
50.14. Ye Angels of Christ, Pour out the Vials of the Wrath of God upon the
Earth; even upon this Babylonish Earth; Pour out your Vials, filled not with
yours, but the Lord's wrath, Rev. 16.1. It Is just work to destroy Babylon, For
she has sinned, and has corrupted the Kings and the Inhabitants of the Earth,
and has made even all Nations drunk with the Wine of the Cup of her
Fornications, Rev. 18.3. Strip her, and make her naked as in the day she was
born; for in her will be found the blood of the Prophets, and of Saints, and of
all that were slain upon the Earth, Rev. 18.24. Discover, by a light of
Scripture, her Adulteries, and lay open the filthiness of her Skirts, the
beastliness of her Power, the earthliness of her Church and Members, Chap.
13.12, 13, 14, 16. Show and discover the nature and vileness of her Locusts, or
Clergymen, Chap. 9. Discover their even killing Wormwood, or bitterness of her
Waters or Doctrine, Chap. 8.10, 11. Show that she is the great Whore, great
Cheat, and greatest Enemy that ever the Lord Jesus or his People had or shall
have; even the same power of unrighteousness which put our Lord, them, and his
Saints now to death. Bid defiance to her, and to all her Power, and all her
Romish Trinkets; and cry aloud to all the people of God, to have neither more
nor less to do with her; but speedily to obey that voice, Come out of her my
people, partake not of her sins, lest that ye partake also of her plagues,
Chap. 18.4. Never think of her Repentance, for Repentance is, and shall be
hidden from her eyes: She is none of those Whores that know how to be ashamed,
or repent, as Chap. 9.21, 22. She is the great Traitor against the Crown and
Dignity of our Sovereign Lord King Jesus; no such Treason has been hatched or
plotted against the Lord Jesus throughout all the World, as in and by the Roman
Church and Synagogue. Therefore plead you Worthies of the Lord with her, and
against her, and pray without ceasing. Down with her, down with her, down with
her, as a Millstone into the bottom of the Sea, and let her never rise any
more, and set Faith and Patience to work in this case; for is it not written,
And they overcame him by the Blood of the Lamb, and the word of their
Testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death; and he that leads
into captivity, shall go into captivity; he that kills with the Sword, must
be killed with the Sword. Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints, Rev.
12.11. and Chap. 13.10.

O therefore, to conclude, Let all the Gospel Ministers of the Lord Jesus this
day in the World be Antipasses, men for Christ, but against Antichrist, and
whatsoever is truly of Antichrist both Root and Branch.

So much for the first part of this Exhortation, which was to the Ministers of
Jesus Christ.

Let me now close with a few closing words to the Churches and Servants of
Christ.

If Christ's Ministers spring from him, and both they and their Ministrations
depend upon him, and are given of him for the good of you his People, then let
me exhort you, who are the Churches and Servants of Christ, to two or three
things, and so I shall conclude this Doctrine, and the Text, because I would
not be too prolix.

First; Be you Christ's Porters, and the Instruments of making Christ's
Servants his Ministers. Be very careful and circumspect to whom you open the
Door, or a Door of Entrance or Admittance in any Office of Ministry under the
Lord Jesus. Be sure you consult diligently your Charter, the New Testament
Institution concerning Ministers; and when you are to choose any, be sure you
ask Wisdom of God, who gives liberally, and upbraideth not, James 1.5.

Secondly; Set your thoughts and choice only upon such men as are of honest
report, and full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, Acts 6.

Thirdly; Choose men competently, and sufficiently endued with such Gifts, as
may truly enable and furnish them unto Ministry, yea, unto that particular sort
of Ministry whereunto you ordain and appoint them, whether it be to the Office
of Teacher, Pastor, Elder, or Deacon; do not choose idle Shepherds into the
place of Christ's Shepherds, such as may wear the Name of Christ's Ministers,
but want the Gifts of Christ's Ministers; such will exercise the Instruments of
foolish Shepherds among you, rather than of Wise Ministers or Preachers, and be
like neither Goads or Nails to you. Yea further, be very circumspect that you
mistake not the Gifts of your Ministers, and appoint them to that Ministry in
particular, which though they have Gifts for Ministry, yet may not have the
proper Gift of that Ministry you choose them for; for every one has his proper
Gift of God, that fits and disposes Persons for some one or other particular
work, not for every, or all the works to be performed in his Church. It were to
make your Ministers lying Signs, and like tinkling Brass, and a sounding
Cimbal, to appoint them to one Ministry, when their Grace and Gift propenses
and disposes them to another. Therefore as you would honor Christ, or have him
honored by his and your Ministers, be careful and wary in this particular
Concern.

Fourthly; Watch over your Ministers that watch over you in the Lord, that they
make full proof of their Ministry, and fulfill it in the Lord; lest your
watchlesness over them, make them presume to be watchless over themselves,
their Ministry, and you also, and so you partake of other men's sins, 1 Timothy
5.22.

Fifthly; You that want such, and may enjoy them, neglect not so great a Mercy,
neither hinder Christ of so great a Glory, as the Glory of his own Ministry in
his own Church, through your want of Zeal and forwardness to promote his and
your own concern; but I shall hope I need not enlarge here.

Sixthly; If Christ's Ministers flow from him, and depend upon him, then when
you enjoy them, bless and magnify him for them, who has not left you Orphans,
or as Sheep without a Shepherd. Wise Gospel Ministers such as we have all along
been discoursing of, are very great blessings to a People that enjoy them.
Wherefore, when God loves a People, he promises them that he will set Watchmen
upon their Walls, which shall never hold their peace day nor night; and also
that their Teachers shall no more be removed into Corners, Isa. 62.6. and 30,
20. Therefore you that enjoy wise, faithful, able, painful Gospel Ministers,
bless God, through Jesus Christ, for this singular Gift of Grace, etc.

But again, Are Ministers of the Gospel such as have been described Christ's
Gift and Ordinance, both they and their Ministrations? then let none intrude or
impose upon you, the Churches of Christ, a Ministry, or Ministrations, which
are none of Christ's, nor to be found contained in Scripture; but being free, be
not the Servants of Men, but remember Paul's Counsel; Beware lest any man spoil
you through Philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, and after
the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. Let no man at his pleasure
bear rule over you by humbleness of mind, and worshipping of Angels, intruding
into these things, which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly
mind, Col. 2.8, 18.

Further, let me, in the fear of the God, Exhort you, that enjoy Christ's
Ministry and their Ministrations; Remember to obey them that have the Rule over
you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your Souls, as they that must
give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is
unprofitable for you, Heb. 13.17. Their Work is hard enough from the men of
this World. O, let it be good from you for whom they endure all things, or at
least very many things, 2 Timothy 2.10. They do not only do much for you, but also
endure much for you. O! therefore, let them not endure any thing from you, but
rather, according to Paul's advice, Let the Elders that rule well, be counted
worthy of double honor, especially such as labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. remembering what is said concerning them, without the least shadow of
pride or vanity. How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad-tydings of
peace, Romans 10.15. Now if you would eminently honor and rejoice your
Ministers, pray then labor greatly to improve and profit by their
Administrations; for such as are Christ's faithful Ministers, seek not yours
but you, 2 Cor. 13.14. and have no greater joy, than to hear that their
Children walk in or according to truth, 3 John 4. This makes great rejoicing
and thanksgiving by Christ's Ministers, when they either hear or see, that
those they labor among do prosper, and their graces grow, as we have it,
Ephesians. 1.15, 16. Wherefore I also, when I heard of your Faith in the Lord
Jesus, and love unto all the Saints, cease not to give thanks for you, making
mention of you in my prayers; whereas to find the Saints and Churches of
Christ, in a poor, low, beggarly state of Soul, not improving nor profiting
under means of Grace, this will cause Christ and his Ministers to weep and
complain, and even sit down and bemoan themselves in the sense of it, according
to that prophecy, Isa. 33.7. Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without; the
Ambassadors of Peace shall weep bitterly, fulfilled by this Prophet the Type of
Christ. Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for
naught, and in vain, Chap. 49.4. And how fully was this Prophecy made good by
Christ, who, when he was come near, he beheld the City and wept over it, Luke
19.41. Wherefore Sirs, if you have any love to Christ, or compassion toward
your Ministers, improve them, and strive to prosper under their Ministration,
so will you prevent their grief, and give them a good reward for their labor.

But again, to hasten to a conclusion, and closing up of the Use of
Exhortation; pray you, if your Ministers be Christ's Ministers, and Christ's
Ministers flow from him, depend upon him, and minister for him; pray you join
with, and assist them in whatever they for Christ have need of you; as Paul
directed the Church of the Romans, To do for Phebe, that ye receive her in the
Lord, as becomes Saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business she
has need of you, Romans 16.2. So say I, pray assist your Ministers with your
watchfulness, with your observation of those they labor among and for. Help
them with your Informations, concerning what you observe wanting either in them
or others. Help them with your Zeal and readiness, to join issue with them in
any business of Christ, like those Holy Ones we read of, Exodus 36.1. Then
wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wisehearted man, in whom the Lord put
wisdom and understanding, to know how to work all manner of work, for the
service of the Sanctuary, according to all that the Lord commanded. The like
frame of Spirit we read of in those mentioned, Ezra 1.5, 6. with Nehem. 2.18.
where the People of the Lord are found thus doing; And they said, Let us rise
up and build: So they strengthened their hands for this good Work.

But lastly; Pray you, let me Exhort you to assist Ministers with your Prayers
for their good, and the prosperity of Christ's work in their hand; remembering,
That whilst Moses 's hands were uplitld by Aaron and Hur, Israel prevailed,
Exodus 17.11, 12. Even so my Brethren, your incessant Prayers in your Ministers
behalf, will utterly overthrow Amalek, and help Joshua and Israel to prevail.

And thus I have done with this Exhortation, and with what I shall offer to
your consideration upon this Scripture; wherein I have, with what clearness and
brevity conveniently I could, set before you what Preaching is, and whose
Ordinance it is; who is a truly wise Preacher, and what his Work is; and the
Blessing and Duty of all that enjoy such Preachers.

Now consider and examine what has been said, and the Lord give you wisdom in
all things. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

