Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, OR, A DISCOURSE OF The Nature, Causes, Kinds, and
Cure, OF ENTHUSIASME;

Written by Philophilus Parresiastes, and prefixed to ALAZONOMASTIX HIS
Observations and Reply:

Whereunto is added a Letter of his to a private Friend, wherein certain
passages in his Reply are vindicated, and several matters relating to
Enthusiasme more fully cleared.

(...)

LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher, and are to be sold by W. Morden Bookseller in
Cambridge, MDCLVI.

Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, OR, A DISCOURSE OF The Nature, Causes, Kinds, and
Cure, OF ENTHUSIASME;

Written by Philophilus Parresiastes, and prefixed to ALAZONOMASTIX HIS
Observations and Reply:

Whereunto is added a Letter of his to a private Friend, wherein certain
passages in his Reply are vindicated, and several matters relating to
Enthusiasme more fully cleared.

(...)

LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher, and are to be sold by W. Morden Bookseller in
Cambridge, MDCLVI.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THou may very well marvel what may be the meaning that I should publish the
Writings of another, the Author being yet alive and at leisure to do it
himself: But I can inform thee, though it perhaps may seem a Riddle to thee,
that he is alive and not alive. For when I treated with him concerning this
matter, I found him quite dead to all such kind of businesses. His Constitution
is grown so unexpectedly and astonishingly grave or sower, I know not whether
to call it, that there is now, as I told him, some small hopes that he may be
brought off in time, to put on a pair of Satin ears, or wear a silk cap with
as many seams as there be streaks in the back of a Lute, as himself expresses
it, in the Preface to his Reply, Assuredly, said I, Mastix, thou have an
ambition of being one of those venerable Idols, or stalking pieces of Gravity,
to whom little boys smack the top of their fingers so loudly, making long
legs; and young girls and women drop so demure courtsies to as they pass by
in the street. How strongly is my friend Mastix metamorphosed within this space
of three or four years.

But Parresiastes, said he, is I perceive, the same man still, as merry and
unluckie as ever: and for my self I am not so much changed or sunk into thy
present temper, but that I can with the same patience bear with thy frolicks,
as I could with others sullenness in the days of my jollitie. But I know by
certain and approved experience, that there is nothing so safe and permanently
pleasant, as a staid mind and composed spirit; not easily loosned into profuse
mirth. For such Jocantrie, while we are in these earthly Tabernacles, is but
like the dancing of men and women in an unswept room, it does but raise a dust
and offend the eyes even of the Revellers themselves, what ever it does to the
Spectatours. Wherefore what a vain thing were it in me, to ruffle the calm
composure of my own Spirit, by perusing and republishing of that which proved
so great an aggrievance to one, to whom I never did, nor yet do, bear the least
enmity.

I seeing Mastix so seriously set against Mirth, presently conjectured, for all
his smooth speeches, that it might happily fare with him after the usual
manner of other mortals, who commonly do not wholly quit themselves of their
passions, but change them; and therefore did not much mistrust, but that though
I could not melt him into a merry temper, yet I might heat him into a fit of
Indignation and natural sense of Revenge. And to this purpose I set before his
eyes the high Insolences of Eugenius against the Universities, his
unpardonable Incivilities to that Miracle of Ages the noble Descartes, besides
his outrageous Barbaritics upon Mastix his own self; where I exhibited to his
view a whole Catalogue of those honorable Titles he so liberally bestows upon
him throughout his writings, being so many and so uncouth, that they might
stuff out a whole Dictionary with terms of scurrility. These I spread before
him, like the blood of Mulberries before^ Elephants in battle, to provoke his
Irascible. But to my amazement he seemed to me not at all moved, but in a
careless manner made this Answer, The grosser these Revilements are, the
Greater Christianity not to be incensed. Besides, if either he or any others by
his defamations think worse of me then I deserve, the injury is theirs, not
mine; as when one conceives a true Proposition to be false, the Proposition,
says Epictetus, is not hurt, but he that is mistaken in it.

When I saw these Engines levelled at his affections could make no breach upon
him, at last I betook me to more subtle weapons. Well said I, Mastix, it should
seem you are grown a man of strange Master-dome over your Passions, or at least
you are willing to appear so for the present; but you have been as great a
professor of Reason heretofore. I pray you let me ask you one question; whether
do not you think your Observations and Reply very serviceable for that purpose
you intended them, viz. for the discountenancing and quelling of vain Fantastry
and Enthusiasme. Here he putting upon himself a ctosse and unexpected garb of
Modesty, told me that it was unfit for him to speak any thing that may seem to
tend to the commendation of his own Writings; but smilingly asked me what my
opinion was thereof. I profess, said I, I cannot but think them very
serviceable for that end, nor can imagine how that Fanatic spirit can be
better met withal, then by slighting and deriding it, there being always so
much Pride at the root from whence these Follies and Vanities bloom. For
Fantasticks and Enthusiasts seek nothing more then the admiration of men,
wherefore there is no such sovereign Remedy as scorn and neglect, to make them
sober. But anxiously to contend in a dry way of Reason with them that profess
themselves above it, is indeed to condescend below a man's self, and use his
sword there where he ought to have shown his whip, which was the mistake of the
Scythians when they fought against their slaves; and therefore it being not so
rational to prefer a private humor before a public good, you ought not to be
so shie in the matter I propound. I know not what you mean said Mastix, Your
late laudable intentions, said I, have been as well against Enthusiasme as
Atheism, what pretense then have you that those two Pamphlets against
Enthusiasme may not march in one body, I mean, be bound up in one Volume with
the rest of your Treatises, for they would be then more in view, and
consequently do more service. It may be so, said Mastix, if they would do any
at all. But you do not in the mean time consider what disservice they may do to
the rest of my Writings, which are so grave and serious, and how they may cause
the Reader, through incogitancy, to think me in good earnest no where having
once found me so much in jest.

Now certainly, Mastix, said I, it is not Gravity but Melancholy that makes
such a prudent fool of thee. Do not even the godliest and severest men that
are, without either sin or scruple, laugh heartily at dinner and tell merry
tales, though they begin and end their meal wi^h more then ordinary
seriousness and devotion? Besides, the promiscuous jumbling of those divine
Raptures, in your Reply, with your usual merriment there, seems in my
judgment far more harsh then the joining both your Observations and it with
the rest of your Discourses.

This struck Mastix home, as I thought, who a little changing his countenance,
after some pause returned this answer. The truth is, said he, that confusion of
so great seriousness with so humoursome mirth, is the very worst thing in all
that book. Which my spirits so ill relish now I am more cool, that I would
gladly, if opportunity were offered, have my Reply distinguished into Sections
with Arguments before every Section, that there may be a due time of
Interspiration betwixt the ending of the serious and the entering into the merry
passages, as well as there was in my writing of them. But this may be done,
though these two Pamphlets be still kept apart from the rest in a lesser
volume. That Is true, said I, but you do not observe that you endeavor the
declining of that which is unavoidable. For as sure as your Books will to the
Press again after your death, these two, which you would keep out, will crowd
in with the rest.

Here Mastix began to scratch his head, and se^med utterly at a loss what to
say. But at last recovering himself, what reason, said he, have I to take
Philophilus for a Prophet, or admit of his Presage as probable, that my
wr^tings should be so much in ^equest hereafter, unless it be because they are
in so little now, Writers having the same fate that Fashions, they all coming
up by their turns and then going down again. But suppose your presage true,
what then Philophilus? I^ plainly then follows, said I, that you are to
republish your two Pamphlets, and join them with the rest of your Writings,
especially having opportunity thereby to cast your Reply into Sections, and
make what corrections else you think fit in either of them. It does not at all
follow, says he. It follows indeed, that it is fit the thing should be done,
but it does not necessarily follow that I do ^t my self. Friend Mastix how
captious are you, said I, My main drift was to demonstrate that the thing was
fit to be done, not questioning but that that being proved, you would not stick
to do it your self. Well, said he, my friend Philophilus, it is acknowledged
then on both sides, that it is fit and requisite to be done, but my self
refusing of it, will any body else think you do it? Not any body, said I:
Whether can you do it or no, said Mastix to me.

Here I began to fumble, but I could not but confess that I could do it. The
whole business, said Mastix, lies then betwixt you and me. As for my own part
I am resolved I will not meddle with it, it being utterly against the present
temper of spirit I am in. And a thing so fit to be done in your own judgment,
which you can do if you will, and will not be done unless by you, must lie at
your door as a neglected duty if you refuse it. I marry, said I, friend Mastix
this is rare indeed, I perceive though you can forego your wonted mirth, you
have parted with little of your wit, that you can thus finely catch me in a
noose of mine own making. Well, I will not be unwilling to think it my duty for
this once, since it can be no otherwise. And I have Reader outdone his desire
in the prosecuting thereof.

For I have not only cast his Reply, but his Observations also into Sections,
prefixing before each Section the Argument thereof, in which I might almost
equalize my pains to his that first compiled the Books, at least I might the
fruits of them; being well assured that they will prove ten times more plain
and consequently more pleasant then they were before, especially if thou take
notice of what Instructions I shall impart to thee in reference to their
perusal.

Know therefore that in every Argument of the Sections of his Observations,
there is exhibited to thee the Matter that Mastix speaks to in each
Observation, and that so fully and faithfully, that if the Discourse he writes
against lay open before thine eyes, it would not make him more intelligible.
Now his Observations being so punctually numbered and fully understood, it will
follow that his Reply will be as easy, the same numbering of the Observations
being kept there also, so that if thou be not satisfied in the sense, it is
but having recourse to the Observation, the number does direct thee to in the
foregoing Pamphlet, and then all will be clear. The chief light therefore for
understanding both, being the right framing of the Arguments of the Sections of
his Observations, which were so plainly to propose to thy view the Matter that
is first spoke to, it made me very careful in contriving thereof. But I was
less curious in the Arguments of the Sections of his Reply, they being not so
much to tell what is spoke to, as what is spoke in every particular Section.

Besides this dividing his two Pamphlets into Sections, I have also prefixed A
Brief Discourse concerning the Nature, Causes, Kinds, and Cure of Enthusiasme,
where though my pains seem more entirely my own, then in the following Books,
yet to confess ingenuously, they are here far less, I having had more easy
and frequent access to Mastix in this so serious and weighty a Matter. After
the whole compilement whereof it being reduced to that form thou see it,
desirous to leave out nothing, in so important a subject, that was of
consequence to be put in; I asked him if it seemed not something maimed in the
enumeration of the Causes of Enthusiasme, because there is nothing set down
there concerning the Devil, nor the wilful wickedness of the mind of man; but
all is resolved into Complexion or the present Temper or Distemper of the body,
arising from natural causes that necessarily act thereupon. For thus this
Discourse, said I, may seem as well an Excuse for, as a Discovery of this
disease of Enthusiasme. Why, said Mastix, I hope it is not your design, I am
sure it is not mine, to incense the minds of any against Enthusiasts as to
persecute them: all that I aim at, is only this, that no man may follow them.
And your Discourse already, I think, is effectual enough for that purpose, it
so plainly discovering that what seems so strange and taking in them, is not
from God, but a mere Constitution of body, the fanaticall workings whereof,
though they may be much heightened by some peculiar Vitiosity of the mind or
subtle insinuations of the Devil, yet because it is not always so, and that
it does very seldom plainly appear that there is any thing more of either
Devil or Vitiosity in the Enthusiast then in others, saving what his mere
Complexion leads him to, I think it is, said he, more safe to leave those
Considerations out, their causality being more lax and general then to be
appropriated to Enthusiasme, and it being far more laudable in my judgment
and allowable to let the guilty go free, especially in matters of this nature,
then to endanger the innocent.

Thus, Reader, thou see how thou art beholden to Mastix, as well for what is
judiciously left out, as what is fitly and usefully taken in to the following
Discourse. For I must confess, that in the unridling of this Riddle of
Enthusiasme, I have wholly plowed with his Heifer, which having told thee, I
shall now dismiss thee, being unwilling any longer to detain thee from the
reaping of the harvest of my Labors.

Philophilus Parresiastes.

The Contents of the ensuing Discourse.
1. THe great Use and necessity of discovering the imposture of Enthusiasme. 2.
What Inspiration is and what Enthusiasme. 3. A search of the Causes of
Enthusiasme in the Faculties of the Soul. 4. The several Degrees and Natures
of her Faculties. 5. Why Dreams, till we awake, seem real transactions. 6. The
enormous strength of Imagination the cause of Enthusiasme. 7. Sundry natural
and corporeal causes that necessarily work on the Imagina^ion. 8. The power of
meats to change the Imagination. 9. Baptista his potion for the same purpose.
10. The power of diseases upon the Fancy. 11. Of the power of Melancholy, and
how it often sets on some one absurd conceit upon the mind, the party in other
things being sober. 12. Several Examples thereof. 13. A seasonable application
of these examples for the weakening of the authority of bold Enthusiasts. 14.
That the causality of Melancholy in this distemper of Enthusiasme is more
easily traced then in other extravagancies. 15. Melancholy apertinacious and
religious complexion. 16. That men are prone to suspect some special presence
of God or of a Supernatural power in whatever is Great or Vehement. 17. The
mistake of heated Melancholy for holy Zeal and the Spirit of God. 18. The Ebbs
and Flows of Melancholy a further cause of Enthusiasme. 19. The notorious
mockery of Melancholy in reference to Divine love. 20. That Melancholy partakes
much of the Nature of Wine, and from what complexion Poets and Enthusiasts
arise, and what the difference is betwixt them. 21. That a certain Dos^s of
Sanguine mixed with Melancholy is the Spirit that usually inspires Enthusiasts,
made good by a large Induction of Examples. 22. More examples to the same
purpose. 23. Of Enthusiasticall Joy. 24. Of the mystical Allegories of
Enthusiasts. 25. Of Quaking and of the Quakers. 26. That Melancholy disposes to
Apoplexies and Epilepsies. 27. Of the nature of Enthusiastic Revelations and
Visions. 28. Of Ecstasy, The nature and causes thereof. 29. Whether it be in
man's power to cast himself into an Enthusiastic Apoplexy, Epilepsie or
Ecstasy. 30. Of Ent^usiastick Prophecy. 31. Of the Presage of a man's own heart
from a supernatural impulse sensible to himself, but unexplicable to others,
where it may take place, and that it is not properly Enthusiasme. 32. Several
examples of Political Enthusiasme. 33. David George his prophecy of his rising
again from the Dead and after what manner it was fulfilled. 34. A description
of his person, manners, and doctrine. 35. The evident causes of his power of
speech. 36. An account of those seeming graces in him. 37. That he was a man of
Sanguine complexion. 38. Further and more sure proofs that he was of that
temper. 39. That it was a dark fulsome Sanguine that hid the truth of the great
promises of the gospel from his e^es. 40. The exact likeness betwixt him and
the Father of the modern Nicolaitans, and the Authors censure of them both.
41. A seasonable Advertisement in the behalf of them that are unawares taken
with such Writers, as also a further confirmation that Enthusiastic madness
may consist with sobriety in other matters. 42. Of Philosophical Enthusiasme.
43. Sundry Chemists and Theosophists obnoxious to this disease. 44. A
promiscuous Collection of diverse odd conceits out of several Theosophists and
Chemists. 45. A particular Collection out of Paracelsus. 46. That it is he that
has given occasion to the wildest Philosophic Enthusiasmes that ever was yet
on foot. 47. That his Philosophy, though himself intended it not, is one of the
safest sanctuaries for the Atheist, and the very prop of ancient Paganism. 48.
How it justifies the Heathens worshipping of the Stars, derogates from the
authority of the miracles of our Savior, makes the Gospel ineffectuall for the
establishing of the belief of a God, and a particular Providence, gratifies
that professed Atheist Vaninus in what he most of all triumphs in, as serving
his turn the best to elude all religion whatsoever. 49. That Paracelsus and his
followers are neither Atheistical nor Diabolical, and what makes the Chemist
ordinarily so pitiful a Philosopher. 50. The writer of this Discourse no foe
to either Theosophist or Chemist, only he excuses himself from being over
credulous in regard of either. 51. The cure of Enthusiasme by Temperance,
Humility, and Reason. 52. What is meant by Temperance. 53. What by Humility and
the great advantage thereof for Wisdom and Knowledge. 54, What by Reason, and
what the danger is of leaving that Guide, as also the mistake of them that
expect the Spirit should not suggest such things as are rational. 55. Further
Helps against Enthusiasme. 56. Of the raised language of Enthusiasts; and of
what may extraordinarily fall from them. 57. Of Enthusiastic prophecy that
ordinarily happens to fools and madmen, and the reason why; as also why
Extaticall men foresee things to come, and of the uncertainty of such
predictions. 58. That if an Enthusiast should cure some diseases by touching or
stroaking the party diseased, that yet it might be no true mira^le. 59. Of the
remote Notions, mysterious Style, and moving Eloquence of Enthusiasts. 60. How
we shall distinguish betwixt pure Religion and Complexion. 61. That the
devotional Enthusiasm of holy and sincere souls has not at all been taxed in
all this Discourse. 62. That the fuel of devotion even in warrantable and
sincere Enthusiasme is usually Melancholy. 63. That there is a peculiar
advantage in Melancholy for divine speculations, and a prevention of the
Atheists objection thereupon. 64. How it comes to pass that men are so nimble
and dexterous in finding the truth of some things, and so slow and heavy in
othersome, and that the dullness of the Atheists perception in divine matters
is no argument against the truth of Religion.
A short Discourse of the Nature, Causes, Kinds, and Cure of Enthusiasme.
1. HAving undertaken the republishing of the two following Books, and reduced
them both under one common Title of Enthusiasme, I think it not amiss to speak
somewhat by way of Preface, concerning the nature of that Disease, partly
because it may be the better discerned of what good use the Author's pains are
against this distemper of Fantastrie and Enthusiasme, and partly because by a
more punctual discovery of this distemper, the distemper it self, or at least
the ill influence of it upon the credulous and inconsiderate, may be prevented.
For where the natural causes of things are laid open, there that stupid
reverence and admiration which surprises the ignorant, will assuredly cease.
Which is a thing of no less consequence then the preserving of that honest and
rational way of the education of youth in liberal Arts and Sciences, and
upholding of Christian Religion it self from being supplanted and overturned
from the very foundations, by the dazeling and glorious plausibilities of bold
Enthusiasts, who speaking great swelling words of vanity, bear down the weak
and unskilful multitude into such a belief of Supernatural graces and
inspirations in their admired Prophet, that they will not st^ck to listen to
him, though he dictate to them what is contrary, not only to solid Reason and
the judgment of the most learned and pious in all ages, but even to the
undoubted Oracles of the holy Scriptures themselves.

Wherefore for the detecting of this mysterious Imposture, we shall briefly,
and yet, I hope, plainly enough, set out the Nature, Causes, Kinds, and Cure of
this mischievous Disease.

2. The Etymology, and variety of the significations of this word Enthusiasme
I leave to Critics and Grammarians, but what we mean by it here, you shall
fully understand after we have defined what Inspiration is: For Enthusiasme is
nothing else but a misconceit of being inspired. Now to be inspired, is to be
moved in an extraordinary manner by the power or Spirit of God to act, speak,
or think what is holy, just, and true. From hence it will be easily understood
what Enthusiasme is, viz. A full, but false persuasion in a man that he is
inspired.

3. We shall now enquire into the Causes of this Distemper^ how it comes to
pass that a man should be thus befooled in his own conceit: And truly unless
we should offer less satisfaction then the thing is capable of, we must not
only treat here of Melancholy, but of the Faculties of the Soul of man,
whereby it may the better be understood how she may become obnoxious to such
disturbances of Melancholy, in which she has quite lost her own judgment and
freedom, and can neither keep out nor distinguish betwixt her own fancies and
real truths.

4. We are therefore to take notice of the several Degrees and Natures of the
faculties of the Soul, the lowest whereof she exercises without so much as any
perception of what she does, and these operations are fatal and natural to
her so long as she is in the body, and a man differs in them little from a
Plant, which therefore you may call the Vegetative or Plantall faculties of the
Soul. The lowest of those Faculties of whose present operations we have any
perception, are the outward Senses, which upon the pertingencie of the Object
to the Sensitive Organ cannot fail to act, that is, the Soul cannot fail to be
affected thereby, nor is it in her power to suspend her perception, or at
least, very hardly in her power. From whence it is plain that the Soul is of
that nature, that she sometimes may awake fatally and necessarily into
Phantasmes and Perceptions without any will or consent of her own.

Which is found true also in Imagination, though that Faculty be freer then
the former. For what are Dreams but the Imaginations and perceptions of one
asleep, which notwithstanding steal upon the Soul, or rise out of her without
any consent of hers, as is most manifest in such as torment us, and put us to
extreme pain till we awake out of them. And the like obreptions or unavoydable
importunities of Thoughts, which offer or force themselves upon the mind, may
be observed even in the day time, according to the nature or strength of the
complexion of our Bodies; though how the Body does engage the mind in Thoughts
or Imaginations, is most manifest in Sleep. For according as Choler, Sanguine,
Phlegm, or Melancholy are predominant, will the Scene of our dreams be, and
that without any check or curb of dubitation concerning the truth and existence
of the things that then appear: Of which we can conceive no other reason then
this, That the inmost seat of Sense is very fully and vigourously affected, as
it is by objects in the day, of whose real existence the ordinary assurance
is, that they so strongly strike or affect our sensitive Faculty; which
resides not in the external Organs, no more then the Artificers skill in his
instruments, but in some more inward Recesses of the brain: and therefore the
true and real seat of Sense being affected in our sleep, as well as when we
are awake, it is the less marvel the Soul conceits her dreams while she is a
dreaming, to be no dreams but real transactions.

5. Now that the inward sense is so vigoroufly affected in these dreams,
proceeds, as I conceive, from hence; because the Brains, Animal spirits, or
what ever the Soul works upon within, in her imaginative operations, are not
considerably moved, altered or agitated from any external motion, but keep
entirely and fully that figuration or modification which the Soul necessarily
and naturally moulds them into in our sleep, so that the opinion of the truth
of what is represented to us in our dreams, is from hence, that Imagination
then (that is, the inward figuration of our brain or spirits into this or that
representation) is far stronger then any motion or agitation from without,
which to them that are awake dimmes and obscures their inward imagination, as
the light of the Sun does the light of a candle in a room; and yet in this case
also according to Aristotle Fancy is (...), a kind of sense, though weak. But
if it were so strong as to bear it self against all the occursions and impulses
of outward objects, so as not to be broken, but to keep it self entire and in
equal splendor and vigor with what is represented from without, and this not
arbitrariously but necessarily and unavoydably, as has been already intimated,
the Party thus affected would not fail to take his own imagination for a real
object of sense: as it fell out in one that Cartesius mentions, (and there are
several other examples of that kind) that had his arm cut off, who being
hoodwinkt, complained of a pain in this and the other finger, when he had lost
his whole arm. And a further instance may be in mad or Melancholy men, who have
confidently affirmed that they have met with the Devil, or conversed with
Angels, when it has been nothing but an encounter with their own fancy.

6. Wherefore it is the enormous strength of Imagination (which is yet the
Soul's weakness or unweildinesse whereby she so far sinks into Phantasmes,
that she cannot recover her self into the use of her more free faculties of
Reason and Understanding) that thus peremptorily engages a man to believe a lie.

And if it be so strong as to assure us of the presence of some external
object which yet is not there, why may it not be as effectual in the begetting
of the belief of some more internal apprehensions, such as have been reported
of mad and fanaticall men, who have so firmly and immutably fancied themselves
to be God the Father, the Messiah, the Holy Ghost, the Angel Gabriel, the last
and chiefest Prophet that God would send into the world, and the like? For
their conceptions are not so pure or immateriall, nor solid or rational, but
that these words to them are always accompanied with some strong Phantasme or
full imagination; the fullness and clearness whereof, as in the case
immediately before named, does naturally bear down the Soul into a belief of
the truth and existence of what she thus vigorously apprehends; and being so
wholly and entirely immersed in this conceit, and so vehemently touched
therewith, she has either not the patience to consider any thing alleged
against it, or if she do consider and find her self entangled, she will look
upon it as a piece of humane sophistry, and prefer her own infallibility or the
infallibility of the Spirit before a^l carnal reasonings whatsoever; As those
whose fancies are fortified by long use and education in any absurd point of a
false Religion, though wise enough in other things, will firmly hold the
conclusion notwithstanding the clearest demonstration to the contrary. Now what
Custom and Education does by degrees, distempered Fancy may do in a shorter
time. But the case in both is much like that in dreams, where that which is
represented is necessarily taken for true, because nothing stronger enervates
the perception. For as the ligation of the outward Organs of Sense keeps off
such fluctuations or undulations of motion from without, as might break or
obscure these representations in sleep; so prejudice and confidence in a
conceit, when a man is awake, keeps his fond imagination vigorous and entire
from all the assaults of Reason that would cause any dubitation.

Nor is it any more wonder that his Intellectualls should be sound in other
things, though he be thus delirous in some one point, no more then that he that
thinks he sees the devil in a wood, should not be at all mistaken in the
circumstance of place, but see the very same path, flowers, and grass that
another in his wits sees there as well as himself.

To be short therefore, the Original of such peremptory delusions as mankind
are obnoxious to, is the enormous strength and vigor of the Imagination; which
Faculty though it be in some sort in our power, as Respiration is, yet it will
also work without our leave, as I have already demonstrated, and hence men
become mad and fanaticall whether they will or no.

7. Now what it is in us that thus captivates our Imagination, and carries it
wide away out of the reach or hearing of that more free and superior faculty
of Reason, is hard particularly to define. But that there are sundry material
things that do most certa^nly change our mind or Fancy, experience does
sufficiently witness. For our Imagination alters as our Blood and Spirits are
altered, (as I have above intimated and instanced in our dreams) and indeed
very small things will alter them even when we are awake; The mere change of
weather and various tempers of the air, a little reek or suffumigation, as in
those seeds Pomponi^u Mela mentions, which the Thracians, who knew not the use
of wine, wont at their feasts to cast into the fire, whereby they were
intoxicated into as high a measure of mirth, as they that drink more freely of
the blood of the grape: The virtue of which is so great, that as Josephus
phrases it, it seems to create a new soul in him that drinks it, (...), It
transforms and regenerates the soul^ into a new nature. But it does most
certainly bring a new scene of thoughts very ordinarily into their minds that
have occasion to meddle with it. Which made the Persians undertake no weighty
matter nor strike up a bargain of any great consequence, but they would
consider of it first both welnigh fuddled and sober. For if they liked it in
all the representations that those two contrary Tempers exhibited to their
minds, they thought themselves well assured that they might proceed safely and
succesfully therein. And yet wine does not always so much change the thoughts
and alter our temper as heighten it, in so much that its effect proves sometime
contrary, only by reason of the diversity o^ persons; some being weeping
drunk, others laughing, some kind, others raging; as it happens also in those
that are stung with the Tarantula. Alii perpetuo rid^nt, alii canunt, alii
plorant, etc. as Sennertus observes out of Matthiolus. But that which they both
seem most to admire is, That the Fancy of the Tarantulati should be so
mightily carried away with Music; for they do not only forget their pain, but
dance incessantly. Of which Epiphanius Ferdinandus tells a very remarkable
story of an old man ninety four years of age, that could scarce creep with a
staff, who yet being bit by the Tarantula, presently upon the hearing of Music
leaped and skipped like a young kid. Akin to this is that kind of madness
which they call S. Vitus his Dance, which disease Sennertus rightly affirms to
proceed from a certain malignant humor gendred in the body, of near cognation
with this poison of the Tarantula; which will help us for the explicating of
the Causes of stranger workings on the fancy then has yet been mentioned. As
for example, in the (...), and (...), which are distempers of the mind, whereby
men imagine themselves to be Wolves, Cats, or Dogs.

8. There are several Relations in the forenamed Author concerning the power
that nourishment has to work upon imagination, and to change a man's disposition
into the nature of that creature whose blood or milk does nourish him. A Wench
at Bresla being struck with an Epilepsie upon the seeing of a Malefactors head
cut off by the Executioner, when several other remedies failed, was persuaded
by some to drink the blood of a Cat, which being done, the wench not long after
degenerates into the nature and property of that Animal, cries and jumps like
a Cat, and hunts mice with like silence and watchfulness that they do,
pursuing them as close as she could to their very holes. This Narration he
transcribes out of Weinrichius, and has another short glance upon another in
the same writer, of one that being long fed with swines blood, took a special
pleasure in wallowing and tumbling himself in the mire: as also of another
Girl who being nourished up with Goats milk, would skip like a Goat and brouze
on trees as Goats use to do. We might add a fourth, of one, who by eating the
brains of a Bear became of a Bear-like disposition; but we will not insist upon
smaller considerations.

9. Baptista Porta drives on the matter much further, professing that he had
acquaintance with one that could, when he pleased, so alter the imagination of
a man, as he would make him fancy himself to be this or that Bird, Beast, or
Fish, and that in this madness the party thus deluded would move his body, as
near as it was capable, so as such Creatures use to do; and if they were
vocal, imitate also their voice. This intoxicating Potion is made of the
extract of certain herbs, as Solanum manicum, Mandrake, and others, together
with the heart, brain, and some other parts of this or that Animal, with whose
image they would infect the fancy of the party. And he does affirm of his own
experience that trying this feat upon some of his comrades, when he was young,
one that had gormundized much beef, upon the taking the potion, strongly
imagined himself to be surrounded with bulls, that would be ever and anon
running upon him with their horns.

10. What happens here in these cases where we can trace the Causes, sometimes
falls out where we cannot so plainly and directly find out the reason. For
Physicians take notice of such kind of madnesses as make men confidently
conceit themselves to be Dogs, Wolves, and Cats, when they have neither eat
the flesh nor drunk the blood of any Cat, Dog, or Wolf, nor taken any such
artificial potion as we even now spoke of to bring them into these diseases.
The causes of which cannot be better guessed at then has been by Sennertus in
that of S. Vitus his dance. For as there the body is conceived to be infested
by some malignant humor near akin to the poison of the Tarantula, so in these
distempers we may well conclude that such fumes or vapors arise into the brain
from some foulness in the body (though the particular causes we do not
understand) as have a very near analogy to the noxious humors or exhalations
that move up and down and mount up into the imagination of those that have
drunk the blood of Cats, or have been nourished with the milk of those Animals
above named, or taken such intoxicating potions as Baptista Porta has described.

11. We have given several instances of that mighty power there is in natural
causes to work upon and unavoidably to change our imagination. We will name
something now more general, whose nature notwithstanding is so various and
Vertumnus-like, that it will supply the place of almost all particulars, and
that is Melancholy; of which Aristotle gives witness that according to the
several degrees and tempers thereof men vary wonderfully in their
constitutions, it making some slow and sottish, others wild, ingenious, and
amorous, prone to wrath and lust, others it makes more eloquent and full of
discourse, others it raises up even to madness and Enthusiasme: and he gives
an example of one Maracus a Poet of Syracuse, who never versified so well as
when he was in his distracted fits. But it is most observable in Melancholy
when it reaches to a disease, that it sets on some one particular absurd
imagination upon the mind so fast, that all the evidence of reason to the
contrary cannot remove it, the parties thus affected in other things being as
sober and rational as other men. And this is so notorious and frequent that
Aretaeus, Sennertus, and other Physicians define Melancholy from this very
effect of it.

12. Aristotle affords us no examples of this kind, Others do. Democritus
junior, as he is pleased to style himself, recites several stories out of
Authors to this purpose. As out of Laurentius one concerning a French Poet,
who using in a feaver^ Vnguentum populeum to anoint his temples to conciliate
sleep, took such a conceit against the smell of that ointment, that for many
years after he imagined every one that came near him to sent of it, and
therefore would let no man talk with him but aloof off, nor would he wear any
new clothes, because he fancied they smelt of that ointment; but in all other
things he was wise and discreet, and would talk as sensibly as other men.
Another he has of ^ Gentleman of Limosen (out of Anthony Verduer) who was
persuaded he had but one leg, affrighted into that conceit by having that part
struck by a wild Boar, otherwise a man well in his wits. A third he has out of
Platerus, concerning a Countreyman of his, who by chance having fallen into a
pit where Frogs and Frogs-spawn was, and having swallowed down a little of the
water, was afterward so fully persuaded that there were young frogs in his
belly, that for many years following he could not rectify his conceit: He
betook himself to the study of Physic for seven years together to find a cure
for his disease: He traveled also in Italy, France, and Germany to confer with
Physicians about it, and meeting with Platerus consulted him with the rest. He
fancied the crying of his guts to be the croaking of the frogs, and when
Platerus would have deceived him by putting live frogs into his excrements that
he might think he had voided them and was cured; his skill in Physic made that
trick ineffectuall. For saving this one vain conceit, the man was, as he
reports, a learned and prudent man. We will add only a fourth out of
Laurentius, which is of a Nobleman of his time, a man of reason and discretion
in all other things, saving that he did conceit himself made of glass; and
though he loved to be visited by his friends, yet had a special care that they
should not come too near him, for fear they should break him. Not much unlike
to this is that of a Baker of Ferrara, that thought he was composed of butter,
and therefore would not sit in the sun, nor come near a fire for fear he should
be melted. It would be an infinite task to set down all at large. Sennertus has
given some hints of the variety of this distemper, remitting us to Schenkius,
Marcellus, Donatus, Forestus and others for more full Narrations. Some, says
he, are vexed and tormented with the fear of death, as thinking they have
committed some crime they never did commit, some fancy they are eternally
damned, nay they complain that they are already tormented with hell fire,
others take themselves to be a dying, others imagine themselves quite dead, and
therefore will not eat, others fear that the heavens will fall upon them,
others dare not clinch their hands for fear of bruising the world betwixt their
fists, some fancy themselves Cocks, some Nightingales, some one Animal, some
another, some entertain conference with God or his Angels, others conceit
themselves bewitched or that a black man or Devil perpetually accompanies them,
some complain of their poverty, others fancy themselves persons of honor,
Dukes, Princes, Kings, Popes, and what not? Much to this purpose may you see in
Sennertus, and more in Democritus junior.

13. That which is most observable and most useful for the present matter in
hand is; That notwithstanding there is such an enormous lapse of the fancy and
judgment in some one thing, yet the party should be of a sound mind in all
other, according to his natural capacities and abilities; which all Physicians
acknowledge to be true, and are ready to make good by innumerable examples.
Which I conceive to be of great moment more thoroughly to consider. I do not mean
how it may come to pass (for that we have already declared) but what excellent
use it may be of, for to prevent that easy and ordinary Sophisme which imposes
upon many, who, if an Enthusiast speak eloquently, and it may be rationally and
piously (you may be sure zealously and fervently enough and with the greatest
confidence can be imagined) are so credulous, that, because of this visible
dress of such laudable accomplishments, they will believe him even in that
which is not only not probable, but vain and foolish, nay, sometime very
mischievous and impious to believe; as, That the party is immediately and
extraordinarily inspired of God, that he is a special Messenger sent by him,
the last and best Prophet, the holy Ghost come in the flesh, and such like
stuff as this: which has been ever and anon set on foot in all ages by some
Enthusiast or other. Amongst whom I do not deny but there may be some who for
the main practical light of Christianity might have their judgments as
consistent, as those Melancholists above named had in the ordinary prudentiall
affairs of the world, but as for this one particular of being supernaturally
inspired, of being the last Prophet, the last Trumpet, the Angel in the midst
of Heaven with the eternal Gospel in his hand, the holy Ghost incorporated,
God come to judgment, and the like, this certainly in them, is as true, but
far worse, dotage, then to fancy a man's self either a Cock or Bull, when it
is plain to the senses of all that he is a Man.

14. But it being of so weighty a concernment I shall not satisfy my self in
this more general account of Enthusiasme, that it may very well be resolved
into that property of Melancholy whereby men become to be delirous in some one
point, their judgment standing untouched in others. For I shall. easily
further demonstrate that the very nature of Melancholy is such, that it may
more fairly and plausibly tempt a man into such conceits of inspiration and
supernatural light from God, then it can possibly do into those more
extravagant conceits of being Glass, Butter, a Bird, a Beast or any such thing.

15. For besides that which is most general of all, that Melancholy enclines a
man very strongly and peremptorily to either believe or misbelieve a thing (as
is plain in that passion of Suspicion and Jealousy, which upon little or no
occasion will win so full assent of the mind, that it will engage a man to
act as vigorously as if he were certain that his jealousies were true) it is
very well known that this Complexion is the most religious complexion that is,
and will be as naturally tampering with divine matters (though in no better
light then that of her own) as Apes and Monkies will be imitating the actions
and manners of men. Neither is there any true spiritual grace from God but
this mere natural constitution, according to the several tempers and workings
of it, will not only resemble, but sometimes seem to outstrip, by reason of
the fury and excess of it, and that not only in Actions, but very ordinarily
in Eloquence and Expressions; as if here alone were to be had that live sense
and understanding of all holy things, or at least as if there were no other
state to be paralleld to it. The event of which must be, if a very great
measure of the true grace of God does not intervene, that such a Melancholist
as this must be very highly puffed up, and not only fancy himself inspired,
but believe himself such a special piece of Light and Holiness that God has
sent into the world, that he will take upon him to reform, or rather annull the
very Law and Religion he is born under, and make himself not at all inferior
to either Moses or Christ, though he have neither any sound Reason nor visible
miracle to extort belief.

16. But this is still too general, we shall yet more particularly point out
the Causes of this Imposture. Things that are great or vehement, People are
subject to suspect they rise from some supernatural cause; insomuch that the
wind cannot be more then ordinary high, but they are prone to imagine the Devil
raised it, nor any sore Plague or Disease, but God in an extraordinary manner
to be the Author of it. So rude Antiquity conceived a kind of Divinity in
almost any thing that was extraordinarily great. Whence some have worshipped
very tall Trees, others large Rivers, some a great Stone or Rock, othersome
high and vast mountains, whence the Greeks confound great and holy in that one
word (...) that signifies both. And the Hebrews by the Cedars of God, the
mountains of God, the Spirit of God, and the like, understand high Cedars,
great Mountains, and a mighty Spirit or Wind. We may add also what is more
familiar, how old Women and Nurses use to tell little Children when they ask
concerning the Moon, ^^^ting at it with their fingers, that it is Gods Candle,
because it is so great a Light in the night. All which are arguments or
intimations, that man's nature is v^^y prone to suspe^t some special presence
of God in any thing that is great, or vehement. Whence it is a strong
temptation with a Melancholist when he feels a storm of devotion or zeal come
upon him like a mighty wind, his heart being full of affection, his head
pregnant with clear and sensible representations, and his mouth flowing and
streaming with fit and powerful expressions, such as would astonish an
ordinary Auditorie to hear; it is I say a shrewd temptation to him to think
that it is the very Spirit of God that then moves supernaturally in him, when
as all that excess of zeal and affection and fluencie of words is most
palpably to be resolved into the power of Melancholy, which is a kind of
natural inebriation. And that there is nothing better then nature in it, it is
evident both from the experience of good and discreet men, who have found
themselves strangely vary in their zeal, devotion and elocution as Melancholy
has been more or less predominant in them, and also from what all may observe
in those that have been wicked, mad and blasphemous, and yet have surpassed in
this mistaken gift of prayer; as is notorious in Hacket, who was so besotted
with a conceit of his own zeal and eloquence, that he fancyed himself the
Holy Ghost.

17. And when men talk so much of the Spirit, if they take notice what they
ordinarily mean by it, it is nothing else but a strong and impetuous motion
whereby they are zealously and fervently carried in matters of Religion: so
that Fervor, Zeal, and Spirit is in effect all one. Now no Complexion is so
hot as Mel^^^oly when it is heated, being like boiling water, as Aristotle
observes ((...).) so that it transcends the flame of fire, or it is (...) heated
stone or iron when they are red hot, for they are then more hot by far then a
burning Coal. We shall omit here to play the Grammarian, and to take notice how
well Aristotle's (...) suites with the very word zeal of which we speak, but
shall cast our eyes more carefully upon the things themselves, and parallel out
of the same Philosopher what they call Spirit, to what he affirms to be
contained in Melancholy. (...). The spirit then that wings the Enthusiast in
such a wonderful ^anner, is nothing else but that flatulency which is in the
melancholy complexion, and rises out of the Hypochondriacal humor upon some
occasional heat, as wind out of an AEolipila applied to the fire. Which fume
mounting into the head, being first actuated and spirited and somewhat refined
by the warmth of the heart, fills the mind with variety of imaginations, and so
quickens and inlarges invention, that it makes the Enthusiast to admiration
fluent and eloquent, he being as it were drunk with new wine drawn from that
Cellar of his own that lies in the lowest region of his body, though he be not
aware of it, but takes it to be pure Nectar, and those waters of life that
spring from above. Aristotle makes a long Parallelisme betwixt the nature and
effects of wine and Melancholy, to which both Fernelius and Sennertus do
refer.

18. But this is not all the advantage that Melancholy affords toward
Enthusiasme, thus unexpectedly and suddenly to surprise the mind with such
vehement fits of zeal, such streams and torents of Eloquence in either
exhorting others to piety, or in devotions toward God; but it adds a greater
weight of belief that there is something supernatural in the business, in that
the same complexion discovers it self to them that lie under it in such
contrary effects. For as it is thus vehemently hot, so it is as stupidly cold;
whence the Melancholist becomes faithless, hopeless, heartlesse and almost
witless. Which Ebbs of his constitution must needs make the overflowing of it
seem more miraculous and supernatural. But those cold and abject fits of his
make him also very sensibly and winningly Rhetorical, when he speaks of
disconsolation, desertion, humility, mortification, and the like, as if he
were truly and voluntarily carried through such things, when as only the
fatal necessity of his complexion has violently dragged him through the mere
shadows and resemblances of them. But he finding himself afterward beyond all
hope or any sense or presage of any power in himself lifted aloft again, he
does not doubt that any thing less was the cause of this unexspected joy and
triumph, then the immediate arm of God from heaven that has thus exalted him,
when it is nothing indeed but a Paroxysme of Melancholy which is like the
breaking out of a flame after a long smoking and reeking of new rubbish laid
upon the fire. But because such returns as these come not at set times, nor
make men sick, but rather delight them, they think there is something divine
therein, and that it is not from natural causes.

19. There is also another notorious Mockery in this Complexion, Nature
confidently avouching her self to be God, whom the Apostle calls Love, as if it
were his very essence; when as indeed it is here nothing else but Melancholy
that has put on the garments of an Angel of light. There is nothing more true
then that Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and the highest perfection that is
competible to the soul of man; and that this also is so plain and unavoidable,
that a man may be in a very high degree mad, and yet not fail to assent unto
it. Nay, I dare say, Melancholy it self would be his monitour to reminde him of
it, if there were any possibility that he should forget so manifest and
palpable a Truth. For the sense of Love at large is eminently comprehended in
the temper of the Melancholist, Melancholy and wine being of so near a nature
one to the other. (...), But wine makes men amorous; which the Philosopher
proves in that a man in wine will kiss such persons as a sober man would
scarce touch with a pair of tongs, by reason of their age and ugliness. And
assuredly it was the fumes of Melancholy that infatuated the fancy of a late
new fangled Religionist, when he sat so kindly by a Gypsy under an hedge, and
put his hand into her bosom in a fit of devotion, and vaunted afterward of it
as if it had been a very pious and meritorious action.

20. But now that Melancholy partakes much of the nature of Wine, he evinces
from that it is so spiritous; and that it is so spiritous, from that it is so
spumeous: and that Melancholy is flatuous or spiritous, he appeals to the
Physicians, (...). Wherefore the Philosopher assigns another companion to
Venus besides the plump youth Bacchus, which the Poets bestow upon her, who,
though more seemingly sad, yet will prove as faithful an attendant as that
other, and this is Melancholy. (...). Now besides this Flatulencie that
solicits to lust, there may be such a due dash of Sanguine in the Melancholy,
that the complexion may prove stupendiously enravishing. For that more sluggish
Du^cour of the blood will be sometime so quickened and actuated by the
fierceness and sharpness of the Melancholy humor (as the fulsomnesse of
sugar is by the acrimony of Lemons) that it will afford far more sensible
pleasure; and all the imaginations of love, of what kind soever, will be ^arre
more lively and vigorous, more piercing and rapturous, then they can be in pure
Sanguine it self. From this complexion are Poets, and the more highly
pretending Enthusiasts: Betwixt whom this is the great difference, that a Poet
is an Enthusiast in jest, and an Enthusiast is a Poet in good earnest;
Melancholy prevailing so much with him, that he takes his no better then
Poetical fits, and figments for divine inspiration and real truth.

21. But that it is a mere natural flatuous and spiritous temper with a
proportionable Dosis of Sanguine added to their Melancholy, not the pure Spirit
of God that thus inacts them; is plainly to be discovered not only in their
language, which is very sweet and melting, as if sugar plums lay under their
tongue, but from notorious circumstances of their lives. And in my apprehension
it will be a sufficient pledge of this truth if we set before our eyes those
that have the most highly pretended to the Spirit, and that have had the
greatest power to delude the people. For that that pride and tumor of mind
whereby they are so confidently carried out to profess, as well as to conceive
so highly of themselves, that no less Title must serve their turns, then that
of God, the Holy Ghost, or Paraclet, the Messiah, the last and chiefest
Prophet, the Judge of the quick and the dead, and the like; that all this comes
from Melancholy is manifest by a lower kind of working of that complexion. For
to begin with the first of these Impostours, Simon Magus, who gave out that he
was God the father, he proved himself to be but a wretched lecherous man by
that inseparable companion of his, Helena, whom he called Selene; and affirmed
to be one of the Divine powers, when she was no better then a lewd Strumpet.
There was also one Menander a Samaritan, that vaunted himself to be the Savior
of the world, a maintainer of the same licentious and impure opinions with
Simon. Montanus professed himself to be the Spirit of God, but that it was the
spirit of Melancholy that besotted him, his two drabs Prisca and Maximilla
evidently enough declare, who are said to leave their own husbands to follow
him. We might add a third, one Quintilla, a woman of no better fame and an
intimate acquaintance of the other two, from whence the Montanists were also
called Quintillians. Manes also held himself to be the true Paraclet, but lest
a sect behind him indoctrinated in all licentious and filthy principles.
Mahomet more successful then any, the last and chiefest Prophet that ever
came into the world, (if you will believe him) that he was Melancholy, his
Epilepticall fits are one argument, and his permission of plurality of wives
and concubines, his lascivious descriptions of the joys of heaven or Paradise,
another. But I must confess I do much doubt whether he took himself to be a
Prophet or no; for he seems to me rather a pleasant witty companion, and shreud
Politician, then a mere Enthusiast: and so wise as not to venture his credit or
success upon mere conceits of his own, but he builds upon the weightiest
principles of the Religion of Jews and Christians: such as, That God is the
Creator and Governor of the world, That there are Angels and Spirits, That
the Soul of man is immortal, and that there is a Judgment and an everlasting
reward to come after the natural death of the body. So that indeed Mahometisme
seems but an abuse of certain principles of the doctrine of Moses and Christ to
a political design, and therefore in it self far to be preferred before the
vain and idle Enthusiasmes of David George; who yet was so highly conceited of
his own light, that he hoped to put Mahomet's nose out of joint, giving out of
himself that he was the last and chiefest prophet, when as lef^ to the
intoxication of his own Melancholy and Sanguine, he held neither heaven nor
hell, neither reward nor punishment after this life, neither Devil nor Angel,
nor the immortality of the Soul; but though born a Christian, yet he did
Mahomitise in this that he also did indulge plurality of wives. It should seem
that so dark and fulsome a dash of Blood there was mixed with his Melancholy,
that though the one made him a pretended Prophet, yet the other would not
suffer him to entertain the least presage of any thing beyond this mortal life.
He also that is said to insist in his steps, and talks so magnificently of
himself, as if he was come to judge both the quick and the dead, by an
injudicious distorting and forcing of such plain substantial passages of
Scripture as assure us of the existence of Angels and Spirits, and of a life to
come, bears his condemnation in himself, and proclaims to all the world that
he is rather a Priest of Venus or a mere Sydereal Preacher out of the sweetness
and powerfulness of his own natural Complexion, then a true Prophet of God, or
a friend of the mystical Bridegroom Christ Jesus; to whose very person as to
her Lord and Sovereign, the Church his spouse, does owe all reverential love
and honor. But such bloated and high swollen Enthusiasts that are so big in the
conceit of their own inward worth, have little either sense or belief of this
duty, but fancy themselves either equal or superior to Christ; Whom
notwithstanding God has declared supreme head over men and Angels. And yet they
would disthrone him, and set up themselves, though they can show no Title but
an unsound kind of popular Eloquence, a Rapsodie of slight and soft words,
rolling and streaming Tautologies, which if they at any time bear any true
sense with them, it is but what every ordinary Christian knew before; But what
they often insinuate by the by, is a bominably false, as sure as Christianity it
self is true. Yet such fopperies as these seem fine things to the heedless and
pusillanimous: but surely Christ will raise such a discerning spirit in his
Church, that by Evidence and conviction of Reason, not by force or external
power, such Mock-prophets and false Messiasses as these will be discountenanced
and hissed off of the stage; nor will there be a man that knows himself to be
a Christian that will receive them.

22, We have I think by a sufficient Induction discovered the condition and
causes of this mysterious mockery of Enthusiastical love in the highest
workings of it, and shown how it is but in effect a natural complexion, as very
often Religious zeal in general is discovered to be: As is also observable from
the tumultuous Anabaptists in Germany: For amongst other things that they
contended for, this was not the least, to wit, a freedom to have many wives:
So that it should seem that for the most part this religious heat in men, as it
arises merely from nature, is like Aurum fulminans, which though it fly upward
somewhat, the greatest force when it is fired is found to go downward. This
made that religious sect of the Beguardi conceit that it was a sin to kiss a
woman, but none at all to lie with her. The same furnished Carpocrates and
Apelles, `two busy sectaries in their time, the one with his Marcellina, the
other with his Philumena to spend their lust upon.

23. But enough of this. Nearest to this Enthusiastical affection of Love is
that of Joy and Triumph of Spirit, that Enthusiasts are several times actuated
withal to their own great admiration. But we have already intimated the near
affinity betwixt Melancholy and Wine, which cheers the heart of God and Man, as
is said in the Parable. And assuredly Melancholy that lies at first smoaring in
the heart and blood, when heat has overcome it (it consisting of such solid
particles, which then are put upon motion and agitation) is more strong and
vigorous then any thing else that moves in the blood and Spirits, and comes
very near to the nature of the highest Cordialls that are. Which Aristotle also
witnesses, asserting that Melancholy while it is cold, causes sadness and
despondency of mind, but once heated, (...), Ecstasies and Raptures with
triumphant joy and singing.

24. There are Three delusions yet behind which because they come into my
memory I will not omit to speak of, viz. Mystical interpretations of Scripture,
Quakings, and Visions, all which are easily resolved into effects of
Melancholy. For as for the first we have already shown that Melancholy as well
as Wine, makes a man Rhetorical or Poetical; and that Genius how fancieful it
is, and full of allusions and Metaphors and fine resemblances, every one knows.
And what greater matter is there in applying moral and spiritual meanings to
the history of the Bible, then to the History of Nature? and there is no
Rhetorician nor Poet but does that perpetually. Or how much easier is it to
make a story to set out a moral meaning, then to apply a moral sense to such
stories as are already a foot? And for the former AEsop was old excellent at it
without any suspicion of inspiration, and the later Sir Francis Bacon has
admirably well performed in his Sapientia Veterum, without any such peculiar or
extraordinary illapses of a divine Spirit into him, a business, I dare say, he
never dreamt of, and any man that understands him will willingly be his
Compurgatour.

25. And for Quaking, which deluded souls take to be an infallible sign they
are in actuated by the Spirit of God; that it may be only an effect of their
Melancholy is apparent: for none have so high passions as Melancholists; and
that Fear, Love or Veneration in the height will cause great Trembling, cannot
be denied. And to these passions none are any thing nigh so obnoxious as those
of the Melancholy Complexion, because of the deepness of their resentments and
apprehensions. That Fear causes trembling there is nothing more obvious, and it
is as true of Love, which the Comoedian had judiciously noted in that passage
where Phaedria upon the sight of his Thais, speaking to Parmeno, Totus tremo,
says he, horreoque post quam aspexi hanc. And for Veneration, which consists
in a manner of these two mixed together, it is a passion that Melancholy men are
soundly plunged in whether they will or no, when they are to make their
addresses to any person of honor or worth, or to go about some solemn or
weighty performance in public, they will quake and tremble like an Aspinleaf;
some have bin struck silent, others have fallen down to the ground. And that
Fancy in other cases will work upon the Spirits, and cause a tumultuous and
disorderly comotion in them, or so suffocate the heart that motion will be in a
manner quite extinct, and the party fall down dead, are things so familiarly
known, that it is enough only to mention them. Wherefore it is no wonder the
Enthusiast fancying these natural Paroxysms with which he is surprised, to be
extraordinary visits of the Deity, and illapses of the holy Ghost into his
Soul; which he cannot but then receive; with the highest Veneration imaginable;
it is no wonder, I say, that Fear, and Joy, and Love should make such a
confusion in his spirits, as to put him into a fit of trembling and quaking. In
which case the fervor of his spirits and heat of imagination may be wrought-up
to that pitch that it may amount to a perfect Epilepsie, as it often happens in
that sect they call Quakers, who undoubtedly are the most Melancholy Sect that
ever was yet in the world.

26. Now that Melancholy disposes a man to Apoplexies and Epilepsies is
acknowledged both by Philosophers and Physicians. For what is Narcotical and
deads the motion of the Spirits, if it be highly such, proves also
Apoplectical. Besides gross vapors stopping the Arteriae Carotides and Plexus
Coroides, and so hindering the recourse and supply of Spirits, may do the same.
Some would illustrate the matter from the fumes of Charcoale; that has often
made men fall down dead. But take any or all of these, Melancholy is as like to
afford such noxious vapors as any other temper whatsoever. And that an
Epilepsie may arise from such like causes, these two diseases being so near a
kin, as Galen writes, is very reasonable; and that the morbifick matter is,
(...), as his Master Pelops expresses it, it is evident from the sudden and
easy discussion of the fit.

27. But in both these there being a ligation of the outward senses, what ever
is then represented to the mind is of the nature of a dream. But these fits
being not so ordinary as our natural sleep, these dreams the praecipitant and
unskilful are forward to conceit to be Representations extraordinary and
supernatural, which they call Revelations or Visions, of which there can be no
certainty at all no more then of a Dream.

28. The mention of Dreams puts me in mind of another Melancholy Symptom,
which Physicians call Ecstasy, which is nothing else but Somnus praeter naturam
profundus, the causes whereof are none other then those of natural sleep, but
more intense and excessive; the effect is the deliration of the party after he
awakes; for he takes his dreams for true Histories and real Transactions. The
reason whereof, I conceive, is the extraordinary clearness and fullness of the
representations in his sleep, arising from a more perfect privation of all
communion with this outward world, and so there being no interfareings or
cross-strokes of motion from his body so deeply overwhelmed and bedeaded with
sleep, what the imagination then puts forth of her self, is as clear as broad
day, and the perception of the soul is at least as strong and vigorous as it is
at any time in beholding things awake, and therefore Memory as thoroughly
sealed therewith, as from the sense of any external Object. The vigor and
clearness of these Visions differs from those in ordinary sleep, as much as the
liveliness of the images let in artificially into a dark room accurately
darkened from those in one carelessly made dark, some chinks or crevises letting
in light, where they should not. But strength of perception is no sure ground
of truth: And such visions as these let them be never so clear, yet they are
still in the nature of dreams. And he that regards dreams is like him that
catches at a shadow, or follows after the wind, as Syracides speaks.

29. Whether it be in any man's power to fall into these Epilepsies, Apoplexies,
or Ecstasies when he pleases, is neither an useless nor a desperate question:
For we may find a probable solution from what has been already intimated; for
the Enthusiast in one of his Melancholy intoxications (which he may accelerate
by solemn silence and intense and earnest meditation) finding himself therein
so much beyond himself, conceits it a sensible presence of God, and a
supernatural manifestation of the Divinity, which must needs raise that passion
of Veneration, and most powerful Devotion, which consists of Love, Fear, and
Joy, which single passions have been able to kill men or cast them into a
trance, how can they then (if they be well followed by imagination and desire
in the Enthusiast of a nearer union with this inward Light) fail to cast him
into Tremblings, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Ecstasies, and what not; Melancholy
being so easily changeable into these symtomes? And it is very probable that
this may be the condition of some of those they call Quakers. But for St.
Austins African Presbyter (who was named Restitutus) who by a lamenting voice
or mournful tone would be cast into such an Ecstasy, he is found alone in that,
and is hardly imitable, it arising from some proper and peculiar constitution
of his own. That Cardan and Facius his Father could cast themselves when they
would into an Ecstasy, I can as easily believe as that the Laplanders could,
and do in my own judgment refer them both to one cause, which Sennertus notes
that Cardan somewhere does intimate concerning his Father, that he had (...),
which I conceive also to be the case of the worser sort of Quakers. But this
kind of Enthusiasme I do not so much aim at as that which is Natural.

As for those Visions that Enthusiasts see wakeing, we have already referred
their causes to that strength of Imagination in a Melancholy Spirit.

30. And for that fervor of mind whereby they are carried out so confidently
to foretell things to come, that there is nothing supernatural in it may be
evidenced in that either some probable grounds, that ordinary prudence may
discover, might move them to think this or that, the vehemence of their own
Melancholy adding that confidence to their presage as if God himself had set it
upon his Spirit; or else in that they most frequently presage false, and
therefore when they foretell true, it is justly imputed to chance. As a man
that dreams a nights, it is a hard case if in so many years dreams he light not
on some (...), as they are called, such as are plainly and directly true,
(...), as they that shoot often may some times hit the mark, (as Plutarch speaks)
but it is more by luck then good skill.

31. And yet notwithstanding humbly conceive that there may be such a presage
in the spirit of a man that is to act in things of very high concernment to
himself or to the public, as may be a sure guide to him, especially if he
continue sincerely devout and pious. For it is not at all improbable but such
as act in very public affairs in which Providence has a more special hand,
that these agents driving on her design may have a more special assistance and
animation from her. Of which, as others have not the sense, so neither can they
imagine the manner of it. And this is the case, I think, wherein that of
Syracides may be verified, That a man's own heart will tell him more then seven
watchmen on an high Tower. But this is Enthusiasme in the better sense, and
therefore not so proper for our discourse who speak not of that which is true,
but of that which is a mistake; the Causes whereof we having so fully laid
down, we will now consider the Kinds of it, bur briefly and only so far forth
as suits with our present purpose and design.

Wherefore setting aside all accuracie, we shall content our selves to
distribute it from the condition of the Persons in which it resides, into
Political and Philosophical. For Enthusiasme most-what works according to the
natural Genius of the party it does surprise.

32. Wherefore those whose temper carries them most to Political affairs, who
love rule and honor and have a strong sense of civil rights, Melancholy
heating them makes them sometimes fancy themselves great Princes (at least by
divine assignment) and deliverers of the people sent from God, such as were in
likelihood the false Messiasses that deceived the people of the Jews, as
Theudas and that Egyptian Impostor, also Barcocab, Ionathas, Dositheus and
several others, who it is likely, it being the common fame amongst the Jews that
the Messiah the deliverer was about that time to come, according to the heat
and forwardness of their own Melancholy, conceited themselves to be him. Which
is the easier to believe, there being several instances in History of those
that have fancyed themselves Monarchs, Popes, and Emperors, when as yet they
have been but Foot-boys, Grooms, and Serving-men. Whether there might not be as
much of Villainy as Melancholy in some of these false Messiasses, if it be
suspected, it will be hard to take off the suspicion. But there was a German in
whom we may more safely instance not many years ago here in England, that
styled himself a Warrior of God, David the second, who in deep compassion of
the sufferings of his Country would very fain have got some few forces here in
England to carry over; with which he was confident he could have silenced the
enemy and settled all Germany in peace. The man seemed to be a very religious
man, and a great hater of Tyranny and oppression, and very well in his wits to
other things, only he was troubled with this infirmity that he fancyed
himfelfe that David the Prophets foretell of, who should be that peaceable
Prince and great Deliverer of the Jews. He published a short writing of his
which I had the opportunity of seeing, which was full of zeal and
Scripture-eloquence: I saw his person in London, if he that showed me him was
not mistaken. He was a tal proper man, of a good age, but of a very pale wasted
melancholy countenance. Another also of later years I had the hap to meet
withal, whose discourse was not only rational but pious, and he seemed to
have his wits very well about him, nor could I discover the least intimation to
the contrary, only he had this flaw that he conceited that he was by God
appointed to be that fifth Monarch of which there is so much noise in this age,
which imagination had so possessed him, that he would sometime have his servant
to serve him all in plate, and upon the knee, as a very learned and religious
friend of mine told me afterward.

33. Wherefore I do not look upon this man as so sober as the former, nor on
either as comparable to that David that was born at Delph, lived first in lower
Germany with those of his sect, after came to Basil, Anno 1544. and there dyed,
1556. and was dug up again, 1559. Wherein his prophecy of himself was in an
ill-favored manner fulfilled, who to uphold the fluctuating minds of his
followers, whom he would have persuaded that he was immortal, told them at his
death, that he should rise again within three years, presaging that of himself
that he denied would ever come to pass in any one else.

34 This David George a man of very low parentage, was yet in the judgment of
his very enemies, one of notable natural parts, a comely person to look upon,
and of a graceful presence. He was also square of body, yellow-bearded, gray
eyed bright and shining, grave and sedate in speech; in a word, all his
motions, gestures and demeanours were so decent and becoming, as if he had been
wholly composed to honesty and godliness. He lived very splendidly and
magnificently in his house, and yet without the least stir or disorder. He was
a religious frequenter of the Church, a liberal reliever of the poor, a
comfortable visiter of the sick, obedient to the Magistrate, kind and affable
to all persons, discreet in all things, very cunning in some, as in his
closeness and reservednesse in his Doctrine to those of Basil, where he lived,
to whom he communicated not one Iota of it, but yet he sedulously dispersed it
in the further parts of Germany both by books and letters, the main heads
whereof you shall hear as follows.

1. That the doctrine hitherto delivered by Moses, the Prophets, Christ
himself, and his Apostles, is maimed and imperfect, published only to keep men
in a childish obedience for a time, till the fullness and perfection of David
George his Doctrine should be communicated to the world, which is the only
doctrine that can make mankind happy, and replenish them with the knowledge of
God. 2. That David George is the true Christ and Messiah, the dear Son of God,
born not of the flesh but of the holy Ghost and Spirit of Christ, which God had
reserved in a secret place, his body being reduced to nothing, and has infused
it wholly into the soul of David George. 3. That this David the Messiah is to
restore the house of Israel, and reerect the Tabernacle of God, not by the
cross, afflictions and death, as the other Messiah; but by that sweetness and
love and grace that is given to him of his Father. 4. That the power of
remission of sins is given to this David George, and that it is he that is now
come to judge the world with the last judgment. 5. That the holy Scriptures,
the sayings and testimonies of the Prophets, of Christ and of his Apostles do
all point, if rightly understood in the true mystery of them, to the glorious
coming of David George, who is greater then Christ himself, as being born of
the spirit and not of the flesh. 6. That all sin and blasphemy against the
Father or the Son may be remitted or pardoned, but the sin against the holy
Ghost, that is, against David George, is never to be remitted. 7. That the
resurrection of Christ out of the grave, and the resurrection of the dead is a
mere mystery or Allegory. 8. That Angels and Devils are only good men and
evil men, or their Virtues and Vices. 9. That Matrimony is free, no obligation,
and that no man thereby is confined to one woman; but that procreation of
children shall be promiscuous or in common to all those that are born again or
regenerated by the spirit of David George.
These things are recorded in the Life and Doctrine of David George, published
by the Rector and University of Basil 1559.

35. As for his own writings not a little admired by some, his moving
eloquence, his powerful animations to the great duties of Godliness, I have
already laid down such natural Principles as they may be easily resolved into,
without any recourse to any supernatura^l Spirit. For a man illiterate, as he
was, but of good parts, by constant reading of the Bible will naturally
contract a more winning and commanding Rhetoric then those that are learned,
the intermixture of tongues and of artificial phrases debasing their style,
and making it sound more after the manner of men, though ordinarily there may
be more of God in it then in that of the Enthusiast.

36. If he may with some zeal and commotion of mind recommend to hi^ Reader,
Patience, Peaceablenesse, Meekness, Brotherly kindness, Equity, Discretion,
Prudence, Self-denial, Mortification, and the like, there is nothing in all
this but what his own Sanguine temper may suggest without any inspiration from
God. For there is no Christian virtue to be named which concerns manners, but
Complexion will afford a spurious imita^ion of it: and therefore they answering
in so near similitude one to another, it will be an easy thing to color over
those mere Mock-graces with Scripture Phrases; so that he that has but these
complexionall Virtues and a Scripturall style, amongst the less skillful will
look like an Apostle or Prophet, but amongst the rude Multitude he may boast
himself to be what he will without suspicion or contradiction. The most
unlikely of all these imitations is Self-deni^ll, which seems abhorrent from a
Sanguine temper; But Enthusiasme is not without a mixture of Melancholy^ and we
are speaking now of E^thusiastick Sanguine, in which the fiercer Passions will
also lodge, and therefore this Self-denial and Mortification may be nothing
else but the Sanguines cenflict and victory over the most harsh and fierce
Melancholy. And that it is the Reign of Sanguine, not the Rule of the Spirit,
is discoverable both from the complexion of the head of this sect, as also from
the general disposition of his followers, and that tender love they bear to
their own dear carkases, who would not, I dare say, suffer the least aching of
their little fingers by way of external Martyrdom for any Religion; and
therefore their prudence and discretion consists most in juglings,
aequivocat^ons, and slight tergiversations, peaceable compliances with an^thing
rather then to suffer in body or goods: which is the natural dictate of
Sanguine triumphant; which dominion yet seems far better then the Tyranny of
Choler and Melancholy, whose pragmatical ferocity can neither prove good to it
self nor just to others; being prone to impose, and as forward to avenge the
refusal of every frivolous and impertinent foppery or abhorred falsitie with
inhumane and cruel persecutions.

37. Now that Sanguine was the complexion of David George, the foregoing
description of his person will probably intimate to any Physiognomer. For it is
very hard to find an healthy body very comely and beautiful, but the same
proves more then ordinarily venereous and lustful. We might instance in several
both men and women. Helena, Lais, Faustina, Alcibiades, Ismael Sophi of Persia,
and Demetrius, who is said to have been of an admirable countenance, and
majestic graceful presence, mingled with gravity and benignity, also exceeding
full of clemency, justice, piety and liberality but so libid^nous and
volup^uous, that no King was ever to be compared to him.

38. But two surer signs are yet behind of this Prophets natural constitution,
which are, His denying of a life to come and existence of Angels or Spirits,
and his allowing of plurality or community of wives. The former whereof I must
confess I cannot so much impute to any thing as to a more luscious and fulsome
mixture of Sanguine in his Enthusiastic complexion. For nothing will so slake
a man's desires, or dead his belief of that more spiritual and immaterial state
and condition, as this sweet glut of blood that so thickens and clouds the
Spirits, that the mind cannot imagine or presage any thing beyond the present
concernment of this mortal Body. And of the latter I think it is acknowledged
by all, that no such genuine cause can be assigned as this same complexion of
Sanguine that disposes men so strongly to the love of women.

39 Wherefore this Enthusiast being overborne by the power of his own
constitution into the misbeliefe of those great promises of Eternal life, set
forth in the Scripture, took the holy writers thereof either to be mistaken, or
only to have intended Allegories by what they writ; and that fervor that he
found in himself to love, and peace, and equity and the like, boiling so high
as to the driving of him into a persuasion that he was inspired, he conceited
his misbelief of those precious promises of Immortality and glory in the
heavens, a special piece of illumination also; and the resurrection of the dead
to be nothing else but to be raised into a like ardency toward such things
with himself, and to a like misbelief with him of that celestial crown the
Apostle speaks of. And therefore he not being able to raise his mind by faith
to heaven, he brought heaven to earth in his vain imagination: Which was less
pains then Mahomet took, who was fain to walk to the mountain, when he saw the
mountain would not move to him.

40. This is a brief account of David George, whose error the Father of our
modern Nicolaitans did drink in so carefully, as if he were loath one drop
should spill beside. Never was that in Solomon so plainly verified in any as in
these two, As face answers to face, so the heart of man to man. Wherefore
concerning them both I dare pronounce, that though they equalized themselves to
Christ, and made themselves Judges of the quick and the dead, yet they were
more devoid of true judgment in matters of religion then the meanest of sincere
Christians; and though they have so deified, or (as they phrase it) begodded
themselves all over, I might say bedaubed themselves with the feigned and
counterfeit colors or paint of high swelling words of vanity to amaze the
vulgar, yet they were in truth mere men, of shallow minds and liquorsome
bodies, cleaving to the pleasures of the flesh, and so deeply relishing the
sweet of this present life, that all hope or desire of that better was quite
extinct in them; and therefore their settled and radicate ignorance made them so
Enthusiastically confident in their own error.

41. But that my zeal to the Truth may not turn to the injury of any, I cannot
pass by this Advertisement; That this poison we speak of is so subtly
conveyed, and silently supposed in the reading these writings, that a good man
and a true Christian may be easily carried away into an approbation of them
without any infection by them (as not minding what they imply or drive at) or
yet any defection from the main principles of Christianity; and indeed by how
much the heat seems greater toward the highest perfection of holiness, the
Reader is made the more secure of the Writers soundness in the main Essentials
of Religion, though it be far otherwise at the bottom. For Madness and
Melancholy drive high, and we have proved by diverse instances that a man may be
most ridiculously and absurdly wild in some one thing, and yet sound and
discreet in the rest, as Gazeus handsomely sets it out in a story of an old man
that conceited himself God the Father. And Acosta verifies it in a true
history of his own knowledge concerning a certain learned and venerable
Professor of Divinity in the K^^gdome of Peru, whom he does affirm to have been
as per^ectly in his senses, as to soundness of brain, as himself was at that
time when he wrote the Narration; Which being something long ^ shall transcribe
only what precisely makes to my purpose. This Peruvia^ Doctor would sadly and
soberly affirm that he should be a King, yea and a Pope too, the Apostolical
Sea being translated to those parts, as also that holiness was granted unto
him above all Angels and heavenly hosts, and above all Apostles, yea, that God
made profer unto him of Hypostatical union, but that he refused ^o accept of
it. Moreover that he was appointed to be Redeemer of the world as to matter of
Efficacy, which Christ, he said, had been no further then to Sufficiency
only. That all Ecclesiastical estate was to be abroga^ed, and that he would
make new Laws, plain and easy, by which the restraint of Clergymen from
marriage should be taken a way, and multitude of wives allowed, and all
necessity of Confession avoided. Which things he did maintain before the Judges
of the Inquisition with that earnestness and confidence, with so many and so
large citations out of the Prophets, Apocalypse, Psalms, and other books, with
such unexpected Applications, and Allegorical Interpretations of them, that the
Auditotory knew not whether they should laugh more at his fancy, or admire his
memory. But himself was so well a^sured of the matter, that nothing but death
could quit him of the delirium. For he dyed a Martyr to this piece of madness
of his, to the eternal infamy of his Judges, who were either so unwise as not
to know that Melancholy may make a man delirous as to some one particular
thing, though his Intellectuals be sound in others, or else so cruel and
barbarous as to murder a poor distracted man. The story you may read more at
large in a late Treatise concerning Enthusiasme; what I have transplanted
hither, is further to evidence the truth of what Physicians say of Melancholy,
that it may only befool the understanding in some one point, and leave it
sound in the rest; as also to confirm what I did above observe, that
Enthusiasts for the most part are intoxicated with vapors from the lowest
region of their Body, as the Pythiae of old are conceived to have been inspired
through the power of certain exhalations breathed from those caverns they had
their recesse in. For what means this bold purpose of contriving a new law for
plurality of wives amongst Christians, but that his judgment was over-clouded
by some venereous fumes and vapors?

42. That other kind of Enthusiasme I propounded was Philosophical, because
found in such as are of a more speculative and Philosophical complexion; and
Melancholy here making them prone to Religion and devotion, as well as to the
curious contemplation of things, these natural motions and affections toward
God may drive them to a belief that he has a more then ordinary affection
toward them, and that they have so special an assistance and guidance from
him, nay such a mysterious, but intimate and real union with him, that every
fine thought or fancy that steals into their mind, they may look upon as a
pledge of the Divine savor, and a si^gular illumination from God; imitating in
this the madness of Elionora Meliorina a Gentlewoman of Mantua, who being fully
persuaded she was married to a king, would kneel down and talk with him, as if
he had been there present with his retinue; and if she had by chance found a
piece of glass in a muck-hill, light upon an oyster shell, piece of tin or any
such like thing that would glister in the Sunshine, she would say it was a
jewel sent from her Lord and husband, and upon this account filled her cabinet
full of such trash. In like manner those inspired Melancholists stuff their
heads and writings with every flaring fancy that Melancholy suggests to them,
as if it were a precious Truth bestowed upon them by the holy Spirit, and with
a devotional reverence they entertain the unexpected Paroxysmes of their own
natural distemper, as if it were the power and presence of God himself in their
Souls.

43. This disease many of your Chemists and several Theosophists, in my
judgment, seem very obnoxious to, who dictate their own conceits and fancies
so magisterially and imperiously as if they were indeed Authentic messengers
from God Almighty. But that they are but Counterfeits, that is, Enthusiasts, no
infallible illuminated men, the gross fopperies they let drop in their writings
will sufficiently demonstrate to all that are not smitten in some measure with
the like Lunacy with themselves. I shall instance in some few things concealing
the names of the Authors, because they are so sacred to some.

44. Listen therefore attentively, for I shall relate very great mysteries. The
virtues of the Planets do not ascend, but descend. Experience teaches as much,
viz. That of Venus or Copper is not made Mars or Iron, but of Mars is made
Venus, as being an inferior sphere. So also Jupiter or Tin is easily changed
into Mercury or Quicksilver, because Jupiter is the second from the firmament,
and Mercury the second from the Earth. Saturn is the first from the heaven, and
Luna the first from the Earth. Sol mixeth it self with all, but is never
bettered by his Inferiors. Now know that there is a great agreement betwixt
Saturn or Lead, and Luna or Silver, Jupiter and Mercury, Mars and Venus,
because in the midst of these Sol is placed. What can it be but the heaving of
the Hypochondria that lifts up the mind to such high comparisons from a
supposition so false and foolish? But I have observed generally of Chemists and
Theosophists, as of several other men more palpably mad, that their thoughts
are carried much to Astrology, it being a fancyfull study built upon very
slight grounds, and indeed I do not question, but a relic of the ancient
superstition and Idolatry amongst the rude Heathens, which either their own
Melancholy, or something worse, instructed them in.

There are other pretty conceits in these Writers concerning those heavenly
Bodies, as, That the Stars and Planets, the Moon not excepted, are of the
same quality with precious stones that glister here on the earth, and that
though they act nothing, yet they are of that nature as that the wandering
Spirits of the air see in them as in a looking-glass things to come, and
thereby are enabled to prophecy.

That the Stars are made of the Sun, and yet that the Sun enlightens them.

That our eyes have their original from the Stars, and that that is the
reason why we can see the Stars.

That our eyes work or act upon all they see, as well as what they see acts on
them. That also is a very special mystery for an inspired man to utter; That
there is only Evening and Morning under the Sun.

That the Stars kindle heat in this world every where for generation, and
that the difference of Stars makes the difference of Creatures.

That were the heat of the Sun taken away, he were one light with God.

That all is Gods self.

That a man's self is God, if he live holily.

That God is nothing but an hearty Loving, friendly Seeing, good Smelling, well
T^sting, kindly Feeling, amorous Kissing, etc. Nor the Spirit, say I, that
inspires this mystery any thing but Melancholy and Sanguine.

That God the Father is of himself a dale of darkness, were it not for the
light of his Son.

That God could not quell Lucifers rebellion, because the battle was not
betwixt God and a beast, or God and a man but betwixt God and God, Lucifer
being so great a share of his own essence.

That Nature is the Body of God, nay God the Father, who is also the World, and
whatsoever is any way sensible or perceptible.

That the Starre-powers are Nature, and the Starre-circle the mother of all
things, from which all is subsists and moves.

That the Waters of this world are mad, which makes them rave and run up and
down so as they do in the channels of the Earth.

That the blew Orb is the waters above the Firmament.

That there be two kinds of Fires, the one cold and the other hot, and that
Death is a cold fire.

That Adam was an Hermaphrodite.

That the Fire would not burn, nor there have been any darkness, but for Adams
fall.

That it is a very suspicable matter that Saturn before the fall was where
Mercury, and Mercury where Saturn is.

That there are Three souls in a man, Animal, Angelical, and Divine; and that
after Death the Animal Soul is in the grave, the Angelical in Abraham's bosom,
and the Divine soul in Paradise.

That God has eyes, ears, nose, and other corporeal parts.

That every thing has sense, imagination, and a fiduciall Knowledge of God in
it, Metals, Meteors and Plants not excepted.

That this earth at last shall be calcined into Crystal.

That at the center of the earth is the Fire of hell, which is caused and
kindled by the Primum mobile and influences of the Stars.

That the Artick pole draws waters by the Axeltree, which after they are
entered in, break forth again by the Axeltree of the Antartick.

That the Moon as well as the Stars are made of a less pure kind of fire
mixed with air.

That the pure Blood in man answers to the Element of fire in the great world,
his heart to the Earth, his Mouth to the Artick pole, and the opposite Orifice
to the Antartick pole.

That the proper seat of the Mind or Understanding is in the mouth of the
Stomach or about the Spleen.

That Earthquakes and Thunders are not from natural causes, but made by Angels
or Devils.

That there were no Rain-bowes before Noah's flood.

That the Moon is of a conglaciated substance, having a cold light of her own,
whereby the light of the Sun which she receives and casts on us becomes so cool.

45. Hitherto our Collections have been promiscuous, what follows is out of
Paracelsus only; as for example:

That the variety of the Altitudes of the Sun does not cause Summer and Winter,
because the Sun has the same heat, be he higher or lower, but that there be
AEstivall and Hybernall Stars that are the grand causes of these seasons.

That the absence of the Sun is not the cause of night, for as much as his
light is so great that it may illuminate the earth all over at once as clear as
broad day, but that Night is brought on by the influence of dark Stars that
raye out darkness and obscurity upon the earth, as the Sun does light.

That the Gnomi, Nymphae, Lemures and Penates, Spirits endued with
understanding as much or more then Men, are yet wholly mortal, not having so
much as an immortal soul in them.

That the Stars are as it were the Phials, or Cucurbits, in which the
Meteoricall Sal. Sulphur, and Mercury are contained, and that the winds which
are made of these, by the AEthereall Vulcanes, are blown forth out of these
Emunctories, as when a man blows or breaths out of his mouth.

That the Stars are as it were the pots in which the Archeus or heavenly
Vulcan prepares pluvious matter, which exhaled from thence first appears in the
form of clouds, after condenses to rain.

That Hail and Snow are also the fruits of the Stars, proceeding from them as
flowers and blossoms from herbs or trees.

That Thunder is caused by the Penates, who taking AEthereall Sulphur,
Sal-nitre and Mercury, and putting them into their Al^del, that is their Star,
after a sufficient preparation there, the Star then powers them forth into
the air, and so they become the matter of Thunder, whose sound is so great and
terrible, because it is re-echoed from the arched roof of Heaven, as when a Gun
is let off under an hollow vault.

That the Lightnings without thunder are as it were the deciduous flowers of
the aestivall Stars.

That the Stars eat and are nourished, and therefore must ease themselves,
and that those falling Stars, as some call them, which are found on the earth
in the form of a trembling gelly are their excrement.

That those Meteors called Dracones volantes have a brutish understanding and
sense in them.

That the Parelii and Paraselenae are made by the Penates as by Artificers,
that counterfeit the form and shape of a silver Pot in adulterate metal.

That all Humane and natural understanding is in the Stars, and conveyed
from thence to man, and that he must suck it from thence to feed his soul, as
he takes in meat to nourish his body.

That the reason of Divination is this, That a man has a sydereall body besides
this terrestrial which is joined with the Stars; and so when this sydereall
body is more free from the Elements, as in sleep, this body and the Stars
confabulating together, the mind is informed of things to come.

That the Stars are struck with a terror or horror of the approach of any
man's death, whence it is that no man dies without some sign or notice from
them, as the dances of dead men, some noise in the house or the like.

That as by a divine faith the dead are raised and mountains cast into the
midst of the Sea, so by the faith of nature the influence of the Stars, who
know all the secrets of nature, is to be commanded, and thereby a man may know
naturally what is to come.

That Giants, Nymphs, Gnomi and Pygmies were the conceptions and births of the
imaginative power of the influence of the Stars upon matter prepared by them,
and that they had no souls, as it is most likely the Inhabitants of the more
remote parts of the world have none, as not being the offspring of Adam.

That a Fowler by the help of his Star need not go after birds, for they will
fly after him, and so Fishes swim to the Fisherman, and wild beasts follow
the hunter upon the same account of his Stars.

That the separation of the three parts of the world, Europe, Asia, Africa, is
a certain representation of the three Chymicall principles, Sal, Salphure and
Mercury, of which three the whole world was made.

That there is an artificial way of making an Homunculus, and that the Fairies
of the woods, Nymphs and Giants themselves had some such original, and that
these Homunculi thus made will know all manner of secrets and mysteries of art,
themselves receiving their lives, bodies, flesh, bone, and blood from an
artificial principle.

46. These are the rampant and delirous Fancies of that great boaster of Europe
Paracelsus, whose unbridled imagination and bold and confident obtrusion of his
uncouth and supine inventions upon the world has, I dare say, given occasion to
the wildest Philosophical Enthusiasmes that ever was broached by any either
Christian or Heathen. That last conceit of his some have endeavored to
Allegorise, as the Persians do the Alcoran, ashamed of the gross sense of it,
but in my apprehension so frigidly and unsutably, that it would confirm a man
the more, that the letter is the intended truth; and if one compare it with
what he writes of Nymphs, Giants, and Fairies in his Scientia Astronomica, he
will make no further doubt of it.

47. There is some affectation of Religion, I confess, in his writings and
far more in his followers, who conceive themselves taught of God, when I
plainly discern, their brains are mee^ly heated and infected by this strong
spirit of Phantastrie that breaths in Paracelsus his books. I know it is no
part of Prudence to speak slightly of those that others admire, but that
Prudence is but Craft that commands an unfaithful silence. And I know not how
any honest man can discharge his conscience in prudentially conniving at such
falsities as he sees ensnare the minds of men, when they do not only abuse
their Intellectualls by foppish and ridiculous conceptions, but insinuate such
dangerous and mischievous opinions as supplant and destroy the very
Fundamentalls of Christian Religion. For I appeal to any man, what is nearer to
ancient Paganism then what this bold writer has uttered concerning the
Stars? or what Sanctuary so safe for the Atheist that derides and eludes all
Religion, then such a miraculous influence of the heavens as Paracelsus
describes in his Scientia Astronomica? Wherefore I should be very much amazed
at the Madness and Inconsistency of him and his followers, who have ever and
anon a fling against Heathen Philosophy, when themselves take into their
writings the very dregs of it, viz. the gross principles of the ancient Pagan
superstition and Idolatry, did I not remember that they are Enthusiasts and
follow not the guidance of Reason, but the strength of Fancy.

Jupiter est quodcunque vides, etc.
This taken in the coursest sense, I make no question but it was the grand
Principle from whence did flow so many varieties and impurities of the Pagan
superstition, they fancying they met God in every object of their senses; and
our exorbitant Enthusiasts profess, That every thing is God in love or wrath:
Which, if I understand any thing, is no better then Atheism. For it implies
that God is nothing else but the Universal Matter of the world, dressed up in
several shapes and forms, in sundry properties and qualities; some grateful,
some ungrateful; some holy, some profane; some wise, some senseless; some
weak, some strong, and the like. But to slice God into so many parts is to
wound him and kill him, and to make no God at all.

48. Again, how does Paracelsus justify the Heathens worshipping the Stars,
he making them such knowing, powerful, and compassionate spectatours of humane
affairs! And why might they not pray to them as Anne Bodenham the Witch did to
the Planet Jupiter for the curing diseases, if they have so much power and
knowledge as to generate men here below, and confer gifts upon them? For it
would be no more then asking a man's Father or Godfather blessing. For if it be
admitted that any one nation is begot by the Stars, the Atheist will
assuredly assume that they are all so. Moreover how shall we repair the loss
(and damage done to the authority of our blessed Savior his miracles? whereby
not only Christianity, but the first Fundamentalls of all true Religion are
eminently established, viz. the discovery of a Special and Particular
Providence of God; and an hope of a Life to come. For if the Stars can make
such living creatures of prepared matter that have sense and understanding,
which yet have no immortal souls, but wholly return into dead matter again, why
is it not so with men as well as them? And if they can contribute the power of
such wonder-working wisdom as was in Moses and in Christ, or what is so very
nigh to it, what footsteps does there remain of proof that there is any God or
Spirits? For all is thus resolvable into the power of the stars. A thing that
that zealous and industrious Atheist Caesar Vaninus triumphs in exceedingly in
his Amphitheatrum aeternae Providentiae: Where he cites several Astrological
passages out of Cardan under pretense to refute them, in which he fetches the
original of those three eminent Lawgivers, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet, from
the influence of the stars. The law of Moses is from Saturn, says Cardan, that
of Christ from Jupiter and Mercury, that of Mahomet from Sol and Mars: The Law
of the Idolaters from the Moon and Mars. And in another place Cardan imputes
that sweetness, and meekness, and wisdom, and eloquence that was in our
Savior, whereby he was able to dispute in the Temple at twelve years of age,
to the influence of Jupiter. Pomponatius also acknowledges the wisdom and
miracles of Christ, but refers all to the stars, a man as far laps't into
Atheism, I conceive, as Vaninus himself; so that these wild fancies of the
Enthusiasts are in truth the chief Props or Shelters that Atheists uphold or
defend themselves by. But how fancieful and confounded an account there is of
Astrology, let any man that has patience as well as sobriety of reason, judge.

49. I do not speak these things as if I thought either Paracelsus or his
followers thus Atheistical, but to show their Phantastrie and Enthusiasme, they
so hotly pretending to matters of Christianity and Religion, and yet handling
them so grossly and indiscreetly, blurting out any garish foolery that comes
into their mind, though it be quite contrary to the Analogy of Faith, nor has
any show of ground in solid Reason, only to make themselves to be stared upon
and wondered at by the world. But the event of it is, that as some admire them,
so others execrate them, as men of an impious and diabolical spirit. Which I
confess I think too harsh a censure, well meaning men being liable to
Melancholy and Lunacies as well as to Agues and burning Fevers. Yet a man
should be so far off from thinking the better of any discovery of Truth by an
Enthusiastic spirit, that he should rather for that very cause suspect it,
because that temper that makes men Enthusiastical is the greatest enemy to
Reason, it being more thick and muddy, and therefore once heated intoxicates
them like wine in the must, and is more likely to fill their brains full of
odd fancies then with any true notions of Philosophy. But men of a purer
blood, and finer spirits, are not so obnoxious to this distemper: For this is
the most natural seat of sublimer Reason; when as that more mechanical kind of
Genius that loves to be tumbling of and trying tricks with the matter (which
they call making experiments) when desire of knowledge has so heated it that it
takes upon it to become Architectonical and fly above its sphere, it commits
the wildest hallucinations imaginable, that material or corporeal fancy
egregiously fumbling in more subtle and spiritual speculations. This is that
that commonly makes the Chemist so pitiful a Philosopher, who from the narrow
inspection of some few toys in his own art, conceives himself able to give a
reason of all things in Divinity and Nature; as ridiculous a project, in my
judgment, as that of his that finding a piece of a broken oar on the sand,
busied his brains above all measure to contrive it into an entire ship.

50. What I have hitherto spoken, I would have so understood as coming from one
that neither contemns the well-meaning of the Theosophist, or disallows of the
industry of the Chemist, but I shall ever excuse my self from giving any
credit to either, any further then some lusty miracle, transcendent medicine,
or solid Reason shall extort from me.

51. We have spoken of the kinds of Enthusiasme so far as we held it
serviceable for our design, we shall now touch upon the Cure of this Disease.
Where waving all pretense to the knowledge of Physic or acquaintance with the
Apothecaries shop, we shall set down only such things as fall under a moral or
Theological consideration, giving only instructions for the guidance of a man's
life in reference to this grand error of Enthusiasme: which a sober man cannot
well determine whether it be more ridiculous, or deplorable and mischievous.
Now the most sovereign medicine that I know against it, is this Diatrion or
Composition of Three excellent Ingredients, to wit, Temperance, Humility, and
Reason, which as I do not despair but that it may recover those that are
somewhat far gone in this Enthusiastic distemper, so I am confident, that it
will not fail to prevent it in them that are not as yet considerably smitten.

52. By Temperance I understand a measurable Abstinence from all hot or
heightning meats or drinks, as also from all venereous pleasures, and tactual
delights of the body, from all softness and effeminacy, a constant and
peremptory adhesion to the perfectest degree of chastity in the single life,
and of Continency in wedlock, that can be attained to. For it is plain in
sundry examples of Enthusiasme above named, that the more hidden and lurking
fumes of lust had tainted the fancies of those Pretenders to Prophecy and
Inspiration. We will add also to these, moderate exercise of Body, and
seasonable taking of the fresh air, a due and discreet use of Devotion,
whereby the Blood is ventilated and purged from dark oppressing vapors; Which a
temperate diet, if not fasting, must also accompany; or else the more hot and
zealous our addresses are, the more likely they are to bring mischief upon our
own heads, they raising the feculency of our intemperance into those more
precious parts of the Body the Brains, and animal Spirits, and so intoxicating
the mind with fury and wildness.

53. By Humility I understand an entire Submission to the will of God in all
things, a Deadness to all self-excellency and preheminency before others, a
perfect Privation of all desire of singularity or attracting of the eyes of men
upon a man's own person: As little to relish a man's own praise or glory in the
world, as if he had never been born into it; but to be wholly contented with
this one thing, that his will is a subduing to the will of God, and that with
thankfulness and reverence he does receive what ever Divine Providence brings
upon him; be it sweet or sour, with the hair or against it, it is all one to
him, for what he cannot avoid it is the gift of God to the world in order to a
greater good. But here I must confess, That he that is thus affected, as he
seeks no knowledge to please himself, so he cannot avoid being the most
knowing man that is. For he is surrounded with the beams of Divine wisdom as
the low depressed Earth with the rays of the stars his deeply and profoundly
humbled soul being as it were the Center of all heavenly illuminations, as this
little globe of the Earth is of those celestial influences. I profess I stand
amazed while I consider the ineffable advantages of a mind thus submitted to
the Divine will, how calm, how comprehensive, how quick and sensible she is,
how free, how sagacious, of how tender a touch and judgment she is in all
things. When as pride and strong desire ruffles the mind into uneven waves and
boisterous fluctuations, that the aeteranl light of Reason concerning either
Nature or Life, cannot imprint its perfect and distinct image or character
there; nor can so subtle and delicate motions and impressions be sensible to
the understanding disturbed and agitated in so violent a storm. That man
therefore who has got this Humble frame of Spirit, which is of so mighty
concernment for acquiring all manner of wisdom as well Natural as Divine,
cannot possibly be so foolish as to be mistaken in that which is the genuine
result of a contrary temper, and such is that of Enthusiasme, that puffs up men
into an opinion that they have a more then ordinary influence from God that
acts upon their Spirits, and that he designs them by special appointment to be
new Prophets^ new Lawgivers, new David's, new Messiasses, and what not? when it
is nothing but the working of the Old man in them in a fanatical manner.

54. By Reason I understand so settled and cautious a Composure of mind, as will
suspect every high flown and forward fancy that endeavors to carry away the
assent before deliberate examination; she not enduring to be gulled by the
vigor or garishnesse of the representation, nor at all to be born down by the
weight or strength of it; but patiently to try it by the known Faculties of
the Soul, which are either the Common notions that all men in their wits agree
upon, or the Evidence of outward Sense, or else a clear and distinct Deduction
from these. What ever is not agreeable to these three, is Fancy, which testifies
nothing of the Truth or Existence of any thing, and therefore ought not, nor
cannot be assented to by any but mad men or fools. And those that talk so loud
of that higher Principle the Spirit with exclusion of these, betray their own
ignorance, and while they would by their wild Rhetoric dissuade men from the
use of their Rational faculties under pretense of expectation of an higher and
more glorious Light, do as madly, in my mind, as if, a company of men
travailing by night with links, torches and lanthorns, some furious Orator
amongst them should by his wonderful strains of Eloquence so befool them into a
misconceit of their present condition, comparing of it with the sweet and
cheerful splendour of the day, that they should through impatience and
indignation beat out their links, and torches and break a pieces their
lanthorns against the ground, and so choose rather to foot it in the dark with
hazard of knocking their noses against the next Tree they meet, and tumbling
into the next ditch, then to continue the use of those convenient lights that
they had in their sober temper prepared for the safety of their journey. But
the Enthusiasts mistake is not only in leaving his present guide before he has
a better, but in having a false notion of him he does expect. For assuredly
that Spirit of illumination, which resides in the souls of the faithful is a
Principle of the purest Reason that is communicable to the humane Nature. And
what this Spirit has, he has from Christ (as Christ himself witnesses) who is
the eternal (...) the all-comprehending Wisdom and Reason of God, wherein he
sees through the natures and Ideas of all things with all their respects of
Dependency and Independency, Congruity and Incongruity, or what ever habitude
they have one to another, with one continued glance at once. And what ever of
Intellectual light is communicated to us is derived from hence, and is in us
Particular Reason, or Reason in Succession, or by peece-meal. Nor is there any
thing the holy Spirit did ever suggest to any man but it was agreeable to, if
not demonstrable from, what we call Reason. And to be thus persuaded, how
powerful a Curb it will be upon the exorbitant impressions and motions of
Melancholy and Enthusiasme, I leave it to any man to judge.

55. To these three notable and more general Helps, we might add some
particular Considerations whereby we may keep off this Enthusiastical
pertinacity from our selves, or discover it when it has taken hold upon others.
As for example; If any man shall pretend to the discovery of a Truth by
inspiration that is of no good use or consequence to the Church of God, it is
to me little less then a Demonstration, that he is Fanatical. If he heaps up
Falsehoods as well as Truths, and pretends to be inspired in all, it is to me an
evidence he is inspired in none of those my steries he offers to the world.

56. There are certain advantages also that Enthusiasts have, which are to be
taken notice of, whereby they have imposed upon many; as, That they have spoken
very raisedly and divinely, which most certainly has happened to sundry persons
a little before they have grown stark mad; and that they may hit of something
extraordinary is no pledge of the truth of the rest. For this unquiet and
tumultuous spirit of melancholy shaking their whole bodily frame, is like an
Earthquake to one in a dungeon, which for a small moment makes the very walls
gape and cleave, and so lets in light for a while at those chinks; but all
closes up again suddenly, and the prisoner is confined to his wonted darkness;
This therefore was a Chance in nature, not a gracious visit of the Spirit of
God.

57. Hereunto you may also join the luck of Prophecy, be it sleeping or waking;
for such things have happened to mad men and fools, and Aristotle offers at a
pretty reason that may reach both. (...). To which he also adds why Extaticall
men foresee future things, (...). All which intimates thus much, That an
alienation of mind and rest from our own motions fits us for a reception of
impressions from something else, and so by a quick sense and touch we may be
advertised through a communication of motion from the Spirit of the world what
is done at a distance, or what causes are conspiring to bring this or that to
passe^ which turning off again make the Prediction false: For every thing that
offers to be, does not come into actual being. Wherefore all these Presages
are not (...) but may be only (...), they are the words of Aristotle, but such
as some skilful Platonist will most easily explain. All that I aim at is this.
That Prophecy may arise from on this side of the pure and infallible Deity,
and it is our mistake that we think that what predictions fall out true, are
certainly foreknown by the Foreteller. For the present conspiracy of causes
that shoot into the vacant mind may corrupt and alter, and be blown away like
clouds, that at first seem to assure the husbandman of a following rain.

58. But there is yet a stronger allurement then Prophecy to draw on belief to
the Enthusiast, which is a semblance of doing some miracle, as the curing some
desperate disease; as it happened very lately in this Nation. For it is very
credibly reported, and I think cannot be denied, That one by the stroaking of a
man's arm that was dead and useless to him, recovered it to life and strength.
When I heard of it, and read some few pages of that miraculous Physicians
writing, my Judgment was that the cure was natural, but that his blood and
spirits were boiled to that height that it would hazard his brain, which proved
true; for he was stark mad not very long after. There may be very well a
healing and sanative Contagion as well as morbid and venomous. And the Spirits
of Melancholy men being more massy, and ponderous, when they are so highly
refined and actuated by a more then ordinary heat and vigor of the body, may
prove a very powerful Elixir, Nature having outdone the usual pretenses of
Chymistrie in this case.

59. Whatever credit the Enthusiast may conciliate to himself from his moving
Eloquence, his mysterious style and unexpected notions, they are easily to be
resolved into that principle of Melancholy above named, the sense of which
complexion is so deep and vigorous, that it cannot fail to enable the Tongue to
tell her story with a great deal of life and affection; and the imagination is
so extravagant that it is far easier for her to ramble abroad and fetch in
some odd skue conceit from a remote obscure corner, then to think of what is
nearer and more ordinarily intelligible. But these things are so fully and
plainly comprehended in those General causes of Enthusiasme we have already
declared, besides what we have particularly touched upon before, that it will
not be worth our labor to insist any longer upon them. When we have satisfied
a Scruple or two concerning what we have said of Melancholy and Enthusiasme, I
think we shall have omitted nothing materially pertinent to this present
Speculation.

60. And the first is, How we can distinguish betwixt Religion and Melancholy,
we having attributed so notable effects thereunto. The second is, whether we
have not reviled and vilified all Enthusiasme whatsoever, and invited men to a
cold Pharisaicall stupidity and acting, merely according to an outward letter
without an inward testimony of life.

The meaning of the first scruple must be restrained to such things as in their
externals are laudable and approveable, viz. whether such as they, be out of a
Divine or Natural principle, whether from God or Complexion. For in those
things that are at their very first view discerned to be culpable, it is plain
that they are not from God. I answer therefore, That there are three main
discriminations betwixt the Spirit and the most Specious Complexion. The first
is, That that Piety or Goodness which is from the Spirit of God is universal,
extirpating every vice and omitting nothing that is truly a divine virtue. The
second is, A belief of those Holy Oracles comprehended in the Old and New
Testament, they being rightly interpreted, and particularly, of that Article,
That Jesus Christ, even he that died on the cross at Jerusalem betwixt two
thieves, is the Son of God, and Sovereign of men and Angels, and that he in
his own person shall come again to judge the quick and the dead. The third and
last is, An universal Prudence, whereby a man admits nor acts nothing, but
what is solidly rational at the bottom, and of which he can give a good
account, let the success be what it will. He that finds himself thus affected,
may be sure it is the Spirit of God, not the power of Complexion or Nature that
rules in him. But this man to others, if they be unbelieving and so rude and
unprepared as not to be capable of Reason, he is nothing to them, unless he
can do a miracle. How vain then is the Enthusiast that is destitute of both?
But those ancient Records of miracles done in the behalf of Christianity, are a
sufficient Testimony of the truth of our Religion to those whose hearts are
rightly fitted for it.

61. To the Second scruple I answer, That there has not one word all this time
been spoken against that true and warrantable Enthusiasme of devout and holy
souls, who are so strangely transported in that vehement love they bear toward
God, and that unexpressible Joy and Peace they find in him. For they are modest
enough and sober in all this, they witnessing no other thing to the world then
what others may experience in themselves, and what is plainly set down in the
holy Scriptures, That the kingdom of God is Righteousness and Peace and Joy
in the Holy Ghost. But in none of these things do they pretend to equallize
themselves to Christ, whom God has exalted above men and Angels, but do
profess the efficacy of his Spirit in them to the praise and glory of God,
and the comfort and encouragement of their drooping Neighbor. But what is
above this, without evident Reason or a Miracle, is most justly deemed to
proceed from no supernatural assistance but from some Hypochondriacall
distemper.

62. Moreover for these Rapturous and Enthusiasticall affections even in them
that are truly good and pious, it cannot be denied but that the fuel of them
is usually natural o^^^ntracted Melancholy, which any man may perceive that is
religious, unless his Soul and Body be blended together, and there be a
confusion of all; as it is in mistaken Enthusiasts, that impute that to God
which is proper to Nature. But Melancholy usually disposes, and the mind
perfects the action through the power of the Spirit. And a wise and holy man
knows how to make use of his opportunity according to that Monition of the
Apostle, If a man be sad, let him pray; if cheerful, let him sing Psalms.

63. But there is also a peculiar advantage in Melancholy for divine
speculations; and yet the mysteries that result from thence, are no more to be
suspected of proving mere fancies, because they may occasionally spring from
such a constitution, then Mathematical Truths are, who ow their birth to a
Mathematical complexion; Which is as truly a complexion as the Religious
complexion is; and yet no sober man will deny the truth of her Theorems. And as
it would be a fond and improper thing to affirm that such a complexion teaches
a man Mathematics, so it would also be to affirm that Melancholy is the only
mother of Religion.

64. But most certain it is and observation will make it good, That the souls
of men while they are in these mortal bodies are as so many Prisoners immured
in several prisons with their fingle loop-holes looking into several
quarters, and therefore are able to pronounce no further then their proper
prospect will give them leave. So the several Complexions of men's bodies
dispose or invite them to an easy and happy discovery of some things, when yet
notwithstanding if you confer with them concerning other some that lie not
within their prospect or the limits of their natural Genius, they will be
enf^^^ed either to acknowledge their ignorance, or if they will take upon them
to judge (which is the more frequent) they will abundantly discover their
error and mistake. Which sometimes seems so gross and invincible that a man
may justly suspect that they want not only the patience but even the power of
contemplating of some objects, as being not able to frame any conception of
what they are required to think of; and such are the duller sort of Atheists
that rank the notion of a Spirit and consequently of a God in the list of
Inconsistencies and ridiculous Nonsense. Wherein though they seek to reproach
Religion, they seem to me mainly to shame themselves, their Atheism being very
easy to be paralleld with Enthusiasme in this regard. For as some Enthusiasts
being found plainly mad in some one thing, have approved themselves sober
enough in the rest; so these Atheists though they show a tolerable wit and
acuteness in other matters, yet approve themselves sufficiently slow and heavy
in this.

FINIS.
OBSERVATIONS UPON Anthroposophia Theomagica, And Anima Magica Abscondita.

By ALAZONOMASTIX PHILALETHES.

Psalm. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their
wits end.

LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher. 1655.

To Eugenius Philalethes the Author of Anthroposophia Theomagica, and Anima
Magica Abscondita.
SIR,
THE Great deserved fame that followed this noble work of yours (the due
recompense of all eminent performances) engaged me to peruse the same, with
much eagerness of mind, and yet with no less attention; I being one of those,
that profess themselves much more willing to learn, then able to teach. And
that you may see some specimen of the fruits of your labor and my proficiency,
I thought fit to present you with these few Observations. Which, considering
the barrenness of the Matrix, (as you Chemists love to call it) in which they
were conceived, may be termed rather many then few: And that imputed to the
alone virtue, or Magical Multiplication, or Theomagical fecundity of your
Divine Writings, not at all to the sterility of my disfurnished Brain. Which
now notwithstanding, having gathered both warmth and moisture from the heat and
luxuriancy of your youthful fancy, finds it self after a manner transformed
into your own complexion, and translated into the same temper with your self.
In so much that although I cannot with the height of a protestation in the
presence of my glorious God (as your self has gallantly done ( in page 50.
lin. 17. of Anthropos. Theomag.) affirm that the affection and zeal to the
truth of my Creator has forced me to write, yet I dare profess in the word
of an honest man, that nothing but an inplacable enmity to immorality and
foolery has moved me at this time to set Pen to Paper. And I confess my
indignation is kindled the more, having so long observed that this disease is
grown even Epidemicall in our Nation. viz. to desire to be filled with
high-swolne words of Vanity, rather then to feed on sober Truth, and to heat
and warm our selves rather by preposterous and fortuitous imaginations, then
to move cautiously in the light of a purified mind and improved Reason.
Wherefore I being heightened with the same Zeal of discountenancing of Vanity
and conceitednesse, that your self is of promoting the Truth, you will permit
to me the same freedom in the prosecution thereof. For as we are grown near
akin in temper and complexion, so we ought mutually to allow each other in our
Actings alike, according to our common Temper and Nature, and the accustomed
Liberty of the Philalethean Family. In confidence whereof till we meet again
in the next Page, I take leave and subscribe my self,

A Chip of the same Block Alazonomastix Philalethes.

Observations upon Anthroposophia Theomagica, and Anima Magica Abscondita.
SECT. I.
Eugenius taxed of vain glory. Three main ways he atempts to approve himself an
extraordinary knowing man to the world. His affectation of seeming a Magician
discovered in his so highly magnifying Agrippa, in the dress of his Title Page,
and his submissive address to the Rosie-brotherhood. His indiscreet
exprobration of ignorance to the Aristoteleans for not knowing the very essence
or substance of the Soul. His uncivil calling Aristotle an Ape, and ignorant
taxation of his School concerning the frame of the world. The disproportionable
Delineation of Eugenius his World-Animal; and his unjust railing against
Aristotle's writings, which he uncivilly terms his Vomit.

ANd now brother Philalethes, that we are so well met, let us begin to act
according to the freeness of our tempers, and play the Tom Tell-troths. And
you indeed have done your part already. My course is next. Which must be spent
in the Observations I told you of, upon those profound Treatises of yours,
Anthroposophia Theomagica, and Anima Magica Abscondita.

And my first and general Observation is this, That the genius of my brother
Eugenies magical Discourse is such, that Simon Magus-like, he seems to have a
very liquoursome desire to be thought to be (...), some great man in the World.
And for the prosecution of this main end, he lays himself out chiefly in these
three subordinate designs. First, to be thought to have found out some new
concerning Truths, hitherto undiscovered. Secondly, to be more learned and
knowing then Aristotle, that great light of these European parts, for these
many hundred years together: and not only so, but to be so far above him, that
he may be his Master, that he may tew him, and lugge him, and lash him more
cruelly, then any Orbilius or choleric Pedagogue, his puny scholars. Thirdly
and lastly, that he may strike home for the getting of a fame of profound
learning indeed, he does most affectedly and industriously raise in the Reader
a strong surmise and suspicion that he is very deeply seen in Art Magic, and
is a very knowing Disciple of Agrippa, and puts in as far for the name of a
Magician, as honesty will permit, and safety from that troublesome fellow
Hopkins the Witch-finder.

And indeed the very clatter of the Title of his Book, Anthroposophia
Theomagica, sounds not much unlike some conjuration, or charm, that would
either call up, or scare away the Devil. And Zoroaster forsooth, at the bottom
of the page, that old reputed Magician, must stand as an Assistent to this
preludiall Exorcism; with this Oracle in his mouth, (...), Audi ignis vocem.
That is in plain English, Hear the voice or noise of fire. Me thinks I smell a
Gunpowder-plot. What can this voice of fire be? Why! how now Anthroposophus!
you intend certainly to make the Rosy Brotherhood merry with squibs and
crackers. For certainly your Mysteriousnesse does not mean those lesser or
greater fire-squirts, Carbines or Cannons. So might the Fratres R. C. be
received with like solemnity that those Apostles at Rome, the Cardinals. But
the word (...), (which implies a subsultation, or skipping this way and that
way) which is in the context of this Oracle, seems to allude to, and
prognosticate of, Fire-crackers and Squibs rather then Cannons or Carbines. But
how ever if this dog-trick fail, Anthroposophus has another as puerile and
innocent a Present, to entertain that Reverend Fraternity: And that is a very
queint and trim Latin Epistle, which he, like a good Schoolboy, to show them
what a good Proficient he is grown in his Latin Grammar, presents to their
assembled Gravities. It Is a good child, Anthroposophus! and it is well done. Qui
nescit obedire, nescit imperare. He that knows not how to submit himself in the
form of a breeching boy to the Fratres R. C. how can he know so unmercifully to
whip and domineer over poor Aristotle?

Surely, Anthroposophus! when the Rosy brethren ride swooping through the Air
in their Theomagicall chariots, they will hail down sugar plums, and Carua's on
thy blessed pate, if thou have but the good hap at that time to walk abroad
with thy hat off, to cool thy heated nodle.

But stay a while, I am afraid I am mistaken. It may well be, that
Anthroposophus rides along with them, as being the Proloquutour of their
Assembly. For he writes himself Oratoris vestri. How can that belong to a short
Epistle, unless it were some Title of office? But it may be my Gentleman,
being not so dextrous and quick in Latin as in English, measured the length of
it more by his labor then the lines, and thought that that which took him so
much pains, could not prove so little as an Epistle; and therefore would
insinuate that it was an Oration made to the Fratres R. C. I suppose at their
meeting at Friar Bacon's brazen head in Oxford.

Well ^ be it what it will be, my observation here, Anthroposophus, is, that
you would also by your address to the Fratres R. C. make the world bel^eve,
that you are now mellowing a pace, and are not much unripe for admission into
that Society. And then Anthroposophus would be a rare Theomagician indeed. But
enough of this vein of mirth and levity.

Now Philalethes! your brother Tel-troth, intends to fall more closely on your
bones, and to discover whether you have not a greater mind to seem to be wise
then to be so indeed, or to make others so. But yet you may assure your self, I
will only find flaws, not make any in you; but rather heartily pass over what
may receive any tolerably good interpretation, nor touch the sore any where,
but where I may hope to heal it, either in your self or others. And that this
may be done without any tedious taking a pieces of what you have put together,
I shall fairly pass from page to page without any Analyticall Artifice.

And truly from the First page to the middle of the Fourth page of your Epistle
to the Reader, there be many pretty, smart, elegant, humourous contextures of
phrases and things. But there, presently after Friar Bacons Fool and his
fellow, you fall upon our Peripateticks as such superficial Philosophasters,
because they cannot lay open to you the very essence of the Soul. Why!
Anthroposophus! can you tell the very essence of any Substantial thing? Hereby
you show your self very raw and unexercised in meditation, in that you have not
yet taken notice what things are knowable, what not. And thus may you have as
ill a trick put upon you, for want of this discerning, as the old dim and
doting woman had, that with her rotten teeth endeavored to crack a round
pebble stone in stead of a nut, which was a thing impossible. Nor will any man's
understanding, be it as sharp as it will, enter the bare essence of any thing.
But the nearest we can get, is, to know the powers, and operations, the
respects, and fitnesses that things have in themselves, or toward others. Which
is so true, that any man in a little search, will presently satisfy himself in
the evidence thereof.

From the middle of this Fourth page to the middle of the sixth, is continued a
dance of Anticks, or various ridiculous shiftings and postures of phansie^ to
make Aristotle and his followers contemptible. But such general railings, as
they are mis-beseeming the Writer, so they teach the Reader nothing but that
the Author of them is a Mome, or a Mimick, and more like an Ape by far then
him that he compares to one. If this man clap the wings so when he has really
got the foil, (for hitherto he has charged Aristotle with no particular piece
of ignorance but of what is impossible to be known) what would he do if he h^d
the victory?

The second particular taxation (for generals I hold nothing, Dolosus ambulat
in universalibus) is that the Peripateticks fancy God to have made the World,
as a Carpenter of stone and timber. But this is false, because they give an
inward principle of motion to all natural bodies, and there is one continuity
of all, as much as of the parts of water among themselves. But their grand
fault is that they do not say the World is Animate. But is not yours far
greater, Anthroposophus! that gives so ridiculous unproportionable account of
that Tenet? The whole World is an Animal, say you, whose flesh is the earth,
whose blood is the water, the air the outward refreshing spirit in which it
breath^, the interstellar skies his vital waters, the Stars his sensitive
fire. But are not you a mere Animal your self to say so? For it is as
irrational and incredible, as if you should tell us a tale of a Beast, whose
blood and flesh put together, bears not so great a proportion to the rest of
the more fluid parts of the Animal, suppose his vital and animal spirits, as a
mite in a cheese to the whole globe of the earth. And beside this, how shall
this water which you call blood, be refreshed by the air that is warmer then
it? And then those waters which you place in the outmost parts toward his
dappled or spotted skin the coelum stellatum, what over-p^oportionated plenty
of them is there there? In so much that this creature you make a diseased
Animal from its first birth, and ever laboring with an Anasarca. Lastly, how
unproperly is the air said to be the outward refreshing spirit of this Animal,
when it is ever in the very midst of it? And how rashly is the Flux and Reflux
of the Sea assimilated to the pulse, when the pulse is from the heart, not the
brain; but the flux and reflux of the Sea from the Moon not the Sun, which they
that be more discreetly fantastical then your self, do call Cor Mundi.
Wherefore, Anthroposophus! your phansies to sober men, will seem as vain and
puerile, as those of idle children that imagine the fortuitous postures of
spaul and snivell on plaster-walls, to bear the form of men's or dogs faces, or
of Lions, and what not?

And yet see the supine stupidity and senslesnesse of this man's judgment, that
he triumphs so in this figment of his as so rare and excellent a truth, that
Aristotle's Philosophy must be groundless superstition and Popery in respect of
it, this the primevall truth of the creation; when as it is a thousand times
more froth, then His is vomit. My friend Anthroposophus! is this to appear for
the truth (as you profess) in a day of necessity? Certainly she will be well
help at a dead lift, if she find no better champions then your self.

Verily Philalethes, if you be no better in your Book then in your Preface to
the Reader, you have abused Moses his Text beyond measure. For your Principles
will have neither heaven nor earth in them, head nor foot, reason nor sense.
They will be things extra intellectum, and extra sensum, mere vagrant
imaginations seated in your own subsultorious and skip-jack fancy only. But
what they are we shall now begin to examine, according to the number of pages.

Anthroposophia Theomagica. SECT. II.
1. Mastix makes himself merry with Eugenius his rash assertion, that all Souls
at their entrance into the body have an explicit knowledge of things. 22. And
that after a whole Springs experience he had found out those two known
principles of Aristotle, Matter, and Privation. His absurd hope of seeing
Substances. 3. The vanity of Devotion without purification of the mind. That
Aristotle agrees with Moses in acknowledging the World to be framed by a
knowing Principle, 4. Life always accompanied with a natural warmth. 5.
Eugenius his fond mistake, as if either the Divine Light or Ideas could be kept
out any space of time from shining in the opakest matter. 6. The little fruit
of that rarity of Doctor Marci in making the figure of a Plant suddenly rise
up in a glass. 7. Eugenius his natural Idea (which he affirms to be a subtle
invisible fire) no Idea at all. 8. His vain boasting of himself as if he were
more knowing amd communicative then any that has wrote before him. 9. His
tearming the Darkness or the first Matter the fuliginous spawn of Nature. 10.
His inconstancy in creating and uncreating this Matter. 11. The horrible
confused Qualme he fancies in the moist Matter at the creation of the world,
Heat and Siceitie the two active qualities in the Principle of Light assisting
by their Mid-wifry.

Observation 1. Page 2. l. 11.
So have all souls before their entrance, etc. But hear you me Mr.
Anthroposophus! are you in good earnest that all Souls before their entrance
into the body have an explicit methodicall knowledge? and would you venture to
lose your wit so much by imprisoning your self in so dark a dungeon, as to be
able to write no better sense in your Preface to the Reader? But I Will excuse
him, it may be he was riding before his entrance into the body on some
Theomagicall jade or other, that stumbled and flung him into a mystical
quagmire against his will, where he was so soused and doused and bedaubed and
dirtyed, face and eyes and all, that he could never, since the midwife raked
him out all wet and dropping like a drowned mouse, once see clearly what was
sense and what nonsense to this very day. Wherefore we will set the saddle on
the right Horse; and his Theomagick Nag shall bear the blame of the miscarriage.

Observation 2. Page 3.
Lin. 3. I took to task the fruits of one Spring, etc. Here Anthroposophus is
turned Herbalist for one whole Spring, damned to the grass, and fields like
Nebuchadnezzar when he went on all four among the Beasts. But see how slow this
Snail amongst the herbs is, in finding out the truth; when he confesses it was
the work of one whole Spring to find out, That the Earth or seeds of flowers
are nothing like the flowers. There Is not any old Garden-weeder in all London,
but without a pair of spectacles will discover that in four minutes, which he
has been a full fourth part of a year about. But certainly, he intends a great
deal of pomp and ceremony, that will not take up such a Conclusion as this,
(viz. That things that are produced in Nature, are out of something in Nature
which is not like the things produced) but upon the full experience and
meditation of one entire Spring. And now after this whole Springs meditation
and experience, he is forced to turn about to him whom he so disdainfully
flies, and confess two of the three principles of the Aristotelean Physics.
viz. Mat^er and Privation, that homo is ex non homine, arbor ex non arbore,
etc. But this Matter, he says, (and it is the wisest word he has spoken yet)
he knows not what it is. But presently blots his credit again with a new piece
of folly, intimating he will find it out by experience. Which is as good sense
as if he should say, he would see it when his eyes are out. For it is alike
easy to see visibles without eyes, as to see invisibles with eyes. But he
flies off hence, and is in quest after a Substance, which he smells out like a
nosegay in Natures bosom; which Substance he hopes to see by Art. Why!
Eugenius, are you so sharp sighted that you can see Substances? A kind of
Philosophic Hog, he can see the wind too I warrant you. But how can you hope
to see that Substance, when Nature only exposes it, as you say, to her own
vital celestial breath? And tell what this Breath is, and do not amaze us
with strange words, or else keep your breath to your self to cool your pottage.

Observation 3. Page 4.
Here a fit of devotion has taken him, and I am neither so irreligious nor
uncivil as to interrupt him. But now Sir you have done, I hope it will not be
any offense to address my discourse to you again. And it will not be
unseasonable to tell you, that Truth is not to be had of God Almighty for an
old song, no nor yet for a new one. And that no man is to measure his wisdom
by his devotion, but by his humility and purity of mind and unprejudicate
reason; nor that any man is wiser by making others seem more contemptibly
foolish, as your juvenility has thought good to deal with poor Aristotle and
his Orthodox Disciples all this time. Nay, and that you may not take Sanctuary
at Moses his Text, let me also tell you, that before you prove any thing
thence, you ought first to make good, that Scripture is intended for natural
Philosophy as well as a divine life. But we need not arm our selves so well
yet; for from the fourth page to the eight page nothing is said, but that God
from a knowing Principle made the World. Which Aristotle also seems to assert,
while he is so frequent in telling the ends of natural things, which could not
be sense, unless he supposed that Nature was guided by a knowing Principle,
which is to acknowledge a God after the best manner. And that subtle
Philosopher Julius Scaliger uses no contemptible arguments to prove, that
Aristotle's Philosophy furnishes us also with the knowledge of a Trinity in
God, so that Anthroposophus is very unkind and uncivil to so good a Master.

Observation 4. Pages 8. and 9.
What an Aristotelean would dispatch in a word or two, viz. that Life is
always accompanied with a natural warmth, he is mysteriously fumbling out and
drayling on to the length of almost two whole pages.

Observation 5. Page 9.
Lin. 10. The divine light pierced the bosom of the matter, etc. This compared
with what is at the bottom of the fourth page, we see that this rare
philosopher tells us, that the Matter is an horrible empty darkness. And me
thinks his description is an hideous empty fancy, and conveys not so much to
the understanding as Aristotle's description of the Matter, which he would
describe to be, The first subject out of which every thing is. This latter is
more clean and sober, the other more slabby and fantastical. And to call it
Primitive waters is but yet metaphors and poetry: For you do not mean waters
such as we wash our hands in. But they must be waters and dark, that you may
bring in the conceit of the light shining in them, that like as in rivers and
pools the images of trees and birds, and clouds and stars, and what not, may be
seen in them. And this must help us to conceive, that upon the breaking through
of the light, the divine Idea's shone in the waters, and that the holy Spirit,
not being able to see till then, by looking then upon those images, framed the
matter into form. But I pray you tell me, Mr. Anthroposophus! that would be so
wise as if you stood by while God made the World, do not you think that God
can now see in the dark, or behold his own Idea's in the depth of the Earth?
You Will say you do not mean this Natural light but a divine light. If so, was
ever the matter so st^ff and clammy dark, as to be able to keep it out? So that
the divine Idea's shone in the Water so soon as God was, and the Spiritus
Opifex could see to begin his work ab omni retro aeternitate. And it could
never be dark in your blind sense. Is it not so Anthroposophus?

Observation 6.
Lin. 25. Si plantam quasi momento nas^i, etc. If Anthroposophus had such a
device as this in a glass, what a fine gew-gaw would it be for the lad? What
fine sport would he make with his companions? He would make them believe then
that he was a Conjurer indeed. But what other use there would be of it,
Anthroposophus! truly I do not know. For it would not state one controversy in
Philosophy more then what may be done without it. For whether there be any such
things as rations seminales, or whether these forms visible arise from heat,
which is motion, and the conspiracy of fitted particles, is as well and safely
determined from your experiments of one spring, as from this strange whim-wham
in a glass. But weak stomachs and weak wits long most after rarities.

Observation 7. Page 10.
Lin. 4. Twofold Idea, divine, natural, etc. Anthroposophus! Your natural
Idea, is but an idea of your own brain. For it is no more an idea then a sheath
is a knife, or the spittle that wets the seal is the seal^ or the grease the
saw, or the water the Grindle-stone. But you must strike betwixt this and the
divine Id^a, or else you will miss of your natural one. And so will be forced
to do that of penury, which he did of choice and for brevity sake, divide your
Text into one part. But your quotation of Moses here near the bottom of the
page, is either nothing to your natural Idea, or if you mean it of the divine,
is no new notion, but nimmed out of Philo the Jew. And yet in the beginning of
the following page you magnify your self, as one that concerning this primitive
supernatural part of the Creation as you call it, though you have not said so
much as you can say by far, (as being a Nip-crust or Niggard of your precious
speculations) yet you have produced not a little new.

Observation 8. Page 11.
Lin. 5. Some Authors, etc. And the reason why the world is beholding to this
Gentleman more then to any for new discoveries of mighty truths, is, that
whereas some Authors have not searched so deeply into the Center of Nature, and
others not willing to publish such spiritual mysteries, this new Writer is the
only man, that is both deeply seen into the Center of Nature, and as willing
also to publish these spiritual mysteries. So that he goes beyond them all. O
brave Anthroposophus! What a fine man would you fain appear to the World.

In the residue of this page, Anthroposophus his fancy is pudled so and
jumbled in the Limbus or Huddle of the Matter, that he cannot distinguish
betwixt God and the Creature; For he knows not whether the Chaos be created or
uncreated. How much wiser are you now then Aristotle, Mr. Eugenius! that made
the world Eternal? If you can admit this; by the rule of proportion you might
swallow the greatest Gudgeon in Aristotle without kecking or straining.

Observation 9. Page 12.
Lin. 11. Fuliginous spawn of Nature. A rare expression! This Magicician has
turned Nature into a Fish by his Art. Surely such dreams float in his
swimmering Brains as in the Prophets, who tells us so Authentic stories of his
delicious Albebut.

Observation 10.
Lin. 12. The created Matter. Before the Matter was in an hazard of not being
created, but of being of it self eternal. Certainly Eugenius! you abound with
leisure that can thus create and uncreate, do and undo because the day is
long enough.

Observation 11.
Lin. 21. A horrible confused qualm, etc. Here Nature like a childbearing
woman has a qualm comes over her stomach, and Eugenius like a man-midwife
stands by very officiously to see what will become of it. Let her alone,
Eugenius! it is but a qualm, some cold raw rhewme. Margret will escape wel^
enough. Especially if her two Handmaids Heat and Siccity, which you mention, do
but help with their Aquavitae bottles. What a rare mode or way of Creation has
Eugenius set out? Certainly it cannot but satisfy any unreasonable man, if
there be any men without reason; and I begin to suspect there is, for Eugenius
his sake, such as feed as savourly on the pure milk of fancy, as the
Philosophers Ass on Sowthistles.

SECT. III.
12. He asserts, that there was a vast portion of light in the Extract from the
Chaos which surrounded the whole earth. 13. He compares Ptolemees Heavens to a
rumbling confused Labyrinth. 14. He calls the Firmament Cribrum Naturae. 15.
Affirms that the light before the fourth day equally possessed the whole
creation. 16. That the Night peeps out like a baffled Giant when the Sun is
down. 17. That the shadow of the Earth is Natures black bagg. 18. He prays to
be delivered from the dark Tincture which at last by the Protochymist shall be
expeld beyond the Creation. 19. He allows only two Elements, Earth and Water.
^0. He speaks of Water and Fire (which is Apuleius his Psyche and Cupid) of
their bedding together. 21. Cites an obscure Aphorism out of Sendivow. 22.
Affirms that the Air is the Magicians ba^k door. 23. And our animal Oil the
fuel of the vital and sensual fire in us.

Observation 12. Page 13.
THis page is spent in extracting from the Chaos^, a thin spiritual celestial
substance to make the Caelum Empyreum of, and the Body of Angels, and by the
by, to be in stead of a Sun for the first day. But then in the second
Extraction was extracted the agill air filling all betwixt the Mass and the
Coelum Empyreum. But here I have so hedged you in Mr. Anthroposophus, that you
will hardly extricate your self in this question. The Empyreal substance
encompassing all^ how could there be Morning and Evening till the fourth day?
for the mass was alike illuminated round about at once. And for your
interstellar water you do but fancy it employed in Moses text, and can never
prove that he drives at any thing higher in the letter thereof, than those
hanging bottles of water, the clouds.

Observation 13. Page 14.
Lin. 12. A rumbling confused Labyrinth. It Is only Erratum Typographicum. I
suppose you mean, a rumbling Wheel-barrow; in allusion to your Wheel-work and
Epicycles aforementioned. But why small diminutive Epicycles? Eugenius! you are
so profound a Magician, that you are no Astronomer at all. The bigness of them
is as strong a presumption against them as any thing: they are too big to be
true.

Observation 14.
Lin. 26. This is Cribrum Naturae. (...), I warrant you. The very sive that
Jupiter himself pisses through, as Aristophanes sports it in his Comedies.

Observation 15. Page 15.
Lin. 20. Equally possessed the whole Creature. Therefore again I ask thee, O
Eugenius! how could there be Evening and Morning, the light being all over
equally dispersed?

Observation 16.
Lin. 29. Like a baffled Giant. Poetical Eugenius! Is this to ^ay the sober and
sound principles of Truth and Philosophy?

Observation 17. Page 16.
Lin. 1. A Black Bag. I tell thee Eugenius! Thy fancy is snapt in this female
Black-bag, as an unwary Retiarius in a Net. Does Madam Nature wear her
Black-bag in her middle parts? (for the Earth is the Center of the World) or on
her head as other matrons do? That Philalethes may seem a great and profound
Student indeed, he will not take notice whether a black-bag be furniture for
Ladies heads or their haunches: Well! let him enjoy the glory of his affected
rusticity and ignorance.

Observation 18.
Lin. 5. Good Lord deliver us. How the man is frighted into devotion by the
smut and griminesse of his own imagination.

Observation 19.
Lin. 15. Earth and water, etc. Concurrunt element a ut Materia, ergo duo
sufficient, says Cardan. ^Tis no new-sprung truth, if true, Mr. Eugenius! But
seeing that Ethereal vigor and celestial heat with the substance thereof,
(For coelum pervadit omnia) is in all things, and the air excluded from few or
no living Creatures, if we would severely tug with you, Mr. Anthroposophus! you
will endanger the taking of the foil.

Observation 20. Page 18.
Lin. 22. Both in the same bed. Why did you ever sneak in Eugenius, and take
them, (...), in the very act? (...), as the Lawyers speak? This is but
poetical pomp in prose. And Ovid Philosophizes better in verse, where speaking
of heat and moisture, he expresses himself apertly and significantly.

Quippe ubi temperiem sumpsere humorque calorque
Concipiunt, and ab his generantur cuncta duobus.
Observation 21.
Lin. 27. Spiritus aquae invisibilis congelatus melior est quam terra Vniversa.
Now as you are Philalethes, tell me truly if you understand any determinate and
useful sense of this saying. If you do, why do you not explain it? if you do
not, for ought you know, it may be only a charm to fox fishes. And I pray you,
Philalethes! make trial of the experiment.

Observation 22. Page 19.
Lin. 29. It is the Magicians Back-doore. Here I cannot but take notice at the
great affectation of Philalethes to appear to be deeply seen in Magic. But I
suppose if he were well searched, he would be found no Witch, nor all his
Backdoor of air worth the wind of an ordinary man's back-doore.

Observation 23. Page 20.
Lin. 2. The air is our Animal oil, the fuel of the vital. Now Eugenius! you
are so good natured as to give Aristotle one of his two elements again, that
you wrested from him. If this be our animal oil, and fuel of the vital, it
is plain our animal and vital spirits are from the air, and that the air is
one element amongst the rest. And your moist silent Fire that passes through
all things, must be a principle of all things, and may be well attempered heat
to your forenamed oil. So that Aristotle and you that before seemed as
disagreeing as fire and water, now in a love-fit again embrace as close as your
Apulejus his Psyche and Cupid. But why will you be thus humorous Mr. Eugenius!
and be thus off and on to the trouble of others and your self?

SECT. IV.
24. Eugenius having finished his general exposition of the World, Mastix
gives an account of it, shows the contradiction in it, discovers the vanity of
drawing the letter of the Scripture to a rigid Philosophical meaning. 25.
Eugenius his ill manner of laying down the Fundamentalls of Sciences, 26. His
celestial Earth, Magnet, or Jacobs Ladder. 27. His little Suns and Moons in
every Compound of Nature that are Mimulae majoris animalis, and wantonly
imitate the two great Luminaries of the World. 28. His aenigmaticall Receipt of
the Medicine or Philosophers stone. 29. His fixing of the Earth into a pure
Diaphanous Substance. 30. His praetension of explaining the Nature of Man. 31.
His censure of all that know not the earth Adam was made out of (which is the
Philosophical Medicine) as Quacks and Pis-pot Doctors. 32. His two portions
the Soul consists of, Ruach and Nephesh 33. And how the Angels scorning to
^t^end Adam according as they were commanded, contrived to supplant him.

Observation 24. Page 21. l.9.
PErformed an exposition of the World. An excellent performance! Which if a man
taken a narrow view of he will find to amount to no more then this, That God
made a dark Mass of Matter, out of which he extracted, (Chymist-like) first an
Empyreall body, ^hen an Aereall, etc. Which is a very lank satisfaction to the
noble reason of man. Nay, Anthroposophus! I believe you have spoke such stuff
that will amount to little better then a contradiction ^o free reason. For you
make as if the Mass did contain in a far l^sse compass above all measure, all
that was after extracted. Wherefore there was, (for these are all b^dies)
either a penetration of dimensions then, or else a vacuum now: and the
ascending particles of the Mass lie some distance one from another. Besides I
observe that in you, that I do in all others, that fantastically and
superstitiously force Philosophy out of the sacred Writ (which is intended
certainly for better purposes). For as Ovid in his Metamorphoses, after a long
pursuit of a Fabulous story, at last descends to something in Nature and common
use, (as that of Daphne turned into a Laurel, which tree is in Nature and
according to the accustomary conceit of the Heathens was holy to Apollo) so
these running a Wild-Goose chase of Melancholy imaginations and fancies, think
it evidence enough for what they have said, to have the thing but named in some
Text of Scripture. Nay even those that are so confident they are inspired, and
live of nothing but the free breathings of the Divine Spirit; if you observe
them, it is with them as with the Lark, that is so high in the air, that we may
better hear her then see her, as if she were an inhabitant of that Region only
and had no alliance to the Earth, yet at last you shall see her come down and
pi^k on the ground as other birds. So these pretended inspired men though they
fly high, and seem to feed of nothing but free truth, as they draw it from
Gods own breathing; yet they took their ground first from the Text, though they
ran a deal of fancyfull division upon it; and if a man watch them, he shall
find them ^all flat upon the Text again, and be but as other Mortals are for
all their free praetensions and extraordinary assistances. But let us leave
these Theosophists (as they love to be called) to themselves, and trace on the
steps of our Anthro posophus!

Observation 25. Page 22.
He exhorts us in the foregoing page to be curious and diligent in this
subsequent part of his discourse, as being now about to deliver the
Fundamentals of Science. But Anthroposophus! you are so deeply Magical that
you have conjured your self down, below the wit of an ordinary man. The
Fundamentals of Science should be certain, plain, real and perspicuous to
reason; not muddy and imaginary as all your discourse is from this to your 28
page. For in this present page and the former, setting aside your superstitious
affectation of Trinities and Triplicities, which teach a man nothing but that
you are a very fantastical and bold man, and lift at that which is too heavy
for you; you do nothing but scold very cholerickly at the Colliers and
Kitchen-maids, and like a dog return again to the Vomit, I mean that vomit you
cast a while ago on Aristotle. Is that so elegant an expression that you must
use it twice in so little a space? where is your manners Anthroposophus!

Observation 26. Page 23.
Lin. 14. and 24. The Magnet, the Mystery of Union, Not one of ten thousand
knows the substance or the use of this Nature. Yet you tell it us in this page,
that it will attract all things Physical or Metaphysicall, at what distance
soever. But you are a man of ten thousand, Anthroposophus! and have the
Mystery, questionless, of this Magnet. Whence I conclude you King or Prince of
the Gypsies, as being able at the farthest distance to attract metal out of
men's purses. But take heed that you be not discovered, lest this Jacobs Ladder
raise you up with your fellow Pick-pockets to Heaven in a string.

Observation 27. Page 24.
This page is filled with like Gypsy gibberish, as also the 25th. yet he
pretends to lend us a little light from the Sun and Moon. Which he calls the
great Luminaries and Conservatours of the great World in general. How great,
Anthroposophus! do you think would the Moon appear if your Magic could remove
you but as far as Saturn from her? will she not appear as little as nothing?
Besides, if Eugenius ever tooted through a Galileo's Tube, he might discover
four Moons about Jupiter, which will all prove competitours with our Moon for
the Conservatour-ship of the Universe. But though Eugenius admits of but one
great broad-faced Sun and Moon, yet he acknowledges many Mimulae or
Monky-faced Suns and Moons, which must be the Conservatriculae of the many
Microcosmes in the great World. Certainly Anthroposophus! the speculum of your
understanding is cracked, and every fragment gives a several reflection, and
hence is this innumerable multitude of these little diminutive Suns and Moons.
But having passed through much canting language, at the bottom of the page we
at last stumble on the Philosophers Stone, which he intends I suppose to fling
at Aristotle and brain the Stagirite at one throw.

Observation 28.
Lin. ult. A true Receipt of the Medicine, R. Limi coelestis parts, etc. Come
out Tom-Fool from behind the hangings, that peaks out with your Devils head
and horns, and put off your vizard, and be aper^ and intelligible, or else why
do you pretend to lay the Fundamentalls of Science, and crave our diligence and
attention to a non-significant noise and bu^ze? Unless you will be understood;
it may as well, for ought any body knows, be a plaster for a gauld horses
back, or a Medicine for a Mad-dog, as a receipt of the Philosophers Stone.

Observation 29. Page 27.
In this page Magicus prophesies of a vitrification of the Earth, and turning
of it into a pure diaphanous substance. To what end? Magicus! That the Saints
and Angels at each pole of the Earth may play at Boe-peep with one another
through this crystallized Globe? Magicus has rare imaginations in his noddle.

Observation 30. Page 28.
At the end of this page Magicus begins to take to task the explication of man's
nature. But Magicus you must first learn better to know your self, before you
attempt to explain the knowledge of man to others.

Observation 31. Page 29.
Lin. 10. The Philosophical Medicine. This is the Philosophers stone. And they
that are ignorant in this point are but Quacks and Pispot Doctors. Ho! Dr. H.
Dr. P. Dr. R. Dr. T. and as many Doctors more as will stand betwixt London and
Oxenford, if you have not a sleight of Art to Metamorphize your selves into
Triorchises, and have one stone more then Nature has bestowed upon you (which
is forsooth the Philosophers Stone) have amongst you blind Harpers, Magicus
will not stick to teem Urinals on your heads, and crown you all, one after
another, with the Pispot, and honor you with the Title of Quack-salvers. What?
Magicus! Is it not sufficient that you have no sense nor wit, but you will have
no good manners neither?

Observation 32. Page 30.
This thirtieth page teaches that the Soul of man consists of two parts, Ruach
and Nephesh, one Masculine and the other Feminine. And Anthroposophus is so
tickled with the Application of the conceit unto Marriage, which he very
feelingly and savourly pursues, that he has not the patience to stay to tell us
how these two differ, he being taken up so with that powerful charm and thence
accrewing Faculty of Crescite and Multiplicamini.

Observation 33. Page 31.
This page has the Legend that the Alcoran has concerning the envy of the
Angels. But all goes down alike with him, as if every thing printed were
Gospel. In so much that I am persuaded that he doubts not but that every
syllable of his own Book is true, now it has passed the P^esse.

SECT. V.
34. Eugenius broaches an old truth for a new doctrine. 35. His error that the
sensitive part in man is a portion of Anima Mundi. 36. His rash rejection of
Peripateticall forms. 37. His odd conceit of blind men's seeing in their sleep.
38. And of the flowers of Herbs, framed like eyes, having a more subtle
perception of heat and cold then other parts of them have. 39. His
distinguishing the Rational or Angelical spirit in man from the Sensitive.
40. Mastix commends Eugenius for his generous discourse of the excellency of
the Soul. 41. Rebukes him for his enmity with the Peripateticks and
School-Divines, and for his rash swearing and protesting solemnly before God
that he wrote only out of Zeal to the truth of his Creator. 42. Check^ his
bold entitling of his own writings to the Sacrosanctity of Mysteries. 43. Taxes
his vain idolizing of Ag^ippa. 44. Shows him the fruitless effects of
Enthusiastic Poetry without the true knowledge of things. 45. Approves of
several collections of his concerning God and the Soul, but disallows of his
rash censure of Aristotle's Philosophy, challenging him to show any solution of
Philosophic controversies by his Chymicall experiments. 46. Sports himself
with his solicitude of what acceptance his writings will have in the world. 47.
As also with his modest pride in disclaiming all affectation of Rhetoric. 48.
And his lanck excuse in that he wrote in the days of his mourning for the
death of his brother. 49. His ridiculous Tergiversation in not submitting his
writings to the censure of any but God alone.

Observation 34. Page 32.
THis page ridiculously places Peter Ramus amongst the Schoolmen against all
Logic and Method. And at the last line thereof bids us arrigere aures, and
tells he will convey some truth never heretofore discovered, viz. That the
Sensitive gust in a man is the forbidden fruit; with the rest of the
circumstances thereof. Which Theory is so far from being new, that it is
above a thousand years old. It is in Origin and every where in the Christian
Platonists.

Observation 35. Page 38.
Lin. 27. It is part of Anima Mundi. Why! is Anima Mundi (which, you say, in
men and beasts can see, feel, taste and smell) a thing divisible into parts and
parcells? Take heed of that Anthroposophus! lest you crumble your own soul into
Atoms; indeed make no soul, but all body.

Observation 36. Page 39.
Lin. 22. Blind Peripateticall forms. What impudence is this O Magicus! to call
them so unless you make your Anima Mundi more intelligible? This is but to
rail at pleasure, not to teach or confute.

Observation 37. Page 40.
Lin. 2. As it is plain in dreams. Blind men then see in their sleep it seems,
which is more then they can do when they are awake. Are you in jest Eugenius!
or in good earnest? If you be, I shall suspect you having a faculty to see when
you are asleep, that you have another trick too, that is, to dream when you are
awake. Which you practiced I conceive very much in the comp^lement of this
book, there being more dreams then truth by far in it.

Observation 38.
Lin. 11. Represent the eyes. How fanciful and poetical are you Mr. Magicus! I
suppose you allude to the herb Euphrasia or Eyebright: Which yet sees or feels
as little light or heat of the Sun, as your soul does of reason or humanity.

Observation 39.
Lin. 27. Angelical or rational spirit. Does not this see and hear too in
man? If it do not, how can it judge of what is said or done? If it does; then
there are two hearing and seeing souls in a man. Which I will leave to
Anthroposophus his own thoughts, to find out how likely that is to be true.

Observation 40. 46, 47, 48, 49. Pages.
Truly, Anthroposophus! these pages are of that nature, that though you are so
unkind to Aristotle, as to acknowledge nothing good in him; yet I am not so
inveterate a revengefull assertor of him, but I will allow you your lucida
intervalla. What you have delivered in these pages concerning the Soul of man,
bating a few Hyperboles, might become a man of a more settled brain than
Anthroposophus. But while you oppose so impetuously what may with reason be
admitted, and propound so magisterially what is not sense, I must tell you
Anthroposophus! that you betray to scorn and derision even those things that
are sober in the way that you affect, and hazard the soiling of the highest and
most delicate truths, by your rude and unskilful handling of them: And now the
good breath, that guided you for these four pages together, is spent, you begin
to rave again after the old manner, and call Galen Antichrist in the fiftieth
page;

Observation 41. Page 50.
And quarrel again with the Peripateticks, and provoke the School-divines. And
then you fancy that you have so swinged them, that in revenge they will all fall
upon you at once, and so twerilug you: when as they good men feel not your
strokes, and find themselves something else to do, then to refute such crazy
Discourses as this. It is I only, it is I, your brother Philalethes, that am
moved with pi^ie toward you^ and would, if I could, by carefully correcting
you in your distempers, bring you to a sober mind, and set you in your right
senses again. And I beseech you brother Philalethes^ forbear this swearing: An
honest man's word is as good as his Oath. No body will believe you more for
swearing, then he would without it, but think you more melancholic and
distracted.

Observation 42.
Lin. 21. Whiles they contemn mysteries, etc. In this heat all that Philalethes
writes must be termed Holy mysteries. His project certainly is, now neither
Episcopacie nor Presbytery can be settled, to get his book established jure
divino. A crafty colt! Ha, ha, he! Philalethes, Are you there with your Bears?

Observation 43.
Lin. 29. Next to God I owe all I have to Agrippa. What? more then to the
Prophets, and Apostles, Anthroposophus? The business is, for your fame-sake,
you have more desire to be thought a Conjurer then a Christian.

Observation 44. Page 53, 54.
Great glorious penman! A piping hot paper of verse^ ^ndeed, Anthroposophus!
But say truly! What can you do in or out of this heat more then other men? Can
you cure the sick? Rule and counsel States and Kingdoms more prudently for
the common good? Can you find bread for the Poor? Give a rational account of
the Phoenomena of Nature, more now then at another time? or more then other men
can do? Can you tell me the nature of Light? the causes of the Rainbow? what
makes the flux and reflux of the Sea? the operations of the Loadstone, and such
like? Can you tell us in a rational, dependent, and coherent way the nature of
such things as these, or foretell to us what will be hereafter, as certainly
and evidently as the Prophets of old? But if there be neither the evidence of
Reason, nor the testimony of notable effect, you can give us; you must give me
leave Anthroposophus! to conjecture; That all this is but a frisk and dance of
your agitated spirits, and firinesse of your fancy, of which you will find no
fruit, but a palsied, unsteddy apprehension, and unsound judgment.

Observation 45. Page 55.
From this page to the 62. your Theomagicall Nag has been pretty sure-footed,
Philalethes! And it is a good long lucidum intervallum you have ambled out. Nay
and you have done very well and soberly in not plainly pretending any new thing
there. For they are both old and well seasoned, if the Church be so pleased to
esteem of them. But what you have toward the latter end of the 62 page, that
is, a word of your self, and another o^ the common Philosophy, has in it a
spice of the old malady, pride and con^^it^dnesse: as if you had now finished
so famous a piece of work, as that all the world would stand amazed, and be
inquisitive after you, asking who is this Philalethes, and what is he?
Presbyterian or Independent? Sir, may it please you, He is neither Papist,
though he bid fair enough for Purgatory in his Exposition of St. Peter in the
foregoing page; nor Sectarie, though he had rather style himself a Protestant
then a Christian: but be he what he will be, he is so great in his own conceit,
that though you have not the opportunity to ask his judgment, yet he thinks it
fit unasked to set himself on the seat of Judicature, and disgorge his sentence
on our ordinary Philosophy. He means you may be sure the Aristotelean in use
for so many hundred years in all the Universities of Europe. And he pronounces
of it, that it is An inconsistent Hotch-potch of rash conclusions, built on
mere imagination without the light of Experience. You must suppose he means
Chymicall experiments, for you see no small pretensions to that in all his
Treatise. And this very Title page, the first of the book, has the privilege
to be first adorned with this magnificent term of Art, Protochymistry. But tell
me, Mr. Alchymist! in all your skill and observation in your Experiments, if
you have hit on any thing that will settle any considerable point controverted
amongst Philosophers, which may not be done as effectually at less charges.
Nay, whether you may not lose Nature sooner then find her by your industrious
vexing of her, and make her appear something else then what she really is; Like
men on the rack or overwatched witches, that are forced many times to confess
that which they were never guilty of. But it being so unsatisfactorie to talk
in general, and of so tedious purpose to descend to particulars, I will break
off this discourse. Only let me tell you thus much Mr. Philalethes! that you
are a very unnatural son to your mother Oxenford, and to her sister
Universitie; for if they were no wiser then you would make them, you would
hazard them and all their children to be begged for fools: And there would be a
sad consequent of that. But your zeal and heated melancholy considers no such
things, Anthroposophus!

Observation 46. Page 65.
Lin. 3. I have now done, Reader! but how much to my own prejudice I cannot
tell. Verily nothing at all Philalethes! For you have met with a friend that
has impartially set out to you your own follies and faults. And has distorted
himself often into the deformities of your postures, that you may the better
see your ^elf in another, and so for ^hame amend.

Observation 47.
Lin. 8. Paint and trim of Rhetoric. How modest are you grown Philalethes!
Why? this affectation of humor and Rhetoric is the most conspicuous thing in
your book. And shines as oriently, as false gold and silver lace on a
linsie-woolsie coat.

Observation 48.
Lin. 22. Of a brothers death. Some young man certainly that killed himself by
unmercifull studying of Aristotle. And Philalethes writ this book to revenge
his Death.

Observation 49.
Lin. 18. I ^xpose it not to the mercy of man, but to God. See, the man affects
an absolute Tyranny in Philosophy. He Will be accountable to none but God. You
no Papist Philalethes? Why! you would be a very Pope in Philosophy, if you
would not have your Dictates subject to the canvase of man's reason.

Observations upon his Advertisement to the Reader.
THe first thing you require is, that he that attempts your Book, should make a
plain and positive Exposition of all the passages. Why man? that is more
assuredly then your self can do. For you are so weak and supine in many things
that are intelligible, that I am confident you are worse in that which you have
made less intelligible. For as Socrates reading an obscure Author, when he
found all things he understood very good, did charitably conclude, what he
understood not was much better: so I finding in this obscure Treatise of yours,
many things very ill, I also in charity will think you had the wit to conceal
those things which are the worst; or, which will serve the turn, that you
understand them not your self. But have an itching desire that some Reader
skilfuller then your self, should tell you whether you have wrote sense or
nonsense: Like the Country Clown, that desired his young Master to teach him
to write, and being asked how he would be able to read his own writing, being
as yet never acquainted so much as with the christ-crosse-row, made answer he
would get some body else to read it for him. And so you Philalethes! though you
can read your own writing, yet you desire to get some body else to understand
it for you, or to interpret to you what you have writ.

Your second request is not much unlike the former, and too big a business for
your self to do, and therefore you beg it of another.

Your third request is to have your book handled after your own manner and
method. Which is as ridiculous, as if you should request your enemy to smite
softly, or to strike after such a fashion; and at such a part as you will
appoint him. Can it be reasonable for you to expect from an Aristotelean (for
you must think it would be they of all men that would fly about your ears
first) when you have used their Master Aristotle, as they would not, to be used
of them as you would^ But notwithstanding Philalethes! you see I have bin fair
with you, and, though provoked, I shall continue the same candor in my
Observations on your following piece. But before I pass, I must take notice of
your two admonitions to the ingenuous Reader, for I suppose you mean me,
Philalethes! The first is, that I would not despise your endeavors, because of
your years, for they are but few. Why man! who knew that but your self, if you
could have kept your own counsel? Your name is not at your book, much less
your age. But indeed many things are so well managed of you, that if you had
not told us so, we might have shrewdly suspected, you have scarcely reached the
years of discretion. But you are so mightily taken with your own performance,
that to increase admiration, and for the bringing in a phrase or sentence out
of Proclus, you could not withold from telling us that you are but a young
man, and so we easily believe it. But the more saucy Boy you to be so bold with
Reverend Master Aristotle, that grandeval Patriarch in points of Philosophy.
For the second admonition, it is little more then a noise or clatter of words,
or if you will, a mere rattle for a boy to play with. And so I leave it in your
hand to pass away the time, till I meet you again in your Anima Magica
Abscondita.

Upon the Preface to the READER.
NOw God defend! what will become of me! In good faith, Philalethes! I do not
know what may become of you in time, But for the present, me thinks, you are
become a fool in a play, or a Jack-pudding at the dancing on the Ropes, a thing
wholly set in a posture to make the people laugh. Phy! Phy! Philalethes! Do
these humorous and Mimical schemes of speech become so profound a Theomagician,
as your self would seem to be? Does this ridiculous levity become a man of your
profession? You do not a little disparage your self by these boyish humors, my
good Philalethes!

For mine own part, I am neither so lightheaded no^ light-footed, as to dance
the Morisco with you measure to measure, through this whole toy of yours to the
Reader. I shall dispatch what I have to say at once. Your main drift here is to
prove Agrippa's Dogs no Devils, and their Master no Papist, and consequently
your self no unlawful Magician or Conjurer.

And truly if the assembly of Divines be no more suspicious of you then my
self, I am abundantly satisfied, that you are rather a giddy fantastic then an
able Conjurer, so that without any offense to me, you may take Wierus his
office if you will, and for want of employment, lead about Agrippa's beagles in
a string. In the mean time I shall busy my self almost to as little purpose
in the perusal of your Anima Magica Abscondita.

Upon Anima Magica Abscondita. SECT. I.
1. Eugenius his maimed citation of Aristotle's definition of Nature. 2. His
illogical exception against him for using of a general Notion in this
definition, and a difference expressing only what Nature does, not what she
is. 3. His ridiculous exception against Magirus his definition of (...) or
forma, Quae absolvit, expolit, informat rem naturalem, ut per eam una ab altera
distinguatur. 4. His barbarous translation of (...) Consummatio or Finitatio,
and a repetition of his former cavil. 5. He exhorts the Peripateticks to change
their Abstractions into Extractions, that they may discern the substantial
forms themselves in the inward closet of Matter. 6. Tells us that the motions
of the heavens are from an internal Principle, and that Intelligences are
fabulous. 7. Reproaches the Scriblers concerning Mat^er and Form, as writing
nothing to their own credit, or profit of the Reader. 8. Informs us that the
Anima mundi retained in the Matter and missing a vent organizeth bodies. 9. His
misapplication of that Hemistichium of Virgil -- Aurai simplicis ignem. The
passive spirit the inmost vestment of the soul applying to Generation, and that
the vital liquour or ethereal water attracts the passive spirit. 10. His chain
of Descent whereby the soul is caught in the Matter. 11. His declaring of the
foregoing mystery makes him suspect that he has too publicly prostituted the
secrets of Nature.

Observation 1.
ANd here Philalethes! in the very threshold you begin to worrey the poor
Perepateticks more fiercely then any English mastive, and bark and scold into
the air (that is, in general) more cursedly and bitterly then any Butter-quean;
but at last in the first line of the second page, you begin to take to task
some particular Documents of Aristotle's. viz. The description of Nature, of
Form, and of the Soul. Whereby we shall understand of what great judgment and
perspicacity you are in other points of Philosophy. And first of the Definition
of Nature, which you say is defined, Principium motus and quietis. A little
thing serves your turn, Anthroposophus! is this the entire Definition of
Nature, in Aristotle? But what you unskilfully take no notice of, I willingly
wink at, and will deal with you only about those things that you produce and
oppose.

Observation 2. Page 3.
Lin. 19. Nature is a Principle. Here you cavil that Nature is said to be a
Principle, because you cannot find out the thing defined by this general
intimation. But here, Philalethes! you are a pitiful Logician, and know not so
much in Logic as every Freshman in our University does, viz. that that part of
the Definition which is general does not lead us directly home unto the thing
defined, and lay our hand upon it; but it is the difference added that does
that. As if so be we should say only that, Homo est animal, that assertion is
so floating and hovering, that our mind can settle on nothing, which it may
safely take for a man; for that general notion belongs to a slay, or a mite in
a chees as well as to a man; but adding rationale, then it is determined and
restrained to the nature of man. And your allegation against the difference
here annexed in the definition of Nature, is as childish. For you only allege
that it tells us what nature does, not what it is. My dear Philalethes!
Certainly thou have got the knack of seeing further into a millstone then any
mortal else. Thou have discovered, as thou think, Dame Nature stark naked,
as Actaeon did Diana; but for thy rash fancy deservest a pair of Asses ears, as
well as he did his Bucks-horns for his rash sight. Can any substantial form be
known, otherwise then by what it can do or operate. Tell me any one substantial
form that thou know any better way then this, and Phillida solus habeto,
take Phillis to thy self, and her black-bag to boot. Thou art, good
Anthroposophus! I perceive, a very unexperienced novice in the more narrow and
serious search and contemplation of things.

Observation 3. Page 4.
Lin. 23. This is an express of the office and effect of forms, but not of
their substance or essence. Why! Philalethes! as I said before, have you ever
discovered the naked substance or Essence of any thing! Is color, light,
hardness, softness, etc. is any of these or of such like, essence and
substance it self? if you be so great a Wizard, show some one substantial form
in your Theomagical glass. Poor Kitling! how do thou dance and play with
thine own shadow, and understandest nothing of the mystery of substance and
truth!

Observation 4. Page 5.
Here in the third place you cavil at Aristotle's Definition of the Soul, and by
your slubbering and barbarous translating of the term (...) smother the
fitness of the sense. What more significant of the nature of a Soul, then what
this term (...) is compounded of? viz. (...), and (...). -- Totamque inf^sa per
artus
Men's agitat molem.
Or if we read the word as Cicero, (...), it will be more significant, as being
made up of (...) and (...). And that which does inwardly pervade and penetrate,
that which does hold together, and yet move this way and that way, and lastly
still moving possess and command an organical body, etc. what is this but a
Soul, or what better Definition can be given of it then this? But here this
peremptory opposer does still inculcate the same cavil, that the naked
substance or essence of the soul, is not set out by this, but its operations.
But still out of the same ignorance, supposing that a substantial Form can be
better known then by its proper operations. And this ignorance of his makes him
so proud, that he does Fellow at every word, if not Sirrah, Prince Aristotle;
because he has not done that which is impossible to do, unbare to us the very
substance of the Form. What an imperious boy is this! a wrangling child in
Philosophy, that screams and cries after what is impossible, as much as peevish
babes, after what is hurtful. And in this humorous straining and wrigling
bemarres both his Mother and his Aunt, both the Universities at once, casting
dirt and filth upon their education of youth, as if they taught nothing,
because they cannot teach what is impossible to be learned.

Observation 5. Page 8.
Here Anthroposophus begins to be something earnest and rude with Nature, not
content any longer to use his adulterous fancy, but to break open with his
immodest hands her private closet, search her Cabinet, and pierce into her very
Center. What rare extractions he will make thence, I leave to himself to
enjoy. Sure I am, that if any skilful Cook, or Chemist, should take out
Philalethes brains, and shred them as small as mincemeat, and tumble them never
so much up and down with a trencher-fork, he would not discover by this
diligent discussion any substantial Form of his brains, whereby they may be
discovered from what lies in a Calves head. Nay, if they were stewed betwixt two
dishes, or distilled in an Alembek, neither would that extraction be any
crystalline mirror to see the substantial form stark naked in, and discover the
very substance of that spirit, that has hit upon so many unhappy
hallucinations. But you are a youth of rare hopes, Anthroposophus!

Observation 6. Page 9.
Lin. 20. Where by the way I must tell you, etc. viz. That the Heavens are not
moved by Intelligences. Who cannot tell us that? But indeed you are forward to
tell us any thing, that does but seem to sound high, or make any show. There Is
no body now but would laugh to hear, that a particular Angel turns about every
Orb, as so many dogs in wheels turn the spit at the fire. So that it seems far
below such a grand Theomagician as you are, to tell us such incredible
fopperies as these to be false.

Observation 17.
Lin. 10. For the Authors credit and benefit of the Reader. Good Philalethes!
What credit do you expect from your scribbling, though it be the only thing you
aim at in all your Book? when yet nothing of truth but this aim of yours is to
be understood throughout all this writing.

Observation 8.
Lin. 15. This Anima retained in the Matter and missing a vent, etc. A
similitude, I suppose, taken from the bung-hole of a barrel; or more
compendiously from bottled bear; or it may be from the corking up close the
urine of a bewitched party, and setting it to the fire. For Anthroposophus will
not be less then a Magician in all things, nor seem less wise then or witch
or devil. But me thinks, Anthroposophus! your expression of the nature of this
Anima, that must do such fine feats in the world, by the efformation of things
and organizing the matter into such useful figuration and proportion in living
creatures, had been as fitly and as much to your purpose expressed; if you had
fancied her tied up like a pig in poke, that grunting and nudling to get out,
drove the yielding bag out at this corner and that corner, and so gave it due
order and disposition of parts. But, O thou man of mysteries! tell me I pray
thee, how so so subtle a thing as this Anima is, can be either barrel'd up, or
bottled up, or tied up in a bag, as a pig in a poke! when as the first
material rudiments of life be so lax and so fluid, how can they possibly
hopple or incarcerate so thin and agil a substance as a Soul? so that the union
betwixt them is of some other nature, then what such gross expressions can
represent, and more Theomagicall then our Theomagician himself is aware of.

Observation 9. Page 11.
Here Anthroposophus tells us rare mysteries concerning the Soul, that it is a
thing stitched and cobled up of two parts. viz. of aura tenuissima, and lux
simplicissima. And for the gaining of credence to this patched conceit, he
abuses the authority of that excellent Platonist and Poet Virgilius Maro,
taking the fag end of three verses which all tend to one drift, but nothing at
all to his purpose. AEneid. 6.

Donec longa dies perfecto temporis orb
Concretam exemit labem, purumque reliquit
AEthereum sensum, atquo aurai simplicis ignem.
This is not spoken of the Soul it self, but of the AEthereall Vehicle of the
Soul, and so is nothing to your purpose Mr. Philalethes! You tell us also in
this page in what shirts or sheets the Souls wrap themselves when they apply to
generation, (as your phrase is) as if you were Groom of their bedchamber, if
not their Pa^der. You tell us also of a radical vital liquor that is of like
proportion and complexion with the superior interstellar waters, which is as
learnedly spoken, as if you should compare the Sack at the Globe-Tavern, with
certain supernall Wine-bottles hung round Orions girdle: Which no man were able
to smell out, unless his nose were as Atlantic as your rauming and reaching
fancy. And yet no man that has not lost his reason, but will think this as
grave a truth in Philosophy as your interstellar waters. But Interstellar,
indeed, is a pretty word and sounds well, and it is pity but there were some
fine Philosophic notion or other dld belong to it. But now, Philalethes! if I
would tyrannize over you as you do over Aristotle, for the manner of your
declaring the nature of the Soul, where you pretend to show us the very naked
essence of it, and first principles whereof it does consist, you have laid your
self more bare to my lash, then you endeavored to lay bare the Soul to our
view: for you do plainly insinuate to us, That either the Soul is Light, or
else a thin Air, or that it is like to them. If only like these bodies of
Light and Air, how pitifully do you set out the nature of the Soul, when you
tell us the principles of it only in a dry metaphor? Is not the nature of the
Soul far better known from the proper operations thereof (as Aristotle has
defined it) then from this fantastical metaphorical way? But if you will say
that the Soul is properly Light or Air, then be they never so thin, or never so
simple (unless you will again use a metaphor) the Soul must be a Body. And how
any corporeal Substance thick or thin, fluid or dry, can be able to think, to
reason, to fancy, etc. nay to form matter into such cunning and wise frames and
contrivancies as are seen in the bodies of living Creatures, no man of less
ignorance and confidence then your self will dare to endeavor to explain, or
hold any way probable.

Observation 10. Page 12.
In this page you are curiously employed in making of a Chain of Light and
Matter, surely more subtle and more useless then that that held the Flea
prisoner in the Mechanics hand. But this is to hold the Anima, the passive
Spirit and celestial Water together. Our Theomagician here grows as imperious
as wrathful Xerxes. Will you also fetter the Hellespont Philalethes? and bind
the wind and waters in chains? Buc let us consider now the link of this
miraculous chain of his.

Light. Matter.
Anima of 3 of 1 portions Passive spirit of 2 of 2 portions Celestial waters
of 1 of 3 portions
This is your chain, Philalethes! Now let us see what Apish tricks you will play
with this your chain. The three portions of light must be brought down by the
two, the two (if not indeed five, the two and three being now joined) brought
down by one, and so the whole chain drops into the water. But would any Ape in
a chain if he could speak, utter so much incredible and improbable stuff, with
so much munky and mysterious ceremony? His very chain would check his both
thoughts and tongue. For is it not far more reasonable that three links of a
chain should sway down two, and two or five one, then that one should sway two
or five, or two three? Or do we find when we fling up a clod of earth, that the
whole ball of the Earth leaps up after that clod, or the clod rather returns
back to the Earth, the greater ever attracting the less, if you will stand to
magneticall Attraction. But truly Philalethes! I think you do not know what to
stand to, or how to stand at all; you are so giddy and intoxicated with the
steam and heat of your disturbed fancy and vain mind.

Observation 11. Page 13.
Lin. 8. But me thinks Nature complains of a prostitution, etc. Did not I tell
you so before, that Philalethes was a pander? and now he is convinced in his
own conscience and confesses the crime, and his ears ring with the clamours
and complaints of Madam Nature, whom he has so lewdly prostituted. Sad
Melancholist! thou art affrighted into the confession of crimes that thou art
not only not guilty of, but can not be guilty of if thou would. Is there
never a one of our City Divines at leisure to comfort him and compose him? I
tell thee, Madam Nature is a far more chaste and discreet Lady, then to lie
obnoxious to thy prostitutions. These are nothing but some unchaste dreams of
thy prurient and polluted fancy. I dare quit thee of this fact, Philalethes! I
warrant thee, Thou have not laid Madam Nature so naked as thou supposest, only
thou have, I am afraid, dreamed uncleanly, and so have polluted so many sheets
of paper with thy Nocturnall Conundrums, which have neither life, sense, nor
shape, head nor foot, that I can find in them.

SECT. II.
12. That Spiders and other brute creatures have knowledge in them from the
first Intellect. 13. That the Seminall Forms of things are knowing and
discerning Spirits. 14. That the World is from God, and all true wisdom: which
is to be found by experiments, not in Aristotle's writings. 15. Because of the
abuse of Logic he takes up the Letan^e of St. Augustine. 16. His three
Magical Principles; viz. The first created Unity; the Binarius or this Unity
defiled with Matter; the Ternarius or this Binarius refined by Art. 17. That
this Ternarius (which he calls the Magicians Fire, Mercurius Philosophorum,
Microcosmos, and Adam) is the Magical maze where Students lose themselves; And
that this Magical fire moves in shades and Tyffanies here below, above in
white etheriall vestures. 18. His Periphrasis of Agrippa (after a long citation
out of him) This is he with the black Spaniel, etc. 19. His self-condemnation
for going counter to all the World in making use of Scripture for Physiologie.
20 The Mosaicall Heaven and Earth are Mercury and Sulphur. Uxor Solis a certain
principle in every Star and in the whole world. The coition of these two,
their Ejection of seed, with many such lascivious M^taphors. 21. Light a
certain Principle that applied to any body whatsoever perfects it in suo
genere, and that this light is only multipliable.

Observation 12. Page 14.
HEre Philalethes is taken like a Fly in a Spiders Web. He is altogether for
subtilties. But spins but a thick thread from them, such as any Rusticks hand
would draw out as well as his own, viz. That Spiders have some light of
knowledge in them. Who knows not that Philalethes? But in the fifteenth page

Observation 13. Page 15.
He is so lavish of what he has so little of himself, that he bestows it on
every plastic material Form; and not a Rose can grow in Nature but some
seeing and knowing Hyliard with his invisible pencill must draw it, and thus by
his mere rash dictate does he think he has dashed out that long and rational
dogma in Philosophy of the particular (...) or rations seminales. Whose
fondness in this groundless assertion it were easy to confute; but he that
will not bring any reasons for what he says, is not worthy to have any reasons
brought against him. For as for that only slight reason which he intimates,
that the Matter being contrived into such a rational or artificial disposure of
parts, the immediate Artificer thereof must have animadversion and reason in
it, it is only said, not proved, and will reach no further, but that the ratio
seminalis must at least proceed from something that is knowing, and be in some
sense rational, but not have Reason and Animadversion in it self. The like
confidence and ignorance is repeated and insisted upon in the 16 and 17 pages:
but I let them pass.

Observation 14. Page 18,19.
These pages contain a certain preachment, which would have done well if it had
been from some one that had more wit in knowing when to preach and when to hold
his peace, and more charity to abstain from such undeserved chidings of
Aristotle. But your unmeasureable and unmercifull chastisings of him, and so
highly advancing and soothing up your self in your own windy conceits and
fluttering follies make all your serious applications ridiculous and
ineffectual.

Observation 15. Page 20.
Petition of St. Augustine, A Logica libera nos Domine, lin. 7. Assuredly,
Philalethes, ever since the Church Litanie was put down, has used this of St.
Augustine, and that with such earnestness and devotion that he has even
extorted from Heaven the full grant of his Petition, and has become as free and
clean from all sense and reason, as he is luxuriant and encumbred with
disturbed and unsettled fancies and undigested imaginations.

Observation 16. Pages 21.
Lin. 3. These three Principles are the Clav^s of all Magic, etc. Here
Philalethes like the Angel of the bottomless Pit, comes jingling with the Keys
of Magic in his hands. But he opens as Hokus Pokus does his fists, where we
see that here is nothing and there is nothing. But something he will seem to
say, viz. That the first Principle is one in one, and one from one. He that has
so many years so devoutly prayed against Logic, do you expect when he speaks
to hear reason? This is as much as to say nothing. One in one, and one from
one? Suppose a ripe Apple should drop into the rotten hollow of the tree that
bore it. Is this Apple your mysterious Magical principle? It may be that, as
well as any thing else, by this description. For it is one Apple, in one
hollow, from one tree. O but he adds. It is a pure white Virgin. Some
religious Nun I warrant you. No she may not be a Nun neither. For she is uxor
Dei and stellarum. It seems then, there is a kind of Plato's Commonwealth
betwixt God and the Stars, and they have community of wives amongst them. But
if she be so pure a Virgin-wife as you make her, how come some of her Husbands
to wear horns as they do, viz. Aries, Capricorn and others? But is this to
Philosophize, or to play the Theomagician, Philalethes! thus to tell us of
virgins, or wives with white peticoats, or to tell us that from this one there
is a descent into four, etc? This is but idle treading of the air, and only a
symptom of a light swimmering fancy, that can have patience to write such
hovering undeterminate stuff as this, that belongs either almost to any thing
or nothing. You even weary your Reader out, Philalethes! with such
Metaphysicall dancings and airy fables.

Observation 17. Page 22.
Lin. 5. This is a Labyrinth and wild of Magic where a world of Students have
lost themselves. And you Philalethes! have not escaped scot-free. For you have
lost your reason before as I told you, and your so much and so confidently
conversing with mere Unities and Numbers, which in themselves design nothing,
will teach you in time, to speak words without any inward phantasm of what you
say. So that you shall bid fair for the losing of your fancy too, and then you
will be as you are near it already, Vox, praeterea nihil, a mere noise and
clatter of words.

Lin. 13. It moves here below in shades and tiffanies, etc. What a description
is this of the Magicians fire? I suppose you mean the Magicians Thais. It moves
in shades, that is, (for the text is very dark and wants a Commentary) in the
Evening or Twilight. Tiffanies, is plain English, but white etheriall vestures,
must be white Peticoats and white Aprons, or else white Aprons upon Blew
Peticoats, and that she is exposed to such a public prostitution passing
through all hands, every one having the use of her body; this Theomagicians
fire seems to me to be no other then some very common strumpet. But if you mean
any thing but a Strumpet, you have a wondrous infected fancy, that dresses up
your Theomagicall notions in such whorish attire. But of a sudden my
Theomagician has left those more gross and palpable expressions, and now
dances very high in the air quite out of the Ken of our eye, like some
Chymicall Spirit that has broke its Hermeticall prison, and flown away out of
the Artist's sight and reach; being far more invisible and thin now, then the
finest Tiffany that ever took his sight, and more arid and slight then the
faintest shade. I tell you once more, Anthroposophus! that Ternaries, and
Qu^ternaries, and Decads and Monads, and such like words of number have no
useful sense nor signification, nor virtue, if unapplied to some determinate
substance or thing. But our great Theomagician having no project in this
writing that I see, but to amaze the world, contents himself only to rattle
his chain, and to astonish the rude and simple as if some Spirit or Conjurer
was at hand, and so those words that are most sonorous and consist of the
greatest number of syllables, please him better, then what have more solid
signification, and a more settled and sober sense.

Observation 18. Page 24.
Lin. 17. He with the black Spaniell. As for your adored Magus with the black
Spaniell, and that dark Disciple of Libanius Gallus, what I have said to you
already, will serve here too. But my controversy is with you only,
Philalethes! a sworn enemy of Reason and Aristotle, and me thinks you are very
like your self still in the twenty seventh page.

Observation 19. Page 27.
Lin. 22. I am certain the world will wonder I should make use of Scripture to
establish Philosophy, etc. Here, Philalethes, you seem self-condemned even from
your own speech, being conscious to your self, that all the world will be
against you in this superstitious abuse of the Scripture. For are you wiser
then all the world beside in this matter, because you have prayed away all your
Logic in St. Augustines Letanie? What profane boldness is this to distort
that high Majesty of the holy Scripture to such poor and pitiful services, as
to decide the controversies of the World and of Nature? As well becoming it is,
as to set pies and pasties into the oven with the sacred leaves of the Bible?
This is but a fetch of imperious Melancholy and Hypocritical superstition,
that under pretense of being more holy would prove more Tyrannical, and leave
the understanding of man free in nothing at all, but bring in a philosophy too,
Iure Divine! And I can further demonstrate to you (beside what I have intimated
from the transcendency of the Scripture, and high scope and aim thereof) that
the Scripture teaches no secret or principle of Philosophy, of which there is
any doubt amongst men in their wits. For either (as where it seems to speak ex
professo of any such things) it does it so obscurely that men rather father
their own notions fetched from elsewhere, upon the Scripture; or else if it
speak more plainly and literally, yet it being allowed by all sober men as
well Jews as Christians, (as it is indeed undeniably evident from the passages
themselves in Scripture) that it speaks so ordinarily according to the rude and
vulgar use and apprehension of men, there can be no deciding collections in
matters of Philosophy safely gathered out of it. Though I will not deny but
that some Philosophic truths may have an happy and useful illustration and
countenance from passages in Scripture; and their industry is not to be
vilified that take any pains therein. But I do not believe that any man that
has drove the proper use of the Scripture home to the most full and most
genuine effect of it in himself, but will be so wise and so discreet, that he
will be ashamed in good earnest to allow any such Philosophic abuse of it. But
questionless the Scripture is the beginner, nourisher and emprover of that life
and light which is better then all the Philosophy in the world. And he that
stands in this light, the firmer and fuller he is possessed of it, he is the
more able to judge both of Nature, Reason, and Scripture it self. But he that
will speak out of his own rash heat, must needs run the hazard of talking at
randum. And this I make the bolder in charity to pronounce, because I observe
that the reverentiall abuse, and religious misapplication of the holy Writ to
matters of Philosophy, for which it was not intended, does in many well-meaning
men eat out the use of their Reason, for the exercise whereof Philosophy was
intended. And hence so much spurious and fantastic knowledge multiplies now
adays, to the prejudice of man's understanding, and to the intangling him in
vain and groundless imaginations, fortuitously sprung up from uncircumspect
Melancholy, dazzled and stounded with the streamings and flashes of Its own
pertinacious fancy: Which sometime is so powerful as to over-master the
Melancholist into a credulity, that these flarings of false light in his dark
Spirit are not from himself, but from a Divine Principle, the Holy Ghost. And
then bidding a due to Reason, as having got some Principle above it, measures
all truth merely by the greatness and powerfulness of the Stroke of the
Phantasme. What ever fills the imagination fullest, must be the ^ruest. And
thus a rabble of tumultuary and crasse representations must go for so many
Revelations, and every heaving up by an Hypochondriacall flatulency must be
conceited a rapture of the Spirit; they professing themselves to receive things
immediately from God, when they are but the casual figurations of their
anxious fancy, busily fluttering about the Text; which they always eye (though
they dissemble it) as Hauks and Buzzards, fly they never so high, have their
sight bent upon the Earth. And indeed if they should not forge their fancies
into some tolerable suteablenesse with the letter of the Scripture, they would
never be able to believe themselves, or at least to beget belief in others,
that they are inspired: And so that high conceit insinuated into them by that
wonderful yet ordinary imposterous power of Melancholy would fall to nothing,
and they appear not so much as to themselves either Prophe^s or inspired. But
this I have touched elsewhere. I will let it go. Only let me cast in thus
much: That he that mis-believes and lays aside clear and cautious reason in
things that fall under the discussion of Reason, upon the praetence of
hankering after some higher prinple, (which a thousand to one proves but the
infatuation of Melancholy and a superstitious hallucination) is as ridiculous
as if he would not use his natural eyes about their proper object till the
presence of some supernatural light, or till he had got a pair of Spectacles
made of the Crystalline Heaven, or of the Coelum Empyreum, to hang upon his
Nose for him to look through. The truth is, He that lays aside Reason, casts
away one of the most Sovereign Remedies against all melancholic impostures.
For I conceive it would be very hard for men either to be deluded themselves,
or to delude others by their conceited inspirations, if they would expect that
every Revelation should be made good either by sound Reason, or a palpable and
conspicuous Miracle. Which things if they were demanded of the inspired people
when they come to seduce, surely they would sneak a way like the common
Fiddlers, being asked to play a Lesson on the Organs, or on the Theorbo.

Observation 20. Page 28, 29.
In the former page you could not part till you had made God and Nature
mysteriously kiss. In this, you metamorphize Mercury and Sulphur into two
Virgins, and make the Sun to have more Wives then ever Solomon had Concubines.
Every Star must have in it, Vxor Solis. But what will become of this rare
conceit of yours, if the Stars themselves prove Suns? And men far more learned
then your self are very inclinable to think so. But now he has fancied so many
Wives, he falls presently upon copulation helter skelter, and things done in
private betwixt Males and Females, etc.

Verily, Anthroposophus! if you had but the patience to consider your own Book
seriously, and examine what Philosophic truth you have all this while
delivered since your contemning of Aristotle's definition of Nature, Form, and
Soul; you shall find in stead of his sober description from the proper
operations and effects of things, nothing but a dance of foolish and lascivious
words: almost every page being hung with Lawns and Tiffanies, and such like
Tapestry, with black Shadowing hoods, white Aprons and Peticoats, and I know
not what. And this must be a sober and severe Tractate of Anima Abscondita. As
if the Soul were dressed in woman's apparel, the better to be concealed, and to
make an escape. And to as much purpose is your heaps of liquorsome Metaphors,
of Kissing, of Coition, of ejection of Seed, of Virgins, of Wives, of
Love-whispers, and of silent Embraces, and your Magicians Sun and Moon, those
two Universal Peers, Male and Female, King and Queen Regents, always young
and never old; what is all this but a mere Morris-dance and May Game of words,
that signify nothing, but that you are young, Anthroposophus! and very
sportfull, and yet not so young but that you are marriageable, and want a good
wife, that your sense may be as busy as your fancy about such things as those,
and so peradventure in due time, the extravagancy of your heat being spent, you
may become more sober.

Observation 21. Page 30.
Lin. 8. It is light only that can be truly multiplied. But if you tell us not
what this light is, we are still but in the dark. I do not mean whether Light
be a Virgin or a Wife, or whose Wife, or what clothes she wears, Tiffanies or
Cobweblawns, but in proper words what the virtue and nature of it is. Whether
Corpus or Spiritus, Substance or Accident, etc. But, Anthroposophus! you do
not desire at all to be understood, but please your self only to rant it in
words, which can procure you nothing but the admiration of fools. If you can
indeed do any thing more then another man, or can by sound reason make good
any more truth to the World then another man can, then it is something; if not,
it is a mere noise and buzze for children to listen after.

SECT. III.
22. Certain notable Quotations of Eugenius his out of Scripture and other
writers. 23, He presages what ill acceptance his high mysteries will have with
the School-Divines. 24. He acknowledges the Scriptures obscure and mystical.
25. Some Philosophers that have attained to the Ternarius, could not for all
that obtain the perfect Medicine; there being but six Atuhors he ever met with
that understood that mystery fully. 26. That this Medicine transformes the body
into a glorified state, and that the material parts are never seen more. The
divine Spirit swallowing them into Invisibility. 27. He complains how ready the
world will be to boy him out of countenance for his presumption in so high
mysteries, especialy the reverend Doctors, who, he says, sustain their gravity
on these two crutches, pretended Sanctity and a Beard. 28. He advises us not to
tamper with this Theomagical Medicine rashly. 29. Adding a monition out of the
Poet. 30. That the Spirit whereby a man becomes magically wise and a lawful
worker of miracles, is the Christian Philosophers stone and the white stone.
31. He entreats the Reader not to mistake him as if he had as yet attained to
this stone, because God is no debtor of his. 32. He only affirms himself to be
an Indicatour of it to others, as a Mercury to a traveller on the way. 33. And
that if you could show him one good Christian capable of the secret, he would
show him an infallible way to come by it.

Observation 22. Page 31.
FRom this 31 page to the 41, you have indeed set down the most courageous and
triumphant testimonies, and of the highest, and most concerning truth that
belongs to the soul of man, the attainment whereof is as much beyond the
Philosophers stone, as a Diamond is beyond a peble stone. But the way to this
mystery lies in a very few words, which is, a peremptory and persistent
unraveling and releasing of the Soul by the power of God, from all touch and
sense of sin and corruption. Which every man by how much the more he makes it
his sincere aim, by so much the more wise and discreet he will appear, and will
be most able to judge what is sound and what is flatuous. But to deal plainly
with you, my Philalethes! I have just cause to suspect that there is more wind
then truth as yet in your writings. And that it is neither from reason nor from
experience, that yon seem to turn your face this way; but high things and fiery
and sonorous expressions of them in Authors, being suitable to your
Youthfulness and Poetical fancy, you swagger and take on presently, as if,
because you have the same measure of heat, you were of the same fraternity with
the highest Theomagicians in the World. Like as in the story, where the Apples
and Horsdung were carried down together in the same stream, the Fragments of
Horsdung cried out, Nos poma natamus. Pardon the homelyness of the comparison.
But you that have flung so much dirt upon Aristotle, and the two famous
Universities, it is not so unjust if you be a little pelted with dung your self.

Observation 23. Page 42.
Lin. 12. I know some illiterate School-Divines, etc. He cannot be content to
say any thing that he thinks is magnificently spoken, but he must needs trample
upon some or other by way of triumph and ostentation, one while clubbing of
Aristotle, another while so pricking the Schoolmen, and provoking the Orthodoxe
Divines, that he conceits they will all run upon him at once, as the Jews upon
the young Martyr St. Steven, and stone him for his strange mysteries of his
Theomagick stone. Truly, Anthroposophus! there are some good things fall from
you in your own style, and many cited out of considerable Authors, but you do
so soil and bemar all with your juvenile immoralities and Phantastries, that
you lose as much in the one a you get in the other.

Observation 24. Page 44.
Lin. 4. The Scripture is obscure and mystical, etc. And therefore say I,
Philalethes! a very uncertain foundation to build a Philosophy on; but indeed
such a mystical Philosophy as you would build, may be erected upon any ground,
or no ground, may hang as a castle in the air.

Observation 25. Page 45.
Lin. 3. I never met in all my reading but with six Authors, etc. But how do
you know that these six did perfectly understand the Medicine, and this
stupendous mystery, unless you understood it perfectly your self? So that
you would intimate to the world that you do perfectly understand it.

Observation 26.
Lin. 25. After this the material parts are never more to be seen. This is the
nature of the Medicine then, not to rectify a visible body but to destroy it.
Like the cure of the head-ake, by cutting off the neck. Death indeed will cure
all Diseases. But you will say this is not death, but a change or translation.
Nor the other a medicine, but Spiritus medicus. So that in multitude of words
you do but obscure knowledge.

Observation 27. Page 46.
Lin. 5. Boy me out of countenance, etc. Here Philalethes is mightily well
pleased to think that one of his greenness of years should arrive to this
miraculous ripeness and maturity of knowledge in the most hidden mysteries of
Theosophy. And comparing himself with the Reverend Doctors, finds the greatest
difference to be this, that they indeed have more beard, but he more wit. And I
suppose he would intimate unto us, that they have so little wit that they know
not the use of their own limbs. For if he make their beards their crutches,
they cannot escape going on their heads, as if they were not inverted but
rightly postured plants, or walking Stipites. In good truth you are a notable
Wagg, Philalethes!

Observation 28.
Lin. 10. Let me advise thee, I say, not to attempt any thing rashly. And I
commend your wit, Anthroposophus! in this point. For you are so wary of putting
your finger into the fire, that like the Monkey you will rather use the Cats
foot then your own, as you will evidently show anon.

Observation 29.
Lin. 22. Orandum est ut sit men's sana in corpore sano. Keep your self there
Philalethes! It Is a great deal better piece of devotion then that of Augustine,
A Logic a libera nos Domine.

Observation 30. Page 48. 49.
Lin. 22. This is the Christian Philosophers Stone, And, this is the white
Stone. Which you, Philalethes! have covered over with so much green moss, that
you have made it more hidden then ever before. Having little will, and less
power to show it, but in all likelihood a great purpose of ostentating your
self.

Observation 31. Page 49.
Lin. 10. But Reader! be not deceived in me, I am not a man of any such
faculties, etc. I warrant you, Anthroposophus! I am not so easily deceived in
you. You have walked before me in very thin transparent Tiffanies all this
while; or, if you will, danced in a net. I suspected you from the very first
that you would prove so good and so wise as you now plainly profess your self.
But that you are no better then you are, you say is because God is no debtor of
yours. Why! does God Almighty run so much in some men's Arrears that he is
constrained to pawn to them that precious Jewel, or to give them the White
stone, to quit scores with them? How far is this from Popery, Philalethes! that
you seem elsewhere so much to disclaim?

Observation 32.
Lin. 13. I can affirm no more of my self, etc. Right! Philalethes! Right!
Your fancy was never so happy as in transfiguring your self into a Wooden
Mercury, that points others the way which it self knows not, nor can ever go,
but stands stock still.

Observation 33.
Lin. 18. Show me but one good Christian, etc. Why! then it seems Philalethes!
that you are no good Christian your self, and incapable of the secret you are
so free to impart to others. Or it is your discretion to attempt nothing your
self rashly, but as I said before to do as the Ape or Monkey, take the Cats
foot to rake the Chestnut out of the fire.

SECT. IV.
34, He speaks here of the natural celestial Medicine more ordinary then the
former, which after the middle Nature-fire is sublimed per Trigonum and
Circulum and the Terra media, which is betwixt the Unarius and Binarius, is
separated from the Magical compounded Earth, becomes the true Petra
Crystallina, a bright Virgin Earth, Terra Maga in aethere clarificata, carrying
in its belly Wind and Fire; to which if you unite the Heaven in a triple
proportion, applying a generative heat to both, they will attract from above
the Star-fire of Nature, and thus you shall have gloriam totius mundi, and
fugiet a te omnis obscuritas. 35. Though the law of Nature be infallible in it
self, yet God can repeal in particular what he has enacted in the general. 36.
Eugenius his slight ground of Faith, which is the hope or desire that what we
believe might be true. 37 Certain moral instructions of his to his student of
Magic. 38. His salutation of the river Yska from whom he pretends to have
learned many virtues. 39. He walks all night long by this river side a
stargazing. 40. He endeavors to make his mind as clear as Yska's Crystalline
streams. 41. Admires the lowness of his banks. 42. As also their homely
clothing, one and the same all the year long. 43. He learns a lesson of
Simplicity from hence. 44. Is transported in beholding the pure type of piety
in the River. 45. Is astonished at the benignity of his streams, they enriching
those shoars that infringe their liberty by keeping them in their channel. 46.
He takes instruction from the River to swim up to Heaven in his tears, as the
River runs down to the Sea, but expresses himself so obscurely, that he seems
to suppose the River to run to Heaven to show him the way thither.

Observation 34. Page 50.
HE tells us here an obscure AEnigmatical story of attaining the Natural
celestial Medicine, and that without any retractation, as if he himself had
been a potent and successeful Operatour in the Mystery. But let me once more
take notice of the fondness of this affected obscurity in words, that no man be
any whit taken with that sleight of imposture, and become guilty of that
passion of fools, causeless admiration. For the most contemptible Notion in the
World, may be so uncertainly and obscurely set out by universal and hovering
terms taken from Arithmetic and Geometry which of themselves signify no real
thing, or else from the Catachrestical use of the terms of some more particular
and substantial Science, that the dark dress thereof may bring it into the
creditable suspicion o^ proving some venerable mystery; when as, (if it were
but with faithfulness and perspicuity discovered and exposed to the judgment
and free censure of sober men) it would be found but either some sorry
incon^iderable vulgar truth, or light conjectural imagination, or else a
ghastly prodigious lie. But say in good sadness, Philalethes! is not all this
that you tattle in this page, a mere vapor and tempestuous buzz^ of yours,
made out of words you meet in Books you understand not? and casual fancies
sprung from an heedlesse Brain? Is it any thing but the activitie of your
desire to seem some strange mysterious Sophist to the World; and so to draw the
eyes of men after you? Which is all the Attraction of the Star-fire of Nature
you aim at, or can hope to be able to effect. Did your Sculler, or shittle
Skull ever arrive at that Rock of Crystal you boast of? Or did you ever,
saving in your fancy, soil that bright Virgin Earth? did your eyes, hands, or
Experience ever reach her? Tell me what Giant could ever so lustily show you
Lincoln-Calves, or hold you up so high by the ears, as to discover that Terra
Maga in AEthere Clarificata. Till you show your self wise and knowing in
effect, give me leave to suspect you a mere ignorant boaster from your Airy
unsettled words. And that you have nothing but fire and wind in your Brains,
what ever your Magical Earth has in its belly.

Observation 35. Page 51.
Lin. 6. He can repeal in particular. Now, Anthroposophus! you make good what I
suspected, that is, that you do not tell us any thing of this celestial
natural Medicine, of your own Experience. For you being conscious to your self
of being no good Christian, as you confessed before, and God having not given
so full a charter to the Creature but he may interpose and stop proceedings,
surely at least you had so much wit, as not to try where there was so just
cause of fear of frustration and miscarriage. So that you go about to teach the
World what you have not to any purpose learned your self.

Observation 36.
Lin. 27. And who is he that will not gladly believe, etc. A most rare and
highly raised notion. You resolve then that holy expectancy of the Saints of
God concerning the life to come, into that fond kind of credulity and pleasant
self-flattery, Facile credimus quod fieri volumus, and yet you seem to unsay it
again toward the end of this Period. And we will permit you, Anthroposophus! to
say and unsay, to do and undo; for the day is long enough to you, who by your
Magic and celestial Medicine are able to live till all your friends be weary
of you.

Observation 37. Page 52.
In this whole page Anthroposophus is very Gnomicall and speaks Aphorisms very
gracefully. But as moral as he would seem to be, this is but a prelude to a
piece of Poetic ostentation, and he winds himself into an occasion of showing
you a Paper of verses of his. If you do but trace his steps, you shall see him
waddle on like some Otter or Water-Rat and at last flounce into the River Vsk.
Where notwithstanding afterward he would seem to dress himself like a
Water-Nymph at those Crystal streams, and will sing as sweet as any Siren or
Mermaid. And truly, Master Anthroposophus, if that heat that enforces you to be
a Poet, would but permit you in any measure to be prudent, cautiously
rational, and wise, you would in due time prove a very considerable Gentleman.
But if you will measure the truth of things by the violence and overbearing of
fancy and windy Representations, this Amabilis insania will so intoxicate you,
that to sober men you will seem little better then a refined Bedlam. But now to
the Poetry it self.

Observation 38. Page 53.
It Is day my Crystal Vsk, etc. Here the Poet begins to sing, which being a
sign of joy is intimation enough to us also to be a little merry. The four
first verses are nothing else but one long-winded good morrow to his dear Yska.
Where you may observe the discretion and charity of the Poet, who being not
resaluted again by this Master of so many virtues, the River Vsk; yet learns
not this ill Lesson of clownishnesse, nor upbraids his Tutor for his Rustici^y.
Was there never an Echo hard by to make the River seem affable and civil, as
well as pure, patient, humble, and thankful?

Observation 39.
Lin. 17. And weary all the Planets with mine eyes. A description of the most
impudent Star-gazer that ever I heard of, that can outface all the Planets in
one Night. I perceive then, Anthroposophus! that you have a mind to be thought
an Astrologian as well as a Magician. But me thinks, an Hill had been better
for this purpose then a River. I rather think that your head is so hot and your
mind so ill at ease, that you cannot lie quiet in your bed as other Mortals
do, but you sleeping waking are carried out, like the Noctambuli in their
dreams, and make up a third with Will with, the Wisp, and Meg with the
Lanthorn, whose natural wanderings are in marish places, and near Rivers sides.

Observation 40.
Lin. ultima. Sure I will strive to gain as clear a mind. Which I dare swear
you may do at one stroke, would you but wipe at once all your fluttering and
fortuitous fancies out of it. For you would be then as clearly devoid of all
show of knowledge, as Aristotle's Abrasa Tabula, or the wind, or the flowing,
water of written characters.

Observation 41. Page 54.
Lin. 3. How I admire thy humble banks! Why! be they lower then the River it
self? that had been admirable indeed. Otherwise I see nothing worthy admiration
in it.

Observation 42.
Lin. 4. But the same simple vesture all the year. This River Yska then I
conceive, according to your Geography, is to be thought to crawl under the
AEquatour, or somewhere betwixt the Tropicks. For were it in Great Britain or
Ireland, certainly the palpable difference of seasons there, would not permit
his banks to be alike clad all the year long. The fringe of reed and flagges,
besides those gayer Ornaments of herbs and flowers, cannot grow alike on your
Yskaes banks all Summer and Winter. So that you fancy him more beggarly then he
is, that you may afterward conceit him more humble then he ought to be.

Observation 43.
Lin. 5. I Will learn simplicity of thee, etc. That Is your modesty,
Anthroposophus! to say so: For you are so learned that you may be a Doctor of
Simplicity your self, and teach others.

Observation 44.
Lin. 9. Let me not live, but I Am amazed to see what a clear type thou art of
piety. How mightily the man is ravished with the contemplation of an ordinary
Watercourse! A little thing will please you I perceive, as it does children,
nay amaze you. But if you be so much inamoured on your Yska, do that out of
love that Aristotle did out of indignation, embrace his streams, nay drown your
self, and then you will not live. You are very hot Antroposophus! that all the
cool air from the River Yska will not keep you from cursing your self, with
such mortal imprecations.

Observation 45.
Lin. 11. Why should thy floods enrich those shores, etc. Why! how now! what is
the matter, Philaleehes^ that you and the banks no better agree? If you could
so soon fall into the River as you fall out with the shore, you would to your
great honor like Aristotle, be drowned indeed. In good truth you are a very
sickle-headed Gentleman, Philalethes! thus in a moment to reproach what you did
so highly admire even now, viz. the banks of Yska, which you then made so
simple, so humble, and so innocent, that you fancied them an eximious pattern
of those virtues for your self to imitate. But now all of a sudden, your
Poetical rapture I suppose spoiling your memory, you sling dirt on those banks
that before you looked on as holy ground; and accuse them of injury, tyranny,
and cruelty against the streams of your beloved Yska. But any ordinary Advocate
may easily make good the Banks part against the River. For I say unto thee, O
thou man of light imaginations! that the banks of Yska are just, in keeping but
the ground that ever was allotted them; but where ever they have lost ground,
it is the violence and the usurpation of the injurious River, that has worn
them away and overrunne them in an hostile manner. Besides I say, that the
Banks aforesaid are very charitable and pious as well as just, and do not
return revenge for injury. For whereas the aforesaid River, both by open force
and secret undermining, does daily endeavor to wear away and destroy the
Banks, and encroach upon the neighboring ground, (which attempt is as sottish
and foolish as unjust, for so the River would be lost and drunk up by the
Earth; Nor can there be any River without banks, more then an Hill without a
valley;) yet notwithstanding all this provocation of the River aforesaid, the
Banks are so patient, charitable, and of so Christian-like nature, that they
preserve in being and good plight their inveterate enemy, and keep up that
carefully and stoutly in its right form and perfection, that daily practices
and plots their expected destruction. What do you answer to this, Philalethes!
All that virtue and piety which you fancy in the River, you see now plainly
growing upon the Banks. So that you may gather it, if you have a mind to it,
without wetting your finger.

Observation 46.
Lin. ultima. Help me to run to Heavon, as thou do there. Ha, ha, he! Why!
I pray thee, does Yska run to Heaven there? No it runs down into the Sea, as
the Devils and the Heard of Swine did; whither I hope you do not desire to go
for company, Philalethes! But I wonder you being a whole day and a night on the
banks of Yska, that no fish not so much as a small Stittlebag has leapt up into
your fancy all this time. You might have learned many rare lectures of
Morality from them too. As for example; in stead of due vigilancie you might
learn from the fishes eyes never closing, to sleep and dream waking; or in
stead of being mute as a fish when you have nothing to say, to say nothing to
the purpose, or to express your self as unintelligibly as if you had said
nothing. But these and the like accomplishments naturally growing in you, you
wanted no outward emblems to reminde you of them, so that I hold you here
excusable. But before I leave this rare Poem of yours, let me only take notice
thus far: that your Leyitie and Fantastrie does much eclipse the glorious
suspicion of your Theomagicall Faculty. For it will seem very incredible that
so light and fancifull a Poet should ever prove a grave and wonder working
Magician.

SECT. V.
47. He recommends the walking and meditating by River sides and in Groves. 48.
He discredits all modern writers saving Michael Sendivow and the Author of
Physica Restituta. 49. He taxes that incomparable Philosopher Descartes, as if
he wrote nothing but whimzies. 50. He conceits himself to have been strutting
on the stage all this while in the view of the World, but at last gives place
to the next Actor. 51. He suspects some Peripatetick will take the next turn,
whom he professes he shall at all adventures receive with scorn and laughter.
52. He takes it for granted that whosoever shall presume to write against him,
will but prove himself a fool, and professes that the best way to convince such
is to neglect them.

Observation 47. Page 55. l. 1.
THis is the way I would have thee walk in etc. viz. In Majestic Groves, and
Woods, and by River sides. You are not then I perceive, an Anti-Peripatetick,
Philalethes! though you be so violent an Anti-Aristotelean. But with such
pompous gravitie to give such slight Precepts as of walking by Rivers sides and
in Groves, etc. argues more then enough of moping distempered Melancholy in
you, and that it may, if you take not heed, make you indulge so much to
delusive fancy, that you will be never able to set your eye again upon solid
Reason, but range and ramble like one lost in a Wood.

Observation 48.
Lin. 9. To trust no Modern but Mich. Sendivow, and Physica Restituta. How
mightily are these two heholden to you, Philalethes, if you had but so many
grains of judgment and discretion as to make you able to pass sentence upon
any considerable Author? But what do you mean by trusting? To give faith and
credence to them as to Holy Writ? If so, I perceive you have also a Triplicity
of Bibles, viz. the usual one, Mich. Sendivow, and Physica Restituta. But we
ordinary Mortals hope to be as wise and as happy with our single one, as you
with your advantage of three.

Observation 49.
Lin. 13. With the Whymzies of Descartes. This young man has as little manners
as wit, to speak thus reproachfully of the most admirable Philosophy, that
ever yet appeared in these European parts since Noah's flood. Certainly,
Anthroposophus! you are set upon it to demonstrate your self a pure pitiful
Novice in Knowledge, whom only Ignorance makes so magisterially confident. But
for thy want of due sagacitie, I will take thee by the Nose, O Philalethes,
with this one Dilemma, which shall pinch thee as hard, as St. Dunstan did the
roaring Fiend with a red-hot pair of tongs. Thus; Either thou have read Des
Carts his natural Philosophy, or thou have not. If thou have read it, thus
to contemn it and term it a Whymzie, (whereas there was never any thing
proposed to the World in which there is more wary, subtle, and close contexture
of reason, more coherent uniformitie of all parts with themselves, or more
happy conformity of the whole with the Phenomenon of Nature) is to proclaim to
all that understand Des-Carte's Philosophy, that thou have a very broken,
impatient, and unsteddie Apprehension, or a very dull and slow wit, and such as
cannot discern when it lights upon what is most exactly rational, and when
not. But what is most exactly rational, as his Philosophy indeed is to any
competent Judge of Reason, is least of all whymzicall; but whymzies more
naturally lodge in their brains that are loosly fancifull, not in theirs that
are Mathematically and severely wise. So that this reproach returns upon thine
own addle pate, O inconsiderate Philalethes! But if thou did never read his
Philosophy, and yet pronouncest thus boldly of it; that is not only
impudently uncivil, but extremely and insufferably unjust.

Observation 50. Page 56.
Lin. 6. I will now withdraw, and leave the Stage to the next Actour. Exit Tom
Fool in the play.

Observation 51.
Lin. 8. Some Peripatetick perhaps whose Sic probo shall serve me for a
Comedy. So it seems if a man had seriously argued with you all this time, you
would only have returned him laughter in stead of a solid answer, and so from
Tom Fool in the Play, you would have become a natural Fool. But we have had
the good hap to prevent you, and in stead of Sic probo's, to play the Fool for
company, that is, to answer a fool according to his foolishness, that is, to
rail and call names, and make ridiculous. Into which foolish postures as often
as I have distorted my self, so often have I made my self a fool that you may
become wise, and amend that in your self, that you cannot but dislike in me.
Nor would I ever meddle with you, as merry as I seem, but upon this and the
like serious intentions. And must needs reckon it amongst the rest of your
follies, that you expected that some severe Peripatetick would have laid
battery against you, with syllogism upon syllogism, and so all confuted your
Book, that there had not been left one line entire. But assure your self
Philalethes! the Peripateticks are not altogether given so much to scolding,
that they will contest with a shadow, or fight with the wind. Nor so good
marks-men, as to level at a Wilde-goose flying. You are so fluttering and
unsettled in your notions, and obscure in your terms, that unless you will be
more fixed, and sit fair, and draw your Wood-cocks head out of the bush or
thicket, they will not be able to hit your meaning. Which I suspect you will
never be persuaded to do, that you may keep your self more secure from Gunshot.

Observation 52.
Lin. 13. And the best way to convince fools, etc. How wise Anthroposophus is
to what is evil! Here he makes sure of calling him Fool first who ever shall
attempt to write any thing against his Book. But it is no such mischief,
Anthroposophus! to be called fool. The worst jest is when a man is so indeed.
And if you had but the skill to winnow away all the chafe of humorous words
and uncouth freaks and fetches of fancy, and affected phrases, which are
neither the signs nor causes of any wisdom in a man; all that will be left of
this learned discourse of yours, will prove such a small mo^tie of that
knowledge your presumptuous mind conceited to be in her self, that you would
then very sadly of your own accord (which would be your first step to become
wise indeed) confess your self a Fool. And this I understand of your knowledge
in Nature. Now for that in Morality; It is true, you often take upon you the
gravitie to give precepts of life, as especially in the 52 and 55 pages of this
Tractate. But you do it so conceitedly, with such chiming and clinching of
words, Antithetal Librations, and Symphonical rappings, that to sober men you
cannot but seem rather like some idle boy playing on a pair of Knick-knacks to
please his own ear and fancy, then a grave Moralist speaking wholesome words
and giving weighty counsel of life and manners. So that the best that you do,
is but to make the most solemn things ridiculous, by your Apish handling of
them. I suppose because a Religious Humor has been held on in some Treatises,
with that skill and judgment, or at least good success, that it has won the
approbation and applause of most men; an eager desire after fame has hurried
you out upon the like attempt. And though you would not call your Book Religio
Magici, as that other was Religio Medici; yet the favorable conceit you had of
your own Worth, made you bold to vie with him, and in imitation of that, you
have stuffed your Book here and there with a tuft of Poetry, as a Gammon of
Bacon with green herbs, to make it taste more savourly. But all will not do,
poor Magicus! For now your design is discovered, you are as contemptible as
any Juggler is before him that knows all his tricks aforehand. And you run the
same fortune that AEsop's Ass, who ineptly endeavoring to imitate the
Courtship and winning carriage of his Masters fawning and leaping Spaniel, in
stead of favor found a club for his rude performance. But you, Magicus! do not
only paw ill-favouredly with your fore-feet, but kick like mad with your
hinder feet, as if you would dash out all the Aristoteleans brains. And do you
think that they are all either so faint-hearted, that they dare not, or so
singularly moralized, that Socrates-like, if an Ass kick they will not kick
again? Yes certainly next to your self they are as like as any to play the
Asses, and to answer you kick for kick, if you will but stand fair for them.
But you h^ve got such a Magical sleight of hiding your head, and nipping in
your buttocks, like the Hob-gobling that in the shape of an Horse dropped the
children off one by one off his tail into the water, that they cannot find you
out nor feel whereabout you would be, else certainly they would set a mark upon
your hinder parts. For if I, my dear Eugenius! who am your brother Philalethes,
am forced out of care and judgment to handle you so seeming harshly and
rigidly as I do, what do you think would become of you, si incideres in ipsas
Belluas, if you should fall amongst the irefull Aristoteleans themselves? would
you be able to escape alive out of their hands? Wherefore good brother
Philalethes! hereafter be more discreet, and endeavor rather to be wise then
to seem so, and to quit your self from being a fool, then to fancy the
Aristoteleans to be such.

FINIS.
Upon the Authors generous design, in his Observations, of discovering and
discountenancing all mysteriously masked nonsense, and imposturous fancy; the
sworn Enemies of Sound-Reason and Truth.
NObly designed! let not a Sunday suit
Make us my Gaffer for my Lord salute:
Nor his Saints clothes deceive, O comely dress!
Like to a Long-lane Doublets wide excess.
How like a Sack it sits? Less far would fit,
Did he proportion but his garb and Wit.
The Wight mistakes his size, each wiseman sees
His men's Fourteens shrink to a childrens Threes.
Fill out thy Title, man! think thou can daunt
By pointing to the sword of John of Gaun^?
Thou can not wield it yet; an empty name
Does no more feats then a mere painted flame.
Rare Soul! whose words refined from flesh and blood
Are neither to be felt nor understood:
But if they sacred be, because not sense;
To Bedlam, Sirs! the best Divines come thence.
Your newfound Lights may like a falling Star,
Seem heavenly Lamps, when they but Gellies are.
An high swollen Wombs bid fair, but time grown nigh
The promis^d birth proves but a Tympanie.
Should Superstition, what it most does fly,
Seek to take shelter in Philosophy?
And Sacred Writ, sole image of sure Truth,
Be pulled by th'nose by every idle youth?
And made to bend as seeming to incline
To all the fooleries he will call Divine?
Find out the Word in Scripture, all is found
Swarms of Conceits buzze up from this one ground.
As if the Cobbler all his trade would show
From mention made of Gibeon's clouted shoe:
Or Bakers their whole Art at large would read
From the short record of the moldy Bread.
Is this the spirit? thus confusedly mad?
Antipodal to him the Chaos had?
Fell boistrous blast ^ that with one Magic puff
Turns the Schools Glory to a Farthing snuff^
And against that ancient Sage the World adores,
Like to a Lapland whirlewind loudly roares.
Yet from thy travels in the search of things,
Ridiculous Swain! what shallow stuff thou bring'st!
What clothes they wear, Vails, Tiff'nies, do relate,
Thou art Philosophies Tom Coriat.
Else brave Des Carts, whom fools cannot admire,
Had nere been sindg'd by thy wild Whimzie fire.
Poor Galen's Antichrist^ though one Purge of his
Might so unmagick thee as make thee wise.
Physic cures phrenzie, knows inspired wit
O^t proves a mere Hypochondriack fit.
Agrippa's Cur sure kennels in thy weamb,
Thou yelpest so and barkest in a dream;
Or if awake, thou do on him so fawn,
And bite all else that hence his Dog thou art known.
But I will spare the lash, it was my friends task
Who rescuing Truth engaged put on this mask.
Thus does some careful Prince disguised go,
To keep his Subjects from the intended blow;
Nor could his lofty soul so low descend,
But to uncheat the World; a noble end!
And now the night is gone, we plainly find
'Twas not a Light but rotten Wood that shined.
We owe this day (my dearest friend) to thee,
All eyes but Night-birds now the Imposture see.
I. F.
FINIS.
THE SECOND LASH OF Alazonomastix; Containing a Solid and Serious REPLY to a
very uncivil Answer to certain OBSERVATIONSUpon Anthroposophia Theomagica, And
Anima Magica Abscondita.

Proverb. He that reproves a scorner, gets to himself a blot.

Ecclesiastic. Be not proud in the device of thine own mind, lest thy soul rend
thee as a Bull.

LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher. 1655.

To his singularly accomplished friend Mr. John Finch.
SIR,
I Know that your modesty cannot but be much amazed at this unexpected
Dedication. But the causes once discovered admiration will cease. Eugenius, as
children use to do (who fallen into the dirt by their own folly, commonly make
a lamentable complaint to their Father or Mother against them that help them
up, as if they had flung them down) has told a hideous story to his Tutour, as
if I had soyl'd him and dirtied him, when as I only reminded him that he lay
in the dirt, which in this case is all one as to help him out of it. Wherefore,
that I might hold up the humor every way of opposing my Adversary (as I must
for fashion-sake call him) he making his false and grievous Accusation to his
Tutour, I thought fit to direct this my true and pleasant Reply to you my Pupil.

But if I should say, that this is so much as the least part of what moved me
to this act, I confess I should dissemble. For to say nothing of the
Nobleness of your Descent, which is held ordinarily a sufficient ground for
such a respect as this: it is indeed the Sweetness and Candor of your nature,
your great Civility and Pleasantness of Conversation, your miraculous
Proficiencie in the choicest parts of Philosophy, your egregious Perspicacity
and kindly Wit, your generous Freedom of spirit, and true Nobleness of mind
(whom the surly countenance of sad Superstition cannot aw, but the lovely face
of Virtue, and radiant Beauty of Divine Knowlodge do most potently command to
approve and prosecute what is really best) that has extorted this Testimony of
love and respect from

Your affectionate friend to serve you, ALAZ. PHILALETHES.

To his learned Friend Alazonomastix Philalethes, Upon his Reply.
DEar friend! as often as I with care peruse
This strange Reply of thine, I cannot choose
But wonder at thy rare Complexion,
Where Wit, Mirth, Judgment thus conspire in one.
Where Inspirations which make others mad,
Unto thy Reason, grace and credit add;
And Passion, that like dungeon dark, does blind,
Proves the free fiery chariot of thy mind.
Go surly Stoic, with deep furrowed brow,
Natures rude Pruner, that wilt not allow
What Is right and good. Here naught too much appears,
Unless on thy shorn head thine own large ears.
Since Mastix merry rage, all now believe
Passion's an arm of man, no hanging sleeve.
Brave generous Choler! whose quick motions pierce
Swift like the lightning through the Universe;
And in their hasty course as on they fare,
Do cleanse men's souls of vice, as that, the Air.
Noble Contention! which like brushing winds
That sweep both Land and Sea, does purge our minds.
It is thy free and ever-active fire
That rooseth men from snorting in the mire:
And roos'd, thy aw makes them to tread the stage
In a due Order and right Equipage.
Thy hiss more dreadful is then wounding sting
Of serpents teeth, that certain death do bring:
And conscious souls start at thy laughter loud
As at a Thunderclap broke from a cloud,
When Jove some flash of world rebuking wit
Lets fly, and faultlesse Gods all laugh at it:
For so ridiculous vice in ugly guize
Is made the sport and pastime of the wise.
But when fond men themselves to their own face
Have their foul shapes reflected, the disgrace
And conscience of deformity so stings
Their gauled minds, and fretted entrayls wrings,
That even grown wild with pain in vain they tire
Themselves to shake off this close searching fire;
That sticks like burning pitch, and makes them wood
As Hercules wrapped in the Centaurs blood.
This is thy fate, Eugenius! Thy odd look
Reflected to thy self from Mastix book
Has so amazed thee with the sudden glance,
That all thy wits be struck into a trance.
But Grief and Vengeance thou do so revive,
As if to them alone thou were alive.
And only take care with language foul
To soil his person, that would cleanse thy soul.
Thus the free cheerful Sun with his bright rays
Shines upon dunghils, fens, and foul high ways,
While they return naught back for his pure beams
But thick unwholesome mysts and stinking steams.
But yet at length near his Meridian height
Dispells the Morning-fogs by fuller light.
Go on brave Mastix then, those noisome fumes
Thy first appearance raised, sure this consumes.
Johannnes Philomastix.
To the Reader.
Reader,
IF thou have perused my Observations upon the two Magical Treatises of
Eugenius Philalethes, and his Answer to them, I do not doubt but that seeming
and personated sharpness of mine will now seem just nothing at all, to thy
indifferent judgment; if thou compare it with his unchristian bitterness and
inhumane railings against me. For mine own part, I was so far from all
malice, that if I have trespassed, it was from that over-pleasantnesse of
temper I was in, when I wrote: which made me perhaps too heedlesse how much I
might displease the party with whom I dealt, being secure of the truth of that
saying in the Poet, -- Ridentem dicere verum
Quis vetat? --
But I find that I have so nettled him unawares, as if his senses lay all in
his backside, and had left his brains destitute: Which has made him very
ill-favouredly wrong both himself, the Rod, and the Correctour. Verily if I had
thought his retentive faculty had been so weak, I would not have fouled my
fingers with meddling with him. Nor would I now lay on this second gentle lash
(I seeing the disposition of my young Eugenius) if it were not as well to wipe
my self, as to whip him. I could have been content to have been represented to
the world as ignorant of Nature and Philosophy, as he has by his bold and very
bad speeches to me, endeavored to represent me. For I am not bound in
conscience to know Nature, but my self; nor to be a deep Philosopher; but to be
and approve my self a plain and honest Christian. This forced me to this Reply.
But I thought fit to cast in also, what will prove me no less a Philosopher
then no Rayler.

But I am not contented to justify my self only from the success; but to thy
further satisfaction, I shall not think much to acquaint thee with my purposes
and principles. The truth is, Eugenius, though he be so highly conceited of
himself, that he thinks his worth is great enough to contract my envy; yet he
is so little in my eyes, and my self (I thank God) so little envious, that in
this regard he is not at all considerable to me. But my drift was to whip that
Genius and dispensation he is for the present under, upon Eugenius his own
back, as having deserved to be an instrument to so good an end. And I persuade
my self there are those parts and that freedom in some measure already in this
young Philosopher, that in a little time he will say that he deserved this
correction, and will laugh for company at the merry punishment, and will freely
confess that I am his brother Philalethes, a lover of him and of Truth: And
that he that whipped the money changers out of the Temple, is as much the first
Mastix, as Adam the first Magicus. But for the present he is under that
dispensation which is as pernicious to the nature of man and Christianity it
self, as it is, to the sober and wise, ridiculous. For he is even in a
feverish thirst after knowledge and fame, and (as he has made it manifest to
the world) more after fame by far then knowledge. Wherefore, I observing in
his Theomagicall tumor and loftiness nothing but confident misapplying or
conceitedly interpreting the holy Writ, (the drift and meaning whereof is far
above all natural Philosophy or tricks of Magic whatsoever) and then
sleighting and scorning those that, I dare say, he does not understand, who yet
are very rational and intelligible, I mean such as Des Carts: and downright
railing against the Aristoteleans and Galenists, who yet have many sober and
useful truths amongst them: Moreover, I noting a melancholic, flatuous and
heedlesse fancy to appear in his writings, clothed with sonorous and amazing
terms, such as might rather astonish the ignorant, then teach the docible: Add
unto all this, that it is too too common a disease now adays to be driven by
heedlesse intoxicating imaginations under pretense of higher strains of
Religion and supernatural light, and by bidding adieu to sober reason and a
purified mind, to grow first fanaticall, and then Atheistical and sensual,
even almost to the height of abhorred Gnosticisme: I thought in good earnest it
was very fit, out of my indignation to Foolery and Imposture, out of my
detestation to Beastliness, Atheism, and Sensuality, and lastly out of that
honorable respect and tender affection I bear to the Plainness and Simplicity
of the life of Christ and true divine Wisdom, to take occasion to write in
such a manner as I did, and to discountenance that Genius, that defaces the new
appearing face of Christendom, and is a reproach to that just liberty that
belongs to all those that seek after God in sincerity and truth.

I but you will say, This indeed may be well meant: Bu^ what title or right
have you to intermeddle, or to correct another man's follies? This is usurpation
and incivility. To this may many things be answered. It is true; The inward
rottenness of men has made very smooth laws to themselves in favor of their
own follies and vices, and mutual connivence at what is bad is held the best
manners; as if mankind packed and conspired together to keep wickedness warm
in her usurped seat by never taking the boldness to examine her title. But to
judge more charitably of the generations of men, I think it is more out of
self-love, then love to her, and out of a tender dotage toward this imposturous
knot of Atoms, our earthly Personality. Which yet I thought I was more
favorable to here, having to do only with fictitious names, not any known
Person. But it does not follow, Though this be the mode, that therefore it is
the right fashion: and Quando ego non curo tuum, ne cura meum, is but surlily
said of the old man in the Comedy. That Is the principle of Cain, Am I my
brothers keeper? There was more divine generosity in that noted Cynick, then in
civility it self, when it is so soft that it will not prick nor hurt vice. He
would not spare to speak where things went amiss, however he sped for it;
tanquam Pater omnium, tanquam Frater omnium, as they report of him. And I think
I have sped ill enough for my but seasonable speaking.

But if this be to appeal to too high a law, I answer further, that Eugenius
had forfeited his privileges he might claim by the laws of civility, he
himself having so uncivilly dealt with others that are above all comparison
better then he. I but you will say, Why do you make him so ridiculous in your
reproving him? Single reproof had been enough. I answer, I did not make him
ridiculous, but found him so. He put on himself the pyde coat, and I only drew
aside the curtain. Did not the Thracian Girl rightly laugh at Thales when she
see him stumble into a ditch, whiles he was staring up at the stars? And are
not they as ridiculous, that pretend to Seraphick mysterious Theories, and are
not masters yet of common sense and plamest truths of Christianity? That
stumble at the threshold, or rather grope for the door as the blinded
Sodomites? All the faculties of man are good in themselves, and the use of
them, is at least permitted to him, provided that with seasonable circumstances
and upon a right object. And I have made it already manifest that my Act was
bounded with these cautions.

I, but there is yet something behind unsatisfied. Though Eugenius be
ridiculous; yet is it not ridiculous, for one that pretends so much to the love
of Christianity as your self, so publicly to laugh at him? That pinches
indeed. Why! am I so venerable a Personage? I am sure I never affected to seem
any such to the world yet. I wear no satin ears, nor silk cap with as many
seams as there are streaks in the back of a lute. I affect neither long
prayers, nor a long beard, nor walk with a smooth-knobbed staff to sustain my
Gravity. If I be a Precisian, as Eugenius would have me, it must be from hence,
that I precisely keep my self to the naked truth of Christianity. As for Sects,
Ceremonies, superstitious Humors, or specious garbs of Sanctimony, I look on
them all, if affected, as the effects of Ignorance, or masks of Hypocrisy. And
thus am I (...), a Gentleman in querpo, a mere man, a true man, a Christian.
One that never thinks himself so great, as to grow unweildy and unready to put
himself into any shape or posture for a common good. And I prithee, Reader, why
may not such a Christian as this laugh? Or tell me, Who is he in Heaven that
laughs them to scorn, that has the opposers of the reign of Christ in
derision? God is not a man that he should laugh, no more then cry or repent, as
much as concerns the^ Divine Essence it self: But as God is in a Deiform man,
he may be said to laugh, and he can be said to laugh no where else. And if he
might, yet that which is attributed to God, though (...), cannot mis-become a
good man. Thus Reader, is your argument against laughing as solidly argued as
sportingly laughed out of countenance; and affected austerity made ridiculous
by the plain and unaffected reasonings of Eugenius his merry Adversary, but

Your sober and serious friend Alazonomastix Philalethes.

To Eugenius Philalethes.
Eugenius,
THe reason why you heard not from me sooner, is because yours arrived to my
hands later then I exspected. It was so hot, it seems, that none of my
acquaintance had so hard and brawny fingers as to endure the dandling of this
glowing coal till its conveyance where you would have it. It is a brand from
that fire, that has not only cal^ined, but so vitrif^ed Eugenius that it has
made him transparent to all the world. All men may see now through his glassy
sides how unevenly and disorderly his black heart beats and pants; they need
not feel his pulse to find his distemper^ AEsops fair water but a little warmed
has proved a very ^ffectuall Emet^ck, for thee, O Philalethes, and has made
thee vomit up thy shame and folly in the sight of the world, as his Accu^er did
the figs before his Master. So that that which you falsely supposed me to have
e^deavoured, you have fatally brought upon your self, above the desire, I
should think, of your bitterest enemies; I am sure beyond the expectation of me
that am your real friend. I did not endeavor your personal disgrace, but the
discountenancing of that, which in my judg^ment is the disgrace of your person
and many other persons besides. And now that you have done me the greatest
despite you can imagine, and showed your malice to the full^ so that in the
court of Heaven and according to the doctrine of Christ you are no better then
a murderer, yet for all this I am benignly affected t^ you still, and wish you
as much good, as I do those that never endeavored to provoke me. And really I
speak it from my soul, if it lay in my power to do it, you should find it. But
for the present, I could in my judgment do nothing more proper, considering
all circumstances, then what I have done, and still do, in advertising you of
what is for the best. And truly, (looking upon you in some sort as a
Noctambulo, one that walks in his sleep) that Book which has proved so
mischievous a scandal, I intended only for a stumble to wake you, (that you
might shrugg and rub your eyes, and see in what a naked condition you are,) not
a stone of offense for you to fall upon and hurt you. But you are fallen and
hurt, and yet do not awake, as if Mercuries rod, or I know not what other force
of Magic, still held fast your eyes. You only mutter against the present
disturbance, as one shogged while he dreams upon his pillow, but you still
sleep. You cry out as one cramped in your bed, but your closed sight can not
discern whether it be a friend in sport or for better purpose, or whether it be
your foe to torture you. Awake Eugenius! Awake, Behold, it is I, your
sportfully troublesome friend, or what you will in due time acknowledge, though
in this present drowsy humor you puff at it, and kick against it,

Your careful and vigilant brother ALAZONOMASTIX PHILALETHES.

The second Lash of Alazonomastix.
SECT. I.
Mastix sports himself with Eugenius his Title Page [ The man-mouse taken in a
trap, etc.] Taxes his indiscretion for dedicating so foul a paper to his grave
Tutor. Sleights his friends Poetry. Apologizes for his own liberty of speech.
Vindicates himself from that unjust aspersion of being uncivil or immoral by
answering to every particular passage alleged against him out of his
Observations. Declares the true causes of his writing against Eugenius.

ANd now, Eugenius, if it be as lawful to speak to one asleep, as it was for
Diogenes to talk to Pillars and Posts that are not in a capacity of ever being
awake: Let me tell you (to begin with your Title Page first) that you do very
much undervalue and wrong your self, that you being a Gentleman of that
learning and parts that you are, you will thus poorly condescend to that
contemptible trade of a Mous-catcher: And that you are not content to abuse
your self only, but you do abuse Scripture too, by your ridiculous applying
St. Paul's fighting with beasts at Eph^sus, to your combating with, and
overcoming of a mouse. Truly, Philalethes, I think, they that have the meanest
opinion of you, would give you their suffrage for a taller office then this,
and adjudge you at least worthy of the place of a Rat-catcher.

As for your Epistle Dedicatory, I conceive you have a very indulgent Tutor,
else you would not be so bold to utter so foul language in his hearing. You
have a very familiar friend of him, if you can without breach of civilitie thus
freely vomit up your figs into his bosom.

But for P. B. of Oxenford his verses, I will only set this one verse of
Virgil's against them all; Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua carmina Maevi.


Thus you sre how gladly I would rid my self of all your foul language and
fooleries. I have nimbly run through these. I shall leap over the rest as so
many dirty ditches. Your slovenly speeches and uncivil raylings, you must seek
an answer for them in Billingsgate or amongst the Butchers; Nobis non licet
esse tam disertis.
But where you bring any thing that bears any show of reason with it, I will
(though it be far below me to answer so foul a mouth) return what in the
judgment of the sober, I hope will not fail to be approved as satisfactorie.

Page 4, and 5.
In these pages yo^ accuse me of very high incivility and immorality. And it is
an accusation worth the answering, especially being set off with that great
aggravation of being committed against one that is a Christian. But verily,
Philalethes. I do not meet with any man now that takes you to be such, after
this specimen, as I call it, of your Kainish and unchristian dealing with me,
whom indifferent judges will not think to have deserved the hundredth part of
this revenge. I tell thee, Eugenius, there is no Christian but who is partaker
of the holy unction, (...), of the divine Nature, and of that pure and
peaceable love. But if thou think thy mere Baptism will make thee a
Christian (while in the mean time thy heart is possessed of uncleanness and
hatred, which the law of Christ interprets murder) the heathen Poet is able to
show thee thy gross error in this point; Ah nimium faciles! qui tristia
crimina caedis
Flumine a tolli posse putatis aqua,
Oh fools and credulou^! that think you may
By water wash sad guilt of blood away.


But to the accusation and charge it self which is this, That I say you are
Simon Magus-like, a Heated Noddle, a Mome, a Mimick, an Ape, a mere Animal, a
Snail, a Philosophic hog, a Nip-crust, a Pick-pocket, a Niggard, Tom fool with
a devils head and horns, one that desires to be a Conjurer more then a
Christian. This is the first part of your charge. But before I answer to the
particulars of it, or proceed to the other, these two things are to be noted;
First, that you have drained all the sharper humor that was but thinly
dispersed through the body of my book into two narrow places, that you may make
them appear like two angry boyls, or malignant pushes in the body which if it
were done in the soundest body that is there would be the like seeming
distemper. Se^ondly, it is to be considered that I did profess that I would put
my self in some seeming posture of harshnesse and incivilitie, that I might
show you your own real miscarriage to others, by imitating and personating the
same toward your self. But the thing that I contend for now, is, that this
persona^ed incivilitie and harshnesse of mine is nothing so harsh and uncivil
as you do here make it, as will appear from the causes or occasional
circumstances of this hard language you have thus culled out. For to begin with
the first; You having a design to seem no small thing in the World, and also
pretending to Magic; how easily^ how naturally does it fall into the mind of a
man, to compare you to Simon Magus in these regards? And if you did not walk as
all touchy proud men do, as it were with their skins flean off, such a light
thing as this would not smart nor hurt you so sore.

Heated noddle. That Is the only mischief of it that it is true, and your flame
and smoke is as conspicuous as that of AEtna and Vesuvius: -- Quis enim
celaverit ignem?
Enitet indicio prodita flamma suo.
For who can fire conceal? whose flame shoots out
And shining shows it self to all about.
As your heat and fire has sufficiently done, especially in this your last
against me, to your great credit; I am sure to mine, for you have writ so, as
if you intended to save me from all suspicion of being mistaken in you.

A Mome, a Mimick, and an Ape. I only said that you were more like those then
Aristotle: And if you distrust my judgment, I pray you ask any body else.

And to call you a mere Animal occasionally in our dispute, Whether the world
be an Animal or no; what rudeness is there in it? worse then this is held no
incivility between those two famous Phlosophers Cardan and Scaliger, whom your
Magisterialnesse has made bold to use at least as coursely as I seem to have
used you. But you would it seems have the whole Monopoly of reprehension to
your self. And much good may it do you Eugenius! My generous liberty of speech
has been so well entertained by ^ome in the world that I shall take up that
prudential resolution for the future, Si populus decipi vult, decipiatur.

A Snail. But that a poor snail should stick in your stomach so, Philalethes, I
much wonder at it. Certainly as fair as you bid for a Magician, yet I perceive
you will be no Gypsy by your abhorrencie from this food.

But a Philosophic Hog: There Is a thwacking contumely indeed. Truly you are
young, Eugenius: and I pray you then please your self, if you had rather be
called a Philosophic pig. But then you would be afraid that some Presbyterian
may click you up for a tithe-pig, and eat you. (This is a pig of your own sow,
Philalethes, a piece of your own wit.) But being a Philosophic pig you may be
secure: That Is too tough meat for every country Presbyter. But I prithee Phil.
why art thou so offended at the term of Philosophic Hog? The meaning is only,
That thou would pretend to see invisible essences, as that creature is said
to see the wind. Dos Christ call himself thief, when he says his coming shall
be as a Thief in the Night? Peace for shame Caviller, peace.

Niggard and Nip-crust, viz. of your Theomagical notions. That Is all I said,
and I am such a Nipcrust and Niggard of my speech, that I will say no more.

Pick-poket, To this I answer fully at Observe. 26. where I show thee that there
being no suspicion at all of any such fact in you, it makes the conceit
harmless and without scurrility. And as little scurrilous is that which
follows, viz. Tom fool with the Devils head and horns. For my speaking of it in
such such sort as I did, implies only that I look upon you, as a merry wag,
playing the child and fooling behind the hangings, and putting out your head by
fits, with a strange vizard to scare or amaze your familiar comrades and
companions. And I pray you what bitterness is in all this? But you have made
the foulest, ugliest vizard for me in this your book, and put it on my head, to
make the world believe that I were both Fool and Devil incorporate into one
person. And this you have done out of malice, Magicus, and implacable revenge.
But I wish you had some black bag or vail, to hide your shame from the world:
That is the worst I wish you.

One that desires to be a Conjurer more then to be a Christian: If you like not
Conjurer write Exorcist. That Is all I would have meant by it. There is a
Conjuring out as well as Conjuring up the devil. And I wish you were good at
the former of these, for your own sake.

But now to apply my Emollient to the other boil you have made in the body of
my little book. You have made the sharp humor swell into this second bunch by
your unnatural draining. A fool in a play, a Iack-pudding, a Thing wholly set
in a posture to make the people laugh, a giddy fantastic Conjurer, a poor
Kitling, a Calfshead, a Pander, a sworn enemy to Reason, a shittle scull, no
good Christian, an Otter, a water-Rat, Will with the wisp, and Meg with the
Lan^horn, Tom fool in a play, a natural fool.

A fool in a play, a Iack-pudding, etc. Let the Reader consult the place if
there be not a seasonable occasion of reminding you of your over much
lightness, you taking so grave a task upon you as to be a public professor of
Theomagicks.

A giddy fantastic Conjurer. No Conjurer there but a Fantastic. I admit in
you the lesser fault to discharge you of the greater. Is this to revile you, or
befriend you?

A poor Kitling. Poor Kitling! Take it into thy lap, Phil. and stroke it
gently: I warrant thee it will not hurt thee. Be not so shie, why thou art akin
to it, Phil. by thy own confession. For thou art a Mous-catcher which is near
akin to a Cat, which is also a catcher of mice: and a Cat is sire to a Kitling.

A Calfs-head. I did not call thee Calfshead. Eugenius, but said that no
Chemist could extract any substantial visible form out of thy brains, whereby
they may be distinguished from what lies in a Calfshead. And there is a vast
difference in simply calling you Pander, and calling you Pander to Madam
Nature; who, you confess, complains of your prostitutions.

A sworn enemy to Reason. Why, Do you not pray against reason, A logica libera
nos Domine? And I think any body would swear you are a real enemy to that you
pray against, unless your devotions be but a mockery.

A shittle scull. My words were, Did your sculler or shittle skull. I hope you
do not think, that I meant your skull was so flue and shallow that boys might
shittle it, and make ducks and drakes on the water with it, as they do with
oyster-shells: Or that your self was so Magical, that you could row to the
crystal rock in it, as witches are said to do on the Seas in Eggshells. Excuse
me Phil. I meant no such high mysteries. It was only a pitiful dry clinch, as
light as any nut-shell: something like that gingle of thine, Nation and
Indignation.

No good Christian. In that place you bad us show you a good Christian, and you
would etc. There I infer, that (you being at all other times so ready to show
your self, and here you slinking back) you were conscious to your self that
you were no good Christian.

Otter and Water-Rat. I said only that you did waddle on toward the river Vsk
like an Otter or Water-Rat.

Will with the wisp, and Meg with the Lanthorn. I do not call you Will, nor
Meg: but tell you, If you walk by River sides and Marish places, you may well
meet with such companions there as those, to take a turn or two with you.

Tom-fool in a play. Why, is not your name Tom? They tell me it is Tom Vaughan
of Jesus College in Oxford. Well then Tom, Do not you make your self an Actour
in a play? For these are your words: I will now withdraw and leave the stage to
the next Actour. So here is Tom in the play. But where is the fool? say you.
Where is the wisest man? say I. My self says Tom Vaughan I warrant you. Why,
then say I, Tom Vaughan is Tom fool in the play. For the fool in the play is to
be the wisest man, according to the known proverb.

But how will ye wipe off that aspersion of calling me natural fool? says wise
Tom. That indeed I confess impossible, because it was never yet laid on. I said
only, if you had answered the Aristoteleans Sic probo's, with mere laughter,
you would have proved your self a natural fool. But he has not done so, nor
is Tom Vaughan a natural fool, I dare swear for him. He has too much natural
heat to be a natural fool. Bless thee from madness, Tom, and all will be well.

But there is yet something else behind, worse then all this: That all these
terms of incivilitie must proceed from spite and provocation. And this you
place betwixt the two bilious tumors you have raised, as a ductus communis, or
common chanel to convey the sharp malignant humor to swell them to the full.
It is true, my words run thus; That I have been very fair with you, and though
provoked, etc. But this was spoken in the person of an Aristotelean, whom your
scornful usage of their Master Aristotle you may be sure did and does provoke.
But in good truth, Philalethes, you did not provoke me at all with your book,
unless to laugh at you for your Puerilities. I, but you have an argument for
it, that I was provoked, viz. Because your Theomagicall discourse has so out
done or undone my Ballade of the Soul (as you scornfully call it) that my
ignorance in the Platonic Philosophy has now appeared to the world. O rem
ridiculam! Thou art a merry Greek indeed, Philalethes, and art set upon it to
make the world sport. Thou do then profess openly to all the world; that
thou have so high a conceit of thy Anthroposophia, that it may well dash me out
of countenance with my Philosophical Poems; and that through envy, I being
thus wounded, I should by my Alazonomastix endeavor for the ease of my grief,
to abate thy credit. What a Suffenus art thou in the esteeming of thy own
works, O Eugenius? and of what a pitiful spirit do thou take Alazonomastix
to be? I do profess ex animo, that I could heartily wish that my self were the
greatest Ignaro in the world, upon condition I were really no more ignorant
then I am: So little am I touched with precellency or out-stripping others.
(But thou judge me to have wrote out of the same intoxicating Principle that
thou thy self have, that is, vain glory.) Or however if there was any thing of
that when I wrote those Poems, which, I thank God, if any, was very little; yet
long ago (I praise that power that enabled me) I brought it down to a degree
far less then thy untamed Heat for the p^esent can imagine possible. But
you will say, This is a mystery above all Magic. What then was the Impulsive of
writing against your book? I have told you already, but you are loath to be^ieve
me: Mere emnity to immorality and foolery. But if it were any thing that might
respect my self, it was only this; That you so carelessly and confidently
adventuring upon the Platonic way, with so much tainted heat and distemper,
that to my better composed spirit you seemed not a little disturbed in your
fancy, and your blood to be too hot to be sufficiently rectified by your
brain, I thought it safe for me to keep those Books I wrote out of a spirit of
soberness from reproachful mistake: For you pretending the same way that I
seem to be in, as in your bold and disadvantagious asserting, The soul to
pre-exist, and to come into the body open-ey'd as it were, that is, full
fraught with divine notions; and making such out-ragiously distorted
delineaments of that (...), as the Stoics call it, the enlivened Universe,
with sundry other passages of like grossnesse, I was afraid that men judging
that this affectation of Platonisme in you, might well proceed from some
intemperies of blood and spirit; and that, there no body else besides us two
dealing with these kinds of notions, they might yoke me with so disordered a
companion as your self: Reasoning thus with themselves; Vaughan of Jesus in
Oxenford holds the pre-existencie of the Soul, and other Platonic Paradoxes,
and we see what a pickle he is in: What think you of More of Christ's, that
writ the Platonicall Poems? Nay, what think you of Platonisme it self? Surely,
it is all but the fruit of juvenile distemper and intoxicating heat. But I say,
it is the most noble and effectual Engine to fetch up a man's mind to true
virtue and holiness, next to the Bible, that is extant in the world. And that
this may not suffer, I have suffered my self to observe upon you what I have
observed, my young Eugenius. This is true, my Friend, to use your own phrase.

SECT. II.
Mastix provoked by the unworthy surmises of Eugenius, gives the world a taste
of that Spirit that actuated him when he wrote his Poems. Eugenius his abuse of
Descartes the greatest personal Impulsive to Mastix to write his
Observations. The Divine accomplishments of the Soul far beyond all natural
knowledge. What is true Deiformitie. A vehement Invective against the Deified
rout of Ranters and Libertines. Mastix magnifies the dominion of his own mind
over the passions of the body, preferring it before the Empire of the world,
and all the power of Magic that Eugenius so bankers after.

ANd now that the World may know that I have not wrote like some bestrid
Pythonick or hackneyed Enthusiastic, let them look and read under what light I
sat and sung that divine Song of the Soul.

But yet, my Muse, still take an higher flight,
Sing of Platonic Faith in the first Good,
That Faith that does our souls to God unite
So strongly, tightly, that the rapid stood
Of this swift flux of things, nor with foul mud
Can stain, nor strike us off from the Unity
Wherein we steadfast stand, unshak'd, unmoved,
Engrafted by a deep Vitalitie.
The prop and stay of things is Gods Benignity.
Als is the rule of His Oeconomie,
No other cause the creature brought to light,
But the first Goods pregnant fecundity:
He to himself is perfect-full delight.
He wants naught. With his own beams bedight
He glory has enough. O blasphemy!
That envy gives to God, or sour despite.
Harsh hearts! that feign in God a Tyranny
Under pretense to increase his sovereign Majesty.
When nothing can to Gods own self accrue
Who Is infinitely happy; sure the end
Of His Creation simply was to show
His flowing goodness, which He does outsend
Not for himself: for naught can Him amend,
But to his Creature does his good impart.
This infinite Good through all the world does w^nd,
To fill with Heavenly bliss each willing heart:
So the free Sun does light and liven every part.
This is the measure of Gods providence,
The Key of knowledge, the first fair Idee,
The eye of Truth, the spring of living Sense,
Whence sprout Gods secrets, the sweet mystery
Of lasting life, eternal Charity, etc.
And elsewhere in my Poems.
When I my self from mine own self do quit,
And each thing else; then all-spreaden love
To the vast Universe my soul does fit,
Makes me half equal to all-seeing Jove.
My mighty wings high stretched then clapping light,
I brush the stars and make them shine more bright.
Then all the works of God with close embrace
I dearly hug in my enlarged arms,
All the hid paths of heavenly love I trace,
And boldly listen to his secret charms,
Then clearly view I where true light does rise,
And where eternal Night low-pressed lies, etc.
This, Philalethes, is that lamp of God in the light whereof my Reason and
Fancy have wrought thus many years. This is that true Chymicall fire that has
purged my soul and purified it, and has crystallized it into a bright Throne
and shining Habitation of the divine Majesty. This free light is that, which
having held my soul in it self for a time; taught me in a very sensible manner
that vast difference betwixt the truth and freedom of the Spirit, and anxious
impostures of this dark Personality and earthly bondage of the body. This is my
Oracle, my Counselor, my faithful Instructor and Guide, my Life, my
Strength, my Glory, my Joy, my communicated God. This is that heavenly flame
and bright Sun of Righteousness, that puts out the light, and quenches the
heat of all worldly imaginations, and desires whatsoever. All the power and
knowledge in Nature, that is, all the feats and miraculous performances done by
Witches, Magicians, or Devils, they be but toys and tricks, and are no solid
satisfaction of the soul at all, (yea, though we had that power upon lawful
terms) if compared with this. And as for divine knowledge, there is none truly
so called, without it. He that is come hither, God has taken him to his own
familiar friend, and though he speak to others aloof off in outward Religions
and Parables, yet he leads this man by the hand, teaching him intelligible
documents upon all the objects of his Providence; speaks to him plainly in his
own language; sweetly insinuates himself, and possesses all his faculties,
Understanding, Reason, and Memory. This is the Darling of God, and a Prince
amongst men, far above the dispensation of either Miracle or Prophecy. For
him the deep searchers and anxious soliciters of Nature drudge and toil,
contenting themselves with the pitiful wages of vain glory, or a little
wealth. Poor Giboonites! that how wood and draw water for the Temple. This is
the Temple of God, this is the Son of God, whom he has made heir of all
things, the right Emanuel, the holy mystery of the living members of Christ
Hallelujah.

From this Principle which I have here expressed, have all those Poems I have
wrote had their Original: and as many as are moved with them aright, they
carry them to this Principle from whence they came. But to those, whose
ignorance makes them contemn them, I will only say to them what our Savior
said to Nicodemus; The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof, but know not from whence it comes, nor whither it goes.

But I am afraid I have stood all this time in a little too high a station for
thee, my Philalethes: I descend now and come a little nearer to thee. And now I
tell thee further, that thy rash and unworthy abuse of Descartes did move me
to write so as I did, more then any personal regard else whatsoever. For I
love the Gentleman for his excellent and transcendent natural wit, and like
his Philosophy as a most rational, coherent, subtle piece, and an Hypothesis
accurately and continuedly agreeing with the Phenomenon of Nature. This is he
whom thou call my fellow fool, to thy own great disparagement. But this is
he that I call the wisest Naturalist that ever came to my hands. And having not
had the good hap to light on such a rare piece of my own invention, I thought
it was the best office I could do the world to bestow my judgment and censure
of his. And so now you will say I am become so great a Cartesian that I begin
to think but meanly of Platonisme. A wise inference! as if divine and natural
knowledge were inconsistent. I tell thee no, Philalethes: Nor am I become cold
to my own Poems. For I say that that divine spirit and life that lies under
them, is worth not only all the Magic that thou pretendest to, but all that
thou art ignorant of beside, yea, and Descartes his Philosophy to boot. ^I say
it is worth all that a thousand times told over. Descartes Philosophy is
indeed a fine neat subtle thing, but for the true ornament of the mind bears no
greater proportion to that Principle I told you of, then the dry bones of a
snake made up elegantly into a hatband, to the royal clothing of Solomon. But
other natural Philosophies in respect of Descartes his, are even less then a
few chips of wood to a well erected Fabric. But I say that a free divine
universalized spirit is worth all. How lovely, how magnificent a state is the
Soul of man in, when the life of God inactuating her, shoots her along with
himself through Heaven and Earth, makes her unite with, and after a sort feel
herself animate, the whole world, as if she had become God and all things? This
is the precious clothing and rich ornament of the mind, far above reason or any
other experiment. And in this attire thou can not but dance to that Music of
the Sibyll. (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
I am Jehovah, (well my words perpend)
Clad with the frory sea, all mantled over
With the blue Heavens, shod with the Earth I wend,
The stars about me dance, the Air does me cover.
This is to become Deiform, to be thus suspended (not by imagination, but by
union of life, (...), joining centers with God) and by a sensible touch to be
held up from the clotty dark Personality of this compacted body. Here is love,
here is freedom, here is justice and equity in the superessentiall causes of
them. He that is here, looks upon all things as one, and on himself, if he can
then mind himself, as a part of the whole. And so has no self-interest, no
unjust malicious plot, no more then the hand has against the foot, or the ear
against the eye. This is to be godded with God, and Christed with Christ, if
you be in love with such affected language. But you, O ye cages of unclean
birds, that have so be godded your selves, that you are grown foul and black
like brutes or devils, what will become of you? O you sinks of sin! You that
have heretofore followed religion to excuse you from real righteousness and
holiness, and now have found a trick to be abominably wicked without any
remorse of conscience. You are Gods and Goddesses every bit of you, and all
actions in you divine. He leads you up into the bed of a whore, and uncases you
both for the unclean Act. And when you tell obscene stories in a rapture, you
are caught up into God. O you foul mouths! You blebs of venery, you bags of
filth! You dishonor of Christendom and reproach of men! Is not all this
righteously come upon you, because you never sought after Religion, as a thing
within you, holy, and divine; but as an excuse to save you from wrath, and yet
to remain in your sins? But that cannot be: You are in the fuel of wrath
while you are in your sins, and that fuel will be set on fire some time or
other. But that you may be secure of wrath you say there is no sin, but that
it is only a conceit and a name. Is it not a sin to be less happy ten
thousand times then God would have you? Does not both Sense and Reason discover
to you, (I am sure it does to others) that you walk in the ways of Hell and
death? But you are still secure, you your selves are as much God as any thing
else is, and so you may make your Hell as favorable to your selves as you
please; But O you fools and blind! I see you cannot; but you are entangled with
the cords and snares that the divine Nemesis has laid for the wicked in all
the parts of the world. But you are not yet any thing moved, O ye dead in
trespasses and sins! For there is no God, say you, more then a dog or a horse
is God. Behold, O ye forlorn wretches and miserably mistaken! Behold, He is
come down to you: nay, He is ever with you, and you see him not. Ask of him,
and He shall answer you. Demand of him, and He shall declare unto you, not in
obscure words or dark sayings, not in aenigmaticall speeches or parables; but
He will speak unto your own reason and faculties which he has given you:
propound therefore unto him why you think the Soul of man is mortal, and why
you deny an omnipotent and omniscient God distinct from Nature and particular
Beings: propound unto him, and He will plainly answer you. But alas! alas! your
are neither fit to hear, nor able to propound, for you have destroyed those
faculties that he has given you by sinning against the light of them; and now
you have drunk out your eyes, you swear there is no Sun in the Firmament: and
now you have whored away your brains, you are confident there is no God. O sunk
and helpless generation! how have you sop'd and soaked, overflown and drowned
the highest seat and Acropolis of your soul, that through your sensuality it is
grown as rotten and corrupt as a dunghill? You have made your selves as fit to
judge of reason, as if your heads were stuffed with wet straw. These things
has the divine Indignation uttered against you, but more for reproof then
reproach. But your sin has made you sottish, and your sottishness confident
and secure. But his anger burns against you; O you false Religionists! and the
wrath of God will overtake you when you are not aware: and your shame shall
ascend up like the smoke of the bottomless pit, and your stink shall be as the
filthiness in the valley of the children of Hinnom. This will be the portion
of all those that barter away sound reason and the sober faculties of the soul
for boisterous words of vanity, and unsettled conceits of Enthusiasts, that
having neither reason, nor Scripture, nor conspicuous miracle, row down with
the stream of men's corruptions, and ripen and hasten the unclean part in man,
to a more full and speedy birth of sin and ungodliness. But what is all this
to me? says Philalethes. I tell thee, Phil. I neither wrote before nor do I
now write only for thy sake, but for as many as my writings may reach for
their good. Nor am I out of my wits as some may fondly interpret me in this
divine freedom. But the love of God compelled me. Nor am I at all,
Philalethes, Enthusiasticall. For God does not ride me as a horse, and guide me
I know not whither my self; but converses with the as a friend, and speak^ to
me in such a Dialect as I understand fully, and can make others understand,
that have not made shipwreck of the faculties that God has given them, by
superstition or sensuality: for with such I cannot converse because they do not
converse with God; but only pity them, or am angry with them, as I am merry
and pleasant with thee. For God has permitted to me all these things, and I
have it under the broad seal of Heaven. Who dare charge me? God does acquit me.
For he has made me full Lord of the four elements, and has constituted me
Emperor of the world. I am in the fire of choler, and am not burned: In the
water of phlegm, and am not drowned: In the aerie sanguint, and yet not blown
away with every blast of transient pleasure, or false doctrines of men: I
descend also into the sad earthy Melancholy, and yet am not buried from the
sight of my God. I am, Philalethes, (though I dare say thou take me for no
bird of Paradise) Incola coeli in terra, an inhabitant of Paradise and Heaven
upon Earth: and the white stone is mine, however thou scramblest for the
Philosophers stone. (I wish thou had them both, that is all the harm I wish
thee.) I still the raging of the sea, I clear up the sowring Heavens, and with
my breath blow away the clouds. I sport with the beasts of the Earth, the Lion
licks my hand like a Spaniell, and the Serpent sleeps upon my lap and stings me
not. I play with the fowls of Heaven, and the birds of the Air sit singing on
my fist. All the Creation is before me, and I call every one of them by their
proper names. This is the true Adam, O Philalethes: This is Paradise, Heaven,
and Christ. All these things are true in a sober sense. And the Dispensation I
live in, is more happiness above all measure, then if thou could call down
the Moon so near thee by thy Magic charms that thou might kiss her, as she
is said to have kissed Endymion, or could stop the course of the Sun, or
which is all one, with one stamp of thy foot, stay the motion of the Earth. All
this external power in Nature were but as a shop of trinkets and toys, in
comparison of what I have declared unto you. And an adulterous generation only
seeks after a sign, or idiots, such as love to stare on a dexterous jugler
when he plays his tricks. And therefore they being of so little consideration
in themselves; I see and am satisfied why miracles are no more frequent in the
world. God intends an higher dispensation, and greater happiness for these
later times, wherein Divine Love and Reason, and for their sakes Liberty will
lay claim to the stage. For He will as I told you draw us with the cords of a
man, not ride us as with a bridle-like a horse, or tug us along like a mad
stear in a band. He will sanctify our inward faculties, and so take possession
of the Earth. But that a man may not deplore what is lamentable, or be angry at
what is injurious to God or Goodness, or laugh at what is ridiculous, this is
not any part of that Law that is made manifest in the Heavenly life, but the
arbitrarious precepts of supercilious Stoics, or surly Superstitionists. For
God has sanctified and will sanctify all these things. Nor am I at all mad or
fanatic in all this, O you unexperienced and unwise! For as our Savior said
of his body, Touch me and handle me: so say I of my soul: feel and try all the
faculties of it if you can find any crack or flaw in them. Where is my Reason
inconsequent or inconsistent with the Attributes of God, the common Notions of
men, the Phaenonema of Nature or with it self? Where is my Fancy distorted,
unproportionate, unproper? But for the bottom of all these, that, I confess,
you cannot reach to nor judge of, that is divine sense, the white stone, in
which there is a name written that none can read but he that has it. But for
the guidance of my reason and imagination, they have so safe a Stearsman, viz.
that Divine touch of my soul with God, and the impregnation of my Understanding
from the most High; that judgment and caution have so warily built the outward
fabric of words and fancy, that I challenge any man to discover any ineptitude
in them, or incoherencie.

And now verily the serious consideration of these weighty matters has so
composed my mind, that I find it some difficulty to discompose it into a
temper childish enough to converse with my young Eugenius. But as high as I
have taken my station, I will descend, and go less my self, to bring him to
what is greater. Behold, I leap down as from the top of some white rocky cloud,
upon the grassie spot where my Philalethes stands, and I shall now begin the
game of my personated Enmity, or sportfull Colluctation with him.

SECT. III.
Eugenius his skill in Grammar, Rhetoric and Logic. That an Essential
definition does not pretend to set out to us the very naked substance of the
thing defined. That the frame of the World is not like the inanimate frame of
an house according to the Aristoteleans. Mastix his excuse for the manner of
writing against Eugenius, from his want of knowledge of either his name or
person. His Further justification of himself from the warrantable end of his
enterprise. His dexterous discovery of the grand folly of his vaunting
Adversary, and serious exhortation to him to lay aside his vain affectation of
Magic and to become a good Christian.

Page 7. lin. 14.
HIgh swollen words of vanity, I tell you, I have found them in your Ballade.
Ballade is a good old English word, from which I abhor no more then Spencer,
or Lucretius from old Latin, who yet was something younger then Tully. Is not
the song of Solomon called the Ballade of Ballades, in some Church-bibles? Thou
art so angry that thou art not able to rail with judgment. But what high swollen
words of vanity are there in that Ballade of mine? Thou art so ignorant, that
terms of Art seem Heathen Greek to thee. But for those words that I interpreted
for the ignorants sake (you see what care I have of you, O unthankful
Eugenius!) there is an Apology prefixed that will satisfy the ingenuous, and
for others it matters not.

Page 9.
Lin. 15. With a Bull rampant. You bestow upon me many Bulls, Eugenius: But
when you are so kind as to give me them for nothing, you may well expect that I
will be so thankful, as to return you a Calf for every Bull I have gratis. Let
us begin, etc. And you indeed have done your part already. The sense is, But
you indeed have done your part already: What is this but an (...)? But you have
I see as little skill in Rhetoric as Civilitie. The Calf take thee, Phil. or
take thou the Calf. There is one to begin thy herd.

Page 10.
Lin. 1. What, both Tell-troths? Before thou wast no Rhetorician, now thou art
no Logician nor Philosopher, that can not distinguish betwixt Verity and
Veracitie. Veracitie is enough to make a Tom Tell-troth, though his Narration
be false. Hence it is demonstrable that two men may be both Tel-troths, though
their stories be point blank contrary to one another. The sense of my words is
this; You have told what you thought Aristotle was blameable in: I will now
tell what I think you are blameable in. You may be against Aristotle, and I for
him, and both with veracitie, though not with verity.

Page 11.
Lin. 2^. Found out some new truth. Yes, I say, there are passages in your
book, that imply so much at least. We shall see when we come at them: and I
shall show that you found them before they were lost.

Page 12.
Lin. 17. The third project is the same with the first. Why, is to be skilful
in Art magic, and to find out new truths all one? It seems then you suppose
there are no new Truths to be found out but Magical ones. Blessed age that we
live in! All other arts are brought to their Non plus ultra. Physicians,
Geometricians, Astronomians, Astrologians, Musicians, put up your pipes.
Claudite jam rivos pueri. There is nothing remains to be done by you. All is
perfected. But let me ask you one sober question, Phil. Have you gone through
all these Arts and thoroughly understand them, that you do so boldly pronounce
them complete and perfect? I know Philalethes is not so immodest as to say so;
I am sure the world is not so foolishly credulous as to believe so. So that I
must conclude, Eugenius, that thou art so outragiously distempered in thy mind,
that thou art a weaker Arithmetician then the rude Thracians. They told to
foure^ Thou art out at three, and must begin again.

Page 13.
Lin. 11. How many more syllables in Anthroposophia, then in
Antipsychopannychia? Not so many. So that if I had affected to be so Magical as
your learned self, the same conceit would have fitted my Title Page. But I
begin now to suspect, you are so nimble at comparing, that your Title Page was
a kind of Apish Imitation of mine in the first Edition of my Song of the Soul.
But wast thou so simple as to think that any body thought better of my book for
those hard words in the Frontispice of it? I only set them there as a
windmill on a stack of corn, by the clack of it to scare away sparrows and
crows, that it might be reserved entire for men. But I perceive for all that,
that, thy Rooks bill has been pecking there. But much good may it do thee,
Phil. I envy it thee not.

Page 15.
Lin. 20. Vim sermonis esse in verbis, etc. I say, the force and warrant both
of Nouns and Verbs is from their use, Quem penes arbitrium est, and jus, and
norma loquendi.


But if you will have, Orator, to be good and proper: this Epistle of yours
must then be no Epistle, though you call it so, but an Oration to the Fratres
R. C. which you spoke to them when they were God knows where, and they will
answer you God knows when. Verily, Philalethes, thou art a fine fellow to have
made an Orator of in King Midas his time; for he had, they say, very long
ears: And so might thou have made an Oration before the King in his absence.

Page 17.
Lin. 21. A twofold Definition, Accidental and Essential. That Is true, Phil.
what Freshman but knows that? But how it is to be understood I perceive thou
do not know. I am ashamed that I must be fain to rub up in thee the very
first rudiments of Logic, or rather teach thee them. For could thou ever
forget what is meant by Accidental, what by Essential? Accidental is that
which may be or not be in a thing, and yet the thing be: As a horse may be a
horse, be it black or white. Essential is that which so belongs to the thing
to which it is said to be Essential, that the thing cannot be conceived to
exsist without it; Now, say I, these Faculties of Understanding, Reason, and
Sense are essential to the Soul of man, because we cannot conceive a Soul
without a power or faculty of understanding, reasoning, etc. And Aristotle has
defined a Soul from these. Therefore would a Peripatetick say, with an
Essential Definition: But Eugenius, No: This is but circumstantiall, says he.
Therefore I do infer, Eugenius, that thou do dream of knowing the very
naked substance of the Soul; which thou will as soon know, as see the wind. And
thus I spoke to that that thou must needs mean, if thou meanest any thing: but
it is a plain cafe, thou do not know thy own meaning. But Aristotle does
sufficiently countenance mine, with what he has very luckily let fall somewhere
in his Analyticks; (...). And thus is it manifestly true in that sense that you
your self meant; That the very essence of any Substance is not to be known, nor
is there any such Essential Definition. This is as true, Tom. Vaughan, as two
and two are four, though I do not call you Owl for your ignorance, as you do
me for my knowledge. But we shall have another bout again with this, in your
Anima Magica Abscondita.

Page 19. to the 24.
To have made the world as a Carpenter, of stone and timber. Thou have
misplaced a comma in the sentence to make a Cavil. Put on thy spectacles, and
see if there be any comma before of in my Book. If you understood common sense
you could not but understand, that my meaning is this; That you tax the
Peripateticks for fancying God to have made the world as a Carpenter makes
houses of stone and timber. Now pitiful Caviller! But to the point. I say this
is a false taxation, Eugenius: For the parts of the world, according to the
Peripateticks own doctrine, are set in this order they are, from an inward
principle of motion, and their own proper qualities: so that they do as the
stones and trees are said to have done at the music of Orpheus and Amphion,
move of themselves. But the stone and timber in the work of a Carpenter, do not
move themselves into their places they ought to be, for the building up of an
house. But you answer two things to this: First, that the parts of the world do
not move themselves: Secondly, that if they do, then they have infusion of
life. To the first: Why, does not any part of the earth move it self downward,
if it be in an higher place then is natural to it, and the air and fire
upward, etc. and this from an inward principle of motion? Nay, is not the very
definition of Nature, Principium motus and quietis, etc. wherefore we see
plainly, that according to the Aristoteleans, all to the very concave of the
Moon have an inward principle of motion. And for the Heavens themselves, the
most sober and cautious of the Peripateticks hold them to be moved from an
inward Principle, their Forma informans, as they call it. So that though they
do not allow life infused into the world, yet they allow an inward principle of
motion in natural bodies, which is their Substantial Forms, by virtue whereof
they are ranged in this order as we see; or at least according to which they
are thus ranged and ordered. And this is not so dead a business as the
Carpenters building with stone and timber. But in the second place you say,
That if they have this motion from an inward principle, then they have also
infusion of life. But do not you see plainly, that (according to the mind of
the more sober Peripateticks) they have motion from an inward Principle?
Therefore you should have been so far from taxing them to look upon God as a
Carpenter, that you should have concluded rather that they held infusion of
life.

Page 24.
Lin. 1. Thou have abused me basely. Verily, if that were true I should be very
forrie for it: For I would not willingly abuse any man living, of what
condition soev^r. But the thing has happened unluckily. I read thy Book, I knew
not thy person, nor thy name, nor thy nature, further then it was expressed in
thy Book, which did not represent it so ill as now I find it. If I had thought
my Galenical purge had met with such a constitution, I should have tempered it
more carefully: For I delight not in the vexation of any man. The truth is, my
scope in writing that Book was laudable and honest, and such as might become a
very good Christian, and my mirth and pleasantness of mind much and real; but
the sharpness of my style personated, and Aristotelicall; and therefore being
but affected and fictitious, I felt it not, there was no corrosion at all; but
all that was unkind in it, (if you will call that passion unkindnesse) was a
certain light indignation that I bore, and ever do bear, against magnificent
folly. And there being no name to your Book, I thought I had the opportunity of
doing it with the least offense, as meeting with the thing disjoined and
singled from the person. But I ver^ly think I should not have meddled at all, if
you had spared your incivilities to Des-Carters, whose worth and skill-in
natural Philosophy (be it fate or judgment that constrains me to it, let the
world judge) I cannot but honor and admire. He is rayled at, but not confuted
by any that I see, in his natural Philosophy, and that is the thing I magnify
him for. Though his Metaphysics have wit and strength enough too, and he has
made them good against his opposers.

Line 21. And assure thy self I will persecute thee, so long as there is ink or
paper in England. Assuredly thou will not, Philalethes: For why, I am dead
already, taken in thy trap and tortured to death: will not this suffice thee? I
am dead, and thou thy self but mortal; will thou entertain immortal enmity
against me? But how can thou persecute me being dead? Will thou raise my soul
up, O Magicus, by thy Necromancy? and then combat with me over my grave? I
hope thou art but in jest, Eugenius: If thou be not, I must tell thee in
good earnest, thy present bitterness will make thee Simon Magus-like, as well
as thy former boasting. O thou confounded and undone thing! how have thou
shamed thy self! Thy vizard is fallen off, and thy sanctimonious clothing torn
from about thee, even as it was with the Apes and Monkies, that being attired
like men and wearing vizards over their faces did dance, and cringe, and
kiss, and do all the gestures of men so artificially and becomingly, that the
Country people took them to be a lesser size of humane race, till a waggish
fellow that had more wit then the rest, dropped a few nuts amongst them, for
which they fell a scrambling so earnestly, that they tore off their vizards,
and to the great laughter of the spectatours showed what manner of creatures
they were. O Magicus! do not dissemble before me: For thou do not know with
what eyes I behold thee. Were it not better for thee and all the world beside,
to make it their business to be really and fully possessed of those things that
are undoubtedly good and Christian, nay, indeed if they be had in the right
Principle, are the very buds and branches of the tree of Paradise, the limbs
and members of the Divine nature, such as are meekness, patience, and
humility, discretion, freedom from self-interest, chastity, temperance,
equity, and the like: is it not better to seek after these things, then to
strain at high words and uncertain flatuous notions that do but puff up the
mind and make it seem full to it self, when it is distended with nothing but
unwholesome wind? Is not this very true, my dear Philalethes?

SECT. IV.
The Confutation of Eugenius his World-Animal from the unmercifull
disproportion and ugly dissimilitude of the parts thereof compared with a true
Animal, reinforced and invincibly confirmed.

Page 24.
WE are now come to that rare piece of Zoography of thine, the world drawn out
in the shape of an Animal. But let us view the whole draught as it lies in your
book, because you make such a foul noise about it in your answer. Your words
are these. Besides the texture of the Universe clearly discovers its Animation.
The Earth which is the visible natural Basis of it, represents the gross
carnal parts. The element of the water answers to the blood, for in it the
pulse of the great world beats; this most men call the flux and reflux, but
they know not the true cause of it. The air is the outward refreshing spirit,
where this vast creature breathes though invisibly yet not insensibly: The
interstellar skies are his vital ethereall waters; and the stars his animal
sensual fire. Now to pass my censure on this rare Zoographicall piece, I tell
thee, if thy brains were so confusedly scattered as thy fancy is here, thou
were a dead man Philalethes: all the Chymistrie in the world could not recover
thee. Thou art so unitive a soul, Phil. and such a clicker at the slightest
shadows of similitude, that thou would not stick to match chalk and cheese
together, I perceive, and mussi^ate a marriage betwixt an Apple and an Oyster.
Even those proverbiall dissimilitudes have something of similitude in them,
will you then take them for similes that have so monstrous a disproportion and
dissimilitude? But you are such a Sophister that you can make any thing good.
Let Us try. ^he Earth must represent the flesh, because they noth be gross: so
is chalk and cheese, or an Apple and an Oyster. But what think you of the Moon?
is not that as much green cheese as the Earth is flesh? what think you of
Venus, of Mercury, and the rest of the Planets? which they that know any thing
in Nature, know to be as much flesh as the Earth is, that is, to be dark and
opake as well as she. What! is this flesh of the world then torn apieces and
thrown about, scattered here and there like the disjoynted limbs of dragged
Hippolytus? Go to Phil. where are you now with your fine knacks and
similitudes? But to the next Analogy. The element of water answers to the
blood. Why? For in it is the pulse of the great world. But did thou ever feel
the pulse of the Moon? And yet is not there water too? thou little, sleepy,
heedlesse Endymion: The blood is restagnant there, I warrant you and has no
pulse. So that the man with the thorn^ on his back lives in a very unwholesome
region. But to keep to our own station here upon Earth; Do thou know what
thou say when thou venturest to name that monosyllable, Pulse, do thou
know the causes and the laws of it? Tell me, my little Philosophaster, where is
there in the earth or out of the earth in this World-Animal^of thine, that
which will answer to the heart, and the systole and diastole thereof to make
this pulse? And besides this, there is wanting rarefaction and universal
diffusion of the stroke at once. These are in the pulse of a true Animal, but
are not to be found in the Flux of the sea; For it is not in all places at
once, nor is the water rarefied where it is. Now my pretty Parabolist, what is
there left to make your similitude good for a pulse in your great Animal more
then when you spill your pottage, or shog a milk-bowl? But believe it Eugenius,
thou will never make sense of this Flux and Reflux, till thou calm thy fancy so
much as to be able to read Descartes. But to tell us it is thus from an inward
form, more Aristotelico; is to tell us no more, then that it is the nature of
the Beast, or to make Latin words by adding only the termination bus, as
hosibus and shoosibus, as Sir Kenhelm Digby has with wit and judgment applied
the comparison in like case. But now to put the blood, flesh and bones
together, of your World-Animal: I say they bear not so great a proportion to
the more fluid parts. viz. the vital and animal spirits thereof, as a mite in
a cheese to the whole globe of the Earth. So that if thou had any fancy or
judgment in thee, thy similitude would appear to thine own self outragiously
ugly and disproportionable, and above all measure ridiculous: Nor do not think
to shuffle it off, by demanding, If there be so little earth, to tell thee
where it is wanting. For I only say, that if the world be an Animal, there
will be much blood and flesh wanting, Philalethes, for so great a Beast. Nor do
not you think to blind my eyes with your own Tobacco smoke, (I take none my
self, Eugenius,) For to that over ordinary experiment, I answer two things.
First, that as you took upon the parts of the body of a true Animal, in the
same extension that they now actually are, not how they may be altered by
rarefaction; so you are also look upon the parts of your World-Animal, as they
are de facto, extended, not how they may be by rarefaction. And thus your
Argument from Tobacco, will vanish into smoke. But if you will change the
present condition of any lesser Animal by burning it, and turing many of the
gross parts into more thin and fluid, you destroy the ground of your
comparison, betwixt the World Animal and it; for you take away the flesh of
your lesser Animal thus burnt. And besides, the proportion betwixt the vapor
or thinner parts extension to the remaining ashes, is not yet so big, as of the
thin parts of the World-Animal in respect of its solid parts, by many thousand
and thousand millions. Nay, I shall speak within compass, if I say (as I said
before) that there is a greater disproportion then betwixt the globe of the
Earth and a mite in a cheese. This is plainly true to any that understands
common sense. For the Earth in respect of the World is but as an indivisible
point. Add to all this, that if you will rarefie the Tobacco or Hercules body
by fire, I will take the same advantage, and say, that the water and many parts
of the earth may be also rarefied by fire, and then reckon only upon the
remaining ashes of this globe, and what is turned into vapor must be added to
the more fluid parts of the World-Animal, to increase that over-proportion. So
that thou have answered most wretchedly and pitifully every way, poor
Anthroposophus! But besides, In the second place: When any thing is burnt, as
for example, your Tobacco, I say it takes up then no more room then it did
before: Because Rarefaction and Condensation is made, per modum spongiae, as a
sponge is distended by the coming in, and contracted again by the going out of
the water it had imbibed. But the Aristotelic^ll way^ which is yours, (O
profound Magicus! that have the luck to pick out the best of that Philosophy)
implies I say, gross contradictions, which thou c^nst not but understand, if
thou can distinguish corporeal from incorporeall Beings. Thy way of
Rarefaction and Condensation, O Eugenius, must needs imply p^netration of
dimensions, or something as incongruous, as every lad in our Universities, at a
year or two standing at least, is able to demonstrate to thee. But if thou
think it hard, that so little a body as a pipe of Tobacco, should be
multiplied into so very much superficies above what it had before, go to those
that beat out leaf gold, and understand there how the superficies of the same
body may be, to wonder, increased. And beside, I could demonstrate to thee,
that a body whose basis thou should imagine at the center of the Earth, and
top as far above the starry Heaven, as it is from thence to the Earth,
without any condensation used thereunto, is but equal to a body that will he
within the boll of a Tobacco-pipe. Where art thou now, thou miserable
Philosophaster? But to the next Analogy.

The air is the outward refreshing spirit, where this vast Creaure breaths.
Two things I here object, to show the ineptnesse and incongruity of this
comparison. The one is taken from the office of respiration, which is to
refresh by way of refrigerating or cooling. Is not the main end of the lungs to
cool the blood, before it enter into the left ventricle of the heart? But thou
art so Magical, thou know none of these sober and useful mysteries of
Nature. All that thou answerest to this is, That we are refreshed by heat as
well as by coolness. Why then is that general sufficient to make up your
analogy or similitude? This is as well fancied as it is reasoned, when men
conclude affirmatively in the second figure. There are laws in fancy too,
Philalethes: and I shall show thee anon, how ridiculous thou have made thy self
by transgressing them. If thou meanest by refreshed, to be cheared or restored
only, and what ever does this must be ground enough to fancy a respiration;
then thou breathest in thy cawdle, when thou eatest it, and have spoiled that
conceit of his, that said he never would drink sack whilst he breathed; for if
sack do in any sense refresh and comfort a man, it seems he breaths while he
drinks. I tell thee, in the Homologi termini of similitudes, there ought to be
something in some sort peculiar and restrained, or else it is flat, ridiculous,
and nonsense. The other objection was taken from the situation of this air
that is to he the matter of Respiration in this great Animal. What a wild
difference is there in this? The air that an ordinary Animal breaths in, is
external; the air of this World-Animal, internal; so that it is rather wind
in the guts, then air for the lungs; and therefore we may well add the Colic
to the Anasarca. Is the wind-Colick an outward refreshing spirit, or an inward
griping pain? Being thou have no guts in thy brains, I suspect thy brains have
slipped down into thy guts, whither thy tongue should follow to be able to speak
sense. Answer now like an (...), O thou man of Magic! He answers, and the
point and sting of all the sense of his answer is in the tail of it: page 29.
lin. 11. and it is their outward refreshing spirit. He means the Earths and the
Waters. O feeble sting! O foolish answer! This only reaches so far as to
save the Earth alive from my jugulating objection. The globe of Earth and Water
indeed may be still an Animal for all that objection. But thou said the whole
World was an Animal. What, is the whole world an Animal because the Earth is
one? O bundle of simples! (to return thee thine own parcel of ware again, for
it belongs not to me) this is as well argued as if thou should say, That a
cheese is an Animal, because there is one living mite in it. But that this
Earth neither is a breathing Animal, is plain enough: For what respiration,
what attraction and reddition of air is there in it? There may be indeed
something answering to sweating and perspiration, nothing to respiration, my
good Philalethes. But to show thee thy folly, I will follow thy liberty, and
impudently pronounce that a pair of bellows is an Animal. Why, is it not? It
has a nose to breathe through, that is plain, the two handles are the two ears,
the leather the lungs, and that which is the most seemly analogy of all, the
two holes in the backside are the two eyes; as like the eyes in the fore-side
of a Crab as ever thou see any thing in thy life: Look thee, Phil. are they
not? You Will say, The analogy of the nose is indeed as plain as the nose on a
man's face: But how can the handles be ears, when they stand one behind
another? whereas the ears of Animals stand one on one side, and the other on
the other side of the head. And then how can the leather be lungs, they being
the very outside of its body? Or those two holes eyes? They have neither the
situation, as being placed behind, nor office of eyes. Answer me all these
objections. O Mastix! I can fully answer them, O Magicus! This is an Animal
drawn out according to thine own skill and principles. The leather say thou
must be no lungs, because it is without. Why then the air must be no air for
thy World-Animal to breath, because it is within: And if thou can dispense
with within and without, much more may thou with before and behind, or behind
and on the sides. So the ears and lungs of this Animal hold good against thee
still. Now to preserve my monsters eyes against this Harpy that would scratch
them out; They are no eyes say you, because they have not the situation of
eyes. But I told thee before, thou make nothing of situation. But they have
not the office of eyes. Why? They can see as much as the eyes of thy
World-Animal, for ought thou know. I but this Bellows-Animal breaths at
these eyes: And have not I showed thee thy World-Animal breaths in his guts?
But I will make it plain to thee that those two holes are eyes: For they are
two, as the two eyes are; and transmit the thin air through them, as the eyes
do the pure light. So that they agree gainly well in the general: As your
Respiration in the World-Animal, in refreshing, though by heat, when in others
it is by cold. Fie on thee, for a Zoographicall Bungler. These Bellows thou
see is not my Animal but thine, and the learned shall no longer call that
instrument by that vulgar name of a pair of Bellows, but Tom Vaughans Animal.
So famous shall thou grow for thy conceited foolery.

The interstellar skies are his vital ethereall waters. Here I object, O
Eugenius! that there is an over-proportionated plenty of those waters in thy
World-Animal and that thus thou have distended the skin of thy Animal, God
knows how many millions of miles off from the flesh. O prodigious Anasarca! But
what do thou answer here? viz. That I say, that the body which we see betwixt
the stars, namely, the interstellar waters, is excessive in proportion. No, I
do not say so: but that they are too excessive in proportion to be the fluid
parts of a World-Animal. But however, as if I had said so, he goes about to
prove, that there is no excess of proportion in them. Do thou hear, Mastix?
says he, Look up and see. Well, I hear, Phil. I look up. But do not chock me
under the chin, thou wag, when I look up. Now, what must I see? What a number
of bonefires, lamps, and torches are kindled in that miraculous celestial
water. Yes, I see them all. I suppose they burn so clear for joy and triumph,
that my Reason and Sense have so victoriously overthrown thy Fantastry and
Nonsense. But why miraculous waters, Phil? I see the cause: Bonefires and
torches burn in the waters. That were a miracle indeed, Eugenius; but that it
is a falsity. Thou give things false names, and then would amaze us with
verbal miracles.

And the stars his animal sensual fire. What is thy meaning here, little
Phil. (For I never called thee to account for this yet) That this World-Animal
has sense only in the stars? To call them the eyes of the world is indeed
pretty and Poetical. And Plato's delicious spirit may seem to countenance the
conceit in that elegant Distich upon his young friend Aster, (which in plain
English in Star) whom he instructed in the Art of Astronomy: (...)
(...).
Thou viewest the stars, my Star, were I the skies!
That I might fix on thee so many eyes.
But what, Eugenius, will thou venture in Philosophic coolness, to say the
sense of thy World-Animal lies in the stars? I prithee, what can those starry
eyes spy out of the world? They are very quicksighted, if they can see there,
where there is nothing to be seen. But it may be, this Animal turns its eyes
inward and views it self, I would Philalethes were such an Animal too; He would
then find so much amiss within, that he would forbear hereafter to be so
censorious without. But what? is there sense then only in the stars? (For
sense can be no where but where there is access for the Animal spirits:) So it
seems, the stars must hear as well as see, nay, feel and taste; as they do
questionless, as often as they lick in, and eat up that starre-fodder, the
vapors, wherewith in Seneca they are fantastically said to be nourished. And
thus you see, that Tom Vaughans Animal, I mean the Bellows now may see at the
very same two holes that it breathes at, for he confounds all by his indiscreet
fancy. How art thou blown about like a feather in the air, O thou light-minded
Eugenius! How vain and irrational art thou in every thing! Art thou the Queen
of Sheba, as thy Sanguin a little overflowing thy Choler would dress up thy
self to thy soft imagination, and make thee look smugg in thy own eyes? Had
that Queen so little manners, in her addresses to so great a Philosopher? No,
thy language in all thy book, is the language of a scold and of a slut. And for
thy wit, if thou will forgo thy right to the ladle and bells, thy feminine
brains, as thou call them, may lay claim to the maid-marians place in the
Morris-dance: while my strong cruds, (as thou tearmest my masculine
understanding) which are as sweet as strong, not tainted with the fumes of
either revenge or Venery, shall improve their utmost strength, for the interest
of Truth and Virtue.

And thus have I taken all thy Outworks, Eugenius, yea and quite demolished
them. Yet now I look better about me, there is I perceive, one Half Moon
standing still. Wherefore have at thy Lunatic answer to that which thou
call my Lunatic argument, which thou propoundest thus; That the Flux and
Reflux cannot be the pulse of the great World, because it proceeds, from the
Moon, not from the Sun. I say, Philalethes, The Sun being the heart of the
world, according to those that be more discreetly fantastical (consult Dr.
Fludd, thou art but a bad chip of that block) it was to be expected, if thou
would have the Flux and Reflux to be the Pulse, that it should come from the
Sun, that is reputed the heart of the world; but it comes from the Moon. To
this you answer; That it comes no more from the Moon, then from that fictitious
Anti-selene or Anti-moon, as you venture to call it. You say thus, but prove
nothing. But there is such an apparent connection betwixt this Phenomenon of
the Flux and Reflux, and so constant with the course of the Moon, that it is
even unimaginable but that there should be the relation of cause and effect
betwixt them. But I think you will not say, That the motion of the Sea has any
power or effect upon the course of the Moon; wherefore it must be granted, that
the course of the Moon has an effectual influence upon the Flux of the Sea.
And therefore Fromundus speaks very expressly concerning this matter, and very
peremptorily in these words: Si ex effectis de causa conjectatio valere potest,
tam compertum videtur ^stus effici and gubernari a Lunari sydere, quam calorem
ab ignibus effundi, aut lumen a Sole: to this sense; If we can gather any thing
from effects concerning the cause, it seems to be as experimentally sure, that
the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea is made and governed by the Moon, as that
heat flows from the fire, or light from the Sun. For indeed how could there
be kept such inviolable laws, as that the Ocean should always swell at the
Moons ascending; and not only so, but attemperately and proportionably to her
motion, (for she coming every day later and later above the Horizon, the Flux
of the Sea is later and later every time, according to her recession toward the
East in her monthly course) I say, How could these laws be so accurately
observed, Mr. Eugenius, if the Moon were not accessory to, nay, the principal
causer of this Flux and Reflux of the Sea? And if thou be not wilfully
blin^, this is enough to convince thee, that that which thou call the Pulse
of thy World-Animal, is from the Moon, not from the Sun, nor from its own
inward ^orm: for thou see it is caused and regulated by an external Agent.
But for a more full discovery of this mystery, I send thee to Descartes in
the fourth part of his Principia Philosophiae; or to what I have taken from
thence and made use of in the Notes upon my Philosophical Poems. In which
Poems the intelligent Reader may understand, how far, and in what sense any
sober Platonist will allow the world to be an Animal. Nor does one part of it
acting upon another, as the Moon upon the Sea, hinder its Animation. For in men
and beasts, one part of the body does plainly act upon another, though all be
actuated by the soul.

And now, Philalethes, I have taken all thy Outworks, none excepted; out of
which thou have shot many a slovenly shot against me. But thy foul piece has
re^oyled against thy self, in all sober men's opinions, and has beat thee
backward into the dirt. And truly, I know not whether I should pity thee, or
laugh at thy childish Ars but thou have given thy self. For thou railest at me
now thou art down, and threatnest him that is ready to set thee up upon thy
feet, provided thou will not prick up thy ears too, and look too spruntly upon
the business. But thou want no help, thou art a Giant, an invincible man of
war, great Goliath of Ga^h. I a mere Punie, as thou call me; nay, a Munkey,
a Mouse. What, do thou bid defiance to three at once, Philalethes? I tell
thee, any one of these three would be hard enough for thee. But what will thou
do, now thou art to deal with a man? For I shall fight with thee, only with a
man's weapon, Reason. As for thy railings and quibblings, I shall not take
notice of them; so that the battle is likely to be the sharper and shorter for
it. Only let us be a little merry at the beginning, it will be like shaking of
hands at the taking up of the cudgells.

SECT. V.
Mastix makes himself merry with Eugenius upon his abuse of the Argument of one
of the Cantoes of his Poems. That Reminiscency is no proof for the
Praeexistencie of the Soul. That Eugenius is enforced to acknowledge the two
Aristotelean principles, Matter and Privation. His ridiculous mistake of
finding out and seeing the first Matter.

Observation 1.
ARt thou the hobling Poet who sometime
-- Praised with his quill
Plato's Philosophy?
I am the Poet that did, and do with my pen, my mouth, and from my heart praise
that excellent Philosophy of Plato, as the most consistent and coherent
Metaphysicall Hypothesis, that has yet been found out by the wit of man. But
why hobling Poet? thou hobling Ass or Hobbyhorse, choose thee whether. Thou
have so diseased and crazie a brain, that it cannot endure it seems the least
jotting^ and so thou had rather be carried in a Sedan, as those that are
rotten with the Neapolitan disease, or else going the way to it; then be
bravely hurryed in my open magnificent chariot, whose tempestuous wheels dance
and leap while they are wearing down the cragginesse and asperity of
Philosophic difficulties into plainness and easiness. But I know the vulgar,
those poor Merchants of Eel-skins, that deal with nothing but the Exuvia of
things, words and phrases, are more taken with smooth Nonsense, or
superficial flourishes, then with the deepest knowledge in a careless dress.
Do thou not know that those men, that make it their business to be count and
elegant in their clothes and carriages, commonly have little else but this in
them? And so it is too often with Poems and other writings. But how I slight
your simple censures, O ye skin-sucking flies! ye wasps with rush stings in
your tayls! ye winged inhabitants of Crowland! I will show you now, not in the
prose of More, but in the very Trot and Loll of Spencer, as this Natural with
his tongue lolling out of his driveling mouth, uncivilly calls it. As gentle
Shepherd in sweet Eventide
When ruddy Phoebus 'gins to welk in West,
High on an hill his flock to viewen wide,
Marks which do bite their hasty supper best,
A cloud of cumb'rous Gnats do him molest,
All striving to infix their feeble stings,
That from their 'noyance he no where can rest,
But with his clownish hands their tender wings
He brusheth often, and often does mar their murmurings.
Nor have I here called my self Clown by craft, no more then the Poet calls the
Knight so. But thy indiscreet wit cannot distinguish betwixt the Formale and
Materiale of that whence the similitude is fetched; which made thee so ill
digest my Philosophic Bacon. It was thine own Magic, Phil. or perverse
imagination that turned thee into an Hog with tusks and bristles, not I. But to
return to the business: O thou judicious Critic! What is the fault? where is
the flaw in what thou have recited? -- Praise with my quill
Plato's Philosophy.
Thou do only play which the feather of the quill. But for what is writ with
the inky end thereof, in those Poems of mine, I challenge thee to show me if
thou can, where my fancy or reason has really tript. Thou indeed have
attempted something in the Platonic way, but I have made it manifest, thou
have writ with the quill of a goose. But I have penned down the praise of
Plato's Philosophy in this Canto, with the skill of a man, as any man that has
skill will acknowledge. But thy spirit is not yet prepared for the knowledge of
such divine matters. It is not yet fine, gentle, and benign enough, to receive
so delicious impressions. Put thy soul into a crysiple, O pragmaticall Chemist,
and set it on that fire that will excoct and purge out thy dross, and then
judge of Platonisme. Art not thou the Chymicall Monkey that art very busy to
little purpose about the glasses of H. Blunden, an honest man and an happy
Operatour in Chymistrie as I hear? But thou do nothing but lear and look up
at the reek of the furnace, and sendest as high Theomagicall meditations after
every fold or curle of smoke that mounteth up, as the musing Ape after the flur
and far flight of every partridge he let out of the basket. But enough of
Levity. Now to expiate the excess of this mirth with something more solid and
sober. I am ready to answer what thou alledgest, and to make good that my first
Observation is no oversight.

Thou art here mistaken in two things. First, in that thou conceivest that
Reminiscency is so strong an argument to prove the Preexistency of the soul
before her entrance into the body. I say it is not any argument worth the
insisting upon. For though the Soul do find truth in her self, questions being
wisely proposed to her; yet she does not perceive that she ever though^ of
those things before, and therefore cannot acknowledge any such Reminiscency in
herself. And I appeal unto thine own reason, Eugenius, if God should create an
humane soul, and put it into a body fit and complyable with contemplation,
whether that Soul would not be able to answer all the questions propounded in
Plato's Meno, as well as those that are supposed to preexist. And therefore I
have not made use of this argument in all my Platonical Poems. For I tell thee,
Phil. I am a very wary Philosopher, and he must rise betimes that goes about to
impose upon my reason. Thy second mistake is, that thou think I condemn thy
opinion of the Preexistency of the soul, which indeed I might well do as
personating an Aristotelean. But what I really blame there, is thy boldness
and disadvantagious rashness in the proposal of it, thou intimating, as if
the soul descended into the body with her eyes broad awake, which the first
page of thy Praeface to the Reader does plainly imply. Let any one read and
judge. But if any one ask what my opinion is, I answer, It is no matter what my
opinion is, as it is mine, (for what man is (...)?) but the discussion of the
truth of these things he may find in my Poems.

Observation 2.
Here, Philalethes, I charged thee with three absurdities.

The first was affectation of pomp and ceremony in the finding out those things
which cannot be hid from the eyes of the meanest capacity. As pretending it was
a whole springs task, to find out this conclusion, viz. That things that are
produced in Nature, are out of something in Nature unlike the things produced.
To this thou answerest; that thou art not to be understood, as if thou were a
whole spring in finding out this conclusion: For thou only say, I took to
task the fruits of one spring. But I say, that one spring may signify a whole
spring, and your making a task of it seems to determine the words to that
sense. And unless thou tookest the pains of examining all the flowers that
grew in the spring, one after another, I mean their kinds; it would prove no
task, or at least be no proof for thy conclusion. And therefore in all
likelihood, one spring should signify here a whole spring.

The second was, that thou art fain to admit of two of Aristotle's Principles,
Matter and Privation. And this I inferred from the foregoing Conclusion. But
thou answerest, That thou have not so much as named Privation, much less
acknowledged it for a Principle. That Is no matter. Though thou hold thy peace,
thy Observations speak it. That Viola est ex non viola, Rosa ex non Rosa, etc.
Which is the very same thing the Peripateticks observe to be necessarily
included in all generation, and therefore they make a Principle of it, and call
it Privation.

The third absurdity was, that you seemed so simple, as to ptomise your self
that you would find out the First Matter, or the common matter of all things,
by experience. To which you answer, That you have found it out, felt it, and
seen it. Well, Eugenius, thou art grown a great Proficient, I perceive, since
the last time I met thee. For then thou wast to seek for this First Matter, now
thou have found it and felt it. Have not thou felt the Ephialtes, Phil? or is
not thy fancy as gross and thick as a syrup? I believe thou art as much
Jesuit as I Puritan, tell me truly Philalethes, do not equivocate in this
answer? and understandest by this First Matter, only the first matter of some
things, as meal is the first matter of pudding, and pycrust, and bread, and the
like. But if thou say thou have seen and felt the First matter of all things
whatsoever, thou have pronounced what is impossible to be proved, and therefore
as impossible to be believed by the sober and wise. And yet unless thou
pronounce thus, thou pronouncest nothing to the present purpose. For, by first
Matter, is understood the common matter of all things. But now to rebuke thy
boldness in this assertion: Let me ask thee a sober question or two. This
first Matter, which thou soughtest after, and now have found, whether had
thou any marks to know it by, when thou did light on it? For as Venus in the
Poet, when she sends hue and cry after her little Fugitive, describes him from
his marks; (...).
So what ever is sought for by us, we ought to have an idea of it, that we may
know it when we find it. As he that is to seek an horse in the field, if he
have not an idea of an horse and of a cow, etc. he may bring one for the other.
To be short, he that seeks without an idea of what is sought, seeks for he
knows not what, and he will find it he knows not when. So that it was necessary
for thee to have an idea of the first Matter in thy mind, when thou wentest
about to find it out. Now tell me, what the idea of the first Matter can be, if
not this? A substance out of which all corporeal things are made, but it self
out of nothing. And this is, if thou understandest truth when it is propounded
to thee, as true an idea of the first Matter, as, to have three angels, is the
right idea of a Triangle. But answer me now, Eugenius, in good earnest. Is that
Matter which thou say thou have seen and handled, such as will fit with this
idea? How can thou ever prove but that that matter was made of some other
matter otherwise modified, as well as other things may be made of this? But I
will deal very heartily with thee, Philalethes: For I would fain have thee
speak some sense. The idea of thy first Matter thou meanest may happily be
this. Matter so prepared and qualified by the Art of Chemistry, that it is fit
to receive any form whatsoever, or Matter that is reduced to such a temper as
it all was of at first, when it lay fitted for receiving of all forms of what
nature so ever, and by this fitness engaged them to lodge in her large bosom.
And thus though this Matter of thine be made of another matter, yet, because it
is reduced to the state it was in first of all, before it received any forms,
and was contrived into this order and distinction of parts that constitute the
world, it may in this sense be called the first Matter. But tell me, Eugenius,
how know thou that thou have light on such a Matter as this? Thou had no
preconceived idea of the color and consistency of this matter which thou say
thou have felt and ^een, unless somebody has described it to thee, from
certain sensible qualities. But then I would ask both them and thee, how they
know that a Body of this consistency and color is the first matter? It is
either because that they observe, that, what ever they resolve by their
Chymicall fires is resolved into this at last, or because they have observed
that all things will arise out of this matter. But for the first: I say, they
have not, nor can make trial of all things by their Art. For how many things
appear above us out of our reach? besides what he eternally buried below. They
can not distill the stars, as some say, glowworms may be, and make them lamps
of them to study by. Besides, why is that which is left, to be the first matter
more then what is flown away and evaporated? And that which will not evaporate,
I demand whether that is the first matter of air and light? Add to all this,
That you do not so much find this first matter as make it in all likelihood.
For how incredible a thing is it, but that by your fires or heats, (you putting
the body that is under your operation into a perpetual motion, so that the
parts fridge one against another uncessantly) the nature of it should be quite
changed by you. So that you do not by a kind of Analysis discover what is at
the bottom, but by Genesis modifie the matter into a new dress. But that is no
matter you will say, so long as it is reduced to such a temper as it was, when
the whole world was to be impregnated with several forms. But there is no way
now left for you to know that you have thus reduced it, unless you have seen
this Matter of yours, Vertumnus-like to appear before you in all shapes Tell me
then, Philalethes, Have you seen it put on the form of a Sponge? of a Pumex? of
Adamant? of Marble? Have you seen it put on the shape of all plants whatsoever
and Animals? to say nothing of metals and mineralls. Have you played with it in
the shape of a dog? or has it roared against you in the form of a lion? or have
you made sport with the mustacho's of it in the figure of a mouse? Has
Paracelsus his homunculus come tumbling out of it, with his tail upwards in
sign of good luck? or have thou conferred with it in the dress of a wanton
Lady, clothed with transparent lawns or Sybariticall tiffanies? If thou have
not, (and dare thou say thou have?) thou have no reason at all to say thou
have seen and felt the first Matter of all things. It is but vain boasting and
bold imposture. Add unto all this; That if there were any such matter as thou
meanest, so fit for all forms, and yet fitted with none, the Mundus vitae, or
world of Lives and Forms) being every where present so as it is, this destitute
widow, or marriageable Virgin could be no more kept from being ma^ch'd with one
Form or other, then Dana^ could be from Jupiter, who notwithstanding the close
custody she was under, descended into her lap in a golden shower. Wherefore I
conclude, that it is not any certain Experience, but rash Juvenilitie and
confidence, that makes thee pronounce thou have seen and felt the first Matter.

SECT. VI.
Rules whereby we may better assure our selves that we use our Reason aright.
Mastix as well as Eugenius calls the Matter Darkness, but Mastix Poetically,
Eugenius Philosophically. The true and rational notion of the first Matter
according to Aristotle. Eugenius his ridiculous division of an Idea. Of the
divine and natural Idea according to Philo. Eugenius his self-contradiction in
making the Earth environed with light, and yet a vicissitude of day and night.
That the Letter of the Scripture speaks according to the vulgar conceit of men,
and therefore extends the World no higher then the clouds or thereabout.

Observation 3.
HEre thou would fain carp at my Hymn of Humility and Charity, but thy pride
and unchristian bitterresse only makes thee grin at it, it representing that
which is so contrary to thine own nature. But here is nothing said to any
purpose, and therefore it is to no purpose to apply an answer. As for thy
cavills against those expressions of mine, that we are to mea^^re our wisdom
by unprejudicate reason, by humilty and purity of mind, and not by devotion;
the seen is, That we are to try how wise we are, or how ^afely we may conclude
our selves to be wise, by exa^ining whether we have put off all prejudice, and
^se our reason impartially, whether we be humble an^ set free from all
corruption of Flesh and Spirit. Ior by these we may better and more safely
conclude ^at we have used our understanding aright, and are not mistaken in
what we conceive, then by long, or hot, or humorous devotions, such as men seem
b^ to play with God in, and rather show the world what fine heats they have,
then heartily desire the tr^e good from him, whom they seem to solicit for it
But thou art so galled with the sense, that thou wo^dst fain revenge thy self
upon the words.

^n what sense I call the disciples of Aristotle orthodox, any body that has
any wit and urbanity in them may easily discern, and then my praises of Plato
and Descartes may consist very well with this passage.

But as for Scaligers making use of Aristotle's text to make good Athanasius his
Creed, I will be very fair with thee, Phil. He did first believe firmly, that
there is such a Trinity, and then made Aristotle speak to that purpose. Now do
thou but first prove strongly thy Philosophical positions by Reason, and then
I give thee leave for further countenance to call in Moses his text.

Observation 4.
Do you mention no life here, Eugenius? But then Georgius Venetus does for you.
Omne quod vivit, propter inclusum calorem vivit: inde coll^gitur, caloris
naturam vim habere in se vitalem i^ mundo passim diffusam, etc. Construe it,
Phil. and be pacified.

Observation 5.
When you call the Matter darkness i^ your own verse. Why, it seems then you
had a mi^d to write poetical Prose, which I am sure Mr. Bu^^ of Eaton had like
to have whipped me for when I was aboy. But I wonder how thou come to stumble
on ths Stanza of mine above the rest. Let us bring it all forth entire into
view. The last extreme the farthest off from light,
That Is Natures deadly shadow, Hyle's cell.
O horrid Cave, and womb of dreaded Night!
Mother of witchcraft and accursed spell,
Which nothing can avail against Israel,
No Magic can him hurt, his portion
Is not divided nature, he does dwell
In light, in holy love, in union,
Not fast to this or that, but free communion.
O! now I see the reason, there is the word Magic named in it. But tell me, O
Magicus! do thou understand what I have writ there? If thou did, as thou
should do, and had an inward sense and feeling of it, thou would make a
bonefire of all thy books of curious Arts, as the Magicians did in the Apostles
time for joy of finding a better light. But I cannot express what I mean
better then I have already in that Stanza.

Page 40. lin. 20. Prithee, Mastix, what is this subject? I Will tell thee. Nay,
Aristotle shall tell thee: these are his words, Phys. l. 1. c. ult. (...). Thou
will not say that this is in nature, neither (...) nor (...), as thou
barbarously speak. And thou must give me leave to correct thy Greek, when
there is need, as well as thou do my English where there is no need. Thy
(...) is a monster, and has one (...) too much, but I will not tread on this
toe of thine too hard. I pass off, and come to thy head, that, I mean, that
should dwell there; if there be any body within, let them answer me. Is not
that defined there by Aristotle, (the sense whereof is sufficiently set out in
my description of the Idea of the first matter) Is it not in nature, neither
(...) nor (...)? I appeal to thine own reason if thou can any ways shift it,
but that thou must conceive a matter variously changed into several succeeding
forms. Therefore that which continues the same numericall substance, though in
its notion incomplete, and sustains the succeeding form, that is a thing in
Nature. But when we precisely conceive it utterly devoid of all forms, that is a
separation made only by the fire of our understanding ((...), the Oracles call
it) not by your Chymicall fire: and this is not in Nature, but in our
apprehension. Wherefore your assertion is false, when you say that this Matter
is neither (...), nor (...) in Nature. For though the notionall respect be not
in Nature, the thing it self is. And this, I say, is a sober description, and
signifies something. But your horrible empty darkness, which you say here is
the first Matter, does but mock a man's fancy in the dark.

Page 42. line 15. The holy Spirit, say you, is not able to see, etc. I say,
Anthroposophus, that it is you that have put things together so ill-favouredly,
as if you implied so much; as the Reader may judge by perpending the ninth page
of your Anthroposophia.

Page 43. line 20. As soon as God was. Where is thy Logic, Eugenius? does that
imply there was a time when God was not? when we say, that one is as wise as a
wisp, does that imply the wisp is wise? I tell thee, a wisp is no wiser then
thou art, Mr. Magicus. So if I say that the light of the Idea's was not later
then the existence of God, that saying does neither stint nor stretch out the
duration of Gods existence, but only it coextends the light of the Idea's with
that duration.

Page 44. lin. 1. But the water was not so. But what was the horrible empty
darkness? O thou man in the dark! was that ab aeterno, or not? and if that
was, could not the Divine light shine in that darkness? but I will wrestle no
longer with such Lemures in the dark, as thy shifting fancy proves it self, O
Anthroposophus! Let Us go on, and see if we can get into the light.

Observation 6.
And speak of Rations seminales. Yes, I spoke of them, and moved a very
material question concerning them, to wit, what that Experiment in a glass
could do, for the confirming or confuting the Rations seminales. It had been
your duty here to have satisfied this Quaere, but I perceive your inabilitie,
and pardon you.

Observation 7.
Line 10. I my self make the Natural Idea no Idea at all. So then,
Anthroposophus, this is the story. There is a twofold Idea, a divine Idea, and
an Idea which is no Idea at all: Ha ha he! Thou had abused me so unmercifully
in this bitter book of thine, that I thought I should never have been able to
laugh again as long as I lived: But this would make a dog burst his halter with
laughing, I must now laugh or die. What, art thou now turned Preacher, Phil?
though no Puritan by no means, and tel'st us of three kinds of Seekers, that
they are either those which are both Seekers and Finders; or those that are
Finders, but no Seekers; or lastly, such as are neither Seekers nor Finders?
Certainly when thou wrotest this book, thou had a plot to eternize thy fame,
and leave thy folly upon record.

Page 46. line 1. Cite him then, and produce his words. Here they are
Philalethes: (...), page 20. He there proves, that there are divine Idea's
before the creation of the visible plants, from that text of Moses, Genesis 2. v.
4, 5. Philo's own words are these upon that text; (...), says he, (...) (...).
that is, Does not he manifestly set before us incorporeall and intellectual
Idea's, which are the seals of Gods sensible works? for before the earth sent
forth herbs, there was even then (says Moses) herbs, in Rerum Natura; and
before the grass grew, there was invisible grass. Can you desire any thing
more plain and express? But to make thee amends for laughing at thy division
of the Idea which had but one member, and hopped like one of the Monocoli upon
a single leg, I will give thee another Idea besides this out of the same
Philo, and such as may be truly called both an Idea and a natural one, a thing
betwixt thy Ideal vestiment, and the Divine Idea it self: (...) page 6. (...)
that is, But the fruits was not only for nourishment for living creatures, but
preparations also for the perpetual generation of the like kind of plants,
they having in them Seminal Substances, in which the hidden and invisible forms
of all things become manifest and visible by circumvolutions of seasons. These
are the (...), or Rations seminales, the seminall Forms of things.

Observation 11.
Page 48, line 9. Mastix is delivered of a Bull. This is a Calf of thy own
begetting; but I have forgot all this while to render thee a Calf for a Bull as
I promised thee. I am not toyish enough for thee, my little Phil. Do I say Heat
and Siccity are Aqua vitae bottles? But may not heat, and siccity, and Aqua
vitae be consentany arguments? what repugnancy is there in it? Answer,
Logician: Therefore there is no Bull here, till thou be grown up to thy full
stature.

Observation 12.
Here I told you that you incompassing all with the Empyreal substance, you had
left no room for Evening and Morning upon the Mass of the Earth. What do you
answer to this? That the Empyreal substance was a fire which had borrowed its
tincture from the light, but not so much as would illuminate the Mass of it
self. No, Philalethes? Do not you say it retained a vast portion of light? and
is not that enough to illuminate the Mass of it self? Nay, you say it made the
first day without the Sun, but now you unsay it again. Pitiful baffled
Creature! But as for those terrible mysterious radiations of God upon the
Chaos, and dark Evaporations of the Chaos toward God, which thou would fain
shusfle off thy absurdities by; I say, they are but the flarings of thine own
fancy, and the reeks and fumes of thy puddled brain. Do thou tell me this
from Reason or Inspiration, Phil? If from Reason, produce thy arguments; if
from Inspiration, show me thy Miracle.

Page 51. line 25. The clouds are in the Air, not above it, etc. But if the
clouds be the highest parts of the world, according to the letter of Moses,
which is accommodated, as I shall prove, to the common conceit and sense of the
Vulgar; then in the judgment of sober men it will appear, that thy Argument
has no agreement neither with Philosophy nor common sense. Now therefore to
instruct thee, as well as I do sometimes laugh at thee; I will endeavor to
make these two things plain to thee. First, That Scripture speaks according to
the outward appearance of things to sense and vulgar conceit of men.

Secondly, That following this Rule, we shall find the Extent of the World to
be bounded no higher then the clouds, or thereabout: So that the Firmament,
viz: the Air, (for the Hebrews have no word for the Air, distinct from Heaven
or Firmament, Moses making no distinction) may be an adequate bar betwixt the
lower and upper waters. Which it was requisite for Moses to mention, vulgar
observation discovering that waters came down from above, viz. showers of Rain,
and they could not possibly conceive, that unless there were waters above,
that any water should descend thence. And this was it that gave occasion to
Moses, of mentioning those two waters, the one above, the other beneath the
firmament.

But to return to the first point to be proved, That Scripture speaks according
to the outward appearance of things to sense, and vulgar conceit of men. This I
say is a confessed truth with the most learned of the Hebrews. Amongst whom it
is a rule for the understanding of many and many places of Scripture. Loquitur
Lex secundum linguam filiorum hominum, that is, That the Law speaks according
to the language of the sons of men: as Moses AEgyptius can tell you. And it
will be worth our labor now to instance in some passages.

Genesis 19. v. 23. The sun was risen upon the Earth when Lot entered into Zoar.
Which implies, that it was before under the Earth: Which is true only
according to sense, and vulgar fancy.

Deuteronom. 30. v. 4. (...) or (...); Implies that the earth is bounded at
certain places, as if there were truly an Hercules Pillar, or Non plus ultra:
As it is manifest to them, that understand but the natural signification of
(...) and (...). For those words plainly import the Earth bounded by the blue
Heavens, and the Heavens bounded by the Horizon of the Earth: they touching one
another mutually. Which is true only to sense and in appearance, as any man
that is not a mere Idiot will confess.

Ecclesiastic. cap. 27. v. 12. The discourse of a godly man is always with
wisdom, but a fool changes as the moon. That Is to be understood according to
sense and appearance. For if a fool changes no more then the Moon does really,
he is a wise and excellently accomplished man, Semper idem, though to the sight
of the vulgar different. For at least an Hemisphear of the Moon is always
enlightened, and even then most, when she least appears to us.

Hitherto may be referred also that, 2. Chron. 4. 2. Also he made a molten Sea
of ten Cubits from brim ^o brim round in compass, and five Cubits the height
thereof, and a line of thirty Cubits did compass it round about. A thing
plainly impossible that the Diameter should be ten Cubits and the Circumference
but thirty. But it pleases the Spirit of God here to speak according to the
common use and opinion of Men, and not according to the subtilty of Archimedes
his demonstration.

Again Psalm 19. In them has he set a tabernacle for the Sun, which as a
bridegroom comes out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run
his race. This, as Mr. John Calvin observes, is spoken according to the rude
apprehension of the Vulgar, whom David should in vain have endeavored to teach
the mysteries of Astronomy. Haec ratio est (says he) cur dicat tentorium ei
paratum esse, deinde egredi ipsum ab una coeli extremitate, and transire
celeriter ad partem oppositam; Neque enim argute inter Philosophos de integro
solis circuitu disputat, sed rudissimis quibusque se accommodans, intra
ocularem experientiam se continet; ideoque dimidiam cursus partem quae sub
Hemisphario nostro non cernitur, subticet. i. e. This is the reason, to wit,
the rudeness of the vulgar, why the Psalmist says there is a tent prepared
for the Sun, and then that he goes from one end of the heaven and passes
swiftly to the other: For he does not here subtily dispute amongst the
Philosophers of the entire circuit of the Sun, but accommodating himself to
the capacity of every ignorant man, contains himself within ocular experience;
and therefore says nothing of the other part of the course of the sun, which
is not to be seen as being under our Hemisphear. Thus M. Calvin.

I Will add but one instance more, Joshua 10. v. 12. Sun stand thou still upon
Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajalon. Where it is manifest that Joshua
speaks not according to the Astronomicall truth of the thing but according to
sense and appearance. For suppose the Sun placed and the Moon at the best
advantage you can so that they leave not their natural course, they were so
far far from being one over Ajalon and the other over Gibeon, that they
were in very truth many hundreds of miles distant from them. And if the Sun and
Moon were on the other side of the Equatour, the distance might amount to
thousands.

I might adjoyn to these proofs the suffrages of many Fathers and Modern
Divines, as Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, Bernard, Aquinas, etc. But it is
already manifest enough that the Scripture speaks not according to the exact
curiosity of truth, describing things (...), according to the very nature and
essence of them; but (...), according to the^r appearance in sense, and the
vulgar opinion of men. Nor does it therefore follow that such expressions are
false, because they are according to the appearance of things to sense and
obvious fancy, for there is also a Truth of Appearance.

And thus having made good the first part of my promise, I proceed to the
second; which was to show, That the Extent of the world is to be bounded no
higher then the clouds, or there abouts, that it may thence appear, that the
upper waters mentioned in Moses, are the same with those Aquae in coelo stantes
mentioned by Pliny, lib. 31. his words are these, Quid esse mirabilius potest
aquis in coelo stantibus? and these waters can be nothing else, but that
contained in the clouds, which descends in rain; and so the whole Creation will
be contained within the compass of the Air, which the Hebrews call (...)
quasi (...) ibi aquae: because it is seeds nubium, the place of clouds and
rain. And that the world is extended no higher then thus, according to
Scripture, it is apparent. First, because the clouds are made the place of Gods
abode; whence we are to suppose them placed with the highest. There he lives,
and runs, and rides, and walks. He came walking upon the wings of the wind,
in the 104. Psalm. Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who
makes the clouds his chariot, and walks on the wings of the wind. Lays the
beams of his chambers in the waters, to wit, the upper waters which are the
clouds. The Almighties lodgings therefore according to the letter, are placed
in the clouds. Thereabout also is his field for exercise and war, Deuteronomy. 33.
26. There is none like to the God of Ieshurun, who rides upon the Heavens for
thy help in his excellency on the sky, that is, upon the upper clouds, as
Buxtorf interprets it, and indeed what can (...) properly signify above, but
clouds? for below it signifies pulvis tenuissimus, small dust; and the clouds
are as it were the dust of heaven. Vatablus also interprets that place of Gods
riding on the clouds. And this agrees well with that of Nahum, chap. 1. v. 3.
The Lord has his way in the whirlwind, and the clouds are the dust of his
feet. Here he is running as swift as a whirlwind, and raises a dust of clouds
about him. You shall find him riding again, Psalm 68. 4. and that in triumph;
but yet but on the clouds: sutably to that in Deuteronomy. Sing unto God, sing praises
unto his Name, extol him that rides upon the heavens by his name IAH, and
rejoice before Him. That rides upon the Heavens; the Hebrew is (...), which I
would be bold with Aben Ezraes leave, to translate, that rides upon the
clouds: For clouds cause darkness, and the root from whence (...) is (...),
which signifies obtenebrari, obscurari. But for the ground of this Rabbis
interpretation, to wit, Upon the heavens, it is taken out of the 33. verse of
the 68. Psalm, To him that rides upon the heaven of heavens of old. But if we
read on there, we shall find that those heavens of heavens, in all probability,
reach no higher then the clouds. For let us read the whole verse together, To
him that rides upon the heaven of heavens that were of old; Lo, he does send
out his voice, and that a mighty voice: what is that but thunder? and whence is
thunder but out of the clouds? and where then does God ride but on the clouds?
The following verse makes all plain: Ascribe ye strength unto God; His
excellency is over Israel, and his strength is in the clouds, which does
notably confirm, that the Extent of the Heavens, according to the letter of
Moses and David too, are but about the height of the clouds. For here the
heaven of heavens is the seat of thunder, and Gods strength and power is said
to be in the clouds. Nor does this expression of this height, to wit, the
heaven of heavens of old, imply any distance higher. For since all the Firmament
from the lower to the upper waters is called Heaven; it is not a whit
unreasonable that the highest part of this Heaven or Firmament, be called the
Heaven of Heavens. And this is my first argument that the heaven or firmaments
Extent is but from the Sea to the Clouds, because God is sea^ed no higher in
the outward phrase of Scripture.

My second argument is taken from the adjoining the heavens with the clouds
exegetically, one with another, for the setting out of that which is exceeding
high as high as we can express. And this the Psalmist does often, Psalm 36.
5. Thy mercy, O Lord, is in the Heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches unto
the Cloud^. And Psalm 57.10. For thy mercy is great unto the Heavens, and thy
truth unto the Clouds. And Psalm 108. 4. For thy mercy is great above the
Heavens, and thy truth reaches above the Clouds. Where heaven and clouds set
off one and the same height, that which is exceeding high, the mercy and truth
of God.

My last argument is from the Psalmists placing the Sun, (...) in the clouds,
or in the cloudy heaven. For the word must so signify as I did above prove
both from Testimony, and might also from the Etymon of the word. For (...)
signifies comminuere, contundere, to beat to dust: and what are clouds but the
dust of heaven, as I may so speak. Psalm 89. v. 36, 37. His seed shall endure
for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me. It shall be established for
ever as the Moon, and as the faithful witness (...) in heaven: that is, in
the sky, the place where the clouds are. The drawing down therefore of the Sun,
that faithful witness in heaven, so low as the clouds, implies that the
letter of the Scripture takes no notice of any considerable part of the
firmament above the clouds, it terminating its expressions always at that
Extent. And this suits very well with Moses his calling the Sun and the Moon
the great lights, and making nothing as it were of the stars, as is manifest
out of the 16 verse of the first of Genesis. And God made two great lights, the
greater light to rule the day, and the less to rule the night; He made the
stars also. But they come as cast into the bargain, as not so considerable,
when as indeed a Star of the first magnitude is (according to the calculation
of the Astronomers) twenty thousand times bigger then the earth, and the earth
five and forty times bigger then the Moon; so that one star of the first
magnitude will prove about nine hundred thousand times bigger then the Moon.
Which notwithstanding, according to the letter of Moses, is one of the two
great lights, the sole Empress of the night. But here the letter of Moses is
very consistent with it self. For since that the Extent of heaven is not
acknowledged any higher then the clouds, or thereabout wherein, (as I showed
you) the Sun is, and consequently the Moon, and it will not be more harsh to
make the stars stoop so low too; nay, they must indeed of necessity all of them
be so low, they having no where else to be higher, according to the usual
phrase of Scripture) the appearances of the stars will then to our sight
sufficiently set out their proportions one to another, and the Sun and the Moon
(according to this Hypothesis) will prove the two great lights, and the stars
but scattered sky-pebbles. Wherefore from all this harmony and correspondency
of things, I think I may safely conclude, that the Extent of the Firmament
according to Moses, is but the distance from the sea to the clouds, or
thereabouts, as well as it is to our sight, which cannot discern any intervall
of altitudes betwixt the clouds and the Moon, the Moon and the Sun, and
lastly, betwixt the Sun and the fixed Stars. Which interpretation I am
confident any man will admit of, that can bring down the tumor of his
Philosophic fancy unto a vulgar consistency, and fit compliance with the
sweetness and simplicity of Moses his style.

And thus, Philalethes, have I proved that there is no room for thy
interstellar waters within the compass of Moses his Creation, unless they run
into one, and mingle with the rain or clouds.

SECT. VII.
Eugenius his ignorance in the English tongue. His gross mistakes concerning
the Epicycles of Ptolemie. That Air is an Element of our body. That the vulgar
notion of Rarefaction and Condensation implies a contradiction. Of Eugenius his
Magnet. That Temperance and Charity is of more consequence to mankind then
his Philosophers stone. His misapplication of S. John's Prophecy for the
proving of a Vitrification of the Earth.

Observation 13.
HEre I called the Ptolemaick Systeme a rumbling confused Labyrinth. So you did
Philalethes, and I perceive you will do so again. But prithee tell me, do
thou mean the Heavens rumble? and so understandest or rather hear the
rumbling harmony of the Spears? or do thou mean the Labyrin^h rumbles? I
tell thee; Philaleth^s, a wheel-barrow may be said to rumble, for to rumble is
to make an ill-favored ungrateful noise; but no body will say the heavens or
a labyrinth does rumble, but such as are no Englishmen, as you say somewhere
you are not, and so do not understand the language.

Page 53. A confused wheel-barrow is a bull. Is a wheel-barrow a bull? what a
bull is that? But confused, I added not confused to wheel-barrow, that is thy
doing thou author of confusion^

Line 18. The Epicycles in respect of their orb^^re but as a Mite in^^ cheese.
Do yo^ say so, Mr. Lilly? No. Do you say so, Mr. Booker? No. Look thee now,
Phil. how thy confident ignorance has abused those two learned Artists as thou
call them. They are ashamed to utter such loud nonsense. And now they have
denied it, dare thou venture to say it, Anthroposophus? Tell me then how
little and diminutive those Epicycles will prove in respect of their orbs, that
have their diameters equal to the diameter of the orbit of the earth, or which
is all one of the sun. Thou will answer me with the Cyclops in Erasmus,
Istiusmodi subtilitates non capio. I do not believe thou understandest the
Question, though it be plainly propounded, and so I shall expect no answer.

But come thy ways hither again, Phil. thou shall not escape thus. I will not
let thee go till I have called thee to an account for thy great bull of Basan
as thou would call it. Thou say, That the Epicycles of Ptolomy though they
are too big to be true, yet that they are very diminutive things in respect
of their orbs that sustain them; as little and diminutive as mites in a cheese
in respect of the cheese. To speak the most favorably of this assertion of
thine that may be, it is sublime Astronomicall Nonsense. And if we could find
any Nonsense sublunary to parallel it, it would be some such stuff as this:
Although the cannon bullets in the tower be as big as mount Athos, yet they
are so little that they will not fill the compass of a walnut. This is a
bundle of falsities and so is that. That is, Both the parts of these compound
Axioms are false, and the composition it self also illegitimate. These are
Discrete Axioms, Eugenius, and both the parts ought to be true, but they are
both false here. And there ought also, especially these notes Quamvis and tamen
being in them, to be only a Discretion of parts, but here is an implacable
Opposition: things put together that imply a contradiction. In the latter of
these Axioms it is manifest; but I will show you, it is so also, in that former
of yours.

For first, the Epicyoles of Ptolemy, are not too big to be true. For they do
not suppose them bigger then will be contained within the thickness of their
own orbs. And you your self say that they are but as mites in a cheese in
respect of their orbs. So that it is plain according to what you your self
grant, as well as according to the Hypothesis of Ptolemy, that they are not too
big to be true.

But secondly, I say they are not as little as Mites in respect of the cheese
they are in. For the semi-diameter of Saturns Epicycle is to the semi-diameter
of h^s Eccentrick, at least as 1 to 10. and the semi-diameter of Jupiters
Epicycle to the semi-diameter of his Eccentrick more then as 1 to 6. but Mars
his as 2 to 3, or thereabout, and the semidiameter of the Epicycle of Venus to
the semidiameter of her eccentrick more then as 2 to 3 by a good deal. And is
it not plain hence Eugenius, that thy mite in a cheese must swell up at least
to the bigness of a Mouse in a cheese, though thy cheese were almost as little
as a trundle bed wheel, or a box of Marmalade? and what a vast difference is
there betwixt a Mite and a Mouse, but thy ignorance emboldens thee to speak any
thing.

But now in the last place, the putting these two falsities together is
contradiction, as well as they are severally false. For it is evident, that if
the Epicycles be too big to be true, they cannot be so little as Mites in a
cheese, in respect of their orbs. For then would they be easily contained
within the crassities or thickness of their orbs. But their not being able to
be contained within the Crassities of their orbs, that is the thing that must
make them too big to be true.

And questionless if we will join the Epicycle with its right office, which is
to bring down the Planet to its lowest Perigee, then the Epicycles of the
planets will be too big to be true. For there will be of them that are half
as big again as their Deferents, nay five times if not ten times as big. And of
these Epicycles I said (and Ptolemies ought to have been such, unless they did
desert their office) that they were too big to be true. But thou pronouncest
concerning these things thou know not what, and therefore art easily tossed up
and down like a shittle cock thou know not whither, How do I blow thee about
as the dust or the down of thistles?

-- ut plumas avium papposque volantes.
Observation 16.
Thou Moore a (...). As much as a (...). Thou art so drunk and intoxicated with
thine own blood (as Aristotle says of all young men that they are (...)) that
thou see double, two O's in my name for one.

Observation 19.
See what I answer at observation the 23.

Observation 20.
Phy, Phy, some rose water. Who speaks like a Puritan now, Phil? but why some
rose water? have thou devoured an Orange like an apple, pulp and pill and all,
and so made thy mouth bitter, O thou man of Wales! But it is to wash hur mouth
from bawdry. Why will thou be so bold then as to name the Lawyers phrase rem in
re! Or have thou a purpose to call all the Lawyers, bawdy Gentlemen, by craft?
I tell thee, Phil. To the pure all things are pure; but thy venerious fancy
which I rebuked in this passage thou exceptedst against, does soil and corrupt
what is chaste and pure.

Observation 21.
I do, Mastix. I do. Why do thou not then explain it, thou little Mastigia?

Observation 23.
Here I have you fast, Philalethes, for all your wrigling. For if our vital
and animal spirits, which are as much a part of us, as any other part of our
body is, be fed and nourished by the Air, then the Air is an Element of our
body. But here he would fain save himself, by saying that the Air is rather a
Compound then an Element: but let any man judge how much more it is compounded
then the Earth, and then Water which nourishes by drinking, as well as the
Air can do by breathing.

Observation 24.
Page 59. line 1. How can darkness be called a Mass? etc. No it cannot. Nor a
thin vaporous matter neither. Thy blindness cannot distinguish Abstracts from
Concrets. Thy soul sits in the dark, Philalethes, and nibbles on words as a
mouse in a hole on cheese ^arings. But to slight thy injudicious cavil at
Mass, and to fall to the Matter. I charged thee here to have spoke such stuff
as implies a Contradiction. Thou saidest that this Mass (be it black or white,
dark or bright, that is nothing to the Controversy here) did contain in a far
less compass all that was after extracted. I say this implies a Contradiction.
But you answer, this is nothing but Rarefaction and Condensation according to
the common notion of the Schools. I but that Notion it self implies a
Contradiction, for in Rarefaction and Condensation there is the generation or
deperdition of no new Matter, but all matter has impenetrable dimensions.
Therefore if that large expansion of the heavens lay within the compass of the
Mass, that matter occupied the same space that the mass did, and so dimensions
lay in dimensions, and thus that which is impenetrable was penetrated, which is
a contradiction. What thou alledgest of the rarefaction of water into clouds or
vapors, is nothing to the purpose. For these clouds and vapors are not one
continued substance, but are the particles of the water put upon motion, and
playing at some distance one from another, but do really take up no more place
then before.

Observation 26.
To say nothing at thy fond cavil at words in the former Observation^ and thy
false accusation that I called thee dog (for I would not dishonor Diogenes ^o
much as to call thee so) and leaving it to the censure of the world, how plain
and real thy principles are, I am come now to my 26 Observation on the 23 page
of thy Anthroposophia, where thou tellest us, That there is a threefold Earth,
viz. Elementary, Celestial, Spiritual. Now let us see what an excellent layer
of the fundamentalls of Science thou will prove thy self. And here he begins to
divide before he defines. Thou should first have told us what Earth is in
general before thou divide it. This is like a creature with a cloven foot, and
never a head. But when thou did venture to define these Members, where was
thy Logic? Ought not every definition, nay, ought not every Precept of Art to
be (...)? but I will not vex thy head with these severities. The Magnet is the
second member, the object of this 26 Observation. Here you say, I condemn this
Magnet, but I do not offer to confute it. But I answer, I have as substantially
confuted it as merrily; but thou do not take notice of it. I have intimated
that this precept of art is not (...), nay, that it is plainly false: For it
affirms that which has no discovery by reason or experience, viz. That there
is a certain earth which you call the Magnet, that will draw all things to it
at what distance so ever. Quodcunque ostendis mihi sic, incredulus odi.
So far am I from approving thy Magnet, O Magicus. Nor do the pages thou here
citest, of which I give a favorable censure, prove any such thing. Let the
Reader peruse them, and judge. Indeed certain operations of the Soul are highly
and Hyperbolically there set out by thee; but the Magnet came dropping in at
the latter end of the story. I gave no allowance to that. I will not have my
soul so ill taught, as to attract metal out of men's purses at any distance
whatsoever.

Page 64. line 12. Did thou ever hear or know that I was a pick-pocket? If I
had had the least suspicion of thee that thou were so, I would not have called
thee so, for it had been an unmercifull jest. But if thou were as full of
candor and urbanity, as I deem thee clear of that crime, thou would not have
interpreted it malice but mirth. For such jests as these are not uncivil nor
abusive to the person, when the materiality of them are plainly and confessedly
incompatible to the party on whom they are ^ast.

Observation 27.
Page 65. line 14. Prithee why a Galileo's tube, were there more Galileo's then
one? Certainly, Phil. thou do not look through a Galileo's glass, but
through a multiplying glass, that see in my English more Galileos then one.
Go thy ways for the oddest correctour of English that ever I met with in all
my days.

Observation 28.
Page 67. line 1. For I fear God. The devils also believe and tremble: But
do thou love God, my Philalethes? If thou did, thou would love thy
brother also. But shall I tell thee truly what I fear? Truly I fear, that thou
have no such precious medicine to publish, which thou make so nice of; and
that thou do only make Religion a cover for thine ignorance. But let me tell
thee this sober truth, That Temperance will prevent more diseases by far,
then thy medicine is like to cure; and Christian Love would relieve more by
many thousands, then thy Philosophers stone that should convert baser metals
into gold. There is gold enough in the world, and all necessaries else for
outward happiness; but the generations of men make themselves miserable by
neglecting the inward. This is palpably true, and it would astonish a man to
see how they run madding after the noise of every pompous difficulty, and how
stupid and sottish they are to those things which God has more universally put
in their power, and which would (if they made use of them) redound to their
more general and effectual good.

Observation 29.
So does S. John prophecy too. But Magicus is too wise to understand him. S.
John tells us of a new Heaven, and of a new Earth. Here, Magicus having
recourse to his Chymistrie, in the height of his imagination prefigures to
himself not only Crystalline Heavens, but also a Vitrifide Earth. But I
consulting with Scripture, and with the simplicity of mine own plain Spirit,
think of a new Heaven and a new Earth wherein dwells righteousness^ He Is for an
Eden with flowery walks, and pleasant trees; I am for a Paradise, (...)
Where Virtue, Wisdom, and good Order meet,
As the Chalde^ Oracles describe it. He is for a pure clear place, I place my
happiness in a clear and pure mind, which is the holy place or temple of God.

Observation 30.
Tecum habita. I will not urge that Precept too strictly upon thy self, because
I wish thee a better companion.

Observation 31.
For thy ho! sounds like the noise of a S^w-gelder. As much as the celestial
orbs or labyrinth rumble like a wheel-barrow. This is but the crowing of thine
own brain to the tune of the Sow-gelders horn.

SECT. VIII.
The useless mystery of the Souls being an Hermaphrodite. Of the uncleanness
of Aristotle. That the shame of lust is an argument that something better then
the condition of this mortal body belongs to the Soul. That the Soul of man is
not propagated as light from light. That though she perceive nothing but her
own energie, yet the distinction of the inward and outward sense is not without
its use. That Eugenius asserts that blind men do see in their sleep. That
there is but one Sentient spirit in a man which is the Rational soul her self.
Of understanding without Phantasmes. Mastix takes notice of Eugenius his vain
boasting of his quick parts. That a bad man cannot be so much as a friend to
himself. The great satisfaction of the plain Truths of Christianity above the
Zeal and intricacie of sects. Eugenius his injudicious Poetry wherein intending
to praise the University of Oxford he plainly abuses it. That comparison
implies not always a Positive. That Mastix affects not to confute every thing
but what he can plainly show to be false.

Observation 32.
HEre in answer to my objection thou tellest me that Ruac and Nephesh, the
parts whereof the Soul of man consists, differ as male and female. All the
mystery then is to make man's soul an Hermaphrodite. Thou should have told us
here what operations were proper to Ruach, what to Nephesh, whether vegetation
belong to the one^ reason and sense to the other: or whether in this the divine
life were seated, in that the animal and fleshly reason, and the like. But the
subtlety of thy wit reaches no further then the discrimination of sexes, and
the grossly pointing out of Male and Female.

Page 69. line 9. For your Sodomite Patron Aristotle allows of it in his
Politics. More wretched beast he if it be so: but I do not remember any such
passage in his Politics, and yet have read them through, but long since; and
it is sufficient for me if I remember the best things in Authors I read, I can
willingly let go the worst. But what thou say of Aristotle is not unlikely;
for he is taxed for this unnatural practice in Diogenes Laertius, with one
Hermias a foul friend of his, in the praise of whom notwithstanding he has
wrote a very fair and elegant Hymn, which begins thus, (...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).


To this sense, Virtue! that putst humane race
Upon so hard toil and pains;
Life's fairest prize! Thy lovely face
Bright Virgin, the brave Greek constrains
To undergo with an unwearied mind
Long wasting labors, and in high desire
To throng through many deaths to find
Thee; that do fire
Man's soul with hopes of such immortal fruit
No gold can suit,
Nor love of Parents equalize,
Nor slumbers sweet that softly seize the eyes.
So easy a thing is it for bad men to speak good words.

It is recorded by the same author out of Aristippus, that the same
Philosopher was also so much taken with the conversation of Hermias's whore,
that in lieu of that pleasure he reaped by her, he did the same ceremonies and
holy rites to her, that the Athenians were wont to do to their goddess Ceres
Eleusinia. From whence it seems that his soul did consist of two parts, Male
and Female, he having to do with both. So that he is more like to prove thy
Patron then mine, Philalethes! for I have to do with neither.

Page 69. line 10. But I am tickled say you. Yes, I say you are so tickled and
do so tickle it up in your style with expressions fetched from the Gynaeceum,
that you are ridiculous in it, and I thought good to show you to be such as you
are. But for mine own part I am moved neither one way nor another with any such
things, but think good to affix here this sober consideration. That there being
generally in Men and Women that are not either Heroically good, or stupidly and
beastly naught, a kind of shame and aversation in the very naming of these
things; that it is a sign that the Soul of man does in its own judgment find
it self here in this condition of the body, as I may so speak, in a wrong box
and has a kind of presage and conscience that better and more noble things
belong unto it, else why should it be troubled at its own proclivity to that
which is the height, and flower of the pleasure of the body, as they that are
given to this folly do profess.

(...),
(...).
To this sense. What life? what sweet without the golden tie
Of Venus? dead to this, straight let me die.
But that there is a natural shame of these acts and the propension to them,
that story of Typhon in Diodorus Siculus is no obscure argument. For when he
had murdered his brother Osiris, that he might more sacramentally bind to him,
for his future help and security, his twenty four Accomplices in this act, he
hewed the body of his brother into so many pieces, but was fain to fling the
(...) his Pudendum into the river, they every one being unwilling to take that
for their share. So much aversation is there naturally from these obscenities,
that even those that are otherwise execrably wicked, have some sense of it. But
I do not speak this as if Marriage it self were a sin as well as whoredom
and adultery, for questionless it is permitted to the soul in this case she is
in. But if she be not monstrous and degenerate, she cannot but be mindful that
she is made for something far better.

Observation 33.
To this observation thou answerest like a man with reason and generosity and
with a well beseeming wit, how unlike to thy self art thou here, Anthroposophos?

Observation 34.
I perceive by thy answer to this observation thou art not at all ocquaitted
with Ramus what ere thou art with the Schoolmen, bnt I pass over this and come
to what is of more moment.

Page 71. line 19. This is one of your three designs. Yes, it is one of those
three designs I taxed you for in the beginning of my Observations. And here I
make it good out of your own text Anthroposophia page 33. line 1. These are
your words. And now Reader, Arrige aures, come on without prejudice and I will
tell thee that, which never hitherto has been discovered. What can be more
plain if you will but prick up your ears and attend to what you say your self.
But now I have discovered that this is but a boast of yours concerning a known
Notion among the Christian Platonists, you begin to pluck in your ears and
confess your self a Plagiary. In the rest of your answer you do but teach your
Grannam to crack nuts, I go on Magicus to the next.

Observation 35.
As a flame of one candle can light a thousand candles more. Your answer then
to this Observation is this. That the Soul is propagated as light is from
light; That there is a multiplication without decision or division. But for
thine and the Readers fuller satisfaction I shall answer thee here, as thou
somewhere demandest, in the verse of Spencer but in the reason and sense of
More, out of these four Stanzaes in my Canto of the Preexistency of the Soul.

Wherefore who thinks from Souls new Souls to bring,
The same let press the sun beams in his fist,
And squeeze out drops of Light, or strongly wring
The Rainbow, till it die his hands well pressed;
Or with uncessant industry persist
The intentionall species to mash and bray
In marble mortar, till he has expressed
A Sovereign eye salve to discern a Fay.
As easily as the first all these effect you may.
Ne may queint Similes this fury damp,
Which say that our souls propagation
Is, as when lamp we lighten from a lamp,
Which done withouten diminution
Of the first light, shows how the soul of man
Though indivisible may another rear
Imparting life. But if we rightly scan
This argument, it comes nothing near.
To light the lamp's to kindle the sulphurous gear.
No substance new that act does then produce.
Only the oily atoms 't does excite
And wake into a flame. But no such use
There is of humane Sperm. For our free sprite
Is not the kindled seed, but substance quite
Distinct there from. If not: Then bodies may
So changed be by Nature and Stiff fight
Of hungry stomachs, that what erst was clay
Then herbs, in time it self in sense may well display.
For then our Soul can nothing be but blood,
Or nerves, or brains, or body modifyde;
Whence it will follow that cold stopping crud
Hard moldy cheese, dry nuts, when they have rid
Due circuits through the heart, at last shall speed
Of life and sense, look thorough our thin eyes,
And view the Close wherein the Cow did feed
Whence they were milk'd; gross Py-crust will grow wise,
And pickled Cucumbers sans doubt Philosophize.
Observation 37.
Bid adieu to thy reputation Mastix. Well, now I perceive that thou think
that thou have hit the nail on the head indeed: But all that thou do or can
collect from what is in my Preface to the Canto concerning the sleep of the
Soul, is but this: that whether we see or imagine, that both of these are but
the very E^ergie of the Soul, and that the Soul does not, nor can perceive any
thing immediately but her own Energie. But what of all this? It does not thence
follow that the inward and outward sense is all one, but only unitate
generica. no more then if I should say, that to be an Animal is but to have,
corporeal substance, life, and sense, it would thence follow that an horse and
a man are all one. Look thee now, Magicus, how I have passed through this huge
Mound and Bulwark of thine, with as much ease and stillness as a gliding Spirit
through a Mud-wall. I will only look back and laugh at thee Magicus, for a man
of no Logic. But if any man doubt whether thou say blind men see in their
sleep, it is apparent thou do. For in thy Anthroposophia, Page 40. line 1.
thou say, That the visible power is not destroyed as is plain in the dreams of
blind men. Here if thou know what thou say, thou arguest from the effect to
the cause, from the operation to the faculty, but is the operation of the
Visive faculty (for thou do barbarously call it visible) any thing else but
seeing? therefore thou do plainly assert that blind men see in their sleep.
It would be well if they could walk in their sleep too: for then they would
scarce have any loss of their eyes.

Observation 38.
Magicus, I do not altogether contemn the Symboles and Signatures of Nature,
but I believe that Euphrasia or Eyebright that has the signature of the Eye,
sees or feels no more, then the pulp of a walnut that has the signature of the
brain, does understand or imagine.

Observation 39.
What a pitiful account do thou give me here of the difficulties I urged
thee with. My Queres were these, You making two Spirits in a man, the Rational
and Sensitive. First, Whether the Rational Spirit does not hear and see in a
man? Here you distinguish. The Sensitive Spirit sees the Object (say you) and
the Rational the Species. But I say unto thee, that Sensation is nothing else,
but the perceiving of some present corporeal object; and that the Rational
soul does. For when two men discourse, that in them that reasons, hears the
words, and sees the party with whom it reasons, does it not? Therefore they
both see the object: But you will say, One sees by a species, the other
without. I say nothing can be discerned without a species, that is, without an
actual representation of the thing discerned: So that that distinction is in
vain. And I would add this further, That every sentient spirit must perceive
by its own species, and not by another. But thou say, This sensitive Spirit
like a glass represents the species of external objects. Then it seems the
Sensitive spirits office is to be the glass of the Soul to see things in; but
glasses themselves, Magicus, are not sentient, nor need this Spirit be so, that
is the souls glass; and it is plain it is not. For if these two were two
different sensitive spirits, then they would have two different Animadversions;
but there is but one Animadversive spirit in a man, and therefore but one
Sensitve. And that there is but one Animadversive spirit in a Man, is plain
from hence, that if the Rational animadversive bestow its animadversion fully
elsewhere, the Sensitive in man cannot perform the thousandth part of that
which is performed in brutes. We should lose our selves in the most trivial
matters, when notwithstanding this sensitive spirit in man would have as quick
a vehicle as in most brutes. Besides, this Sensitive spirit having this
animadversion, would have also a Memory apart, and would be able while the
Rational is busied about something else, to lay up observations such as Beasts
do by it self; and then long after to show them to the Rational, to its sudden
amazement and astonishment. But none of these things are. And in my
apprehension it is in a very gross and palpable way sensible to me, that there
is but one Animadversive in me, and I think I am no monster; If I be, it is (it
seems) in that I am all rational spirit, and have had the luck to miss of the
sensitive, the beast.

Page 77. line 3. If this be true, then there be two hearing and seeing souls
in a man. This is my second Quere; I asked if there be. To this you answer, Ha
ha he! A very profound answer. This is no laughing matter, my friend. Have I
not already showed you some difficulties, this asserting two sensitive Spirits
in a man, is laden with? Answer them, Phil. I should gladly hear thee use thy
tongue as well as see thee show thy teeth by laughing. For that slender faint
reason that follows thy loud laughing, viz. The objects are different, and the
senses are different, that is taken a way already. For the sting of my Argument
is not this, that there would be two sensitive souls of the same nature in the
body of a man; but that there should be two sensitive souls at all. And indeed,
considering that the superior soul contains the faculties of the inferior, it
is altogether needless. And that is a very sober truth, Entia non sunt
multiplicanda sine necessitate: Which is to the same sense with that so often
repeated in Aristotle and Theophrastus, (...), God and Nature do nothing in
vain. And the right organization of parts, and due temperature of the body, and
proportion of animal spirits, this is all the glass the Soul of man wants in
this life to see by, or receive species from. But his glass has no more sense
it self, then an urinall or looking-glass has. Where are you now, Phil. with
your Ha ha he?

Line 10. I could, Mastix, teach thee an higher truth. Yes truly, Magicus, you
are best of all at those truths which dwell the highest. You love to soar aloft
out of the ken of sense and reason, that you may securely Raunt it there in
words of a strange sound and no signification. But though thou fliest up so
high, like a Crow that has both his eyes bored out, yet I have thee in a
string, and can pluck thee down for all thy fluttering. Thou say that a Soul
may understand all things, sine conversione ad Phantasmata: this I suppose thou
would say to contradict Aristotle; but I do not suspect thee of so much
learning as to have read him. He tells us in his book De Anima, (...). that
there is no understanding without Phantasmes. Yon say that we may understand
all things without them. What think you of Individualls, Magicus? of which it
is controverted amongst the Platonists, whether there be any Idea's of them or
no. But being you are so confident an assertor, let us hear how stout a prover
you are of your assertions. Know you this you have spoken by Sense, Reason, or
divine Revelation? By this string I have plucked this blind Crow down; I have
him as tame in my hand as a Titmouse: look how he pants, and gapes, and shows
the white tip of his tongue, but says nothing. Go thy ways, Phil. for a pure
Philosophic Thraso.

Observation 41.
Three quarters of a year have thou spent, etc. O Magicus, Magicus! thou art
youthful and vainglorious, and tellest thy Tutour that this hasty cookery
thou entertainest him with, was dispatched and dressed up some ten days after
the Press was delivered of my Observations. How many ten days do thou
mean, by thy some ten days? Thou would have thy Tutour to stroke thee on the
head for a quick-parted lad, I perceive, Eugenius. But had thou not better
have staid longer, and writ better sense, more reason, and with less railing?
But I poor slow beast! how long do tho^ think I was viewing and observing
that other excellent piece of thine? I confess, Magicus, because thou forcest
me to play the fool as well as thy self, I was almost three quarters of a
Month about it; and how much more is that then some ten days, though but
twice told over? and I will not be so curiously vainglorious, as to tell thee
how great a share of this time was daily taken from me by necessary
employments. This is to answer thy folly with folly. But I thank God that I
glory in nothing, but that I feel my self an Instrument in the hand of God, to
work the good of Men. The greatest strength of a man is weakness, and the
power of Reason, while we are in this state, depends so much of the organs of
the body, that its force is very uncertain and fickle. Is not the whole
consistency of the body of Man, as a crudled cloud or coagulated vapor? and
his Personality a walking shadow and dark imposture? All flesh is grass, and
the glory thereof as the flower of the field: but the word of the Lord endures
for ever. Verily the people are as grass.

Observation 42.
Have at you my friends the Independents. The Independents indeed may be thy
friends, Magicus; but I dare say thou art not in a capacity to be theirs, as
having not yet wit and morality enough to be a friend unto thy self. (...). A
bad man cannot be friendly disposed toward himself, as having nothing in
himself amiable and friendly, Aristot. Eth. ad Nicom. lib. 9. cap. 4.

Observation 43.
Mastix, You denied formerly the Scripture was intended for Philosophy. But
you contending that it was, how fondly do you prefer Agrippa before Moses and
Christ. This you would have called blasphemy; but I have learned no such hard
language.

Observation 44.
For the natural Queres I put to thee here concerning the nature of Light, the
Rainbow, the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, and the Lodestone; I tell thee thou will never be able to answer sense to them, unless thou turn Cartesian, and
explain them out of that Philosophy. But in the General. I mean, That the
heats which the Soul takes from personal admiration, make her neither wise,
nor just, nor good; but only disturb the spirits, and disadvantage Reason.

Observation 45.
Page 81. line 2. Mastix would gladly put those asunder, whom God has put
together. You mean then that a Protestant and Christian, are termini
convertibiles. What a rare Independent is Magicus! he is an Independent of the
Church of England; which is as good sense as if he should say, he is a
Protestant of the Church of Rome. Truly, Magicus, I think thou art an
Independent in nothing but in thy Reasons and speeches; for in them indeed
there is no dependency at all. They are Arena sine ^alce, and hang together
like thum-ropes of sand. But before I be merry with thee; and I foresee I
shall be when I come to thy verses, hear this sober Aphorism from me. If that
those things which are confessedly true in Christianity were closely kept to by
men, it would so fill and satisfy their souls with an inward glorious light
and spiritual joy, that all those things that are with destroying zeal and
unchristian bitterness prosecuted by this and that Church, would look all of
them as contemptibly, as so many rush-candles in the light of the Sun.

Line 15. You fall on my person. Well, I Will let your person go now, and fall on
your Poetry. Where I believe, I shall prove you a notable wagge indeed, and one
that has abused your mother Oxford and all her children very slyly and dryly.

Dry Punick statues. You make your own brothers of Oxford then so many dry
Pumices, things that have no sap or juice in them at all. I wish you had been
so too Phil, for you have been to me a foul wet Sponge, and have squeazed all
your filth upon my person, as you call it. But if thou knew how real a
friend I am to thy person, excess of kindness would make thee lick it all off
again.

Might make a marble weep to bear your verse. It seems then by you that those
of Oxford make such dull heavy verses, that it would make a Monument of Marble
like an overladen Ass, weep to bear the burden of them.

She heaved your fancies. What heavy leaden fancies are these that want such
heaving. Up heavy heels. But how high did she heave them, Phil? As high as the
other lead was heaved that covers the roof of your Churches and Chapels? Nay
higher. Above the very Pinacles, Mastix! She heaved your fancies higher then
the pride of all her pinnacles. A mavelous height, but the Jack-Daws of our
University sit higher then thus, so it seems that the souls of the sons of
your Mother Oxford are elevated, according to your Poetry, as high as the
bodies of the Jack-daws in the University of Cambridge. What large elevated
fancies have your Academicks that reach almost as ^arre as the eye and sense of
an ordinary Rustic! Your phansie's higher then the Pinnacles, his sight higher
then the Clouds, for he may see the Sun and the Stars too, if he be not
blind.

Go thy ways Phil, for an unmercifull wit. I perceive thou will not spare
neither Father Presbyter as thou call him, nor thy Mother, nor thine own
Brothers, but thou will break thy jest upon them. Well I now forgive thee
heartily for all thy abuses upon me, I perceive thou will not spare thy dearest
friends.

Observation 47.
Thou art not well acquainted with Gold, thou art not a man of that Metal.
Here, Magicus, thy want of Logic has made thee a little witty. For if thou
had understood that Comparison does not always imply any positive degree in
the things compared, this conceit had been stifled before the birth. Thou say
somewhere, that I am a thin, lean Philosopher; but I say, I am as fat as a hen
is on the forehead. Whether do I profess my self lean or fat now? As lean as
thou do. Now when I say as Orient as false gold, do I say that false gold is
Orient. Thou art a mere Auceps syllabarum, Magicus, or to look lower, a
Mouse-catcher in Philosophy.

Observation 48.
Philalethes, say you, writ this book to revenge his death. No, Now I think you
mention his death, only to bring this latin sentence into your Book. Et quis
didicit scribere in lucta lacrymarum and Atramenti.

Observation 49.
I excluded not thy censure but thy mercy. Thy words are, I expose it not to
the mercy of man but of God. But it is no exposall or hardship at all to be
exposed to mercy, therefore by mercy thou must needs understand censure.

Page 86. line 2. You skud like a dog by Nilus. Here your fancy is handsome
and apposite to what you would express, but that which you would express is
false. For I fear no Crocodile, but the fate of AEsops dog who catching at the
shadow lost the substance. Because I more then suspect that there is nothing
real in those places I passed by, but only tremulous shadows of an unsettled
fancy.

Page 87. line 21. Did not I bid thee proceed to the censure of each part? What
is your meaning, Philalethes! That you would have me confute all, right or
wrong? No, Phil, I have done as S. George in his combat with the Drogon,
thrust my spear under the Monsters wing, into the parts which are most weak or
least scaly. What I have excepted against was with judgment and reason, and so
good, that all that I have said hitherto, stands as strong and unshaken of thy
weak reasonings and impotent raylings, as rocks of Adamant and Pillars of
Brass at the shooting off of a Childs Eldern-Gunne against them. Let Us now
see how like a Man thou have quit thy self in the ensuing Discourse.

Anima Magica Abscondita. SECT. IX.
The shrimpishnesse of the second part of Eugenius his Answer. His maim^d
definition of Nature. That Form is not known otherwise then by its operations.
Of the union of the Soul with the Body. That the Soul is not Intelligent Fire
proved by sundry arguments.

WEll, Eugenius, I have now perused this second part of thy Answer, which does
not answer at all in proportion to thy first. How lank! how little is it! Thou
have even wearyed thy self with scolding, and now thou art so good natured as
to draw to an end. Faint, Phil, Faint? let me feel thy pulse. Assuredly it
strikes a Myurus, which is a sign thou art languid at the heart. Or is thy
book troubled with the Cramp, and so has its legs twitch'd up to its breech?
or has it been on Procrustes his bed and had the lower parts of it cut off?
Whatever the Cause is, the Effect is apparent; that thou art wrinkled up at the
end like a Pigs tail, and shriveled on heaps like a shred of parchment. How
many sober passages of Morality? How many weighty Arguments of Reason? How many
Froli^ks of wit have thou slipped over and not so much as mentioned, much less
applied any suitable answer? But I hope thou will make good use of them silently
with thy self, and rectify thy fancy hereafter by my judgment, though thou
think it as harsh, as standing on the Presbyteriall stool, to give me
public thanks. In the mean time, Reader, be contented, that I only reply to
what he has thought good to oppose. But what he runs away from so cowardly,
I will not run after him with it, nor be so cruel as to force him to abide.

Observation 1.
Page 91. line 9. It is plain then, that the body and substance of the
definition is contained in these few words, Principium motus and quietis. Why,
Magicus, because you make up the rest with thinking? Suppose thy Picture were
drawn to the waste, and thou thoughtest of the rest of thy body. Does that
picture therefore contain the full draught of thy body? Away, thou Bird of
Athens.

Observation 2.
You tell me a form cannot be known otherwise then by what it can do or
operate. I told thee so Phil, and do tell thee so again. And thou only deniest
it, thou do not disprove it; wherefore Phyllis is mine yet, and not the
willow Garland; but the willow Rod is thine, for not learning this plain lesson
any better all this while. For, (to speak to thy own sense and conceit of the
Soul, that it is an Intelligent Fire, or Light) thou can not frame any notion
of Intelligent, but from intellectual operations; nor of Light, but from what
it operates upon thy sense, thy sight; which is a truth most evidently plain to
any man that is not stark blind.

Page 92. line 5. You say Mastix, I have not considered the difference added in
the definition of Nature. No, You had not when you cavilled at the Genus, as
angry at it, because it did not monopolize the whole office of the definition
to it self, and supply also the place of a Difference. Fond Cavil! But thou
supposed'st, it seems, that I would never deigne to answer so unclean an
Adversary as thou have shown thy self, and that thy Readers would never take
the pains to see whether thou spoke true or false; and that has made thee say
any thing, and that with undaunted confidence and foulest insultations, that
the simple might be sure to believe thee, without any more ado. Eugenius, enjoy
thou the applause of the simple. (...). --
But one wise man to me is as much as ten thousands of such, and infinite
swarms of them not so much as one. I am fully of Heraclitus his mind for that,
Philalethes.

Observation 3.
Here, Philalethes, you contemning Definitions made from the proper Operations
of the things defined, I intimate to you, that you necessarily imply, that you
look after the knowledge of a stark-naked substance, which is impossible ever
to be had. What do you answer to this? Nothing. Let the Reader judge else.

Observation 4.
Let any body compare thy Finihabia with the expositions of those terms (...)
and (...), made by Julius Scaliger (for it is he that is more cunning at
nonsense then the devil, not I) and he shall find that thou have spent a page
and an half here to no purpose, but only to show some few faint flashes of
wit. For at last thou do acknowledge the aptness and significancie of the
words, but still complainest that there is no news of the substance of the soul
in them. To which I answer again, A substance is a thing impossible to be kno^n
otherwise then by its proper operations, or peculiar relations to this or that,
as I have often inculcated. But how do you take away this answer? Only by
making a wry mouth, Away! away! Have I not already demonstrated unto thee, that
it is impossible to know substances themselves, but only by their operations?
Here he answers again, that that cannot be; For then a Plowman would be as wise
as himself, and mother Bunch as his mother Oxenford. But to satisfy this
inconvenience, (if it be any, to grant a Plowman wiser then thou art) I say,
Thou and thy mother may be wiser then a Plowman in other things, though not in
this; and in this, if your notion be more adequate and precise then his is,
that is, If you are able, according to the Rules of Logic, to examine whether
your assertion may go for an axiom, that is, (...), or (...), and are able to
rest fatisfied, by finding your selves to know according to the capacity of the
subject. But now, Phil. you endeavor to go so far beyond the Plowman, that
you fall short of him, and reach at so high strains, that you have strained
your self till you seem half cracked to the sober. For this truth, That a
Substance is not to be known, but by its proper operations, is a truth so
clear, that it is clear that he is destitute of sight and judgment, that does
not discern it even at the first proposal.

Observation 5, 6, 7.
What thou answerest to these 5th, 6th, and 7th Observations is nothing at all
to the purpose, and therefore to no purpose at all to answer any thing to them,
as I have already said in the like case, and I must leave something to the
candor and judgment of the Reader.

Observation 8.
Page 97. line 1. Mastix, you place the difficulty in the Rudiments or Sperms,
because they are lax and fluid. No, Magicus, but I do not. For I think they are
always so, or else the Ratio Seminalis would have a hard task of it. But when
thou say, That the Anima in the Matter missing a vent, etc. the difficulty
is, how a thing so subtle as a Soul is, should miss a vent in so lax a matter
as the first Rudiments of life. This is the difficulty, Magicus. But thou
understandest not the force of any thing I propound to thee, thy apprehension
is so out of tune with straining at high things nothing to the purpose. But I
perceive, though thou would dissemble it, Magicus, that I have beat thee from
the Bung-hole, and that rude expression borrowed thence. And now thou art as
busy as a Moth about a candle, to fetch a Metaphor thence. For thou tellest
us, that this union is like that betwixt the candle and the flame. This indeed
for some Poetical illustration may do well: but what Philosophical
satisfaction is there in it, Philalethes? For first, the flame is without the
candle, not in it; but the Soul within the body, not without it. Secondly, the
flame is ^n effect of the candle, but the Soul is not an effect of the body,
the body is not the pabulum thereof, and the very substance of which it is
made, by superinducing a new modification. Thirdly, and lastly, the Soul is
still the same individual soul; but the flame is no more the same flame, then
the water betwixt such and such banks of the river, is still the same water, If
thou had put thy finger into thy nose, and said, Lo the mystery of the union
of the Soul and Body; it had been as much Philosophical satisfaction as this,
from the union of flame and candle. Thou pitiful puzzled thing! thou are not
yet able to weigh what thou say. And now I have drove thee from the flame of
the candle, thou have scudded away quite into the dark, flown to I know not
what strange obscure expressions, a story, of old grand-dame Nature, with a set
Ruff and a gold chain about her neck, which thou call propinquity of
Complexions, and I know not what. I prithee how much does this differ from
Sympathy and Antipathy, which all knowing men call Asylum ignorantiae: and now
I have drove thee thither, I will leave thee in that Sanctuary of fools, What I
have said, I have already made good, That the Souls union with the Body is more
Theomagicall then Magicus himself is aware of.

Observation 9.
Page 98. line 16. This aethereall sense and Fire of simple Air, both which he
makes to be one and the same thing. All that I say there is, That those verses
are understood of the vehicle of the soul, not of the soul it self; and it is
Theupolus his opinion as well as mine, who cites those verses of Virgil, and
gives that sense of them; to wit, that the twofold vehicle of the soul is
there meant, the AEthereall and Spirituous, not the Soul it self, Academic.
Contemplat. lib. 4. So that Virgil does not at all patronize thy gross conceit
of making the Soul consist of fire and air.

Page 99. line 10. I grant the soul to be a hodily substance that has
dimensions too. Why Phil? Is there any bodily Substances without dimensions? I
could very willingly grant thee a mere body without a soul, thou have so little
reason and sense in thee; or if thou have a soul, that it is a corporeal one,
and it may well be so: But my question is meant of souls that have Sense and
Reason in them, whether they be corporeal substances or no? Yes, say you, they
are. They are intelligent Fire and Light. I say, Phil. thou art all fire, but
no light, nor intelligent at all. Thou art the hottest fellow that ever I met
with in all my days, as hot as a Taylours Goose when it hisseth, and yet as
dark. But let us endeavor (if it be possible) to vitrifie thy opake carcass,
and transmit a little light into th^e. Do thou know then what fire is? how
it is a very fluid body, whose particles rest not one by another, but fridge
one against another, being very swiftly and variously agitated. In this
condition is the matter of fire. But now I demand of thee; Is there any
substance in this fire thou speak of, (for thou say it is really fire,
and usest no Metaphor) which we may call the essential Form thereof, or no? If
there be, I ask thee whether that Form be Intelligent or no? If it be, then
that is the soul, and this subtle agitated matter is ^ut the vehicle. But if
thou will say, that the subtle fiery matter is the Intelligent Soul, see what
inconveniences thou intanglest thy self in. For Fire being as homogeneall a
body as water is, and having all the parts much what alike agitated; how can
this fire do those offices that commonly are attributed to the soul? First, how
can it organize the body into so wise a structure and contrivement, the parts
of this fire tending as much this way as that way, or at least tending only
one way, suppose upward. Secondly, how can it inform the whole body of an
Embryo in the womb, and of a grown man? For if it was but big enough for the
first, it will be too little for the latter; unless you suppose it to grow,
and to be nourished. But thus, you will not have the same Individual Soul you
was Christened with, and must be forced to turn not only Independent, but
Anabaptist, that your new soul may be baptized; for it is not now the same that
you was Christened with before. For I say, that ten spoonfulls of water added
to one should rather individuate the whole, then that one of that whole number
should individuate the ten. Thirdly, how can it move it self, or the body in a
spontaneous way? For all the particles of this fiery matter wriggling and
playing on their own centers, or jointly endeavoring to tend upwards, makes
nothing to a spontaneous motion, no more then the Atoms of dust that are seen
playing in the Sun beams, striking through a chink of a wall into a dark room,
can conspire into one spontaneous motion, and go which way they please.

Wherefore I say, there ought to be some superintendent Form that takes hold of
all these fiery particles and commands them as one body, and guides them this
way or that way, and must be the (...) of this fiery substance, that is, There
must be such an essence in this fiery matter (and that is noted by the
preposition (...)) as does (...) and (...) that does hold together, that does
drive this way, according to its nature or will, and yet thus driving does keep
possession of this fiery Matter; and what is this but ^ Soul? not the indument,
the smock or peticote of the Soul as thou call'st it. Eugenius, thou art old
excellent at finding out naked essences, it seems, that take the garment for
the body. Thou art so young that thou can not distinguish betwixt a living
barn, and a baby made of clouts. But this is not all that I have to say Phil.
Fourthly, I say that this Fire cannot be the Soul, because fire is devoid of
sense. I but you say you understand an Intelligent fire. Learnedly answered,
and to as much purpose as if you should say, that a Soul is a Post or a Pillar,
and then you should distinguish and tell me; you meant an Intelligent Post or
Pillar, but I say Fire has no more sense then a Post or Pillar has reason. For
if it have sense, it must have that which the Schools call Sensus communis. And
now tell me Phil, to which of all the playing particles of this Ignis fatuus of
thine thou will appoint the office of the Sensus communis, or why to any one
more then to the rest? But if thou appoint all, there will be as many several
sensations, as there are particles: Indeed so many distinct living things. And
thou will become more numerous within, then the possessed in the Gospel, whose
name was Legion, because they were many. But if thou will pitch upon any one
particle above the rest, tell me where it is? In the middle or at the outside
of this fire? I will interpret thee the most favorably, and answer for thee;
In the middle. But I demand of thee, Why shall this in the middle have the
privilege of being the Sensus Communis rather then any other, or how will it
be able to keep it self in the middle in so fluid a body? And if it were kept
there, what privilege has it but what the most of the rest have, as well as
it, to make it fit for the office of a Sensus Communis? For it must be, either
because it is otherwise moved on its Center, then the other are on theirs,
which you can not prove either to be, or if it were, to be to any purpose: Or
it must be, because it has some advantage in consideration of the joint motion
of the particles. Let the joint motion therefore of the particles be either
rectilinear or circular. If rectilinear, as suppose in a square, let the
process of motion be from side to side parallel. Has not then any particle in
a right line that is drawn through the center of this Square figure, parallel
to two of the sides, equal advantage for this office (the transmission of
outward sense being perpendicular to the said right line) that the middle
particle has? For thus it can receive but what comes in one line, transmission
of sense being parallel, as is supposed. Nay, the points of any other inward
line parallel to this, will do as well as the points of this middle line, which
is as plainly true, as two and two is four, if thou understandest sense when it
is propounded to thee. Well, but it may be you may think you can mend your self
by supposing the joint motion of this fiery matter to be circular. I say no.
For then that of this motion, that respects external objects is from the
Center to the Circumference, as it is plain in that ordinary experiment of a
Sling. And thus motion is from the middle particle, not toward it. But you
should say here, if you could answer so wisely, that motion bearing forward
from this center toward the object, that reciprocally the object will bear
against it; and so there will be a transmission of sense round about from all
the circumferentiall parts of this fiery Orb which thou calledst the naked
soul. But I say, Magicus, if the middle point of this Orb get the place of the
Sensus Communis, because there is a common transmission of motion from sensible
Objects thereunto: I say then that there be more Sensus Communes in this Orb
then One, because such transmissions as are not perpendicular to this Orb, will
meet in several points distant from the middle point or center of this Orb,
and there are enough such external transmissions as these. I might add also,
that the middle point or particle being though a minute one, yet a body, and
consequently divisible, that that will also bid fair for a multiplicity of
Common Senses. But I will add only this, That I hope to see the day wherein
thou will be so wise as to be able to confess, that the Author of
Anthroposophia Theomagica, etc. was the most confident Ignaro that ever wet
paper with ink. But before I leave this fourth argument, let me only cast in
one thing more which equally respects both Hypotheses, either of rectilinear or
circular motion. And that is this, If any one particle of this fiery substance
be the Common sense, it must be also the principle of spontaneous motion to the
whole substance. For we see plainly that that which has the Animadversive
faculty in man, or the office of Common sense, moves the whole man, or that the
motion of him is directed at the beck of this. But I prithee Phil, tell me if
thou can possibly imagine, that any one particle in this fiery substance
should be able to impresse spontaneous Motion upon the whole; I know thou can
not but think it impossible. Fifthly, if the Soul be fire (fire being so fluid
and unsteddy a substance) how can there be any memory in it? You remember that
expression in Catullus, whereby he would set forth sudden obl^teration and
forgetfulness of things, that it is like writing in the Water or in the Air,
In vento aut rapida scribere oportet aqua.
But what think you of fire then, will that consistency bear more durable
characters? The perpetual fridging and toying of the fiery particles dorh
forthwith cancel whatever is impressed, and now there is neither Common sense
nor Memory to be found in your fire, we may be secure there is no Reason to be
found there. For the Discursive Faculty requires some (...), something fixed to
tread upon as well as the Progressive: But in your fire all is aflote, nothing
fixed. Sixthly and lastly, If the Soul of man be either fire or air, or both, I
do not see that it will prove immortal; but that its consistency will be
dispersed and scattered like the clouds. It will not be able to conflict with
the boistrous winds, or escape blowing out, or being lost in the thin air, as
other flames are, it once being uncased of the armature of the body. And these
Vehicles which you will have to be the very Soul it self, they being so
changeable and passive within the body, it will not be absurd with Lucretius to
infer that they will be utterly dissolved when they are without: Haec igitur
tantis ubi morbis corpore in ipso
Iactentur, miserisque modis distracta laborent,
Cur eadem credis sine corpore, in aere aperto,
Cum validis ventis aetatem degere posse?


To this sense, If in the body racked with tort'rous pain
And tossed with dire disease they are wearied so;
This shelter lost, how can they then sustain
The strong assaults of stormy winds that blow?
I tell thee Phil, such a Soul as thou fanciest would be no more able to
withstand the winds, then the dissipable clouds, nor to understand any more
sense then a Soul of clouts, or thy own Soul does.

But now I have so fully confuted thy gross opinion of the Soul, it may be
happily expected that I would declare mine own. But Phil, I only will declare
so much, that I do not look on the Soul as a Peripateticall atome, but as on a
spiritual substance, without corporeal dimensions, but not destitute of an
immateriall amplitude of Essence, dilatable and contractible. But for further
satisfaction in this point, I refer to my Philosophical Poems. And do
profess that I have as distinct, determinate, and clear apprehension of these
things, and as wary and coherent, as I have of any corporeal thing in the
world. But Heat and Fantastry to suddled minds are as good companions as
Caution and Reason to the sober. But the durablenesse of that satisfaction is
uncertain, whereas solid Reason is lasting and immutable.

SECT. X.
The Confutation of Eugenius his Magical Chain explained and confirmed. His
arguments for knowledge or understanding in the Seminall Forms of things
utterly subverted. The fondness of his definition of the first principle of
his Clavis: A demonstration that the stars receive not any light from the
Sun. Eugenius taxed of Enormous incivility. Mastix his friend vindicated. His
Conjecture of Magia Adamica. His censure of the present ill temper of Eugenius.

Observation 10. Page 101.
MY Book also informs you that this Descent of light proceeds not from any
weight, but from a similitude and Symbol of Nature. You are indeed very good
at similitudes Phil. as I have proved heretofore out of your skill in
Zoography. But this is another business. For here you profess to speak of the
symbolizing and sympathizing of things one with another in Nature, and so
mutually moving to union, by a kind of attractive power, according to that
saying (...).
Well be it so that there is a mutual attractive power in things that
symbolize one with another (for the attraction is mutual as well as the
similitude mutual) What is this to take away what I have objected? Nothing.
But I will show you how you are hanged in your own chain. For it is as plain,
as one of the (...), that where two things of the same nature act, the greater
is stronger, and the stronger prevails. Wherefore three portions of light
should fetch up two, or five one; rather then one should fetch down three, or
five, or two. This is the bare point of my reason which I covered with a double
comparison. viz. from the greater number of the lincks of a Chain
preponderating the less number, and from the greater portion of Earth
prevailing over the less; as in that instance, when a clod taken from the
earth and let go in the free air, the earth commands it back to it self again,
according to that conceit of Magnetisme. And here the argument was a pari, not
a specie, and there may be a collation of parity even in contraries. And your
ignorance of that Logical Notion, has enabled you to rayl so much, and speak
so little to the purpose on this Observation, as any Logician may very easily
discern.

Observation 13.
Page 103. line 14. Answer if thou dare to any one of these Questions. Assure
thy self, Eugenius, I can give a very rational answer to every one of them.
But for thy sake I think fit to answer none of them. But what is in my
Philosophical Poems will salve them all.

I will now rather examine what force of Arguments you have to prove that that
which orders Matter into shape and form, is Animadversive and Intelligent.

Your first Argument is; that if there were no Animadversion in the Ratio
Seminalis, (or call it what you will) that shapes the Matter into Form, the
Agent would mistake in his work.

Secondly, That he would work he knew not what, nor wherefore, and that
therefore all Generations would be blind Casualties.

Thirdly, there would not be that Method, infallibility of Action nor
proportion and Symmetry of parts in the work.

Fourthly and Lastly, That there would be no End nor Impulsive cause to make
him to work.

To all these unsound Reasons, I have already answered very solidly and truly;
That the force of them reached no further then thus: That the Ratio Seminalis
must at least proceed from something that is knowing, and be in some sense
Rational, but not have reason and animadversion in it self. And this is the
opinion of Plotinus, Marsilius Ficinus, and all the Platonists that I have met
with. (...), etc. Ennead. 2. lib. 3. To this sense. For the Ratio Seminalis
acts in the Matter, and that which acts thus naturally, neither understands nor
sees, but has only a power to transform the Matter, not knowing any thing,
but making only as it were a form or shape in the water. And Ficinus compares
this Ratio Seminalis, to an Artifice cut off from the mind of the Artificer and
made self-subsistent, and able to work upon prepared matter, but without
knowledge, as being disjoined from all animadversive essence. This is the right
notion of the (...). And this fully takes away the force of all your Arguments.
For these being divine art imbodied in Nature and Matter, and working
naturally, they will

First, Mistake no more, then a Stone will in its journey downwards, or the
Fire in its course upward; which go always right, if no external obstacle
hinder them. And these will work right, if the Matter be duly prepared.

Secondly, Though they work they know not what, yet they work right in virtue
of that cause from whence they came, the divine Intellect: and their operation
is no more casual then the ascent of Fire, and descent of Earth; for it is
natural.

Thirdly, This third falls in with the second, and the same answer will serve
both.

Fourthly, There is an Impulsive cause and End of their working, though unknown
to them, yet not unknown to the Author of them. As in the orderly motion of a
Watch the Spring knows not the end of its Motion, but the Artificer does. Yet
the watch moves, and orderly too, and to a good End. But this fourth falls in
also with the second or first. And you see now that they are indeed all fallen
to nothing at all. So easily is Confidence overcome when unbacked with solid
Reason.

Observation 16, 19.
Page 107. line 5. Did ever man scribble such ridiculous impertinencies? Never
any man before Eugenius Philalethes. But why will you scribble such stuff,
Phil. that will put you to the pains of reproaching of it when you have done?
My exception against your definition of the first principle of your Clavis was
as solid as merry. For, One in one, and One from one, is no definition of any
one thing in the world. For definitio, or (...), is a bounding and limiting
what you define. But here is no bounds nor limits at all. For every thing that
is, is One in one, and One from one, viz. in one world and from one God. And
then in your other attempt this way, to define it, A pure white Virgin walking
in shades and Tiffanies, is a mere foolery in Philosophy, and teaches nothing
but that your fancy is very feminine. Now in answer to all this, you contrive
two ridiculous paralogisines, and then laugh at them when you have done.

Page 108. line 8. Made their God Jupiter an Adulterer. And you Eugenius,
bestow a wife on the God of Israel, and make her after an Adulteress, and then
call me blasphemous for deriding your folly.

Page 109. line 14. Which thou do blasphemously call pitiful services. Yes,
Philalethes, And I ought to call them so, in comparison of that high good that
is intended to us by Scripture. They are pitiful things indeed in comparison of
that. And thou art a pitiful fellow to make an Independent of, that have no
more wit nor Christianity in thee then to call this blasphemy. But a man may
easily discern how religious thou art, though by Moon light, at the latter end
of the 110 page, where thou do display thine own Immomodesty, by talking of
displaying of Petticotes.

Observation 20.
Line 5. The Stars could not receive any light from the Sun. Now you show
how wise you are, in straining at so high a Philosophical notion. I tell thee,
Phil. the Stars cannot receive any light from the Sun, no more then this
earth can from one single star. For the Sun to our sight at the distance he
is from the fixed stars, would seem no bigger then they, if so big. For
according to the computation of Astronomers, the stars of the first magnitude
are really far bigger then the sun: yet you see how little light they impart
to the earth, and how very small they appear to us. And yet the lively
vibration of their light shows plainly that it is their own, not borrowed. So
that it is plain, that if the Sun and Stars be Man and Wife, this immense
distance makes them live in a perpetual divorce.

Observation 26.
Line 17. Now at last Reader, he perceives his error, and grants it no death
but a change. Therefore there needed none of your Correction. And I wish you
could of your self perceive yours too, that you may need none of mine. But I
perceive by what follows here, thou do not know my meaning by Spiritus
Medicus. Which I pardon in thee, thou do so seldom understand thy own.

Observation 42. 46.
Line 12. Otherwise grass could not grow on the banks of it all the year
long. I said the fringes of Reeds and Flags, and those gayer ornaments of herbs
and flowers, could not grow all the year long on the banks of Yska, if it were
a river in Great Britain or Ireland. What is now become of thy faint Ha ha he?

Line 14. He thinks Yska runs to heaven. Do I so, Phil? why then I gave thee
friendly counsel when I bid thee fling thy self into its stream. For then thou
would with ease have gone along with the stream to heaven, when others are
fain to row hard against the stream, and scarce arive thither when they have
done all they can. I knew thy meaning by thy mumping, Phil. but thou
expressedst it so disadvantagiously, that thou gave me good occasion to be
merry with thee. But thou have no mirth nor urbanity at all in thee, but wrath
and foul language, which without any heed or discretion thou flingest upon
every one that comes in thy way. And here in this 114 page, thou bidst fair for
the calling of that noble Philosopher Descartes, knave, as heretofore thou
did call him fool. What Wit, Civility, or Judgment is there in this
Philalethes? Thou art resolved to be recorded to posterity the most immortal
and ignorant man that ever appeared yet in public. But thou have as much
confuted his Philosophy, by saying it is a Whim and a Wham, as thou have
solidly answered thy Observatour. I have made it apparent, that thou have not
spoke sense scarce to any one thing I objected against thee. But have
discovered thy gross ignorance in Logic and Philosophy so far, that I
profess I did not suspect thou had been any thing near so weak as I have
found thee: but I willingly leave the censure of it to the Judicious. I will
only speak thus much in favor to thee and for thy excuse, that the strength
of thy passion may very well have more then ordinarily weakened thy reason.

Now for that Ingenuous young Gentleman, the smartnesse of whose Poetry has so
wrung thee, and vexed thy guts, that it has brought upon thee the Passio
Iliaca, and made thee so foul mouthed, I will only say so much, Phil. and
speak within compass, that he has more wit and Philosophy in one hair of his
head, then thou have in thy whole noddle. And that his verse was not obedient
to my prose; but the Muses were very obsequious to his wit and humor of
representing thee such as thou art. And in this only he was no Poet, in that
he does not write Fictions as thou do in prose. But it seems he has so paid
thee home, that the sense of my gentle strokes are struck out by his quicker
lash. For thou say I am a good harmless sneaking Observatour, thy Ala^.
that is, thy, thou know not what, but no Mastix by no means, but only one
that gave thee a flap with a fox-tail. Verily, thou say true, I did not
intend to hurt thee, and thou make me so weak as if I were not able. Why
do thou raise then so mighty Trophies upon the victory of so harmless and
unable an enemy? For as inconsiderable as I am, to make himself considerable to
the world, he makes a Colosse, a Giant, a Monster of nine acres long of me. But
how can this consist with thy putting me up into a little box. Parturiunt
montes -- or rather, Debiscunt montes, tandem intrat ridiculus mus. The Colosse
falls, the Mountains gape, and at length enters in the merry Mouse. An
excellent jest my Masters! But why into a box with wire grates, rather then
into an iron cage, as Tamberlain used Bajazeth, and so carried him up and down
in triumph? I wonder thou did not take this jest by the Turkish Mustachoes,
rather then that. But this it is, to have a wit no larger then a
Mouse-catchers; or a fancy heaved up no higher then the pinacles of Oxenford.
Thou will in time, Phil. make a fellow of a fit size to show the Lions and
Rattoon at the Tower; and I suppose thou fawnest upon the Independents so as
thou do, to get their good will for the next reversion of that office. But
enough my Philalethes, of levity and folly. I will not abuse my liberty to
excess, only let me in some way answer the expectation of those that may
happily expect my censure of thy Magia Adamica. But I shall not so much answer
it, as frustrate it: for I profess, I take no pleasure in the censuring of any
man's writings; I can employ my self better. I was in a very merry frolic when
I ventured upon this; yet the Judicious may discern that there was sobriety
enough at the bottom of all that mirth. But as for this Magia Adamica, I
confess I have not read it; but I do favorably conjecture, that the Author
thereof is as well skilled in those books of Magic that Adam read by the
fireside in winter nights, while Eve held to him the candle, as any young man
is in these European parts. I let Adamicus alo^e, my business is only with
Anthroposophus, over whom now I having so full a victory, it will be expected,
perhaps, that I lead him about in triumph. But I must answer my friends in
Christian soberness, that I am the right Philalethes, a lover of truth more
then a lover of victory, and of victory more then of triumph; -- satis est
prostrasse leoni.
Only I will say, not of his Person, but of that Dispensation and Genius in
which he is in for the present; Lo, there lies the contagious spectrum of
Ephesus, which I have discovered to be the pest of the Commonwealth of
learning, and of humane and divine reason, as much as that demoniacall
imposture was the walking plague of that famous city: and now he has been
pelted a little with hard language, as Apollonius commanded the Ephesians to
stone that hypocritical old Mendicant with stones, he appears in the very same
shape with him at the uncovering of the heap, that is, an uggly huge black
Mastife sprawling for life, and foaming forth a^undance of filthy stinking
scum, after the manner of mad dogs. And thus have I approved my self wise as
Apollonius, in discovering imposture; and valiant as Hercules, who
over-mastered that (...), as Dionysius calls him, that brazen-barking Cerberus.

SECT. XI.
Mastix his Oration to the men of Ephesus. A threfold dispensation under which
Christians are. The way to be delivered from the Impostures and Fooleries of
the second Dispensation. The nature of the third Dispensation or second
Covenant. In what sense Mastix is Puritan or Independent. That he is above all
Sects whatsoever as Sects. The Transfiguration of his inward man into a
breathing Colosse, speaking from Heaven, and what he thence utters. That Mastix
is no Enthusiast for all this. His friendly and faithful Monitions to
Eugenius, freely discovering to him the true causes of his being defeated in
his great designs upon Fame, and Knowledge. That a wise man will not only not
be hurt but be profited by his Enemy.

ANd now, O men of Ephesus! I mean all you that reap the fruit of this noble
exploit of mine, rear me up my deserved Trophey, and inscribe this Tetrastich
upon it, for an everlasting monument of your gratitude to me, and love to the
truth: Religions Heat as yet unpurged quite
From fleshly sense and self, when it makes a stir
About high Myst^ries above Reasons light,
Is at the bottom but a rabid Curre.


But that I may conceal nothing from you, O men of Ephesus, I must tell you,
that whether you rear up this monument, or whether you forbear all is one. For
the truth of these verses is already written in the corner stones of the
Universe, and engraven on the lasting pillars of Eternity. Heaven and earth may
pass away, but no^ one tittle of this truth shall pass away. High and windy
Notions do but blow up and kindle more fiercely the fire of Hell in the hearts
of men, from whence is Pride, and Contention, and bitter Zeal. This is the pest
and plague of Mankind, and the succeeding torture of the sons of Adam. For
while the mind of man catches at high things, of which she is incapable till
she be refined and purged, she does but fire the frame of her little world by
her overbusie Motion, which burning in gross fuel, fills all with smoke. And
thus the Soul is even smothered and stifled in her narrow mansion. Her first
enlargement here must therefore be, by Temperance and Abstemiousnesse: For
without this breathing-hole for fresh air, Devotion it self will choke her
still more and more, heating her thick and polluted spirits in such sort, that
they cannot be sufficiently rectified by the power of the brain. But in this
Dispensation especially is lodged a strong voice, weak sense, and a rude
contempt of any thing that will trouble the head, as Reason, Philosophy, or any
but ordinary subtilty in learning. But they love Christ very heartily after
their gross way, as their Protector and Securer from what outward evil
naturally attends so bad an inward condition. But being so immersed in brutish
sense, and yet with conscience of sin; if any body have but the trick to
persuade them that Sin is but a name, he will be a very welcome Apostle to
them, and they will find more ease to their beastly nature, in fancying nothing
to be sin, then they did in making their Hypocritical addresses to an
offended Savior. And then (poor souls) through the foulness of the flesh,
are they easily inveigled into Atheism it self. In so great danger are we of
the most mischievous miscarriages, by contemning of tho^^ known and confessed
virtues of Temperance, Continence, and Chastity.

But we will suppose Men in a great measure temperate; yet how far off are they
still from real happiness in themselves, or from not disturbing the
happiness of others, so long as Envy, Ambition, Covetousness, and
Self-respect does still lodge in them? Here indeed Reason may happily get a
little more elbow-room; but it will be but to be Patron to those vices, and to
make good by Argument harsh opinions of God, and peremptorily to conclude the
power of Christ weaker then the force of sin. And the Fancy in these
something more refined Spirits, will be more easily figurable into various
conceits, but very little to the purpose. Of which some must go for sober
Truths, and those that are more fully shining, in the midst of a shadowy
Melancholiz'd imagination, must bid fair for Divine Inspiration, though neither
Miracle nor Reason countenance them. But you, O men of Ephesus! if any one tell
you strange devises, and forbid you the use of your Reason, or the demanding of
a Miracle; you will be so wise as to look upon him as one that would bid you
wink with your eyes, that he might the more easily give you a box of the Ear,
or put his hand into your Pockets.

Now out of this Second Dispensation, innumerable swarms of Sects rise in all
the world. For Falsehood and Imagination is infinite, but Truth is one. And the
benignity of the Divine Spirit, having no harbor in all this variety of
religious Pageantry; Envy, Covetousness, and Ambition must needs make them
bustle, and tear all the word in pieces, if the hand of Providence did not hold
them in some limits: Quin laniant mundum; tanta est discordia fratrum:
as he says of the winds. In this Dispensation lodges Anger and active Zeal
concerning Opinions and Ceremonies, Uncertainty and Anxiety touching the
purposes of God, and a rigid injudicious Austerity, of which little comes but
the frighting men off from Religion: which notwithstanding if it be had in the
truth thereof, is the most cheerful and lovely thing in the world. These men
having not reached to the Second Covenant, will also thank any body that could
release them from the First, For whereas true Religion is the great joy and
delight of them that attain to it, theirs is but their burden. And so it is not
impossible that these may be also wound off to the depth of wickedness, and
sink also in time even to Atheism it self. For what is real in them will
work, but what is imaginary will prove it self ineffectuall. Wherefore, is it
not far better for men to busy all their strength in destroying those things
which are so evidently destructive of humane felicity, then to edge their
spirits with fiery notions and strange Fantasmes, which pretend indeed to the
semblance of deep mysterious knowledge and divine speculation; but do nothing
hinder but that the black dog may be at the bottom, as I said before?

But you will ask me, How shall we be rid of the Importunity of the impostures
and fooleries of this Second Dispensation. But I demand of you, Is there any
way imaginable but this? viz. To adhere to those things that are
uncontrovertedly good and true, and to bestow all that zeal, and all that heat,
and all that pains for the acquiring of the simplicity of the life of God, that
we do in promoting our own Interest, or needless and doubtful Opinions. And I
think it is without controversy true to any that are not degenerate below men,
that Temperance is better then Intemperance, Justice then Injustice; Humility
then Pride, Love then Hatred, and Me^cifulnesse then Cruelty. It is also
uncontrovertedly true, that God loves his own Image, and that the propagation
of it is the most true dispreading of his glory; as the Light which is the
Image of the Sun, is the glory of the Sun. Wherefore it is as plainly true,
that God is as well willing, as able to restore this Image in men, that his
glory may shine in the world. This therefore is the true Faith, to believe that
by the power of God in Christ we may reach to the participation of Divine
Nature: Which is a simple, mild, benign light, that seeks nothing for it self
as it self; but does tenderly and cordially endeavor the good of All, and
rejoices in the good of All, and will assuredly meet them that keep close to
what they plainly in their consciences are convinced is the leading to it. And
I say, that sober Morality, conscienciously kept to, is like the morning light
reflected from the higher clouds, and a certain Prodrome of the Sun of
Righteousness it self. But when he is risen above the Horizon, the same
virtues then stream immediately from his visible body, and they are the very
members of Christ according to the Spirit. And he that is come hither, is a
pillar in the Temple of God for ever and ever; for he teaches the Second
Covenant, whic he can in no more likelihood break, then lay violent hands on
himself to the taking away of his natural life. Nay, that will be far more
easy then this; for a man may kill himself in a trice, but he cannot
extinguish this Divine life without long and miserable torture. If this be to
be a Puritan, Eugenius, I am a Puritan. But I must tell thee, that by how
much more a man precisely takes this way, the more Independent he will prove.
And the pure simplicity of the life of God revealed in Jesus Christ, will shine
with so amiable a luster in his inward mind, that all the most valuable
Opinions that are controverted amongst Churches and Sects, will seem no more
comely then a Fools coat compared with the uniform Splendor of the Sun. But
if thou meanest by either Puritan or Independent, one in the second
Dispensation, I should dissemble in the presence of Heaven, if I should not say
I am above them; as I am above all Sects whatsoever as Sects. For I am a true
and free Christian; and what I write and speak is for the Interest of Christ,
and in the behalf of the life of the Lamb which is contemned. And his Interest
is the Interest of the sons of men; for he has no Interest but their good
and welfare. But because they will not have him to rule, the Nations of the
world (by a Divine Nemesis) are given up into the hands of Wolves, Foxes, and
Lions: The earth is full of darkness and cruel habitations. Wherefore,
Eugenius, thou do very unskilfully, in endeavoring to tumble me off from
the Independents, to cast me amongst the Puritanes, as thou call them. For
it is not in thy power to cast me so low as any Sect whatsoever; God has
placed me in a Dispensation above them, and will thou throw me down? No,
Eugenius, I shine upon them both as the Sun in the Firmament, who does not
wink on one side, or withdraw his Rays, but looks openly upon all, imparting
warmth and light. Thou have encountered with a Colosse indeed (though thou
call me so but in sport and scorn) far bigger then that stradling Statue
at Rhodes, and that reaches far higher. And yet no Statue neither, but one
that will speak what nothing but Ignorance and Hypocrisy can deny. Wherefore
with my feet wading amidst the Sects of the earth and with my head stooping
down out of the Clouds, I will venture to try the world with this sober
question. Tell me therefore, O all ye Nations, People, and Kindreds of the
earth, what is the reason that the world is such a stage of misery to the
Sons of Men? Is it not from hence, That that which should be their great
Guidance, their Religion and highest Lights of their minds, is but Heat and
squabbling about subtle uncertain points, and foolish affectation of high
mysteries; while the uncontroverted sober truths of Virtue and Piety are
neglected, and the simplicity of the life of God despised, as a most
contemptible thing. And I had no sooner uttered these words in my mind, but me
thought I heard an Answer from all the Quarters of the World, from East, West,
North and South, like the noise of many waters, or the voice of Thunder,
saying, Amen. Halelujah. This is true.

Nor is this any vain Enthusiasme, Philalethes, but the triumph of the Divine
Light in my Rational Spirit, striking out to my exterior faculties, my
Imagination and Sense. For my head was so filled with the noise, that it felt
to me as bound and straitened, as being not able to contain it, and coldness
and trembling seized upon my flesh. But you will say, All this is but a
trivial Truth that you are so zealous and triumphant in. But verily, Eugenius,
is it not better to be zealous about those things that are plainly true, then
those that are either uncertain or false? It Is true, what I have said to thy
soaring mind may seem contemptible. But if thou once had the sight of that
Principle from whence it came, thou would be suddenly ashamed of that
patched clothing of thy soul, stitched up of so many unfutable and heedlesse
sigurations of thy unpurged fancy, and would endeavor to put on that simple
uniform light.

And now, Eugenius, that I find my self in an advantageous temper to converse
with thee, come a little nearer me, or rather I will come a little nearer to
thee. Hitherto I have played the part of a personated Enemy with thee, give me
leave now to do the office of an open Friend. I perceive there is in you, as
you have made it manifest to all the world, an eager desire after Knowledge,
and as insatiable thirst after Fame: both which are to be reputed far above
that dull and earthy pronenesse of the mind of some men, whose thoughts are
bent upon little else but the Bed and the Board. But I tell thee, that this
desire of thine being kindled so high in thy melancholy complexion, there arise
these three inconveniences from this inordinate heat.

First, Thy spirits are so agitated, that thou can not soberly and cautiously
consider the Objects of thy mind, to see what is truly consequent, what not;
and so thy reason goes much to wrack.

Secondly, Thy melancholy being so highly heated, it makes thee think
confidently thou have a Phantasme or Idea of a thing belonging to this or that
word, when thou have not; which is a kind of inward Frenzy, and answers to
the seeing of outward apparitions when there is nothing before the sight. Thus
art thou defeated in thy design of knowledge in divine and natural things by
this distemper.

But thirdly, The same untamed Heat causes Boldness, Confidence and Pride.
And hence arises thy Imprudence. For I tell thee, Eugenius, there is no such
imprudent thing in the world as Pride. Wot'st thou not what the humor of all
men is; how they think themselves no inconsiderable things in the world? You
know the story in Herodotus, how when the Greeks had overcome the Persians and
after it was debated amongst them, to whom the (...) belonged, who should have
the honor of being reputed most valiant in that service, every one did
acknowledge that next to himself Themistocles did best. Wherefore it is plain
that he that will not let any man go before him, provokes all men. Here
therefore was thy imprudence, Eugenius, that thou would take the (...) to thy
self without so much as any debate or asking leave, when every Galenist,
Aristotelean, Cartesian, and Theosophist, thinks it belongs to him as much as
to thee. Thus have thou provoked all men against thee, and made shipwreck of
thy fame, as well as fallen short of Learning. But you will say, why? what would
you have me to have done as some others do, who (though they be proud, yet) put
on a handsome dress of Modesty and squeamish Humility? That I tell thee had
been indeed something more like Prudence, which thy raised heat could not stoop
to, but I must confess it had been but a kind of Moral Sneaking. For as the
bending down of the upper parts of the Body, so that the tallness of the
stature thereof is concealed, is the Sneaking of the Body: so to make a man's
self more humble then he is, or less high-minded, is the Sneaking of the Soul.
But the first point of wisdom is to be really humble indeed. For an Humble
mind is as still as the night, and as clear as the noonday. So that it is able
without any impatiency or prejudice to discern all things, and rightly to judge
of all things. This Christian temper is so sober, and wise, that no Imposture
can surprise it, nor ever will it hurt it self by rashness and imprudency.
This is the heir of God, the treasury of all humane, divine, and natural
knowledge, and the delight and praise of men where ever it appears. But the
inseparable companions of haughtiness, are Ignorance, Shame, and Enmity. But
believe it, Eugenius, as this divine Humility is of more worth, so is it of
more labor then to find the Philosophers stone, or the famous Medicine you
talk of; I am certain of more consequence by ten thousand times. And me thinks
now at length through all those waves and rufflings of thy disordered mind, I
see something at the bottom in thee, O Eugenius, that begins to assent to what
I say, that begins to shine and smile, and look upon me as a very pleasant
Apostle, sent (not without providence) to toy and sport thee into a more sober
temper, and advertise thee of the highest good that the Soul of man is capable
of; and thou will I am confident very suddenly say, and that from thy heart,
that better are the wounds of a friend, then the kisses of an enemy. Or if thou
can not yet fancy him a friend that has worn the vizard of a foe so long,
yet I do not mistrust but that thou will be so wise, as, according to Xenophons
Principle, not only not to be hurt, but also to be profited by thine enemy.

An enemy indeed is not a thing to be embosomed and embraced, as the Satyr
would have done the fire when he first saw it, and therefore was forewarned by
Prometheus to abstain, (...),
(...).
But in the, mean time, that which it would pain or consume, may by observing
the right laws of using it, receive kindly warmth and vigor from it, and work
excellent things in virtue of its heat or light.

Did not Telephus heal his wound by his enemies spear? And had not Jason his
impostume cured by that weapon that was meant for his deadly dispatch? You know
also the story of Hiero, Eugenius, who when his enemy had upbraided him with
his stinking breath, chid his wife when he came home, because she never had it
discovered to him all^ that time of their living together: But she being very
honest and simple, told her husband that she thought all men's breaths smelt so.
You see then how much more easy it is, to hear what is true concerning us, of
our professed Adversaries, then of our bosom Friends.

But methinks I hear thee answer that neither a bosom Friend nor an embittered
Enemy can be competent judges of a man's vices or virtues: for the one would be
too favorable, and the other too severe. What then? would thou have some
Third thing, a mean betwixt both, (according to that known Aphorism (...))
whom thou might hope would prove an impartial judge? why, that is I, Phil.
whom, I dare say thou art confident to be no friend to thee; and I dare swear I
am no enemy. And therefore why should I despair, but that my fitness and skill
may prove as successful in allaying of Eugenius his tumor, as that
unskilful hand was lucky in lancing Iasons impostume.

And being once cured, do not then repine, that there was a time wherein thou
wast unsound, no more then Alexander the great, that he was once so little as
to be lodged within the narrow compass of his mothers womb; or Milo who at
length could lift an ox, that he was once so weak that he could not stir a
lamb.

And what think thou Phil. of Plato, Empedocles, Democritus, Socrates, and
other profound sages of the World, can you imagine that when they had arrived
to that pitch of knowledge, that it was any shame or regret to them, that there
was once a time when they knew not one letter of the Alphabet. Why then should
my Eugenius be troubled, that he was once Childish, Ignorant, Proud and
Passionate, when he is well cured of those distempers. We are what we are, and
what is past is not, and therefore is not to afflict us. But he that is more
anxious concerning Fame then Virtue, and seeks only to seem a gallant and
invincible thing to the whole world, when in the mean time his mind is very
weak and vulnerable. I know my Eugenius is so wise, that such a man as this,
will seem as irrational to him, as if one having by ill chance cut his shinne,
he should be less solicitous about healing of his leg then mending of his
stocken.

FINIS.
The Contents of Mastix his Letter.
1. THe reason why he permitted his Observations and Reply to be reprinted. 2.
Of David George and Jacob Behmen. 3. That there are two main ways of assenting
to truth viz. The Evidence of Reason, or the Vigor of Fancy, and to which of
these two Jacob Behmens complexion carried him. 4. The great use of that
Consideration, and a vindication of Jacob Behmen from the calumny of his
Adversaries. 5. Mastix suspects the objections here propounded to be his
friends own, though he dissemble it, but the willinglier answers to them for
his sake. 6. A general Apology for the mirth of his Observations. 7. An
Apology for the whole second Section of his Reply. 8. The Faith of the
Platonists and of Christians in reference to a blessed immortality in what they
agree and in what they differ, and the pre-eminence of the one above the other.
9. That God is not united after the same manner with every Christian, that he
is with Christ himself, and yet that God is communicated to every true
Christian. 10. Deification what it is, and how warrantable a term, and yet
discountenanced by Mastix, and the reason why. 11. That the Wise and Virtuous
are truly Kings and Priests according to the suffrage both of Christians and
Heathen Philosophers, and the reason why Mastix put on so gorgeous a Scheme of
grandiloquence toward his Antagonist. 12. That it is not Enthusiasme but
thankfulness to profess what knowledge we have, to have received it from God.
13. The vast difference betwixt Articles of Faith and Opinions, and the great
price Mastix sets on the one, though he slights the other. 14. That he is a
professed friend to all Sects whatsoever, provided that they revolt not from
the Essentialls of Christianity. 15. Bertius his partiality against the
Calvinists taxed, and that a conscientious Christian that keeps to the plain
truths of the Gospel, sits free and secure from the Distraction of Sects. 16.
Mastix his Opinion concerning the Quakers. 17. What may be the most dangerous
design of the devil in that Sect. 18. How to defeat this design of his; with
an intimation of the reason why God may permit this error to spread. 19.
Mastix his Dream of the beginning of the late commotions in England. 20. The
interpretation of his Dream. 21, The occasion of his Dream, and the comparing
thereof with the Figuration of his fancy by day into a breathing Colosse. 22.
That that fit was not properly Enthusiasme, but ordinary (though very vehement)
Devotion; and that there was nothing divine therein, but that truth which was
there uttered, viz. That the Christian life is far to be preserred before
conformity of Opinions. 23. What happened to Mastix nearest to the nature of
Vision or Enthusiasme of any thing that ever befell him, and his Descant
thereupon. 24. That the guidance of Dreams is more proper for Action then
Speculation, and more fit to determine us (when we are plainly at a loss) what
to do, then what to conceive in points of Philosophy or Religion. 25. Mastix
apologizeth for taking the liberty of telling his own Dreams, excusing himself
from the example of Cardan. 26. The reason why he sets himself so zealously and
professedly against Enthusiasme. 27. The exceeding great advantage the staid
and sad mind has above the light and merry. 28. Why Melancholy men may become
more holy and illuminate then others, and the great danger of miscarriage in
that Complexion.
Mastix his letter to a private Friend concerning his Reply.
SIR,
I Received yours ^ome three weeks or a month after the date thereof. I
suppose the tedious length of the way and many digressions, and by-visits of
the Bearer, made it to come so late; but it is not the more unwelcome or less
seasonable. Your good opinion of what I have wrote against Atheism is no small
satisfaction to me for my pains therein. For that men of so exquisite judgment
as your self allow of a Performance, it is to me a plain argument, that if
others do not concurre^ that the fault is more to be suspected in him that
reads, then in him that writes the Discourse.

1. If my Observations and Reply be shortly reprinted, as you hear, it is
through the importunity of our friend Parresiastes, who would not let me be
quiet till I had given him leave to do it. The strongest Engine that he had to
move me to it, was the consideration, that if I would not let them be reprinted
while I might amend such things as I thought fit, that they might hereafter be
republished whether I would or no, with what ever disadvantages hang upon them.

That you wish they were as effectual an Antidote against Enthusiasme, as That
other is against Atheism, it does imply that you think they are not; and I
thank you for your freedom in declaring your opinion; to which I willingly
subscribe. But Parresiastes will prefix a Treatise concerning the Nature,
Causes, Kinds, and Cure of Enthusiasme, that in my judgment will strike home
to the purpose^ so that mingling all together they may happily prove as
sovereign a Medicine against Enthusiasme as you conceive that other to be
against Atheisme^

2. Methinks he is something bold with some Authors that considerable men set
no small price upon. But let him look to that; You know the man and the manner
of his disposition, how free and exert he is, and what a sincere zeal he has to
the Truth. What he writes concerning David George and that other so near akin
to him, I must confess I dare not blame his boldness therein, they seeming to
me (so far as I can possibly fathom them) at the best but Enthusiastic
Sadduces. But as for Jacob Behmen I do not see but that he holds firm the
Fundamentalls of the Christian Religion, and that his mind was devoutly united
to the head of the Church, the crucified Jesus, to whom he breathed out this
short ejaculation with much Fervency of spirit upon his deathbed, Thou
crucified Lord Jesus, have mercy on me, and take me into thy kingdom. But
though I be very well assured of the sanctity of the Man, and look upon him as
one that is as much beyond the other two, as his boastings of his own person
are less then theirs who either equalized themselves with, or set themselves
above our Savior, who is God blessed for ever; yet it is to me no argument at
all, that whatsoever he writes is from an infallible spirit; But the case seems
to me to stand thus.

3. There being two main ways whereby our mind is won off to assent to
things. viz. The guidance of Reason, or The Strength and vigor of Fancy; and
according to the complexion or constitution of the body we being led by this
Faculty rather then by that, suppose, by the strength or fullness of Fancy
rather then the closeness of reason (neither of which Faculties are so sure
guides that we never miscarry under their conduct; in so much that all men,
even the very best of them that light upon truth, are to be deemed rather
fortunate then wise) Jacob Behmen, I conceive, is to be reckoned in the number
of those whose Imaginative faculty has the pre-eminence above the Rational;
and though he was an holy and good man, his natural complexion notwithstanding
was not destroyed, but retained its property still; and therefore his
imagination being very busy about divine things, he could not without a
miracle fail of becoming an Enthusiast, and of receiving divine truths upon the
account of the strength and vigor of his Fancy: Which being so well
quallified with holiness and sanctity, proved not unsuccesfull in sundry
apprehensions, but in others it fared with him after the manner of men, the
sagacity of his imagination failing him, as well as the anxietie of reason does
others of like integrity with himself.

4. Which things I think very worthy of noting, that no man's writings may be a
snare to any ones mind, that none may be puzzled in making that true which of
it self is certainly false; nor yet contemn the hearty and powerful
exhortations of a zealous soul to the indispensable duties of a Christian by
any supposed deviations from the truth in speculations that are not so
material nor indispensable. Nay though something should fall from him in an
Enthusiastic Hurricano that seems neither suitable to what he writes elsewhere,
nor to some grand Theorie that all men in their wits hitherto have allowed for
truth, yet it were to be imputed rather to that pardonable disease that his
natural complexion is obnoxious to, then to any diabolical design in the
Writer; which rash and unchristian reproach is, as far from the truth, if not
further, as I conceive, then the credulity of those that think him in every
thing infallibly inspired.

5. I cannot but interpret it as an argument of the sincerity of your affection
and friendship that you discover some measure of sollicitudes, what success
this second edition of the forenamed Pamphlets may have, and must give you many
thanks for your so seasonable and particular intimations of what you have
observed most liable to the hasty censure, as you say, of either the heedlesse
or malevolent Reader; but I suspect it is but an handsome Scheme of suggesting
to me your own dissatisfaction in several of those passages which you
propound. And therefore I am the more willing for surenesse to answer to all,
to ease you of that anxiety your mind may be any way burdened with on my
behalf, when you shall understand that all is right at the bottom, let things
appear at first sight as they will.

6. First then as for my Observations, let the mirth and humors therein be as
wild and exorbitant as they may, provided they be no other then may well be
found in some angry Aristotelean that has taken pepper in the nose, upon the
sleights and abuses put upon his Master Aristotle, the Dramatist has offended
nothing in all this, having throughout kept the Decorum of such a person as he
intended to represent. And must confess that on set purpose that the Writer
might be the more certainly concealed, I gave my self leave to let slip
sometimes such passages as were least likely to fall from my pen. But
understanding what an enraged Antagonist I had got, that he might not add
injustice to wrathfulnesse, and discharge his choler at random where ever his
suspicion and jealousy should carry him, I thought it better to be so
courteous as to satisfy the inquisitive, and so just as to prevent that injury
that might fall upon the falsely suspected, then to shelter my self any longer
by concealing the author of that merry Exploit.

But as concerning my Reply, I cannot there give so succinct an account, the
impatiency and fury of my Adversary having torn off our masks, and constraind
us to act in our known persons, but must descend particularly to those several
Exceptions that you observe to have been made against sundry passages of that
writing, and I shall take them in that order of Pages as they lie.

7. What you intimate concerning the whole second Section (according as
Parresiastes has divided the Book) as if it smelt too much of pride and
magnifying my self, You are first to consider what a shower of dirt my
Antagonist had powered upon me in his foul Answer, endeavoring to tread me down
into a dunghill if he could; and therefore it is more pardonable if I rise up
with more courage and shake off all suspicion of being so pitiful a creature
as he would make me; and truly I had a conceit that showing the inward frame of
my mind so freely to him, it might have proved as successful as the flying
open of Prince Arthurs shield in his combat with the Giant Orgoglio; but it
seems he had no eyes to behold that kind of luster. But in the second place
that which is more considerable, I magnify my self in nothing, but in the
common accomplishments of every sincere Christian, and that I set them off in
so high and lofty a strain, is but a zealous profession that the ordinary
Christian graces are far to be preferred before all the miracles of Magic
that my Antagonist hankers after, all the knowledge of Nature, and what ever
else the world will afford; but I have apologized to this purpose already in my
Preface to my Antidote.

8. Page 175. line 27. Sing of Platonic Faith. What you write as if some men
conceited from this passage that I affected a Faith that was not Christian, I
wonder much at their mistake. These verses are transcribed out of my Poems of
the Immortality of the Soul, and contain a very considerable argument thereof,
which is the Goodness or Benignity of God, on which the Platonists or better
sort of the Heathen relied, or reposed themselves upon, in their expectation of
happiness from him; that is, They had their Recumbency upon that principle in
God which moved him in the fullness of time to send Jesus Christ into the
world, according as it is written, God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, etc. which is a greater and more particular manifestation
of the love of God, then the poor Heathen ever did enjoy. But yet so far
forth as they did rely on the goodness of God, they did not differ in their
faith from us Christians, who also rely upon the same, though upon more
explicit terms, and from a more certain and particular knowledge thereof
revealed in Christ Jesus, that noble pledge of the love of God toward us.
Besides, the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ is a more palpable argument
of a blessed Immortality then any the Philosophers could ever produce.

9. Page 177. l. 23. My glory, my joy, my communicated God. That some have been
scandalized with this Passage I conceive is, because they have fancied that I
understood thereby a more mysterious union with God then is competible to any
saving Christ himself. But for my own part I am so far from thinking that the
union of a Christian with God is hypostaticall, that I hold it utterly
inconsistant with Christian Religion to think so. For if our union with God be
the same that Christ's union is, we are as much God as he, and as lawful
objects of adoration: whith in my apprehension destroys the whole frame of
Christianity. But to those that have no mind to cavil, this place have been
found void of all offense, it signifying no more then what is expressly in the
Scripture if you compare S. Peter's (...) with that of S. John, God is love, and
he that abides in love, abides in God and God in him. But it is a riddle to
me that God who is Love, should communicate himself so fully as to live and
abide in a man, and yet that he should not be for all that communicated to him,
which they do plainly imply that cavil at this Passage.

10. Page 180. l. 20. This is to be Godded with God and Christed with Christ.
Those that reprehend this passage, they seem to me to be very reprehensible
themselves, as having fallen into two errors: The one is, that they think it
so enormous and extravagant an expression of men being called Gods, when as
very sober and holy writers have made use of the phrase, being warranted
thereunto as they conceive from Scripture it self which expressly bestows upon
us the title of sons of God, John 1. Filios Dei fieri, h^e. Deos, say they,
Nam quis nisi Deus potest esse filius Dei, Isa. Cafaub. and the same Author
out of the Fathers. (...). S. Augustine speaks very roundly to the same
purpose, Templum Dei aedificaxi ex iis quos facit non factus Deus, and
Athanasius ad Adelphium, (...), Christ became man, that he might make us Gods.
But what this Deification is, he does distinctly and judiciously set down thus,
(...), To be made God, says he, is to be united with the Deity by the
partaking of the Spirit of God. And for my own part I understand nothing else
by Deification which is so often repeated in that excellent Manual Theologia
Germanica, in which, though there be much of Melancholy, yet I think there is
more true and savory Divinity then in thousands of other writings that make a
greater noise in the world. The other error my Reprehenders are reprehensible
in is, in that they look upon me here as countenancing such phrases as these,
when it is plain I check the users of them, for their affectation of such high
language, especially they having abused it, not only to an unmannerly
usurpation of an equal estate or paritie with Christ, but to a wild
presumption that there is no other God but such as themselves are. Which
abominable opinion of theirs presenting it self then so fully to my mind,
carried me forth in that zeal and vehemency you see, and therefore may be a
sufficient excuse for so large an excursion, I keeping my self still so well
within compass, as not to let go my main design, which was against
Phantastrie and Enthusiasme, And do here plainly show that it may well lead a
man at length to down right Ranting and Atheism.

11. Page 183. l. 11. Lord of the four Elements, and Emperor of the World. It
is in my apprehension but an extravagant censure of those that say these
expressions are so extravagant. If these words were to be literally understood,
I confess it were the voice rather of a Mad man, then of one in his right
senses: but they being to be understood morally, they are not only sober in
themselves but contain in them a consideration very proper and effectual for
the making others sober also, I mean such as by their natural complexion,
being hurried on too fast after high things, are liable to grow mad with
excessive desire of being in some great place of honor and rule amongst men,
or else of being admired for some strange Magical power over Nature and
external Elements; we reminding them hereby, that there is a more noble Empire
and more useful Magic to be fought after, then what so pleases their mistaken
fancies; in endeavoring after which they shall neither forfeit their Bodies to
the sovereign Power they ought to obey, nor yet their Souls to the Devil, nor
squander away the use of their wits and reason upon mere lying deceits and
vanities. Besides, this inward command over a man's self, which the wisest have
always accounted the highest piece of wisdom and power, has ever been by all
good men compared with and preferred before scepters and kingdoms; so that I
do but speak in the common Dialect of all those that have professed themselves
to have had that right esteem of Wisdom and Virtue which it deserves. The
Philosophers are very loud in their expressions concerning this matter, (...),
Laert. Zen. And Horace following their steps, or rather outgoing them, writes
thus; Ad summam sapiens uno minor est Jove, Dives,
Liber, honoratus, pulcher, rex denique regum.
Nay they are not only content to set out the dignity of their Wise man as
they call him by the title of a King, but will not allow any to be truly so
called besides him. (...). And Dem^philus adds that he is the only priest
also (...): Christianity joins both Titles together, the Scripture teaching us
that all true Christians are both Kings and Priests: So sober and warrantable
are those Metaphors taken from political dignities.

But is it not a piece of Pride to speak of a man's self in such high terms? I
answer, is it not a piece of baseness for a man to be ashamed to profess
himself a Christian, and his high esteem he has of that calling, especially he
being so fairly invited thereunto, partly to wipe off the foul calumnies of his
Adversary who would make the world believe, I wrote against him out of envy,
the poorest and most sneaking of all passions, and utterly contrary to all
magnanimity and true gallantry of Spirit; and partly to recommend to all
generous Souls the love of Christianity and Virtue. under the notion of a very
Royal and magnificent State and condition (which I do in most parts of this
present Section) and so to win over, if it were possible, my Antagonist
himself, from the vain affectation of Magic to a more sacred and more truly
glorious power over his own Nature.

Page 183. l. 24. I still the raging of the Sea, etc. Impera ventis and
tempestatibus, dic mari, quiesce; and Aquiloni, ne flaveris, etc. is the very
allegory that that devout Soul Thomas a Kempis uses in his devotions lib. 3.
cap. 23. See also my Moral Cabbal^ and the Defense thereof, and it will
warrant to a syllable every thing that I have wrote in this Section of this
kind.

12. Page 115. l. 7. And impregnation of my understanding from the most High,
etc. Here you say they demand of me if I take my self to be inspired. Yes, in
such sort as other well meaning Christians are, that take a special care of
venting any thing but what they can, or at least think they can, give a
sufficient reason for. I suppose that every one that is wise, it is the gift of
God to him: And Elihu is right in this, though much out in his censure of Job,
I said, days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom. But
there is a spirit in a man; and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. The Apostle also bids, that if any one lack wisdom, that he ask
it of God, wherefore if any one find any measure of wisdom in himself, or at
least think he does, he is to give him the glory of it: but whether Wisdom
thus obtained of God be Inspiration, or no, I leave to those to dispute that
love to bring all things into a form of controversy.

13. Page 281. l. 12. The most valuable Opinions that are controverted amongst
Churches and Sects, etc. That from this place and some others of my Reply, some
would gather that I make nothing of the Articles of the Christian faith, it is
a sign to me that they either want Reason or Charity. For in my own thoughts I
make a vast difference betwixt the Articles of the Christian faith and
Opinions, and cannot forbear to profess that my judgment is, That if Sects
differ in these, some of them will not fail to prove maimed or defective
Christians; of which sort I conceive are such Articles as these; namely, The
existence of a God Omnipotent, Omniscient, and infinitely Good, together with
the Trinity of the Godhead, The Divinity of Christ, That he is a sacrifice for
sin. That he came into the world to root out the works of the Devil, and every
plant that is not of his Fathers planting, that is, all manner of Idolatry and
Wickedness of either Flesh or Spirit. That he rose corporeally out of the
grave. That he ascended up into heaven visibly in the sight of his Disciples.
And that he will in due time return visibly from thence to take vengeance on
the wicked, and recompense the good when he shall change their vile bodies into
the similitude of his glorious body, crowning them with everlasting life and
joy. These and such like Truths as these so plainly comprehended in the sacred
Text, it never came into my mind to debase them so much as to cast them into
the rank of Opinions, though of the best sort that can be imagined: For these
are not the objects of Opinion to any real Christian but of Faith, by which I
understand a steady and unshaken belief that they are true. And whosoever
contradicts any of these, I make bold to pronounce (let him talk as sweetly and
graciously as he will) that it is nothing but either puzzled Nature,
obfuscating Melancholy, or some Diabolical mystery working in him, that
imboldens him to contradict so holy a truth.

14. Page 281. l. 31. To cast me amongst the Puritans as thou call them. It
is also groundlesly spoken of those that vote me for a peculiar enemy to the
Puritanes, from this passage and some others of like nature, when as if they
read but on a little further in this place, they may see I openly profess my
self a Friend to all Sects whatsoever in the Christian world. For what warrant
have I to be a foe to them that God himself is a friend to; as I make no
question but he is to any, in any Sect that hold the Fundamentalls of
Christianity with a conscionable endeavor of living accordingly, and does
mercifully wink at their Childishness in the rest. But if in stead of Children
they prove Bears and Lions, and devour their Neighbors out of a zeal to their
own follies, or it may be out of a worse principle, Pride, Covetousness and
Revenge; I must confess I think they are not then Christians at all, but
Wolves in sheeps clothing.

15. And verily every Sect, as a Sect, is of this nature and condition, and
they want nothing but opportunity to show their fangs, and therefore I think
Bertius has done very unjustly in laying all the load upon the Calvinists, as
if that were peculiar to them that is the disease of all Opinionists
whatsoever. But for my part my ambition is to be found rather amongst them that
are sound then those that are diseased, containing my self within the sober
limits of the Word of God for the Articles of my Faith, and shall be so civil
to others, as to give them leave to believe what they will, so they do not
believe against what is plainly and expressly contained in Scripture. For for a
man to be hot for some Point that with a great deal of study and care he has
hammered out of the Text, and imperiously to obtrude it upon others, seems to
me as absurd, as if some conceited Artisan should force another to buy some
elaborate toy, that he has spent a great deal of time and pains upon, at his
own rate, when the chapman professes he has no need of any such impertinent
curiosities. And I doubt not but that this is the condition of every man that
has an hearty and favoury sense and firm belief of the grand Truths of
Christianity, such as are, That there is an all-seeing eye of Providence that
takes notice of all our actions to reward or punish them. That if we sin and
unfainedly repent thereof, that we have a Mediator Jesus Christ the righteous,
who is a propitiation for our sins. That we may through him in time have a very
considerable victory or conquest over them, we keeping as close to his precepts
and example as we can, and earnestly imploring the aid of his Spirit for a
further proficiency daily in that life that has begun to appear in us, and to
^each us; that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed
hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify
unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works; I say, a constant
endeavor after such a pitch of holiness as this, and a firm belief of His
return to judgment whom we most affectionately love, adore, and to the utmost
of our power imitate in our conversations, is so warm and filling a cordial to
the sincere Soul, that he will either loath, or at least not much long for what
ever humane invention can afford him as an overplus. For if a man stick to such
plain things as these, and others of the same nature that are to be found and
easily understood in Scripture, he has built his house on the Rock of ages, and
all the Sectarian Gibberish in the world cannot distract him, nor dissettle or
bring him into any diffidence but that he is safe and well.

16. Page 282. l. 32. Coldness and trembling seized upon my flesh. What you
say some have collected from this place, is the most fair and probable
calumniation of any. For for my own part I have so little esteem of any Sect
whatsoever, that comparing their Title with that of a Christian, I conceive it
little better then a reproach or calumny. But to tell you my opinion of that
Sect which are called Quakers, though I must allow that there may be some
amongst them good and sincere hearted men, and it may be nearer to the purity
of Christianity for the life and power of it, then many others; yet I am well
assured that the generality of them are prodigiously Melancholy, and some few
perhaps possessed with the Devil. And I conceive that he does work more
cunningly and despightfully against the kingdom of Christ in that Sect then in
any open Sect that has appeared in these latter times. For they intermingling
so great severity and conspicuous signs of Mortification, the close keeping to
the light within, and the not offending in the least manner the dictates of our
consciences, but to walk evenly and sincerely before God and man, they
intermingling, I say, these wholesome things with what is so abominable and
dangerous, viz. the slighting of the history of Christ and making a mere
Allegory of it, thereby voiding all that wisdom of God that is contained in
the mystery of Christianity, as it referres to the very person of Christ;
this, I say, cannot proceed from any thing so likely as from the craft and
watchful malice of Lucifer, who undoubtedly envies Christ his Throne both in
Heaven and in Earth, and therefore would bring one of these two mischiefs upon
his Church, that is, either the slurring of the person of our Savior, or else
of that, without which he can take no complacency in his Church, and that is,
true and real Sanctity or Holiness.

17. Wherefore this is the perverse Dilemma he thinks he has caught us in. That
if this Leaven of the Quakers prevail, the person of Christ will be outed and
the mystery thereupon depending cancelled, and all that advantage to Life and
Godliness therein comprehended taken away; which he will be as able to effect
as to pull the Sun out of the Firmament. But though it succeeds not this way,
yet he at least promises himself that these Instruments of his speaking so
loudly for and acting (so far as many can discern) so earnestly and seriously
according to the stricktest rules of a Christian life, and calling upon every
one so vehemently to do the like, to mortify the old man with all his lusts
and concupiscences, and to put on the new man which is created in
righteousness and true holiness, adding, that God will enable us to do all
this if we will but cordially set our selves to it, and that unless we do
this, all the rest of our Religion profits us nothing (which things are most
true and precious) he hopes, I say, that this their so lavish profession of
these duties will make them be still mo^e coldly entertained by them that
otherwise are zealous enough in that other part of Christianity, they being
thus blemished and besmeared with the foul fingerings of such execrable persons
as they must needs seem to be, and indeed are, that set so little by him whom
God of a truth has exalted above men and Angels: and so like Children they
will forsake their meat because some ugly body has touched it, as Hucsters and
Victuallers in Turkey let go for naught what ever a slave, as he passes by,
lays his hand on, no body after vouchsafing to eat thereof.

Now in as many as this Stratagem takes effect, the end of Christianity is
supplanted as Christianity it self was endeavored to be supplanted before. For
Christ gave himself, that he might redeem us from all iniquity and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, as was above rehearsed out of
the Apostle.

18. But the plot being discovered, the mischief may be certainly prevented
viz. If besides all that honor we otherwise give Christ, we add a faithful
and constant obedience to his will: which will of his is that we become
perfect, as his Father which is in heaven is perfect: And we shall be the
better spurred up to mend our pace toward these accomplishments, or be more
forcibly driven thereunto, if we seriously set our selves to enquire into the
true causes, why God permits such a Mystery as this to work, that tends in
very truth to the utter overthrow of that warrantable, though more external,
frame of Christianity that the Scripture it self points out to us, and which
should be as a rich Cabinet wherein that Jewel the Divine life is to be found,
viz. whether it be not, that we hypocritically content our selves with this
empty Tabernacle though the Presence and power of God abide not therein (as it
does not unless we find our selves purified from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, or at least hold our selves bound in duty with all earnestness
possible to endeavor thereafter) whether, this I say, be not the cause that
God threatens thus unto us the utter overthrow of that Religion under which,
against the mind of our Lawgiver we would shelter our selves with all our
hypocrisies and abominations.

As for those that from this Passage of this aenigmaticall Colosse, that my
Imagination was transfigured into, conceive me to affect divine Visions as you
say, and extraordinary Revelations, and so to be sick of that Disease that I
would pretend to cure others of; I must confess I was transported so far in
this place, that it is pardonable if they do suspect me of some such distemper,
they not knowing of what frame of spirit I am. But as for my self, there is
nothing at all in this that happened to me, that seemed to me extraordinary,
and that only I look upon as divine in it which such men as these in all
likelihood would the least of all esteem as such, which I think I shall easily
make you understand, by comparing what has happened to me in my sleep with this
that befell me awake.

19. At the beginning of the late commotions here in England I dreamed thus. Me
thought I was at a friends house in the rode betwixt London and Scotland, where
having gone out into the outward court in a bright Moonshine night; a little
before I returned in again, I looked first toward the North, where I saw in
the heavens a Woman with a child on her lap, holding her arm over it, with that
care and tenderness that Mothers and Nurses usually do over young Children. I
afterward turned me toward the South, and looking up I beheld the Effigies of a
very old Man with a long beard, lying on his side all along stretched parallel
to the Horizon. This representation was, as I easily discerned, made of a very
bright cloud, that had imbibed plentifully the light of the Moon. I looking
steddily upon him, he began to move his right arm, but from the elbow only,
and that very leasurely, raising it but a little height, and then let it fall
to the same posture it was before. He moved it thus, so far as I can
remember, some six or seven times, lifting this part of his arm every bout
higher then other, and keeping the same distance of time in all; but the last
stroke was struck by his whole arm from the very shoulder. When he had thus
done, I turned my face, returning into the house; but before I had reached the
door, he sent these words after me, with an hollow voice much like thunder
afar off, There is indeed love amongst you, but only according to the flesh.

20. Not at all dismayed neither with the sight nor the voice I passed into the
hall and told them what had happened, expounding the general meaning of my dream
in my dream, advertising them that the Old man his manner of striking so
gradually, was an Emblem of the proceedings of God when he chastises a nation,
adding certain reasons out of Aristotle's Mechanics, which I had very lately
read, why those strokes must needs be one heavier then another and the last
(which represented the hand of God striking to a more signal overthrow if not
final destruction) by far the most heavy of all.

That this was the Method of God in plagueing a people, but that which provoked
him to wrath or brought mischief upon them was the want of that life and spirit
of Christianity which is the Divine love, whereby the eagerness of the love of
the world with all the honors and pleasures thereof is abated and all
Christian duties, we owe one to another, thereby the more easily performed. For
whereas that carnal love will amount to no more then what is found in wild
Beasts and base Vermin, that rake and roven and tear away their prey where ever
they can get it, pulling it into their own dens and dark holes to provide for
themselves and their young ones; that better Love which is the Spirit of God
communicated to us, makes us more universally benign and kind, desiring and
endeavoring the good of all, being as ill at ease at the calamity of our
Neighbors, as if it had happened to our selves; and rejoicing as much in their
welfair as if it were our own; which assuredly is the indispensable condition
of every true Christian; and therefore if we were such, Christendom could not
be embroyled in such wars, disturbances and confusions as it has been these
many ages. To this purpose I spoke in my sleep, which being no more then I
thought oftentimes before, while I was awake, could seem to me to have nothing
in it extraordinary.

21. That which may seem most strange to others is the Vision (as I may so call
it) in this dream, which would have amused my self, had I not remembered that
over night I had looked upon the Frontispiece of Ptolomies Maps, where my fancy
it seems having laid hold on his venerable beard, drew in thereby the whole
scene of things that presented themselves to me in my sleep; And though some
may think this dream to be more particularly applicable to what has happened of
late years here in England, yet no man can demonstrate but that the congruity
may be only casual.

Now as occasionally from the Picture of Ptolomie my Fancy was carried into
that dream by night, so was it also in the day time transfigured into this
breathing and speaking Colosse, by Eugenius his mentioning of and comparing me
with that enormous statue. For that the fancy will work of it self without any
leave or direction from our superior faculties, is very plain, and that as
well by day as by night. But the difference is, that a man awake has ordinarily
the power, if he think good, to curb such Fantasmes when they appear, and so I
could have done this knowing right well it was but an occasional fancy, but
such as would serve my turn to set off that Truth I had to declare unto the
World, with more force and vigor; and therefore I let it go on. Nor is there
in all this any thing either extraordinary or divine, the natural causes being
so apparent to any man's capacity.

22. But that Truth which this breathing Colosse uttered to the world is not
only divine, but one of the most concerning divine Truths that Christiandome
can take notice of. For it arises out of the height of that life that is truly
and indispensably Christian, and without which those happy times, which the
Prophets have prophesied of and very good and precious men hope for, will never
come upon the earth. And if that of the Deity that lies hid in men ((...), as
the Philosopher speaks) raised it self up more then ordinarily at this bout, it
producing nothing but a more quick and sensible gust of a truth, so sacred and
evident to every one in whom the grace of God does abide, it cannot amount to
that which men call Enthusiasme, but is to go only for a sober and
warrantable, though a very vehement and affectionate fit of Love and Devotion,
upon a fuller and clearer impresse or manifestation of the excellency of that
Life and Spirit which Christ came to communicate to the world. Of which by how
much every one does partake, by so much the more he will slight the curiosities
of Opinions, and in this light plainly see that the zeal after a conformity to
them does more then any thing hinder the growth of Truth, and the advancement
of the kingdom of Christ upon the earth. For while they have that whereby they
may make a show of godliness before others, they are the more easily retained
in the estate of Hypocrisy, they fancying that they serve God well enough in
the promoting of their own conceits and inventions which they shamefully call
the Truth of God. And besides, they hinder that good which sincere Christians
may do in the world, who have so much the fear of God before their eyes, that
they will not lie and dissemble for their own advantage, and therefore men of
least conscience, careless what is true or false in Religion, but very crafty
for themselves, and that will conform to any thing to mend their livelihood
(and those that are the most Atheistical, will be able to do this the most
exquisitely) get into power and place in the Church, and so the Wolf having put
on the Shepherds coat and taken his crook into his hand, very formally tends
the flocks of Christ, and undoubtedly will give a wonderful fair account of
his office at the last to that great Pastor and Bishop of our souls.

This therefore that is so intelligible and rational so manifest and commonly
known to all that have made that due progress in Christianity which they may,
is not to be held as an extraordinary piece of Enthusiasme but a plain, though
very zealous, declaration of an indispensable Truth.

23. That which came the nearest to Vision or Enthusiasme that ever happened to
me, was about seven or eight and twenty years ago, when on a morning in my bed
after break of day I heard, as I thought, a sound of a Trumpet very shrill and
piercing, the longer it sounded, the more shrill and piercing it was, so that
it pained my ear more and more. Methought I was then in an open place and in a
free Horizon, saving that something a thick Mist hundred my prospect, but it
grew thinner and thinner, and an innumerable company of Angels, blew and purple
colored about the shoulders, filled the heavens round about, but the sight was
obscure by reason of the mist. But according as the Trumpet sounded louder and
louder, the Mist grew thinner and the Vision clearer: But the shrilnesse of the
Trumpet did pierce my ear with such a great pain, that I could not go on till
the sight was perfectly cleared up.

That which might persuade a man that there was something more then ordinary in
it, is this, that whereas I was really asleep; yet I did plainly find in my
self a power of waking my self, if I would; which seems almost impossible for
one that is asleep. But out of the great desire that I had to see the vision
cleared up. I forbore the waking of my self so long as I could, and endured the
great torture the shrill sound of the Trumpet put me to; but at last it growing
intolerable, I was fain to awake my self out of this dream.

That a man should be in such intolerable torture may also seem to some to be
beyond the causality of a dream: But to me it does not at all, who, upon the
reading of Aristotle's Mechanics, where he speaks of the (...) and (...), and
the power of removing timber thereby, fell into a dream of moving a great piece
of timber by this ordinary engine, that caused a pain unspeakable. For every
time I pressed down the Lever with my body, I was in as great a torment, as if
my bowels had been torn out, so that groaning very pitteously, my
Chamberfellow called to me, thereby ridding me of my dream and pain at once.
And in my apprehension that other circumstance of finding it in my own power to
awake my self if I would, is not much unlike their case that are troubled with
the Ephialtes, that perceive themselves in some sort asleep, and endeavor to
waken themselves as well as they can.

That which seems most unanswerable to my self is what it is impossible to
propound to another, as being unexpressable, and that is that admirable Temper
and frame of spirit I found my self in upon my waking, which, if it were in my
power to relate, would seem to most men incredible; so that, for this passage
sake, I should be prone to suspect something more then natural in what
preceded it, did I not consider that sometimes there may be of it self such a
Tenor and Disposition of body, that may either suggest or imitate what is most
holy and divine: So uncertain a guide shall we have of whatsoever offers it
self to us, and would inform us of any thing that cannot be made good out of
Reason or Scripture: And I know nothing worth the taking notice of in all
Divinity that is not determinable by these two.

24. But for those Dreams or night-Visions that do not ptetend to instruct us
in any general Speculation or Theoreticall Mystery, but concern the
management of our affairs, and particular negotiations, humane prudence being
so lubricous a principle, when we are once really at a plunge; I think it not
at all unwarrantable in a matter not unjust to follow such intimations as
these, if they be offered, there being therein more of self-resignation and a
fuller relyance upon that Providence which by such uncertain becks and nods (as
they must needs seem to strangers) does notwithstanding hereby sometimes most
clearly and certainly communicate her mind and purpose to her own favorites,
to their singular advantage and stupendous success.

25. Sir you will pardon my garrulitie, as you may be enduced to term it from
Theophrastus his example, who makes the telling of a man's dreams a character of
that vice: But the best is it must be then to a stranger, which will I hope
excuse me that have told mine to an intimate friend; and I might further
justify my self from the practice of Cardan, that published several of his to
all the world, which I think are of as little consequence as these of mine.

26. I have now answered to the chief Exceptions made against any particular
passage of my Reply. What you say of some that they much marvel at the whole
design in general, that I do so zealously and industriously oppose
Enthusiasme, they not seeing that it is worth the while so to do; Certainly
this censure must come from such men as are either tainted with this disease
themselves, or else such strangers to it, that they have not so much as
observed the mischievous workings thereof. But for my own part I being so
thoroughly persuaded in my judgment of the truth and solidity of Christian
religion and that it is maintainable by Reason against all cavills and
sophistries whatsoever (let the Adversary oppose as fiercely and cunningly as
he can) and observing likewise that the whole business of Enthusiasts is to
decry Reason as an impure and carnal thing, I could not but look upon
Enthusiasme as the only Slight and most effectual Engine (seem it to others
as despicable as it will) to unhinge Christiandome, dethrone Christ and annull
that great and precious Mystery of Christianity, in which the Wisdom and
Goodness of God does more clearly shine forth, then in any Dispensation of his
Providence that he ever set a foot as yet in the world. And what is to come,
must be but the accomplishment of this Period. Wherefore it seemed to me very
unjust and ignoble, not to endeavor to the utmost, by any means possible and
lawful, to hinder the progress of so dangerous an evil, and to provide so
well for the honor of that Religion I was born under and do profess; that it
should not be basfled or dashed out of countenance by that which is neither
Religion, solid Reason, nor any thing else laudable, but merely a bold and
wild Distemper of a Melancholy spirit.

27. To what some particularly except against the Merriment of my Reply I have
said enough elsewhere, and therefore will only add this, That if that false
Gravity, which is nothing else but a sower kind of pride, take the chair of
censure, Mirth appealing thence to any indifferent Judge, will need no Pleader;
but if she stand in competition with that sedatenesse and benign sadness of
spirit wherein dwells true Gravity indeed, she will then deserve none. For
assuredly this temper is beyond all comparison better then that merry
Complexion. For whereas Mirth and Levity do often betray the Soul, so that she
is surprised by what is foolish and vain, this Stayednesse and Gravity does not
only guard her from what is evil, but restrains her from what is trivial, and
makes her spend her pains upon no enterprise but what is worthy so noble a
nature as her own; which is no Pride, but true Magnanimity and Generosity of
Spirit. Besides, such as are of a light Genius that is always so pleasant and
well contented, even to a redoundancy of toyishnesse and sport; it is a sign
that their desires are shallow, in that they are so easily and continuedly
satisfied, and therefore in a present incapacity of valuing the representations
of more weighty objects. Whence it is that the profoundest and most concerning
Mysteries of Philosophy and Religion are never infused into such slight and
flue vessels. But the grave and sad mind that seldom ruminates on small
matters, whose carriage being calm and quiet to the world, yet is full of
workings within and strong breathings after the noblest Acquisitions, does not
fail in the conclusion to enjoy her contentment secretly and apart from others,
being fully compensated for her patience with all that wisdom and holiness
that the Spirit of God bestows on them that have long waited for him.

28. And in this I conceive, Melancholy men have their special advantage, that
Complexion making their desires vast and vehement, and their resentments very
deep and vivid, and therefore very fit for the highest communications, their
desires, joy and thankfulness bearing a more answerable proportion to the
weighty matters they receive. Hence it is they are more frequently blessed with a
greater share of illumination and extraordinary sanctification then others, if
there be no Let by reason of some flaw in Nature, or some default in
themselves. For then instead of proving better then others, they may prove
far worse, that Complexion exposing them to errors and mistakes
proportionable to the greatness of their spirits and vastness of their
desires, and so makes them often degenerate from the state of men that seemed
to the World extraordinarily holy and illuminate, into mere Mock-prophets and
ridiculous Enthusiasts; afterward Ranters, Atheists, and what not.

Sir, I have now answered to all the intimations in your Letter, saving what is
generally intimated, or rather fully expressed in them all, which is your
faithfulness and unfeigned friendship, which cannot be answered by words, but
by an earnest endeavor of really approving as well as professing my self

Your affectionate friend to serve you, M.

Errata Insigniora sic corrige.
Page 15. l. 4. for live sense read lively sense. p. 25. l. 33. como^ion r.
commotion. p. 29. l. 14. his spirit r. their spirit. p. 100. l. 2. And this r.
And his. p. 107. l. 6. slay r. flea. p. 176. l. ult. then all-spreaden r. then
an all-spreaden. p. 269. l. 24. (...) r. (...). p. 273. l. 17. immortal r.
immorall. p. 276. l. 28. Religions r. Religious. p. 280. l. 21. Divine r. the
Divine. p. 280. l. ult. reaches r. has reached to. p. 282. l. 16. Lights r.
Light. p. 286. l. 13. it discovered read discovered it. p. 296. l. 29. read
And I. p. 299. l. 32. r. ex Diis p. 302. l. 31. r. page 185. In the Epistle
page 1. l. 24. r. How strangely. p. 2. l. 4. r. into this.


