A PIOUS AND Christian Consideration OF LIFE and DEATH, AND Of all HUMANE
ACTIONS.

Written Originally in French by the Famous Philip Morney Lord of Plessis.

Translated into Latin by Arnoldus Freitagius.

And now done into English by M. A. for the benefit of his Countrymen.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for LUKE MEREDITH, at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1699.

A GODLY AND Christian Consideration OF Life and Death.
IT seems to me a thing worthy of great wonder and amazement, and not unlike
a Paradox, when I consider how all sorts of Workmen and Mercenary People rise
up early, and labor hard all the day, in hopes to enjoy their desired rest at
night; how Mariners tug at the Oar with all their might, that they may gain
their port; and with what signs of joy, with what shouts and acclamations, they
behold the shore, though at a distance: How Travelers, despising the
allurements of Life, think nothing more pleasant than to attain their Journeys
end. Only we, who are engaged in the labors and trouble of this World, are
soon tired therewith, and though we be tossed with the waves of this
troublesome Sea, and worn out with hard and painful Travel, yet are we
unwilling to see the end of our labors; we cannot without tears think of
coming to our safe and secure Harbor, nor without fear and trembling, of
entering into a quiet retirement. This our Life is much like Penelope's Web,
which was daily to be woven and unwoven. It is a Sea exposed to Winds and
Storms, with which sometimes the outward, sometimes the inward Man is miserably
tossed; it is a Journey in which we must expect to meet with hard Frosts, and
deep Snows, in which we must travel through craggy Rocks, dreadful Precipices,
vast Wildernesses, and be daily in danger to be assaulted by Thieves and
Robbers. Let us daily meditate of these things, and of these things let us
commune with our own hearts, and let us thus tug at the Oar that we may gain
our Port. But when we see Death draw nigh, and offering us an helping hand to
refresh us who are wearied with Labor, to put an end to all our grief and
sorrow, to bring us into a safe Haven, after so dangerous a Journey, and
instead of such troublesome Inns, to lodge us safely in our own House; instead
of Joy and Rejoicing thereat, instead of a Swan-like Song, we are more willing
(if the Fates would allow it) to repeat our former Labors, reiterate our
former Voyage, and once more trust our selves to the tumultuous and tempestuous
Sea of this World; we are willing to forget all our former miseries, all our
shipwrecks, and all that danger of Thieves and Robbers that we have been in;
and to look upon Death as our greatest punishment, much greater than all those
dangers and misfortunes that we have undergone, or can possibly befall us in
this Life. We act like Children, who, though they have spent whole days in
tears, yet upon the approach of a Physician, will not own that they are sick:
Not unlike those, who being miserably afflicted with the Toothache, spend whole
days and nights in bewailing their misery, yet upon the sight of a Surgeon,
who offers to pull out their faulty tooth, deny that they have any pain at all.
We act much like those delicate ones, who being afflicted with an acute
Pleurisy, send forth most miserable groans, and can scarce have patience to
stay the coming of a Surgeon; yet when he is come, and come to remove their
Malady, they no sooner see him make ready his Instrument, but they draw back
their Arm, and hide themselves within their Bed, as if he were about to kill
them. We fear the Physician more than the Disease, the Surgeon than the
pain, Incision than Suppuration. We have a quicker sense of the bitterness and
momentany trouble of a Medicine, than of the cruelty of a long and tedious
Disease; we are more afraid of the end of our misery, than the continuance of
those evils, which we do and must daily suffer in this World. Now whence comes
it that we are thus mad and stubborn? but only from hence, that we do not
rightly understand what Death is. Hence is it that we are afraid of those
things which we ought to hope for, and desire those things which we ought to be
afraid of. We call that Life, which is a continual dying, and we call that
Death, which is an Exit out of that state of continual dying, and an entrance
into Eternal Life. Furthermore, what is there is Life that is so greatly to be
desired? Or what is there in Death that is so greatly to be feared? Let us
examine the several periods of our whole Life.

We enter into life weeping and wailing, The miseries of each several Age.
we go through it toiling and sweating, and we go out of it decaying and
languishing. There is no difference between high and low, Noble and Ignoble, in
this they are all alike, they must all submit to this Condition of Life, none
can plead an exemption therefrom. The Condition of Man therefore is much worse
than that of other living Creatures, being born and brought forth into this
light, he cannot remove himself from the place where he is. Of Infancy.
The first years of his Infancy are void of all pleasure, yea so far therefrom
that he is troublesome both to himself and others, and even to those years in
which Reason and Judgment begin to bud he is exposed to infinite dangers. In
this one thing that period of time is more happy than the rest, that he does
not understand his own unhappiness. Now is there any of so abject and base a
Mind, that he would willingly choose to live always in this state of Infancy?
Whence it is plain, that if we take an estimate of Life as it is in it self and
in its own nature, there is nothing desirable therein, but only to live well
and happily.

But let us proceed. Childhood.
Together with the growth and increase of the Body trouble and sorrow increase
too. No sooner is he freed from the hands of his Nurse, and before he knows
what pleasure there is in Play, he is committed to the discipline of a
Schoolmaster, (I speak of those who are more liberally Educated) whilst he is
at Play, he is in fear; whilst he is at his Book, it is grievous and unpleasant
to him. All that period of time which is spent under the tuition of another, is
no better nor worse in his esteem than a Prison. He thinks of nothing else, nor
aspireth at any thing more, than how he may arrive at those years, in which he
may be free from the government and restraint of others, and live at liberty.
This is his great and only care, that he may quickly see an end of his
Infant-state, and be admitted into another of more freedom.

The entrance into this State, Adolescence.
what is it else but the destruction of Infancy? What is Manhood, but the death
of Youth? What is the rising of to morrow, but the setting of this day? If
therefore we rightly consider the thing, when Men desire a change of their
Condition, they desire Death, and judge their present State unhappy; they are
discontented with their present Condition, and therefore cannot be happy in it.

Now let us consider Man in that Age which he has so greatly longed for, Youth.
i. e. an Age of freedom and liberty; wherein he may walk either in ways of
Virtue, or Vice, and choose what Guide he pleases therein, either Reason, or
Passion. Now having two ways before him, he is at a stand which to choose.
Passion greatly Courts him, endeavors with a thousand baits to allure him,
propounds a thousand kinds of worldly pleasure to bewitch him. But at length
what are those delights? they are wicked and vicious, such as vex the Mind as
it were with a perpetual Fever; they are such as Repentance follows close at
the heels; like an Itch, which being allayed with much scratching, at last the
part is exulcerated thereby, and leaves behind it a long remembrance of pain
and grief. These kind of Pleasures are not acquired without great pains, labor
and danger, but in a moment they are gone, and leave the Mind under a long and
unquiet remembrance of them. Such are the Pleasures of this World, and such the
Nature of all frail and flitting Vanities. If any one will take the pains fully
to examine them, he will find that there are none of them seasoned with so much
sweetness, which is not only not abated, but overcome by the bitterness
thereof; none, though never so pleasant to the Palate, but are hurtful to the
Stomach, by long usage becoming nauseous to him that uses them; none (which is
the most deplorable thing of all) that are so well tempered, but that they have
something in them, which not only gnaws upon, but deeply wounds the Mind and
Conscience.

I shall not now insist upon those inconveniences which all do confess and
acknowledge to be in Pleasures; as Brawlings, Strifes, Fightings,
Manslaughters, Banishments, Diseases, and diverse Hazards, into which either the
incontinency of Life, or the imprudence and insolence of Youth is wont for the
most part to precipitate Men.

But if those seeming Pleasures be real troubles, if the grief that attends
them, like Wormwood-water allayed, be swallowed with them, it will evidently
appear what, and what kind of Pleasure it is, as also what sort of bitterness
that is, which Men suck in together with them. Such generally is unbridled
Youth, which having shaken off the Patronage, and transgressed the directions
of Parents or Masters, and having loosened the reins of their licentiousness,
become Slaves and Vassals to all manner of Vice and Wickedness. Such licentious
Youth may fitly be compared to some unclean Spirit possessing a Man; which
sometimes throws him into the Water, sometimes into the Fire; sometimes sets
him up upon a steep Precipice, and sometimes casts him down to the bottom. But
if he take Reason for his Guide, Let us consider what difficulties he has to
encounter with; he must sleep in Armor, and watch with his Weapons in his
hand, he must be ready every moment to engage his Enemy, because he has an
unwearied Adversary to deal with, one who will sometimes assault his Head,
sometimes his Side, and sometimes the lower parts of his Body; and therefore he
must always be Armed Cap-a-pee. But who is this Enemy? I answer, his own Lusts
and Corruptions, which slatter and deceive him: He must stand upon his guard
against every thing that he sees, against the World and every thing therein,
and (which is most deplorable) he must engage with a thousand dangerous,
erroneous and false Opinions of his own, and with many desperate disturbances
of his Mind, which at that Age Men are most subject to, and which seek all
occasions to oppress and ruin him, by engaging him in all manner of Sin and
Wickedness. It is only our great and good God, that can show us the way out of
this Labyrinth, it is he alone, that can give us Victory in these Conflicts.
But how few are they who enter this Path, and of those few, how many are they
who draw back their foot? Now follow whichsoever of these ways you please, you
must still reckon your selves subject to the tyrannical power of trouble and
disturbance; you must expect to be engaged in great and dangerous Conflicts;
either you will voluntarily cast your selves headlong, or in Bonds and Fetters
be made Slaves against your wills; either you will be carried down with a
smooth stream, or else be forced to row against Wind and Tide, and meet with
Storms and Tempests by the way. Some there are who at that Age are stupefied
with full draughts of false and vain allurements; not unlike those who at some
sumptuous Entertainment drink themselves drunk, who the next day abhor the
former Days Entertainment, and cannot otherwise remember it, than with
nauseousness and loathing. Others there are, who seem scriously to despise
Pleasures, yet find themselves so wearied and worn out with labor, that they
are ready either to yield themselves to the Enemy; or being quite tired out
with the tediousness of a troublesome Life, to hasten their own Death. These are
the Pleasures of flourishing Youth, which Children so greatly long for, and
which in their riper years they so much loath.

Now follows the perfect Age of Man, Manhood.
which we call Manhood; this all Men look upon as Dedicated to Wisdom, and hope
to consecrate it to a quiet and happy Life. But this consummate Age, in this
one thing, and indeed in all the degrees of Perfection is absolute; that then
the Universal impersection of Humane Nature, which either a simple and innocent
Infancy covered, or an inconstant and inconsiderate Youth excused, does first
show its head, and appears vigorous and perfect. I shall pass by many, and only
instance in those whom the World esteems Wise and Happy. Bitherto we have been
possessed with fear, and deluded by it; our Pleasures have been short, our
Repentance long, and our Remembrance of them sad and sorrowful. Now greater
Evils invade and gain the possession of our Minds, viz. Covetousness and
Ambition, which promise abundance of Riches and Honor if we will but fall down
and worship them. Nor is there any Mortal, except the true Children of God, who
is not bewitched with the love of one or other of these, and by that means
falls from the height of Happiness into the Abyss of Misery. But suppose a Man
prospers in his desire, let us consider what he gets by it.

The Covetous Man makes a thousand Voyages and Journeys by Sea and Land,
Covetousness.
is a thousand times exposed to Piracies in the one, and Robberies in the
other; and as often to the various Chances of Fortune; with continual fear and
labor he escapes a thousand Shipwracks, but seldom without great loss of time,
without some Disease, some pains or aches in his Joints or Bones, and at last
finds his whole Body and all the Members thereof greatly weakened and worn out,
partly by those labors, and partly by growing Age. That he may gain ease and
quiet, he engages himself in business; that he may get Riches, he denies
himself the necessaries of Life, and offers violence to Life it self. Now
grant that together with Riches he has obtained his ease, grant that he now
rejoices in the spoils of all the East, and has exhausted the Mines of the
West, is he thereby like to be one jot the happier, or more quiet? After all
his trouble, cost and travel, what has he got? even a great heap of care and
sorrow. He is tossed from one trouble to another, and yet there is no end of
his misery, but only a change of his Calamity. He has toiled and sweat out of
an ardent desire to heap up Riches, and now he labors under great fear and
anxiety of Mind lest he should lose them again; with a feverish ardour he
heaped them together, and now he possesses them with fear and trembling. He
oftentimes exposed himself to the assaults of Thieves and Robbers, that he
might make them his own; and now he has got them, he lives in perpetual fear
of Thieves and Robbers, lest they should take them from him. With great care
and pains he took them out of the Bowels of the Earth, and now his great care
is, how and where he may safely hide them in the Earth again. And to say all at
once, having finished his whole Journey, he at length finds himself a Prisoner;
instead of those labors and sorrows which infested his Body, he now finds
himself surrounded and attended by infinite troubles and disturbances of Mind
and Spirit. But what has the poor wretch got for all this pain and labor?
Mammon, who is called the God of Covetousness, persuades him by vain illusions
to hope for some great and good thing; but it happens to him as it usually does
to those wicked Men whom he is wont to draw into his Snare, who instead of
coined Gold, find their hands full of leaves. He now possesses that, or rather
is possessed by it, which in its own Nature is of no power nor efficacy; which
cannot ease, much less remove any malady: being in that inferior to all Herbs
and Plants that the Earth produces. He heaps up vile excrements, he has put
on such a Beast-like Nature, that he adorns his head with those things which he
ought to tread under his feet. But is his Covetousness thus satisfied? By no
means, it is so far from that, that he is inflamed with greater and stronger
desires than before. We commend that Drink which quenches thirst, and those
Meats which in least quantity nourish the Body, and stanch Hunger. These things
are of that kind, that the more you use of them against thirst and hunger, the
less you quench the one, or stanch the other. Covetousness is a Dropsy, an
imaginary hunger, an insatiable appetite or desire of having much; so that we
may rather expect to see a Covetous Man burst or break in sunder in the middle,
than to see him satisfied with Riches. But the worst of it is, this thirst,
this insatiable appetite has taken such deep root in them, that though they
have never so much plenty, yet still they want that which should satisfy their
longing. In the middle of Rivers they die with thirst, in Storehouses well
fraught with provisions, they perish with hunger; though they have abundance,
they dare not use it. They seem to enjoy them, though they reap no benefit by
them; they have indeed heaped them up, but neither for their own, nor the use
of others, and therefore cannot be thought to have any thing of that which they
possess, and yet they are grievously tormented with the want of what they
possess not. That Proverbial saying therefore has a great deal of truth in it,
viz. A Covetous Man wants what he has, as well as what he has not. Wherefore
let us return to the point in hand, which is to demonstrate, that the
acquisition of those things, which by a false name are called Goods, is nothing
else but the pain and trouble of the Body; and the possession of them for the
most part, is the burden of the Soul, which is much more heavy than that of
the Body, because the Mind is endued with a much quicker and purer sense than
the Body is. Then are they overwhelmed with misery, when they are spoiled of
their Goods; when either by Shipwreek, or by Plunder, or by Fire, or by any
such like Calamity, they are violently taken out of their hands, and consumed.
Hence is it, that with howling and crying they bewail their lost goods; hence
is it that they so macerate themselves with cares and grief of heart for them,
and will not be comforted. No reason can prevail with them to believe, that all
those things which mortal Men possess in this World are subject to those, or
the like misfortunes. They, and their Riches are become so much one, that when
they are bereaved of their wealth, they think themselves to be slead alive, and
their skin pulled over their ears. By which it comes to pass, that these Men,
who have placed all their confidence in these trifles, and fixed all their
thoughts upon Earth, when once they come to be despoiled of them, their hearts
sink within them, and they fall into the snares of despair, out of which it
seldom happens that any of them ever escapes, and returns to a better and
founder Mind. But that which surpasses all madness is, that they think
themselves to have lost all that which they do not get by Usury, they account
all that as their loss, and to diminish their store, which by some unusual and
unlawful way of gain is not added thereunto; and this drives many of them to
that height of madness, that they conspire their own death. In a word, the
reward which Covetousness bestows upon its Slaves and Clients, is much like
that which the Devil bestows upon his, who, after he has for some time
indulged and gratified them, at last leaves them either in the hands of the
Executioner, or makes them become their own Executioners. I pass by those many
prodigious and monstrous offenses, which Covetous Men in heaping up Riches, are
wont to enslave themselves unto, by the Conscience of which their Minds, as it
were with so many Furies, are perpetually vexed and disturbed. At length it
happens, that by this violent exercise, in which the much greater part of
Mankind do busy themselves, the Body is wasted and destroyed, the Mind is
undermined, and the Soul it self, without any delights or pleasures of Life, at
length miserably perishes.

Now let us proceed to the consideration of Amhition, Ambition.
which, by too earnest a desire of Honor, does foolishly and madly force many,
otherwise exceilent Men, to run counter to all the ways of truth and goodness.
If in this we hope to find more of happiness, we are deceived; we shall find
much less. For, as Covetousness, when it recompenseth all humane labors with
some vile excrements of the Earth, does delude them; so this feeds men with
smoke and air, which have as much of vanity in them, as the other of rude and
indigested matter. Both of them do indeed precipitate Men into some deep gulf,
but this is by so much the more dangerous, by how much the more specious and
cautious in deceiving us, by how much at first sight it appears brighter and
purer than Covetousness does. Of this sort of Men who have dedicated themselves
to Ambition, some are in great esteem with Princes, some Command Armies, and
every one have their distinct degrees of Offices and Dignities. You see these
Men courted by others, and feared by those whom they command; you see them
shining in Purple, in Armor, and in Attalic Vestments; and that in such sort,
as if all the Delights of this World were prepared for them, and them only. But
there are very few, who truly understand with what a ponderous weight but one
ounce of that vainglory does oppress them, how much that Courtship and
veneration costs them, at how dear a rate they buy but one Ell of those
precious Vestments. Would but Men seriously ponder these things, we should find
but few, who at such a price, and with so great repentance, would trouble
themselves to seek after these things. A long and troublesome servitude and
obsequiousness is usually the way to Honor, and when by these Means Men have
attained thereunto, the remainder of their Lives must be exposed to dangers,
out of which they seldom escape without the loss of some Member, an Arm or a
Leg, and this to satisfy the pleasure of their Prince, who more values an
hundred perches of ground that lies convenient for him, than a thousand such
Servants, though of known and approved fidelity. That Man is indeed unhappy,
who serves another by whom he is not beloved; but he is a Fool, who thinks
himself to be in great esteem and honor with one who values him so little,
that for a thing of no value, he will expose him to the danger and hazard of
his life.

By Fawning and Flattering most Men attain to that height. The Art of
Parasites, and a graphical description of a Court Life.
These Men by a long tract of time have accustomed their tongues and hands to
say or do any thing that may please the Prince, a thing which no good Man could
ever bring his mind unto. These demy-men must endure a thousand injuries, and
suffer themselves to be spit upon, without resistance or complaint. Though
these Men seem to be very familiar with Princes, and their Companions in their
greatest Pleasures, yet are they in no better place with them, than the Keepers
and Governors of those most fierce and most untamed Creatures, viz. Lions, are
with them; who, though they have long waited on them, a thousand times fed
them, and courted them with a thousand blandishments, yet when ever they give
them meat, they carefully observe this one thing, to withdraw their hands out
of their reach, lest by chance they should lay hold upon them, and so pay them
the wages of their so long ministration and attendance. Such usually is the end
of those Courtiers, who by Fawning and Flattery have screwed themselves into
the favor of their Prince.

It is a pleasure to great Men, The disposition of Princes toward their Court
Servants.
when they have lifted up one to the height, and find that he is past his
labor, to tumble him down headlong from that height; if any one in their
Service happen to be overgrown with Riches, to squeeze him like a swelled
Sponge, 'till he has disgorged them all again. They are lovers of themselves,
and love only to please themselves, and look upon all others as born to be
Slaves to them and their Pleasures. This blind sort of Courtiers think they
have many friends, that they have many who adore them, never considering, that
as they have feignedly courted others, so do these counterfeit only a
veneration for them. They rather despise those that are more powerful, and
seldom open their lips but to their disgrace; they salute their Inferiors,
because they have need of them; it is not therefore the Person, but his
Fortune, his great Place, or his fine Apparel that they reverence. But Equals
(instead of that Friendship that ought to be eminent between them) do
continually vex themselves with mutual hatred, calumny, treachery, and
perpetual envy at one another prosperity. You see then, that these Men are
void of all friendship, which among wise and good Men is judged to be the
greatest good that is to be found among Mortals. But would you see them better
painted? When Fortune shows the bald part of her head to them, and turns her
back of them, they are forsaken of all; when she frowns, every one looks upon
them with a squint eye. If they happen to be divested of their gay Apparel, no
body knows them any more. But if these Vestments happen to be bestowed upon
another, though unworthy and infamous, yet he without all controversy and
difficulty, shall, by the virtue of this Vestment, and the Titles thereunto
annexed, be made Heir of all those Honors and Dignities which the former once
possessed. They in the mean time swell and are proud, not unlike that Ass of
burden, which carried the Image of the Goddess Isis, and seeing the Honors
which were given to her, thought they were given to him; so these unthinking
Animals, never consider that they carry their fortune upon their backs, and
that it is not unto them, but to that fortune that People pay respect and
reverence. But you will say, whilst Fortune thus favors them, they live
happily, and have every thing they can desire; and he who thus lives for three
or four years more or less, cannot be thought unhappy all his Life. If to live
in perpetual fear of being thrown from that height of Honor into the lowest
degree of Disgrace, be to live happily, he indeed so lives. If to be always
aspiring to something greater than what he at present enjoys, i. e. to live
in continual discontent, be to live quietly and at ease, then such an one may
be said to live so. But under that outward Pomp, which you only consider, you
do not know what inward troubles and vexations they carry about with them;
Prisons may be splendidly built, and look beautiful outward, and yet within be
full of deep Dungeons, thick darkness, and furnished with all manner of
Torments. Those who you think do live at large, Inhabiting large and stately
Houses, think far otherwise of themselves, they look upon themselves as too
much straightened and confined. Those who in your Opinion are arrived at the
highest step of Honor and Dignity, in their own opinion are but in a very low
and abject state. Some there are who think themselves afflicted with some
Disease, and to be equally as infirm as those who really are so; others, who
when they may be Princes, yet think no otherwise of themselves than as Pages;
and both the one and the other are really what they think themselves to be. You
see some environed with great Troops of Guards, yet how little do they trust
these, though designed for their safety; neither alone nor in Company can they
be free from fear. When alone they look behind them, when in Company they look
about them. They drink out of massy Gold and Silver, but those are the Cups,
not those of Earth or Glass, out of which poisoned Potions are wont to be
drunk. They lie down upon a soft and well-made Bed, and not a Mouse to be
heard, or a Fly to be seen, which may disturb their rest, yet do they always
think they hear something or other, so unquiet is their rest. Whilst the
laborious and weary Peasant, being void of care, lies himself down by some
murmuring Brook, making the Earth his Bed, and the Heaven his Canopy, sleeps
much more sweetly, and rests far more quietly than they. Would you see the
difference between these and those who are confined to some close and nasty
Prison? Both of them are fettered, the one has his Body laden with Iron, the
other his Mind clogged with Golden Fetters; the Prisoner draws his Chains after
him, the Courtier is entangled in his. The fettered Prisoner in the midst of
his sorrow finds comfort, and asswageth his grief with a Song; the Courtier
grievously tormenteth himself, and never releaseth his Mind from Cares. You are
deceived, if you think Courtiers to be at Peace within; you judge them to be in
an high and eminent Place, because they are placed in an higher station. But by
the same way of measuring you may make a Dwarf a great Coloss, if you set him
upon the top of some high Mountain, and measure the Statue by its basis; but
this is no good Geometry, for the Statue is to be considered in, and measured
by it self, without any respect had to the place whereon it stands. And if
you consider it separate from its basis, you will find it but a very small
thing. You judge them indeed to be great, (if there be any such thing as
greatness upon Earth, which it self in respect of Heaven is but as a point) but
if you could but look into their inward parts, especially those of the Mind,
you would not find any such greatness there. True greatness consists in the
contempt of all those vain greatnesses which we see with our eyes, to which
these Men are Slaves, though they do not think themselves to be so; but it is
plain they are so, else they would not so earnestly and indefatigably renew
their endeavors to rise higher and higher, and never think they are high
enough. Some there are who propose to themselves a certain Scope, at which if
they can once arrive, they covenant with themselves there to rest, and enjoy
their ease. Well, the wished for Point is attained, and yet they can scarce
allow themselves a breathing space before they are aspiring at something more.
Every one thinks himself in a low Condition, because he sees another in a
higher Station than he is: But being set up on high, though he cannot be
ignorant that there are thousands, yea myriads of Men who are in a lower
Condition than he, yet still aspires higher; 'till at length either his Spirits
fail him, or else he is tumbled down from that height into some deep Precipice.
But if at length, with all his pains and labor he happen to attain to what he
aims at, then like those who live upon the top of the Craggy and Snowy Alps, he
is not only exposed to Clouds, and Winds, and Hail, and Snow, but also to
Thundrings and Lightnings, to most grievous Storms and Tempests, and to an
injurious Air; which then assault him with a greater power and force; which
things partly through fear shake the constancy of Men's minds, and partly by
great and grievous dangers entangle and involve them; which exert all their
power and strength against the vain and foolish arrogance of such Men, and with
one flash of Lightning not only singe all the Plumes of their aspiring Pride,
but reduce them to smoke and ashes. You will perhaps grant me all this, being
compelled so to do by the Authority of Examples, of which all Antiquity is
full, in which all History does abound. But here it will be objected, That
those, without all controversy, are exempted from all the injurious storms and
tempests, on whose heads Nature her self has placed a Crown, to whom she has
given a Scepter; whom, from their very Cradles she has raised to such a degree
of Honor and Dignity, and with such success, that they seem to have attained
thereunto without any labor or trouble at all. And therefore these, if none
else, may justly be styled happy. But the matter may peradventure thus fall
out, These being Born and Educated in that height may be less sensible of
difficulties than others are, and that may befall them by Use and Custom, which
is storied of those who live near the Cataracts of Nile, who by the impetuous
and rapid falling of those Waters become deaf. He that has been accustomed to
a Prison, does not much long after liberty; those who among the Cimmerians live
in perpetual Night and Darkness, do not so greatly desire Day; those who live
upon the utmost top of the Alps, do not much regard either the thickness of the
Snow, or the nolse of Thunder, or the violence of Storms and Tempests, because
they are accustomed thereunto. Yet are they not exempted therefrom, for,
sometimes it happens that a flash of Lightning fades the Flower of their
Diadem, and dasheth the Scepter out of their hands; sometimes they are
entangled in a great storm of Snow, out of which they do not escape without
great danger; sometimes their Minds are not only darkened, but struck blind by a
cloud of grief and sorrow. They are Crowned indeed, but with a Crown of Thorns,
they carry a Scepter in their hand, but it is but a Reed, which of all the
things in this World is most subject to be shaken with Winds and Tempests, and
their Crown is so far unable to drive away the Lethargy of the Mind, or their
Scepter to ease their Cares and Troubles, that their very Crown and Scepter it
self adds to their Troubles, and they are miserably vexed therewith. Hence
that Saying of a Persian Monarch. That no Man would stoop to take up a Crown,
if he knew the weight of it. But that Prince, though he seem to govern the
Fortune of the World, and at his will and Pleasure to distribute either
Prosperity or adversity among Mortals, though it be thought to be in his power
and his only, to bless all Men with the most profound Peace and Tranquillity;
yet will he freely and ingenuously confess, that in all that World which he
governs, there is nothing else to be found, save only trouble and misfortune.
What do you think would all the rest say, if they would ingenuously answer
those that ask them? I pass by those who in great trouble and grief of Mind
have long outlived their Kingdoms, the destruction whereof they have seen with
their own eyes, and who after the ruin of all their Royal Pomp and Pageantry
have long lived Poor and Miserable. Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant found more
pleasure and satisfaction, when with a Birchen Stepter he governed the Youth of
Corinth, than ever he did when he wore a Crown, and grievously Tyrannized over
all Sicily. What shall I say of Sylla? who so cruelly infested the
Commonwealth of Rome (which was then the Mistress of all the World) with
Depredations, he never enjoyed so much peace and quiet of Mind, as when of his
own accord he divested himself of all Power, Authority, and Dignity. But let us
hear the Judgment of King Solomon, who, though he was endowed by God with many
singular Prerogatives, and great Riches; though he had searched out the hidden
Treasures of the Isles, and the 'till then unknown Riches of the World; yet in
his Ecclesiastes he sufficiently instructs us, that after so long and tedious a
search after the acquisition of that which this World calls Happiness, and the
trial of all kinds of Worldly felicities, he at length had found nothing but
labor and sorrow, vanity and vexation of Spirit. Let us enquire of Augustus
Caesar, who was Lord of the peaceable and well-composed World, and we shall
find him weary of the troubles of his bypast Life, and preferring the quiet
and secure condition of the vile and most abject person before his own, and
judging it an happy hour, wherein, his Royalties being laid aside, he should be
freed from the heavy burden of Honor and Dignity, and suffered to live in
peace and quietness with Men of the lowest Rank and Condition. Let us also
enquire of his Successor in the Empire, viz. Tiberius, and he will tell us,
that he held the Empire like a Woolf by the ears, and would willingly let go
his hold, if he could do it without danger of being bitten thereby. That Man
may justly accuse Fortune, which having lifted him up into so high a Place,
takes away the Ladder by which he ascended, so that he cannot tell how to come
safely down again. Dioclesian, in whom were lively drawn the lineaments of
Princely Virtue and Wisdom, yet preferred his Exile and Banishment before the
Majesty of the Roman Empire. Lastly, let us enquire of Charles the Fifth, whom
this Age judges to be the most happy of all those who in many Ages had lived
before him, and we shall find him cursing his Victories, the propagation of his
Empire, his Triumphs, and his Trophies; and confessing that he had found more
real pleasure and advantage in one days Monastic Solitude, than in all the most
splendid Triumphs of his whole Life. Now shall we judge these Men to be happy
in this imaginary splendour of an Illustrious Life, when they themselves judge
themselves to be unhappy therein? who think their only happiness consists in
the diminution of their greatness, and in the low degree of a more humble Life?
who in all the World can scarce find so much room where they may disburthen
themselves of their so vast and weighty fardel of Honor and Dignity; no Bed so
fit and easy, in which they can compose themselves to rest and quiet. C.

That Man only is truly happy, Who is happy.
who lives contented with his present Condition; and of all Mortals he is the
most unhappy, whose desires are so ravenous, that nothing in this World can
satisfy them, or settle his Mind in Peace and Quietness. Pyrrhus King of
Epirus was therefore very miserable, whose Covetousness and Ambition nothing
less could satisfy than the Empire of the whole World, and therefore put
himself upon all that labor and travel, all those dangers and hazards to seek
that abroad, which he might have found at home, if he could have been content
with his own Epirus. But that famous Alexander the Great was yet much more
unhappy than he, who was Born to a Flourishing Kingdom, and by his Arms had
Conquered the great Empire of Persia, and as he thought all the known Worlds,
yet wept, because there were no more Worlds for him to Conquer; that with the
Spoils thereof he might satisfy his insatiable Ambition; and yet not long
after was forced to be contented with a small Grave, and to bury all his
Ambition within the compass of six foot of ground. Briefly; Suppose these
Ambitious Princes to be born and bred in the highest top of the Alps, to aspire
at the Conquest of Heaven, and to seek out all ways and means how they may come
at it. Suppose any of them should Conquer all the Kings of the Earth besides,
yet would they not be so satisfied, but would contend with God himself about
the bounds of their Empire; their Ambition would know no limits nor measure,
'till God himself at that very juncture of time when they think themselves at
the highest found of the Ladder, with one blow of a Thunderbolt, tumbleth them
down headlong, breaks the Scepter in their hands, and oppresses them with
their own Diadem. In a word, all the felicity that is to be found in Ambition
is, that wicked and ambitious Men grasping at greater things, bring down the
greater evil upon their ownheads. Some there are who by climbing high hope to
get out of the reach of all those Evils, never considering that that which they
so earnestly strive to attain unto, is nothing else but an heap of Evils. I
pass by the unfortunate lot of those, who through the course of their whole
lives have waited upon the Court, in hopes to taste of its beneficence, and at
last are not one jot the better for it. With great grief of Mind they may see
how all things of their own accord flow in to him, who never did, nor ever
pretended to take any pains for them; they may see also how the treasure of
those who with great toil and labor have gathered it together, instead of
being their gain, becomes a great loss to them; they may see how Riches are
conferred upon some, who never stir a foot for them; whilst others who make it
their great care and study not only to get, but preserve them; yet cannot with
all their diligence keep them together. But these kinds of Men are of all
others the most unhappy, because they know their own misery, and in their own
opinion are really miserable. At length let this Consideration suffice, that
all those Riches, which Mammon that Hellish Demon conferreth upon us, are only
a bait, by which he may allure us into his Net; all these present and momentany
things are wonderful shares, by which he deludeth all our labors and
endeavors, which with so much sweat we undergo, to heap up Riches; and that he
at long run is the most unfortunate of Men, to whom Fortune, in the acquisition
of them, is most favorable.

But some will say, it is confessed indeed, that the Covetous Man in the
abundance of his Riches, enjoys no good, and that according to the Proverbial
Saying, he as much wants what he has, as what he has not. It is acknowledged
also that the Ambitious Man even when he thinks himself the most happy, is then
the most unhappy. And that both of them get nothing more certainly to
themselves than hellish pains, racks and tortures. Yet they ask, whether some
may not be found in the number of those who attend upon the administration of
Law and Justice, or do daily wait upon the person of a Prince, who enjoy their
Wealth and Honor with pleasure, who are not liable to any covetous desires, or
trouble of mind arising therefrom, who get and enjoy their Dignities with a
quiet and peaceable Mind? Perhaps some such there might be in former Ages, in
the days of our Ancestors, when some small spark of candor and ingenuity was
to be found among Men. But in this present and so deplorable state of affairs,
I do not see how this can be done; if Men intermeddle in public business, they
will do it either well or ill. If ill, they stir up Divine wrath against
themselves, and make their own Conscience their Executioner, which will
continually vex and torment them. But if well, they procure unto themselves the
hatred and enmity of Men, and those not of the lowest but highest rank, whose
envy and malevolence will lay snares for them, and whose tyranny and cruelty
will cruelly threaten them. If it be popular applause they aim at, they may
perhaps please that furious Beast, but in so doing they must of necessity
displease themselves. If Men be passionate Lovers of themselves, they cannot
choose but displease God. But if they conform their own to God's Will, they
incur a thousand dangers from the World, and procure an innumerable company of
inconveniences to themselves; whence it is, that if you consult the greatest
part of good Men, and such who seem in some measure to be well content with
their present Condition; you will find some willing to change a fine Coat for a
Farmer's Jerkin; others who think those live most happily who have nothing to
live upon; others grievously complaining of the noise and tumult of the Court,
and willing to take any occasion to get rid of it. In a word, you will scarce
find any one who is not weary of his own condition, who does not envy another
Man's, and who is not willing to change his own for that of another. There is
none any where to be found, who are not tired with those studies, to which they
had dedicated their whole lives, though they are still willing and desirous to
live even to old Age. What therefore in such a diversity and contradiction of
minds and humors shall we do? shall we avoid the society of Men, that we may
find out true and genuine humanity? shall we hide our selves in Woods and
Thickets among wild Beasts, that so we may shun those troubles and
perturbations of mind? Or lastly shall we separate our selves from that herd of
Animals, which are called rational, or leave the World, that we may escape the
miseries thereof? If by so doing we should obtain that quiet and peaceable life
which we so much desire, is that a matter of so great moment? For it seldom
happens that those who so earnestly desire it, can so adjust their methods, as
to enter into that way of living when they please; and those that do, seldom
find that peace and quietness which they expected therein. There are some who
strenuously apply their minds thereunto, but meeting with some rub or obstacle
in their way, they stop in the middle of their course, and proceed no farther.
How mad and foolish are they who are stopped by that which in their own
judgment they condemn? but how much more foolish and mad are they, who take
counsel of him, whom they cannot but look upon as their deadly Enemy? Some
there are who are persuaded to engage in business upon this specious pretense,
because it is their duty to serve the public; but those who suffer themselves
to be thus persuaded, do not consider that those who persuade them, do thereby
endeavor to serve themselves, not others; and that the far greatest part of
them would never engage in any public business, if they did not thereby hope
to serve their own private interest. Others are induced upon this account,
because they hope by the example of a good life, and uncorrupted manners, to
bring many to goodness. But let such consider, that in a City infected with the
Plague, it oftener happens that an hundred of Men, and even Physicians
themselves die of the contagion, than that one infected Person is recovered and
restored to health again. To commit our selves to such an infected air is to
tempt God, seeing no more present and safe remedy can be found for this evil,
than to remove our selves from that place where it reigns. It is found by
experience, that it is not less difficult to draw one or two, like Lot and his
Family in Sodom, from an evil custom of living to a better, than it is to
preserve a stream of fresh water, which discharges it self in the Sea, from
the saltness thereof. As for those who excel others in wisdom and knowledge,
whose care it is to preserve both their Souls and Bodies in health, who choose
for themselves a pure and uninfected air, far distant from that, in which
wicked and ungodly Men live, who, having the Angel of God for their guide, do,
according to the example of Lot, retire themselves to Zoar, leaving the Court
for the Country, where they may be at a distance from the World's flagitious
way of living, who choose for themselves some private places remote from the
noise and tumult, and danger too of pestiferous Cities, in which they give
themselves to the study of some Science, or some serious contemplation: I
readily grant that these Men are less exposed to danger than others, but that
they are altogether exempt from the common calamity, I cannot agree, because
they carry their danger along with them. They avoid indeed the Court, but the
Court follows them; they do what they can to withdraw themselves from the
World, but the World pursues them even unto death. And in that immense and
vast circle of this world, they can scarce find out any hole, wherein to hide
themselves from the World; so desirous is the World to deliver them over to
death. But if by some singular blessing of God they happen to keep their heads
above water in all these storms and tempests, yet are they either pressed with
poverty, or vexed with some domestic strifes and dissentions, or grieved
either with or for some familiar friend; so that some way or other they always
find the World in them and about them.

But that which is most deplorable of all, being freed from these outward wars
and troubles, we wage a civil and intestine war with and against our selves;
the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, Passion rises up in rebellion against
Reason, Earth opposes Heaven, and the World within struggles hard for the
World without us; which though it be shunned by us, yet having fixed its seat,
it keeps a constant residence in the bottom of our hearts. But what do I say?
when they themselves, who with tragical and demure looks, and with specious
words, profess to renounce the World, do yet cherish themselves with a vain
ambitious hope of worldly praise and profit. They pretend to sly the World,
and yet run into its embraces. Some shun Honors, and by that means make their
way to Dignities, hoping for their seeming modesty to be invited to accept of
them. Others hide themselves that they may be sought after. So it comes to
pass, that the personated World often lives among those who seem to run from
it. We are deceived, if we follow the multitude, for, in the greatest throng
and concourse of People, the World, and the God of this World keep their Court;
do we love solitude, he, who tempted Christ in the Wilderness, has there his
lurking places. Do we live with our selves, or within our selves, we may there
as well as any where else find a contaminated World; nor have we any other way
to mortify it, but by dying to it. We live in the World, and the World in us,
and therefore we have no other way to rid our selves of the World, but by
departing from our selves; and this departure we call Death. We leave an
infected City, but we do not consider that we carry infected Bodies along with
us, and that we our selves are not the least part of the Infection; so that
though we wander through craggy Rocks, Deserts, Mountains, that Infection is
still our inseparable Companion. Whilst we shun the Contagion of others, we
labor under our own. We may fly the conversation of Men, and yet not abdicate
the Man from our selves. The stormy and tempestuous Sea of this World we find
to be very troublesome, our heart aches, our stomach is sick, whilst we sail
through the waves thereof; and to free our selves from this trouble, we change
that which is firm and solid, for that which is frail and brittle; we leave
that which is truly great and good, for that which is base and little. And yet
we cannot promise our selves any rest or quiet, we are not one jot the better
for our change, we are still beaten upon by the same waters, and tossed by the
same waves. There is one and the same Haven to all Mortals, and that is Death,
wherein they may rest from their labors. The sick Man may be laid in a Chamber
near the Street or Market, the noise whereof is troublesome to him; he may be
removed from that to a more retired lodging, more remote from noise and tumult,
and yet, for all that, his fever continues still, and abates nothing of its
heat and vigor. We may change our Bed, our Lodgings, our House, and our
Country, and yet find no abatement of our troubles; and the reason is plain,
because we every where find our selves, we do not endeavor to change our
lives, but our place, we do not strive to be other Men, but other where. We
desire solitude, that we may shun solicitude, that being at quiet, we may shake
off the burden of our cares. We desire to be at a distance from the
conversation of wicked Men, and for that end we change our places; but
whithersoever we carry our Bodies, thither also we carry our own Covetousness,
our own Ambition, and all the passions of our depraved minds; which a thousand
ways vex us, and a thousand times a day call our minds back to the Onions and
Garlic of Egypt. These do always pass the same Bridge that we do, and
therefore on which side soever of the River we are, we have them to conflict
with. But if we were able to conquer this Army of Vices, which eats up our
Minds, we should without doubt, find peace and quietness, not only in solitude,
but in the greatest throng and press of People.

The whole Life of Man in this World is a continual warfare. We cannot be
secure either from external treacheries, or clandestine counsels and deceits.
The Greeks had no sooner raised their Siege, and founded a Retreat, but the
wicked Sinon troubles all within the walls of Troy, and endeavors to betray
the City to the Greeks. We must always watch therefore, and keep a strict
guard; we must always have our weapons in our hands, lest by our security and
too much confidence, we be every moment in danger to fall into the hands of our
Enemies, out of which we have no probability to escape, no not by the benefit
of Woods, or Rivers, or Mountains; no not though we enclose our selves within a
Press, or hide our selves in some Cave or Den under ground. Only Death, which
by the separation of Soul and Body, i. e. of the pure and clean part, from that
which is impure and unclean, can do this; which whilst they were conjoined in
one Person, could never agree, but were always brawling and at strife between
themselves, 'till either the one or the other was totally subdued and brought
under.

Now though I am not ignorant, how those, who have given themselves up to a
solitary life, do spend their time; viz. either in the study of Sacred or
Profane Literature, and of all Sciences and Disciplines; and that these Men
live far otherwise than those Men who have wholly given themselves up to Sports
and Pleasures, and thereby have rendered themselves as brutish as those
Wild-beasts which they hunt; yet even the wisest of these Wise Men must
subscribe to the censure of the wise Solomon, and confess with him, that all
these things, when seriously considered, are nothingelse but mere Vanity, and
Vexation of Spirit. What Vanity there is in Sciences, or rather in the Persons
who spend their whole time in the study of Arts.
Some there are who spend their whole time in Grammar and Rhetoric, i. e. in
learning to speak well, but do not in the least think, nor allow themselves any
small portion of their time to think, how they may live well. Logic.
Others there are who are so busy in finding out the Riddles of a Logical
Sphinx, that they examine all the trifles and impertinencies of Reasons, to
find out what Reason is, and in the search thereof oftentimes lose themselves
and their Reason too. A ithmetick.
Others there are who by Arithmetic learn to divide every thing into the most
minute Fractions, and yet are so bad Proficients, that they do not know how to
divide a Halfpenny with a Brother in way of Charity. Geometry.
Many there are, who by the help of Geometry can give limits to grounds, and
separate them from one another, who can measure Cities and Countries, and yet
cannot attain so far, as by any rule to measure themselves. Music.
The Musician can bring different Voices and Tones into one harmony, and yet
all the while have nothing that is harmonious in his own mind, nothing, which,
by reason of the perturbations of his Mind, does not run counter to all Musical
measures. Astronomy.
The Astronomer, whilst with fixed eyes he looks up to Heaven, and seriously
vieweth the motion of the Stars, stumbles and falls into the next Ditch;
foretelling things to come, he loses those that are present, though with fixed
eyes he looks up to Heaven, yet has he a Mind which is stuck fast in the mire
of this World. Philosophy.
The Philosopher disputes gravely and accurately of the Nature of things, and
yet cannot attain to the knowledge of himself. Medicin^
The Physician takes care of the health of others, but as to the knowledge of
the Diseases of his own Mind, he is as blind as a Beetle; he very well knows
the beating and alteration of his own Pulse, but how to cure the burning Fever
of his Mind (to which all his thoughts in the first place ought to have been
converted) he knows nothing of it, not in the least regards it. History.
The Historian has the Theban and Trojan Wars at his fingers ends, but is
wholly ignorant of what more nearly concerns him. Law.
The Lawyer makes Laws for all the World, but he cannot make any Law for
himself. Theology
The Divine earnestly contends for and disputes about the Faith, but never
thinks of Charity; he speaks much of God, but to help his Neighbor in time of
need, he regards not. Arts and Sciences therefore do indeed weary the minds of
Men with continual labor, but yield them no ease nor quiet. By how much our
Minds are filled with knowledge, by so much we desire more, nor does any
Science take away those Controversies, which distract the minds of Men, nor
remove those cares and troubles which perpetually vex them. Arts and Sciences
do indeed polish the Minds of Men, but they do not free them from Vices and
Diseases. Learning does indeed cultivate Men, but it does not make them good,
nor truly wise. To all which we may add, that by how much the greater knowledge
we attain unto, by so much we know how small proficients we have been; by how
much the Mind is filled with knowledge, by so much the more it knows its own
emptiness; how great soever the knowledge of Men may be in this world, it is
only of the least part of those things which we are ignorant of; so that the
highest pitch which our wisdom can attain unto, is to know our own ignorance
and want of knowledge; the top of Man's perfection here, consists in the
knowledge of his imperfection, which whosoever attaineth to, is Endued with
greater wisdom than others, and may be reckoned the most perfect. So that at
length, we may conclude with the wise Solomon, that the fear of the Lord is
both the beginning and end of Wisdom, which Wisdom in the World's esteem is
mere folly, and the followers thereof worthy of deadly hatred. Those therefore
who are endued with this Divine fear of God need not fear any evil, because
whatever misfortune they may be liable to, it will certainly be changed for the
better: Nor are they to hope for any good from the world, because they must be
at perpetual war with him, who is called the Prince of this world.

Furthermore, A Recapitulation of Old Age, and all Vices.
in what manner soever we have spent our time, it matters not much. Old Age is
at hand, it silently comes upon us unawares, it hangs over our heads, and
wherever it finds us, whether in the throng of Men, or in solitude, separated
from the society of Mortals, it there assaults us. Most Men do reckon, and bend
all their thoughts to this one thing, that in Old Age being freed from all
their cares, they may live quietly, and indulge the health and quiet of their
wearied Bodies. But it usually happens far otherwise, for, in Old Age Men are
scarce so sensible of any thing, as of the great evil of their by past lives,
that being a fitter time than any other, wherein to call to mind all those
Vices, wherewith the former part of their lives has been contaminated. Then
will they find how weak and unprofitable their Infancy has been, how unbridled
and luxurious their youth, whereby they brought upon themselves weakness of
joints, Palsies, Stone, and many other kinds of Diseases, which by little and
little, but with great pain, pull Men to pieces; then will they remember the
great solicitude and anxious care which attended their Manhood, and how the
same is now rewarded with blindness and deafness, and lastly with the privation
of all sense, except that of pain. There is no part of our Body but is
mortgaged unto Death, we are all, and all together enslaved thereunto; by
reason whereof it happens to us, as it usually does to them who are in debt,
who when they find themselves unable to pay, are in perpetual fear of the day
of payment. And when there is nothing of us left, which Death may not justly
lay claim unto, yet even then our Vices not only live in us, but, whether we
will or no, do daily grow stronger in us. The Covetous Man, though he has one
foot in the grave, yet is daily grasping at more wealth. The Ambitious Man, by
his last Will and Testament, takes care to have a sumptuous and pompous
Funeral, and even after Death erects Monuments and Trophies to his Vices. The
Lascivious Person though he cannot go, his body being worn out, yet will he
creep; though all his Vices have left him, yet can he not bid adieu to them.
The Infant aspireth to Youth, and having attained it, he loathes it; the Youth
longs for a more mature Age, and in that he finds a present evil, and occasion
enough to bewail the slippery and fallacious pleasure of the time past, nor
does he see what there is in growing Age that is so greatly to be desired. That
Man is much less wise than an Infant, who in vain bewails the loss of bypast
time which can never return, and yet has laid aside the remembrance of past
misery. And he is much more unhappy than a Youth, who when Death takes him out
of a miserable life, sees nothing left for him but only matter of despair. But
he, who from his blooming Age has not only waged but stoutly managed a War
with the Flesh and the World, who has undergone so many and so great troubles,
that he might learn to die, and leave the World before his time, and besides
all these evils sees himself pressed with that incurable disease of Old Age,
and his flesh wasted with so many troubles and diseases; yet it often happens
that he finds himself stronger in Spirit. Now what advantage I pray, can this
Man expect from all this, save only this one, that he is now got into the
Neighborhood of Death, that an end of all his troubles and conflicts is now at
hand, that his freedom from this Prison in which he has suffered so much all
his life long, now draws nigh. I omit in this place those infinite Evils
which encompass and afflict Men in the several periods of their Age, as the
loss of Friends and Relations, their banishment, proscription, and many other
such like evils, which frequently occur in this World; one bewails the death of
his Children, another on the contrary complaints of the burden of a numerous
Offspring, this bemoans the death of his Wife, that complains of her living too
long. It is a trouble to some to be in an high place, and no less grief to
another, to be in any place under the highest. So many and so great are the
cares and troubles which compass Men about in this World, that should a just
and full description be given of them, the World it self would scarce be able
to contain it. In a word therefore, he who in the esteem of others is the most
happy of Men, when he compares his happiness with those cares and sorrows
which attend it, finds himself very unhappy; those who admire the splendid
condition of others, if, but for three days, they had the trial of it
themselves, would quickly be weary of it. If Men would but consider those great
inconveniences which they do suffer in the acquisition of pleasures, and what
torturing cares and anxiety of Mind they are exposed unto for the preservation
of them, (I speak of those delights which are of some moment, and worth
valuing, not of those momentany ones which like Flowers fade and wither) they
would quickly be convinced that the possession of them is full of unhappiness
and misery. Whence we may draw this necessary consequence, that Infancy is only
a foolish simplicity, Youth a vain heat, Manhood a troublesome anxiety, and Old
Age an incurable Disease; that our eyes are nothing else but tears, the
pleasures of the Mind only fevers, riches only torments, which continually
torture and vex the Mind, honors only burthensom vanities, quiet mere
inquietude; To proceed from one Age to another, is to change one Evil for
another, that which is lighter, for that which is heavier; so that as one wave
beats upon another, so one trouble comes upon the neck of another, 'till we
arrive at the Haven of Death. Let us conclude then, that this Life is only a
desire of that to come, a grief for that which is past, a loathing of that
which we have sometimes thought to be sweet and pleasant, a longing desire of
that, the taste whereof is yet unknown to us, a vain remembrance of that
condition in which any one died, an uncertain hope of a future state, in which
there is nothing certain, save only the certainty of Death, and the uncertainty
of the time thereof.

Behold Death hastening toward us, The consideration Death n^^ terrible.
see that approaching, which we so much fear. Let us consider it, whether it be
such a thing as it is commonly thought to be, whether it be so much to be
shunned as for the most part it is. We act like fearful Children, who are
greatly affrighted with the sight or thought of personated Ghosts; one cause
whereof is, because we do not conceive it in our Minds as it really is in it
self, but as a sad, sorrowful and horrid thing, such as Painters represent it
upon Walls, and for that reason we shun it. With these and the like vain
conceptions and imaginations we impose upon our selves, and leave no room to
view it in its true and proper light. Let us stay a little, let us fix our
foot, let us take up our standing, where we may take a more accurate view of it
on all sides, and we shall find it quite another thing than that we have
painted in our imaginations, to have a more beautiful face than hitherto we
have thought it to have. Death gives a period to the labor and trouble of this
Life, but of what Life? of that Life which is nothing else but mere calamity,
and a perpetual storm and tempest. Death therefore is the end of all our misery
and sorrow, and an entrance into a quiet Harbor, wherein we may be safe from
the danger of any dreadful storm. Shall we then fear this which freeth us from
danger, and brings us safely to our Port? But, you will say, there is grief in
Death; no body denies that; so there is in the cure of a wound; it is so
ordered, that in all Humane Affairs there is no curing of one Evil but by
another. Incision is necessary to restore a bruised and battered part of the
Body to its former soundness.

But you will say, ^^e Argu^^nt taken ^^^m the ^^^ficulty of ^onfuted.
the way to Life by Death is a difficult passage. So is the entrance into any
Harbor, it is usually strait and narrow, and not to be got into without great
difficulty. There is scarce any thing of value in this World, that is to be
attained unto without great pains and labor. The entrance indeed is difficult,
but it is we that make it so; by approaching it with vexation and grief of
heart, with a troubled and unquiet mind, with fluctuating thoughts and without
deliberation. But if we bring with us a sedate, quiet and well composed Mind to
the consideration thereof, we shall find no such danger, nor any such trouble
in Death. What pain, I pray, is there in Death? does it any thing more, or can
it do any thing more, than affect and afflict our senses? We look upon it as
the source of all those Evils with which we are then tormented; but we do not
consider how much greater Evils we have suffered, with how much greater
torments we have been tired out, which yet have not consigned us over unto
Death; out of what pains and griefs we have escaped, under the pressure of
which we have wished for Death. We give but little thanks to Death for
delivering us from those pains which we do then endure, nor do we well
consider, that whilst we are spinning this thread of Life, whilst we lengthen
it out, we are on all sides encompassed with pain and grief, nor that it is
impossible that we should finish our Lives without them.

We do not well understand what it is that afflicts us, it is not Death, It is
life that afflicts us.
which is the end of our so tedious and troublesome Journey, but the end of our
Lives that grieveth us; it is not the Haven we enter into, which is nothing
else but a quiet retirement from storms and tempests, and a passage to a
blessed Life. We complain of Death, when we should rather with tears bewail our
Lives, much like those who being recovered of some Chronical Disease blame
their health, not the remainder of their Distemper, as the cause of their last
pains and grief. What is it to be dead, but only to be no longer in this World?
And is that so calamitous a matter? Did we never feel any pain, nor undergo any
trouble whilst we were in the World? Are we ever more like to Dead Men, than
when we are fast asleep? And yet we never enjoy more rest and quiet than when
we are so. If therefore we be free from trouble and sorrow whilst we sleep, why
then do we impute those pains we suffer, when the Soul leaves the Body to
Death, which ought rather to be imputed to Life, from whence they proceed,
unless, by the same reason we foolishly accuse that time in which we were not,
for those pains which we endure at our entrance into Life? But if no Man can
enter into Life without pain, why should it seem strange that the end should be
answerable to the beginning? If from the beginning of our Generation we weave
the Web of sorrow, no wonder if in like manner we finish the same. If in that
time when we were not, we were void of grief and trouble, but now that we see
the light, we find our selves encompassed with them, and assaulted by them on
every side; whether of these periods shall we accuse for them, whether that
time in which we were not, or that in which we are and shall be? we never think
we shall die, 'till we find our breath fails us; but if we would rightly
consider the matter, we should find our selves dying every day, every hour, yea
every moment. We look upon Death as some unusual thing, when as we carry
nothing about with us, which is or ought to be more familiar to us. Our Life is
scarce any thing else but a continual dying. Every day that is added to Life,
is a day taken from it; so that the lengthning of it, is but the shortning
thereof. We are no sooner entered into one step of Life, but we are so far
onwards in our Journey toward Death. He that has passed the third part of his
Age, is a third part dead, and he that has passed half, is half dead. The
bypast time of our Lives is dead, the present lives, but is dying, and that
which is to come shall certainly fall under the power of Death. Whatsoever is
past, is not, that to come is not as yet, and the present is, but in a moment
is no more. In a word, our whole Life is nothing else but a kind of Death. Life
is like a Candle lighted up in the Body, which in most Men is melted away by
the wind, in many others it is so agitated, that it seems to be only half
lighted. Some indeed there are, in whom it is preserved whole and entire to the
last. But howsoever it be, what quanity of light soever it gives, by the same
it consumes it self. The brightness of it is a deflagration, its flame
suddenly becomes a vanishing smoke, and its last blaze ends in a stinking
snuff. The same is the Life of Man, for in him to live and die is the same
thing. But if we call our last breath by the name of Death, we cannot deny the
same name to the rest, because they all flow from the same Fountain. There is
only one difference between this Life, and that which we call Death; that so
long as that lasts, it daily supplieth us with new matter of dying, but when
that is ended, there is an end of us too, we are no longer in this World. This
at length is confessed by all, that those who believe Death to be the end of
all their labor and travel, have no handle for fear to take hold on. Whosoever
is desirous of a longer Life, is also desirous of a longer Death. And he who
fears lest Death should come too suddenly upon him, fears also to be too
soon rid of that which occasioneth Death. But to those, who walk by more holy
Rules, Death is quite another thing. For, they do not, like the Heathens, seek
for consolation against Death, but embrace it as a most certain remedy against
all kind of afflictions. Nor do they study how they may despise it, or at least
not fear it, but rather how they may comfortably hope for it, and cheerfully
embrace it. Because they do not look upon Death as the end of all pain and
grief only, but as a storehouse of all good; not as the end of Life, but of
Death, and the beginning of an Immortal Life. Well therefore did the wise
Solomon say, An Heavenly Life only good.
That the day of ones Death is much better than the day of his Birth. And why
so? Because that day is not the last that shall shine upon us, but the
beginning of a never failing day, and of a most happy Eternity. In that
brightness we shall neither be concerned for the trouble of time past, nor
greatly desire that to come; for then all things shall be present, and that
present time shall never have an end. None shall then any more enslave
themselves to those vain and troublesome allurements of the World, but every one
shall then enjoy the true, real, and solid joys of the world to come. Nor shall
any one think it worth his while, to heap up earthly things, being possessed of
the eternal Seats of the Blessed in Heaven, having left behind them, and
rejected all Earthly treasure, which, by its weight, did for some time keep
them under, and fixed down to the Earth. Blind Ambition shall not then inflame
the Mind, they shall not then desire to ascend higher, nor climb the steps of
greater Honors and Dignities; being fixed in a place far above Earth, and all
Earthly things, they will laugh at the madness and folly of those, whom once
they admired; who for little or no cause wage war, who like Children contend
for trifles. They will then find no Civil-war within themselves, the Flesh
being then wholly subdued, the Spirit at full liberty, and enjoying a plenary
and perfect Life, and all the passions and affections which formerly were so
troublesome and tumultuous, submitting themselves to the guidance and governance
of Reason. The Soul being then freed from this nasty and filthy Prison, in
which by so long a space of time it had contracted some ill habits, and was
sat down wearied with laboring under its own weight, shall now look up, and
breath in a purer air, it shall acknowledge its old habitation, and remember
its ancient Honor and Dignity. It is not so, O Friend, as you think, neither
that Flesh which thou feel, nor that Body which thou touchest, is the Man.
Man is the Inhabitant of Heaven, from whence he first came; that is his
Country, that is the air he loves to breath in. If you look upon the Body,
you see the place of his banishment and proscription; the Man does properly
consist of Soul and Spirit, Man is of an Heavenly and Divine Nature, which has
nothing of rude matter in it; but the Body is but as the bark or shell, in
which the Spirit being enclosed, there lies hid, and if we desire to be
delivered therefrom, to live, and behold the light, that shell must be broken,
that bark must be stripped off, and that case must be opened. By what reasons
can we persuade our selves that we live and think, when in the mean time we are
even spent and worn out with long sloth and idleness, and can very difficultly
stretch out our wings; so long as we are laden and burdened with this mass of
Earth, we cannot fly toward Heaven. We see indeed, but it is with such
Spectacles as deceive us, we have eyes indeed, but they are covered with a
white Film, we think we see, but we do but dream, and are mocked by a lying
sight, and fallacious apparition. Whatsoever we possess or know, it is all but
mere Vanity, and mere Imposture. It is only Death that can restore us both
Life, and the sense of Living. And yet so brutish are we, that we suspect this,
as if it were about to despoil us both of Life and Sense. We call our selves
Christians, we believe there is, and after this Life ended, hope to enjoy a
Blessed and Immortal Life, nor do we think Death to be any thing else but only
a separation of Soul and Body, and that the Soul returns to her rest, there to
enjoy perpetual Joys with God, in whom alone all good things, and all the
treasures of Happiness are laid up; and that after the end of this World, it
will be restored to its own Body, which shall never more be subject to
corruption. With these kind of Heroical and most Noble Expressions we stuff
whole Volumes, and yet when it comes to the push, we shake for fear, and
tremble at the voice of Death, as if it were of all things the most horrible.
And why so, I pray, if you believe those things I have even now mentioned? Is
it Happiness and true Pleasure that ye abhor? which, without this, we cannot
pretend truly, nor scarce in part, to believe, we must look upon all that has
been said upon this subject to be only idle talk, and no better than the vain
Discourses of Men in their Jollity. Some there are who constantly and with
sufficient confidence affirm, and will by no means be persuaded to doubt, but
that after this Life, they shall pass to another far better, and much more
excellent than this is; but when they consider the ruggedness of the way, and
the difficulty of the passage thereunto, both their constancy and confidence do
very much abate, and they begin to fear and tremble at the thoughts of it. How
broken and disjoynted are the Minds of those Men, who fear not oftentimes to
expose themselves to Death for the preservation of their Lives, who can be
content to endure a thousand pains for that cause, who to please others, are
not afraid to expose themselves to a thousand wounds, who for the sake of some
vile, frail, and perishing trifles, and such as are not only subject to
destruction themselves, but also draw their owners into the same snare and
ruin, do a thousand times encounter Death, without attaining the End they aim
at; and yet at the difficulty of one small passage, by which they may procure
unto themselves a sure and certain tranquillity, and that not for one day, but
for ever, not a common rest, but such an one as the Mind of Man is not able to
comprehend, do shake and tremble, their courage fails them, and they suffer
themselves to be overcome by their own fears? In vain do they accuse that grief
which they suffer, this is only a frivolous excuse for that little Faith, or
rather that great incredulity under which they labor. For, how they can
possibly persuade either themselves or others to the contrary I see not; when
they choose rather to wear out themselves with Aches in their Bones, with the
pains of Gout or Stone, rather than by some more gentle kind of Death, to
change this Life, without pain, for one far more happy. They had rather lose
Limb after Limb, and die by degrees, that they may miserably outlive their own
Senses, Motions, and Actions, than by some sudden Death to be delivered from
those so many and so great Evils, that they may live, and live happily for
ever. But they have an excuse ready for this, they only desire their Lives may
be prolonged, that they may learn to live. There are none who are ignorant of
that, it is an Art which all have learned; It is not therefore the Art of
Living, but the Art of Dying that we ought now to study and learn; which that
we may happily do, let us learn every day to die to our selves. We cannot
better fortify our Minds against all assaults, than by looking upon every day
as the last day of our Lives. But it happens out far otherwise, more is the
grief, for there is no word more troublesome to the Ears of Men, than the
mention of Death. How foolish and inconsiderate are Men, who for the gain of a
little money are hired to take up Arms; and expose their Lives to the Fortune
and Chance of War? who in hope of Prey will first scale the Walls, and attempt
those Places, from which they have little or no hope to return in safety? so
Prodigally do they hazard both their Bodies and Souls upon that account. But to
exempt themselves from the injuries and mockeries of Fortune, that they may
gain things rare and incomparable, that they may enter into an Immortal Life,
that we look upon as a dangerous and difficult passage; though all the danger
and difficulty thereof is only in learning to know it right, i. e. in
imprinting upon our Minds a right notion of it, considering, that whether we
will or no, that passage at one time or other must be entered into, and passed
by us. But, alas! Men are so much addicted to their own mischief, that there
are few or none to be found, (though oppressed with never so much misery) who
are willing to adventure upon this passage.

Some allege their Age, saying, they could more readily and willingly submit
to the Laws of Fate, if they had attained to the Fiftieth or Sixtieth year of
their Age; but in their blooming years, in their flourishing youth, they think
it hard to leave the world, and a difficult thing to die; that they would
willingly know the world before they leave it. But these Men do not consider
how ignorant they are of all things; they do not think that the greatest Age,
if it be compared either with time past, present, or to come, is but like a
point. Do ye not see, that when ye are arrived at that Age to which ye did
aspire, time past is as nothing, and ye burn with a greater desire of that
which is to come? The remembrance of time past will be troublesome to you, the
expectation of that which is to come will be very tedious, and the present will
afford you but little or no solace and pleasure. You will as earnestly as
before desire a truce with Death. You hide your selves Month after Month from
the sight of your Creditors, and still put off the time of Payment, and are as
unready at the last as at the first to pay your Debt; ye do not consider that
one day it must be paid, and if so, then the sooner the better. Try all the
Pleasures of the world, ye will find none new, ye will never quench your
thirst, though ye drink often; for, that Body which you carry about with you,
is like that Tub of the Daughters of Danae, which was full of holes, and
therefore could never be filled with water; it will sooner be worn out with
use, than you will be wearied with the use or rather the abuse of it. I do not
see why you should so greedily desire long Life, unless it be that you may
consume it in vile and tastless Pleasures, or spend it in hunting after
Vanities; you greedily desire it, that you may prodigally spend it. In vain do
you complain of a Court-Life, and the arrogance of the Palace; that specious
and splendid pretense, by which you would seem more willing, to serve the
Public, to assist your Country, and to give up your selves wholly to the
worship of God, will not acquit you from all blame. He who enjoined you this
Task, knows, without doubt, the day and hour in which it is to be done; he
knows when you ought to labor, and when to rest, and accordingly will direct
his own work. But if he should suffer you to be longer busied in those
troublesome affairs, you might perhaps faint under your labors. Now, if God be
willing, out of his Grace, Goodness, and liberal Beneficence, to pay you your
wages; if he be pleased to recall you from the Place of Suffering, and the
Stage of Labor, and to give you as much for the work of half a day, as for a
whole one; ought ye not then the more to praise his beneficence and liberality,
and to return him the greater thanks for it? But if you will but enter into the
inward Chambers of your Hearts, if you will but examine the Secrets of your own
Consciences, you will be forced to confess, that it is not the Cause of the
Widow and Fatherless, nor the neglect of a Duty to a Son, a Parent, or a
Friend, not unfaithfulness to the Commonwealth, nor to God, by denying him the
Worship which is due unto him, which you pretend and seem to deplore: No, it is
something else that you complain of. There are Houses and Gardens, which
trouble your Minds, there are imperfect Platforms of Edifices and Buildings
which distract your Thoughts; your imperfect and immature Life will not suffer
your Mind to fly higher than these; which you have no hope to perfect, no not
by length of time; whereas if you more accurately weigh the matter, even one
moment of time may suffice for the perfecting of it, if you seriously consider
with your selves, that when this Life shall hasten to an end, all those things
will be of no concern, provided you do but make it your business to finish your
Course well and happily. Now to finish our Course well, what is it else, but to
hasten to our End without trouble, to obey the will of God readily, to follow
him as our Guide cheerfully, and not to do any thing that may make it be
thought that we are unwillingly dragged thither by inexorable Fate or
inevitable Destiny. Then may we be said willingly to meet our Death, when we
approach thereunto with a sure hope, without fear or doubting; when we are well
persuaded that after this present Life ended, we shall enjoy another far
better, and much more excellent. But this hope and expectation of a better Life
must be kindled and nourished in us by a true fear of God, whom if we truly
fear, we shall not need to fear any thing in this world, but may hope all
things in that to come. For, whosoever is possessed of this sure Hope and
lively Faith, Death it self will be both pleasant and grateful to him; knowing
for certain that by the separation of Soul and Body he shall obtain a quiet
Retirement, in which no kind of Happiness shall be wanting to him. And though
there may be some pain in Death, yet will it be allayed with a far greater
pleasure. When the mixed Cup of Hope and Sufferance shall be drunk up, the
sting of Death will have no more strength, which is only troublesome and pungent
by virtue of our own fear. I may add this also; that he, who has thus
fortified his Mind, shall not only not be troubled or dispirited by any Image
of Evil which Death offers to his imagination, but all the misfortunes of
this Life, which are wont to weaken the Minds of Men, and all fear of trouble
and molestation, shall then be despised by him, and set at naught. For, how can
he be said to fear, who hops to die? Does he fear to be Banished from his
Country? No, he knows that he has a better Country elsewhere, from which
none can banish him; he looks upon this World only as an Inn, and himself as a
Guest there; where, though he may have a Being at present, yet does he not take
it for his abiding place. Does he fear a Prison? He can have no more grievous
nor straiter confinement than that of his own Body, than which he can meet with
none more loathsome, nor liable to thicker Darkness; nor can he any where meet
with greater torments and vexations than he finds there. Does he fear least any
one should deliver him over to Death? that is it which he daily hopes for, and
greatly desires. Which whether it happen by Fire, or Sword, or Famine, or
Sickness; whether it linger for the space of three years, or come to pass in
three days, or three hours it matters not; he is not concerned by what way, or
when he leaves this troublesome Life, being always ready fitted and well
prepared for his Journey, and being well assured that as soon as he departs out
of this, he shall enter into an Happy and Immortal Life. The menaces of Death
only are levelled against him, and this is that which he daily expects and
hopes for. Death is looked upon as the greatest and most grievous of all
punishments, but he looks upon it as the best of all those things that are to
be hoped for. The Threatenings of Tyrants are to him in place of Promises, the
Swords of most deadly Enemies are not unsheathed against him, but for him; he
esteems the threats of Death, as the commination of Life, and that by the
most mortal wounds, he shall be conveyed to an happy Immortality. Whosoever
does truly revere God, stands not in fear of Death; and he that is free from
that fear, is not afraid of the greatest and most grievous Evils of this Life.
But some will say, if Death be in the number of those things that are to be
desired, then it will follow, that Life is to be exposed and precipitated, that
we may be delivered from the numerous Evils thereof, and obtain so much Good
thereby. Though that sort of Solicitude does not at all affect me, yet that
there are some who being encouraged with the sure promise of so great and good
things hereafter, are willing to hasten toward Death; but though the Spirit
may greatly long for that Life, yet is it kept down, and hindered from flying
thither by the weight of its Earthly Body. But that which is here objected, is
a perfect inconsequence, and can in no wise be drawn from the premises. That
the Flesh is to be tamed and kept under by accustoming our selves to the
thoughts of Death, is readily granted; that we ought to withdraw our selves
from the World, is not denied; but that we may, when we please, take our selves
out of the World, I cannot agree; because that is not a thing in our own power.
A Christian, as he ought not to shun Death for fear of dying, so neither ought
he presumptuously to precipitate his Life in hopes of a better; though he be
exposed to continual assaults of grief and sorrow whilst here, yet can he not
without reproach and infamy forsake the Post in which he is placed. But when
his Chief Captain shall think fit to recall him thence, then may he readily
obey, and retire without reproach or infamy. A Christian is not born for
himself, but for God, to him he lives, and prolongeth his Life, 'till it shall
please God to give him the reward of a well-spent Life; it is free for God to
take it from him, but not for him to lay it down when he pleases. But if it
shall happen in Youth, in the Flower of thy Age, do as Mariners use to do, give
thanks unto God that with a prosperous gale he has brought your Ship to
Harbor sooner than you expected. But if Death delays its coming 'till Old Age,
give thanks to God also, because though your Voyage has been tedious, yet have
you not met with so many Storms and Tempests as might have befallen you in that
time. In the mean time do you neither make too much have, nor create delays,
for the Wind is not in your power: Shipwreck may be then nearest, when to shun
it, you make too much have into your Port. Before Mid day God is pleased, by
Death, to give rest to some from their Labors, to others at that time, and to
many not 'till late at night. Some he employs no longer than their first sweat,
others he roasts with the heat of the Sun, and some he boileth down, 'till they
are altogether dry, and have no juice left in them. Yet he is not forgetful of
any of his Servants, he has a time of rest for them all, and gives to every
one their reward in due season. Nor is any one deprived thereof, unless he
forsake his Post before he be recalled, leave his work unfinished, and require
his Wages before they are due. Wherefore we ought always to acquiesce in his
will, who in the midst of all our pains and labor can, and often does, refresh
us with sweet and quiet rest. Our Life ought not to be tedious or odious to us,
because of the Labors which we undergo therein; for, that would betray a
sluggish and abject Mind; nor is it to be loved, because of the Pleasures
thereof; for, that would betray our folly and madness. But let us serve our
selves, that we may the better serve God; who, after this Life ended, will
abundantly bless us with true rest and quietness, and pleasures for evermore.
Death is not to be fled from, and indeed it is vain and Childish so to do, for,
it will certainly either meet us in our flight, or pursue us at the heels. Nor
is it to be sought after, lest we incurr the Character of rash and presumptuous
Persons; for no Man, though he would, can die when he will. There is as much of
despair in the one, as of sloth and pusillanimity in the other; and seeing
both of them are within the confines of Vice, neither of them can deserve
either the name of, or praises due to Fortitude and Magnanimity. It is enough
for us constantly, and every hour, to expect Death, that we may not be
surprised by it, nor overwhelmed with it, like unwary and imprudent Persons;
for, as there is nothing more certain than Death, so there is nothing more
uncertain than the hour of Death. This is known to God alone, who is the only
Author both of Life and Death; to whom that we may all both Live and Die, ought
to be the only study and business of our whole Lives.

We ought so to Die, that we may Live, and so to Live, that we may Die Happily.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for L. Meredith, at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE Christian's Sacrifice: A Treatise, showing the Necessity, End, and Manner
of receiving the Holy Communion, together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year; and the principal Festivals in Memory of our
Blessed Savior. In Four Parts. The Fourth Edition Corrected. The Devout
Christian instructed how to pray and give thanks to God: Or, a Book of
Devotions for Families, and particular Persons, in most of the concerns of
Humane Life. The Eighth Edition. An Advice to a Friend. The Fourth Edition. The
Truth of Christian Religion, in Six Books; written in Latin by Hugo Grotius,
and now Translated into English, with the Addition of a Seventh Book against
the present Roman Church. A Book for Beginners; or, a Help to young
Communicants, that they may be fitted for the Holy Communion, and receive it
with Profit. A Treatise of the Necessity and Frequency of Receiving the Holy
Communion; with a Resolution of Doubts about it: In three Discourses begun upon
Whit-sunday in the Cathedral Church of Peterburgh, 1684. To press the
Observation of the Fourth Rubric after the Communion-Office. The Practical
Christian; in Four Parts: or, A Book of Devotions and Meditations: also with
Meditations and Psalms upon the Four last things; 1. Death. 2. Judgment. 3.
Hell. 4. Heaven. By. R. Sherlock, D. D. Rector of Winwick, the Fifth Edition. A
Winter-Evening Conference in Three Parts. The Old Religion demonstrated in its
Principles, and described in the Life and Practice thereof. The Golden Grove; a
choice Manual, containing what is to be believed, practiced, and desired or
prayed for: the Prayers being fitted to the several Days of the Week: also
Festival Hymns according to the manner of the Ancient Church. A Collection of
Offices, or Forms of Prayers in Cases Ordinary and Extraordinary; taken out of
the Scriptures and the ancient Liturgies of several Churches, especially the
Greek. Together with a large Preface in Vindication of the Liturgy of the
Church of England. The Second Edition.
FINIS.

