AN ACCOUNT Of the Present PERSECUTION OF THE CHURCH IN SCOTLAND, IN SEVERAL
LETTERS.

LONDON: Printed for S. Cook. 1690.

Good Christian Reader,
BY the help of a very little Natural Logic, thou may easily observe how far
some Men's specious Pretenses are outdone by their Actions; their Principles
(to which they ought to stand in the Opinion of their great Master Hobbs)
exceeded and bafled by their Practice, since those very Persons who lately
Addressed for Liberty of Conscience, in words full of flattery, do now Usurp,
Tyrannize over others, and deprive them not only of their freedom in Religious
concernments, but of their Possessions; and (that no Barbarity may be omitted,)
even of their precious Lives, only for adhering to that Holy Doctrine which was
once delivered to the Saints, and often established by sundry Laws in that
Kingdom.

And it will be no hard matter, after the perusal of the following Sheets, to
perceive the vast difference between an English and a Scotch Persecution, (as
some call it) how gently and orderly the Church of England proceeded against
the Dissenters, in comparison of the Kirk; who by their Clubs and Batoons; have
come near to, if not outdone the merciless fury of French Dragooning.

And here it may be worthy remark, how dangerous it is for the best Constituted
Established Government to connive at, not to say encourage, the profane Vulgar
in their Riots. A number of wild Beasts, let loose, have as much Conduct, less
Malice, and cannot do half the Mischief: The noise of the Waves, the raging of
the Sea, may as soon be stilled, as the madness of the People; it is a Work
only for a power Almighty: that many headed Beast ought to be carefully looked
after, and watched.

But further, methinks, it is also very clear by the subsequent Tract, that in
some parts of the World there are a company of Resolute Christians, that dare
lay down their Lives for the Truth of those Doctrines which they have formerly
Taught; and that in those places there may be a large History written, not only
of the Doctrine, but real Practice of Passive Obedience, in the Sufferings of
those Men, who contrary to the new Maxims of Government, pay Obedience where
they can have no Protection.

And now Christian good Reader, if thou shall be convinced of the verity of
these foregoing deductions, by the subsequent undeniable Truths; I have but one
thing to request from thee, and that is no more than what thy Profession will
oblige and command thee: I mean to put on Bowels of Mercy and Compassion to the
Poor, Afflicted, Distressed, to help them as much as thou art able with thy
Substance, and to extend that Charity which is already gone over the Alps, and
has assisted the Protestants in France, Hungary, and Piedmont, to thy
Neighboring Brethren, and of thy Communion in Scotland: and if thy
Circumstances are too mean to assist them with thy Purse, be sure to let them
have thy Charity for their Sufferings, in thy hearty Prayers for a happy and
sudden Deliverance from those, who so Cruelly, and Despightfully use them.

Farewell.
The First LETTER.
My Lord,
Some instance of my duty to your Lordship may be justly expected, though at
this distance, and none I think more seasonable and proper from this place,
than the present condition of the Church of Scotland; which though your
Lordship may more fully understand from some other better able to give it, yet
that consideration is no apology for my silence, in so Important an Affair; and
this use at least will be made of my attempt, to testify to your Lordship, how
ready I shall be to give an account of other Transactions not so well known at
London.

THE Church of Scotland is at this time under the Claw of an enraged Lion;
Episcopacy abolished, and its Revenues alienated, the Clergy routed, some by a
form of Sentence, and others by violence and popular fury; their Persons and
Families abused, their Houses ransacked, their Gowns torn to pieces, with many
other injuries and indignities done them, which I forbear naming, that I may
not Martyr your Lordships patience by the bare recital of them. My Post in the
Army as it has carried me unto many places of this Kingdom, so it has given me
as many opportunities to see and lament their condition.

The occasion of all these disasters, is the prevailing strength of the
Cameronian Party, a Faction here taking its name from one Cameron formerly
their Leader, and who was slain in his Rebellion: They are a sort of rigid
Presbyterians, or rather Fifth Monarchy-men; valuing neither K. William nor K.
James, any further, than as these Princes happen to please them; some designing
Heads in the Council and Parliament, have made use of those Men's hands to bring
their ends about, whose weakness otherways was too discernable. From these
disorders they represent abroad the inclination of the People to the
Presbyterian Government, and allege the Popular Zeal; when it is highly
suspected they are only tumults of their own making, otherways upon the
Complaints and Petitions of injured Persons, redress might be obtained, which
however they are so far from, that after such remonstrances they fare the
worse, and have this aggravation to their miseries; that they are unpitied by
those who ought to protect them: Nay now at last the Government it self is
become a Party against them; and where before good Neighborhood and well
affected Persons, screned their Ministers from the Dissenters Barbarity; now
they suffer by a form of Law, Acts of Council, and are themselves reputed
Malignants, and suffer as a discontented Factious People.

And yet the Church Party, both for number and quality was predominant in this
Nation: The Nobles and Gentry are generally Episcopal, and so the People
especially Northward, where to my own knowledge they are so well affected, that
it would be no hard task to bring them, Cultui and Ritibus cum Anglis
Communibus subscribere, as Buchanan says the Ancient Scots did when they stood
in fear of the French, and desired England's assistance against them; my
frequent reading of our Service, and Preaching in their Churches to the
Auditories satisfaction, the Caresses of the Gentry, and respect of the
ordinary People, whenever I met them, infers so much, and plainly discovers
that they neither abhorred me nor my way of Religion. At Perth I was readily
admitted into the Church and Pulpit, though the Magistrates refused the same
favor to the Lord Cardross a Privy Counselor, and the Lord Argyle in behalf of
two Cameronian Preachers; and though the former of these, forced his way
thither upon one Sunday, yet the Lord Provost was better provided against
another, and took the same method, I mean the strength of the City to oppose
and baffle the Latter; and when it was urged by both these Lords, that that
liberty they desired, was granted to me some Sundays before, The Magistrates
excused themselves with an order to that purpose from Sir John Lanier. Even at
Edinburgh it self, the Faction was so weak, that they were forced to send
privately to the West for assistance, before they durst attempt any violence
against the regular Clergy: But the College of Justice being informed of their
coming, Armed themselves and their Friends, and so were secured both they and
their Ministers, until an order was obtained for laying down their Arms again;
Indeed at Glasgow the Faction is stronger, and this Town may be said to be the
warmest nest of the Cameronians, and yet to my knowledge, the most
considerable, and Persons of the best quality are very well affected, and would
prevail, were it not for the assistance of the Mountainers which the
Malignants, have sometimes brought privately into the Town to assault and
overawe the others. But then it is a wonder the adversary succeeded so well,
and that they have got to such an ascendancy as to ruin the Church; if it be
supposed that the Church was so strong to have acted in her own safety, yet it
is not to be much admired at, if this be considered: That in the beginning of
this revolution; the Episcopal Party in Scotland, not knowing at that time how
far things would go, judged it safest for them to keep at a distance, and
having a deep impression of their Allegiance to King James, they appeared a
little too tender and unconcerned in the Election of Members for the
Convention. By which means the discontented and Presbyterian Party, as they are
in themselves always very active, so upon this occasion they became more
numerous, and carried it against those few Gentlemen, that showed themselves
for the Church and old Constitution. The first instance and discovery of their
new strength, was their carrying the Vote for the Committee about controverted
Elections; a point not obtained with difficulty, as the Convention was then
composed, and the consequence was, that no Episcopal Gentlemen should be
admitted in case of a competition, let the number of Electors in Shire or
Borough be never so unequal: Nay many were allowed to be Members of that
Convention, who were incapable to sit by the most Ancient Laws of the Kingdom,
either in Convention or Parliament; and especially such as were not infeoft in
their Estates, of which instances might be given. The Episcopal Party finding
this, most of the Nobility withdrew themselves both from Convention and
Parliament, and if my Lord Dundee had lived (who was a great Patron of this
Clergy) none doubts but that he had changed the whole State of Affairs in this
Nation: And having mentioned that Gentleman's name, I insert one word concerning
the troubles of which he seemed to be the whole occasion in this Country, but
did no more I think than what a great many others would have done, on the same
reason of self Preservation. It appears then, that in the beginning he sat in
the Convention, and intended so to do, till he heard of a design on Foot, to
Assassinate his Person, he complained of this to the Convention, and desired
their Protection: But no notice was taken of it, he repeated his complaints,
and offered to prove the attempt; and declared, that without the assistance of
their Authority, he held it not safe to attend any longer. But all this to no
purpose; the only answer he had, was, that his non-attendance would be no great
loss to them; hereupon he withdrew himself to the Mountains, and being a Person
of great Spirit and good Conduct, he was resolved not only to defend himself,
but call them also to an account, whom he found so much incensed and set
against him, and it is generally believed here, he would have gone no further.
-- But enough of this.

The only means, My Lord, to remedy all this is the dissolution of this
Parliament, and then it is not to be doubted, but the Episcopal Party will show
their own strength, and concern themselves more in a new Election, then they
did in that before; for their eyes are now sufficiently opened, and they see,
though somewhat late, their former omission and mistake; but withal see no
possibility to retrieve themselves, if this Parliament continue. Indeed they
wonder, that His Majesty can be very fond of keeping it a foot, since they have
taken away so eminent a Branch of his Prerogative, as to deny him a Sovereign
Interest here, in what is debatable in Parliament, they wonder that His Majesty
is not sensible, how little they value the promoting of his Service, that
notwithstanding the great necessity of his Affairs, they have not thought fit
to give him a penny: They wonder how the Presbytery of the Church can suit
Monarchy in the State, and that one Ruler should give encouragement to the
setting up of many; they wonder how it comes to pass, that the Clergy of
Scotland should be by a form of Law turned out of their Benefices, for not
praying for King William and Queen Mary in terminis, when the Intruders
themselves, as I have observed, refuse to do it in their Usurped Pulpits, and
it is equally strange, that even these Gentlemen that have complied in that
particular, and in reading the Proclamation, are notwithstanding dismissed their
charges by some other Libel, or in case any be wanting to set the Rabble to
work to out them. So that seeing no Obedience can secure them, but that they
are destined for sacrifices to those wild People; this is the reason, why as
yet they have made no address to the King, nor think themselves encouraged to
do it, since their inveterate and implacable Enemies have His Majesty's ears so
much, as to make such an attempt of no effect to them: And, My Lord, they also
wonder, that the Church of England endeavors not to interpose, and ^^ve the
King to pity them in their present calamity; since the violent Party in
Scotland will certainly inflame the discontented in England, for they are sworn
by their Covenant, to reform England upon their model; and to purge the
Neighbour-land from Popery and Superstition. My Lord, I have had the honor and
happiness to converse with the Clergy here of the first form, and I find them
very reverend, and as far as I can judge very learned and judicious Gentlemen,
they are exceedingly wronged by the Faction, when they are called ignorant and
scandalous; it is an unjust calumny to say they would have betrayed the Laws,
which were made for the defense and security of the Protestant Religion; when
all the Bishops of Scotland, two excepted, were unanimous against the repeal of
the Penal Laws against the Papists in My Lord Murray's Parliament 1685. And as
great is the popular mistake concerning the Bishops Revenues, which they will
have to be one Arbitrary Stipend from the Crown, which makes them precarious
and subservient to the Princes Will; whereas their Incomes are as independent
in that respect, as the Bishoprics of England, and have their several
Localities, as they are here called, or Tithes and Manors to support them:
These and the like objections against them and the regular Clergy, are only
inventions to countenance some Men's resolutions right or wrong to ruin them;
and indeed that they are so resolved not only against the Bishops, but all the
Episcopal Clergy, is evident from hence, that notwithstanding they have those
qualifications, which are even now requisite for the exercise of their
Ministry, as praying for the King, etc. -- Yet some other objection is raised
against them, and this now is a very influencing one, that if all the rest of
the Parish be Church People, and well disposed to their Minister, and but one
single Dissenter among them, it is a sufficient reason to eject and deprive
him, how industrious soever the others are to continue him with them; as in the
instances of the Ministers of Mousegard, Collingtoune, Kirkneutoun, and
Kirklistoune, not to mention several hundreds, that have been routed by the
Rabble, and yet are never restored to the purpose, nor have opportunity to show
whether they will comply or no.

My Lord, if the perfect knowledge of these things has made some impression on
me, it is no wonder upon the account of common Christianity. I am sorry for the
distress of this Church, and in compassion to it, I wish I were able to
contribute any ways to the relief and recovery of it. This is all I can do in
order to that, to give your Lordship the best account I can of her present
circumstances; and what hopes she has in prospect upon the Dissolution of this
Parliament.

What Interest your Lordship has with Their Majesty's, is a thing well
understood; here I humbly recommend the Matter to your Lordship; I beg pardon
for this interruption given your Lordship, by one who desires at all times to
show himself, though he may fail in the manner of it.

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Obedient. Curate and Servant
Glasgow October. 12. -- 89. POSTSCRIPT.
We are hastening to the Seaside, to be transported into Ireland, an
expedition no way suited to a Man of my constitution, but I submit to my Lot
and humbly entreat your Lordship to consider me.



The Second LETTER.
SIR,
I Received yours of the date, etc. Wherein as you express a mighty concern for
the distressed Episcopal Clergy within this Kingdom; so you prescribe me a
task, which will not be so easily performed as ye imagine: You tell me, strange
Representations are made of them by their Enemies, and disseminated through the
whole Kingdom of England; you therefore require me to give you a just and true
account of their Present State and Persecutions; assuring me, it is not so much
to satisfy your curiosity, as to enable you for their vindication. This I say
is a very hard task; for to digest an account of that Nature to purpose (in my
opinion) would require the diligence of a great head, the expense of much time,
and a considerable Volume; for it is hardly possible to set their circumstances
in their due light, without deducing their Affairs from the very Reformation,
and dipping in matters of State all along, as well as of Ecclesiastical
Concern; so closely have the two interests be* still linked together in this
Kingdom: Without that, Strangers will never understand sufficiently, either our
Constitution, or the Grounds on which the Clergy have been obliged to go in
many transactions: Neither will they be able to perceive how unjust and
calumnious the Representations be, which are made by their Adversaries; nor how
partial they are in their accounts, nor how carefully they take all things by
the wrong handle; industriously presenting the dark side of things to the
World, where there is any intricacy; and many times blackening even that which
is truly fair and beautiful, when it makes for their purpose.

Such a work as that, I am hopeful, ye may see ere long; for I have good reason
to believe, some abler Pen than mine will be employed that way by and by: And
therefore, I was once inclined to have referred you entirely to it: But calling
to mind again, what earnestness ye express, to have if it were but some overly
notice of our Case; and withal considering, that herein you may be gratified
without prejudice to that more full and large account: And likewise, that
perhaps a present account (though never so short and rude) may have its proper
usefulness; I have prevailed with my self, to cast together what follows. I
will use as few words as I can, and perhaps I shall not be careful to observe
exact Order and Method; but I hope your goodness will pardon that, upon my
promising to tell you nothing, but what can be made appear to be true, beyond
all contradiction.

I take my Rise from the Death of that Great Prince King Charles II. He left
this Church of Scotland in more peaceful condition, then it had been of a long
time before; it was united to a very desirable degree: Generally all Scotchmen
were of one Communion; for those of the Popish persuasion were scarcely one to
500. The Quakers were not one to 1000. The Presbyterians a good time before,
were divided into two Sects, one (but by far the smaller) was against all
Indulgences given by the King; the other had taken the liberty, which he had
several times granted, but was then retracted. This Party had for the most part
returned to the Churches Unity; their Preachers were generally become our
Hearers, attended duly our Public Assemblies, and many participated of the
same Sacraments with us. There were no separate Meetings kept (at least
publicly,) but very rarely, and only by that other Party, now commonly known
by the name of Cameronians, from one Mr. Richard Cameron, who (being sometimes
Schoolmaster at Falkland, and turned out of that employment for insufficiency)
betook himself to the trade of Field Preaching, became wonderfully admired of
the giddy Multitude, was killed at last in open Rebellion, at Airds-moss, and
so commenced Martyr Anno 1680.

This is that Party with whom these sharp Methods were taken, which are
complained of in the P. of O. his Declaration for the Kingdom of Scotland, and
hugely aggravated by the Paper called the Scotch Inquisition. But had his
Highness known their practices; (how they (by their Manifesto's) rejected K. C.
as their Sovereign, made many Declarations of War against him, Excommunicated
him, and (when they had opportunity) Murdered those, who (in their Stations
according to their duty,) any ways supported his Government, especially
Bishops, Ministers, and Soldiers; pretending it was done in a just War, and
they had Commission from King Jesus for it, etc.) I doubt he would never have
made the treatment they met with a grievance: And if the World knew it (as
perhaps it may, sooner or later) certainly it would have but a very mean
opinion of the Author of that most scurrilous Pamphlet: I only said their
Practices, for all Presbyterians (at lest in Scotland, as will appear in the
Sequel) have really the same Principles: The only substantial difference is,
the Cameronians are the more ingenuous Party; the rest the more subtle. These
own their Principles when they think it seasonable; those, (like the honester
Men) upon all occasions; By these Cameronians (I say) Conventicles were only
then kept; and they were condemned for it by the rest of the Presbyterians, who
at that time (in pretense at least) had fallen in love with Moderation.

When King James came to the Throne, Monmouth in England, and Argyle in
Scotland (you know) raised a formidable Rebellion. Argyle gave out his
Manifesto's, and made many specious pretenses, etc. it appeared he was earnest
to have had the Presbyterians join with him; but his Conditions did not please
the Cameronians; and the rest continued still as formerly in the Kings and
Churches Peace. This made us all hopeful, they had once resolved seriously
never to divide any more, and weaken the Protestant Interest, by rending the
Church in pieces: But it seems they went then on other Principles. They found
Argyle's attempt desperate, and their Party weak, and they had smarted lately
for Enterprises of that nature; therefore they found it convenient to wait a
sitter opportunity.

When that Rebellion was quasht, King James, being a Roman Catholic, turned
serious to have some ease granted to those of his own persuasion; so the
business of the Penal Statutes came to be managed: For this end, it was
resolved the Parliament should meet, and before it sat, several Persons of
Greatest Note within the Kingdom were called up to London; the Duke of
Hamilton, Sir George Lockart (the Greatest Lawyer in the Kingdom) then
President of the Session, etc. Their errand was to concert Matters, and make
way for the King's inclinations in that particular: Amongst the rest, the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, and the then Bishop of Edinburgh, now Archbishop of
Glasgow: They made a condescension too, which afterward was very much talked
of; but I can assure you Sir, it was nothing so odious in it self, as it was
represented to be: I have seen it and considered it, it did not go the length
(by far) of Pensionary Fagels Letter; and to tell the truth freely, so far as I
can comprehend things, they had great reason to go so far as they went; and I
doubt not it shall be sometimes published to the World, and fully vindicated.
But I go on.

The Parliament met; all the Members were qualified according to Law, they took
the Test, etc. But the Court-designs prevailed not; the Penal Statutes were
still kept on foot by that Episcopal Parliament (pardon the Phrase, it is
ordinary in this Kingdom) and some of the Bishops too were active in the
matter. This, to let you see whether the Episcopal Party in this Kingdom can be
said to be inclined for Popery.

This disappointment irritated his Majesty; wherefore, the next great step was,
the suspending, stopping, and disabling all the Laws against Dissenters, and
granting a Toleration to Christians of all Persuasions. This was done by
public Proclamation; the first Edition was dated Feb. 12. 1686/7. The
Presbyterians, as much as any Men, stood amazed at the Dispensing Power at
first, and seemed to see clearly the ill consequences of a breach in that
juncture. This themselves frankly confessed at the beginning; and I know it was
therefore once very near to a general resolution amongst them, never to take
the benefit of it: This all know, that for some Months after the publication of
it, no considerable breach was made; they still continued in the same Communion
with us.

Ye will easily believe (I think) this grated the Popish Party; for they saw
evidently, if the Unity of our Church was not broken, their Interests would
advance but very slowly; so pains were taken with the Presbyterians to make
them separate. And because perhaps they might scruple at the Oath contained in
the first Edition of the Toleration, a second Edition, without that Oath, was
obtained and published. Whether the Arguments which were made use of to engage
them, prevailed with them; or by that time, the second Edition came out, (which
was June 28. 1687.) they had considered the strength of their Party, and found
they would be able to make a Figure; or, they had then got secret instructions
from Holland, to comply with the Dispensing Power, in Subserviency to the
ensuing Revolution (for which I know there be very strong presumptions) I shall
not readily determine. This is certain, they closed presently with the second
Edition.

It Is true, they pretended the terms in the first were too grievous; and that
considerable Mitigations were made in the second; so they could not any longer
be disobedient to the Divine Providence, (you cannot quarrel the expression,
when ye know that according to their Divinity, Providential Occurrences make a
considerable part of the Rule of Faith and Manners) nor neglect so blessed an
opportunity: Although it is evident to any who compares the two Proclamations,
that there are no material alterations. It Is certain the second was designed to
carry on the same Interest with the first; and it had altogether as much of the
Dispensing Power in it: Both alike required, that whoever would have the
benefit of the Toleration, should own the King's absolute Dispensing Power, by
which it was granted; only the Oath contained in the first, was left out in the
second: But even in the first it was not absolutely required; for the
Proclamation says no more, but that, instead of all former Oaths required by
Law, That only should be taken and sworn, by all His Majesty's Subjects, or
such of them, as he or his Privy Council should require so to do: And moreover
it was entirely dispensed with by the King's Letter to his Council, dated March
31. Anno 1687. so that it can never be pretended as a reason, why they did not
separate for three Months hereafter.

Thus the great Schism began amongst us; the Toleration was it is Parent, and
that was the Child of the Dispensing Power. But before I proceed to show how it
was carried on, let me remark one thing: It is, whatever now they may pretend,
it was no ways any Principle of Conscience, which made them separate from us,
on that occasion. My Reasons are these; They had lived in Communion with us,
for some years before the first Edition of the Toleration: They continued so,
even for some Months after that Edition, viz. till they got the second; at
least very few broke off in that interim. While they lived in Communion with
us, they acknowledged their Consciences allowed them; indeed, what sort of
Christians had they been, if it had not been so? Many (I can find their Names
if I be put to it) thanked God, that they were reconciled to us, and frequently
protested all the World should never again engage them in the Schism. Nay some
of the ablest of their Preachers, (within a very few Weeks before they embraced
the Toleration) said to some of the Regular Clergy, they should never do it;
they were resolved never to Preach more in their life time. Further yet, some
of them, even after the second Edition, continued for a long time resolved
never to engage in it; and it cost their Brethren much pains, before they could
overcome that Resolution: yea they tell us, to this very day, if they were
deprived of their Liberty, they could return to us again. Can there be clearer
Evidences for any thing, than these are, that it was not Conscience, but some
other Interest, that involved them in such a general Apostasy from one of the
greatest Concerns of Christianity, the Unity of the Church? Indeed, how could
ever Conscience be pretended in the Matter? We had not the least sinful
condition in our Communion: We still maintained what themselves, the same
Articles of Faith; we worshipped God after the same manner: There is no
imaginable difference between them and us, in the Administration of Sacraments;
if the Orders of the Church of England be valid, so are ours. All that was ever
controverted amongst us, was the point of Church Government; it is true we use
the Lord's Prayer and the Doxology, and commonly require the Creed in Baptism,
which they do not; if these can justify a Separation, we are guilty: But if
they can, let the World judge. And now these things being so, I would further
ask any Man this Question; whether, when they make such clamours now concerning
their bypast sufferings, it can be said, that ever they suffered for
Conscience sake? This by the way.

So was the Schism circumstantiate, as I have said, and being once begun, it
was wonderful to see how soon it came to a considerable height; within a few
Weeks, Meeting Houses were Erected in many places; especially in the Western
Shires, (the great Nests of Fanaticism) and the Churches were drained; Altar
was set up against Altar, and the pretended Presbyter against the Bishop. All
arts were used to increase their Party, and render the Regular Incumbents
contemptible; People were not left to their own choice, to join or not join
with them: But all Methods of compulsion, except downright force were taken to
engage them; if any Man went to Church (whither all had gone very lately) he
was forthwith out of favor with the whole Gang; if he was an Husbandman, his
hap was good if his Neighbors Cattle were not fed amongst his Corns in the
Night time; if he was a Tradesman, no employment for him; if a Gentleman of an
Estate (a Lord as we call them) his own Tenants would abuse him to his face,
and threaten him twenty violences: in short, nothing was left untryed, that had
the least probability of weakening our hands or strengthening their own.

On the other hand, never a more thankful People to His Majesty. Addresses you
know, were then much in fashion, and none more forward than they; witness, That
famous one entitled, To the King's Most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address
of the Presbyterian Ministers, in His Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland; and at the
foot, Subscribed in Our Names, and in the Names of the rest of the Brethren of
our persuasion at their desire, in which Address,

They His Majesty's Most Loyal Subjects, from the deep sense they have of His
Majesty's Gracious and surprising favor, in not only putting a stop to their
long sad sufferings for Nonconformity, but Granting them the Liberty, of the
public and peaceable exercise of their Ministerial Function; as they bless the
great God, who put it in his Royal Heart, so they do withal find themselves
bound in duty to offer their most humble and hearty thanks to His Majesty. Then
they make vast Protestations in behalf of their Loyalty, His Majesty is but
just to them when he believes them Loyal: And by the help of God they will so
demean themselves, as His Majesty may find cause rather to enlarge than
diminish his favors toward them; and they humbly beseech, That all who
promote any disloyal Principles or Practices (as they do disown them) may be
looked upon as none of theirs whatsoever name they may assume to themselves.

And indeed for a good time, (even till they had made a good Party, and the P.
of O. was coming) they continued moderate and thankful to a Miracle; for tho by
virtue of that same Toleration, swarms of Popish Priests were let loose through
the whole Kingdom, infinitely active to gain Converts, compassing Sea and Land
to make one Proselyte, yet seldom so much as one word against Popery in any
Meeting House: Whether it was that they thought it indiscreet, to fall on their
Brethren who stood upon the same bottom with themselves; or they had received
it amongst their Injunctions from the Court Party, not to meddle with these of
the Roman Church; or they did not understand the Controversies (which seems the
most probable,) and so found themselves obliged in prudence to let them alone;
I am not concerned to determine. It Is certain it was so de facto (for once to
make use hereof that term) and I have twenty times heard it confessed by their
constant Auditors. Nay to this very day (though now they may make bold with
Popery, without the hazard of giving the present Court a displeasure, and it
might be expected they should do it, for very obvious Reasons) they very rarely
meddle with it. Their great work is to batter down Antichristian Prelacy and
Malignancy, Prelacy has been the cause of all the Calamities this Nation has
groaned under, God knows for how many years; King Jesus has been banished, the
Gospel has not been Preached in this Land these 27 years bypast. Upon my word
I Am serious Sir, there is nothing more ordinary in their Sermons then such cant;
and though their Texts be commonly taken from the Old Testament, yet they are
all pat and home to the purpose: I could easily give you a great many good
notes of their Prayers, as well as their Sermons; and condescend upon the
particular Persons, etc. But perhaps ye may see that sometimes done by it self.

While in these Conventicles, Popery was so kindly forborne; in our Churches
these Controversies were our most frequent Subjects; especially in these places
where Priests were setting up. This is well known all over the Kingdom; some
suffered, and many were terribly threatened for it, I could give you part of
their Names and Histories if it were needful.

Such was the broken State of our Church from July 87. till October 88, when
the late great Revolution began to cast up; and his Highness the Prince of
Orange was said to be coming to Britain, to deliver us from Popery and Slavery,
and restore our Religion, Laws and Liberties: You know that was an
extraordinary Enterprise; Britain had not been Invaded by any Foreign Prince,
for an hundred Years before. Therefore it was expedient his Highness should
forecast, for as kindly a reception as was possible; to this end he gave out
his Declarations for both Kingdoms. It seems that either his Highness, has been
diffident of the Regular Clergy in Scotland, and dreaded they would not so
readily embark with him, as the Presbyterians were likely to do; or he has had
none, or very few of the Scotch Nation then about him, but such as were of that
persuasion. For the Declaration for the Kingdom of Scotland, we found to be
purely Presbyterian: I Am confident Doctor Burnet did not Pen it; otherwise the
Act of Glasgow had not been put into it as a Grievance: He knows very well upon
what reasons it was made, and if he pleases, can easily justify it; neither
had the Clergy of the West (for they must be the Men) been so generally
pronounced scandalous and ignorant: He was better acquainted with many of them
than so; I had rather think, the Doctor had never seen that Declaration until
it was published. But what though he had? and for Reasons of State, thought fit
to let it go as it was? It Is no great matter. As I said, it was downright
Presbyterian, and presaged no good to us: But God be thanked, it found us
generally in good preparation for suffering Persecution, for we had cast up our
accounts before, and foreseen that possibly we might be exposed to Trials:
though we had not much reflected, that it was to be by the hands of
Protestants. We were confirmed further yet in our suspicions, when we found
that those who were engaged in the Presbyterian Interests, were flocking up to
London, and making the most numerous, as well as active appearances about his
Highness's Court; that they only had his ear, and seemed to be the chief
Persons, who (upon His Majesty's Retirement) transferred the Government of this
Kingdom upon him. By these steps, we began to see further too into the
politics of our Brethren, and upon what Designs they had carried on the Schism
so vigorously the year before; yet we never dreaded that such horrid
Barbarities would be our lot, as afterward were put in execution. And so I am
introduced to the main part of my work, which is to give you a brief account, a
taste as it were of our present Sufferings; which were they represented fully,
and in all their proper Colors, perhaps they would not obtain belief among
Strangers: Nor will I make it my work at present to do it; both for that I
intend brevity, and am unwilling to give to the World such a disgust at my
Native Country, as the Barbarities we met with, fully laid open, must needs
produce in all those, who have any sense either of Christianity or Humanity. In
short then:

It pleased Almighty God (to whose Providence it becomes us humbly to submit in
all conditions) to permit that we should have a Trial of the Cross; whereof God
forbid we should ever be ashamed; and, for that end, to give us up to the
malice of our Enemies, that they might thrust us into the furnace. For carrying
on which Glorious Work, this was their opportunity; when the certain accounts
came of the Prince of Oranges's Resolutions, to come into England, all our
standing Forces were called thither: So that this Kingdom was left destitute of
such means as were necessary to secure the Peace, if any disturbance should
happen to arise amongst us. When that Prince Landed, King James being deserted
by his Army, and soon after disowned by his Subjects; was put upon the
necessity of leaving Britain: And here in Scotland his Council very soon
dissolved, of its own accord, so that in effect the Nation was in a manner
without Government, by whose fault I am not now to inquire. Upon this His
Majesty's sudden Abdication, and voluntary dissolution of his Council, our
Brethren found it seasonable for them to turn serious with us. But it was
expedient to project how their Game might be successful, before they began to
play it: Therefore a Stratagem was contrived; a general Massacre of Protestants
was pretended, and alleged to be intended by the Papists. But how to be
effectual? Seeing their Numbers were so very few, especially on the South Side
of the Forth, which was to be the chief Scene of the Tragedy? for that, this
salvo was at hand: So many Thousands of Irish-men were landed in Galloway, had
already burnt the Towns of Kirkhudbright all to Ashes, and put all to the edge
of the Sword, Young and Old, Male and Female, only three or four Persons (like
Job's Nuncio's) had escaped; and these Savages were posting hard, to be over
the whole Kingdom, etc. This Story flew at the rate of a Miracle; for within
twenty four hours or so, it was spread every where through the greater half of
the Kingdom. No body doubts now, but People were appointed at several Posts, to
transmit it every where at that same time, for it run like Lightning; and
wherever it went, it was so confidently asserted to be true, that he was
forthwith a Papist, and upon the Plot who disbeliev'd it. At first we all
wondered what it might mean; but it was not long before we learned by the
effects, what was the Politic; for immediately in the Western Shires (where the
Fiction was first propagated) tumultuary Rabbles knotted, and went about,
searching for Arms, every body's house whom they suspected as disaffected to
their Interests: The pretext was, that the Country might be in a posture of
defense against the Irish; but the real purpose was that all might be made
naked, who were inclinable to retard them, in the prosecution of their designs
upon the Clergy. Especially they were sure, no Minister should have Sword or
Pistol (as indeed few had any) or any other Weapon, that might be useful for
his defense, if an attempt should be made on him. When they had thus made their
preparations for the work (and you would wonder to hear how speedily, and yet
how dexterously it was done) they fell frankly to it.

It was on Christmas day (that day which once brought good tidings of great joy
to all People;) that day which once was celebrated by the Court of Heaven it
self, and whereon they sung, Glory to God in the Highest, on Earth Peace, and
good will toward Men: That day which the whole Christian Church ever since has
solemnized, for the greatest Mercy that ever was shown to sinful Mortals; that
day I say it was (to the Eternal Honor of all, especially Scotch,
Presbyterians) on which they began the Tragedy; for so were matters concerted
amongst them, that upon that same very day, different Parties started out in
different places, and fell upon the Ministers: Particularly about five or six
of the Clock at Night, Mr. Gabriel Russel Minister at Govean, was assaulted by
a number of Fellows (most of them, as I am told, his own Parishioners, to whom
he had sometimes done considerable Kindnesses) in his own house: They beat his
Wife, his Daughter, and himself too, so inhumanely, that it had almost
endangered his life; carried off the Poor's Box and other Utensils of the
Church, and threatened peremptorily if he should ever offer after that to Preach
there, he might assure himself of more severe treatment.

That same night about Eleven of the Clock, another Party came to the
Dwelling House of Mr. Finnie Minister at Cathcart; he was from home himself:
The Season was not only then naturally cold, but a most vehement frost
prevailed; yet (behold their humanity!) they thrust his Wife, with four or five
small Children out of doors, about Midnight; threw out all his furniture, and
(till after more than half an hours entreaty) would not suffer the poor
Gentlewoman with her tender Babes, to have lodging that night, so much as in
the Stable, nor a Fire of her own Walls to keep the Young ones from the
severities of the Weather. The weak tender Children, (and no wonder, when
exposed to such a rigor) almost all sick'ned thereafter: But whether any of
them dyed, I know not.

That same Night Mr. Buyd Minister at Carmunnock, his Family was as rudely
treated; and in many other places, it was solemnized after the same manner. But
I am not at this time, to give you a particular inventory of all the incredible
Barbarities, which were either on that, or many subsequent days committed: That
would make this Letter hugely swell beyond its primary design; for what work
would it require to represent particularly

How they took Mr. Robert Bell Minister at Kilmarnock, from his Chamber on a
very frosty day, kept him four or five hours bare-headed, exposed to the Cold;
caused his own Sexton to tear his Gown in pieces from his Shoulders; took the
English Liturgy from his pocket, and burnt it with much ceremony in the
Marketplace; calling him Papist, and it the Mass Book in English, etc.

How they came upon Mr. Simpson Minister at Gastown, took him out bare-headed
also, caused his Sexton carry his Morning Gown, to the most public place of
the Village, (for he had put his Canonical Gowns and Cassicks out of the way,
and it was necessary a Gown should be torn; that was an essential formality,)
where they caused him to put it on, and then rent it in pieces. How thereafter
they carried him to a River, forced him to wade through it, at one of the
deepest places, then turned his face Northward, saying to him, get you gone to
your own Country, and see for your life you never look Southward or Westward
again.

How they carried Mr. Miln Minister at Cawdir, his Gown, being from home
himself, in procession to the Churchyard, made a long harangue, concerning
their Zeal for God's Glory and the Good Old Cause, after that a long Prayer,
then rent the Gown; and concluded the solemnity with a volly of shot, etc.
Could there be greater dishonor done to Jesus Christ and his Holy Religion.
How they smote Mr. White Minister at Balingtre, on the face with the butt of a
Musket, for speaking to them with his Cap on, as they worded it, though it was
in his own House, and the Fellow that said and did so, was a mean Peddler. How
they thrust at his heart with a naked Sword; so that both his Clothes and Skin
were pierced, though, such was the good Providence of God, what through the
throng that was in the Room, and what through the distance the Miscreant stood
at, who made the thrust, the Wound was not dangerous? and how they beat his
Wife most rudely, though at that time she was so big with Child, that she had
past her Reckning.

How in a mighty storm of frost and snow, they took Mr. Brown Minister at Kells
in Galloway, then residing at Newtoun, carried him to the Market place about
four of the Clock in the Morning, tied him to a Cart, set his face to the
Weather, etc. in which posture he had certainly died, if a poor Woman, whose
heart it seems was made of softer metal, had not cast some Clothes about him.

How they came on Mr. Francis Ross Minister at Renfrew, and threw out his Wife
the third day after she was brought to Bed, together with her tender Infant.

How they treated Mr. Guthrie Minister at Keir, in a stormy rainy day, turning
all his Family and Furniture out at doors, although three of his Children were
dangerously sick, one of a Fever, the other two of the Small Pox; and how two
of them dyed upon that treatment.

How by their rudenesses to Mr. Skinner Minister at Daly, they first frighted
his Daughter, a Young Gentlewoman Aged about twenty, into a Fever; and then
returning after five or six days, while she was in the rage of it, how they
turned her out of her Bed, pretending to search for arms, though it was very
well known the whole Country over, the good Man's genius lay never that way, and
so disturbed her, that she dyed raving, amongst her last words repeating these
over and over, O! these wicked Men will Murder my Father. How they contrived
and carried on the Tumults at Edinburgh and Glasgow. What Letters were sent to
some; what Citations in Name of the Rabble to others, commanding them to remove
from their Churches and Manses under the highest Penalties. What work would it
require, I say, to digest all these and the like instances fully and
particularly? perhaps the World may sometimes see it done: But it is enough for
my purpose at present, to tell you, that these were their common Methods, and
by such means, in a very short time, more than two hundred were thrust from
their Churches and Dwellings. Do not think I am imposing on you; what I have
affirmed can be so attested, that greater Moral Evidence can be had for nothing.

When ye have read thus far, and when your surprise and first horrors are over,
and, as your temper is, you fall a pondering what I have told you; I am apt to
apprehend, a great many things may offer themselves to your consideration; such
is your humanity, that, I know, you will be casting about for Topics and
Apologies to alleviate this heavy charge, I am giving in against our
Persecutors. What? (so may you think) certainly no applications have been made
to those in power; for what Person in the World bearing the name of a
Magistrate, would not have found himself obliged in credit and honor, as well
as duty, to fall on speedy remedies for stopping such an impetuous Current of
barefaced Wickedness? Or, at most, they have been but pure Rabble, the scum
and refuse of the People, who acted these Barbarities; and they have been so
numerous, so fierce and uncontrolable at that time, that Authority has been too
weak for them; for it is not possible that any of the Nobility or Gentry, and
much less, that any of the Presbyterian Preachers, could allow of, or have an
hand in such Villainies: Or, if these in Power were acquainted with such things,
and yet gave no protection: And if the Rabble had encouragement from any
Persons of better Quality; you can hardly miss to conclude, that these
Clergymen who were so treated, have been the most profligate Rogues in the
World; Wretches, who deserved to be swept from off the face of the earth,
without pity, and with all the solemnities of disgrace and contempt; for what
else can be imagined to justify such proceedings? Thus (I say) perhaps, Sir,
you may reason with your self, when you are making your reflections on what I
have already told you: Be pleased therefore to have a little patience, and
consider what I am to tell you further.

No sooner did these outrages begin, than such applications were made, as you
your self (I Am sure) will judge sufficient. Such of the Peers of the Kingdom,
as were Privy Counselors, and had not gone for London were addressed, but they
could bring us no relief: Our next Work therefore was to send up private
accounts to London, as we had interest or acquaintance, with those of our
Nobility and Gentry who were there. But our Enemies had well foreseen all that,
and had their instruments ready to run down all private Letters, as the
blackest Lies and Forgeries; and we were called all the infamous things that
could be: Our design was to work mischief, and breed disturbances. We were
Popishly affected; and the Politic of such reports was to hinder the
Settlement of the Peace, and Establishment of the Government: In a word, we
were mortal Enemies to the Prince of Orange, and all his Glorious Designs for
securing the Protestant Religion, etc. They received Letters to the quite
contrary; sure they were, their Correspondents were Men well acquainted with
whatever passed; and besides, they were Men of Conscience and undoubted
Integrity: They would not conceal the truth, far less would they write Lies and
Falsehoods; yet their accounts bore daily, that there were no such Persecutions
of Ministers, no Tumults, no Rabbles, etc. The Kingdom was in a most profound
peace, and every Man had all imaginable security, especially the Clergy. With
such bold affirmations as these, they persuaded his Highness, on whom was
transferred the Government of this Kingdom, that all our accounts were most
false and villainous, and he ought not to believe them; only by them he might
judge what a pack we were, etc.

This we were advertised of by some of our Friends: Wherefore, to give his
Highness convincing Evidence, if it was possible, the Brethren of the Seven
Presbyteries, (that you may not be scandalized at the word, be pleased to know
that according to the constitution of our Church, the Presbyters of the same
Diocese, are commonly combined into several Consistories or Fraternities: These
Consistories meet usually once in three or four Weeks for Discipline; lesser
matters they dispatch, and the greater they prepare for their Bishop; and these
Consistories or Fraternities with us, are commonly called Presbyteries) of
Glasgow, Hamilton, Lanerk, Air, Irwiny, Paisley and Dumbartoun, on whom the
Persecution came first, and lay most heavily, communicated Counsels, and
concluded to send up one of their number, well instructed, to acquaint his
Highness with their circumstances. Accordingly Dr. Scott Dean of Glasgow was
sent to London: He had with him, an humble Petition for protection, to be
presented to his Highness, and a Commission to himself to present it; each of
them subscribed by twelve or fourteen hands: Besides these two Papers, that the
evidence might be yet more unquestionable, he had likewise particular accounts
of the injuries and violences done to the Brethren of these several
Presbyteries, from their Respective Deputies, who met with Power to send him,
subscribed with their Hands; and wherein they undertook to make good what they
Represented, upon their highest Perils. What more could be required to make
Faith? to make the truth of our complaints appear beyond all exception? Yet
when the Doctor came to London with these instructions, the good Party
continued to have the forehead to contradict all, and run him down with Noise
and Clamor. However, his Highness was convinced then, of the Western
Barbarities, and seemed willing to contribute for the protection of the Clergy:
So a Declaration was ordered for the preservation of the Peace of this Kingdom,
dated Feb. 6. 1688/9. And, though Dr. Scott was earnest to have had some
Clauses put in it, which had been very proper and useful, but could not obtain
their insertion, it cannot be denied, but it seemed favorable to the Regular
Clergy. But would ye know what success it had? You may learn that from the
Tumult, which happened at Glasgow after it is publication.

Upon the protection promised, and the keeping of the Peace commanded by that
Declaration, at the desire of many People of the best quality within the City,
upon the 17 th of Feb. The Parson of Glasgow ventured to the Pulpit; but was
forced to escape for his life before Sermon was ended; for instantly, upon
notice given that Sermon was in the Cathedral, (by the instigation of their
Preachers as I am told) all the Meeting Houses emptied, and forthwith went to
Arms, came to the Church, discharged several Guns through the Windows, then
made open the Doors by force, etc. In sum, many were wounded, several
Gentlewomen were stripped almost naked, and most rudely treated; but you must
expect the full account of this from some other hand.

So likewise Master James Little Minister at Trailslat, upon the Authority of
the same Declaration, resolved to have repossess'd himself of his Pulpit; but
was exercised to purpose by a Rabble of Females, who tore not only his Coat,
but his very shirt from him; and (such was their modesty) had well nigh done
the like with his breeches, had he not cried to them over and over, that it
would be shame for them to look on a Naked Man, etc.

So little was his Highness's Declaration noticed; and when it was objected to
these Hero's and Heroins of the Reformation; their Answer was ready: That
Declaration was but a Sham-paper; they knew his Highnesses mind and resolutions
better than so; they would go on in their work, and take their Hazard. Then
began we to see further into the Presbyterian Intrigues than we had done
before; for it required no great skill either in Logic or Politics, to
conclude, that they had got their instructions from their Agents at London, to
continue in their laudable Zeal, notwithstanding that Declaration: But of this
more afterward. In the mean time, an account of that Tumult at Glasgow was
forthwith sent to his Highness, by an express: But no notice was taken of it
further, than to refer it to the Meeting of Estates, which was to set on the
14th of March: But before I come to that

Give me leave once more to return to that Declaration, and take notice of one
thing: Because the Interests of the Clergy were concerned: It is, it is
commanding all then in Arms (except the Garrisons of the Fortresses, and the
Company of Foot entertained by the Town of Edinburgh) within the Kingdom,
instantly to disband; and it is discharging all Persons in time coming to take
Arms, or to continue in Arms upon any pretense whatsoever, etc. There was an
Intrigue in this which perhaps ye have not remarked. When the work had gone on
so successfully in the West, especially in Glasgow, by the first Tumult, which
was there on the 17th of January, the Presbyterian Party in Edinburgh,
(animated thereto by their Brethrens success and solicitations; for constant
correspondence was kept amongst them) were upon the resolution of falling upon
the Clergy of that City likewise: And that it might be done to purpose, the
Western Zealots were coming to the Town in Troops daily. This the Magistrates
had notice of; wherefore considering what Tumults had been raised in the City
before, how unfixed the Mobile was, and how much led by Wildfire and Humor;
and so, being diffident of the fidelity and forwardness of their ordinary
Guards: They invited the College of Justice to take Arms, and assist them in
defending the Ministers and securing the Peace of the City. That College
(consisting entirely of Gentlemen, and Persons of liberal and generous
Education) readily complied with the invitation, formed themselves into a
Regiment, and kept Guard for several days according to the Military Discipline.
One would think there was nothing here amiss. On the contrary, it was certainly
a most generous Action, an undertaking becoming good Patriots, (thus to appear
against Tumults and Rabbles, the greatest Plagues of Society, and Enemies to
the peace of Mankind) and deserves to be transmitted to Posterity with the
highest Encomium's: Yet as generous as it was, and as much of equity as it had
on it is side, it galled the Presbyterians exceedingly; for thereby their
Designs were disappointed; they durst not fall upon the Regular Clergy: Knowing
what good affection these Gentlemen had for them, and that if any Tumult should
arise, they would undoubtedly behave themselves according to their Character.
Wherefore, they presently sent up hideous accounts to London to their
Correspondents, of that matter, who (having then most of the Princes ear)
easily gave him a wrong notion of it, and thereby got that Clause put into the
Declaration. Nay Sir, such a deep grudge did that behavior of these Gentlemen,
beget in the hearts of the Party, that (notwithstanding they disbanded
immediately upon the publication of that Declaration) there were designs on Foot
since, to have called them to a strict account for it: But why do I say it was
designed? The Council, I think in June or July last, actually appointed a
Committee to try them; and several Advocates were cited to appear before them,
and examined concerning the matter: But it seems (whether it was for shame, or
some other cause, I know not) they thought fit to let it fall; for they have
not yet proceeded further: Yet on the other hand, the Western Rabbles were
never called in Question; on the contrary, they were still encouraged; as you
shall hear incontinent. And so I return to

The Meeting of Estates; you know they met on the 14 th of March, and (as I
said) to them the troubles of the Clergy were referred: Perhaps for your making
a distinct judgment of our Affairs, it might be requisite, that you should have
a full and just account, how that Meeting was called; how many of the Nobility
were absent from it; what scruples the best and most judicious of the Gentry of
the Nation had about it; how thin the Meetings of the smaller Barons were in
many Shires, when the Commissioners were chosen; how industrious the
Presbyterian Party was to have all Members Elected of their own Gang; what
methods were taken with the simpler Members, to impose upon them; what
partiality was used in the matter of controverted Elections; what violences
were threat'ned to some; particularly several Noblemen, etc. and what snares
were laid for them: These I say, and twenty other things might perhaps be
necessary to be punctually and particularly related to you, before ye can have
an exact understanding how things went amongst us. But I have resolved all
along to keep close to the treatment of the Clergy: And never to meddle with
the State, but so far as they are concerned; and therefore if ye are curious to
know these things, ye must either make your application to some other Person,
or at least wait till another Occasion.

The first thing done by the Meeting, which could comprehend the Clergy was an
Act that passed on the 16 th day of March; whereby they voted themselves a full
and lawful Meeting of the Estates; and that notwithstanding of any thing that
might be contained in King James's Letter, which that day was presented to
them, they would continue undissolved, until they should settle and secure, the
Protestant Religion, the Government, Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. This
Act, when it passed gave those of the ejected Ministers, who were then at
Edinburgh, occasion to refresh themselves with the hopes, that presently their
Case would be considered; for they were as good Protestants as their
Neighbors; and they had Rights and Liberties, asserted by Law, and which (by
consequence) ought to have been settled and secured, as much as the Rights and
Liberties of any other Subjects. But alas* these hopes lasted not long: For not
only was their Case never so much as mentioned in the Meeting for a good time;
but, with no good aspect to them, upon the 28 th of March, when several of the
Bishops, many of the Nobility, and not a few of the Barons and Burgesses had
deserted the House; the thanks of the Meeting were given to that very same
Rabble, which had turned out the Ministers: It Is tr^^ indeed, the Complement
was not made them, under that Reduplication; but I say, they were generally the
same Persons; and that appearance they made, and for which they were thanked,
was as illegal, though not so barbarous as the other. But though that was
disheartening enough, it was not the worst on it: That wounded the poor
sufferers, but indirectly; but the next step was downright for their Ruin.

It was that Famous Proclamation dated April 13 th. and entitled a
Proclamation against the owning the Late King James, and Commanding Public
Prayers to be made for King William and Queen Mary. Famous, (amongst many other
Reasons,) for Keeping and Turning out of their Churches and Livings, the Better
as well as Greater half of the Clergy within the Kingdom. And therefore let me
give you the History of it a little more fully.

On the 4 th of April, the Meeting of Estates, by their Vote, declared that
King James had forfeited the Right to the Crown, and the Throne Vacant. On the
11 th a Proclamation was Published, declaring William and Mary, King and Queen
of England, to be King and Queen of Scotland: But all this time,
notwithstanding the Meeting had Sitten very near to a Month, the Rabble were as
busy as ever; and that same Week, had fallen on Mr. Stewart Minister at Ratho.
He represented it, and gave in his Petition for Protection, on the 13 th day,
being Saturday. This gave them occasion to talk of the Clergy indefinitely, and
of the troubles many of them had met with. But what should be done in Relation
to them? It was moved, and the motion was entertained, that a Proclamation
should be ordered, requiring them to disown King James, etc. and promising
Protection to all that should give dutiful Obedience. But then another Proposal
was made, by his Grace the Duke of Hamiltoun, President of the Meeting, viz.
That those who had been thrust from their Stations, might be likewise
comprehended, commanded home to their Respective Churches, and promised
Protection upon their compliance. This was vigorously opposed by several of the
Members; particularly Sir James Montgomery of Skelmorly, said, that was
downright to take the whole West on their Top; it would disoblige all the
Presbyterians; and might have very fatal consequences: Therefore the Meeting
must not look so far back; it would be enough if Protection were promised to
those who were in the actual possession and exercise of their Ministry, which
reasoning prevailed; so it came to a Vote, and carried, that the Proclamation
should run so, as it was afterward published.

However plain the Case may appear to be between K. James and our present King
William and Queen Mary, which was the main Subject of the said Proclamation;
yet at this time I shall only tell you what effects it produced upon the
Clergy. It distributed them (as is evident to any who reads it) into two
Classes: Those who on that 13th. of April were (as it words it) presently in
the possession and exercise of their Ministry; and these who before that day,
had been expelled by the Rabble: To the former it grants a Conditional, to the
latter no Protection at all, but entirely excludes them from their Churches and
Livings, and the benefit of the Government.

I Will dispatch what I have to say concerning these of the latter Class first,
because their Case is so very singular, and will make the distinctest Figure,
when all is subjected to one view, contracted into one body. I have already
given you a taste of the Violences done them. I have likewise taken notice,
that you may be apt to impute all that was done, merely to the Mobile, and
believe, none of the Heads of the Presbyterian Party were any ways accessory to
such Barbarities. I have also insinuated such Arguments already, as may
convince you that you are in a mistake, if ye think so: Particularly, the pains
were taken to run down all Accounts that were sent to London; (to what purpose,
if these Agents were not on the Plot?) The no notice taken of the Prince's
Declaration for keeping the Peace; but the Rabble's turning more insolent after
its publication; (unaccountably sure; if they had not their secret Instructions
from their Correspondents at Court, to go on vigorously, notwithstanding that
Declaration) and the business of the College of Justice. These seem to me to be
unquestionable Proofs, that they were the Heads, the Politicians of the Party,
who plotted and encouraged all the Tumults, and the Persecutions of the Clergy:
They were the Projectors, and at the bottom of all, and the Mobile was nothing
but the base Instrument.

If it were needful, I could give you plenty of further Arguments, to make it
yet more clear and evident: For (to omit what I have often heard from Persons
of no contemptible Worth nor Intelligence, viz. That there were Letters sent
from London, which gave life to the Irish Plot mentioned before, and first set
the Rabble in motion: And that the Lord Stair, now President of the Session,
was one Author (as perhaps can be made appear), I could tell you, that I have
been assured by People of undoubted Credit, that they have heard some who were
then very active in rabbling the Clergy, confess since, that the Course was
unchristian and horrid; that they had never attempted it, if they had not been
put upon it by Persons of influence; that they were made to believe, there was
no other way to introduce the Presbyterian Government; that they now heartily
repented, they had been so forward; and if it were to do again, it should never
be done. I could tell you further, that even after the 13th. of April, the Earl
of Crawford wrote Letters to the Leaders of Rabbles, encouraging them to
persist in their laudable Atchievments; and this so very certain, that the Duke
of Hamilton produced one of them in June or July last, before the Council, and
put the Earl to it, and he could not deny it; and that it made a great noise,
not only at that Table, but through the whole City. And Monroe of Towlis, one
of the Members of Parliament, seeing one day a Minister in his Gown in the
Parliament-Court, pointed at him, crying, Behold Antichrist! Will no body tear
the Gown from him? The Minister (a pretty bold Fellow) replied, But, Sir, you
are the Beast! Which made the Spectators laugh; and so he escaped: For you your
self would have sworn he spoke truth, had you ever seen the Man. Further yet;
to this very day, not one Presbyterian Preacher, has ever been heard condemn
these Methods from his Pulpit. On the contrary, I could name more than two or
three, who actually approved them; commended the Zeal that put People upon
them; encouraged them to proceed; and in the new Church of Edinburgh ( De Iure,
the Bishops Cathedral, De Facto, now a Presbyterian Meeting House) it self,
where now the great concourse is of all the Nobility and Gentry, who follow the
new Guises, it was told them in a Sermon, That such shakings as these (it is
the very words) were the shakings of God, and without such shakings, his Church
was not in use to be settled. Once more yet; Notwithstanding Rabbling has been
all along in fashion, and continues to this moment; and many Complaints have
been made; yet never hitherto, so much as one Proclamation taking notice of it
in form, that is, bearing a Narrative to this purpose, Whereas such Violences
have been done, etc. never yet, I say, so much as one Proclamation of that
nature, never so much as one Person punished for such Violences. On the
contrary, the two or three West-Country Regiments, who pass under the name of
Cameronians, seem to have been sent of purpose to quarter in the Shires of
Perth and Angus (Where the People have still been peaceable and affectionate to
their Ministers) that they might persecute the Clergy; for, wherever they go
they do it, and they are never discharged, nor taken any notice of. You would
wonder to hear what a wild Pack these are; I dare not (dreading Prolixity)
enter upon a full particular description of them: But I cannot forbear to tell
you one Fancy which made me laugh, lately when I was told it: It was, That they
will not obey their very Officers, but when they please, especially in point of
Exercise, when they are bid do this or that, two days together, they will not
do it for any Authority or Persuasion; and when they are challenged for it,
they tell, They are not for set Forms. This by the way. By these things,
methinks, you may see pretty clearly now (tho nothing more could be adduced)
who acted the Rabbles: But, in truth, I needed not have been at the pains of
collecting these Arguments; for,

By that Proclamation of the 13th. of April (to which I now return) all the
antecedent Deeds of the Rabble are clearly justified, and fair permission, or
rather fresh encouragement is given them to persevere in their course. The
Clause is as plain as it is wonderful; these are the very words, And the
Estates do prohibit and discharge any Injury to be offered by any Person
whatsoever, to any Ministers of the Gospel, either in Churches or
Meeting Houses (tho these Meeting Houses and the Conventicles kept in them,
were most directly contrary to Law; and the States by their forementioned Act,
dated March 16. had declared they would sit till they should secure the Laws
and Liberties of this Kingdom) who are presently (N.B.) in the possession and
exercise of their Ministry therein: Whereby, all forced from their Churches
before that day, were entirely excluded the Protection of the Government.

If you doubt that that was the sense and purpose of the Clause, I have to
produce another Proclamation, which will make an excellent Commentary; it is
that which is dated August 6. 1689. and entitled, A Proclamation anent the
Ministers; whereof the Narrative runs thus, Whereas the Estates of the Kingdom
did prohibit and discharge any Injury to be offered by any Person whatsoever to
any Minister of the Gospel, either in Churches or Meeting Houses, who were
then, viz. on the 13 th. of April last in possession and exercise of their
Ministry. And thus in the mandatory part* Therefore the Lords of their
Majesty's Privy Council, in their Majesty's Name and Authority do strictly
command and charge, that none of the Leidges take on hand to do any Violence or
Injury to any of the Ministers of the Gospel, whether they be preaching in
Churches or Meeting Houses, and that all such as were in possession and
exercise of their Ministry, since the 13 th. of April last, be allowed to
continue undisturbed, and that such Ministers as have been removed,
dispossessed, or restrained, without a legal Sentence in the exercise of their
Ministry, since the 13 th. day of April last, shall be allowed to return, etc.
Are you satisfied now? But I have yet more to give you.

It is a Passage in that Address, said to be signed by the greatest part of the
Members of the Parliament of Scotland, and delivered to his Majesty at
Hampton Court, the 15th. day of October 1689. The words are, It is not unknown
to your Majesty what have been the sad Confusions and Disorders of this
distressed Country under Prelacy, and for want of its ancient Presbyterian
Government (What scope for commenting here! if it were my present business?)
And now the whole West, and many other Parts of Scotland, are at present
desolate and destitute, having only Ministers (it seems you own these Ministers
to be no Ministers; otherwise, having them, how can the West, and these other
Parts, be said to be desolate and destitute?) called upon the late (K. James's)
Liberty, without any Benefice or Living, or convenient place to preach in.
There are a thousand things here quereable, if a body had inclination to be
nice; for example, who knows not that these Ministers were so wise as to make
secure Bargains with the People who called them, before they would set up their
Meeting Houses amongst them? Who knows not that these Eight or Nine Months by
past, they have possessed themselves of all the Churches of the West, and
lately of many elsewhere too? How then can they be said to want convenient
places to preach in? And for what reason can the late Liberty be mentioned? Was
it a sufficient or a legal Warrant for the People to call these Ministers, and
these Ministers to embrace such Calls? Or was it not? If it was, there was Law
for the Dispensing Power, by consequence King James is injuriously treated; If
it was not, how comes that People and these Ministers now to be so kindly dealt
by? Did they not comply with the Dispensing Power? Did they not what they
could, by their compliance, to assert it, and give it countenance? For my part,
I think, Reason would say, they deserved as well as any, to be comprehended in
the Third Vote, which that Address mentions: But you may interpret this a
Digression; be it so: This I Am sure is home; you see the Addressers tell their
King, that now The whole West is desolate and destitute. What if he had
answered, How comes it to be so? Were there not Ministers established there by
Law? What is become of them? What (can you imagine) could they return to that,
besides one of these two, viz. Either again to address his Majesty for
restoring and repossessing those who had been thrust out? (an Overture, which I
readily believe, got never footing amongst their inclinations) Or to own that
they justified what was done to these Ministers? And indeed the Air of their
Language, in that passage, imports not only that, but likewise, that they take
it for granted, that their King will readily justify all too; tho I am
confident he neither can nor will.

Would you have more yet? As on Christmas day, Anno 1688. the Rabble first fell
upon the Clergy of the West, as I have said; so on Christmas-Eve, Anno 1689.
the Council did interpose their Authority, and have discharged all the inferior
Judges within the Kingdom to pass Decreets in favors of any Ministers who were
not in possession and exercise of their Ministry on the 13th day of April, Anno
1689. for the said Years Revenue; adducing for their reason, that often
mentioned Act and Proclamation, inferring thence, that no Judicature can
determine in the Case, except a Parliament.

Thus, Sir, you may briefly understand the state of those Ministers who were
thrust from their Churches by lawless Force and Violence: Poor People! It would
extort Compassion from any Breast not altogether Stone, to see what sad
Circumstances many of them have been in this good time by gone; having had
little or nothing to maintain themselves with, and (in many instances) their
numerous Families, but the Charity and Benevolence of some good Christians: For
generally our Scottish Benefices are but small; and the most part of the
Western Clergy had got little (till very lately) of their Stipends for the Year
1687. and nothing of the 1688. And by what I have said last, you may guess what
they may expect of the Year 1689. Can any History show a President for their
Case? Were ever Christian Ministers so treated in a Christian Kingdom? Will
this pass with after-Ages for good Service done to the Protestant Interest? --
But it is now time

To pass over to the other Class, consisting of those who escaped the Hands of
the Rabble, till that mysterious 13th. day of April was over: They had indeed a
certain sort of Protection promised them by the Proclamation: But perhaps such
an one, as you shall hardly find its like under any Government; tho I have set
down the Clause in part already; yet I will repeat it over again fully, that
you may the better understand it: And the Estates do prohibit and discharge any
Injury to be offered by any Person whatsomever, to any Minister of the Gospel,
either in Churches or Meeting Houses, who are presently in possession and
exercise of their Ministry therein; they behaving (N. B.) themselves as
becomes, under the present Government: That is, if they shall read the
Proclamation, and pray for K. William and Q. Mary, as King and Queen of
Scotland; let no Violence be done them: But if they shall not (be it upon
whatsoever Reasons and Necessities) To your Task Rabble; you shall not be
questioned for it: Is it not an excellent Government (think ye) where Rabbles
are constituted Judges, and Executors of Laws? Was not that brave protection,
at a Juncture, when the great Statesmen and Casuists of both Nations, were
making Protection and Allegiance reciprocal? Yet verily Sir, considering the
posture of Affairs then, no Man (without doing Violence to his own Sense) could
put a better gloss upon it. Nay, what I have said, is the least that can be
collected; for in many Men's opinion, these words [ They behaving themselves as
becomes, under the present Government] were designed to comprehend more than
Reading and Praying, and were put in of purpose to expose those to the mercy of
the Rabble, who (tho they should obey that Proclamation) should at any time
thereafter, refuse Obedience to any thing. That a Presbyterian Meeting, Council
or Parliament, should enact or determine; certainly the words will go so far
easily, and without stretching: It Is as certain the Rabble herefrom took new
encouragement, and kept up the Persecution as hot as ever; and for my part I
can see no other thing like Law for turning out some Ministers afterward, who
had both Read and Prayed, for not observing the late Fast: But of that more
anon. Such was the nature of the Protection granted by that Proclamation: I
proceed next to as wonderful effects.

It required the Ministers within the City of Edinburgh, under the pain of
being deprived, and losing their Benefices, to read it publicly from their
Pulpits, upon Sunday next, being the 14th. at the end of their Forenoons
Sermon; and the Ministers on this side of the River of Tay, upon the 21st. and
those be North the said River, on the 28th under the Pains aforesaid.

You see what expedition it required of the Ministers of Edinburgh: It was
voted and enacted in the meeting on Saturday about Twelve of the Clock, it was
late before it came from the Press, it came not to their hands till it was much
later: Some of them were in Bed before they heard of it: some received it not
till the next morning: some (as I am told) never saw it till they were in the
Pulpit. To be sure, none of them had time to consider it thoroughly, examine the
great Matters contained in it, or deliberately satisfy their Consciences about
it. The seven English Bishops, the year before, by their example, had taught
the World that Ministers were not to Read Proclamations fide implicita, and in
a blind Obedience. The present English Parliament, had given several months to
the Clergy of that Kingdom to deliberate in, before Sentence was to be past
against them, for not complying with the present Revolution. If I am not
mistaken, no Church man in England is Deprived to this day; but you know that
better than I. Sure I am, this our Proclamation contained things of as great
Consequence as that which these seven Bishops found so choking, that they
rather choosed to run the greatest hazards, than enjoin their Clergy the
Reading of it: or as that Law either, upon the account of which so many of the
English Clergy are now under Suspension: yet the Clergy of Edinburgh must Read
and Pray the very next day, and upon so short Advertisement, or be instantly
Deprived: nor can the inclinations of the people be pretended for so quick
dispatch; for I am told, (and I know it to be certain) that when the Gentleman
who Preached that day in the new Church, had refused to Read it, and the Clerk
(after the Blessing pronounced) fell a Reading of it; the whole Congregation
(which that day was very frequent) run so hastily out of the Church (such was
their indignation) that before he had half done, there was not so much as one
to hear him. So went matters in that Church.

In other Churches of the City, some gave Obedience, and some did not. These
who did it not met with pretty quick Justice, for the very next Week they were
Cited to appear before the Committee of Estates.

The first who appeared, was one Doctor Strackan, Professor of Theology in the
University, and one of the Ministers in the Trone Church, an ingenuous Man, and
a truly Primitive Christian: he made a Defense for himself, which many thought
so reasonable then, that I cannot yet forbear to give you an account of it. It
was this for substance, That the Estates had found (in their claim of Right)
that none can be King or Queen of Scotland till they have sworn the Coronation
Oath: for this Reason they had Declared that James, by assuming the Regal
Power, and acting as King without ever taking the Oath required by Law, -- had
forfeited the Right to the Crown: That all the Estates had yet done, was only
to nominate PP: William and Mary, as the Persons to whom the Crown should be
offered; but they had not yet actually made the Offer; far less had PP. William
and Mary accepted of it: it was possible they might refuse it, but though they
should not, yet they could not be King and Queen of Scotland till they had
solemnly sworn the Oath, which was not yet done; therefore he did not see how
he could Pray for them as King and Queen of Scotland; nor how the Estates, in
reason, or in consequence to their own Principles, could require it of him. I
am told the whole Committee was silent; perhaps it has been for want of a ready
Gift: yet, for all that, (and though he had in Family twelve or thirteen
Children) there was no Mercy for him. His Defense (though it could not be
answered) was not sustained; no further time to deliberate, was granted; but
upon his confessing he had not Obeyed, he was forthwith Deprived, and made the
first Sacrifice. Nay, some other Ministers there were, who after they had used
the same Defense, told moreover, they were willing to Pray for them as King and
Queen, so soon as they had taken the Oath; but this availed not neither: they
had not obeyed as the States had enjoined; and so they were Sentenced. Thus
proceeded that Committee, and in two or three Weeks Deprived betwixt twenty and
thirty: and all too before PP. William and Mary had sworn the Oath; or (which
is all one) before accounts came from London that they had done it: for upon
their assuming the Royal Power (you know) the Execution of the Law belonged to
them and their Council, and so there was no more place for that Committee.

PP. William and Mary took the Coronation Oath, at White Hall, the eleventh of
May 1689. Then they named their Counselors for this their Ancient Kingdom.
They were, for the greater part, persons who had never sat at that Table
before: they came in upon a new Found; they had New, and untryed Rules to walk
by, new Designs to carry on: in a word, they had as it were, a split new
Systeme of Government, to temper and establish. Besides, there were great
varieties of Humors at that time in the Nation. Armies were in the Fields, and
a Parliament was to Sit: so the Council had a vast Ocean of Business before
them: and so for some Weeks, they had not leisure to fall upon the Clergy; that
is, till about the middle of July. Till which time leave we them, and return to
the Rabble, to see what they were doing in the Country.

And indeed they were making clean work wherever they came; I dare scarcely
say, it was all one to them, whether the Ministers they fell on, had complied
or not complied: for now the Complyers were meeting with the sharpest measures.
After the Proclamation came out, for a while they remitted something of their
eagerness: they hoped the Proclamation (considering how deeply all who had
taken the Test, were sworn, never to disown King James as their Sovereign)
would ease them of their Labor; but when they found that severals were winning
over their Oaths, and giving Obedience to the Estates Orders; it gave them new
provocation. If such should be suffered to possess their Churches peaceably,
and securely, the Presbyterian Interest should still be at a loss: a great
many, of Episcopal Principles, would still be in Office, which afterward might
breed disturbances: Besides, if we may believe the Rabblers themselves, it
irritated them to see any man give Compliance, upon this Head, that they looked
upon them, as perjured, and men of no Conscience. Whatever the cause was, a
good many found the effects: such as Mr. Mac math, Minister at Laswade, (on
whom three or four fellows, came one night, as he was going betwixt Edinburgh,
and his own House, stabbed him with Awls and Bodkings, so that he had ten or
twelve Wounds in his Belly; filled his Mouth, till they had almost choked him,
with the dung of Horses, and then left him in that sad condition*) Master
Burgess, Minister at Temple, (though he was so earnest to Read and Pray, that
when he saw the Proclamation was not like to be sent to him by Authority,
against the day appointed, he was careful to provide a Copy for himself, and
Read it very faithfully,) Mr. Mac Kenzie, Minister at Kirklistoun, (who had for
some years been Chaplain to Major General Maccay's Regiment in Holland, and was
actually with him under the same Character at the Battle of Gillychranky,) Mr.
Hamiltoun, Minister at Kirknewtown, Mr. Nimmo, Minister at Colingtown, Mr.
Donaldsone, at Dumbartown, etc. Nay* I could instance in a whole Presbytery in
Galloway; for upon the News that such a Proclamation was ordered; these
Brethren met, and consulted what was to be done; and in brief the Resolution
was, that all should give Obedience, and all truly did it; (as, who could blame
them, seeing besides the Authority of the Estates, they had the Votes of their
own Consciences for it?) But within a few days not one of them escaped
Rabbling: they were as indiscriminately turned out, as they had unanimously
transferred their Allegiance from King James, to King William and Queen Mary.
Twenty more such instances might be adduced, if it were needful: but there are
three so very remarkable, that I cannot pass them by.

One is, Mr. Mac Gill, Minister at Killsyth, within the Presbytery of Glasgow:
all his Neighbor Presbyters had been turned out before; he alone, of that
Fraternity, was spared till the 13. of April was past. The good Man loved his
Religion; and upon the precise day, gave Obedience. But the very next Sunday a
Rabble Convened to interrupt him. It is true, they were that day repulsed with
loss; for many of the people of the Parish appeared for him; and one of the
Rabble was killed in the Scuffle. The poor Minister (no blood-thirsty Man) had
fled for his life to the Earl of Kilmarnock's House, who lived at no great
distance; and knew not how the Fray was ended: but one Master Maxwell, the Lord
Kilsyth's Factor in these Parts, seeing the Man was dead, took Journey straight
for Edinburgh; that he might be the first, for acquainting the Lords of the
Committee with what had happened. He told them, the Minister had given
Obedience to the Proclamation; so that he had a right to the Protection
promised in it; that therefore when the Rabble came upon him, a good many
people found themselves obliged to defend him, not only out of respect they had
for him as their Pastor; but also for their own security, for if they had not
done so, they might have been liable to the Law, which obliges the several
Parishes within the Kingdom to protect their Ministers; otherwise to be
answerable for his Losses. He told them likewise, that one had lost his life in
the Quarrel.

The Lord Ross was then Preses of the Committee: when the Gentleman had thus
far told the Story, his Lordship told him gravely, he wished the Rabble had not
been opposed; such people cared not what they did; it had been better to have
yielded to their humor; he was truly sorry that blood was shed; but in such a
Case, it would be hard to get the Actor punished. But my Lord (said the
Gentleman) he was none of ours, he was of the Rabble who was killed: what do
you say (replied his Lordship) one of the Rabble! That may draw deeper than you
are aware of. This to let you see the humor which then prevailed amongst our
Leading Men in the Government; and it brings me in mind of a Scotch Proverb I
have heard, viz. That Halkertons Cow is a very old Beast. But how ended the
Matter? The next day, after they had buried the Man who was killed, the whole
Company fell upon Mr. Mac Gill's House, Rifled it, broke and tore all his
Furniture to pieces, destroyed all his Books and Papers, carried off about 15
or 20 l. Sterling of money, plunged his Hats and Periwigs in the Churn amongst
some Milk, and pounded them with the Churn-Staff, emptied all his Meal out of
its Repositories, and then the Chamber-Box amongst it; in a word, you have
hardly read or heard of such Barbarous tricks as they played: The poor
Gentleman sustained of Loss to the value of 150 l. (a good Stock for a Scotch
Minister) and to this day has got neither Reparation nor Protection.

The other two instances shall be Mr. Craig, and Mr. Buchannan, both Ministers
within the Presbytery of Dumbartoun: I do not adduce them for any thing that
was odd, and singular, in the treatment they had from the Rabble; for so far,
they received only the common Measure: But to let you see how little it avails
Men not only to have Complied but to have done good Services, if they have once
owned Episcopacy. These two Gentlemen are Barons in Stirlingshire, that is,
they hold such Lands of the King in Capite, as gives them the privilege of
Voting at the Choosing Commissioners for Parliament, or being such themselves;
if they should be Chosen. Now, when the Members were a choosing for the late
Meeting of Estates: the Gentlemen of that Shire of Stirling were almost equally
divided about the persons to be Elected for their Representatives. Four were
Listed, two downright Malignants, Cavaliers, who would have been clear for King
James his Interest; and two who were as clear for that, of the Prince of
Orange: When it came to be determined, the Votes ran equal, till it came to the
two Laird-Ministers who were last, so they had the casting of the Balance, and
both did it in favors of the new Statesmen: what could they have done more
for the Prince of Orange? Their Votes made (and by consequence were equivalent
to, two Votes of) two Members of the Meeting for him; besides (not being turned
out before the 13. of April,) they did all Duty, Read and Prayed, etc. Yet now
that they are Rabbled, no more Protection for them, than for the Rottenest
Iacobite in the Kingdom. These are the advantages of Compliance amongst us; not
one of all those whom I have named (and as I said, it were easy to name as
many more) has Protection to this day, none of them dares venture to their
Churches, few or none to their Houses.

By this you may see what were the circumstances of the Clergy, during the
interval between the Conventions being Changed into a Parliament, and the
middle of July, to which I now return.

What was the Cause which made the Council intermit so long the Deprivation of
the Non-Complying Ministers, I am neither able nor careful to know: but it
seems such delays were extremely unpleasant to the Presbyterian Preachers:
wherefore they thought it convenient to give them the Spur to purpose. The
Parliament was then Sitting; so they gave in a long Address to it: wherein,
having thanked God for the great Deliverance wrought by his Instrument, the
Pious and Magnanimous William, then Prince of Orange, now, by the good hand of
God, their Gracious Sovereign; Complemented the Commissioner, and the rest of
the Lords of Parliament; and miscalled Episcopacy, and Bishops, and all that
own them, as very ill things; they come to their demands, where appears in the
Van, the freeing this poor Oppressed Church from such Oppressors and
Oppressions.

There are many other things in it worthy of your notice, particularly their
Petitioning that the Church Government may be Established in the hands of such
only who by their former Carriage, and Sufferings, have evidenced that they are
known Sound Presbyterians -- (This is nothing like Prelacy) and, their
requesting that the Church thus Established may be allowed by their Lordships
Civil Sanction, to appoint Visitations for purging out Insufficient, Negligent,
Scandalous, and Erroneous Ministers, (and what Apostle, if ye give him a
Prebyterian Jury, shall not come within the comprehension of one of these
four?) This Address, I say, was given in to the Parliament: and what wonder
though the Council was awakened by it?

And, indeed, immediately, they fell to work, the Inquisition revived, and
Summons were issued out, at the Kings Advocates instance, against a good many;
but before I come to their success, there is one thing I must not forget to
tell you.

Every Man knows, and the commonest Equity requires, that public Edicts or
Proclamations, (especially when they are peremptory in their Diets, and
positive in their Sanctions) ought to be very carefully and Authentically
transmitted to those they do oblige. Yet never less care taken since the World
began, of the just and regular Conveyance of any thing, than there was of that
Proclamation to the Ministers: there were hundreds of Ministers to whose hands
it came not till the days prefixed were expired: particularly in the Shire of
Fife, there are betwixt seventy and eighty Parishes; yet I am credibly told,
only six Copies came to the Sheriff Clerks hand, who was ordered to distribute
them: and there was no such Clause in the Proclamation, as allowed, far less
required them to obey it any Sunday thereafter: for what I remark this, you
will know instantly.

Summonds were issued out, as I have said, and the Council (that they might
show a suitable zeal, and be every whit as forward as the party would have
them, or as it is possible for the Ecclesiastical Visitations themselves to be,
sit when they will) proceeded as summarily as could be desired. The person
cited heard a long Libel read, concerning the Irreligion, the Ingratitude, the
Contempt, etc. of his Disobedience. After that, the President of the Council
asked him, if he had read the Proclamation upon the day prefixed, and if he had
ever since prayed publicly for King William, and Queen Mary: (it was added
sometimes by Name and Surname, when the Earl of Crawford was President) as King
and Queen of Scotland? if he answered [No] to both; no Mercy for him. But I
must be a little more particular on this Head.

Be pleased to know then that there was one Clause which in thirty or forty
Libels, was never omitted. This, word for word: Whereas the Ministers, by a
Proclamation dated the thirteenth of April, were commanded and required to read
the same upon the respective days therein contained, and pray -- Yet when the
said Proclamation of the Estates was sent to him (the person accused) at least
came to his hands, or of which he had knowledge (mark the Gradation, and the
Equity of the several steps, especially the last) he was so far from testifying
his Gratitude, and giving due Obedience thereunto, that, etc. And who could
stand before such an Indictment? And indeed few were able. For

If the Minister pleaded, That the Proclamation had never come to his hands,
and was ready to swear it (as many might have done with a good Conscience) it
profited him nothing; he was guilty, by the third step of the Gradation, just
now taken notice of. And it was all one, whether he had prayed for King William
and Queen Mary, or not, if he had not read: e. g. Mr. Guild, Minister at North
Berwick, told the Council, he had prayed for them from the very first day he
had heard they were proclaimed King and Queen, and none in the Kingdom was more
joyful than he, that a Protestant King and Queen were set on the Throne, (I
have half a dozen more of instances of the same nature) yet he was deprived.

If he had both read and prayed, yet if it was not done on the precise days,
there was no escaping. So it fared with Mr. Hay, Minister at Kinsongahair,
Hunter at Stirling, Young at Mony-vaird, and many others, especially Mr. Aird,
Minister at Tory-burn, (an old, grave, serious man) who, tho he brought a
Certificate from the Sheriff of the Shire where he lived, bearing, that he had
read the Proclamation on the Sunday immediately after he received it, was yet
deprived without remedy.

One thing was remarked all along, viz. That the Question was never put
whether they would give Obedience thereafter. No, there was no place for
Repentance. And I remember to have heard, that some of the Magistrates of the
Town of Perth, alias S. Iohns-Town) after both their Ministers were deprived,
came to the Earl of Crawford, and insinuated to him, that they were hopeful.
One Mr. Anderson (a good natured man, and a very good Pastor, and who had been
one of the Ministers of the said Town) perhaps might be induced to comply yet;
and that he would be extremely acceptable to the People, if he were reponed,
etc. But presently his Lordship turned huffy; and told them, that was not so
much as once to be mentioned. So they were forced to let fall their design.
Indeed his Lordship is a most zealous Reformer, and as fit for being President
at a Board, for turning out Episcopal Clergymen, as could have been fallen
upon. I remember a certain Minister who had been a good time of his Lordships
Acquaintance, went to him, thinking to have prevailed with him, to have got the
Diet deserted; and they had a very pleasant Conversation. His Lordship asked
whether he used publicly to pray for King William, and Queen Mary. He
answered, he prayed as the Apostle directed; and cited 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Well
(says my Lord) that is enough for us to deprive you. After some more Discourse,
the Minister said, he was sorry for the Desolations of the Church. And his
Lordship answered very quaintly: But so am not I. The Work had never gone on so
successfully, if he had not been on the top of it. For many times they had
enough to do to get a Quorum of the Council (which can consist of no less than
nine) on these days that were set apart for the Clergy: (in effect, it was no
wonder tho ordinary Stomachs had some kind of loathing to it) and then his
Lordship was in a strange pickle, and you would have seen strange running of
Macers through the City, calling them from their Lodgings. But let me return to
my Thread again.

Within a few days, the Council found it would make tedious work to have them
all cited at the Advocates Instance, therefore they took a shorter method; it
was the inviting and allowing the Parishioners and Hearers of such Ministers as
had not obeyed, to cite them before the Council. This is the great purpose of
that Proclamation dated August 16. mentioned before. The Clause is this: As
also that such Ministers who have not read the Proclamation, and prayed -- may
be deprived of their Benefices. -- The Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council do
invite and allow the Parishioners and Hearers of such Ministers -- to cite them
before the Privy Council, etc.

This Proclamation served two purposes; first it made quicker dispatch, and
then, by it, opportunity was given to every malicious person to frame what
Libels they pleased against their Ministers. Both ends were served pretty
successfully; Deprivations were more expedite, and more numerous than they had
been before; and many Crimes and Scandals were libelled against several
Ministers. It Is true, the Council never examined Witnesses, nor sustained
themselves Judges concerning any thing but what was contained in the Grand
Proclamation, viz. Reading and Praying. And they frequently declared, (when the
persons calumniate, craved, that these Scandals and Immoralities might either
be tried, or put out of the Libel) that they were not to insist against them on
these Heads: yet the Libels with these things in them stand still on Record;
and I hear full Accounts of them are sent to London, and daily Printed there,
and making good company in the Coffee-Houses. No body ever doubted but there
was something insidious and base in the Design. Who knows but the
Ecclesiastical Visitations, when they sit, will sustain all these Libels as
sufficiently proven already, seeing they were before the Privy Council, and
Sentence followed upon them? And God knows what other Fruits the keeping of
them may produce! But certainly it had looked much liker to fair dealing, it
had been more generous, and worthy of Gentlemen, if the Council, (seeing they
were not to dip in these matters) had discharged them to be libelled, and
suffered no more to be brought before them, than what they were to try and
judge of.

One would think, now the Course was quick enough against the Clergy; yet
within some other few days, it was found not to be expedite enough neither. In
many Parishes there were none who would pursue their Ministers; and besides, it
was somewhat expensive for the Lieges to raise Summons before the Council:
wherefore

A further step was made, a third Proclamation was ordered, entitled, For
citing Ministers, who have not prayed for their Majesty's, and Dated August 22:
whereby (that with the greater expedition, and the least expense to the Lieges,
the former Proclamations might attain their intended Design and Effect)
Invitation and Allowance were again given, not only to the Parishioners and
Hearers of the disobedient Ministers, but also to the Heretors of these
Parishes (tho living at never so great distance) and the Sheriffs and their
Deputes, and Magistrates of Burghs, and the Members of the Current Parliament
within their respective Bounds, to cause cite such Ministers before the
Council, and Warrant was granted to Messengers at Arms, for citing them, and
such Witnesses as were necessary; and that the Expedition might be greater yet,
a Messenger's delivering a Copy of this Proclamation, either in Print or Writ,
signed by his Hand, to each Minister that should be cited by him to any Tuesday
or Thursday, (these two days of every Week were set apart entirely for that
purpose) six days after the citation, for all on this side the River Tay, and
fourteen days for all beyond the said River, etc. And further it was declared,
that the said Proclamation was without prejudice of any Citations already
given, or to be given, either upon the former Act of Council, or upon Warrands
from the Council Board. Have ye not enough of expedition now in all Conscience?
Yet to make all surer still; and because they were finding, that severals had
complied, whom they were willing to have turned out, but had no shadow of Law
to do it by!

At the instigation of the Presbyterian Ministers, Elders and Professors (as it
self words it) upon the twenty fourth of August, forth comes another
Proclamation for a general Fast, to be kept on two Lord's Days, viz. on this
side the Tay, Sept. 15. on the other side, Sept. 22. No question it was
designed for a choking morsel; for perhaps you never saw any thing like it.
That it required Christians to fast on the Lord's Day, (tho that was harsh
enough, no ways fitted for a tender Stomach, and would have gone very ill down
with Tertullian himself, as much as he was for Fasting) was the thing least
nauseous about it, except the bad Grammar, and the good Stock of great Nonsense
that was in it. For in effect (besides what was relative to the present State
of Affairs) it not only unministered, but even unchristened, the whole Regular
Clergy, and these who owned them; and expressly bore, that God for a long time
(since the Restitution of Episcopacy, no doubt) had restrained the presence of
his Spirit, in the Conversion of Souls, etc. And this Proclamation was to be
read twice, and the Fast to be kept once, in every Church and Meeting House
within the Kingdom. Now to the success.

What wonder tho these Twin-Proclamations (for so I may call them, considering
how short the interval was between their Dates) wrought strange feats amongst
the poor Clergy? as indeed they did. For many who (with hard Gripings) had got
the Proclamation of the thirteenth of April digested, could not yet get that
for the Fast, forced over their Throats, particularly I could name two of the
Ministers of Edenburg, who the very next Week were deprived for it. And the
other Proclamation was pretty good at citing those who had refused to give
Obedience, as you may guess by its Nature. Yet I must confess it has not done
all the skaith it might; as you shall hear anon; Although it wrought wonders,
of a right strange Address. For by virtue of it, when some Ministers, far
North, in Murray, or Bamf, or somewhere thereabout, were Cited, and Compeared;
but were like to find the Diet deserted, because no Accuser appeared against
them: By virtue of it (I say) upon that occasion, the Lord of Brody, one of
the Privy Council, being a Member of the Current Parliament, representing that
Shire where these Ministers lived, came to the Bar where they were standing,
and smiled, and told them, he would be their Accuser, and was as good as his
word; and then stepped into his Seat at the Table again, and Voted for their
Deprivation. And so I come to the end of my History, when I have told you that
thus it stands with the Scottish Clergy at present.

All our Bishops are turned out, and their Order abolished by Act of
Parliament, dated July 5. their whole Benefices for the year 1689. are taken
from them by public Proclamation. The Number of Presbyters within the Kingdom,
may be about 900 and 40 or 50, or so, of these about 300 are turned out by
Tumult and Rabble; and their Expulsion is (as to the most part) justified and
(as to the rest) connived at by th^^ Government: About 200 are deprived by
sentence of the Privy Council. Those who continue in their Stations (being the
lesser half) may be subdivided into two Categories. A great many have given no
Obedience yet, and have escaped, by the distance they live at, from Edinburgh
and Fanaticism; or because no body has delated them; what may be such Men's Fate
(if the present Methods continue) is easy to imagine. The rest have complied;
but how far that may secure them, God only knows; but (if I may give my
Conjecture) I think I may tell them: They have not done the half of what will
be necessary to save them; and I think I have plausible grounds to say this on.
For not only can I give them a certain Minister by the hand, to whom a certain
Nobleman (a Privy Counselor, who makes a considerable Figure at present, and
who is Presbyterian enough too; though it seems he has more than the ordinary
ingenuity of the Party) said, he was truly glad, that Minister had made no
compliances (they were Cousins; perhaps that made him speak more freely) and
assured him, the present compliance would save no Man; for the resolution was,
that none of the Episcopal Clergy should be spared. This I know to be of
certain truth: Besides, the Council lately were beginning to let so much out:
For when some Ministers in Argyle-shire (who Preach in Irish, by consequence,
whose places cannot be so easily supplied, whom therefore they were not earnest
to lay aside for altogether) were before them; though they made them the
gracious offer, made to few or none before, that they should be continued in
their Ministry, upon their yet obeying the Proclamation, yet they would not
allow them their own Churches: The secret of the matter is, all must be once
out, none must enjoy their Benefices, by virtue of a Presentation from a
Patron, and a Collation from a Bishop; if any shall be permitted hereafter to
bear Office; they must come in upon the new found, that is to be erected after
the Presbyterian Model. This I am told the Statesmen are clear for: But then
the Kirk-men must have their terms too, and what they may be, I am not he who
can divine. Presbytery, Presbytery in Folio must be one; perhaps the Covenant
may be another: And God knows what purgative Doses, those who have ever lived
under Episcopacy must take, before they can be admitted into such a pure
Society: I doubt it would puzzle Mr. Salathiel Stiff-collar himself, your
famous English Mountebank, to tell beforehand what the Recipe may be: This is
certain,

No compliances any of the Conformed Clergy have yet made, have brought them so
much as one inch nearer to a Reconciliation with the Presbyterians: Some have
been at work enough to get their Countenance; particularly Doctor Robinson, and
Mr. Malcome, two of the Ministers of Edinburgh: They have Preached once and
again, against the Pride of Prelates, and the Corruptions of the Church, etc.
(especially the Doctor, whose great complaint it has been of late, that he has
groaned these twenty seven years bypast under the Yoke of Episcopacy; although
at the Restitution of the Government, he did not think his Mission good, having
had only Presbyterial Ordination; and therefore was Reordained by a Bishop.)
They have sent once and again to the Presbyterian Clubs, in treating they might
be admitted into their Fellowship, and to sit in their Presbyteries: And they
have used all Arts for gaining belief, that they are in earnest; for instance,
they are both Prebendaries of the Cathedral of Edinburgh, and the Bishop pays
to each of them ten pound Sterling. per annum: Through the long surcease of
Justice that has been in the Kingdom, till of late; his Lordship had got none
of the Revenue for the year 88, and wanted not reason to doubt if ever he
should have it; so their Fees for that year were resting: Wherefore in August
or September last, they pursued him jointly, before the Bailiffs of Edinburgh,
(no competent Judges) merely to cast dirt upon him, that thereby they might
ingratiate themselves with the Godly: Yet all has not prevailed, they find the
Party inexorable. By what is said, methinks you may now make a tolerable
judgment of the treatment the Scottish Clergy have met with hitherto, or are
like to meet with hereafter.

One thing remains yet to be done, viz. to say something in Vindication of these
Episcopal Clergymen, who have been so treated, and to account some way for
their Lives and Abilities: I know there are strange things talked of them in
England; for besides that the Prince of Orange last year, declared them
generally scandalous and ignorant (as was noted before) the good Party have
long had, and still have their instruments busy, Printing and Publishing odd
stories of them. So that perhaps Sir, you may be as earnest to understand what
can be said on that Head, as any thing I have yet dispatched: But I might with
good reason disappoint you, and make that the shortest part of my task; indeed
two or three Sentences might serve: For

It might be sufficient to say, that general Indictments ought still to go for
Calumnies, and the proper defense is to tell, they are broad Lies. Let their
Enemies condescend upon the particular Persons, and the particular Crimes;
that is the way to find guilt; and whoever believes there is any, till that is
done, is near of Kin to an unjust Judge. Dare they for their hearts pronounce
all ignorant? or all scandalous? or all negligent? or all erroneous? or all of
a persecuting temper? If they dare, I hope they are bound to make it good,
against every Individual; and let them try that when they will. If they dare
not (as certainly they dare not; even Machiavel himself, their Master for that
Politic, were he alive durst not) then, who sees not the Iniquity of these
indefinite aspersions? where were Christians taught to mix the Innocent with
the Guilty, so indiscriminately? This, Sir, methinks might pass for sufficient
Antidote against all these bold Slanders; but lest it may not satisfy you, I
have more to say, and God be thanked, I can say it confidently, because I know
it to be true: I can say,

The Church of Scotland, since the Reformation, was never generally so well
provided with Pastors; as at the beginning of the present Persecution: It Is
true, she has sometimes had some Sons; (such as Doctor Forbes, Doctor Baron,
etc:) more Eminent for Learning, than perhaps any of the present Generation
will pretend to: But what Church is there in the World, wherein every day,
extraordinary Lights are to be found? It cannot be denied neither, that there
are amongst us some of but ordinary Parts; but in what Church was it ever
otherwise? it would be an odd thing, if the poor cold Climate of Scotland could
still afford a thousand Augustines or Aquinas's; perhaps too there may be some,
who are not so careful to adorn their Sacred Office with a suitable
Conversation, as they ought to be: But what wonder, when Our Savior himself
had one, a Devil, of twelve in his Retinue? what Country is it where all the
Clergymen are Saints? And therefore, I say it over again; the Church of
Scotland was never so well planted, generally, since the Reformation as it was
a year ago. This is a Proposition which I confess cannot be demonstrated so, by
a private Man, sitting in his Chamber, as to convince the obstinate, or give
full satisfaction to Strangers. But so far as things of that nature can be made
appear plausible, and at a distance; I think this may be done very briefly, in
answering the Charges commonly given in against them.

The first is Ignorance; but what is the Standard to judge by, whether Men have
such a competency of knowledge, as may (caeteris paribus) qualify them for the
Ministry? till that be condescended on, I might very well bid them put up
their Objection in their Pocket, till they can make palpable sense of it; at
least, till that be done, this pretended Ignorance cannot be sustained, as a
sufficient Argument for justifying the present Persecution. But how can the
Scottish Clergy be so very ignorant? No Man (since I remember) was ever admitted
to the Ministry, till he had first passed his course at some University, and
Commenced Master of Arts: And generally none are admitted to trial for being
Probationers, till after that Commencement, they have been four or five years
Students in Divinity. The Method of that Trial is commonly this, the Candidate
gets first a Text prescribed him, on which he makes a Homily before some
Presbytery: Then he has an Exegesis in Latin, on some common Head, (ordinarily
some Popish Controversy) and sustains disputes upon it. After this he is tried
as to his skill in the Languages and Chronology: He is likewise obliged to
Answer (ex tempore) any Question in Divinity, that shall be proposed to him, by
any Member of the Presbytery. This is called the Questionary trial; then, he
has that which we call the Exercise and Addition; that is, (as it is in most
Presbyteries) one day, he must Analize and Comment upon a Text, for half an
hour or so, so show his skill in Textual, Critical, and Casuistick Theology;
and another day for another half hour, he discourses again by drawing practical
Inferences, etc. to show his Abilities that way too: And then lastly, he must
make a popular Sermon; (I believe you have scarcely so severe trials in
England) all this done, the Presbytery considers whether it be sit to recommend
him to the Bishop, for a License to Preach (and many have I known remitted to
their Studies) if they find him qualifyed, and recommend him, he gets his
License, he Commences Probationer for the Ministry, and commonly continues
such for two, three, four, or more years thereafter, till he is presented to
some Benefice: Then he passes over again through all the foresaid steps of
trial, and more accurately, before he is Ordained: What greater Scrutiny would
you desire, as to point of Knowledge? But besides that, I have something more to
tell you; it is,

That generally, since the Restitution of Episcopacy, our Divines have had
better Education, etc. been put on better Methods of Study, than ever they were
before. They have learned to lay aside prejudices, and trace truth ingenuously,
and embrace it where they find it. With our Predecessors, especially in the
times of Presbytery: The Dutch Divinity was only in Vogue. Their
Commonplace-men were the great Standards, and are so still to that Party, and
whoever stepped aside one hairs breadth from their Positions, was forthwith an
Heretic. But the present Generation, after the way of England, take the
Scriptures for their Rule; and the Ancients, and right Reason for Guides, for
finding the Genuine Sense of that Rule; by which Method in my opinion, they are
come to have their Principles and Thoughts far better digested. For Evidence of
this, be pleased to know Sir, that upon the Restitution of Episcopacy Anno
1662. There were Six Hundred Good, who kept their Stations and Conformed. These
were not only generally of Presbyterian Education, but likewise for the most
part, the ablest Men who were then in Office: There are many of these Men yet
alive. Now, if this experiment were made, if these Men who had that
Presbyterian Education, were examined upon their Skill and Principles in
Divinity; and if again, those who have had the posterior Education were
likewise tried, I could lay an even wager, if I were much provoked, I would
venture three to one, all ingenuous and impartial Judges, should determine in
favors of the latter Sort, and confess that they have clearer and more
distinct Idea's of things, and understand the Christian Philosophy better. In a
word, I Will affirm it confidently, that Philosophy was never understood better,
nor never Preached better in Scotland, than it has been these twenty years
bygone.

I must confess, it was never less practiced: but for that we may thank the
Presbyterians: Do not think this a Slander; for if they (during their twenty
four years Usurpation, i. e. from Thirty eight till Sixty two inclusive) had
not made many things, such as Rebellion and Presbytery jure Divino; if they had
not baffled Peoples credulity, by making all the extravagances of the late
times, God's own work, and the Cause of Christ, etc. And if they had not made
it their chief work ever since; to create and cherish Divisions and Schisms
among us, and keep up a Party for themselves, by all means possible: I doubt
not, the Gospel (with God's Blessing) would have had more desirable success,
than it has had in this Kingdom. What a pernicious thing is it, needlessly to
break the Unity, and disturb the Peace of a Church! I have often thought on
that saying of Irenaeus Lib. 4. adver. Haeres. Cap. 62. Nulla ab iis
(schismaticis) tanta fieri potest correptio, quanta est Schismatis pernicies;
and the more I think on it, I find still the more of important truth in it: And
believe it Sir, if ever there was a Sect, since Christ came into the World, to
whom that Fathers words in that same Chapter, were applicable, they are, (only
one thing excepted) to our Scotch Presbyterians. Suam utilitatem potius
considerantes, quam Unitatem Ecclesiae; propter modicas and quaslibet Causas,
magnum and gloriosum Corpus Christi conscindunt and dividunt, and quantum in
ipsis est interficiunt; pacem loquentes (here it only fails) and bellum
operantes; vere liquantes Culicem, and Camelum transglutientes. By their
Divisions, they have still kept up such Rancours and Animosities amongst us;
that the Meek, Calm, Gentle, Peaceable Spirit of Christianity, could get no
footing. And how can the Religion flourish without that? And by their bold
entituling all their unaccountable freaks, in the late times (as I said) to
God's Authority, and abusing his Holy Word to justify them; they lost all the
credit of the Ministry. For so soon as Peoples eyes opened, and they began to
see what Legerdemain had been played in the Pulpits; especially under such high
pretensions to Godliness, they looked upon the Sacred Office of the Ministry
(and continue to do so ever since) as a mere Imposture; so that though we are
at never so much pains to persuade and convince; yet our Labors are not
regarded, and if they be not that, how can they be successful? I know you will
think this a Digression. Be it so, I could not help it, I have such strong
impressions of the truth of the thing, that I could not forbear to tell it you.

What I have said methinks, may pass for a good enough account of the Abilities
of the Conformed Clergy* Yet I have one thing more to add, I will not
Recriminate, nor go to tell our Presbyterian Brethren back again, that of all
Men alive they ought to have been the last, for charging us with Ignorance. But
this I will undertake for; let them out of their whole Number within the
Kingdom, choose five, six, seven; or what Number they please, and the Episcopal
Clergy shall be content that even out of the Diocese of Glasgow, (that Diocese
which so much pains has been taken to make infamous for its Ignorance) the like
number be chosen, for debating all the points in Controversy between us,
before any sufficient and impartial Judge in Christendom: And is not this
enough ad homines? But I have dwelt too long upon this first charge; and must
make amends in what follows.

The second thing is Immorality, we are generally scandalous as well as
ignorant: But I doubt, if amongst all the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland, they
shall find a match for their own Mr. Williamson: Let them show me a Man that
played such tricks while a Minister, and was so little challenged, as he is, by
his Brethren. Not to mention how (for all his lewdness) he is now a leading Man
of the Party, and was lately one of their Commissioners at London. Indeed, Sir,
what greater pains can be taken either to keep or to purge out scandalous Men
from being of the Clergy, than our Constitution prescribes? after any Man is
presented to a Benefice, before he is either Collated, or put in Orders; an
Edict is read publicly, before the whole Congregation, in the Church where he
is to be settled; requiring and inviting the Heretors, or any within the
Parish, who have any thing to object against his Life, to do it on such a day,
before the Bishop, or some deputed by him; and if any blemish be found that
way, he is rejected: And for those who are once in the Ministry; I believe
there is hardly a sharper Discipline any where, than in Scotland. The least
Crime proven against any has its punishment: e. g. One Act of Drunkenness
clearly made out, will suspend him; and two (though some years intervene
betwixt them) are sufficient to Depose him, and Deprive him for ever.

But I need not dwell on these things: Your Bishop of Salisbury, Dr. Burnet, if
he pleases, can tell the World (I Am sure he has told it in many things as
unseasonably) that when Dr. Lighton was Commendator of Glasgow, and he himself
Professor of Divinity there; the Clamor about the Ignorance and Immoralities
of the Clergy of that Diocese was such, that the said Commendator turned very
earnest to have it purged: That for this end, he allowed and invited all People
to accuse their Pastors, and give in what Indictments they pleased against
them; that this was not done scrimply neither, nor out of mere form; but if
there was any partiality, it was against the Minister: And yet after all that
how many were found worthy of Deposition? only one (as I am told) of some
hundreds; and he too, not without great suspicions of Injustice. Dr. Burnet, I
say, can tell all this if he pleases; for no Man was deeper in that Inquisition
then himself, being one of the Commendators chief Counselors and Instruments.
And after all, when both had done what they could, they were forced to confess,
the Clergy were injured, and it was nothing but the Spirit of Fanaticism, which
made the People so unkind to them, and raise such calumnies against them.
Indeed it would have been hard enough for the greatest confidence, not to have
acknowledged so much; for if he pleases, he can likewise tell, what pains were
taken, to bring the best Men, and best Preachers from all Corners to the West;
to try how the People would be pleased with them, such as Mr. Nairn, Mr. Aird,
etc. And how he himself went about as an Evangelist, showing his gifts every
where; particularly in the Church of Fennick; where he distributed a great many
Bibles, and some money too, being earnest by all means to gain the People: And
yet for all that he and all the other Evangelists were laughed it; and the
People told that if they must needs have Curates, they would not change their
own, for any of them. This work was fifteen or sixteen years ago; and such was
the condition of that Diocese then: And yet though the Clergy in it, had
deserved the Epithets of Scandalous and Ignorant then, by what consequence can
they be applicable to them now, when perhaps the third man is not there now,
who was there then? But to go on.

The third thing is Negligence; but how can that be either? Theer's no such
thing as Non-residence, or Pluralities in use in Scotland: Every Presbyter is
censurable, who is two Sundays together from his Church, without License from
his Ordinary; and generally we Preach twice every Lords day, through the whole
Kingdom. But negligence is like Ignorance; it will be hard to find that
definition of Negligence, which will be able to justify such a general
Persecution, as I have already accounted for.

The fourth is Error: But how shall that be tried? But I think, I can easily
give you satisfaction, Sir, as to that matter; it is by telling you, that I
know not so much as one amongst us, who could not live in Communion with your
Church of England, and subscribe her thirty nine Articles. It Is true indeed,
there be many, who are no ways inclined to be every day talking to their People
of God's Decrees, and Absolute Reprobation, and Justification by Faith alone in
the Presbyterian sense, and such like Doctrins; they think their Hearers may be
much more edifyed by Sermons, that explain the true Nature of Evangelical
Faith, the Necessity of Repentance, and the Indispensibility of a
Gospel-Obedience, etc. And what error is there here?

But the last thing is that we have been great Persecutors; grant it to be
true, sure I am, by this time we are paid home pretty well in our own Coin;
and God of his infinite Mercy grant unto us all, that we may exercise a true
Christian patience, under our present Sufferings: And that they may work a
better temper in us, than it seems their pretended Persecutions have wrought in
our Adversaries. Sure I am, it is no where written in the Gospel, that suffering
for Christ may laudably end in Malice and Revenge, and the horridest
Barbarities. But how can it be proven, that we were such Persecutors? Dare any
man say, that the severities against the Presbyterians, since the Restitution
of Episcopacy, have been near so great, as the severities against the Episcopal
Party were, during the Reign of Presbytery? Dare any man say, that the
Presbyterians have suffered any thing for Conscience sake, these twenty seven
years bypast? Remember what I told you, not far from the beginning of this
Letter. It Is true indeed, the State found there were a number of People of such
seditious and ungovernable tempers, that they could not be well kept from
breaking out daily into open Rebellions: Therefore they made Laws for keeping
them low, and curbing them; and who can blame this? It Is also true, some of
these Laws obliged the Clergy to give an account of those of that temper, who
lived or haunted in their Parishes: And could they top with the Government and
disobey Law, when the Obedience required, was so reasonable? Besides, believe
it Sir, the Clergy did as little that way, as was possible for them; and I can
make it good, when ever I am put to it: That where one was pursued upon their
Informations, twenty were befriended by their Intercessions: A signal instance
whereof I learned not long ago; it was in September last, when the Deprivations
for Noncompliance were very frequent. Amongst the rest one Mr. Chisholm
Minister at Lilsly, was cited at the instance of one Sir John Riddel of the
Minister had given no Obedience, and so was very soon discussed: And when Sir
John and he were just a coming from the Bar; where he had stood his Accuser,
and heard his Sentence; he told him, before a good many Witnesses, that he
confessed he held his Life and Fortune of him; and protested he would never
have treated him so as he had done, if it had not been matter of Conscience to
him. What do ye think of a Presbyterian Conscience? I could give you an hundred
more such instances, for indeed it has been observed generally all along,
that those have been the greatest Enemies to the Clergy, to whom they had done
the best Offices. But it would require a great deal of work, to make you
understand this head of Persecution fully, and therefore I Will break it off: And
tell you only briefly that

If ever you come to understand the state of our Affairs distinctly, you will
find, our Ignorance lies mainly in our being unacquainted with the Principles
of Sedition, and the Ius Divinum of Presbytery; our Scandal, in our being so
generally looked upon as nothing fond of change and Revolution: Our Negligence,
in parting with our Benefices rather than our Consciences; our Erroneousness,
in adhering so stubbornly to the Principles laid down in Scripture, and
maintained by the Primitive Christians; and our itch for Persecuting Dissenters
to lie chiefly in our inclinations, to live and behave as becomes good
Subjects; or, if ye would have it shorter, we are ignorant, scandalous,
negligent, erroneous, insufficient, Persecutors; and whatever men please to
call us, because we are not Presbyterians.

That Is truly the matter; and therefore we are now made to suffer so severely,
not only by being so treated in our Persons and Privileges, as I have briefly
accounted; but also by being so robbed of our Reputations, and loaded with
Reproaches: And all this too, under pretense to secure the Protestant Religion,
and make these Kingdoms happy. I dare not tell you, how much I am tempted, when
I reflect on all together, to ask you some unfashionable Questions, such as
these: Is that to secure the Protestant Religion, when men must either suffer,
or part with the most distinguishing Characters, and most undoubted Principles
of the Protestant Religion? Is the rendering so many Protestant Ministers,
useless and miserable; because they will not play Iesuitish tricks, the way to
secure Protestant Religion? Is there no other way to secure the Protestant
Religion; but to transaccident it (pardon the word, it is as good as
Transubstantiate) into a pretense for justifying all the injuries can be done
to our Spiritual Fathers? Is there no other way to make a Kingdom happy, but by
making downright havoc of the Clergy in it? Cannot a Kingdom be happy unless
God's Portion be either turned out of their Functions in it, or run the hazard
of being turned out of his favor, and excluded his Eternal Kingdom? These and
twenty more such Questions, I say, I am strongly tempted to ask you, but I
forbear: Only before I conclude,

As I said before, I will not recriminate with our Presbyterian Brethren, I
will not go to tell them back again, that they are ignorant or scandalous, etc.
I will not treat them so uncivilly as to throw back their dung in their own
faces: I am not fond of such Retaliations. But this I will say, if they plant
the Church of Scotland, so well as it was planted, when the Prince of Orange
came to England, so long as he lives; if, for all their pretensions to the
Spirit, the Gospel be Preached so purely, so rationally, and so disinterestedly
under their Government, as it has been by the Episcopal Clergy these many years
bygone; if ever the State have Peace, or the Church come to a settlement; if
ever our King sit securely on his Throne, or Caesar have the things that are
Caesar's: If ever the Church of England (as little as she has been concerned
hitherto in her Sisters afflictions) want a horn in her side, or be secured
against attempts for her ruin; and if ever there be Peace, or Order, or
desirable Concord; if ever Animosities, Divisions, Contentions, and such other
Plagues of Humane Society, and Christian Unity be wanting at home, so long as
their Dagon stands in the Temple; Experience has deceived me, and I have
mistaken my Measures.

Thus, Sir, you have a brief prospect of the present State of the Scottish
Clergy, fuller by much than at first I intended, perhaps then you are pleased
with, and ye may think it tedious: But I acknowledge I have that weakness; I
have not the faculty of dispatching things so smoothly, and so shortly, as
possibly your palate would require: But my Apology is ready; I have omitted an
hundred things, proper to have been inserted; if I am tedious, it is in telling
truth, and if the length of this weary you, you shall not be so troubled again:
For these Reasons expecting your Pardon, I am etc.

The Third LETTER.
SIR,
I Told you in the Conclusion of my last, that I had omitted many things,
proper to have been inserted: I could easily justify it, by giving you another
every whit as long and full of matter of Fact as it was. Particularly I could
give you a great many more instances of Ministers, who received hard Measure
from the Council: such as Pitcairn of Logie, who was Deprived, though these
eight or ten years bygone, he has been entirely disabled for the Pulpit,
through old age and infirmity, and has been obliged to maintain an Assistant.
Ionkine at Abernethy, upon his not appearing, the very minute he was first
called, though he kept the day precisely, to which he was Cited, and was
present about twelve of the Clock, and had the Forth to cross that morning: and
the Council at that time used to sit as well after, as before Noon, for
Depriving Ministers. Falioner, a Minister in Murray, notwithstanding he pleaded
for himself, that the Lord Dundee was his Hearer that day on which the
Proclamation was ordered to be Read; that it was easy to conjecture what might
have been his hazard, had he Read it in his hearing: that after that he had
Prayed publicly for King William and Queen Mary. That if the Council should
yet enjoin him, he would Read the Proclamation; and that for his part, he
believed Presbytery was as agreeable to the Word of God, and as subservient to
the ends of Christianity, as Episcopacy, and therefore was as willing to keep
his Ministry under the one, as the other: but there was Original sin in him; he
was a Bishops Son, and so no Mercy for him. But Moncrief, Minister at Herriot,
his Case is prettiest of all, he has done all Duty, and made all Complyances,
yet his Church is disposed of, and a Presbyterian Preacher, actually and
formally admitted to it. Twenty other instances might easily be Collected.

I could likewise tell you what severities have been used in turning Ministers
out of their Dwellings, this Winter, after their Deprivaon: as in the Case of
Mr. Galbraith, Minister at Iedburgh, a very Reverend and worthy Person. All the
Gentlemen within the Parish Addressed to the Council in his behalf; protested
they were sorry that he was Deprived: supplicated that he might be permitted to
live this Winter in the Manse, i. e. Parsonage-House, for no body was making
pretensions to it; no Presbyterian Preacher was settled there; and it was a
Thatcht House, it would be endamaged, if it were not inhabited, if Fire were
not kept in it, etc. But for all that, the good Parson was forced to remove by
the Councils Order. The same was also the Case of Mr. Millar, Minister at
Mussleburgh, and very many others. Nay (I know not if they have got their
secret instructions renewed for it) the Rabbling work is revived in the West
lately, and now they will not suffer the poor afflicted Ministers, (who were
thrust out a year ago) to stay so much as in that Country; though they have no
money to Transport their Families with, being refused payment of their bygone
Stipends. So it has fared within these few days with Mr. Hamilton, Minister at
Kirkoswald, and Irwine at Kilbride, and I am told there is a Design to banish
from that Town all who live in Dumfries, and those in Glasgow dread the same
likewise.

I cannot forbear neither, to tell you, what has happened lately at Edinburgh:
there are five or six of the Episcopal Clergy in that City, who have given all
Obedience; so they still possess their Churches. Each of these Churches has its
own Utensils, Basins, Lavers, Chargers, Chalices, Communion-Table-Cloaths, etc.
All Dedicated long ago by private Persons, who lived in the respective
Parishes. A Church-Treasurer is Chosen yearly by the Church Sessions, to whom
these Utensils are Concredited, and to these Sessions he is accountable for
them at the years end. This has been one immemorial Custom in that City; yet
the present Magistrates (all Rank Presbyterians) would needs have these
Utensils delivered up to them; particularly, they required them of him who this
year bears the Office of Church-Tresurer, or, which is all one, who is the
Elder or Churchwarden, to whom the Utensils of that Church for this year are
entrusted, for that which is commonly called the Tolbooth Church: he refused to
surrender them (and why should he have done it? They were not so much as
Dedicated by the Public, and they were that Churches Property. No Magistrates
had ever demanded the like before, and the present Magistrates are no more
concerned in them, than in any private Citizens Furniture;) For this he was
thrust into Prison; but he made Application to the Lords of Session, who found
the thing so infinitely illegal, that they forthwith ordered his Liberation,
and discharged such Proceedings for the future. Perhaps you may think this is
but a trifle, but there is more in it than you are aware of: For, besides that
Sir John Hall, present Provost of Edinburgh, is a Privy Counselor, and
consequently is not to be supposed to have attempted such a thing without first
consulting Crawford, and some others who sit at that Table; there is this at
the bottom of it: In each of these Parishes there is a Presbyterian
Meeting House, and the Preachers (though they stand on no other Found, but King
James his Toleration) hold themselves for the rightful Pastors of these
Parishes, and so pretend that the use of these Utensils belongs to them, and
they ought to have them in their Custody: this was that which put the
Magistrates upon the foresaid Course.

Innumerable such things as these I could easily Collect, and weary your
patience with them, but methinks by this time, you have got Taste enough of the
Episcopal Parties Troubles on the one hand, and the Prebyterian Parties Temper
on the other, to make you understand both competently; and that was all I
intended. Only there are two things perhaps, which you may be desirous to have
some further satisfaction about; and I will try if I can give it.

The first is, That possibly ye may apprehend, I did not in my last
sufficiently take off these Aspersions which are thrown upon the Episcopal
Clergy by the Phanatick News Mongers, in their Malicious Papers, and Pamphlets,
which they are Printing and Dispersing so confidently every day at London. To
tell the truth, Sir, We only hear of these Papers; at least for my part I have
seen none of them; they come not ordinarily to Scotland, and I believe their
Authors are no ways inclined they should, (it requires a great deal of Forehead
to tell lies where they can be easily discovered) and not coming to our hands,
how can we detect or expose their falsities? I am sure, I said enough in the
general to fortify you, or any sober Man, against them; especially as to all
these Ministers Deprived by the Council; for, (as I said there) the Council
never took notice of any thing but Reading and Praying. But what though
Malicious Men tell false stories with a great deal of Confidence? Are you such
a Stranger to the World, as not to know that Lying has ever been one of the
chief Artifices by which that Party have carried on their purposes; It is no
new Politic of theirs. I could tell you some of the oddest Stories that ever
you heard since you was born, concerning their dexterity in that Art, in the
late Times: but I will trouble you only with one at present; indeed the whole
World should know it, it has such peculiarities in it.

You know how Anno 1638. at the Assembly of Glasgow, they not only pretended to
Depose the Bishops, but even to Excommunicate many of them: amongst the rest,
that most Reverend and Worthy Prelate, Spotswood, Archbishop of St. Andrews.
The Sentence of Deposition and Excommunication passed against him, was ordered
to be Read Publicly after the Forenoons Sermon, in all the Churches within his
Diocese; and, in it, a great many horrid immoralities, (such as Incest and
Adultery, etc.) were amassed. Amongst many others, it was Read particularly in
the Church of Kilrinny in Fife, by Mr. Coline Adam, then Minister there; Beaton
of Balfour was in the Church at the time, he was not a little amazed, at
hearing such strange things charged upon the Archbishop. He had lived many a
year in his Neighborhood. He had been frequently in Company with him; but had
never discovered such Crimes about him, so that he was exceedingly surprised:
but that was the least on it. In the progress of the Sentence he heard himself
named as one of four Witnesses, who had been examined upon Oath, and by their
Testimonies had proven these things against him: this astonished him quite, for
it was not only notorious to all the Neighborhood, that during the whole time
that famous Assembly sat, he was not at Glasgow, but still at home; but no
body knew it better than Mr. Adam himself, for he had not only been his
constant Auditor every Sunday, but he had seen him (or might have done it)
every day; there being but a very short distance (perhaps not two hundred
Paces) betwixt their Dwellings. In effect it put the Gentleman in such
disorder, that he had well nigh stopped the Ministers Reading any further, if
his Father, who was by him, had not hindered him, telling him he would Ruin
himself. However, after they came out, he Challenged the Minister, who easily
confessed he knew it was a Lie, but pretended he behoved to Read it, in Obedience
to Authority. And what might he not have done after that? Tell me Sir, was not
this a well assured wickedness? This passage I have from persons of great
integrity, yet alive, who told me, they had it twenty times from Beaton's own
Mouth; and it is but one of a thousand, as good, if I could be at the pains to
Collect them. Piae frauds (talk we what we please) have done good Service, and
been excellent Christian Tools in their time, for carrying on the Good Old
Cause. But it was not scarcity that made me go so far back for Proofs of
Presbyterian Honesty: these twelve or fourteen months bygone afford variety
enough in all Conscience. Thus to instance but in two or three things.

What Effrontery was used last year at London, for running down all the
Accounts, were sent up, concerning the Persecution of the Western Clergy, as I
told you before? Such ingrain'd impudence (had it not been seen and felt) I had
believed, could neither have come from Hell nor It, the two grand Staple-Ports
for that Commodity. What Relations of Oaths, what confident Assertions, what
Printed Papers had we for King James his being Dead at Breast in March last? I
remember the present Earl of Argile, one day disturbed a whole Meeting House,
with a forged Letter about it.

With what shamelessness did the News go up first, and then come down again
from London in September last, and pass current here: That the Streets of
Edinburgh were thronged with the Heads or Chieftains of Clanns, coming in daily
to take the benefit of King William's Indemnity, that was published after
Dundee's death? Though all the Kingdom knows, not so much as one has come in to
this very day? And what strange Tales have been told of the wonderful Feats of
Iniskilling Men? I remember some Gentlemen about two Months ago, went in one
Afternoon to a Presbyterian Coffee-House, called for the News Book, cast up the
account of the Irish killed by them, and after computation, found the number
amounted to above 48000. These are but their ordinary tricks, and with us they
have now ceased to be Scandalous; for by Custom we are come to reckon it no
more strange to find that Party Lie, than to see Danes Drink, or Englishmen eat
Pork or Pork-Pudding: so that indeed Sir, I pity you heartily, if your Charity
toward the Episcopal Clergy in this Kingdom can be in the least shaken by the
boldness of these miserable Scriblers.

I will only add one thing more upon this Head, and that is, that whatever may
be Published that way, must needs be false upon this account, that (as very
many have observed) since ever the Deprivation-Work began; all the favor
shown, has been to those who least deserved it; and if there was any less
Knowing, less Circumspect in their Lives, or any ways less Qualified for
continuing in the Ministry, they are the Men, who have hitherto escaped
Deprivation. The Politic is no more Damnable than Understood; for as the
showing some Favor to such, with less discerning Persons, may chance to pass
for an Argument of the Councils Moderation: so under this Cover they have the
opportunity of doing a great deal of Mischief; they Ruin more securely, and
with less observation, those of unquestionable Lives, and Abilities, and
disable them for being Remora's hereafter, either to the Settling or Securing
Presbytery, which they are afraid they might have been, after the present
Ferment is over, had they continued in their Stations; and hereby they hope to
Ruin their Reputations too, with people who think little, and Strangers, who
cannot know all the intrigues of their business; for such may readily conclude
they have deserved worse, seeing these are Deprived, while others are
preserved: and then, besides all this, to these least deserving, the seeming
Favor, of sparing them at present, is shown, upon this Design, in all
likelihood, that afterward they may be Ruined and Disgraced with the greater
contempt and ignominy; for, being the weaker Men of the Episcopal side, they
foresee, they will not only not be able to make a suitable Resistance to the
Zealous Gang, when it shall be in Circumstances to dispute it with them; but
also it will be easy for the Ecclesiastical Visitations to Depose them: and
not only so, but their Fall when it comes, may be readily improven into an
heavy Reflection, on all of Episcopal Principles: and Phanaticks will have in
readiness to say, that the whole Party was still such, and by these, it may be
judged what all the rest either were or are. This is truly the Politic, Sir:
but by this time I think I have insisted too much on this purpose.

The other thing perhaps is more Material; for when you have considered all I
said in my last, perhaps ye may think it strange, that you have found nothing
concerning the inclinations of the generality of the People: and such a general
Persecution of the Episcopal Clergy on the one hand, and so deep a silence
concerning the Resentments of the People on the other, may perchance seem to
you a Demonstration of the Truth of that Article in our new Claim of Right (for
we may thank our Stars, we have once gotten an Original Contract betwixt King
and People) which affirms, That Prelacy, and the Superiority of any Office in
the Church above Presbyters, is, and has been a great and insupportable
Grievance, and Trouble to this Nation, and contrary to the inclinations of the
generality of the People, etc. But the Truth is Sir, as from the beginning I
was unwilling to fall foul upon the State; so I thought that did not come so
naturally in my way; for my design was only to acquaint you with the treatment
of the Clergy; and not to Canvass every Assertion, that has been boldly
obtruded on the World by their Persecutors. But seeing that Article makes such
a noise, and I hear some of your English Pamphleteers are taking notice of it,
and talking Confidently that it is True. I am content to trouble you with a
dozen of Lines, or so, about it: And in the first place;

Perhaps it might be sufficient to say no more; but, What then? What tho the
generality of the People were so inclined? Will it follow, therefore,
Episcopacy ought be abolished in Scotland? If I mistake not, I have heard as
good Arguments answered with a Non sequitur. But if I am mistaken, and the
Argument is good, then all you Gentlemen, the Divines of England, are most
miserably affronted; affronted, I say, by the Scotch Meeting of Estates, tho
there was not so much as one Divine amongst them, when they voted their Claim
of Right: You have been wretchedly out all this while, in your Disputes with
the Papists, tho you made a great noise with them (and they were too weak for
you) these four or five Years by gone. You have never hit upon the true Rule of
Faith and Manners (shall I call it) or the Judge, the infallible Judge of
Controversies; that Honor was reserved for the Scotch Laics, they are the Men
who have been the true Students of the Disciplina Arcani, and have fallen upon
the Knack; The inclinations of the generality of the People (tho God knows what
a Rule it would have made in our Saviors time) are the thing; they are Rule or
Judge, or whatever you please to call them; and what more would ye have? Lord
what a Field has a Man here, if he pleased to be wanton! But I must cut short,
and therefore let me return to be serious: Why then, to tell you in a word,
Sir, if I may say it without giving the Lie to the Convention.

There Is not a falser Proposition in the World, than, that the Inclinations of
the generality of the People of Scotland are against Episcopacy; or that they
look upon it as a great and insupportable Grievance and Trouble to the Nation:
And let us have a Poll for it when they will, and you shall quickly see the
Demonstration: If this does not satisfy you, I have more yet to say.

I can affirm, with a well grounded assurance, that, if by the People you mean
the Commonalty, the rude, illiterate Vulgus, the third Man through the whole
Kingdom is not Presbyterian; and if by the People, you mean those who are
Persons of better Quality and Education (whose sense in my opinion, ought in
all reason, to go for the sense of the Nation) I dare boldly aver, not the
13th. For notwithstanding all the Clamors that are made on that Head, it is well
known to all the Kingdom, that Fanaticism has all along had little footing in
that far wider half of the Kingdom, which lies on the North of the Tay. And tho
the Party has been infinitely earnest and active to increase and multiply their
Numbers every where; yet in all that Country, they could never get above three
or four Meeting Houses erected, and these too, very little frequented or
encouraged. Nay, even on this side the Tay (except in the five associated
Shires in the West) the third Man was never engaged in the Schism. For
convincing you of this, I Will ask no other Postulate, than what I suppose you
and all considering Men will readily grant, and that is, that Phanaticism is
more apt to spread and prevail in Towns than in the Country; so that by them we
may best judge of the Numbers of the Party. It would make an intolerable Work to
go through all; let me only instance in some of them, where the Experiment has
been remarkably made, not many Months ago; and by these ye may judge of the rest.

At Perth (or S. Iohnstown) where now a Presbyterian Minister is most illegally
possessed of the Church, the tenth man does not go to hear him, and
particularly, not one of the Magistrates, tho they were elected by Poll. At
Cowpar in Fife, the Presbyterian Preacher (now possessed of the Church)
sometimes has not forty of fifty people in his Congregation. The great Body
waits all upon the Regular Clergy, who have there got a Meeting House. It Is
much the same at S. Andrews. At Sterling and Burnt-Island, the Magistrates were
likewise chosen by the Poll, but all Malignants, as they call them. At Sterling
(as I am told) the Prebyterian Votes were not one to six. At Burnt-Island they
were but one to three. It Is true indeed, the Privy Council has turned out these
Magistrates in both Towns, and put Presbyterians in their stead. Some admire
how arbitrarily it was done: but I am only concerned for the Inclinations of
the generality of the people.

At Mussleburg more than eighteen of twenty parts have once and again (since
their Pastor was deprived) supplicated the Council, that during the Vacancy,
they might have Regular Clergymen to officiate amongst them. I could instance
also, in Dumfermling, Dysert, Weems, Leith, Iedburgh, Kelso, and many other
places. Nay,

Even in Edinburgh, the Churches where the Episcopal Clergy (who have complied)
preach, are more thronged, and better frequented, than the Churches usurped by
the Presbyterians: not to mention, that every Sunday there are five of six
several Meetings of Men, who are not very well pleased with either
Presbyterians, or complying Episcopalians. Shall I tell you further yet, what I
am credibly told, concerning even Glasgow it self? I am told, Sir, that even in
that City, which has been so famous for phanatick Zeal, and wherein on
Christmas last, for a demonstration of it, the Rabble (with the present Earl
of Argyle on their Head) burnt, with the Pope, our two Archbishops in effigy;
I am told, I say, that even in that City, the greater number of Citizens of the
best quality are of Episcopal Principles.

Indeed, Sir, whatever number of Friends they might have had a year or two ago,
I am confident this day it is diminished by a third: For besides that peoples
eyes are now beginning to open, and see the inconsistency of their principles
and practices, with the common rules of Nature, as well as Christianity, they
are beginning to have enough of their cant, and to be weary of their Sermons.
And here I cannot forbear to relate to you a passage, which I had lately from a
very ingenious Gentleman; he had had a conversation with another Gentleman of
good Quality, and good Abilities, but who had been engaged by his interest to
go to the Presbyterian Assemblies; in their conversation they came to talk
concerning the Presbyterian Preachers, and that Gentleman told my Author, he
had now heard them for two months, or so; but he had observed, that he had
never so much as heard one Criticism at the Explication of a Text, never one
Citation out of Father, Poet, or Philosopher, never one passage either of Civil
or Church History. What? (replied my Author) it seems then ye get nothing but
pure Scripture, clean Gospel, but tell me, do ye get any great abundance of
good sense? To tell the truth (he answered) even as little of that too as any
man could wish. See the Postscript
But what needs more? They themselves are beginning now to be sensible, that
they are by far the smaller party: and if I pleased, I could name a certain
person, a Statesman, who had a great hand in the late Revolution, and has yet
in the present Government, who confessed lately to another certain person, that
now he was persuaded (tho he never believed it before) that the Episcopal was
not only by far the greater, but even the better part of the Nation. But after
all this;

Perhaps you may start the Difficulty; How came it then to pass, that that
Article was put in the Claim of Right, and the Presbyterian Party prevailed so
far in the Convention and Parliament? I could easily give you abundant
satisfaction as to that too; but it would require a fuller Deduction than I am
willing to fall upon at present; only in a word, when the Members for the
Convention were a choosing, the Kingdom generally was in a perfect confusion;
vast numbers of people there were whose Opinions would not allow them to give
any countenance to the then Transactions, they having many scruples in their
Heads concerning the Lawfulness of that whole procedure. On the other hand, the
Presbyterians (fond of the opportunity of getting a King deposed, and their
Diana set up) were infinitely diligent. So, many Elections were very far from
being what they would have been, had the Loyal and Episcopal Party bestirred
themselves as they might: neither yet would that have done the business, in all
probability; for even as Elections passed, when the Members first convened at
Edinburgh, had any Interest espoused by them been subjected to a Vote, Affairs
had gone far otherwise than they did. But the Presbyterian Party foreseeing
that, industriously projected delays, and protracted time; and in the interim
were infinitely vigilant to biass the Members; so that before either the
Forfeiture of the King, or that Article of the Claim of Right, I am now
concerned in, were voted, many of the Nobility, all the Bishops, and a great
number of Barons and Burgesses had deserted the House; and not a few of those
who stayed, had (what through fear, and weakness, and the like infirmities)
changed their Principles, which their Electors supposed were in them, and they
brought to Edinburgh with them. This is the true way that matters went: I could
easily give you an account of the Topics were made use of, for inveigling
these Members who were imposed upon: It was impossible the Protestant Religion
could be otherwise secured; England was a wise Nation, they had set the Crown
on King William's Head already; if Scotland should dissent, it would ruin the
Nation; the English were satisfied Presbytery should be established here; and
King William was earnest for it, (which, to tell you by the by, I never or very
hardly could persuade my self to believe) and a great many more to the same
purpose. These and twenty things more I could deduce more largely, if it were
needful; but my Paper is now very near spent, and so you must content your self
with what you have got at present.

Thus, Sir, in two long Letters I have endeavored, in part, to satisfy you
concerning the present Estate of the Scottish Clergy. If my Account is lame, it
is no wonder, for I am none of the most observing men in the world; and I was
obliged for very good Reasons to forbear consulting others, and use only such
Materials as my own observation could afford me. But this I can say over again,
tho you have not all, yet you have nothing but Truth; and tho it be not well
digested, it is as well as I could, considering my Conveniences. And so I bid
you heartily farewell: being, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
I was once minded to have told you fully too, what bitter Reflections our
Presbyterians are daily casting upon your Church of England; how they condemn
her Clergy for deserting the Principles of Passive-Obedience and
Non-resistance, they were wont to glory so much in; how it is their common
talk, that King William loves Episcopacy as ill in England, as in Scotland, and
would be content to have it away (they believe, to make way for the Dutch
Model) if he could get it done; and twenty other such Stories. But I believe,
it is only their hatred to your Constitution, makes them talk so. Yet this is
certain, we have here Reprinted a Pamphlet, called the Ceremony-monger, and (as
I am informed) at the command of some great person.

I am afraid, that possibly, I may have been injurious to the Privy Council, in
giving a partial account of their Act passed on Christmas Eve last, For I find
many people are of the opinion, that it is not to be limited to the year 89,
but may comprehend former years also, for which Reason, and because in its
Narrative, it brings some further light (tho it needed no more) to what I had
asserted concerning their being refused the protection of the Government, who
were turned out of their Churches by the Rabble, before the thirteenth of
April, I have subjoined the Act here word by word, as it stands in the
Register. And it is thus: At Edingburgh, December. 24, 2689.
The Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council considering, that by the Act of the
Meeting of the Estates of the Date the thirteenth of April last, there is a
difference made betwixt the Ministers then in possession and exercise of their
Ministry at their respective Churches, and those who were not so; and that the
Case of the Ministers who were not in the actual exercise of their Ministerial
Function the thirteenth day of April last bypast, lies yet under the
consideration of the Parliament; and lest in the mean time they may call and
pursue for the stipend alleged due to them, or put in execution the Decreets
and Sentences already obtained at their instance, for the same, before the
Estates of Parliament can meet, and give their Determination as to that point.
Therefore the said Lords of Privy Council, finding that the Case foresaid,
depending before the Parliament, is not obvious to be cognosced, and decided
upon by the inferior Judges, but that the samine should be left entire to the
Decision of the Parliament, have thought fit to signify to all inferior Courts
and Ministers of the Law, that the Matter above mentioned is depending before
the Parliament: To the effect they may regulate and govern themselves in the
Judging of all Processes to be intended before them, upon the said Matter, or
in executing Sentences already pronounced thereupon as they will be answerable.

Sic subscribitur, Crafurd J. P. D. S. lon.




I have just now (after my Sheet was ended) learned a Passage, which is put for
the confirmation of that which has a Cross at it, and on the Margin refers to
the Postscript. It is that a Presbyterian Minister in Edinburgh confessed (with
regrate) to a Gentleman, this same very Week, that within this half year
bygone their Party has lost a great many thousands; it is true, he called them
40, but I must beg his pardon: for I doubt if they could ever reckon, by so
great numbers, in the whole Kingdom (I still except the five Western Shires,
where yet there is as little Religion, as in any part of Christendom.) He said
further, That tho Patronages were a great Corruption, and the Church would
never be well constitute, till they were abolished, and popular Elections
advanced in their stead; yet they are not inclined, that that matter should be
determined the ensuing Session of Parliament, because they find as the present
Inclinations of the generality of the People go; were the settling of Ministers
referred to popular Elections, they would choose all either Cameronians, or of
Prelatical Principles: I suppose his Meaning was, in the often mentioned five
Western Shires, Cameronians would be chosen, and Episcopal Clergymen through
the rest of the Kingdom generally. By this ye may judge, whether I had reason
to say, that their Party is very much diminished, and themselves are very
sensible of it.



The Fourth LETTER.
Edinb. Ian. 11. 1690. SIR,
I Wish you a good New Year: When I parted with you lately at London, I found
your Tenderness and Compassion inclined you to lament the sad condition of our
Church, and I remember you ordered me then to let you know whether the Truth of
things would justify the Reports that went current there, of the Sufferings of
the Clergy; I found that the half was not told you then of what is commonly
known in this place. No History can parallel the tragical Disasters the Clergy
have met with since the beginning of this Revolution; it is very surprising,
the present Governors should make it their business to sacrifice the Episcopal
Clergy (by Law established) to the Fury and blind Rage of an opposite Faction;
Strangers will wonder at it, and it is not easily accountable what can be the
Politic to imbitter so considerable a Body. It is shameful for the Judges to be
so partial, as plainly and openly to avow, they do not intend their Obedience,
but their Ruin. To give you a particular account of the Disgraces and Affronts
put upon the Clergy since the beginning of 1689. would fill a Volume: How they
have been driven in the midst of Winter, with their Wives and tender Children,
from their Houses and Residence: Nor is this to be imputed so much to the
barbarous Executioners, as to the bloody and enthusiastic Company that
inspired them. There is no safety for some Men, but in the universal Shipwreck
of Church and State; the shaking of the Nation was so terrible, that all the
Scum got uppermost, our State and our Church were at once levelled with the
Earth, and the Protestant Religion lost its former signification (when we
understood by it unmixed Christianity free from Superstition and Enthusiasm)
and now it is no more than every man's fantastic humor, new Models of
Government, and a liberty to pull down the things that are most ancient and
most sacred. Will not the Protestants in England wonder, that some of our
Ministers have been deprived for not reading a Proclamation for a Fast, the
Narrative whereof employed no less, than that the Episcopal Clergy were
destitute of the assistance of God's Spirit in the exercise of their Ministry:
You may see the Paper when you please, and I believe a coarser you never saw in
print. Not to mention here, that the Art of all Mankind could not make Sense of
a certain Paragraph in it. And is it not as odd, that when they were sifted
before the Council, they were not so much as once asked, why they did not read
that extraordinary Paper, concerning the late King; nor whether they will
comply with the present Government for the time to come. I know, if this Paper
be seen abroad, their Impudence will contradict it, but a matter of Fact so
publicly known, defies Calumny it self. I have spoke with many of the Clergy
here, and with a great many of the Laity; and I never heard of any thing more
bitter and persecuting. How unworthily the Ministers of Edinburgh particularly
have been treated in this Affair, the World may judge by this one instance. The
said Paper passed in the Convention of the Estates upon Friday, it comes from
the Press late at Saturday, and the Ministers within the City upon half an
hours advertisement on Sunday Morning were enjoined to read it, under pain of
Deprivation. I remember you once blamed the Clergy for not Addressing the
present Court for Protection: They made their Application from the beginning,
but to no purpose, tho they were furnished with all necessary Evidence of their
bad Usage. You know that Presbytery is to be established here by the next
Session of Parliament; and you know that the Roman Inquisition is not half so
rigid as that will be when they are once in the Saddle: To what purpose then
should they beat the Air, when their Ruin is thought by many to be a part of
the Bargain. There is nothing so inconsistent with Presbytery, as Toleration of
any that differ from them in the least Iota: It is true, they are against the
Apostolic Doctrine of Non-Resistance, but they will not be resisted themselves.
And since the Episcopal Clergy here know they are given up as a Prey to their
Enemies Teeth, they had rather sit silent under their Malleur, than struggle
with the Stream when it is so violent and impetuous. The present Faction
endeavor by all Art and Industry, to persuade King William, that the Flower
and Multitude of the Nation is for Presbytery: It were an easy thing for him
to put this to the trial. Let the West-Country People, who are so brave and
generous in tearing Ministers Gowns, reduce the Highlanders now in Arms for
King James, and then let it be granted, that they are the Men they pretend to
be: And unless they are able to do this, we must judge of them as a clamorous
and inconsiderable Faction, whose Nature it is, to cross and resist every
Creature that is but called a King. And it is very wonderful, that all the Civil
Magistrates in Christendom do not banish that Supremacy of the Kirk from off
the Earth, being equally subversive of all Republics, as it is indeed
inconsistent with Monarchy. The Protestants in the beginning of the
Reformation, thought they did Christendom good Service, when they discovered
and exposed the Tyranny of the Popish Supremacy over Christian Magistrates; but
the very same Doctrine of Rome is here hugged, as the great Palladium of the
Protestant Religion. And to be short, let them swear Allegiance to all the
Kings in Christendom, it must be in subordination to this great Article, that
all Persons and Councils must strike Sail to omnipotent Presbytery; they are
taught by their hopes of Heaven, to resist the King, when he either counteracts
or contradicts the Decisions of the General Assembly, which general Assembly
may and ought to meet when and where they please, without or against the King's
express Will: These are not imaginary Consequences fastened on them and their
Doctrine by Art and ill Nature; but the plain History of what they have done
here, and by their Principles are obliged still to do. A Liberty to tyrannize
over all not of their stamp is the Idol they adore; the Kirk Supremacy is by so
much the more mischievous, by how much it is more inquisitive, precipitate, and
confused than the pretended Authority of the Bishop of Rome; but I have
digressed too far. If the Disasters under which the Clergy groan, were confined
to what they have suffered in their own Nation, it may be they would endure it
with greater patience. But when the Faction have hired some scurrilous
Scriblers to defame them abroad by weekly Libels, it cannot but excite
Indignation and Pity. There appeared a Pamphlet lately called Plain Dealing; if
the Author had been considerable for any thing, he might be sufficiently
exposed for his Lies; but being but newly put upon writing of Books, he must be
excused, if he cannot otherwise support the Faction, but by Calumny; when he is
more expert, he will defend them with plausible and artificial Stories. It is
not worth your while to go thorough the several Inconsistences and whining
Impertinences that are in that Pamphlet. It is enough to glance at one, by
which you may guess at the man's Impudence, viz. That in the Parliament 1685.
all the Bishops, except Three, were for repealing the Penal Laws against the
Papists, when it is known to the whole Nation, that all of them almost were
determined to Vote against the repealing of those Laws, if ever that Affair was
offered in Parliament: And such of them as might be thought to favor the design
of repealing those Laws, did sincerely judge their Method in their Circumstances
at that time, to be the best Fence and Shelter against Popery, and all their
Concessions did not amount to Min here Fagel's famous Letter, which contained
the Sentiments of the present Court.

When the Faction had ruined the Clergy at home, they were afraid they might be
pityed abroad; and to justify their Sacriledg and Villainy, they endeavor to
cover them all under Libels and Invectives, and represent them to other
Nations, as vicious and Illiterate. For the information of Strangers, I will
consider both parts of the Accusation; first, as to the Immoralities alleged
against the Clergy, there cannot be a more atrocious and spiteful Calumny: It
is not possible for them to convince credulous Strangers by an open, fair, and
visible Trial, that this is a Lie; for they have no Fence against the Malice
and Activity of their Enemies, but their Patience and their Prayers; if their
learned and compassionate Brethren in England would interpose so far with the
present Court, as to have this Affair examined before any impartial Judicature;
then such as were found guilty, should be derpiv'd of the Honor of the
Priesthood, and not suffered to continue Stumbling Blocks to the People; but
let me acquaint you plainly, that there shall never be such a Judicatory
erected, and that it is not the Method of their Enemies, to have things fairly
and calmly enquired into: And therefore the Clergy beseeches all generous
Strangers to stop their Ears against such wicked and indefatigable
Calumniators. They give their Enemies open and public defiance upon this Head;
it is enough that they are banished, rifled, and plundered in the most savage
manner, tho they be not robbed of the Compassion of Strangers. It is true, that
in the Records of Council, relating to the deprived Clergy, there is a Column
containing Immoralities libelled against some of them; but it is as true, that
tho they are recorded (to make the World believe them guilty) yet they were
never examined fairly; the Artifice of their Enemies is mean, as it is wicked;
first, to invent Calumnies and Slanders, and then leave them unexamined, boldly
to vent them amongst Strangers, when they had not the Confidence at home to
give one instance of such Immoralities amongst so many Hundreds that have been
deprived. How easily and how sadly might they recriminate upon this Head; but
that is not so pleasant in it self, nor will it serve the designs of
Christianity: But shortly there shall be a more full, free, and particular
Answer given to those scandalous Reports, in a Treatise ready for the Press.
The Persecutions of the Clergy here are beyond any parallel. I cannot forbear
to give you one instance of it, Mr. John Mowbray, Minister of Strachbrock,
complied with the present Government in all its steps (a place not above Eight
Miles from Edinburgh); yet upon the 12th of July 1689. a Company of Fanatics
who were sufficiently taught how to behave themselves, entered his House in a
hostile manner, tore hi Gown, threatened his Life, beat his Daughter, and
frighted his Wife to death; when their Fury was a little over, he ventured once
again to officiate; but my Lord Cardross, Patron of the said Church, and one of
the Privy Council, caused lock the Church Doors, and sent his Minister a
packing, tho he defies the severest Trial for Life or Doctrine; and all this for
no other reason, but because he had Episcopal Ordination; for my Lord's
Conscience did not allow him to hear any such.

As to the other Accusation of their being Ignorant, I would gladly know, who
are these learned Gentlemen among the Scotch Presbyterians that found them so
after Trial; this is a thing they dare not so much as whisper at home, except
it be amongst those good Women that sell Tripes at the Cow-Gate. There could
not be any thing thought on more comfortable to the Clergy here, than that
there were some learned and grave English Churchmen sent hither to enquire
into the Literature and Sufficiencies of both the contending Parties. But this
Proposal will never be heard, it is enough that they are once run down with
Clamor, Violence, and Noise: But it is no part of their business to have things
put to a fair, serious, and open Trial, they dare not attempt it, and therefore
I allow you to defy the Accusers of the Clergy upon this Head also, and to
convince Strangers how improbable this Calumny must be, let them consider how
much the oppressed Clergy was and is favored by the honorable and learned
Society of the College of Justice, who are the best Judges in this Case. The
Blasphemies and Fooleries that are heard at present from the Pulpits of
Edinburgh, make up the Entertainment of most Companies, they discourse of the
Mysteries of Christianity so coarsly and familiarly, as they do of the meanest
and vilest things in Nature. But it is not possible that the regular Clergy can
be so ignorant as their Enemies represent them: For the steps of their Trial
are various and difficult, before they are allowed to preach in public: And
when they are presented to a Church, they undergo the same Trials over again in
Theology, Languages, and Preaching. I never heard that the Presbyterian Genius
was very fond of too much Learning, especially among the Scotch Cameronians, a
kind of People so wedded to their own peculiar and nonsensical Whimsies, that
they are now become Antipods to Mankind in their Language, Behavior, Morals,
and Intellectuals. There cannot be any thing imagined more fantastically
foolish than the Education of their Preachers, when they have so much Latin as
to understand a Dutch System, they are thought profound, and more learned than
is necessary, and very few of them arrive at this. Lately one of them who had
spent much of his time in selling Buttur and Cheese, would turn a Minister, and
being asked it he understood Greek and Latin, answered No, he could read the
English Bible, and that was enough. It is the saddest Oppression to be run down
with Clamor, and no probability of being heard: But let the Enemies of the
Clergy remember the Jewish Proverb, That he that pulls a Stone out of the
Temple, ere it be long the Dust will fly in his Eyes. The Ruin and Disgrace of
so many Clergymen, one would think, cannot be a good Foundation for a new
Government. But this is not all, when the Clergy are thrust from their Houses
and Livelihoods. It seems there is a further design to starve them, as appears
by a late Act of Council promoted by the Presbyterian Party, discharging all
Judges within the Nation, to pass Sentence in favors of the Clergy for the
bygone Tithes yet unpaid and due to the Episcopal Ministers, until the
Parliament take that Affair into their consideration. I have sent herewith a
Double of that Act, make what use of it you please: I do not incline it should
be printed (tho this should) for that would reflect too much upon the Honor of
our Nation. What to with either, I cannot advise you at this distance. Farewell.

FINIS.

