THE Bishop of Worcester's LETTER To a Friend For VINDICATION of Himself FROM
Mr. BAXTER'S Calumny.

-- Tenet insanabile multos
Scribendi Cacoethes --
London, Printed by R. Norton for Timothy Garthwait at the Little North-door of
St. Paul's Church, 1662.

Mr. Baxter has lately printed a Book called [The Mischiefs of Self-Ignorance,
and the Benefits of Self-Acquaintance] in the Address of which Book to his
dearly beloved the Inhabitants of Kidderminster, he has this ensuing passage
relating to the Bishop of Worcester.
IN a disputation by writing, those of the other part formed an Argument, whose
Major Proposition was to this sense (for I have no Copy) [Whatsoever Book
enjoyneth nothing but what is of it self lawful, and by lawful authority,
enjoyneth nothing that is sinful,] We denied this Proposition, and at last gave
diverse Reasons of our denial; amongst which one was, that [It may be unlawful
by Accident, and therefore sinful] You now know my Crime; it is my concurring
with Learned Reverend Brethren, to give this reason of our denial of a
Proposition: yet they are not forbidden to Preach for it, (and I hope shall not
be) but only I. You have publicly heard from a mouth that should speak nothing
but the words of Charity, Truth and Soberness, (especially there) that this was
[a desperate shift that men at the last are forced to] and inferring [that then
neither God nor man can enjoin without sin] In City and Country this sounds
forth to my reproach; I should take it for an Act of Clemency to have been
smitten professedly for nothing, and that it might not have been thought
necessary to afflict me by a defamation, that so I might seem justly afflicted
by a prohibition to Preach the Gospel. But indeed is there in these words of
ours so great a Crime? though we doubted not but they knew that our Assertion
made not Every Evil Accident to be such as made an Imposition unlawful, yet we
expressed this by word to them at that time, for fear of being misreported: and
I told it to the Right Reverend Bishop when he forbad me to Preach, and gave
this as a reason: And I must confess I am still guilty of so much weakness, as
to be confident that Some things, not Evil of themselves, may have Accidents so
Evil, as may make it a sin to him that shall Command them. Is this opinion
inconsistent with all Government? yea I must confess my self guilty of so much
greater weakness, as that I thought I should never have found a man on Earth,
that had the ordinary reason of a Man, that had made question of it; yea I
shall say more then that which has offended (viz.) That whenever the
commanding or forbidding of a thing indifferent is like to occasion more hurt
than good, and this may be foreseen, the commanding or forbidding it is a sin.
But yet this is not the Assertion that I am chargeable with, but that [Some
Accidents there may be that may make the Imposition sinful] If I may ask it
without accusing of others, how would my Crime have been denominated if I had
said the contrary? should I not have been judged unmeet to live in any governed
Society? It is not unlawful of it self to Command out a Navy to Sea: but if it
were foreseen that they would fall into the Enemies hands, or were like to
perish by any Accident, and the necessity of sending them were small, or none,
it were a sin to send them. It is not unlawful of it self to sell poison, or
give a knife to another, or to bid another to do it; but if it were foreseen*
that they will be used to poison or kill the buyer, it is unlawful; and I think
the Law would make him believe it that were guilty. It is not of it self
unlawful to light a candle, or set fire on a straw; but if it may be foreknown,
that by another negligence or wilfulness it is like to set fire on the City,
or give fire to a train or store of Gunpowder that is under the Parliament
House, when the King and Parliament are there, I crave the Bishops pardon, for
believing that it were sinful to do it, or command it; yea or not to hinder it
(in any such case) when Qui non vetat peccare cum potest* jubet, yea though
going to Gods public worship be of it self so far from being a sin, that it is
a Duty, yet I think it is a sin to command it to all in time of a raging
Pestilence, or when they should be defending the City against the assault of an
Enemy, it may rather then be a duty to pro^ibit it. I think Paul spoke not any
thing inconsistent with the Government of God or Man, when he bid both the
Rule^s and the People of the Church, not to destroy him with their mea^ for
whom Christ dyed: and when he says, he has not his power to destruction, but
to edification; yea there are evil Accidents of a thing, not evil of it self,
that are caused by the Commander: and it is my opinion that they may prove his
command unlawful.

But what need I use any other Instances then that which was the matter of our
dispute? Suppose it never so lawful of it self to kneel in the Reception of the
Sacrament, if it be imposed by a penalty that is incomparably beyond the
proportion of the offense, that penalty is an Accident of the Command, and
makes it by Accident sinful in the Commander. If a Prince should have Subjects
so weak as that all of them thought it a sin against the example of Christ and
the Canons of the General Councels, and many hundred years practice of the
Church, to kneel in the Act of Receiving on the Lords Day, if he should make a
Law that all should be put to death that would not kneel, when he foreknew that
their Consciences would command them all, or most of them to dye rather then
obey, would any man deny his command to be unlawful by this Accident? Whether
the penalty of ejecting Ministers that dare not put away all that do not kneel,
and of casting out all the people that scruple it, from the Church, be too
great for such a circumstance (and so in the rest) and whether this, with the
lamentable estate of many Congregations, and the divisions that will follow,
being all foreseen, do prove the impositions unlawful which were then in
Question, is a Case that I had then a clearer call to speak to, then I have
now; only I may say That the Ejecting of the Servants of Christ from the
Communion of his Church, and of his faithful Ministers from their Sacred Work,
when too many Congregations have none but insufficient, or scandalous Teachers,
or no Preaching Ministers at all, will appear a matter of very great moment in
the day of our accounts, and such as should not be done upon any but a
necessary cause, where the benefit is greater then this hurt (and all the rest)
amounts to.

Having given you (to whom I owe it) this account of the cause for which I am
forbidden the exercise of my Ministry in that Country, I now direct these
Sermons to your hands, that seeing I cannot teach you as I would, I may teach
you as I can: And if I much longer enjoy such Liberty as this, it will be much
above my expectation.

The Bishop of Worcester's Letter to a Friend for Vindication of himself from
Mr. Baxter's Calumny.
SIR,
I Have received that Letter of yours, whereby you inform me that Mr. Baxter
has lately written and printed something with such a reflection upon me, that
I am obliged to take notice of it.

I thank you for your care of my Reputation, which next to Conscience ought to
be the dearest of all things to all men, especially to men of my Profession and
Order, who the more they are vilified (whether justly or unjustly) the less
good they will be able to do, especially amongst those that have industriously
been prepossessed with prejudice either against their Persons or their
Functions This was St. Paul's Case, when there were some that did what they
could to make the Corinthians to undervalue his person, that thereby they might
discredit his Doctrine, and weaken his Authority, whom therefore he thinks he
may without breach of Charity call False Apostles and Deceitful Workers. Nay
this was our Saviors own Case, who, whilst he lived here upon the Earth, was
ever and anon traduced and slandred by the Scribes and Pharisees, those proud
Hypocrites, who were the greatest pretenders to holiness, and yet the greatest
seducers of the people, and the grossest falsifyers of Gods Word, that ever
were in the world, until these our times, which have brought forth a generation
of men (St. Johnaptist would have called them a Generation of Vipers) who in
the Art of holy juggling and malicious slandring have outdone the Pharisees
themselves* and all that went before them; witness their so often wresting and
perverting the Scripture in their Sermons to stir up the people to Sedition,
and their as often Libelling the King in their Prayers, in order to the making
of his Subjects first to hate him, then to fight against him, and at last to
take away his Crown, and his Life from him. And is it any wonder that those
that are such Enemies to Kings, should not be friends to Bishops? or that one
(who has done what he could to make the late King odious unto his People)
should do what he can likewise to make the Pastor odious unto his Flock? to his
Flock I say; For it is the Bishop of Worcester, and not Mr. Baxter that is
Pastor of Kidderminster, as well as of all other Parochial Churches in that
Diocese; neither did I or any other Bishop of Worcester, ever commit the Care
of Souls in that, or any other Parish of that Diocese to Mr Baxter, though by
that Preface of his to those of Kidderminster, he would make the world believe,
that they were his Flock, and not mine, and that therefore he has the more
reason to complain of my defamation of him (as he calls it) in that place and
before that people: whereas the truth is that Mr. Baxter was never either
Parson, Vicar, or Curate there or any where else in my Diocese; for he never
came in by the Door, that is, by any legal right or lawful admission into that
Sheepfold, but climbed up some other way, namely, by violence and intrusion,
and therefore by Christ's own inference he was a Thief and a Robber; and indeed
he did Rob him that was then, and is now again the lawful Vicar of that Church;
he Robbed him I say, first of his Reputation amongst his Flock, and then of his
means and maintenance, by taking away the Fleece as well as the Flock from him;
though (as Mr. Baxter himself has confessed to me) He be a man of an
unblamable life and conversation, though not of such parts (said Mr. Baxter) as
are fit to qualify him for the Cure of so great a Congregation; which whether
it were so or no, I am sure Mr. Baxter was not to be the Judge; but in that
Case the Bishop that was then living should and would have provided him a
Coadjutor, as I have done since, and such an one, as I hope will feed that
flock with much more wholesome Doctrine then Mr. Baxter did, when he sowed the
seed of Schism and Sedition, and blew the Trumpet of Rebellion amongst them.
For which cause I thought it my Duty (as being their Pastor in Chief) not only
to forbid Mr. Baxter to Preach there any more, which, by the way, he had done
without my License; but likewise to Preach there my self, and to do what I
could to undeceive that poor seduced and miserably deluded people; which was
not to be done, as long as they had the person of their Seducer in so great
admiration; and therefore by the example of St. Paul, who in order to the same
end did take the same course with Alexander the Copper-smith, with Demas,
Philetus, and Hymeneus; as likewise by the example of Christ himself, who in
order to the same end, did take the same course with the Scribes and Pharisees,
I thought it necessary to let them know that one that was of great authority
amongst them (meaning indeed, though not naming Mr. Baxter) was not the man
they took him for; that he had not dealt faithfully with them, nor preached the
word of God sincerely to them, when he made them believe it was lawful for them
to take up Arms against the King, nor in suffering (if not making) them to
scruple at these things as unlawful, which he himself confesses to be lawful;
and afterward making use of those scruples of theirs (which he himself had
infused into them, or not endeavored to take from them) as the only argument
why those things they did so scruple at should not be enjoined by lawful
Authority, though lawful in themselves, because, forsooth, the enjoining of
things lawful by lawful Authority, if they may by Accident be the occasion of
sin, is sinful; which assertion of his (as I then said, and must still
maintain) is destructive of humane society in taking away the Authority of
Commanding and the obligation of obeying, together with the whole Legislative
power, Civil as well as Ecclesiastical, and Divine as well as Humane. And thus
much (as Mr. Baxter himself says) I told him before in mine own house, neither
did he then deny the assertion, or endeavor to disprove what I inferred from
it, by any of those distinctions or instances he now uses. And that this is
true the Reverend Dr. VVarmstry now Dean of Worcester will witness for me, whom
I desired to be by whilst I conferred with Mr. Baxter, foreseeing what
misreport a man of Mr. Baxters principles and temper was like enough to make of
what should pass betwixt us. And it was very well I did so; for I find that the
Presbyter as well as the Papist will serve themselves, as often as they are put
to it, of their piae frandes, or holy artifices, of speaking more or less then
the truth, as it makes more or less for their purpose or advantage; as likewise
of putting non causam pro causa, or a part and a less principal part of the
cause for the whole cause. For who would not think that knows not Mr. Baxter,
that when he tells his Disciples of Kidderminster, You now know my Crime, with
reference to the aforesaid assertion, and to that only, who would not think, I
say, that either there was nothing else objected against him, or at least
nothing of moment, or that could be any just and reasonable cause of my
forbidding him to Preach in my Diocese? especially when he adds that the Right
Reverend Bishop gave him this as a reason for his forbidding him to Preach;
where if he means that the Bishop gave him this as the only, or the principal
reason, he speaks without truth, and against his Conscience; for the first and
principal reason the Bishop gave him for his forbidding him to preach, was (as
he well knows, and as the Dean of Worcester will witness against him) His
Preaching before without License, having no Cure of his own to Preach to;
whereunto when he replied, I had promised to give him such a License as the
Bishop of London had given him, viz. Quam diu se been gereret, and durante
beneplacito, I rejoined, That it was true indeed, I had once promised to give
him such a License, but withal, that it was as true, that first I had never
promised to give him a License, if he took it before I gave it him; and that
for this presumption of his, I had now forbidden him to Preach any more.
Secondly, That I knew more of him since then I did at that time; for, first, I
had been credibly informed, that he had abused the Bishop of London 's favor
by preaching factiously, though not in the City, yet in the Diocese of London,
and I named the place to him: Secondly, that since that promise of mine (which
cannot be supposed to be other then Conditional) I my self had heard him at a
Conference in the Savoy, maintaining such a Position as was destructive to
Legislative Power both in God and Man (meaning the Assertion before spoken of,
viz. That the enjoining of things lawful by lawful Authority, if they might by
Accident be the cause of sin, was sinful) which Assertion of his with the
horrible consequences of it I told him then at Worcester, I had formerly told
him of at the Savoy openly, and before all the company that was at the
Conference; whereunto all that he replied at my second telling him at
Worcester, was, that he had used some distinctions to salve that Assertion from
those consequences; but what those distinctions were he did not then mention,
(as Dr. Warmstry can witness) though in this printed address of his to his
friends of Kidderminster, he says, he did tell the Bishop in what a limited
and restrained sense he and his brethren understood that Assertion; which
whether they did or no, will appear by and by, when we shall more nearly
examine his printed Narrative as to that particular. In the mean time, though I
said indeed that one that held and was likely to teach such Doctrines, was not
to be suffered to Preach unto the People, yet this was not then alleged by me
as the cause or crime for which I had forbidden him to Preach, (for that, as I
said before, was His presuming to Preach without a License) but only as a
reason why I should have thought my self not obliged by the promise I had
formerly made him, to give him a License, though he had not otherwise forfeited
his Claim to that promise by Preaching without, or before he had it. Lastly, He
might have remembered another reason I gave him why I could not have made good
that promise, namely, those principles of Treason and Rebellion publicly
extant in his Books, which I had not taken notice of till after the making of
that promise, and which till he should recant in as public a manner, I thought
my self obliged in Conscience not to suffer him to Preach in my Diocese;
whereunto his Answer was, That whatsoever he had said or done in that kind, was
pardoned by the Act of Indemnity: True, said I, so far as the King can pardon
it, that is, in regard of its corporal punishment here in this world, but it is
God that must pardon the guilt or obligation to punishment in the world to
come, which he will not without Repentance, and it is the Church that must
pardon the scandal, which she cannot do neither without an honorable amends
made her by public Confession and Recantation. I could tell Mr. Baxter in his
ear likewise, that in excuse of his Rebellious Principles formerly published,
he said, That now the Parliament had Declared where the Sovereign Power was, he
should acknowledge it and submit to it, as if the King owed his Sovereignty to
the declaration of a Parliament, which is as false as Rebellious, and as
dangerous a principle as any of his former, however by what has been said, it
appears that Mr. Baxter meant to impose upon his credulous friends at
Kidderminster, and upon his unwary Readers, by making them believe that was the
only cause for which the Bishop forbad him to Preach, which was neither the
only, nor the principal cause, why the Bishop did so, nor indeed, to speak
properly, any cause of it at all; for the only proper cause for which the
Bishop forbad him to Preach, was His Preaching before without the Bishops
License; the other which he pretends, together with the third which he
conceals, were properly and professedly the Causes why the Bishop would not
take off that prohibition, or why he would not give him a License to Preach for
the future, either at Kidderminster, or in any other place of his Diocese,
until he should publicly retract that Position which he had openly asserted at
the Conference, and should publicly renounce likewise those seditious and
rebellious principles which are published in his Books. And this is the truth,
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth of what passed betwixt me and Mr.
Baxter at Worcester, before I preached at Kidderminster, where whether I
defamed him, or he, by saying so, has not grossly defamed me, will appear by
that which follows; wherein that I might neither be deceived my self, nor
deceive others, I have not trusted to my own memory only, as Mr. Baxter says
he does to his, but I have consulted with Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson, two of
the three that managed that Conference with Mr. Baxter and his Assistants, and
have seen that Assertion in the same sense that I object it, and Mr. Baxter
disclaimes it, affirmed by Mr. Baxter himself under his own hand.

I found Mr. Baxter at the Savoy engaged in a Dispute, and I perceived that to
keep himself off from that part of the argument which would press near to the
merits of the Cause, he had often affirmed in his Answers, That the Command of
a most lawful Act was sinful; if that Act commanded might prove to any one a
sin per accidens. This Assertion I did then and there presently and openly lay
to his charge; and when he denied it (as it was most frequent with him
immediately to deny what he had before affirmed) the answers which he had
delivered written with his own hand were produced, and upon the reading of
them, the Justice of my charge was most apparent; whereupon I urged him
farther, that this Assertion of his was not only false, but destructive of all
Authority Humane and Divine, as not only denying all power to the Church of
making Canons Ecclesiastical for the better ordering and governing of the
Church, but also taking away all Legislative Power from the King and
Parliament, and even from God himself: I delivered at the same time my reason
for what I said, which was briefly this, because there can be no Act so good of
it self, but may prove per Accidens, or by Accident, a sin; And therefore, if
to Command an Act which may prove per accidens a sin, be a sin, then every
Command must be a sin. And if to command be a sin, then certainly God can
command nothing, because God cannot sin; and by the same reason, Kings,
Parliaments and Churches ought not to command any thing, because they ought not
to sin.

Thus far I then charged Mr. Baxter, and to this Charge he gave then no
satisfaction. Neither can I yet conceive it possible to give any satisfaction,
but by one of these two ways, either by proving that the Assertion, with which
I charged him, was never his, or by showing that the consequence I urged, is
not good; neither of which was he then able to do: and by what he has now been
pleased to publish, it is more then probable that he can never perform either
of them.

For in his bold, but weak Apology, he does not so much as pretend to show any
Invalidity in my Inference, and for the Assertion with which I charged him, he
denies it so poorly, and goes about to prove another instead of it so
manifestly, that he may without any injury be interpreted to yield it. He says
indeed now, That he told us that his Assertion made not every Evil Accident to
be such as made an Imposition unlawful. But whether he ever said so before
this time or no, it was then clearly proved that he did assert, That an Act for
nothing else, but because it might be per accidens a sin, could not be
commanded without sin.

And now in his public appeal, he has taken a strange way to wipe off all
this, for he makes a very brief Narration, and most notoriously imperfect, and
then says, You know my Crime, as if that were all that had been, or could be
objected against him. Besides, in the relating of this short Narrative, he
relies wholly upon his own memory; not so much as endeavoring to satisfy
himself, before he presumed to satisfy others. How his memory may be in other
things I know not, in this if it has been faithful to him, he has been very
unfaithful to others. He relates an Answer in what terms he pleases, and
brings one Proposition, as made by his Opponents in what terms he thinks fit,
and the Application of this answer to that Proposition he propounds as all
his Crime; whereas his answer was far more largely given, and that to several
Propositions in several Syllogisms, of which the Proposition which he relates
was but one, or rather none; so that he has most shamefully abused his
Disciples at Kidderminster, with a short and partial Narrative of his fact.

As for his Concurring with Learned Reverend Brethren, (which he would pretend
to be part of his Crime) and his invidious insinuation, That they are not
forbidden to Preach for it, though he be, the reason is clear. He had often
delivered this Assertion before the company, his Brethren had not; the words of
the Answer were written with his hand, not with his Brethrens. His Brethren had
several times declared themselves not to be of his Opinion (as particularly
when he affirmed ( That a man might live without any actual sin) And therefore
we were so just as not to charge them with this Assertion; especially
considering they did show themselves unwilling to enter upon this dispute, and
seemed to like much better another way tending to an amicable and fair
compliance, which was wholly frustrated by Mr. Baxters furious eagerness to
engage in a Disputation.

All his discourse which follows (after his imperfect Narrative) in
justification of himself, is grounded first upon a misreporting of his own
Assertion; Secondly, upon the dissembling of the several Propositions, to which
his answer was so often applied; Thirdly, upon his pretending That he says
more now, than that which had offended formerly; which is most palpably false,
and in all probability (if he have any memory) against his own Conscience. And
this will presently appear by the vanity and impertinency of all those specious
instances which he brings to mollify his Assertion.

To Command a Navy to Sea (he says) is lawful but if it were foreseen that
they would fall into the Enemies hand, or were like to perish by any accident,
it were a sin to send them. Is this more then he said before, or is it any
defense of his Assertion at all? It is not certainly, because the Opponents had
put it expressly in the Proposition; That the Act in it self lawful, was to be
supposed to have nothing consequent, which the Commander of it ought to provide
against; and yet being so stated, Mr. Baxter affirmed, That if the Act might be
per accidens sinful, the Commanding of it was sin. Now certainly the falling of
a Navy into the Enemies hand, or the perishing of it any other way, if
foreseen, ought to be provided against by the Commander; whereas Mr. Baxters
answer did import, That if any Prince did Command a Fleet to Sea, though he did
not foresee the Fleet would fall into the Enemies hand, or perish any other
way, yet if by Accident it miscarried that or any other way, which he could not
foresee, or were not bound to provide against, the very Command at first was
sin.

The same reason nullifies his instances of the poison, and the knife, because
the sin in selling them supposes the murder of the buyer to be foreseen, and
consequently that the seller ought to prevent it; but if he will speak in
correspondence to his former Answer, he must show, that though the seller do
not foresee that the buyer will use the poison or the knife, to his own, or any
other man's destruction, yet if by any Accident or mistake, either the buyer, or
any other perish by the poison or the knife, the Seller is guilty of his death.

His instance of setting a City on fire, or putting Gunpowder under the
Parliament House when the King and Parliament are there, is of the same nature,
and needs no addition of answer but only this, that Mr. Baxter, in a sense too
true, has been very instrumental in setting the City on fire, and in adding
powder to the Parliament.

The rest which follows betrays the same weakness, because the inconveniences
are urged upon a Duty to prohibit them, and his answer did charge the Command
with sin in respect of such Accidents, as it was no part of the Commanders Duty
to provide against. It is therefore most certain, that no one of those
instances singly, nor all of them jointly have any force in any measure to
justify that Assertion which Mr. Baxter did maintain, and whereof he is
accused.

As for that last instance, which was (says he) the matter of the Dispute, and
which he urges in this manner, ( Suppose it never so lawful of it self to
Kneel in the reception of the Sacrament, if it be imposed by a penalty, that is
incomparably beyond the proportion of the offense, that penalty is an Accident
of the Command, and makes it by Accident sinful to the Commander) he is
manifestly guilty of a double falsification: First, in pretending the matter in
dispute, was the imposition of kneeling at the Communion; when this very matter
was expressly rejected in the very beginning of the dispute, as belonging to the
Canons, not the Common Prayer Book, the lawfulness of which Canons the
Commissioners had no authority to debate, and Mr. Baxter knows, that his
Argument was denied upon that ground. The second falsification is yet greater,
in urging the penalty to make the Command sinful, when his Answer did charge
the Command with sin, without any relation to the punishment; and when the
Proposition he replied to was so framed, that all unjust penalties were in
terminis expressly excluded, even then I say he charged the Command of a lawful
Act with sin, if it were otherwise by Accident sinful; though by the way I must
not grant that the penalty imposed by the Law for not kneeling at the Receiving
of the Sacrament (namely the not admitting of such as will not kneel, at the
receiving of it) is incomparably greater then the offense; for the greatness of
the offense in such cases, and as it stands in relation to such or such a
penalty appointed for it, is not to be measured by the Quality of the Act
considered in it self, but by the more or less mischievous consequences it is
likely to produce, if men be not restrained from such an Act by such a penalty;
for example* when a Soldier is hanged for stealing of a Hen, or for taking
away any thing of never so little a value, without paying for it, no wise man
will blame the General for such a severity; because if he did not do so, every
one would take what he pleased, which would discourage the Country from
bringing in provisions, and consequently the whole army would be ruin^d. And as
the Martial, so the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws likewise in commanding or
forbidding any thing under such or such a penalty, have an eye not so much to
the merit of the Action it self, as to the more or less danger of the Public
in the consequences of it; whence it comes to pass, that a less evil may
sometimes most justly be forbidden under a more severe penalty then a greater,
because the former may be of much more dangerous consequence then the latter;
so that he that will judge rightly, and impartially of the equity or iniquity
of appointing or inflicting such or such a penalty, he must not so much
consider the quality of the Transgression singly in it self, nor whether it be
from weakness, or wilfulness in the party transgressing (as he is this or that
individual person) but rather he must consider what the Consequence would be of
the breach of such a command if it were not prevented by such a penalty,
always supposing the Command it self to be lawful, and that the transgressor
of it is to be considered as he stands in relation to that whole Body, whether
Civil, or Ecclesiastical, whereof he is a part; and that the whole is not to be
endangered out of tenderness and indulgence to some particulars, as evidently
it would be, if every man were left at liberty to do what seemed best in his
own eyes, even in the Ceremonials and Circumstantials of Gods Worship; for
considering the pride and self-love that is in humane nature, which makes men
so overvalue their own practices and their own opinions, that they are always
apt to undervalue those that will not conform to them, as it always has been,
so it always will be; he that worshippeth God one way, will either judge or
condemn him that worshippeth God another way; he that Kneeleth at the
Sacrament, will be thought to be Idolatrous or Superstitious by him that
Kneeleth not, and him that kneeleth not will be thought wilful, or weak, by him
that kneeleth. And thus from diversity grows dislike, from dislike enmity, from
enmity opposition, and from opposition, first Separation and Schism in the
Church, and then Faction, Sedition and Rebellion in the State; which is a
progress very natural, and I would we had not found it to be so by our own
experience; for as the safety of a State depends upon the safety of the Church,
so the safety of the Church depends upon Unity, and Unity it self depends upon
Uniformity, and Uniformity there cannot be, as long as there is diversity or
diverse ways of worship in the same Church, which will be always, unless it be
lawful for public Authority to oblige all particulars to one way of public
worship, and that under such penalties, as the Lawgivers shall think necessary
to prevent the disturbing of the public Peace and safety; the preservation
whereof being the main end of all Laws, and of all penalties appointed by Law,
those practices that are either intentionally or consequentially destructive to
this End, may be, and no doubt ought to be restrained by severe penalties. It
is not therefore the not kneeling at the Sacrament, but the breaking of the
Orders of the Church, and the endangering of the Peace and Safety of the whole,
which our Laws punish by not admitting such unto the Sacrament, as will not, or
perhaps dare not kneel at it; for as they will not endanger the Peace of their
Consciences for the Churches sake; so it becomes the Lawgivers not to endanger
the Churches and the States Peace for their sakes: And surely when there is a
necessity of the yielding of the one or of the other, it is much more
reasonable that a part should yield unto the whole, then the whole unto a part,
especially when the whole cannot yield without endangering it self, and with it
self even those themselves also, that, will they nill they, must be involved in
the ruin of it; as the Presbyterians have found by their own experience also,
who by their groundless and needless separation from us, have given example and
ground enough for others to separate from them, till by dividing and
subdividing from one another, there was nothing of Uniformity, or unity, or
order, or decency left in that Church, which was formerly (and I hope by the
Prudence and Piety of Public Authority will be now again) the Glory and
Pattern of all other Protestant and Reformed Churches in the world; of which,
by the way, there is not one which does not use as great severity for the
preserving of Unity by Uniformity as we do, even in this particular; for do not
the Protestant Churches in France enjoin Standing, the Churches of Holland,
Scotland, and the Churches of Germany that follow Calvin enjoin Sitting, and
the Churches that follow Luther there and elsewhere enjoin Kneeling as we do,
and all of them upon the same penalty of not receiving it otherwise? And is it
not as lawful for our Church, as for all other Protestant, and all other
Christian Churches, to require of her Children the like conformity to her Laws
under the like penalty for the same end, and to prevent the same danger? Yes
(replied Mr. Baxter when this question was asked him) just as lawful, that is,
not lawful at all, such an injunction upon such a penalty being sinful,
wheresoever and by whomsoever it is enjoined. O happy England, that has such
an Aristarchus as is worthy to censure all the Churches of the world, whose
Catholic practice (if it cross Mr. Baxters opinion) must presently without
more ado be Condemned as sinful, and all the world must be Liars rather then
Mr. Baxter must not be justified in his sayings. You have before seen the
ingenuity and veracity, you now see the humility, and the modesty of the Man;
and indeed in proportion, of the whole party, for crimine ab uno, -- Disce
omnes. But does Mr. Baxter and the rest of his persuasion think indeed, that it
is so great and grievous a punishment to be kept from the Sacrament when men
will not receive it in that way and upon those terms that the Church offers? if
they do, why then do they deny it to so many that hunger and thirst after it,
whenever either by reason of Age, or Lameness, or sickness, or some other
bodily infirmity they cannot come to Church for it? especially when the
Catholic Church in the 12th Canon of the first General Council commands it be
given even to those that are Excommunicate, if they desire it when they are in
Extremis, or going out of the world. Secondly, why have they suffered so many
whole Parishes in England under their charge to have been without a Communion
so many years together, as I am credibly informed they have? Thirdly, why do
they reject those from the Sacrament, that will not come before hand to them to
be examined by them, there being neither precept nor practice in the Gospel,
nor Canon in the Church, either to warrant them to require it, or to oblige the
People to submit to it upon any such penalty? I am sure St. Paul when he chides
those of the Church of Corinth for coming ignorantly to the Sacrament, and for
behaving themselves profanely at the Sacrament, that which he prescribes for
avoiding the same or the like faults for the future, is not that every man
should come, and be examined by the Minister, but that every man should examine
himself before he eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup; And yet I will not
deny but that every man before he Communicates ought to be well Catechis'd and
instructed by the Minister, and thereby enabled to examine himself the better;
nor will I deny neither but that every man may and ought in Case of scruple of
mind or trouble of conscience to advise with, and to be advised by him that
has the cure of his Soul; but that every man as often as he intends to receive
the Sacrament should be obliged under the penalty of being rejected from it, to
come and to be examined by the Minister, this is that which I utterly deny, and
which I take to be the same thing in other words with that of Auricular
Confession; so that they who exact the one, have no reason to condemn the
other, unless it be because they would ingross it wholly unto themselves:
Howsoever, if refusing the Sacrament to those that will not kneel, when the
Church enjoins it, be a penalty so far transcending the offense, how much more
must the same penalty transcend the offense, when there is indeed no offense at
all? for where there is no (...), there can be no (...), where there is no Law
there can be no transgression, and consequently there being no Law of God nor
Man that requires all Communicants to be pre-examined by the Minister, those
that are refused the Sacrament because they will not be pre-examined, are
punished with the same punishment which they complain of, for no offense at
all. And therefore si maxim digna essem (may our Church say) ista contumelia,
indigni vos, qui faceretis tamen; for, Who art thou O Man that judge another?
nay, that judge thy Mother, when thou do the same, or worse, thing, then
those are for which thou condemnest her? And how can any man of reason be so
scrupulous, as to quit his Calling, rather then deny the Sacrament to those
that will not receive it kneeling, when the Church commands it should neither
be taken nor given otherwise, and yet make no scruple at all of denying it to
whole Parishes? of denying it to those that cannot come to Church for it,
though desirous of it, and qualified for it, and such as have most need of it
to strengthen their faith in their last Agony? and lastly, of denying it to
such as refuse to be pre-examined by them, and all this without any command or
warrant from Gods Word, and contrary to the Command and Custom of Gods Church?
whereby it plainly appears, that either they do not think the receiving of the
Sacrament of so great importance, as indeed it is, nor the denying of it so
great an injury or punishment as they pretend it to be; or else that they would
have every Minister to be a Monarch or Sovereign Lawgiver in his own Parish,
and this indeed is that they would fain be at, now they have lost their hopes
of Governing the whole Kingdom; for you see by what Mr. Baxter adds, that if
they may not be suffered to give or deny the Sacrament to whom they please, and
in effect to do what they list in their own Parishes, they threaten to quit
their Stations, which he calls being Ejected because they dare not put away all
that will not kneel at the Sacrament: And this menace they often repeat upon
all occasions, as if they were the only men that could carry on the work of the
Lord; or as if the Church must needs sink and perish, if it wanted such Pillars
as they are to uphold it. But (thanks be to God for it) the Church of England
is not yet (notwithstanding all their endeavors to that purpose) reduced to so
very ill a condition, that she cannot subsist without them; whereas the truth
is, she cannot subsist with them, as long as they continue to be what they have
been, the sowers and fomenters of Schism in the Church, and sedition in the
State; and as long as they continue to do as they have done in humouring, and
hardening, and confirming the people in their obstinate standing out against the
lawful commands of their Superiors; which they would never have done at all,
if these men had not at first infused into them these scruples. And therefore
as God asked Adam and Eve, How came you to know that you are naked? so if I
should ask those poor souls whom those sly and subtle Serpents have beguiled
and seduced, How came you to know that you shall sin against God if you obey
the Orders of the Church in general? or particularly how came you to know, That
it is against the Canons of the General Councels, and many hundred years
practice of the Church to Kneel in the Act of receiving? Did you or can you
your selves read those General Councels? Did you or can you examine so many
hundred years practice of the Church as Mr. Baxter speaks of? What answer can
they make to these demands, but that which Eve made unto God? The Serpent
beguiled me, and I did eat; Mr. Baxter, or some such Godly and Learned men as
Mr. Baxter is, did tell us so, and we believed them: But what if Mr. Baxter do
not b^lieve that himself which he would have you believe? For first he would
have you believe that there is great reverence and respect to be given (as
indeed there is) to the Canons of General Councels, and to the Catholic
practice of the Primitive Church; but does he himself believe this? if he do,
why did he so furiously oppose that which all General Councels approve of and
confirm? I mean the Government of the Church by Bishops in the sense wherein it
is asserted and practiced in our Church? Or why did he persuade Subjects to
take Arms against their Sovereign? which he knows to be contrary to the
Doctrine and practice of the Primitive Christians for many hundred years more
then he speaks of. Secondly, Mr. Baxter would have you believe, that Kneeling
at the receiving of the Sacrament is forbidden by General Councels, and
contrary to the custom and practice of the Ancient Church, which I am afraid
he does not believe himself; I am sure there is no convincing reason to make
him believe it; for it is not the Ancient Churches injunction to stand when
they prayed betwixt Easter and Whitsontide, that will prove they were forbidden
to Kneel when they received; especially if the Presbyterian opinion be true,
that we are not to be in the Act of Praying, when we are in the Act of
receiving; But if we may pray (as no doubt we may and ought to pray) in the Act
of Receiving, then supposing the Ancient Injunction of the Chuch to stand at
Prayer upon Sundaies betwixt Easter and Whitsontide to be still in force, yet
all the rest of the year we are to kneel when we Pray, and consequently when we
Receive, though there were no particular command of our own Church for it.
Besides Mr. Baxter knows that the aforesaid Injunction of the Church was but
Temporary, till the people were sufficiently confirmed in the Doctrine and
Belief of the Resurrection; for if it had been of perpetual obligation, and
were still in force, Mr. Baxter must needs condemn the whole present Church of
God for kneeling when they pray betwixt Easter and Whisontide, and particularly
he must most of all condemn himself and the Presbyterians of England, for not
standing when they receive, if at least that Injunction be to be understood of
Receiving, as well as Praying; which if it be not, then is it urged by Mr.
Baxter against us to no purpose, as indeed it is; And therefore no doubt Mr.
Baxter does not believe himself what he would have others believe, when he
presses that occasional temporary injunction of the Church for standing
against kneeling; which if it be of force, must needs condemn his own practice
of sitting, as well as ours of kneeling. The like may be said of Christ's
example alleged by him also; for would he, or would he not have his Disciples
believe that they are obliged to do as Christ did? if he would not have them
believe so, why does he press them with Christ example? if he would have them
believe so, I demand again whether he does believe it himself or no? if he do
not, it is plain he is a seducer of the People; but if he do believe it, he
must needs condemn the French Presbyterians for standing, as well as the
English Protestants for kneeling; nay he must needs condemn himself and all
other Christians in the world for not doing as Christ did in point of time, I
mean, for not giving and receiving the Sacrament in the Evening as Christ did,
as well as he condemns us for not doing as Christ did in point of gesture;
unless he can prove (which I think he cannot) that we are of necessity to
follow Christ's example in one circumstance of the same action, and not in
another, and in that circumstance which is less, but not in that which is more
material; for certainly that circumstance which denominates the action (as the
circumstance of time does the Lords Supper) is most material; and yet that
circumstance by the consent of all Christendom is altered from the Evening to
the Morning, and so was the gesture or posture of receiving also, and that upon
most just and weighty reasons, till those that delight in change would needs
have it otherwise, and that perhaps for no other reason but because they found
it settled in the Church* This is not to follow Christ's example, who in things
indifferent in their own nature conformed his practice to that of the Church in
which he lived, though varying in some circumstances from the primitive
Institution; and particularly in this very action, from which they press us
with Christ's example. For it is certain that Christ and his Disciples sat at
the Passover, (though it be uncertain whether he or they sat at the giving
and receiving the Sacrament o^ no, for it was (...), after he had supped, says
the Text, Luk 22.20.) Howsoever it is certain, I say, that Christ and his
Disciples sat when they eat the Passover, and this no doubt was according to
the custom of the Jewish Church at that time; but it is as certain that this
was not the manner according to the first institution of it, which was to eat
it standing, as you may read Exodus 12.11. So that to urge Christ's example
against us, is to urge Christ's example against himself; for as we conform our
selves to the Churches order and custom of our times in receiving the
Communion otherwise in point of gesture, then perhaps it was received at the
first institution; so Christ and his Apostles conforming themselves to the
order and practice of the Church of their times, did celebrate the Passover
otherwise then according to the first Institution it was to be celebrated in
point of gesture also; thereby perhaps intending to teach us, that as long as
the Essentials of Doctrine and worship (which are unalterable) are preserved,
we are not to separate from the Church, or quarrel with our Superiors, if
those things that are in their own nature alterable, be not always and in all
places just the same that they were at first, because there may be very just
cause for the alteration of them; and whether there be such a cause or no in
this and the like particulars, it is the Church that is to be the Judge. So
that there is nothing that can be collected either from the Canons of the
Councels, or from the practice of the Primitive Church, no nor from Christ's own
example, that can prove kneeling at the Sacrament to be a sin; neither does Mr.
Baxter himself believe it to be sinful, for if he did, he would not say (as he
does. Page 411. of his five Disputations) that he himself would kneel rather
then disturb the peace of the Church, or be deprived of its Communion. In which
words he confesses, First, that Kneeling at the Sacrament is not sinful or
unlawful, Secondly, that not to Kneel when it is imposed, is to disturb the
Peace of the Church, and Thirdly, that the imposing of it upon penalty of being
deprived of the Communin, is an effectual means to make those that otherwise
would not kneel, to conform to it; and consequently, that the imposing of it
upon such a penalty is prudent and rational, and whatsoever is prudent and
rational cannot be unlawful; so that not only the Act of Kneeling it self, but
the imposition of it by lawful Authority must needs be lawful. Neither indeed
would the People scruple at the imposition, if they had not been taught that
the thing it self were unlawful, or if Mr Baxter would yet teach them to
believe what he himself believes, namely, that it is lawful; which with what
conscience he can refuse to do I know not; for sure he is obliged to teach them
obedien^e not to Divine Authority only, but to humane authority also in all
lawful things; and not to let them go on in such an erroneous opinion, as will
disturb the Peace, and deprive them of the Communion of the Church, and
consequently make them sin against God and man and their own Souls. Of which
sin of theirs he must needs be a partaker in a great measure, if he do not
persuade them from it; seeing (as he himself says) Qui non vetat peccare cum
potest, jubet. And what Power he has to lead or mislead those kind of men,
their venturing to kill and be killed in a most unrighteous quarrel (upon his
persuasion) has more then enough demonstrated during the time of the late
troubles; unless he will say that he has conjured up a Spirit that he cannot
lay. Howsoever by how much the more fault he has been in misleading them
heretofore, by so much the more zealous he should be to reduce them into the
right way hereafter; which if he and the rest of his Brethren can do (as I am
confident they can if they will) they will make some amends for the mischief
they have done and then there will be no fear or danger of Ministers being
Ejected for their tenderness toward the People, nor of the Ejecting of any of
the People from the Communio of the Church for not conforming themselves to the
Orders and Commands of it, and consequently, there will be no Schisms or
Divisions amongst us, when we shall all worship the same God the same way. But
if they will not do this (which by all obligations humane and Divine they are
bound to do) for my part I know no better way for undeceiving and reducing of
the People, then by removing such Ministers, and then we shall see when the
blowing of those boisterous winds cease, whether the waves will not be still
or no: In the mean time, I hope the removing of erroneous and seditious, will
not necessitate the introducing of ignorant and sca^dalous Ministers, though
Mr. Baxter ought to remember, that as there is no sin more heinous then
Rebellion, so no teacher ought to be more scandalous (I am sure there is none
more dangerous) then a teacher of Rebellion.

And now (to use Mr. Baxters own words) I think there is no man to be found on
earth, that has the ordinary reason of a Man, but will confess, That it is
indeed destructive of all Government and Legislative power, to Assert (as Mr.
Baxter did Assert) the command of a thing in it self lawful by lawful
Authority, under no unjust punishment, with no evil circumstance, which the
Commander can foresee or ought to provide against (for all these pre-cautions
were expesly put in the proposition which Mr. Baxter denied) is a sinful
Command, for no other reason, but because the Act Commanded may be by Accident
a sin.

Let Mr. Baxter then know, and (if he have ingenuity enough) confess, that the
words I spoke (as to this particular) were words of truth, and words of charity
also, as being intended and spoken to no other end, but to undeceive that
People, who by having his person too much in admiration (as if he could neither
deceive nor be deceived) had been so long and so dangerously misl^ad by him; so
that it was not I that defamed him then, but it is he that has defamed me now.
Neither could I expect less from the boldness of this man and that Party, who
have had the confidence publicly to own the obligation of the Covenant, even
since it has been condemned to be burnt by the Parliament. And truly I see no
reason why all those Books and Sermons which have been Preached and Printed in
defense of the Covenant, or to maintain the same or worse principles of
Sedition then are in the Covenant, should not be burnt also. Nay I dare be bold
to say, that if the Authors of such Books and Sermons were not still of the
same opinions (and if they be, God deliver us from such Preachers) if they were
not still, I say, of the same opinions, but did truly repent of them, and were
heartly sorry for the horrible mischief they have done by them, they would with
those converted Exorcists, Act. 19.19. bring all those Conjuring Books of
theirs together, and to save the Hangman a labor, would publicly burn them
all with their own hands, that so, though by the burning of their works they
may perhaps suffer some loss in point of reputation with some of their
Disciples, yet they themselves may be saved, but so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.15. At
least they ought to be enjoined to write Books of Retractation, as St.
Augustine did, having much more reason to do so then St. Augustine had.

And this Sir is all I have to say upon this occasion, and more a great deal
then I thought to have said, or then perhaps was needful to be said to one that
knows Mr. Baxter and me as well as you do; which if it satisfy you, as I hope
it will, you may do what you please with it, in order to the satisfying of
others; for this is the first and last trouble I mean to put my self to of this
kind, whatsoever provocation I may have from him hereafter.

Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, G. Worcester.

The Attestation of Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson. Concerning a Command of Lawful
Superiors, what was sufficient to its being a lawful Command.
THis Proposition being brought by us, viz. That Command which commands an Act
in it self lawful, and no other act or circumstance unlawful, is not sinful.

Mr. Baxter denied it for two reasons which he gave in with his own hand in
writing thus: One is, Because that may be a sin per accidens, which is not so
in it self, and may be unlawfully commanded though that accident be not in the
command. Another is, That it may be commanded under an unjust penalty.

Again this Proposition being brought by us,

That Command which commands an Act in it self lawful, and no other Act
whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined, nor any circumstance whence per
accidens any sin is consequent which the Commander ought to provide against, is
not sinful.

Mr. Baxter denied it for this reason given in with his own hand in writing
thus: Because the first Act commanded may be per accidens unlawful, and be
commanded by an unjust penalty, though no other Act or circumstance commanded
be such.

Again this Proposition being brought by us,

That Command which commands an Act in it self lawful, and no other Act
whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined, nor any circumstance whence directly or
per accidens any sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide
against, has in it all things requisite to the lawfulness of a Command, and
particularly cannot be guilty of commanding an Act per accidens unlawful, nor
of commanding an Act under an unjust penalty.

Mr. Baxter denied it upon the same Reasons.

Peter Gunning. John Pearson.


The Postscript.
LEast Mr. Baxter should say I have defamed him once more, by charging him with
devising and publishing Maxims of Treason, Sedition and Rebellion, (which till
he should as publicly recant, I thought it unfit to restore him to the
exercise of any Act of the Ministry in my Diocese) I think my self obliged to
set down some few of his Political Theses or Aphorisms in his own words, as
they are extant (though it be strange such a Book should still be extant) in
his [Holy Common-wealth] most falsely and profanely so called.

Mr. Baxter's Theses of Government and Governors in General.
I. Governors are some limited, some de facto unlimited: The unlimited are
Tyrants and have no right to that unlimited Government, P. 106. These. 101.

II. The 3. qualifications of necessity to the being of Sovereign Power are, 1.
So much understanding, 2. So much will or goodness in himself, 3. So much
strength or executive power by his interest in the People or others, as are
necessary to the said ends of Government, P. 130. These. 133.

III. From whence he deduceth 3. Corollaries, ( viz.)

1. When Providence depriveth a man of his understanding and intellectual
Capacity, and that statedly or to his ordinary temper, it makes him materiam
indispositam and incapable of Government, though not of the name. These. 135.

2. If God permit Princes to turn so wicked as to be incapable of governing so
as is consistent with the ends of Government, he permits them to depose
themselves, These. 136.

3. If Providence statedly disable him that was the Sovereign from the
executing of the Law, protecting the just, and other ends of Government, it
makes him an incapable subject of the power, and so deposes him. These. 137.

IV. Whereunto he subjoyns, that though it is possible and likely that the
guilt is or may be theirs, who have disabled their Ruler by deserting him, yet
he is dismissed and disobliged from the charge of Government; and particular
innocent members are disobliged from being Governed by him.

V. If the person (viz. the Sovereign) be justly dispossessed, as by a lawful
War, in which he loses his right, especially if he violate the Constitution
and enter into a Military state against the People themselves, and by them be
conquered, they are not obliged to restore him, unless there be some special
obligation upon them besides their Allegiance. These. 145.

VI. If the person dispossessed, though it were unjustly, do afterward become
incapable of Government, it is not the Duty of his Subjects to seek his
restitution. These. 146. No not although ( says he) the incapacity be but
accidental, as if he cannot be restored but by the Arms of the Enemies of God
or of the Commonwealth.

VII. If an Army (of Neighbors, Inhabitants, or whoever) do (though
injuriously) expel the Sovereign, and resolve to ruin the Commonwealth, rather
then he shall be restored; and if the Commonwealth may prosper without his
restoration, it is the Duty of such an injured Prince for the Common good to
resign his Government, and if he will not, the people ought to judge him as
made incapable by Providence, and not to seek his restitution to the apparent
ruin of the Commonwealth, These. 147.

Where by the way we are to note, he makes the people judge of this and all
other incapacities of the Prince, and consequently when or for what he is to be
Deposed, or not Restored by them.

VIII. If therefore the rightful Governor be so long dispossessed, that the
Commonwealth can be no longer without, but to the apparent hazard of its ruin,
we ( that is, we the people, or we the Rebels that dispossessed him) are to
judge that Providence has dispossessed the former, and presently to consent to
another. These. 149.

IX. When the People are without a Governor, it may be the duty or such as
have most strength, ex charitate, to protect the rest from injury. These. 150.
and consequently they are to submit themselves to the Parliament, or to that
Army which deposed or dispossessed or murdered the rightful Governor.

X. Providence by Conquest or other means does use so to qualify some persons
above others for the Government when the place is void, that no other persons
shall be capable competitors, and the persons ( does not he mean the
Cromwells?) shall be as good as named by Providence, whom the people are bound
by God to choose, or consent to, so that they are usually brought under a
divine obligation to submit to such or such, and take them for their
Governors, before those persons have an actual right to Govern. These. 151.

XI. Any thing that is a sufficient sign of the will of God, that this is the
person, by whom we must be Governed is enough (as joined to Gods Laws) to
oblige us to consent and obey him as our Governor. These. 153.

XII. When God does not notably declare any person or persons qualified above
others, there the people must judge as well as they are able according to Gods
general rules. These. 157.

XIII. And yet All the people have not this right of choosing their Governors,
but commonly a part of every Nation must be compelled to consent, etc.

XIV. Those that are known enemies of the Common Good in the chiefest parts of
it, are unmeet to Govern or choose Governors, but such are multitudes of
ungodly vicious men. Page 174. So that if those that are strongest (though
fewest) call themselves the Godly Party, all others besides themselves are to
be excluded from Governing or choosing of Governors. And amongst the ungodly
that are to be thus excluded, he reckons all those that will not hearken to
their Pastors ( he means the Presbyterian Classis) or that are despisers of the
Lord's Day, that is, all such as are not Sabbatarians, or will not keep the
Lord's Day after the Jewish manner, which they prescribe, and which is condemned
for Judaism by all even of the Presbyterian persuasion in the world, but those
of England and Scotland only.

XV. If a People that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign, shall
sinfully dispossess him, and contrary to their Covenants, choose and Covenant
with another, they may be obliged by their latter Covenant notwithstanding
their former; and particular subjects that consented not in the breaking of
their former Covenants, may yet be obliged by occasion of their latter choice
to the person whom they choose. These. 181.

XVI. If a Nation injuriously deprive themselves of a worthy Prince, the hurt
will be their own, and they punish themselves; but if it be necessarily to
their welfare, it is no injury to him. But a King that by war will seek
reparations from the body of the People, does put himself into an hostile
State, and tells them actually that he looks to his own good more then theirs,
and bids them take him for their Enemy, and so defend themselves if they can.
Page 424.

XVII. Though a Nation wrong their King, and so quoad Meritum causae, they are
on the worser side, yet may he not lawfully war against the public good on
that account, nor any help him in such a war, because propter finem he has the
worser cause. These. 352.

And yet as he tells us (page 476.) we were to believe the Parliaments
Declarations and professions which they made, that the war which they raised
was not against the King either in respect of his Authority, or of his Person;
but only against Delinquent Subjects, and yet they actually fought against the
King in person, and we are to believe ( says Mr. Baxter page 422.) that men
would kill them whom they fight against.

Mr. Baxter's Doctrine concerning the Government of England in particular.
HE denies the government of England to be Monarchical in these words.

I. The real Sovereignty here amongst us was in King, Lords, and Commons. Page
72.

II. As to them that argue from the Oath of Supremacy and the title given the
King, He might have referred them to himself, page 460. where he gives the same
answer to the same objection.
I refer them ( says Mr. Baxter) to Mr. Lawson's answer to Hobb's Politics,
where he shows that the Title is often given to the single Person for the
honor of the Commonwealth and his encouragement, because he has an eminent
interest: but will not prove the whole Sovereignty to be in him: and the Oath
excludes all others from without, not those whose interest is implied as
conjunct with his -- The eminent dignity and interest of the King above others
allowed the name of a Monarchy or Kingdom to the Commonwealth, though indeed
the Sovereignty was mixed in the hands of the Lords and Commons. Page 88.

III. He calls it a false supposition, 1. That the Sovereign power was only in
the King, and so that it was an absolute Monarchy. 2. That the Parliament had
but only the proposing of Laws, and that they were Enacted only by the Kings
Authority upon their request. 3. That the power of Arms and of War and Peace
was in the King alone. And therefore ( says he) those that argue from these
false suppositions, conclude that the Parliament being Subjects, may not take
up Arms without him, and that it is Rebellion to resist him; and most of this
they gather from the Oath of Supremacy, and from the Parliaments calling of
themselves his Subjects; but their grounds (says he) are sandy, and their
superstructure false. Page 459, and 460.

And therefore Mr. Baxter tells us, that though the Parliament are Subjects in
one capacity, yet have they their part in the Sovereignty also in their higher
capacity, Ibid. And upon this false and traiterous supposition he endeavors to
justify the late Rebellion, and his own more then ordinary activeness in it.
For,

IV. Where the Sovereignty ( says he) is distributed into several hands (as
the Kings and Parliaments) and the King invades the others part, they may
lawfully defend their own by war, and the Subject lawfully assist them, yea
though the power of the Militia be expressly given to the King, unless it be
also expressed that it shall not be in the other. These. 363.

The conclusion (says he) needs no proof, because Sovereignty, as such, has
the power of Arms and of the Laws themselves. The Law that says the King shall
have the Militia supposes it to be against Enemies and not against the
Commonwealth, nor them that have part of the Sovereignty with him. To resist
him here is not to resist power, but usurpation and private will; in such a
case the Parliament is no more to be resisted then he. Ibid.

V. If the King raise War against such a Parliament upon their Declaration of
the dangers of the Commonwealth, the people are to take it as raised against
the Commonwealth. These. 358.

And in that case (says he) the King may not only be resisted, but cease to
be a King, and enters into a state of War with the people. These. 368.

VI. Again, if a Prince that has not the whole Sovereignty be conquered by a
Senate that has the other part, and that in a just defensive War, that
Senate cannot assume the whole Sovereignty, but supposes that government in
specie to remain, and therefore another King must be chosen, if the former be
incapable. ( These. 374.) as he tells us, he is, by ceasing to be King, in the
immediately precedent These.

VII. And yet in the Preface to this Book he tells us that the King withdrawing
( so he calls the murdering of one King and the casting off of another) the
Lords and Commons ruled alone; was not this to change the species of the
Government? Which in the immediate words before he had affirmed to be in King,
Lords and Commons; which constitution ( says he) we were sworn, and sworn, and
sworn again to be faithful to and to defend. And yet speaking of that
Parliament which contrary to their Oaths changed this Government by ruling
alone, and taking upon them the Supremacy, Vid. Preface to the Holy Common
wealth. p^g. 6.
he tells us that they were the best Governors in all the world, and such as
it is forbidden to Subjects to depose upon pain of damnation.

What then was he that deposed them? one would think Mr. Baxter should have
called him a Traitor, but he calls him in the same Preface, the Lord Protector,
adding, That he did prudently, piously, faithfully, and to his immortal honor
exercise the Government, which he left to his Son, to whom ( as Mr. Baxter
says page 481.) he is bound to submit as set over us by God, and to obey for
conscience sake, and to behave himself as a Loyal Subject toward him, because
( as he says in the same place) a full and free Parliament had owned him:
thereby implying, That a maimed and manacled House of Commons, without King and
Lords, and notwithstanding the violent expulsion of the secluded Members were a
full and free Parliament; and consequently that if such a Parliament should
have taken Arms against the King he must have sided with them. Yea, though they
had been never so much in fault, and though they had been the beginners of the
War, for he tells us in plain and express terms,

VIII. That if he had known the Parliament had been the beginners of the War
and in most fault, yet the ruin of the Trustees and Representatives, and so of
all the security of the Nation being a punishment greater then any faults of
theirs against the King could deserve from him, their faults could not
disoblige him ( meaning himself) from defending the Commonwealth. Page 480.

And that he might do this lawfully, and with a good Conscience, he seems to be
so confident, that in his Preface, he makes as it were a challenge, saying,
that if any man can prove that the King was the highest power in the time of
those Divisions, and that he had power to make that war which he made, he will
offer his head to Justice as a Rebel.

As if in those times of Division the King had lost or forfeited his
Sovereignty, and the Parliament had not only a part, but the whole Sovereignty
in themselves.

IX. Finally Mr. Baxter tells us, Page 486. That having often searched into his
heart, whether he did lawfully engage into the War or not, and whether he did
lawfully encourage so many thousands to it; he tells us, I say, that the issue
of all his search was but this, -- That he cannot yet see that he was mistaken
in the main cause, nor dares he repent of it, nor forbear doing the same, if it
were to do again in the same state of things. He tells us indeed in the same
place, that if he could be convinced he had sinned in this matter, he would as
gladly make a public recantation, as he would eat or drink: which seeing he
has not yet done, it is evident he is still of the same mind, and
consequently would upon the same occasion do the same things, viz. fight, and
encourage as many thousands as he could to fight against the King for any thing
that calls it self, or which he is pleased to call a full and Free Parliament:
as likewise that he would own and submit to any Usurper of the Sovereignty as
set up by God, although he came to it by the murder of his Master, and by
trampling upon the Parliament. Lastly, That he would hinder as much as possibly
he could the restoring of the rightful Heir unto the Crown. And now whether a
man of this Judgment, and of these affections, ought to be permitted to Preach
or no, Let any, but himself, judge.

FINIS.

