MORE JOYFUL NEWS FROM HVLL Being the Happiest Tidings that ever came to
London, set in a Letter from Sir John Hotham and read in the House of Commons
upon Monday last.

With the Answer of the House of Commons to the said Letter.

Likewise His Majesty's Letter to the Queen in Holland, intercepted by the
Earl of Warwick, and read in the House of Comemons upon Saturday, July 30. And
the Joyful Resolution of the Scots, concerning the Forces raised by his
Majesty.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

August 2. Printed for J. Wels, 1642.

Better and Better NEVVES FROM HULL; Being the happiest and Joyfullest Tidings,
that ever came to London.
TRVTH is the Daughter of Time, and Experience the best Schoolmaster, who has
long since taught many Men and States, the sad and woeful effects of an
half-done work, and those Convulsions, and renting Pains which the Body of
Great Britain now shows, that the Ill Humors and Obstructions, and not yet
fully purged nor dissolved.

God will have a through work done, if instead of redressing Evils, we think
to to transseat all by removing of persons, and not things, well may we bush
our Troubles for a season, but they will return with a greater violence; for
believe it, let us flatter our selves as we please, any sighted Eye may see,
that although we think we have now passed ths Equinoctial and Straffordian
Line, and seem to have gone beyond Canterbury.

Yet their Faction, and their undermining Agents (of all the Religions) grow
daily more and more powerful, and no doubt do labor an extirpation of all
Parliaments, and men which will not think, say and swear to their Opinions and
Practices.

But we have friends in the North, that will not suffer these persons to
remain any longer here neither will they suffer true Religion to be beaten
down; but is Resolved to finish the work which he has for merly begun

Whereupon they having taken into consideration the proceedings of the
Cavaleers, which they conceive to be the Opposers of true Religion, and the
occasion of these Distempers which has now crept into the Bowels of this
didressed Kingdom, has set down their full Resolution in these ensuing
particulars.

1. THat they are Resolved to maintain Gods true Religion against all Opposers
whatsoever, and the they will spend their dear^st Blo^d in the maintenance
thereof. 2. That they are Resolved to assist His Sacred Majesty and the High
Court of Parliament, against the Disturbers of the Peace of this Kingdom. 3.
That they will adventure and spend their lives and fortunes, in the Defense of
His Majesty's Prerogative, the Privileges of Parliament, the liberty of the
Subject, and the Laws of the Realm.
These foregoing particulars, are the Propositions and Resolution of our
well-affected Brethren in Scotland, wherein they do declare their love and
affection to this Kingdom, being likewise Resolved to assist the King and
Parliament against the Cavaleers, who commit many Outrages against the
Inhabitants in diverse Counties, contrary to his Majesty's Command.

And will to the uttermost of their power, riase a certain Number of men, for
the preservation of the Peace of this Kingdom.

Joyful New from Hull.
Upon Monday last there was letters read in the Audience of both Houses, that
came from Sir John Hotham, wherein he declared his happy victory, which he had
obtained against the Cavaleers, and after some 3. or 4. hours skirmish, they
were forced to fly, slaying a great number of them, the Lord Rich being
likewise dangerously wounded, and the Earl of Lindsey were also hurt, and also
intimating, how that the ships which the Earl of Warwick sent to him do stand
him in great stead, and have had many skirmishes with the Cavaleers who had
fortified themselves at Paul, but after some fight, they bate down the
Fortifications, and made the Cavaleers to fly.

Both Houses having ratd the aforesaid Leettes, after some Debate thereupon,
returned this Answer to Sir John Hotham, That for his good service which he
has performed lately, they give him much thanks, being joyful to hear of his
happy Proceedings, inciting him to the continuance of the Parliaments
confidence.

This is the effect and substance of the Parliaments Answer to Sir John Hothams
Letter.

There was also a Report made at a Conference to the Lords, by the Earl of
Essex, that he had received Letters from the Earl of Warwick, intimating that
he had intercepted a packet of letters at the Sea, which were going to the
Queen from his Majesty; which was to this effect.

That his Majesty desired her to send over those things he sent for, and to be
careful therein, informing her also of his late Proceedings, and how confident
he is of obtaining Hull, and that he has so won the hearts of his Subjects,
that there are scarce four in a County of a contrary mind.

The aforesaid particulars concerning his Majesty and his Royal consort the
Queen, was read in the House of Commons upon Saturday last, with many more
letters, but of no great consequence, being intercepted by the Earl of
Warwick, and by him sent to the Right Honorable, the Earl of Essex, Lord
General of the Army, now setting forth of his Majesty, the Parliament, and
Kingdom. God of his great mercy protect him from all those Blood-sucking
Parties, that seeks the extirpation and Ruin of the true Protestant
Profession, and laws of the land.

Ordered that this be printed and published. John Brown Cler. Part.


