THE URIM OF CONSCIENCE. To which the Author has had recourse, for plain
Answers, in his own particular Case (as every Man living ought to do in his) to
FOUR QUESTIONS, of great weight and importance, viz. 1. Who, And what art thou?
2. Where have thou been? 3. What art thou now doing? 4. Whither art thou going?

Together with Three Select Prayers for Private Families.

By Sir Samuel Morland, Knt. and Bart. During his Blindness and Retirement.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. and B. B. for A. Roper E. Wilkinson and R. Clavel,
over against St. Dunston's Church, Fleet Street. 1695.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT having pleased Almighty God, to deprive me of the Sight of both my Eyes,
for above Three Years already past; and being thereby disabled to do my King or
Country any further Service, I thought it might not be amiss, to employ some
part of my Time, during this Solitude and Retirement, in Recollecting some
Observations and Reflections, which I have heretofore made, from what I have
seen or heard, either at Home or Abroad; as believing they might, at present,
be profitable to my self, and hereafter useful to others.

And therefore I have at last digested them into a small Treatise, containing
four Questions and Answers, which do, in truth, concern every one, who has the
true use of that Reason with which he was born: But more especially professed
Christians, who ought, every Day of their Lives, seriously to propose to
themselves such Interrogatories, and require, at the same time, sincere and
direct Answers from their own Consciences.

Now, if the Method of the following Discourse, be looked upon as Particular and
Unusual, I hope it may be the more grateful; forasmuch as new things, though of
little consequence, do usually find a tolerable acceptance.

If it be thought too Short and Concise for a Subject of such Weight and
Importance; there will be this Convenience, that it will give less trouble to
the Readers.

If it should be censured for Sharp and Satirical Reflections, I desire it may
be considered, That those Reflections are either directed against professed
Atheists, Libertines, and vicious Livers, who make a Mock of Religion, and the
Holy Scriptures; or else, that they are made use of to lessen the Credit and
Reputation of a certain Treatise called Leviathan, which has corrupted the
Minds and Manners of so many hopeful Youths of this last Age, who by reason of
the tenderness of their Years, and want of Solidity and Experience, could not
easily discern the Fallacies and Inconsistences of those dangerous Doctrines,
that are so subtly couched in that impious Discourse.

And lastly, if in this small Treatise there shall be found Errors, Mistakes,
or useless Passages proceeding from the Author's Blindness, Old Age, or
Weakness, and his being forced to make use of other Men's Hands and Eyes, he
begs the courteous and candid Perusers, to put them all into a Parenthesis, and
to consider that since humanum est errare, he had in the following Discourse a
two fold end and Purpose; the One to gratify his Readers, the other to benefit
Himself: For while They either do, or may go away with what is of real Use and
Practice in their Lives and Conversations, He comes after, to glean and gather
up those Mistakes and Trivial Passages, for the Exercise of Self-mortification,
and for the begetting and continuing a mean Opinion, and low Thoughts of his
own Abilities.

And therefore flatters himself with hopes to find a favorable Interpretation
of his hearty and sincere, though weak Endeavors (being already past the
Seventieth Year of his Age) to leave that behind him, which may at least help
to turn some Souls to Righteousness, when he himself shall be turned to Dust
and Ashes:

THE First Question.
Q. Who, And what art thou?
Answer.

One, who deserves no Name: A poor and despicable Individual of the unhappy
Species of Human Race, which in its Original was Excellent and Admirable, but
is now become Wretched and Miserable.

Sometimes, in the Silence and Shades of Night, my roving Fancy gives me a
transient view of Adam in his Innocence; as he was LORD and KING of this lower
World, and sitting in State, with his Royal Consort, in the Garden of EDEN,
whither all the Creatures resorted to do him Homage, with all Respect and
Submission, as to their Liege and rightful Sovereign.

Again, sometimes it represents the doleful Scene of his terrible Fall, by his
fond Compliance with his new Bride's desires, to disobey his Maker's Command,
and thereby to expose himself, and her, and his whole Posterity, to Death and
endless Misery.

That Angels were created before Man, and that one of their chief Order for his
Pride and Ambition was cast out of Heaven, we need no better proof than the sad
Rehearsal of Adam's Fall; for certainly no other Created Being would ever have
attempted to deface God's own Image and Likeness, but the chief of Apostate
Angels, and Prince of Devils.

Methinks I hear the Father of Lies, in the shape of a Serpent (which was
probably at that time, the most Lovely and Beautiful, as well as the most
Crafty and Subtle of all the inferior Creatures) thus accosting the Mother of
all Living,

Fair Queen of this Lower World! What great pity it is, that such excellent
Creatures as your Self, and your Royal Associate, should here feed on Herbs and
courser Meats, whereas there is so noble a Plant in this your own Garden, the
Fruit whereof is not only incomparably fair to the Eye, and extremely pleasant
to the Taste, but has also a secret Virtue to inspire the Eaters with Heavenly
Wisdom and Knowledge. If your Maker has forbidden it you, it is only to raise
and heighten the Desires of your Divine Souls, after their proper, Adcquate and
Celestial Objects. How should the LORD GOD take Offense at your doing that,
which will most certainly make you so like to himself, and his own Divine
Essence?

How far Eve might be surprised, to hear a Serpent speak in her own Language;
Or, whether the Gift of Speaking might, in those Days, be sometimes given by
God, to some of the chief of Inferior Creatures, upon some special occasion (as
it was in aftertimes given to Balaam's Ass) And whether the Devil spoke to her
through the mouth of a real Serpent, or in an assumed shape, I shall not go
about to determine. Some learned Men believe that this Serpent was a Dragon;
because, say they, the Naturalists in their Writings describe the Dragon to be
a Creature of wonderful Beauty, (and doubtless it was a much more beautiful
Creature before its Curse, in case that were the very Animal that was made use
off by the Devil) with a long golden Beard, bright and sparkling Eyes, Scales
shining with glorious Colors, and the like; insomuch that the Egyptians
worshipped a Dragon, as a Diety; and the Greeks borrowed (...) that Beautiful
Creatures Image, to represent their God AEsculapius: But in how beautiful a
shape soever the Devil appeared, it is evident that his Design was, to all
intents and purposes, most spiteful and malicious.

O cruel Satan! Was there not room enough for thee, and all thy Infernal Crew,
to range up and down in the vast and wide Expanse, without intruding so rudely
and abruptly into Paradise?

O spiteful old Dragon! What Wrong, or Injury, did our first Parents do to
thee, while they were dressing the Garden, which their MAKER had so lately
placed them in, that thou should invent so hellish a Stratagem, and in
Masquerade make so fatal an Address, at once to rob them of their Innocence,
disturb their present Peace, and disappoint them of their future Happiness?

Be therefore for ever accursed, O Beelzebub, Thou Prince of Devils, and true
Original of all Sin and Wickedness, for thy malicious Practices to deceive all
the Nations of the World, for so many Thousand Years; whenas thou can not be
ignorant, but that the Sins of every Soul that thou has tempted, (be it Saved,
or be it Damned) shall one Day be set to thy Account, and add Degrees to thy
Eternal Torment. (From all Evil and Mischief, and from all the Crafts and
Assaults of the Devil, and all his Infernal Spirits, Good Lord deliver us.)

Now here, I doubt not, but that the ingenious Reader will expect I should
insert some short Discourse concerning Blessed and Apostate Spirits, and I
could heartily wish I had a sufficient Knowledge of, and Insight into those
Mysteries, to answer fully his desires.

But I am afraid on the one side, that he would be very little satisfied with
my Endeavors, in case I should, in imitation of a late learned Author, try to
squeeze a plausible Description of LOST PARADISE, out of St. John's Vision in
the Isle of Patmos, and fancy to my self a formal and pitched Battle, upon a
vast and wide Plain, in the North part of Heaven, fought between two mighty
Hosts of Blessed and Revolted Spirits, conducted and led up by mighty
Archangels, (for their Generals) riding in Brazen Chariots, drawn by foaming
Steeds, and clad with Adamantine Coats, one of which was, by a massy Sword, cut
down to the wast, and stained with Angelick blood: Where the one of these
Armies dug up the Terrain of Heaven, and with the Materials they there found,
made Powder, Bullets and great Guns (it is pity that Bombs were not in use when
he wrote that Treatise) and with them did great Execution upon their Enemies,
who in Revenge tore up great Mountains by the Roots, and hurled them at their
Heads, with a great number of other Romantic Stories, which is Ludere cum
Sacris, and much fitter for Poets and Painters, who when they are got to the
top of their P^rnassus, frame to themselves Idea's of what Chimera's or Goblins
they please.

And on the other side, I judge it altogether needless, to make use of the
Dark-Lanterns of Homer, Ovid, Virgil, or any of the old Heathen Poets, or to
borrow the dim Tapers and blinking Lights of Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, or any
of those Half-Divine Philosophers, or to be beholding to the Schoolmen for
their vain Distinctions, and splitting of Hairs, with their lame Definitions,
and Explanations of Obscurum per Obscurius.

Neither am I willing to tire my Reader with endless Quotations out of the
Ancient, Pious and Learned Fathers, who were, for the most part, somewhat
tender in delivering their Opinions about the Doctrine of Spirits, but wisely
waved the positive Determination of Questions, relating to the Invisible World,
and those deep Mysteries of Incorporeal Beings, as not to be fathomed by the
Line and Plummet of Human Understanding.

And therefore I shall content my self with what Light I can get from the Holy
Scriptures, and where those are either obscure, or silent, to be very cautious,
sober and modest.

1. That there were, are, and ever shall be, true and real Subsistencies of
Good and Evil Angels, the following Passages of Sacred Writ do plainly inform
us, viz. -- Before the Angels of God, 12 Luke 8.

-- He shall come -- with all his holy Angels, 25 Matthew. 31.

-- If God spared not the Angels that sinned, 2 Pet. 2. 4.

-- The Angels that kept not their first Estate, Jud. 6.

-- The Angels came, 4 Matthew. 11.

-- Out of whom went 7 Devils, 8 Luke 2.

-- Everlasting Fire Prepared for the Devil and his Angels, 25 Matthew. 41.

-- But are as the Angels in Heaven, 22 Matthew. 30.



2. As concerning the Time when the Angels were Created, it may be conjectured,
by comparing several Texts of Scripture, and making the following Inference,
viz.

The Sons of God, and the Morning-Stars are put together, and the Morning-Stars
were made before the Earth, Job 38. And the Earth was made three Days before
the Stars in the Firmament, Genesis 1. (And consequently Morning Stars cannot be
meant Stars of the Firmament.)

Again, by Stars, are meant Angels, 12 Rev. 4.

And by the Heavenly Host, are meant Angels, 2 Luke 13. and 1 Kings 19. 21.

And the Heavens and Heavenly Hosts are joined together, 2 Genesis And the Heavens
said to be Created the First Day.

Therefore it seems probable, that the Sons of God, otherwise the
Morning-Stars, (or which is the same thing) Angels, or the Host of Heaven, were
created on the first of the Six Days in the Morning.

3. That there were great Numbers of both Blessed and Apostate Angels, we are
assured from several Passages in the Old and New Testament. -- More than 12
Legions (or, as some compute it) 79992) Angels, 26 Matthew. 23.

-- Thousand Thousands ministered unto him, and Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand
stood before him, 7 Dan. 10. and 5 Rev. 11.

-- An innumerable Company of Angels, 12. Heb. 22.

-- A multitude of the Heavenly Host, 2* Luke 13.

-- His Tail drew a Third part of the Stars of Heaven, 12 Rev. 4.

-- My Name is Legion, for we are many, 5 Mark 9.



Now, if Solomon, who was LORD but of a very small Spot of the Terrestrial
Globe, (which Globe is by us thought to be little more than a Point, if
compared with the Starry Firmament) had so many Attendants What Number should
we think a fit Retinue for the KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS? Myriades
Myriadum, will be too small a Sum: And so will our ordinary Terms of
Arithmetic, and we must be forced to borrow some of the learned Commentator
upon Archimedes his Arenarius, and say, Billions, Trillions, Quadrillions, etc.
of blessed Angels to attend his Throne, and to make up the Court of Heaven.

4. That there were different Orders and Degrees of Good and Evil Spirits, we
have reason to believe, from the following Texts, viz. -- The great Prince
Michael, 12 Dan. 1.

-- Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, 11 Luke 15.

-- The Prince of the Power of the Air, 2 Ephesians. 2.

-- The Voice of the Archangel, 2 Thessalonians. 4. 16.

-- Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers, 1 Coloss. 16.

-- Michael and his Angels, and the Devil and his Angels, 12 Rev. 3. 9.



5. That all the blessed Angels which attend God's Throne, are Ministering
Spirits, and sometimes appeared in Humane shapes, we find in the following
Texts, viz. -- Three Men stood by him, 18 Genesis 2.

-- Behold two Men stood by them in shining Garments, 24 Luke 4.

-- And there came two Angels to Sodom, and Lot went out to meet them, 19 Genesis
1.

-- And the Angel of the Lord found her by a Fountain of water, 16 Genesis 7.

-- And the Angel of the Lord called unto him, (viz. Abraham) 22 Genesis 11.

-- And Jacob went on his way, and the Angel of the Lord met him, 32 Genesis 1.

-- The Angel of the Lord went out, etc. and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians
185 Thousand, 2 Kings 19. 31.

-- And there died, etc. 70 Thousand. And when the Angel of the Lord stretched
forth his hand upon Jerusalem, the Lord said to the Angel, Hold now thine hand,
2 Samuel 24. 15, 16.

-- You shall see the Heavens opened, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of Man, 1 John 51.

-- I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God, and am sent to speak to
thee, 1 Luke 19.

-- And the Angel ministered unto him, 1 Luke 13.

-- And the Angel of the Lord came down from Heaven, and rolled away the Stone,
etc. 28 Matthew. 2.

-- He knew of a surety, that God had sent his Angel, Acts 12* 11.

-- Who received the *Law by the Disposition of Angels, 7 Acts 53.

-- Are they not ministering Spirits, for the good of, etc. 11 Hebrews.



Ejaculation.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords! about whose Throne are always attending,
Thousands of Thousands, and ten Thousand times ten Thousand blessed Angels, be
graciously pleased to give Charge to some of those ministering Spirits, to guide
and conduct me throughout my whole Pilgrimage in this Val^y of Tears, and at
last, to convey my departing Soul to the place of Everlasting Rest and
Happiness.
What were, and are the fatal Consequences of the Disobedience of our First
Parents, we too well know, and find by woeful Experience. (And had not their
heavy Sentence been allayed with a happy Promise of a Messiah, both their, and
our Condition had been altogether hopeless.) But what had been the
Consequences, in case they had remained in that purity in which they were
created: As namely, to what Numbers they had increased and multiplied? in what
parts of the World they had inhabited? And if in colder Climates, their Bodies
had required Covering and Vestments? Whether Flesh had been allowed them for
Food, as well as Fruits and Herbs? And the Earth brought forth its Increase
without any Labor or Tillage? And lastly, if they had never died, but after a
certain Term of Years, had been Translated from Earth to Heaven, as Righteous
Enoch was, and afterward Elias? Are all Questions more curious than necessary,
(as the Case now stands with us.) And such, as I believe, the wisest Man
living, had he all imaginable Helps of Humane Learning, and acquired Knowledge,
would never be able, with any certainty, to determine.

Thus much we may reasonably believe, and safely conclude, That as they were at
first created by the wonderful Contrivance and Mechany of the blessed Trinity,
and made after G O D's own Image and Likeness, they were truly Noble and
Excellent Creatures.

Of their Bodies we have a Specimen, by the Dissection of one of our own, they
being undoubtedly the same with ours, as to the Figure, Number and Uses, as
well of their Exterior, as their Interior parts, though extremely different in
Perfection and Duraho^ those lasting more than twice as many Hundreds, as ours
do now Scores of Years, even after they were mortified by their Fall, and were
Condemned by G O D himself, the one, to daily Labor and Tillage, and to eat
his Bread by the sweat of his Brows; and the other, to be subject to the Laws
and Will of a Husband, to struggle with the sharp Pains and Throws of
Childbed, and to have her Griefs and Sorrows greatly multiplied.

In the Dissection of Humane Bodies, what thinking Men can take a serious view
of the Skin, the Membranes, the Flesh, the Fibers, the Veins, the Arteries, the
Nerves, the Ligaments, the Cartilages, and the Bones; as likewise of the three
Cavities (or Venters) of the Trunk, namely the Abdomen, the Chest, and the
Head, with all things therein contained; as also the Arms, Thighs and Legs,
with their different Positions, Compositions, and admirable Use, without being
struck with great Wonder and Astonishment, and crying out with good King David,
Behold, I am fearfully and wonderfully made.

When he considers how closely the Stomach, with the help of its Fibers,
embraces the Meat that is chewed in the Mouth, and the Drink that is received
in, and swallowed down, and mixeth therewith specific fermentatious Juices,
bred in its inner Coat, and impregnated by the Saliva, till the finer parts, by
a convenient heat, become a white milky Cream; after which, together with the
thicker Mass, (with which they are as yet involved by the Constriction of the
Stomach,) they pass down to the Guts, where by the mixture of the Bile, and the
pancreatick Juice, they are by another manner of Fermentation, quite separated
from the thicker Mass, and so received of the Lacteal Vessels, as the thicker
is ejected by the Stool.

When he rightly considers the Figure and Motion of that admirable Machine,
(the Heart) and how it is suspended in the Body, by the Vessels that go in and
out of it, and that as an ordinary Forcing-Engine, being placed in the middle
of a City, or Town, draws the Water of an adjoining Source, or Fountain, into
its own Bowels by one Motion, or stroke of the hand, and the help of a Valve,
to keep it from returning back again, and then thrusts, or forces out the same
Water by another stroke of that hand, and the help of another Valve, into
another Pipe, which is afterward distributed into smaller Branches, to supply
the Uses of the several and respective Houses: So the Heart receives the Blood
out of the Vena Cava into its Ventricles by a Djastole, (or Dilatation) and
then thrusts, or forces it out again by a Systole (or Contraction) into the
Arteries, and out of these, into the parts that are to be nourished, from
whence it is to be resolved by the Capillary Veins, which conduct it back
through the larger Veins into the Vena Cava again, and this by the help of
diverse Semi-lunar or Semi-circular Valves, curiously and conveniently placed in
the aforementioned Vessels and Passages, and thus is made the admirable
Circulation of the Blood: But how, or by what secret Power the Heart receives
its Motion, and makes its constant pulses, is known to God alone, the Maker and
Searcher of all Hearts.

We are apt to admire the Skill of an Artist, who can make us a Pendulum-Clock,
of the choicest Brass and Iron, to vibrate with a just and equal Motion, for
the space but of one Year, and that with the help of a suspended Weight: What
shall we then think of a Movement, composed of fleshy Muscles and Fibers
suspended in Methusalem's body, and continuing its Pulses, without the help of
either Weight or Springs, for the space of Nine Hundred, sixty and nine Years,
which time would certainly wear out the Wheels and Pinions of a great many
Brass and Iron Clocks.

If there were but room enough in so small a Treatise, there are yet behind
many and great Wonders of the Almighty Maker's Mechany and Contrivance,
relating to Motion and Sense.

According to that small Skill I formerly had in Optics, it was my Opinion,
(with submission to better Judgments,) that the Figure and Color, or Colors
of a visible Object (however situated, or in what posture soever it be placed)
make the Base of an imaginary Cone, composed of infinite visical Rays, which is
conveyed in an instant through a Lucid Medium, to the Superficies of every
Beholders Eye, where a small section of the Apex of that Cone, is refracted by
the several Waters and Tunicks, and then the Figure of the said Object being
inverted by the Humor Chrystallinus, is, in the same posture, lodged in the
Tunica Retina, from whence it is conveyed into the common Sensory.

Again, by those Experiments I have heretofore made in Acousticks, I then
judged, that different Percussions of the Air, do beget infinite spherical
Figures of Aereal Motions, (as a Stone thrown into the midst of a Pool of
standing Water, or (which is much more curious) a stroke with a Pin's head upon
the supersicies of a long Vessel of Quicksilver, begets in the first infinite
numbers of Circles, or in the last infinite Arches) which spread themselves
every way, till they meet with some harder Body that makes resistance; which
let us suppose to be a Man's Ear, in the Cavity of which the aforesaid Figures
of Aereal Motions suffer several Reverberations, and then make a Percussion
upon the Tympanum, or Drum, (which is a Nervous, and almost pellucid Membrane,
and of most exquisite Sense) and from thence are conveyed into the Brain.

And by the help of these, and other Experiments, I then made (which were many
Years since) and the Blessing of God upon my Endeavors, I found out the
Tubastentero-phonica, or Speaking-Trumpet, and improved that Invention so far,
as to make humane Voice both audible and intelligible, either in plain Words
and Sentences, or else in Cipher, for conveighing Secrets into, or out of
besieged Places, (over the heads of their Enemies) or for one Ship to speak to
another, at the distance of three English Miles, or thereabouts; and had I not
received some Discouragement (which then I did not think I deserved) I did not
doubt but to have improved it to the distance of eight, nine or ten Miles.

I did likewise, at the same time, contrive, and cause to be made by my
Directions, a very large Otocoustacon, one end whereof being laid to my Ear in
a still Evening, in the middle of St. James' Park, brought into it (as I
thought) innumerable Sounds of Coach and Cart-wheels, and humane Voices, in,
and throughout all the Streets, as well those of Westminster, St. James's and
Pickadilly, as the others between White Hall and London Bridge; but those
Sounds being often confused, and those that were nearer, drowning those which
were more remote, and sometimes offending the Ear by the sharpness of the
noise, (not to mention the large Dimensions, and great Weight of such
Instruments.) I then desisted from my making any further Experiments: However,
some years since, having received several Visits, in the behalf of several deaf
Persons, and believing that it might be an acceptable Service to all Mankind, I
determined to proceed, not doubting to contrive such a Machine, as would have
taken a just Gage, or Measure, of the Degrees of any Persons deafness, and
likewise to invent another small Instrument, to hang upon the Ear as an
Ornament, whereby those Degrees of Deafness should have been in a great
measure, or altogether restored; had it not pleased Almighty GOD, in the
interim, to visit me with Blindness.

But now, in all the aforementioned Operations, how the Soul of Man, by the
help of the Brain, (which is the general Organ of Sense) perceives and judges
Sensations of all sentient parts, and out of it, as out of a Fountain, by the
help of eight or ten pair of Nerves (whose Origin is derived from the
Medulla-substance of the Brain) it communicates the Animal Spirits (being
first elaborated) to all the sentient parts of the Body, and thereby endows
them with the faculty of performing Animal Actions: For example, how, and in
what mysterious manner, the Soul sends out the Animal Spirits, so many several
ways, to receive in, and judge of the Figures and Colors of so many hundred
Objects in one Minutes space, and so many different Sounds of Vocal and
Instrumental Music, within the compass and measure of a Semibref, and that
without confounding visual Rays, or Aereal Percussions, which must of necessity
very often interfere with each other, or what manner of Creatures those Animal
Spirits are, which have never yet been discerned by the sharpest Eye, or best
Glasses?

Let the ablest Philosopher in the World tell me, otherwise than by the empty
Terms of Anatomy. -- Et erit mihi magnus Apollo.

And this is all I have here room to treat of, relating to Sense. There is yet
something that very well deserves to be taken notice of, concerning The Motion
of the Limbs, and their great force, in lifting up, thrusting from them, or
pulling to them great weights with the nimble Motion of all the Parts, some of
those Operations agreeing with, and others confounding our ordinary Doctrine of
Staticks.

I know very well, That a pound weight, suspended at one end of an iron Rod
placed horizontally, at six foot distance from its Fulcrum, or perpendicular
Axis, equiponderates a Weight of six pounds suspended at the other end of the
said iron Rod, at one foot distance from the said Fulcrum, or Axis, (the length
of one foot of that Rod, on the one side of the Axis being first made equal in
Weight, to the aforesaid length of six foot of the same Rod, on the other side
of the Axis) And if the aforesaid Weight of six pound, be raised two Inches in
perpendicular height* by the force of the said one pound, (with some small
addition) that one pound weight must of necessity descend Twelve Inches, or one
Foot.

Likewise I am not ignorant, that if a Globular weight of six pound, be
suspended at one end of an Iron Rod of six foot in length, hanging
perpendicularly upon a small Pin, or Joint, the force of two pound weight being
fastened by a Pack-thread, to the Center of Gravity of that Globular weight, and
conveniently placed, so as to move up and down over a Pulley, will heave up
that Globular weight, (a proportional part of the said Rod being first
equiponderated) to the perpendicular height of two foot. Again, the weight of
four pound applied in the same manner, will heave up the said Globular weight,
to the perpendicular height of four foot, and the force of six pound Weight,
will heave it up to the Horizontal Line, (or 90 Degrees) which Experiment,
being exactly performed, gives great light to young Practitioners in the
Mechanics.

Lastly, I know by Experience, that an Engineer standing on the top of a Tower,
may by the help of Ropes and Pullies, with a small force, heave up a Tun
weight, or more, to the perpendicular height of 10 or 20 Foot, provided there
be proportionable time given him for that Operation; and also, that he has a
sufficient Fulcrum, or place, to which he may fasten one of his Blocks.

I can likewise imagine the Soul of a Man, whilst his Body stands bolt up
right, to be a spiritual Engineer, and to be seated in the Brain, as in its
Watchtower, and there to make use of each hand and arm to lift up a ponderous
Weight, to the perpendicular height of 6 or 12 Inches: But I must, at the same
time, ingeniously acknowledge, that I do not at all apprehend, neither have I
any Idea, or Imagination, by what secret power the Soul contracts or dilates
the Muscles, how it elaborates, and sends forth the Animal Spirits, or how it
makes use of any of the ten pair of Nerves, whose Origin is derived from the
Medulla substance of the Brain, which is, in a manner, as soft as Butter: And I
leave, to the Contemplation of the most skilful and subtle Mechanic, or
Philosopher, in the World, the innumerable Difficulties that will arise from
all the following Instances.

1. Of a Porter, taking up great and ponderous Burdens from off the ground,
and heaving them on his shoulders.

2. Of a Waterman, who, upon a Wager, pulls in his Oars with both his Arms
toward his body, and, at the same time, thrusts from him with his Thighs and
Legs, in which Motion, viz. that of his Arms and Hands, he works with a
Quintiple disadvantage, according to the Doctrine of Staticks; because the
Muscle of the Humerus, is fastened but to a 6th. part of the Cubitus, or Radius,
as I my self have measured upon a dead Man's bones.

3. Of a Seaman, working at a Drum-Capstan (a Contrivance I presented to the
late King Charles the Second, many years ago) to weight up the ponderous
Anchors of great Ships, which has since saved great Numbers of English
Sea-men's lives.

4. Of one, who distorts all the Parts, Members and Joints of his Body, so as
to make it appear in many different Figures, and strange Shapes: Such a one I
have seen at Paris, and such a one there was, not long since, in the City of
London, who went by the Name of Posture John.

5. Of one, who jumps, wrestles, throws the Bar, runs a Race, or fights a Prize.

6. Of one, who performs strange Feats of Activity, Vaults and cuts Capers in
the Air to a great height, as he is dancing on the Stage, or on the Ropes.

7. A skilful and active Musician, the different Motions of whose Fingers, are
of incredible swiftness.

Ejaculation.
O Almighty GOD, Maker of all things Visible and Invisible, How wonderful and
unsearchable are all thy Works? How deep are all thy Thoughts, and thy Ways
past finding out, by us poor Mortals, or indeed, by any finite Creatures.
All that I shall add to what has been already mentioned upon this Subject,
shall be only this: That if there are so many insuperable Difficulties, about
Bodily Operations, as to Motion and Sense; how much greater must of necessity
be the Difficulties of the Souls Operations, which are wholly abstracted from,
and have no Correspondence at all with Bodies or Sense.

Of this Sort, as I think, is a late learned Philosopher's (Cogito) though I
understand not at all his Inference of (Ergo sum.)

But whatever he intends, my meaning is, the Soul's drawing necessary
Conclusions from undoubted Premises, and so forming within it self Syllogisms:
As likewise its Apprehensions of a Supreme Diety, or an Almighty MAKER of all
Things, who is from Everlasting to Everlasting, and depends upon none.

And its Reflections of Conscience, either Accusing, or Excusing Moral Actions.

Forgive me, Courteous Reader, I am already lost in a Labyrinth of Thoughts,
and my Soul is overwhelmed with a Deluge of Imaginations, and can make no
further progress: At the Resurrection, you and I shall know more, and be much
wiser than we now are, When this Mortal shall put on Immortality; When our
Understandings shall be more illuminated, and when the Eyes of our Souls shall
be no longer forced to look, or peep through such thick Humors, muddy Waters,
dull Tunicks, and horny Spectacles.

The Second Question.
THE Second Question.
Q. Where have thou been?
Answer.

Alas! I do not well know where: Nor how: Nor when: Nor what I have been doing.

Of my Infant-days I have no Knowledge or Remembrance, but admire God's
infinite Goodness, who, I verily believe, sends his blessed Angels to watch
over young Babes, and tender Infants, who, of all other living Creatures, are
the least able to help themselves.

Ejaculation.
Thou, O Lord, art he, who took'st me from the Womb: And thou have been my
hope, ever since I hung upon my Mothers Breasts.
In the Morning of my Life, for several Hours, I stood idle in the
Marketplace, with others of my Companions, pleasing my self with childish Toys
and youthful Vanities.

In my more mature Age, though I had frequent Calls and Invitations to labor
in God's Vineyard, yet nevertheless I rather chose to gratify my own roving
Fancy, and satisfy my vain Curiosity, in ranging Abroad, and making enquiry
into the Customs and Manners of foreign Countries, and then to enter into the
secret Intregues and mysterious Transactions of my own; where I had opportunity
to hear, see and observe many things, which must be buried in Oblivion.

And here, I must acknowledge, I met with no small variety of Cares and
Troubles, Fears and Jealousies, Crosses and Disappointments, and found my self
at the brink of many a deep pit, and steep precipice, and in great danger to
have perished, without a wonderful preservation and deliverance.

Besides all this, I leave it to Men of greater Wisdom and Experience to
consider, how hard and difficult a thing it is, to be entangled with the
Cross-purposes of public Affairs, and yet have leisure to mind that one Thing
necessary, The Salvation of our Souls; with which all the Riches, Honors and
Pleasures which this World affords, are not worthy to be laid in the Balance.

Ejaculation.
Remember not, O Lord, the unaccountable Follies and Vanities of my Childhood
and Touth, nor the innumerable Transgressions of my riper Tears. Blot out of
thy Remembrance, the many Breaches of solemn Vows and Promises by me made in
Times of Danger and Sickness, or any prevarications with the God and Father of
Mercies, and the hazarding my Soul's Eternal Welfare and Happiness, for the
sake of a few sinful and shortliv'd Pleasures.
Methinks this World does not unfitly resemble a Theater or Stage, whereon
every Man presents himself, Acts his Part, and so makes his Exit.

But in all the various Passages of his Life, and frequent shifting of Scenes,
the Devil, and his Agents, are always at hand, to disturb and hinder the Actor
in his performances, both of Religious and Moral Duties, and at last to carry
him off the Stage, with Eternal Dishonor and Disgrace.

It will not be difficult to trace his Cloven-Footsteps, from the first
Creation to this present Time.

Having beguiled our first Parents, he resolved to mischief their two Sons:
First, by polluting Cain's Offering, and laying Sin at his door; then by urging
him to be wroth and angry with his Maker, for not accepting it. And lastly, by
provoking him to break all the Bonds of Nature, and to become his own Brother's
Murderer.

This done, he proceeds to tempt the Old World to the Commission of gross and
enormous Impieties, till God destroyed them with a Deluge.

After the Flood, when Noah's Posterity was multiplied, the Devil turned
Architect, and drew a Design for the Children of Men, to build a Tower in the
Plain of Shinaar, whose top was to reach to Heaven, from which he himself had
so lately fallen.

When God had dispersed those Builders, by the Confusion of Languages, he took
upon him the Office of an Infernal Prophet, Priest and King, instructing his
Disciples and Followers, to forsake the Worship of the True God, to yield
Obedience to all his Commands; and to erect Altars, plant Groves, and to offer
Sacrifice to Devils, under various Forms of Beasts, Birds and Creeping Things.
And so great was his Malice, that he would not spare that Grove of Oaks, at or
near the Plains of Mamre, which the good old Patriarch Abraham had planted, and
made use of as an Oratory, orselect place of Divine Worship for himself, and
his numerous Family; but caused it to be converted to Idolatrous Uses, till
such time as Constantine the Great took care to have the Heathen Altars and
Images demolished by the Bishop of Jerusalem, and those of Palestine, and a
Christian Church erected in their stead.

It would be endless, to make enquiry into all the Actions, and various Forms
of Worship among the Men of the Old Gentile World, and Heathen Idolaters: Or to
make an Enumeration of the Names of their respective Idols. I shall only
entertain the Reader with a brief Narrative, of what I have collected out of a
late Traveller of no small Credit amongst us, which may give him some light
into the Practices of former Ages.

There is (says my Author) a Kingdom in the East Indies called Tunquin, where
some of the Inhabitants worship four Gods, whose Names are Rauma, Betols,
Ramonu and Brama, and a Goddess called Satisbana. Others of them hold
Transmigration of Souls, and have a great Veneration for a certain Hermit
called Chacabout, one of the greatest Impostors that ever was in Asia.

A third Sort, have great esteem for one Lanthu, one of the greatest Magicians
of the East: That Impostor's Disciples having given it out, that his Mother
carried him in her Womb, without losing her Virginity, for the space of Seventy
years, which, I am apt to believe is a Mock the Devil puts upon our blessed
Savior's being carried Ten Months in the Womb of a Virgin.

It is the Custom of the Tunquineses to Adore three things: The first is the
Hearth of their Chimney, made of Three Stones. The second is an Idol, which
they call Tiensa, the Patroness of Handy-Crafts. The Third is the Idol Buabin,
which they implore before they build their Houses.

They likewise present Offerings to Trees, Elephants, Horses, Cows, and almost
all kinds of Animals.

Besides all this, they have great Veneration for two Magicians, and one
Magicianess: The first Magician foretells future Events: To the second, they
have recourse in all their Sicknesses. And sometimes after several
Apish-tricks, he himself, together with the sick Party, and those who brought
him, do Homage and the Devil, and the sick Party's friends present him and the
Devil, with an Entertainment of their choicest Meats.

But if the sick Person, after all their Offerings, do not recover, his Friends
and Relations, with as many Soldiers as they can get together, discharge their
Guns and Muskets three times, to drive away his Devilship from those parts.

Sometimes the chief Magician (Thaybou) being consulted, and finding that the
Distemper arises from the Souls of the Dead, he, or his Brother Thay-phouthouy,
finds ways to draw to him that Soul that is the Author of the Disease, and then
shuts it up in a bottle of water well stopped, till the Party be cured,
afterwhich he breaks the Bottle, and lets that Soul loose to go about its
business.

The Magicianess Bacoti, keeps constant Correspondence with the Devil, (to
whom, if she has a Daughter, she offers her as soon as she is born,) and if any
Mother happen to lose a Child, she makes her Address to this Magicianess, who,
by the beat of a Drum, pretends to Summon the Soul of that Child, and tell the
Mother, whether its Condition in the other World be Good, or otherwise.

When the Moon is in an E^clipse, they believe it is assaulted by a Dragon, and
therefore they make a hideous noise with Drums, Trumpets, Bells and Muskets,
till the Eclipse be over, and then make great Rejoycings for having conquered
that monstrous Creature.

It is very wonderful to consider, what cruel Tyranny the Devil exercises over
many of the poor Idolatrous Indians.

Some he makes to carry their Arms over their Heads, during their Lives, which
causes certain Carnosities to breed in their Joints, that they can never bring
them down again.

Others he makes to stand upon one Foot, holding a Chaffing-dish in one hand,
and with the other pouring out Incense, as an Offering to their God, fixing
their Eyes all that while upon the Sun.

When the Inhabitants of the City Malde, in Bengala, on a certain Day go out of
that City, great Numbers of them hang themselves by the flesh of their Bodies
upon iron Hooks, fastened to Trees for that purpose, till the weight of their
Bodies tearing away the Flesh, they fall off themselves to the ground; and
which is almost incredible, not a Drop of Blood issues out of the Wounds, nor
the least bit of Flesh is left upon the Hooks, and within the space of two Days
they are cured by the Bramans.

Ejaculation.
I bless and praise Thee with my whole heart, O Lord of Heaven and Earth, for
thy distinguishing Goodness and Mercy to me, the meanest and most unworthy of
all Adam's Posterity, in permitting me to be Born within the Pale of the True
Church, where the Gospel of Thy Son is openly preached, and professed in the
public Assemblies: And not among Pagans, Turks, or other Infidels.
It is very remarkable, that the Devil, notwithstanding his great Power and
Dominion over the Heathen World for so many Thousand Years, has never yet been
able utterly to deface those Principles of Right, Justice and Conscience, which
the Almighty Maker has stamped upon Men's Souls, though at the same time, in
most places, he has extremely sullied them with hellish Impostures and
Delusions, and Idolatrous Worship of diverse kinds, so as to make sure of them
in the main, and always hold them fast within his Clutches.

Thus, in the foregoing Instance of the Tunquineses, the Hermit Chacabout left
behind him Ten Commandments, which he enjoined his Followers to observe with
all manner of strictness, viz. First, Not to Kill. Secondly, Not to Steal.
Thirdly, Not to defile their Bodies. Fourthly, Not to Lie. Fifthly, Not to
falsify their Words. Sixthly, To restrain their inordinate Desires. Seventhly,
Not to do Injury to any Man. Eighthly, Not to be great Talkers. Ninthly, Not to
give way to their Anger. Tenthly, To labor to their utmost to get Knowledge.
Besides all this, They who designed to lead a Religious Life, must renounce the
Delights of this Life; be Charitable to the Poor; overcome their Passions, and
give themselves up to Meditation.

He taught moreover, That after this Life, there were Ten distinct Places of
Joy and Torment; and that the Contemners of these Laws, should feel Torment
proportionable to their Offenses, without any End of their Torments. That they
who endeavored to fulfill his Law, and had failed in any point, should wander
in diverse Bodies (holding Transmigration of Souls) for the space of Three
Thousand Years, before they entered into Happiness. But that those who had
perfectly Obeyed his Laws, should be rewarded, without suffering any Change of
their Bodies: And that he himself had been Born ten times, before he enjoyed
the Bliss that he possessed; not having in his first Youth, been illuminated
with that Knowledge which he afterward attained.

Reflection.
As for his Ten Commands, and his other Instructions immediately following, one
would think at first sight, that this Impostor had collected them out of the
Holy Scriptures, save only that there is not a Word therein that has the least
regard to a Savior or Messiah. But alas! that subtle old Serpent, and Prince
of Darkness, who is so perfect a Hater of the Savior of the World, and of
Humane Race, makes it his principal Care and Caution, to keep all his Subjects
and Vassals from the least Knowledge of those divine Mysteries which relate to
the holy JESUS.

For my part, I am apt to believe, although so many Ages have past since the
Martyrdom of the blessed Apostles among the Pagans and Barbarians, who
undoubtedly converted very great numbers of them, while they lived amongst
them; that some of these Converts left behind them many pious Instructions to
their Children, who also left the same to their Children, and so from
Generation to Generation, which, in process of time, were corrupted by Satan's
Artifices, being confounded and intermingled with a great number of foolish and
extravagant Traditions.

Of this I shall here take the freedom to mention one famous Instance. There
were, about fifteen Years since (as a Traveller assures me, who was himself in
those parts) and probably are to this day living, above Twenty thousand
Families, of a certain People who call themselves Christians, or Disciples of
St. John, from whom they pretend to have received their Faith, their Books and
Traditions.

These people inhabit at present at Balsara, about ten days Voyage from that
place, where the River Tigris divides it self into two Arms, (the one running
through the ancient Chaldaea, and the other toward Mesopotamia) in view of
which stands an old Wall of about a League in compass, which the Chronicles of
that Country say, was the Ruins of the ancient Babylon, (upon which Wall six
Coaches may go abreast) being made of burnt Brick, each Brick ten Foot square,
and three Foot thick.

These Christians of St. John, anciently lived by the River of Jordan, where
St. John baptized, and so from him they took their Name: But since the time
that Mahomet conquered Palestine, although he had given them his Hand and
Letter of Privilege not to be molested; his Successors resolved to extirpate
them, ruining their Churches, burning their Books, and exercising all manner of
Cruelties upon their Persons, which obliged them to retire into Mesopotamia and
Chaldaea, and for some time, they were under the Patriarch of Babylon, from
whom they separated about 175 Years since, and then removed into Persia and
Arabia, and the Towns round about Balsara.

Their Creed is full of Fables, and soul Errors.

They never Baptize, but in Rivers, and only upon Sundays: But before they go
to the River, they carry the Infant to Church, where there is a Bishop, who
reads certain prayers over the head of the Child; from thence they carry it to
the River, with a train of Men and Women, who, together* with the Bishop, go up
to the knees in Water, then the Bishop reads again certain prayers out of a
Book which he holds in his hand, which done, he sprinkles the Infant three
times, saying, Beesme brad Er-rabi, Kaddemin, Akreri, Menhal el Gennet Alli
Koulli Kralek, which is in English, In the Name of the LORD, first and last of
the WORLD and of PARADISE, the high Creator of all Things. After that, the
Bishop reads something again out of his Book, while the Godfather plunges the
Child all over in the water; after which, they all go to the Parents house to
feast.

If any tax their Baptism for insufficient, in regard the Three Persons of the
Trinity are not mentioned therein, they give no reasonable Answer, nor have
they any knowledge of that Mystery; only, they say, that Christ is the Spirit
and Word of the Eternal Father.

They believe the Angel Gabriel to be the Son of God, begotten upon Light; yet
will not believe the Eternal Generation of Christ as God, although they confess
he became Man, to free us from the punishment of Sin; and that he was conceived
in the Womb of a Virgin, without the knowledge of Man, by means of the Water of
a certain Fountain which she drank of. They believe he was Crucisied by the
Jews, That he rose the Third Day, and that his Soul ascended up to Heaven, his
Body remaining upon Earth; but withal, That Christ vanished when the Jews came
to take him; and that he deluded their Cruelty with his shadow.

In the Eueharist, they make use of Meal kneaded up with Wine and Oil; the Wine
they make with Grapes dried in the Sun, and casting water upon them, let them
steep a long time, and with that they Consecrate the Cup; The Arabians (under
whose Government they live) not permitting them the use; of ordinary Wine. The
Words of their Consecration, are no other then long Prayers, but make no
mention of Christ's Body or Blood, which they say is not necessary, because God
knows their intention. After the Ceremonies are ended, the Priest eats some of
the Bread, and distributes the rest to the people.

All their Bishops wear their Hair long, with a little Cross wrought with a
needle.

These People believe, and say, That the Angel Gabriel undertaking to create
the World, according to God's Command, took along with him Three hundred thirty
six Thousand Demons, and made the Earth so fertile, that it was but to Sow in
the Morning and Reap at Night. That the same Angel taught Adam to plant and
sow, and all other necessary Sciences.

Moreover, That the same Angel made the Seven lower Spheres, the least whereof
reaches to the Center of the World, in the same manner as the Heavens do, all
continued one within another; and that all these Spheres are of different
Metals: That, next the Center of Iron, the Second of Lead, the Third of Brass,
the Fourth of Laten, the Fifth of Silver, the Sixth of Gold, and the Seventh of
Earth, which contains all the rest.

They believe that over every Heaven there is Water, and that the Sun swims in
a Ship upon that Water, and that the Mast of that Ship is a Cross; and that
there are a great number of Boys and Girls to guide the Ships of both Sun and
Moon: Besides, they have the picture of a Bark, which, they say, belonged to
the Angel Bachan, whom God sends to visit the Sun and Moon, to see whether they
move exactly, and keep close to their Duty.

In reference to the other World, and Life to come. They believe there is no
other World, but where Angels and Devils, together with the Souls of Good and
Bad reside. That in that World there are Cities, Houses and Churches; and
likewise that the Evil Spirits have their Churches, where they pray, singing
and rejoicing upon Instruments, and feasting, as in this World.

That when any one lies at the point of Death, three hundred and sixty Demons
come and carry his Soul to a place full of Serpents, Dogs, Lions, Tigers and
Devils, who, if it be the Soul of a wicked Man, tear it in pieces; but if it be
the Soul of a just Man, it creeps under the Bellies of those Creatures into the
presence of God, who sits in his Seat of Majesty, to judge the World.

That there are also Angels, who weigh the Souls of Men in a Balance, and
those who are thought worthy, are immediately admitted into Glory.

That Angels and Devils are Male and Female, and beget Children; and that the
Angel Gabriel has a Daughter called S^^ret, who has two Sons.

That the Angel Gabriel has several Legions of Demons under him, who are
instead of Soldiers, and others that are his Officers of Justice, whom he
sends from Town to Town, and from City to City, to punish the wicked.

They hold that Christ left 12 Apostles to preach to the Nations.

That the Virgin Mary is not dead, but lives somewhere in the World, though no
body knows where; and that next to her, St. John is to be the chiefest Saint in
Heaven, and next to them Zacharias and Elizabeth, of whom they recount several
Miracles and Apocryphal Tales. That when St. John came to be of Age, his Father
and Mother married him; and also that he had four Sons which he begat upon the
Waters of Jordan, and not upon the Body of his Wife. That he died a natural
Death, but commanded his Disciples to Crucify him after his death, that he
might be like Christ; and lastly, that he died in the City of Fuster, and was
buried in a crystal Tomb, brought to that City by a Miracle, and that this
Sepulcher was in a certain House near the River Jordan.

They highly adore the Cross, because, say they, we have a Book wherein it is
written, That every Day, early in the Morning, the Angels take the Cross and
put it in the middle of the Sun, which receives its Light from it, as the Moon
does also hers: And that without these Crosses neither Sunnor Moon would give
any Light, and the Ships they were in would suffer Shipwreck.

Their Festivals are Three, the one is in Winter that lasts three Days, in
memory of our First Parent, and the Creation of the World: The Second in
August, and called the Feast of St* John: The Third lasts five Days in June,
during which time they are all Rebaptized.

On Sunday they do no work. They neither Fast, nor do any Penance. They have no
Canonical Books, but a great number of others that treat of nothing but
Witchcraft, in which they believe their Priests to be very crafty, and that the
Devils are at their beck.

They suffer no Women to go to Church, nor any of the Laity to kill a Hen, or
any Fowl: They eat of nothing dressed by the Turks, and after a Turk has drunk in
one of their Cups they break it to pieces, and picture Mahomet, and four of his
Parents, as shut up in Hell; and say, That all Turks are carried to the same
place, to be devoured by wild Beasts.

They all pretend to Salvation, by a Promise made by God to Gabriel on their
behalf, when he framed the World. They have a great Antipathy against the blew
Color called Indigo, which they will not so much as touch* For, say they,
certain Jews dreaming that their Laws should be abolished by St. John, told it
their Countrymen, which they understanding, and seeing that St. John prepared
to baptize Christ, in a great rage fetch a vast quantity of Indigo (in their
Language Nill) and flung it into Jordan, which continued unclean for some time,
and had hindered the Baptism of Christ, had not God sent his Angels with a large
Vessel of Water, which he caused them to fill out of Jordan, before the Jews
had defiled it with Indigo; and that for the foresaid bold Attempt to defile
the River, God particularly cursed that Color.

Ejaculation.
How long, O Lord, Holy and True, will thou cease to be avenged of that Prince
of Darkness, for tyrannizing and triumphing over the poor Heathens, and
beguiling them with his Sorceries, Witchcrafts and Enchantments, for so many
thousand Years. How long will thou suffer that Enemy of Souls, secretly to
divert and please himself, by seeing such vast numbers of his Slaves and
Vassals, to take more pains, undergo more hardships, and to endure more
exquisite bodily Torments in traveling along the Broad way, and passing
through the wide Gate that leads to endless Woes and Miseries, than thou
suffer a great number of thine own Elect, and chosen Servants to meet with
in the Narrow Way, and in their passage through the straight Gate, that leads
to Eternal Life.
But to return to my Observations of the Devil's practices.

When God had covenanted with Abraham, that his Seed should be multiplied as
the Stars of Heaven, and inherit the Promised Land, What Stone did Satan leave
unturned? Or what Opportunities did he ever lose of attempting to frustrate
God's gracious Designs?

His first Achievement was to exasperate Esa^ to murder his Brother Jacob,
upon whose individual Person his aged Father had so lately fixed a Blessing; and
out of whose Loins were to come forth 12 Tribes, whose Posterity were to be as
innumerable as the Sands of the Sea, hoping that he being once removed, the
blessed Effects of all God's promises would be utterly vacated and disappointed.

When Jacob's Family were kindly received by K. Pharaoh and the Egyptians, How
watchful and diligent was that old Serpent, to wait for the coming of another
King, whom he might incense, and so bring the Isratlites under Slavery and
Bondage?

When Moses was deputed immediately by God for their Deliverance, what
diabolical Artifices did he use, to help the Magicians to counterfeit some of
his Miracles, and so to harden the heart of Pharaoh, and the hearts of all his
Servants?

When the distressed Israelites were got out of that King's Dominions, How
ready was he, upon all occasions, to improve to the utmost the sullen Nature,
and unthankful Disposition of that People, so as to provoke God in the
Wilderness, by their frequent Murmurings and Complaints, for the space of forty
Years?

When they had got possession of the Promised Land, How quickly did* he bring
them acquainted with Baal and Ashtaroth, and the rest of the false Gods of the
Nations round about them, whom Joshua had not yet extirpated?

And thus they continued their Rebellion, and brought upon themselves many
severe Judgments, and were very often subject to the Will and Pleasure of their
Enemies; till at last a great part of them were carried away Captive to
Babylon, with their Wives and Children, and others of them exposed to the
Sword, Pestilence and Famine.

When our Savior was born in Bethlehem, How subtly and maliciously did he
prompt that cruel Tyrant Herod, in his Rage and Anger, to murder for his sake,
all the Male-Children in those parts, from two years old, and under?

Reflection.
But here I must entreat the Reader's patience, to permit me a while to make a
pause: For certainly had that Enemy of, thoroughly understood the Mysteries of
Man's Redemption, by the coming of the blessed JESUS, he had neither incensed
Herod to make so cruel a Slaughter in Bethlehem, or inspired the Jews with such
vehement Rage and Passion, to urge Pilate (against his own Inclination) to give
Sentence for his Crucifixion, which must of necessity prove so fatal to
himself, and his Kingdom of Darkness.

When the blessed Jesus was gone to Heaven, and had given Commission to his
Apostles to act in their several Provinces, and to disperse the Gospel
throughout all Nations, How did the Devil animate and enrage the Heathen
Idolaters, and Savage Barbarians, to treat them with all manner of Cruelties?
And its almost incredible, how many Thousands, or rather Millions, suffered
Martyrdom for the sake of the Gospel, during the Reign of Nero, Domitian,
Trajan, and the rest of the persecuting Emperors; no less than thirty three
Roman Bishops successively are said to have been put to Death with great
Cruelties.

Now in all those Proceedings both of the Jews and Heathens against the
Christians, the Devil's Malice was sufficiently evident and notorious: But I
must needs confess, that his great Masterpiece of Malice and Revenge was shown
in After-ages, in sowing Discords and Divisions in the Church of Christ, and in
animating Christians against Christians, of which, to this very day, we have
sad and woeful Experience: I am loath to mention any Particulars, for fear of
giving Offense to the several and respective Parties, but leave every good Man
to his own Observations and Reflections, and to his private Prayers to the God
and Father of Mercies, for Unity, Peace and Concord in his holy Catholic and
Apostolic Church, and for the blessed Communion of all his Saints and chosen
Servants, during their Pilgrimage in this Valley of Tears; and that he will be
graciously pleased, in his due time, to purge out of his Church, all manner of
Sin and Wickedness which now rules and reigns amongst us.

What are those Follies and Vanities, nay, What are those gross and enormous
Impieties which are not at this day to be found within the Pale of the Church,
and amongst those who name the Name, and are in outward appearance Professors
of the Gospel of Christ Jesus?

Here dwell Atheism, Infidelity, Pride and Vainglory, Dissimulation and
Hypocrisy, with Hatred, Malice and Envy. Here you you may find the Poor
oppressed by Men of Might, and innocent Lambs made a Prey to ravenous Wolves.

Here we have too often presented to our Eyes most doleful and lamentable
Objects, and have one Ear filled with Slanders, Reproaches, Calumnies, Oaths,
Blasphemies and horrid Curses; and the other, with deep Sighs, sorrowful
Groans, mournful Complaints, and bitter Lamentations.

Here we may observe Men, of almost all Ranks and Degrees, instead of seeking
first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and that one thing necessary
The Salvation of their Souls; build themselves stately Houses upon sandy
Foundations, and propose to themselves (that which is never to be had in this
World) true Content and Happiness, but still make gross Mistakes, and never
accomplish their Designs: Not unlike Arches of greater and lesser Circles, all
which seem to eneline (some more some less) toward a straight Line; but none
of them can truly agree, or ever be co-incident with any part of it.

Here we may find ambitious Men climbing and twisting themselves up by a Spiral
Line to the top of Honor, and suddenly falling headlong down by a
Perpendicular.

Here likewise we may observe the Covetous Man (whom the Lord abhors) hoarding
up Gold and Silver in his rusty Coffer, that so he may lay Field to Field,
Arable to Pasture, and Tenement to Lordship, till he be left alone within a
vast circumference, of which his Purse was the Diameter, and his contracted and
shrunkup Soul the Center; and it sometimes happens that our Savior's Item
(Thou Fool this night, etc.) becomes his Doom, and he leaves behind him that
Wealth which he never truly enjoyed, to purchase an Equipage for some dissolute
and prodigal Heir to ride post to Hell.

A friendly Caution to those who study the Perpetual-Motion.
THE young Mechanic has no sooner learned the plain Operations of Arithmetic,
and galloped over the first six Books of Euclid, had the sight of a
Pendulum-Clock, wrought a few strokes with his own hand at a Pump, or forcing
Engine, and seen how a Water-wheel turns about the Lantern-wheel of a
Corn-mill; but the very first thing he sets upon is the Perpetual-Motion, not
at all doubting, but in a short time to triumph over the old Rules of Staticks,
and Ordinances of Hydrostaticks, by making one Pound weight, descending six
foot perpendicularly in the space of a Minute, to raise up the weight of two
pound to as great, or greater, perpendicular height in the same space of time;
and with the strength of a Child of 8 or 10 years old, to force up 4 or 500 Tun
of Water in an hours space to any given height, above its own Superficies, and
by this means to drain, or drown whole Countries: To erect Corn-mills in all
standing Pools, with many such Projects, and thereby to gain to himself
immortal Fame, and a princely Fortune; till at last, having spent his
Patrimony, and wasted his precious time, he unfortunately meets with an
Ordinance of the Almighty Maker, (called an Equilibrium) which pronounces the
poor Projector's doom; and then he sits down in great sadness and melancholy,
to lament his Ignorance and Folly.

I have, in former days, been visited by several of those Mathematical
Enthusiasts, some of whom were near Neighbors, others came, as I remember, 60
or 80 Miles from their Habitations, with a (...) in their mouths, desiring me
to join with them in Praise and Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for hiding those
Mysteries from the learned Philosophers of the World, and revealing them to
such ignorant and unskilful Persons, as they acknowledged themselves to be, and
of so mean Capacities* As likewise to enter into Indentures with them, for
their Assigning over to me a large proportion of their endless and unknown
Gains and Profits; and this usually happened at such times when the Sun was got
up to the Summer solstice, and the Worm of vain Imagination wrought within the
Dura and Pia Matter of those poor Engineers; till such time, as having revealed
to me their Secret of Secrets, I had prevailed with them by evincing Arguments,
and Ocular Demonstrations, (having had my self sufficient Experience of such
vain Attempts) to quit their Pretensions of doing Wonders, and to repair to
their own Homes, and follow their several respective Occupations.

Another Caution concerning the Philosopher's STONE.
THE Well-wisher to Chimistry has no sooner pawned the best part of his small
Substance, to purchase his Glasses, Melting-pots, and other Utensils, and built
up his Chemical Furnace, but he boldly undertakes, without fear or wit, the
Transmutation of Metals; and hopes, by safe and regular steps and degrees, to
come in due time to pro^ection; But after a tedious progress the poor
Philosopher finds he has been rolling Sysiphus his Stone, and instead of
turning his brass Pots and copper Saucepans into Golden Vessels, he has only
made an unlucky Transmutation of his silver Tankard and gilt Cup into a wooden
Can and earthen Pipkin, and out of a new Suit of Cloths, extracted an old
threadbare Coat and Breeches, pieced and patcht and torn all to rags.

The Religious and Moral Hypocrite, with the temporizing Turn-coat, propose to
themselves great Content and Happiness, and value themselves extremely by their
skillful Addresses, in winnowing with every Wind, and sailing with every point
of the Compass; and which is yet more, they very much please themselves in
deceiving and abusing Persons of all Qualities, Ages, and Sexes, as well the
Great and Wise, as the Ignorant and Foolish, looking upon this as a noble
practice, and worthy of Men of Learning and Parts. And thus they appear a long
time in Masquerade and Disguise, till by some Accident they are discovered, and
then they become to all Parties, more hateful and odious than Toads or Serpents.

The Rich Glutton, (whose God is his Belly, and thinks there is no other Heaven
than his Pantry and Kitchen) does very seldom leave off to gorge his Paunch
with dainty Dishes and costly Meats (the Expense whereof would satisfy many
hungry Souls) till by his Intemperance, a Surfeit ends his Days, and his
loathsome Carcass becomes a Feast for the greedy Worms.

The Drunkard no sooner sits down in a Tavern or Alehouse with his boon
Companions, but thinks himself in Paradise: O how he hugs and blesses himself,
to see his beloved Nectar poured out and sparkle in the Glass! And thus he goes
on from Morning till Midnight, till the Wine inflame him; but in the end, he
often finds that it bites him like an Adder, and stings him like a Scorpion.

The Voluptuous Man makes bold Adventures, fights desperate Duels, and
compasses Sea and Land to gain a few Prostitutes, which, for a time, he esteems
as Birds of Paradise, and every fresh Beauty, a Phoenix; till he learns by
woeful experience, that they are indeed much worse than fading Flowers: And yet
notwithstanding all hazards, being once infected with the Plague and Leprosy of
Fornication and Adultery, (unless it pleases God to open his Eyes, and convince
him of his folly and madness) he seldom forbears hunting after his accursed
pleasure, till rottenness enter into his Bones, and a dart strike him through
the Liver.

The Theif and Robber is not without his Designs to repair his broken Fortune,
or at least to better his Condition, and at last to live with great content and
happiness, with his wicked Associates and lewd Strumpets.

This Person, upon his first admittance into the Brotherhood, no sooner meets
with a few lucky Hits, and rich Prizes, but thinks himself a great Prince, and
all the Inhabitants of the neighboring Counties, his Subjects and Vassals; and
bound by their Allegiance to supply him with what Gold, Silver and Jewels he
pleases to call for in his progress.

But alas! how often do we see this bright Sun suffer a total E^clipse at high
Noon, and the miserable Wretch housed in a loathsome Prison, fast bound with
Fetters, massy Chains and manicles of Iron; and having received his just
Sentence of Condemnation from the mouth of the Judge, see him to be dragged
from his subterraneous Dungeon, to the dreadful place of Execution.

The Extortioner, (that Antropophagus,) swallows like a Cormorant, and digests
like an Ostritch, the Pawns and Pledges, which he so greedily snatches out of
the hands, and sometimes pulled from off the Backs of Necessitous and indigent
Persons.

This is he who drives away the Widows Ox, and the Ass of the Fatherless: And
being attended with his respective Officers, puts in execution his fatal
Judgments, and at one Morcel, devours Cottages and Enclosures (together with
the Bodies of the Owners) Farms, Fields and Pastures with all their Stocks and
Effects, Tenements and Lordships, with Gardens, Orchards, Coach-Houses,
Stables, Barns, Outhouses, and all their Appurtenances; always watching for
the Windfalls of prodigal Heirs, and decayed Fortunes; as Eagles do after the
dead Carcasses of broken Armies, never considering, That unless God have mercy
upon his Soul, he does but heap up Treasures against the Day of Wrath and
Vengeance.

There is yet behind another Generation of Men, who promise themselves, above
all others, to please their sensual Appetites with the true Gusto of Worldly
Pleasures, having hardened each other in their Opinions and Belief, That there
is no God, Angels or Spirits, or any Real Subsistences of Departed Souls: No
Heaven to reward the Righteous, nor a Hell to punish Sinners.

The Fools of old Times said only in their Hearts, There is no God, and so kept
their Opinion to themselves; but the Fools of this last Age are more bold, and
pronounce it openly with their Mouths.

O foolish Atheists! Who has bewitch't you to outdo the Pagans, Turks and
Infidels? Yea, and the very Devils themselves (who believe and tremble, while
you make merry and turn all to Ridicule;) by denying the Divine Existence, of
which, the Heaven above and the Earth beneath, with the Sea and all that
therein is, (to the least Mite or Grain of Sand, that can possibly be discerned
by the best of Microscopes,) do bear evident testimony. and
Would you but retire a while into your private Closets, (and there make use of
that reason, and those Principles which were born with your Souls!) These would
soon furnish you with sufficient Proofs, and evincing Arguments. Mark, I
beseech you, in what significant Terms a heathen Philosopher rebukes you,
Mentiuntur qui dicunt non esse Deum, etiamsi enim interdiu negant, noctu tamen,
et sibi, dubitant! Which is hardly to be turned into English, without losing a
great part of its emphasis. They lie, who say there is no God! for though in
the day time they deny him, yet in the Night, and being alone, they doubt
concerning Him.

How is it possible, that it should ever enter into the thoughts, of Men of
Reason and common Understanding; That those glorious Bodies of the Sun, Moon
and Planets, together with that Numberless number of fixed Stars, and those of
such prodigious Magnitudes, should all be produced by mere Fortune or Chance?

Vain man would fain be wise! but which of your Leaders, who darken their
Counsels by words without knowledge, can tell me, how the great Bodies
beforementioned of the Sun, Moon, and the other Planets, are suspended in the
vast Expanse, and by what extrinsick, or intrinsic Powers they have performed
their several and respective Motions, and served for Signs and for Seasons, and
Measured time, for so many thousand Years.

Is there any of you, who knows the Ordinances of Heaven, or can set the
dominion thereof in the Earth? Which of you can bind the sweet Influences of
Pleiades, or loose the Bands of Orion?

Or to come nearer to our own Terrestial Globe: Who is he that gathers and
holds the Wind in his fists? Who is he that has bound the Waters in a Garment?
Who is that has established all the ends of the Earth? What is his Name, and
what is his Son's Name, if you can tell me? Which of you can give a clear
Account of those black and grisly Clouds, when they seem to be rent and torn by
the Thunderclaps, as if their substance were of molten Brass; or the Lightning
that shoots through the Hemisphere, and in its passage, tears and rends one
sturdy Oak, and leaves another untouched; Passes by one stately Edifice and
takes away part of another, and how it should pull out massy Bars of Iron, and
again strike them into Stone walls to the Depth of many Inches, with other
prodigious Effects? Of which, I am sure, you can give but very slender Reasons,
No more than of the Treasure of the Snow, the Hail, or Hoary Frost? Or of
Hurricanes, Deluges or Earthquakes.

Alas! poor dull Philosophers, the wisest of you all know not how any grass
pile or the least hair of your heads grows, and yet are so presumptuous to
dispute and question Divine Providence.

O foolish and perverse Atheists, who has bewitch't you to make mock of Moses
and the Prophets, to divide our blessed Savior and his Apostles, and to make
the Holy Scriptures a mere Humane Artifice for Sovereign Princes to keep their
Subjects in Obedience, and to preserve to Ecclesiastic Prelates, their vast
Revenues, and to Inferior Priests their Tithes and Maintenance.

In the first place, we are as well assured that the Books of the New
Testament, were writ by the first Divulgers of Christianity, which were soon
afterward Translated into Latin, Syriac, and other Languages, and Copies
thereof dispersed, and publicly preached in most parts of the habitable World,
and so transmitted to us without any notorious depravations; as we are sure,
that in our Statute Books are faithfully Recorded the several Laws which have
been Enacted in all the King's and Queen's Reigns, from William the Conqueror
to this present Age; and much more sure, then you or any private Man can be, of
the Conveyances, Hands, or Seals, of his Ancestors, from time to time, whereby
he holds his Lands and Possessions.

We have no more reason to doubt that there was a Jesus born in Bethelem, than
that there was at that time a Herod at Jerusalem, or an Augustus Caesar at
Rome: The wonderful Star that appeared at Christ's birth, is mentioned by
Macrobius: And a great Enemy to Christianity speaks of the coming of the Magi
from the East to Jerusalem, and Julian the Apostate Confesses, the appearing of
a New Star, though he trifles about the manner of its appearing.

The Eclipse at Christ's Passion was left upon Record among the Heathen.

As for the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, and for their being most
carefully preserved through-out all Ages, till the coming of our Savior Jesus!
(at which time they were publicly read in all the Synagogues) we need no
better Evidence, than the universal Consent of his Implacable Enemies the Jews.

We read in the 31st. of Deuteronomy, that when Moses had made an end of
writing the Words of the Law in a Book, until they were finished, That He
commanded the Levites which bore the Ark of the Covenant of the LORD, saying,
Take this Book of the Law, and put it in the side of the Ark of the Covenant of
the Lord your God. (And we may reasonably judge, that the rest of the Canonical
Books, when written, were also here laid up) Besides the King was to keep a
Copy for his own use, 17. Deuteronomy. 18. And the Priests that were to expound the
Law must needs have Copies of it themselves: So in an ordinary way it might be
preserved by multitudes of Copies, some of which might escape in the hands of
good and pious Men, in Idolatrous Times. Whence it will follow, That we have no
reason to think that the Book of the Law, which was lost for a great while, and
after the Captivity found by Hilkiah, and by him given to Saphan the Scribe,
who carried it to King Josiah, was the only Copy of the Law that was preserved,
2 Kings 22. 8.

During the Captivity, those Books which were already written, were undoubtedly
in the hands of the Prophets and Priests, some of whom, as Jeremiah and
Gedaliah staid in their own Land; others, as Daniel and his Companions, were
carried away Captives: And we are sure that Daniel had these Books, and out of
them gathered the number of Years the Captivity was to last, 9 Dan. 2. where it
is thus written, viz. In the first Year of Darius, the Son of Ahasuerus, of the
Seed of the Medes, etc. I Daniel understood by Books, the number of Years,
whereof the Word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet, that he would
accomplish Seventy Years in the Desolations of Jerusalem.

Josephus says, That Cyrus was moved to restore the Jews by reading the
Prophesy of Isaiah, where it is foretold 210 Years before his time, that he
should be raised up for that Work.

After the Captivity these Books were kept in a great number of Copies, of
which every Synagogue had one at least. In this interval, Ptolomy Philadelphus
procured the Translation of the Seventy, the authentic Edition of which was
kept in the famous Alexandrian Library, about the Year of the World 3465. As
for the Books of Moses, they were in one entire Volume long before the
Captivity; and it is probable, that the rest of the divinely inspired Psalms
and Prophesies that were written before the Captivity, were laid up with them.

After the Captivity the Jewish Historians relate, that the great Synagogue,
(of which Ezra was President, and at which Haggai, Z^chariah, Malachi and
Nehemiah assisted) compiled the Books of the Old Testament, as we have them now
divided into three parts, and as they continued in our Savior's time; (who
himself refers to the Old Testament as consisting of the Law of Moses, the
Prophets, and the Psalms) and of each of these three parts they appointed
certain Sections to be read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day.

Now that their Collection contained the same Books the Old Testament now
consists of, (22 in number) is clear from Josephus contra Appionem, quoted by
Eusebius.

That these Books were kept with a Religious care, we have the celebrated
Testimony of Philo the Jew, who wrote a little after the Ascension of Christ;
who says, That a Jew would rather suffer an hundred Deaths, than allow the
least alteration in one Letter of the Law. And Buxtorf tells us in his Comment.
Masoreth. Of their particular care, in numbering the very Letters of every Book.

In the next place, our blessed Savior's miracles were so numerous, so openly
performed, and before so many thousand Spectators, both of the Jews and other
Nations, of which many were his implacable Enemies, who wanted neither
Learning, Subtilty nor Malice to have soon discovered any fraudulent Practices;
and those Miracles being such, as could not be performed by Men or Devils, or
any thing less than a supernatural and Almighty Power, it being never known,
since the World was created, that the Devil ever opened the Eyes of those that
were born blind, or fed so many thousands of hungry Persons with five Loaves
and a few small Fishes, or with the speaking of two or three Words, raise Men
out of their Graves who had been dead and buried four days, there will be lest
no reasonable or plausible Pretext for any skeptical Unbeleiver to call in
question his divine Power.

I do believe, that the Devil is a Spirit of wonderful knowledge, and mighty
power; and able when ever God permits him to blind the Eyes of us Mortals, and
so to counterfeit real Miracles, as for a while Pharaoh's Magicians did in
appearance perform some of Moses's Miracles, and that which is no small help to
the performance of his Sorceries and Witchcrafts, and other of his diabolical
practices; he has undoubtedly a perfect knowledge of the Sympathies,
Antipathies, and secret virtues, that are either in the Bodies of all sorts of
Animals and Plants, or else in Minerals and inanimate things; which if they
should be publicly known or divulged, Humane Society would be very much
confounded, if not utterly destroyed.

Who can give a rational accout of Straws jumping to the jett? Or the Dust of
Iron to the Lodestone? Or of the needles turning to the North.

What reason can any Philosopher give, why the bark of a Tree in Peru should be
a ready Cure for a Fever or Ague? Or why the Skin of an Eele or Snake should
give present ease, to the violent pain of the Cramp? Or, (which is yet more
wonderful) why a small bit of Wood, being cut and taken at such a critical
hour, or minute, and being gently rubbed upon a fresh wound, should immediately
staunch the Blood, (though issuing forth with great violence) and perform the
Cure in a few hours space, (the Wound being only wrapped up close, and kept
warm,) without any chyrurgical Operations.

I my self have seen and practiced many strange Experiments of other kinds
which I think not at all convenient here to publish: And look upon it as an
effect of God's wonderful Providence, Mercy and Goodness, that the Books which
Solomon wrote concerning Plants and Herbs, were concealed from, or at least not
made common or public in, future Ages. And that several Experiments, which
some later and learned Authors (such as Paracelsus, Agrippa, and others, have
published to the World,) have either been misunderstood, or not at all believed.

As for the Miracles done by Moses, there are two things very considerable and
worth our notice.

First, though the Magicians, by the Devil's assistance, did in appearance,
turn the Rods into Serpents, and Water into Blood, and bring up Frogs upon the
Land of Egypt; yet it is manifest that they were in no wise able to undo
Moses's Miracles, or to remove any of the Ten Plagues, which would certainly
have been a most acceptable Service to K. Pharaoh, who had so much a do to
bring his hard and stubborn heart to entreat Moses to beseech the Lord his God,
for the speedy removal of the Frogs, the Flies, the Hail, and the Locusts.

Again, it is no less observable, That the Magicians counterfeited no more than
two or three of Moses's Miracles; and when they attempted to proceed, they were
forced to desist and confess it was the power and Finger of God: Neither was
the Devil, with all his Magick-Arts, able to help them to produce so vile and
despicable a Creature as a Lowse; or to give them afterward a Receipt to cure
their Boils and Blains which Moses had fixed upon their bodies, so that they
were no longer in a condition to stand before Pharaoh and his Servants; neither
do we hear any more of their appearance in all those Transactions; whereas
Moses went on triumphantly with his Miracles, till he had safely landed all the
Israelites on the other side of the Red Sea, and left Pharaoh, and all his Host
overwhelmed with the returning Waters, and become dead Carcasses.

Reflections.
If God should permit real Miracles to vouch diabolical Delusions, or indeed,
suffer any of the Devil's Magick-Arts to stand in competition with his own
Almighty works upon such extraordinary Occasions, of either revealing, or
confirming any new Truth or Doctrine, it would soon overthrow throw Christian
Religion: But we always find the contrary throughout the Holy Scriptures.

Pharaoh's Magicians were soon put to silence: Their Rods were swallowed up by
Aaron's Rod: They were at a Nonplus in producing a Lowse; and at last were
forced to withdraw, and disappear with shame and disgrace.

The priests of Baal, though they cut and mangled their flesh with sharp
knives, and from morning to Evening made bitter Cries, were not able to bring
down Fire from Heaven upon their Altars.

The Sorcerer Elymas, was, by St. Paul, struck blind at Salamis and St. Peter
more than once publicly baffled the famous Sorcerer Simon Magus.

So that whatever was done by Pharaoh's Magicians (which is one of the most
remarkable Instances of the Devil's power and Enchantments) or whatever was at
any time after done by any of his Sorcerers, does not in the least derogate
from any of our blessed Savior's Miracles, or the Miracles afterward
performed by any of his Apostles or Disciples, which did immediately prove on
both his, and their Testimony to be Divine; And consequently were an absolute
Confirmation of our Savior's being the true Messiah, and sent by God himself
from Heaven for the Redemption of lost sinners, and opening the Kingdom of
Heaven to all Believers.

This Argument of Miracles was urged by Christ himself, (who certainly knew
best the force of it) against the Scribes, Pharisees, and unbeliving Jews: And
he did acknowledge, that if he had not done those things which no other Man on
Earth could do, they might have had a fair excuse for their Unbelief.

In the time of Tiberius, (says Josephus, a Jew by Nation, and of a contrary
Profession, and wrote his History about 86 years after Christ)

There was one Jesus, a wise Man (if it be lawful to call him a Man) who was a
Worker of great Miracles, and a teacher of such as love the Truth, and had
many, as well Jews as Gentiles who clove unto him: This was Christ, and when
Pilate, upon his being accused by the Men of our Nation, bad sentenced him to
be Crucified, yet did not they who had first loved him, forsake him; for he
appeared to them the Third Day alive again; according to what the Prophets,
divinely inspired, had foretold concerning him: As they had done an innumerable
number of very strange things besides, and even to this day, both the Names and
sort of Persons called Christians so named from him, do remain.

To which Attestation of Josephus, were it necessary, might be added great
numbers of Testimonies from ancient Writers.

I must needs acknowledge, That our blessed Savior's Apostles, though the
greatest part of them were poor (...) men, of low Birth, small Fortune, and
mean Education, were by the Spirit of God, endued with the wonderful Gift of
speaking strange Languages, and other miraculous Powers, that so they might be
better enabled to disperse the Gospel into many remote Countries, as they
afterward did: Namely St. Peter in Sicily, Britain and Africa, as likewise at
Antioch and Rome. St. Andrew in Galatia, Bithinia, and all along the Euxine
Sea: St. James in Spain, Britain and Ireland. St. John in Asia, and other parts
of the East. St. Bartholomew in India. St. Thomas among the Parthians, Medes,
Persians, Carmans, Hircans, Bachtrians the Asians, Ethiopians and Indians.
Simon the Zelot in Egypt, Syrene and Africa. St. Jude in the Cities of Arabia.
St. Matthias in Cappadocia. St. Mark in Alexandria. And though St. James the
Just did stay at Jerusalem, yet probably he might have some Converts of almost
all Nations, who frequently resorted to that City, Parthians, Medes and
Elamites, Dwellers in Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, and diverse other
places.

To all these may be very well added St. Paul, who though he was none of the
Twelve, yet he was not the least of the Apostles; and having received his
Commission from Christ himself in a Vision, left Damascus, and preached the
Gospel at Antioch, Seleusia, Cyprus, Pamphilia, Iconium, Lystra, Pisidia,
Galatia, Macedonia, Samothracia, Neapolis, Thessalonica, Beraea, Athens,
Corinth, Ephesus, Jerusalem, Illiricum, Sclavonia, Troas and Rome.

Yet notwithstanding all this, it was impossible that these poor Men should, at
the same time, carry on any private Design of their own, being all of them sent
forth as Lambs among Wolves, and foretold by their own Master (whom all, but
Judas, had seen scourged, Spit on, and crucified between two Thieves,) that
they should be persecuted and hated of all Nations for his Name sake, and the
Gospel, (which yet at their peril they were to preach and publish) and after
all sorts of Affronts, and cruel Usage, should suffer shameful and ignominious
Deaths, which they all did, as ancient Historians assures us, St. John
(Christ's beloved Disciple) excepted; neither had he escaped, as one of them
tells us, had God permitted the Cauldron of burning Oil, into which he was
thrown by Domitian's Order, to put an end to his life.

As for St. Peter, he, for baffling Simon Magus, was, by the Command of the
Emperor Nero, crucified at Rome with his Head downwards.

St. Andrew was at Patra, a City of Achaia by the Proconsul's Order, first
scourged, (seven Lictors successively whipping his naked Body) and then tied
(not nailed) to the Cross, to prolong his Torments, and was two whole days
before he expired.

St. James was beheaded in Jerusalem by Herod Agrippa, Son of Aristobulus, and
Grandchild to Herod the Great, in whose Reign Christ was born.

St. Bartholomew was first flead alive, and then crucified at Albanople in
Armenia.

St. Matthew is said to be Martyred at Naddaba in Ethiopia.

St. Thomas suffered Martyrdom at Malipur, in the Kingdon of Cormandel, where,
by the Brachmans, he was first loaded with stones and Darts, and then run
through with a Lance.

St. James the Less was thrown down from a Pinnacle of the Temple.

Simon the Zelot is said to have suffered great Cruelties in Britain, and then
to be crucified by the Infidels.

Jude suffered Martyrdom in Persia, for rebuking the Superstitions of the Magi.

St. Matthias, as is conjectured, was crucified by the barbarous people of
Cappadocia.

St. Mark was seized on by the Alexandrians, at the celebration of their God
Serapis, where they dragged him by the legs over rugged and uneven ways, till
his flesh was torn, his blood wasted, his Spirits decayed and his blessed Soul
expired.

To these may be added the cruel Usage of St. Paul and St. Luke.

St. Luke was by the Infidels hanged on an Olive Tree in Greece.

St. Paul was, by Nero's cominand, beheaded at Aquae Salvae, about three Miles
from Rome, for having converted one of the Emperor's Concubines, so that she
utterly refused any further compliance with his wanton desires.

One man in an Age may throw away his Life, on purpose to get himself a Name,
and be famous as Erostratus, who set on fire the Temple of Ephesus, or
Ravillac, who stabbed a King of France: But for all these Apostles, and many
thousands of their Disciples and Converts to throw away their Lives, and
thereby to purchase nothing but ignominy and disgrace, (for alas! they were
accounted as the Scum of the Earth, and the Offscouring of all things) it can
never so much as enter into the Thoughts of any Man of Reason or Sense.

Besides, there were hardly ever committed in the World, any kind of notorious
Crimes, or treacherous Designs contrived, but at some time or other, they were
discovered, by one or more of the Criminals: But let the ablest Historian in
the World, (if he can) produce a real Instance of any of the Apostles or
Martyrs, among so many thousands (possibly Millions) whose cruel Sufferings for
the Faith of Jesus, made them openly recant, or confess themselves guilty of
any fraudulent Practices, or setting up a false Worship to deceive all Nations.

After all this, tell me, ye foolish and perverse Atheists, Who has bewitched
you to build your Tabernacles of Happiness upon such sandy Foundations, or to
sell your immortal souls to the Devil at so cheap and easy rates?

I have yet one question to ask of certain Persons, who are rightly styled
Modern Sadduces, and that is, For what Reason they deny the Resurrection? Or
why they should at all doubt God's Omnipotence? Or once imagine, That He who
made all things out of nothing, should not be able, when ever he pleases, out
of something to make any thing?

How many Emblems of the Resurrection have we frequently before our Eyes? The
Night lies down, and the Day arises; again, The Day departs, and the Night
comes on: The Year that dies in Autumn, has a Resurrection in the Spring: The
seed of Herbs, Corn and Fruit Trees, first suffer a Dissolution in the Earth,
(some for a few Days, others for a few Weeks) and then, by the Power of the
Almighty Maker of all things, have a new Body given them of the same Kind or
Species.

If that be true which some have related of the Phoenix, (a thing I would
rather believe, than undertake to disprove since there are so many strange
things to be found among the Works of the Creation) It is a wonderful Type of
the Resurrection.

In Arabia (say they) there is a certain Bird called a Phoenix, of which there
is but one at a time, and that one lives 500 Years; and when the time draws
near that it must die, it makes it self a Nest of Frankincense and Myrrh, and
other Spices, into which, when its time is fulfilled, it enters and dies; but
its Flesh putrefying, breeds a certain Worm, which being nourished by the Juice
of the dead Carcass brings forth a new Phoenix, and when it is grown to a
perfect Age, it takes up the Nest, in which the Bones of its Parent lie, and
carries it from Arabia into Egypt, to a City called Heliopolis, and flying in
open Day, in the sight of all Men, lays it on the Altar of the Sun, and so
returns into the Country from whence it came: This done, the Priests make
search into the Records of Time, and find that it returns at the end of 500
Years.

Whether this Report be true or no, sure I am, that nothing can be too hard for
the Almighty.

Let us suppose, in two or three Instances, things that are within the reach of
our apprehensions, viz. First, a Mariner in a Sea Fight to be shot to death,
and thrown overboard, and afterward the Flesh of his Body to be eaten up by a
great number of small Fishes, and these Fishes to be taken in Nets, and eaten
by hundreds of Men, Women, and Children, of different places and abodes, and
some of them to be drowned in the Sea, and devoured by other Fishes, and some
to be cast into the Earth, and eaten up by Worms.

In the next place, Let us suppose a Man to die in a wide Forest or Wilderness,
and part of his Carcass to be devoured by wild Beasts, part by the Fowls of the
Air, and part by Flies and creeping* Things; and again, those Beasts and Fowls,
and creeping things to die, and part of them to be eaten up by other Creatures.

Lastly Let us suppose a Man-Child born into the World, and (as it is believed)
the Flesh of that Infant, in a few Years, to be evaporated, and new Flesh grown
up in the room of the other; and let us suppose this Body to live and change
for the space of threescore or fourscore years, and then be buried in the
Sands, (as is practiced in some very hot Countries) and there remain a Thousand
or fifteen Hundred Years, till such time, as it is grown perfectly dry, and fit
to be made use of for Mummie; and this Mummie to be distributed into the hands
of several hundreds of Apothecaries, and each of these Apothecaries to make use
of it in their physical Doses, Potions, or otherwise, and to administer it to
as many hundreds of their Patients, and each of those Patients to void the
same, or any part of it, by stool and those stools to be carried away by the
Scavengers, into some common place, and there mingled with the Ordours of ten
Thousand other Persons, and from that place taken up by the Saltpeter Men and
converted into Gunpowder, and that Powder shot away into the Air.

Give me leave to tell those unbelieving Sadduces, (my life for theirs) that
the Almighty God, and Maker of Heaven and Earth, is able to recall every
Particle, Dust or Atom of a Human Body, in any of the aforesaid Instances to
its Original and proper Mass, and to form that Mass into its first Original and
infant Body: As also to give that infant Body its full stature, and perfect
Dimensions; and this done, from a Natural and Corruptible, to change it into a
Spiritual and incorruptible Substance: And lastly, to reunite it to its own
proper and immortal soul; and all this in a moment, -- in the twinkling of an
Eye, -- at the last Trump, -- and the Voice of the Archangel, calling for the
Dead to arise and come to Judgment. --

I must needs acknowledge, That the Disbelief of a future Resurrection, is no
small encouragement to either Atheist or Libertine, to go on in his sin with
great presumption: For if the Dead rise not, our Faith is altogether vain; And
if this Corruptible shall never put on Incorruption, nor this Mortal,
Immortality; then go to, Let us Eat, Drink and be Merry, for to Morrow we die.

There are some who satisfy themselves, that God is so merciful, and so just
in his Judgments, that he will never punish finite Sins with everlasting
Punishments, but such Men little think how miserably they deceive themselves,
while they ascribe less Power to the Almighty Maker over his Creatures, than an
ordinary Potter has over his Clay and earthen Vessels: Besides, that in the
Gospel Dispensation there are proposed to Fallen Man two things, which very
well counterballance one the other, both as to Time and Measure; namely, on the
one side Eternal and inexpreslible Happiness; and on the other, endless and
unspeakable Miseries. Now, if the Sinner do voluntarily, and with deliberation
choose the last of these, Volent non fit Injuria, he has his choice and desire,
and has no reason in the World to complain of any hardship, much less of any
Injury done to him, it being a greater Mercy to grant Eternal Life upon a bare
Repentance and Believing, during our earthly pilgrimage, than it is a Severity
to inflict eternal Torment, for continuing in actual Sin, for the very same
term of time.

The Author of Leviathan will, by no means admit of a Local Hell, or indeed of
a Local Heaven: For the first of which he has no better Reason than this,
(trusting to his own skill in Geometry and Staticks) that it cannot be either
in the Cavity of the Earth, or any other body of the like magnitude hanging in
the expanse; forasmuch as in any circumscribed Bodies there cannot be included
a Bottomless-Pit, which, in sacred Style, is sometimes called Hell: Whereas if
he had considered, that our Antipodes tread as heavy on the superficies of the
Earth, and carry their Bodies as upright toward Heaven, as any of us; and that
showers of Hail and Rain in calm Weather, fall upon any part of this Terrestial
Globe directly toward the Center, in a straight line; He might very easily
have judged, that this Globe of Earth hanging in the expanse, by nothing but
the Almighties Word and Power, has its own proper Center, as all other Bodies
of the same or greater Magnitude have; and consequently, that if underneath
there were a great Cavity* and that Cavity filled with a fluid body of Fire and
Brimstone, the unequal Superficies of that globular fiery Lake, would in every
part of it be the uppermost, and the parts adjoining to its Center would be the
lowest, and probably the Bodies of damned Reprobates being thrown into this
Lake, would sometimes float upon it, and sometimes plunge to and fro in it: But
forasmuch as the Center of this globular Lake, would be but an imaginary point,
those Bodies would plunge and move to and fro within it in Saecula Saeculorum,
without finding any solid Fulcrum, or firm Bottom; neither could the most
learned Philosophers, or skilful Geometricians in the whole World, be ever
able, by contemplating all their Lives, the Dimensions of that fiery Lake, and
its Center of Gravity, to make any other thing of it then truly and properly a
Bottomless-pit.

And if those learned Men should allow in that case, the shell of this
Terrestial Globe to be no more then 17 or 18 hundred Yards in thickness, and
then compute how many cubick Yards and Feet would be contained within its
concave Superficies, they would perhaps find room enough, and to spare, for all
the Bodies of Human Reprobates, from the first Creation to this present time,
and for some Thousands of Years to come. As for the Devil and his Angels, if
above six Thousand of them were crowded into the body of one Gadarene, a few
thousands of cubick yards might very probably contain all his Infernal Legions:
And as for the Bodies of Human Reprobates, they being once Spiritualized, may,
for ought any Man knows, be pressed into a much less compass, than ours that
are of a grosser substance.

Besides all this, who knows whether the Confinement of both Devils and
Reprobates, within a small compass and narrow space, may not rather augment and
increase, than any way lessen or diminish their everlasting Torments.

Ejaculation.
From being shut up, with the Devil and his Angels in that dreadful and
bottomless pit; and from so near a conjunction with those infernal Finds and
Furies in the Blackness of Darkness, Good Lord deliver us.
And methinks our Savior's making so often mention of a Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, should strike all Atheists and Libertines with as great a dread and
fear, as the Handwriting on the Wall, did of old Belshazzar: When they do but
consider what vast quantities of sulphurous Matters have been cast out of the
gaping Orifices of Mount Aetna and Vesuvius in Sicily and the Kingdom of
Naples; and what horrid Noises, (as Travelers report) have been sometimes
heard out of those burning fiery Furnaces, like the howlings and skreeches of
some miserable living Creatures: Especially that prodigious Lake of burning
Brimstone, which a few Years since (if we may believe Gazettes) was vomited out
of one of those Mountains, and like a mighty Torrent, run along upon the
ground, and so into the Sea, a whole League in length before it was
extinguished.

For my own particular, if it were lawful to make Conjectures in matters of
that consequence, I should be apt to believe, that the Sun, were a Body much
more convenient for that purpose; forasmuch as

First, It is a Body greater than the Body of the Earth, by many Degrees, as is
plainly demonstrable by Ecclipses.

Secondly, We have reason to believe from Sacred Writ, that at the End of the
World, there will be no further use of the Sun's light.

Thirdly, According to the Opinion of the best, and most accurate Astronomers
of latter Ages, the Sun is placed in the very Center of the World, (however in
the Holy Scriptures that are written, as is supposed, ad captum vulgi, it is
expressed otherwise) And therefore must be, of all other Bodies, the most
infernal, and then one would think that place is most likely to be Hell, which
is furthest off from Heaven.

Fourthly, If the Rays of the Sun, which are sent out from its lucid body at a
vast distance, being contracted here below, and with the help of parabolical
and eliptical Figures, become in their Focus much hotter, and sooner melt down
Gold and Silver, than any Culinar, or indeed, any chemical Fire, How great must
we then imagine the heat of that fiery Globe to be, in its own proper body,
especially if the Sun were darkened, and its glowing Rays turned inwards; and
those few Spots which we discern on its supersicies, were multiplied till they
should become an entire Cover, and be made the Blackness of Darkness for ever
and the body of the Sun made a fluid and eternal Fire by God's Almighty Power.

And now if all these things should be so, the History of Abraham, Dives and
Lazarus would not be extreme difficult to be explained by Interpreters.

If Telescopes help us to discover unknown Stars, of different Lights: If
speaking-Trumpets, or close Pipes, may be so made, as to conveigh Words several
Leagues: And if Stephen's mortal Eyes could look from Earth into Heaven, and
there see Jesus standing, at the distance of, no Man knows how many mvriads of
Miles, how easy had it been for the Maker of all things, by his Almighty Power,
first to translate the Bodies of Dives and Lazarus, after they were dead and
buried, (as well as those of Enoch and Elias, before they were interred) the
one to Heaven and the other to Hell? And afterward so to clear up all the
Mediums between Heaven and the Center of the World, as that the immortalized
Eyes of Abraham and Dives might plainly see one another's Persons and Postures,
and their Ears might hear each other's Voices at as great a distance, as the
length of the Semidiameter of the whole Universe.

But here I must put the Reader in mind, that, in truth, all these things are
mere Conjectures, And far be it from such a poor Worm as I am, to be the
Broacher of new Opinions, in Matters so far above the reach of my own
Understanding and Conception: For, I must ingenuously confess once more, That I
am lost in a Labyrinth of Thoughts, and should I go on further, but a few
steps, I should lose both my Reason and Senses, and never be able to finish
this small Treatise. And therefore all I shall here add, is to beseech all
Libertines to take heed and beware, how they turn plain Scriptures into mere
Metaphors, or make a derision of the true Tophet, or Valley of Hinnon; least one
day they hear the dreadful Voice, Go ye Cursed into the place of Torments,
where the Worm of Conscience never dies, where the Fire that burns is never to
be quenched, nor the Body that is burning never consumed.

THE Third Question.
Q. What art thou now doing?
Answer.

I hope (through God's great Goodness and Mercy) That one Thing necessary.

For having wandered up and down, and made many weary steps in the wide
Wilderness of a vain and sinful World, I was at last very desirous to return
home to my self; but must freely confess some Truths, which to my Readers, at
first sight, may seem Paradoxes, or Riddles, viz.

I could never truly get into my self, before I was got out of, and had wholly
left my self.

My wavering Mind was never rightly composed, till it was extremely disturbed.

I had no ease, till I was in pain; nor Peace and quietness, till I was in
trouble and distress.

I could enjoy nothing, till I was dispossessed of all things; I was unable to
stand up* till I was fallen down; to make the least progress, till I was struck
with Lameness; or to see my Way, till I had lost both my Eyes.

Ejaculation and Prayer.
Father of Mercies, I do sincerely, and with all my Soul, bless and praise
Thee, for all the Changes and Chances, the Disgrace and Misfortunes, the
Crosses and Disappointments, and the bodily pains and Torments that have
followed one another, like Job's messengers, and so closely attended this last
Scene of my Life, and Evening of my Days: As really believing, that they were
all Marks and Tokens of thy favor and loving Kindness; and that the great
Physician of Soul and Body, never does administer those bitter Pills to his
Sick Patients, but for blessed Ends and Purposes.

Lord, I believe all this, help my unbelief, and graciously grant that thy poor
distressed Servant may at last come out of the Furnace of Affliction and
Troubles, like Gold and Silver that has been tried in the fire, and purified
seven times.

Let others imbarque, and hazard their immortal Souls in what false Bottoms
they please.

Let the Ambitious-Man glory in his Honors and Preferments.

Let the Covetous Man's trust and confidence be his worldly Wealth, and Mammon
of Unrighteousness.

Let the Voluptuous Man's Paradise be his Dalilahs, and sensual Pleasures.

But, Christian Reader, let you and I, in this our Day, and while we have Time
and Opportunity, make Provision for Eternity.

In order to this, there are some things which we either do, or may know by the
Light of Nature, and those Principles which we brought into the World with us;
the visible things of the Creation, naturally leading us to the knowledge of
one God Almighty, Maker and Governor of all things; and the Law of Nature that
is written in our hearts, prompting us to worship that God; to be just in our
Dealings; to honor our Parents, and the like: And when on the one hand, we
faithfully perform, or on the other hand do any thing contrary to what the
Light of Nature dictates to us, we have Consciences within us, that do either
accuse or else excuse our Actions and Behaviors, and thus far go the Heathens.

But now there are other things, which more nearly concern us Christians, and
these are revealed to us in the Holy Scriptures, which Scriptures we are to
esteem and reverence, as undoubted and unquestionable Truths, both as to the
historical part of them, and also the Precepts, Promises and Threats contained
in them, and that for the Reasons alleged in a foregoing part of this Treatise.

1. In these Scriptures we are taught and commanded, to acknowledge the Holy,
Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons and one God, who is an infinitely
glorious Spirit, that was from Everlasting without Beginning, and shall be to
Everlasting without End; That he is no bodily Substance, such as our Eyes
behold, but Spiritual and Invisible, whom no Man has seen, or can see; who
comprehends all things, and is only Immense, not to be comprehended by any, who
can never be defined by any Words, nor conceived by the Mind; That He is
infinitely Great and Excellent, beyond all that we can possibly imagine; That
He has received his Being from none* and gives Being to all things.

2. To acknowledge* His Divine excellencies and glorious Attributes; as namely,
His All Sufficiency, and admirable Providence, in Disposing, Governing, and
preserving all things; his Omnipotence, Omniscience, and Omnipresence; his
Eternal Truth and Justice; his transcendent Purity and Holiness; and his
infinite Mercy and Goodness.

3. To love this God with all our Hearts and Souls, as He is the Fountain of
all Goodness and Excellency in himself, and as He is infinitely kind and
merciful toward us, both in respect of our Souls and Bodies; in giving us a
Being in the World, in forming and framing us wonderfully in our Mother's
wombs, in breathing into us the Breath of Life, and enduing us with reasonable
Souls, after his own Image and Likeness; in giving us our Birth within the Pale
of the Church, and not among Heathens, Turks or Infidels; in leaving us so many
pious Examples of the blessed Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, who
are gone before us, and with their own Blood have traced out for us the true
way to Life and Happiness; But above all, that unparalleled Pattern of Piety
and Goodness in the Life of the Holy Jesus, who so freely gave up himself, as
an Offering, to save lost Sinners, and to open the Kingdom of Heaven to all
Believers; in giving us Food and Raiment, and all the good Things of this Life;
and preserving us from sudden Deaths and Dangers, ever since we hung upon our
Mother's breasts.

To answer all which Love and Kindness of God to us, we must express our Love
to him by our hearty and honest Endeavors to please him in all things, which
we can never do, without a sincere Repentance, and a firm Resolution to amend
our Lives, and never to harbor in our Bosoms any secret Lust, or live in any
known Sin or Sins; as likewise by taking all Opportunities of conversing with
him, as well in our private Closets, as in the public Assemblies, by Prayer,
Fasting and Meditation, by reading and hearing his Word, and receiving the
blessed Sacrament; and lastly, by our earnest and longing Desire, whenever we
shall put off these fleshly Tabernacles, to enjoy him by Beatifick Vision,
amongst blessed Saints and Angels in the highest Heavens.

4. To fear him, not only with an awful fear, from the consideration of his
Power and Justice, he being a God of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, and
also, when provoked by our Impieties, able to cast both Body and Soul into
everlasting Flames, which is infinitely more than either Men or Devils can do
against us; but also with a Filial fear, as an obedient and dutiful Child,
truly fears to offend or displease a loving and tender Father.

5. To trust in Him, and to depend upon Him at all times, and in all
Conditions, as well in regard of our Spiritual as our Temporal Concerns.

If we are assaulted by Temptations, we are to rely upon him, either for
removing them, or else, for giving sufficient strength to withstand them.

If at any time we are threatened with outward and temporal Dangers, by our
Enemies or Persecutors, we are to rest upon Him, knowing that the God whom we
serve is able to deliver us; and that He will surely do it, if He sees it best
for us; if not, that He will as certainly allay our Sufferings with that inward
peace, and those spiritual Comforts, that neither the World can give us, nor
the worst of our Enemies can ever take from us, and therefore we must be
careful never to attempt, or seek to deliver our selves from such like dangers,
by any unlawful or indirect means; forasmuch as in so doing, we utterly forfeit
God's more powerful aid and assistance.

If we are in want either of Spirituals or Temporals, we are to trust and rely
upon Him, for a seasonable and plentiful supply of both kinds: He having
graciously promised to give the Holy Spirit to those that ask Him, 11 Luke. 13.
And as for bodily wants, those who truly serve and fear him, are assured, that
they shall want no good thing that is sit for them, 34 Psalm. 10. And again,
Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that hope in his Mercy, to deliver
their souls from death, and to feed them in the time of Famine, 33. Psalm. 18,
19. Why should we distrust a God, who is able, whenever he pleases to make
Rivers flow out of hard Rocks, or prepare a Table in the Wilderness; who
clothes the Lillies, and feeds the young Ravens; with whom the very hairs of
our Heads are all numbered, and in whom none ever trusted and were confounded.

6. To submit entirely, and with all humility to His holy Will, and heavenly
Wisdom, in all His Dispensations and dealings with us; and that from a deep
sense of our own meaness and vileness, and his transcendent Excellencies and
Perfections, and that infinite distance and disproportion that is between him
and us.

To be fully persuaded, that the State and Condition in which He places us, for
the time being, is that which is best and most convenient for us, however
contrary to our own Desires and Inclinations.

And to bear our Afflictions with Christian Patience; that so all His Fatherly
Chastisements may have their blessed Effects, and bring forth the fruits of
Righteousness in our future Lives and Conversations.

7. To Honor Him, and to pay a due Reverence and Respect to whatever
immediately relates to His Worship and Service.

To have no other Gods besides Him, whether Idols made with hands, or those of
our own beloved Lusts.

Not to take His holy Name in vain in our ordinary Discourses; much less to
profane it with wicked Oaths, bitter Curses, or horrid Blasphemies.

To pay a due Respect to the Ministers of His Word and Sacraments, and never to
defraud them of their Dues and Maintenance, which is in effect to rob God of
his Tithes and Offerings, and to commit the highest Sacrilege.

To keep holy His own Day, (and indeed all other Days solemnly set apart for
His Worship and Service) not following our own Ways, nor speaking our own
Words, nor thinking our own Thoughts, much less going to Church to hear News,
or to make Bargains with our Neighbors, (as the custom of some is) and so to
make their Fathers house a House of Merchandise; or else to observe and reflect
upon each others Dresses; and which is much worse than all this, to employ a
great part of the time in Whispers, Slanders and Back-bitings; or else in
wanton Looks, lascivious Glances, or amorous Courtships, and so to turn the
House of Prayer and Supplications into a Scene of Pride and Vainglory, Slander
and Calumny, Lasciviousness and wanton Behavior.

Lastly, to come to the Lord's Table, with due preparation, and a sincere
Intention to renew our Covenant made with him in Baptism, then to receive with
all Humility and Thankfulness those blessed Pledges of Eternal Life and
Happiness.

8. To be meek and lowly, and to have a very mean Opinion of our selves, which
is the only Sovereign Remedy against Pride and Vainglory; and the best
Expedient we can make use of throughout the whole Course of our Lives, for the
conquering our unruly Passions, and subduing our inordinate Affections. And
this we must do, unless we intend to make God our professed and open Enemy; and
what the issue and end of that will be with obstinate Offenders, the following
Texts will soon inform and satisfy us, 16 Prove. 18. Pride goes before
Destruction, and an haughty Spirit before a Fall, Again 16 Prove. 5. Every one
that is proud in Heart, is an abomination to the Lord, and though hand join in
hand, he shall not be unpunished. Nebuchadnezzar was in his time, for ought we
know, the greatest King upon Earth, and yet for his Pride was driven from among
Men, to dwell and feed with the Beasts of the Field.

9. To be modest and chaste in all our Actions, Words and Thoughts, and not to
spend the flower of our Age, and the choicest part of our Lives in Chambering,
Wantonness, Adultery, Fornication, and all Uncleanness; and to pull down many
grievous and heavy Judgments upon our own heads.

10. To be Temperate in all things, that is to say, in our Eating and Drinking,
and not squander our precious Time, throw away our Estates, and ruin our
Families, most shamefully wast such quantities of God's good Creatures, as
might relieve great numbers of indigent Persons, prejudice our own Healths,
beget Quarrels and Contentions, and many times shorten our days, and bring our
selves to untimely Ends; and which is worst of all, forfeit our precious and
immortal Souls, by Gluttony and Drunkenness, and all manner of Riot and Excess.

To be temperate in our Sleep, which was ordained by God, for the refreshment
of our frail Bodies, that so they might not be wearied out with continual Toil
and Labor, and that we might be enabled from time to time, to perform such
Duties, as Religion, or Works of our Calling require of us. And forasmuch as
some Constitutions require more than others, every Man must be governed by his
own Experience; for whoever does not limit himself, does not only wast his
precious time, but also injures his Body, and makes it a very sink of Humors,
and subject to sundry Diseases and Distempers.

To be moderate in our Recreations, which are sometimes necessary both for the
Body and Mind; always provided that they are such as neither dishonor God,
injure our Neighbor, take up too much of our time, or divert our Minds from
our more necessary Employments; in the number of which lawful and useful
Recreations, can very hardly be reckoned the sitting up whole Days and Nights
at Cards and Dice, and immoderate use of other Pastimes, which I forbear to
mention, but leave the consideration of all such Excesses to every Man's
private Conscience.

To be moderate in Apparel and Dresses; since Apparel and Garments were the
Effects of the Transgression of our First Parents; and therefore none of their
Posterity have any Reason to make use of them so extravagantly, as some Persons
of this last Age have done to that degree, that they have made themselves
ridiculous, in the Eyes of many sober Beholders.

The Pride and Vanity of the Daughters of Sion, or Jewish Ladies, were severely
reprehended in the time of the Prophet Isaiah by God Almighty Himself, 3 Isai.
16, 17, 18, etc. Namely, their walking with stretch'd-forth-Necks and wanton
Eyes, mincing as they went; and priding themselves with the bravery of their
tinkling Ornaments about their Feet: There was likewise particular Notice taken
of their Cauls and Round Tires, like the Moon; of their Chains, Bracelets and
Mufflers; their Bonnets, Head-bands and Ornaments of their Legs; their Tablets,
Earrings and Nose-Jewels, their Mantles, Wimples and Crisping-pins, together
with their ch^ngeable Suits of Apparel. For all which Extravagances and
Excesses, there were at the same time, threatened and denounced very severe
Judgments, I pray God the Vanities of this latter Age, may not give as great
offense.

Reflection.
Should a plain Country-Gentleman of Wit and Parts, who has, by any Misfortune,
been confined and shut up in a close place, for twenty or thirty Years last
past, be suddenly brought forth into some places of public Shows and
Concourse, I am apt to believe, that he would be extremely surprised with the
sight of some strange Dresses that are in use nowadays, and possibly fall
into as great fit of Laughter, crying Aha! Aha! as those who are stung or bit
with a Tarantula: And peradventure, it might be as difficult to reconcile him,
and oblige him to approve of their wild Fancies, as it would be to compose such
a specific musical Tune, as might perfectly cure, and bring the others to
their right Senses.

11. To love our Neighbor as our selves; not to slander, calumniate, reproach,
backbite, or bear false Witness against him.

Not to lessen or detract from his Worth or Merits, or delight to hear it done
by others, or to envy his Prosperity and Happiness.

Never to break out into sinful Anger, unbridled Passions, provoking Language,
or reviling Speeches, much less to do him any kind of violence, or give him
mortal Wounds.

Not to rob or steal his Goods, or any way to cozen or deceive him, by false
Wares, Weights or Measures, or other fraudulent practices.

Not to covet his House, his Wife, his Manservant, his Maidservant, his Ox,
his Ass, or any thing that is his.

Not to let his Ox, or his Ass go astray, and hide our selves from them; but to
take particular care of, and restore them.

Not to remove old Landmarks, or enter into the field of the Fatherless; and
not to oppress the Poor in the Gate, or devour Widow's houses.

Not to judge, or set at naught our Brother, Nor to lay any Stumbling Block, or
occasion to fall in his way, or to censure him for strickly observing Meats, or
Drinks, or Days; Not to draw him into any Sin or Wickedness, by our
Encouragements, Connivance, or ill Examples.

When we converse with others, to be assable and courteous, and to behave our
selves with all humility and meekness, condescending to Men of low Estates, and
esteeming others better than our selves.

To follow Peace with all Men, as much as in us lies, and to be Peacemakers
our selves.

To let our Love be without dissimulation and hypocrisy, and to be kindly
affectioned one to another, rejoicing with them that rejoice, and weeping with
them that weep.

To show kindness, as we have occasion, to our very Enemies; and to pray for
those that hate, persecute, and despitefully use us.

To show mercy with cheerfulness and alacrity, and never to let our Alms be
accompanied with harsh and uncomfortable words: And thus, to deal our Bread to
the Hungry, to give Drink to the Thirsty, to cloth the Naked, to visit the
Sick, to relieve the Prisoners, to redeem the Captives, to help the Poor, the
Widow and the Fatherless; to comfort and assist the Desolate and Oppressed, and
never to shut up the bowels of our Compassion from any (without distinction of
Persons or Qualifications,) who stand in need of our asssistance.

To conclude, all Persons whatever, are bound in Conscience to behave
themselves with all sincerity and uprightness, in their several and respective
Stations and Relations.

Wives are to submit themselves to their own Husbands, as unto the Lord, for
the Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of the Church;
and as the Church is subject unto Christ, so are the Wives to be to their own
Husbands in every thing, 5 Ephesians. 22, 23* 24.

Again, Husband are to love their Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church,
so ought Men to love their Wives, as their own Bodies: He that loves his Wife,
loves himself, for no Man yet hates his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it: For which cause, shall a Man leave his Father and his Mother,
and shall be joined unto his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh, 5 Ephesians.
25, 26. etc.

Children are to obey their Parents in the Lord: To honor their Father and
Mother, (which is the first Commandment with promise) that it may be well with
them, 6 Ephesians. 1, 2, 3.

Parents are enjoined to bring up their Children in the Nurture and Admonition
of the Lord, and according to their Abilities, to make suitable provision for
their Maintenance.

It is no small Trust that Parents repose in Governors and Governesses; but
more especially in Schoolmasters and Mistresses, for the pious and virtuous
Education of the Youth of both Sexes; which Trust, if it be faithfully and
honestly performed, is of unspeakable Benefit and Use in a Commonwealth, and
such Schoolmasters and Mistresses deserve to be valued and respected according
to their Merits.

On the other side, if this Trust be not rightly performed, but neglected and
abused, it is of pernicious consequence, of which I my self have seen some
woeful effects, and have heard very bitter Complaints.

It is, and has been a daily practice, in some Schools, by harsh and cruel
Masters, and by peevish, hard-hearted, and ill natured Mistresses, to beat and
bruise poor Childrens heads, as if their double Fists were so many Mallats,
their Scholars heads as so many Blocks, and they themselves Hemp-beaters: And
the truth is, Beating of Hemp would be a much fitter Employment for the meaner
sort of those unmerciful Wretches; and it is great pity, that there are not very
severe Laws made against such barbarous and inhumane Practices; which so
manifestly obstruct and hinder the Soul, (whose principal seat the head is) in
sending too and fro, and rightly making use of the Vital and Animal Spirits,
for the due performance of their several and respective Operations, of which
the natural consequences are oftimes Deafness, Imposthumes, and other dangerous
Disorders and Distempers.

And God alone knows how many persons there are, and have been in this very
Kingdom, within the space of forty or fifty Years, who promised Wonders in
their Childhood and Youth, and yet as they grew up to a riper and more mature
Age, by reason of such cruel Usage, became melancholy and mopish, and at last
mere Sots, Dullards, and Dunces.

Now, if Masters and Mistresses are charged with so great Cruelty, for abusing
the Children of Strangers: What can be said in the behalf of some Fathers and
Mothers, who, as barbarously beat and bruise the heads of those very Children
who came out of their own Loins, even in their tender years; never considering
how softly our blessed Savior laid his tender hands upon young Childrens
heads, when he took them up into his Arms, and blessed them.

There is yet a Generation of Vipers, (I mean some particular Nurses) who are
so barbarous, as to give dangerous Blows, in their Fury and rage, to poor young
Infants in their Cradles, and in their own Laps; insomuch that those innocent
Babes dread as much the fierce Looks of those Furies, as Men usually dread the
sight of Lions or Tigers: Not to mention some other Behavior of some of those
Nurses, after they have taken upon them so great a Charge, that many times
proves the loss of those poor Infants Lives; for all which they must
undoubtedly one day Answer, it being a kind of Manslaughter, and so near akin
to Murder.

Servants are to be obedient to their Masters, according to the Flesh, in
singleness of heart, as unto Christ* Not with Eye-service, as Men pleasers, but
as the Servants of Christ, doing the Will of God from the heart; with good will
doing service, as to the Lord, and not to Men, 6 Ephesians. 5, 6, etc.

Masters are to be just and kind to their Servants, forbearing threatening, as
knowing that their Master also is in Heaven, 6. Ephesians. 9. And for that reason,
they ought not to be as Lions in their Houses, nor Frantic among their
Servants; as the Son of Sirach wisely advises, 4 Ecclesiasticus. 30.

Joshua 's Declaration before all the Tribes of Israel at Shechem, is an
excellent President for all Parents and Masters of Families, and plainly
admonishes, and points out to them their Duties, viz. Choose you this day whom
you will serve; whether the Gods which your Fathers served, that were on the
other side of the Flood, or the Gods of the Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell;
but as for me and my House, we will serve the the Lord, 24 Joh. 15.

All Subjects are commanded in the Holy Scriptures, both to pray for, and to
yield due obedience to Kings, and all Supreme Governors, as to God's
Vicegerents: Forasmuch as by Him King's Reign, and there is no Power but of
God; and therefore whoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God.
13 Romans 1, 2.

On the other side, Kings and Queens, Sovereign Princes and Princesses (who
receive their Crowns and Scepters from the Hands of the great King of Kings,
are to be considered as Nursing-Fathers and Nursing-Mothers to all their
Subjects; but more particularly to his own Church, where ever it is planted or
established within their respective Realms and Dominions, according to those
Royal Presidents of David, Hezekiah, Josiah, and several others recorded in the
Holy Scriptures.

It is both the Honor and Duty of Senators, Counselors and Ministers, who are
in effect Pilots of those great Ships called Empires, Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths, with their utmost Skill, Wisdom, and Diligence, to discharge the
great Trusts that are reposed in them, by their Sovereign Lords and Masters
(...)
to keep the Helm of the Government steady; to have a watchful Eye upon their
Compass, and never to give Directions for either Larboard, Port, or Starboard,
with an intention to steer a wrong Course, to gratify their ambitious Desires,
or for any other sinister or Self Ends.

Bishops have their respective Diocesses; and inferior Pastors and Ministers
their particular Congregations, and ought to act as good Shepherds, watching
over and feeding the Flocks of Christ committed to their charge.

Judges and Magistrates are commanded by God, to hear the Cause of the Widow,
and Fatherless, and to be no respectors of Persons.

Lawyers, (both Civilians and others) for the very same reason, are obliged to
plead with zeal and diligence, for the Oppressed against the Oppressors, and
not to spin or wire-draw just and righteous Causes, while a Man might make
several Voyages to and from the East or West Indies, nor to suffer their
Atto^neys, Proctors, or Sollicitors, to cut large Thongs out of their Clients
Hides.

The proceedings of Physicians with their sick Patients (forasmuch as the best
of their Skill lies in a very narrow Compass, by reason of the great variety of
Constitutions, and the daily Mutations which happen in the same Human Bodies)
ought to be with great caution, and very conscientious, never throwing away
Men's lives to make Experiments, or feeding them with vain hopes, when they
plainly see them drawing near to their last Agonies; or for greedy Lucre, to
play with little Distempers, till they turn to remediless Diseases.

There is likewise a Conscience to be used by Apothecaries, in preparing and
administering their Doses and Potions, the particulars whereof I leave to their
own private reflections.

Chyrurgions ought to be very cautious how they dally with slight Sores, till
they become incurable Wounds.

God alone knows what some Shopkeepers have to answer, for making false
Protestations to put off their Wares to unskilful Buyers or Customers.

Merchants and Tradesmen, of all Professions, are required and commanded by
God himself, to be just and upright in all their Dealings, and not to defraud,
or go beyond their Brethren in Sales or Bargains, or in any wise to break their
Covenants for Gain and Advantage; for which, they will do well to read what the
aforesaid Son of Sirach observes, A Merchant shall hardly keep himself from
doing Wrong; and an Huckster shall not be freed from Sin, 25 Ecclesiasticus. 29.

The Rich and Mighty, are not to oppress the Poor and Needy, or to make use of
their Labors, Skill, or particular Talents, without giving them sufficient
Recompenses and Rewards; as the custom of some is, feeding them with fair
Promises, and flattering Speeches, till they have obtained their own Ends and
Purposes, and then taking no more notice of them, then if they had never known
them; which Behavior of theirs, (together with a friendly Caution to such poor
Men) is not unaptly expressed in the following Verses, When Great Men cajole
thee, mark well their design;
True Friendship's a Goddess that few Men adore:
It Is something they want, from thee, or from thine,
Which, when they have got, they know thee no more.


By the foregoing Passages, we are taught and instructed in the Holy
Scriptures, what God requires, either to be done, or not to be done, on our
parts, in pursuance of his second Covenant made with us; and how we are to
demean our selves, while we remain in these fleshy Tabernacles; To encourage us
to the performance of which with all Integrity and Faithfulness; we have, in
the first place, the pious Examples of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and
others of God's chosen Saints and Servants: But above all, of our blessed
Savior Jesus.

In the next place, a great number of passionate and earnest Exhortations, to
incite us to fight manfully, as valiant and good Soldiers, under Christ's
Banner all our Lives, to which are annexed large Promises of spiritual Graces
and Comforts, to support us during our Pilgrimage in this Valley of Tears, and
after this painful Life ended, Crowns of Glory and Everlasting Happiness, with
blessed Saints and Angels in the highest Heavens.

But on the other side, to deter us from continuing in Sin and Disobedience; we
have in the last place, not only Threats, but also Examples of God's dreadful
Judgments here in this Life upon wilful Offenders, and the Vengeance of Eternal
Fire denounced against all impenitent Sinners in the World to come, with the
Devil and his Angels.

Ejaculation and Prayer.
O blessed JESUS, whose coming down from Heaven, to take upon Thee our Nature,
for the Redemption of lost Sinners, was the true foundation of the Holy
Scriptures, and of the Promises therein contained of Eternal Life and Happiness
to all true Penitents and Believers. Let therefore, O Lord, this holy Word of
Thine, be from henceforth a Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my Paths: And O
that my ways were so directed, that I might keep thy Statutes, and never more
turn aside unto lying Vanities. Honne^ni elohim keckhasde^kah, kerov Rahame^ka
pheseanga^i, kerov kabbesseni, mengavoui, ou meckhata^ti tahare^ni. Have mercy
upon me, O God, according to to thy loving Kindness, according to the Multitude
of thy tender Mercies, do away my Offenses; wash me thoroughly from mine
Iniquities, and cleanse me from my Sin. (...) Forsake me not, O God, in mine
Old Age, now that I am gray headed, and my Strength fails me, and the Light
of mine Eyes is gone from me. Now that I am as a Pelican in the Wilderness, as
an Owl in the Desert, and as a Sparrow upon the House top. Behold, thou have
made my Days as an handbreadth, and mine Age is as nothing before Thee. O spare
me a little, that I may recover my Strength, before I go away from hence, and
be no more seen. (...) In thee, O Lord, I have trusted, let me never be
confounded.
And here I crave leave, before my Departure out of this World, to leave behind
me a friendly Caution to all young Gentlemen and Students, to beware of a
certain pernicious Treatise, which does, in effect, make a Jest of the Holy
Scriptures, and turns Angels and Spirits into Phantasms, and Heaven and Hell
into mere Metaphors.

It is a Book that very well deserves a Noli me tangere, or a Caveat Emptor to
be stamped in Capital Letters upon its Cover. I am very tender of naming the
Author, who now stands or falls to his own Master, and hope that he made his
Peace with Heaven, by a sincere and hearty Repentance before he went from
hence; besides, that Christian-Charity obliges me to make very soft and gentle
steps over dead Men's Graves; though, at the same time, Christian-piety prompts
me to declare to all the World, That had I the vanity to think my self equal to
him, both for Natural Parts and acquired Learning, I would not have been the
Writer and Publisher of such a Discourse, to have gained the Wealth of both the
Indies.

The Company of Stationers may do God and their Country very signal Service,
(and possibly not at all impair thereby their private Fortunes) if, instead of
applauding and vending that impious Treatise, they would join together, in
buying up all the Copies, and converting them to Ashes.

The Psalmist speaking of the vast and wide Ocean, tells us of a Leviathan,
that God had made to play therein: But, sure I am, that God could never be
pleased that any Man should make a Leviathan here upon Earth, to play with his
Divine Attributes, and Holy Scriptures.

This Treatise may not be improperly called the Authors (...) or, The Sinner's
Common Hall, where all Persons concerned may be furnished at very easy Rates,
with new invented Mattocks, Spades, and all other Instruments and Utensils of
politic Pioneers, to undermine Civil and Church-Governments.

I must needs acknowledge, That the Method of this Treatise is very pleasant,
the Style elegant, and the Expressions very proper and significant, and is
interlaced with specious Touches of Learning, and that of diverse kinds,
politely extracted, and wittily digested; but let me tell thee (mi figliolo, mi
Jovane) and timely forewarn thee, Guardati d' aceto di vin dolce! It is only to
beguile the Readers, and ere they are aware to lead them into Labyrinths, and
make them swallow down most pernicious Principles.

Thus the skilful Angler covers the fatal hook with a pleasant Bait, and the
cunning Fowler carefully hides the Snare from the unwary Bird.

Thus the appearance of a Sepulcher is often times very glorious, when the inside
is full of Rottenness, dead Men's Bones, and all Uncleanness.

Thus a lewd Strumpet, being adorned with gay Cloths, and set off with rich
Jewels, false Teeth, Hair and Eyebrows, and a painted Face, seems beautiful to
the beholders; who, if she did but once lay aside those Ornaments and
Disguises, would soon affright her most voluptuous Lovers, and become a
Sovereign Remedy for their incontinence.

Leviathan! -- It is the Devil's Alcoran. Beware ingenious young Men: There Is
Death in the Pot: There Is Poison in the Cup: There Is a Snake in the Grass: You
are near the Hole of an Asp: And the Den of a Cockatrice.

Leviathan! -- Its the Author's imaginary Golden Image, set up in the Year 52,
in a place which he then looked upon as the English Babylon, whose height of
Impudence was much more than thirty Cubits, to which, he did then really
believe, that both the Leaders, and the Populace of those Times, being
wonderfully charmed with his witty Fancies, and pleasing Novelties, would as
readily fall down and do Obeisance, as Nebuchadnezzar's Subjects did of old, to
his real Golden Image, at the sound of the Sackbut, Psaltery, Dulcimer, and
other Musical Instruments.

Reflection.
How apt are frail Mortals, on whom God has, at any time, bestowed some
extraordinary Gifts of Nature, to be transported with their own wild Fancies,
and to be drunk with the New Wine ('it is what the Author calls his own
Treatise*) of their vain and foolish Imaginations; and then, How ready is Satan
at hand (who too well knows their Nature and Constitutions, their Tempers and
Dispositions, with their Inclinations and Infirmities) to improve those humane
Frailties, and to push and drive them to all manner of extravagant Actions, and
presumptuous Undertakings.

Ejaculation.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Who pullest down the Mighty from their
Seats, and exaltest the Humble and Meek, whenever Pride and Vainglory puffs us
up, and makes us become wise in our own Eyes: Let the remembrance that we are
but Dust and Ashes, pull down our haughty Looks, and abate our swelling
Thoughts.
Leviathan! -- Its a monstrous Goblin, that much better deserves to be exposed
to public view in Fairs and Markets than an Elephant or Rhinoceros, these
being the wonderful Works of the great Creator, the other, the Mechanisme, and
mere Invention of a grand Impostor.

Leviathan! -- It is a Juggler's box, to cheat his Readers with mere Tricks and
Legerdemains. It is, and It is not: There is a Law of Nature, and yet There is
no such thing: All Men are in a state of War and Enmity, and yet remain in Love
and Unity: There are Angels and Spirits, and yet they are but Phantasms,
Apparitions and Delusions: There Is a Kingdom of Heaven, and yet there is none:
There is an Enfer, and yet Hell is but a Metaphor.

Leviathan! -- Its the Trojan Horse, whose Belly and inner Cavities are filled
with Men of War, and all sorts of Weapons, to kill and destroy their hospitable
Friends and Receivers.

Leviathan! -- Had learned Milton waved his Subject of Lost Paradise, and
exercised his poetic Talent upon this Treatise, he might have found here his
God Chaos, and a much more convenient Pandaimonion for Beelzebub, and his
Infernal Crew, to sit in consultation, how to make a second War with Heaven.

Leviathan! -- Sure it was something akin to that formidable Beast with seven
Heads and ten Horns, in the Revelation^, to whom was given a Mouth to speak
Great Things, and to Blaspheme against God, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell
in Heaven.

This Author, in page 63, 64. 87. 169. and in many other places boldly asserts,
That all Men by Nature, are in a Condition of War, every Man against every Man:
That every Man has right to every thing, even to the Goods and Body of his
Neighbor; that is to say in plain English; every Man, by Nature, is a Rascal,
Villain, Thief, Robber and Murderer; till by a Pact or Agreement, they chose
out of their Company a Sovereign, who is absolute, and nothing that he can do
is any Injury or Injustice to any of his Subjects, and is perfectly Master of
their Estates and Lives: Insomuch, that David's killing Uriah, was no injury to
Uriah, because the Right to do whatever he pleased, was given to David by Uriah
himself.

In the first place, if every Man be, by Nature, such a Rascal and Villain, How
great a Rascal and Villain does this Author (even in print) acknowledge himself
to be for one?

2. If all Men be such Rascals and Villains, till they agree, and chose to
themselves a Sovereign; this Sovereign must be as great a Rascal and Villain as
any of them, as well after, as before his Coronation, (being no more able to
shake of his Savage Qualities, than a Leopard his Spots, or a Blackmoor to
change his Skin) And by making him their Sovereign, they enable him to be ten
times a greater Rascal and Villain than ever before he was; and then let the
ingenuous Reader but imagine what a Hydra of a Commonwealth this would be? And
what a Centaur, their supreme Governor: Nero, Domitian, and the rest of the
persecuting Emperors, would not deserve to be mentioned in any Histories. In
such a gygantick Prince's Court as this, so pitiful a Tyrant as Herod, would
not have merit enough to be one of his Majesty's Gentlemen-Ushers, nor Pontius
Pilate to be a Page of his Back-stairs.

3. What an high Affront and Indignity does he here cast upon God Almighty, who
created Adam in his own Image and Likeness, and made him an absolute Lord and
Sovereign of this lower World, and endued him with sufficient Wisdom and
Understanding to govern it* And though Adam by his first Transgression exposed
himself, and his Posterity, to the Wrath and Displeasure of his Maker; yet we
no where find that his Maker took from him that Sovereignty and Dominion, or
the use of his Reason to manage it, which he had before given him; or that he
left his Subjects in a state of War, to Rob, Spoil, and Murder one another. But
on the other side, have good Reason to believe, that Adam enjoyed his
Sovereignty while he lived; and consequently, that all that came forth of his
Loins, were his Natural Subjects, and yielded him due Obedience: And though
there might be many wicked Men amongst them, yet that there was not so much as
one that durst publish a Leviathan, neither were they in the general, so far
degenerated, and become worse than any of the brute Creatures, (as the Author
pretends) having quite lost all those Principles of Honor and Justice, which
were originally stamped in their Souls.

We have likewise reason to believe, that the Patriarchs, Noah and Abraham, and
others, were Sovereigns in their respective Families, till such time, as
Families being multiplied, there arose Quarrels and Dissentions, and the
stronger subduing the weaker, enlarged their Dominions, but without those
senseless Pacts and Agreements, as this Author would fain persuade us; for no
such thing was ever yet in practice, but is a product of his own waking
Thoughts, of which he makes mention, page 60. in the following words, viz. That
waking, he thought of his absurd Dreams; but never dreamt of the Absurdity of
his waking Thoughts. And the plain truth is, I think in my Conscience, no other
Man in the whole World, ever dreamt of them, till he himself so absurdly
published them.

Again, how confidently soever this Author asserts, That David did Uriah no
injury. We read, 2 Samuel 12. That the Lord sent Nathan to David to complain of
Two of the greatest Injuries and Acts of Oppression and Injustice that could
possibly be offered, by a Prince to his Subjects; or indeed, by one private
Person to another. The first was, killing of Uriah wrongfully. The 2d. was,
defiling his Wife. The words of Nathan are these, Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, I anointed thee King over Israel, and I delivered Thee out of the hand
of Saul, and I gave thee thy Master's house, and thy Master's Wives into thy
bosom; wherefore have thou killed Uriah the Hittite, by the hands of the
Children of Ammon, and taken his Wife to be thy Wife?

Now one of these Injuries being represented darkly by Nathan to David, in a
Parable of two Men living in one City, the one Rich, and the other Poor, and
the rich Man taking wrongfully the poor Man's Lamb out of his bosom, the faid
King waxed wroth, and so highly resented it, that he swore to Nathan, that this
cruel Deed should cost the Offender his life: And why? Because he had no pity.

So then it is manifest, that, to assert that David neither did, nor could do
any wrong to Uriah, is not only to give Nathan and David, but also God himself
the Lie, which is no less than Blasphemy.

In page 152. He instructs his Disciples, That in case a Man shall come from
the Indies hither, and persuade Men here to receive a new Religion* though he
be never so well persuaded of the truth of what he teaches, he commits a Crime,
and may be justly punished for the same; now this Lobster-like-argument of his,
being artificially thrown forward, does again naturally crawl backwards. His
meaning is, as he has too plainly expressed in many places; That if a Man go from
hence, and preach a New Doctrine in Africa, he commits a Crime, and
consequently St. Jude did very ill after Christ's Resurrection, to take a
Journey from Jerusalem into Persia, and there to take upon him to rebuke the
Superstition of the Magi, and to preach a New Doctrine, and so was put to death
deservedly.

The like may be said of St. Paul, for his making a Mutiny and Uproar at
Athens, and disturbing the Worship of the great Goddess Diana of the Ephesians:
And in fine, both he, and all the Apostles, committed great Crimes, in
presuming to preach New Doctrine amongst all Nations, where Idolatry was
Established, and owned by public Authority. (for, says the same Author, page
152. To maintain a Doctrine contrary to the Religion Established, is a greater
Fault in an authorized Preacher, than in a private Person.) And therefore they
all suffered condign Punishments, and were accessory to their own cruel Deaths.
But now, this reflects more severely upon our blessed Savior, who gave his
Disciples their Commissions, Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

And which is yet more, it reflects upon God the Father, who sent his Son into
the World for that end and purpose; and also the Holy Spirit, which was sent
down from Heaven after our Savior's Resurrection, to inspire those Apostles
with diversity of Tongues, and such other miraculous Gifts, as might rightly
qualify them for the preaching the Gospel throughout all the Nations of the
World.

So that this last Assertion is, in effect, Blasphemy against the Three Persons
of the sacred Trinity.

Our blessed Savior 10 Matthew. 33. Says, Whosoever shall deny me before Men,
him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven: And in another place,
By your Words you shall be justified, and by your Words condemned. So that, to
deny Christ before Men, is our Savior's sense, in a Crime that excludes and
shuts a Man out of Heaven. But this Author affirms positively, page 271. That
the denying of Christ before an Infidel Prince, is not a Christian's Act, but
his Sovereign's Act, and consequently no Sin. And so he plainly gives the Son
of God the Lie.

Our blessed Savior, when he sent out his Disciples 10 Matthew. 15. Tells them,
That into whatsoever City they entered, and were not received, it should be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the Day of Judgment, than for that City.
That is to say, the refusing to receive and hear the Doctrine of Christ's
Disciples was a greater Sin then that of Sodom.

But this Author tells us, page 286. That those who refused so to hear and
receive them, did not Sin in so doing. And here we see again, the Arrogance and
Impudence of the same Author, in giving the Lie to the Lord Jesus.

Our Hebrew Masters, do indeed, teach us to read the Words and Sentences of
part of the Scriptures; but this politic Pedagogue would instruct us to read,
not only the Words and Sentences, but the true Sense and Meaning of them
backwards.

Our Savior Christ, in diverse places, owns his casting out Devils and unclean
Spirits; and sometimes these unclean Spirits owned him to be the Son of the
most high God, as did the Legion of Devils, with which the Man was possessed in
the Country of the Gadarenes, 5 Mark 7. and diverse others. And the Pharisees,
(the worst, and most malicious of his Enemies) acknowledged his casting out
Devils: Yet notwithstanding, the composer of this Treatise had the Confidence
to affirm, page 354. That no Man was ever possessed with any other Spirit, than
that by which his Body was naturally moved. And so gives the Lie, not only to
our Savior, but to all the Four Evangelists, who have left upon Record most
remarkable Instances of those Miracles.

In page 62, 63, and 64. this Author tells us, That Man, by Nature is in a
State of War, every Man against every Man; and every Man has a right to every
thing, over the Goods and Body of his Neighbor: And yet in his next Chapter,
(which is not above eight pages further, he sets down Ten Laws of Nature, which
Laws of Nature are immutable and eternal, and stamped upon Men's Souls, and
every of them tends to Peace and Quietness, Love and Kindness, Gratitude and
doing to others, as we would be willing they should do to us; and these two
Assertions, are as contrary one to the other, as Light is to Darkness; however
it is much more modest to give himself the Lie, then to give it so often, as he
has done, to the Savior of the World, and the second Person of the Trinity.

In page 88. he acquaints us, That by the People assembled, are transferred all
their Right on him whom they chose their Sovereign, which Sovereign can do no
Injustice, though at his pleasure, he take away any of their Lives: And yet
page 152. he asserts, That no Man in the institution of their Sovereign, can be
supposed to give away the Right of preserving his own Body. And page 112. If an
Assembly meet and agree together, they may rebel, and make War against their
Sovereign. And I affirm, that no Man of Sense or Reason, can be supposed to
defend the Authors reputation in so notorious a Contradiction.

In page 285. and diverse other places, he affirms, That Christ's Kingdom not
being of this World, he left the Jews to the Law of Moses, and other Nations to
their respective Sovereigns; and yet page 106. he plainly affirms, That Christ
acted in this World, as King of the Jews, and by his Sovereign Power and
Authority, sent two of his Disciples to untie, and bring away the She-ass, and
her Colt, on which he was to ride into Jerusalem.

Page 62. He affirms, That the Desires and Passions of Man are no Sin, though
it be an absolute Breach of the Tenth Commandment.

Our Savior forbids swearing by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, or a Man's own head,
5 Matthew. 34, 35, 36. but this Author asserts, page 71. That such kind of Oaths
is no swearing, and so makes our Savior guilty of Lying.

Page 152. he says, That every man is supposed to know the Law of Nature, it
being so plain; and yet, page 141. he avers, That the Law of Nature is, of all
Laws the most obscure.

Page 261. he says, Christ*s death did not satisfy God 's justice, and yet,
page 356. he acknowledges, That the Passion of Christ is a full Ransom for all
manner of Sins.

Page 272. he affirms, That there were no true Martyrs, but those who conversed
with our Savior while he was here upon Earth; and that he who is no Minister,
can be no Martyr: Now if so, all other Martyrs have thrown away their Lives,
and were accessory to their own Deaths*

Page 60. he says, That Contempt is the Immobility of the Heart: But this
cannot be, for when the Pulse ceases to beat, the Man can no longer live; and
consequently, this Author, contemning all sorts of Laws, Learning and Religion,
could never have lived to finish his Leviathan.

Our Savior acknowledges, that if he had not done such Miracles as no Man else
could do, the Scribes and Pharisees might have had for their Unbelief some just
pretense.

But this Author avers, page 148. That Miracles are not at all sufficient to
give evidence: But sure I am, that this bold Assertion of his, which is a
Wonder, though not a Miracle, gives the whole World a sufficient Evidence of
his great Arrogance and Impudence.

Our Savior says, That the Reprobates shall go into everlasting Punishment:
And St. Paul says, That this Mortal must put on Immortality: but this Author
says p. 345. That the Reprobates Bodies shall not be immortal.

And page 245. That no individual Person shall be punished with Torment Eternal.

Page 360. he says, That to pray to the King for fair Weather, is Idolatry: But
if the King command a Man to do so, and he do it, it is no Idolatry.

Page 360. he tells us, That if a Man, who is no Pastor, worships an Idol, and
others follow him, this is no Scandal given: However, I wonder he should not
think this to be a very scandalous Doctrine.

If the Author were yet living, I should take the boldness to give him this
civil Item, (oportet mendacem esse memorem) especially since he asserts, page
60. That Imagination and Memory are the same thing: For if so, I greatly wonder
how he could imagine so many Falsities and Contradictions, and yet, at the same
time not remember them. For my part, I must confess, I do not apprehend
Imagination and Memory to be the same thing; and if it were practicable, I
should thus reason the Case with him: Sir, Your Leviathan is a product of mere
Imagination; for never any such thing yet was: But of that which never yet was,
you could have no Remembrance, Egregie magister ergo falleris.

I cannot here omit his positive Assertion in the same page, That all Men have
equal Faculties of Body and Mind; but God forbid it should be true, for then
every Man, equal to him as to Education and acquired Learning, would write and
publish a Leviathan, and by that means, all Booksellers shops would soon be
filled with impious and pernicious Books.

What other Men may judge of this his positive Assertion, I know not: For my
part, I am not of that Opinion, That a Marius, Dioclesian, Julius Caesar, or
Tamberlane had not Gifts and Endowments of Nature far above a Plebeian, or
Common Soldier; or that every Pesant, or Country Thatcher, had equal parts to
compare with Jack Straw, or Wat Tyler.

I must needs confess, That if all other Men were like the Author of this
Leviathan, I should then conclude, That all Men are indeed both by Nature and
Art in a State of War.

It Is too plain, That he was in War with the whole World; and its great pity
the whole World was not in War with him, when he first published his accursed
Leviathan.

He was in War with Man's Creation, and in War with his Redemption; in War with
the Law of Moses, and in War with the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; in
War with the Subsistence of Departed Souls, and in War with that of Angels and
Spirits* (and yet I have heard it reported of him, that he was afraid to be
alone in a dark Room) in War with the mavelous Act, and Deeds of the Old
Prophets, and in War with our blessed Savior's Miracles; in War with those
Heavenly Mansions, which the holy Jesus is gone before to prepare for his
blessed Saints and Martyrs, and in War with the place of Eternal Torments
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; or else, (if it be true what is commonly
said of him, when his Man was rubbing his Body in a Morning) he would never
have adventured to pronounce such Words in raillery, as (Rub you Rogue for
Eternity;) in War with all civil Common Wealths and Established Laws, and in
War with all Church Governments and Gospel Ordinances; in War with all Moral
Honesty and Rules of Sobriety, and in War with Religion and all its
Fundamentals; in War with the Works of Aristotle and the Heathen Philosophers,
and in War with Euclid's Elements and Mathematical Demonstrations; in War with
Schools and Universities, and in War with all the Liberal Sciences* in War with
his own Definitions, and in War with his own pernicious Principles, between
many of which, there is a much greater Contrariety and Distance, than he allows
at the Resurrection between the Saints and Reprobates, making all both Good and
Bad to stand, at the last Day, upon the Earth's superficies, page 242. And
making the Punishment of the one, to consist only in beholding, for a short
time, the Glory and Happiness of the other: How they must be placed I do not
well understand; some few of the Reprobates, I confess, might look over the
shoulders of others, but they being so exceeding numerous, the Saints, Antecii
and Perecii, must certainly have great difficulty to see them plainly: But how
to find Expedients, or how to make Spectacles for the eyes of their Antipodes,
would have been past the Author's little Skill in Geometry or Optics.

As to the Design in* general of this impious Discourse, I am willing to
believe that the Author's Res Angusta Domi, and personal Vainglory, might move
him in such a juncture as that was, to fish in troubled waters, in hopes to
advance his Fortune, and get himself a Name: But Satan who stood behind the
Curtain, and prompted him to this Undertaking, had undoubtedly a further and
deeper Design; namely, to encourage all Persons whatever, to follow the Devices
and Desires of their own hearts, without the least fear or dread of burning
Lakes, or endless Torments, by shamefully distorting and wresting the plain
Texts of the holy Scriptures, by searching for Errors in the Books of Moses,
by undervaluing and lessening our Savior's Miracles, and so endeavoring to
overthrow the Fundamentals of Christian Faith, by calling in question the
Subsistence of blessed Angels, Unclean Spirits, and Departed Souls; by turning
heavenly Mansions, and the place of Eternal Torments into mere Metaphors: And
lastly, by setting up a New Commonwealth, and a Sovereign, who, by an
incomprehensible Law of Nature, must have the absolute Command, not only of the
Estates and Bodies, but also of the Souls and Consciences of all his Subjects,
though it be to deny the Doctrine of Christ and his and to Worships Idols, and
Sacrifice to Devils.

This Arch Enemy of Souls is, alas! too well acquainted with Humane Frailties;
(which are, in truth, the effects of his beguiling our First Parents) and
knows, That Quicquid volumus, facile credimus, that very slender Arguments, if
they do but gratify fleshly Desires, have great power and force with poor
Mortals. It was a promise of sensual Delights and Pleasures (though in the
other World,) by which Mahomet so advanced his Dominions, and gained so many
Proselites, and at last exalted himself above our blessed Savior Christ Jesus,
who indeed, as a Prophet, is by the Alcoran acknowledged; but as to his
Divinity, or his being the Second Person of the Trinity, it is by the Turks
utterly denied. I can never forget a Passage in Mahomet the Fourth's insulting
Letter to the Emperor, at the beginning of this last War, namely, (I value not)
or (I am not afraid of your CRUCIFIED GOD) to which blasphemous Expression, I
do really attribute his being Deposed a few Years after with great Dishonor
and Disgrace, and all the Misfortunes and Disasters (as so many Marks and
Tokens of God's displeasure) which have ever since befallen that Ottoman Empire.

And here I hope it will not be ill taken, to make an humble Address to the
young Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, that they will be pleased to have so
great a regard to their own Eternal Welfare and Happiness, as neither to
countenance this impious Book themselves, nor allow it a place in their
Libraries, for fear it may one day corrupt some of their noble Race, when they
are laid in their cold Tombs.

I most earnestly beseech you, Sirs, to hearken to a poor Man's Advice, who has
no sinister Ends or Designs; and whatever he here urges, is out of true respect
and kindness. Who reflects with great remorse upon his own misspent Hours, Days
and Years; and were it in his power to recall Time and Opportunities, would
certainly (with God's assistance) employ them to better Ends and Purposes.

Hitherto, your tender years, and little Experience, may justly plead for your
not discerning Id manticae quod in tergo est, or diving into the subtle
Fallacies and Mysteries of the Composer of this Treatise: But now that you have
some of his Blasphemies, Arrogancies, Contradictions and Extravagancies laid so
plainly and clearly before your Eyes, to harbor or cherish in your Bosoms such
Snakes and Vipers, would admit of no excuse.

If you find a Gamester making use but of one false Die, he never wins a
Shilling more of your Moneys. If a Tradesman cheats you with false Wares, you
never after, by your good Wills, come within his doors: And then, Why should
you give the least respect or countenance, to one who endeavors to cheat you
of your Souls, and rob you of Eternal Happiness.

Forasmuch as you may be well assured, That all such impious Discourses as
these, are Traps and Snares laid for you by the Devil, and his Emissaries, to
entice you to Sin and Wickedness, and then to plunge you in endless Woes and
Miseries;

For the timely prevention of which, the best and safest Advice that I can
possibly give to the Youth of both Sexes is, to employ some part of their
precious Hours in reading the Holy Scriptures, (rather than Plays and Romances,
(which are appointed by God himself to be the Rule of their Lives, and by which
they must be one day judged, and give an account of all those extraordinary
Talents and Donatives, which they have received at his hands, above the vulgar
and meaner fort of Human Race: By which I mean,

1. In the first place, their ingenuous, liberal, and more refined Education,
there being few Parents among the Gentry or Nobility, who, for their own
Reputation, are not exceeding careful to put their Children under such
Discipline of Tutors and Governesses, as may break their natural rudeness, and
mould them into some form of Civility, and teach them that fundamental Lesson
of Obedience, upon which must be built all future Instructions; and afterward
to cultivate their Understandings, to bend their Wills, and ^ncline their
Affections, as they grow up in years, to those things, which are proper
Accomplishments for each of the respective Sexes: Which is an Advantage, that
poor and indigent Parents can never purchase for either Sons or Daughters, by
reason of the great Expense, they being forced to send them abroad, into all
places, and among all Companies, where the one are in danger of learning all
sorts of Vices, and the other liable to manifold Temptations, and can seldom or
never observe or practice such a Severity and Reservedness, as otherwise would
become a Virgin-Innocence.

2. A second Advantage is, Wealth and Riches, which many times comes into the
hands of young Heirs and Heiresses, as if they were dropped out of the Clouds:
Houses and Palaces, which they built not; Goods, which they provided not;
Lands and Possessions, of which they never made the purchase; But are now
become God's stewards, and must one day give account of all particulars, that
is to say, what they have laid out upon themselves, what they have distributed
among the Poor, the Widow and the Fatherless, and what they have left behind
them to their Children and Families.

3. A third Advantage is, that of Time, the Rich have no need to employ their
time, to gain that wherewith they already abound; whereas the poor Man has
scarce any vacant Hours, or such as he can call his own, but they are all
forestalled by their pressing Necessities: The Shepherd must, by Day and Night,
watch his Flocks and his Folds; the Husbandman is confined to his Plough, his
Goad, and his Oxen; the Carpenter to his Saw and Ax; the Smith to his Hammer
and Anvil; the Potter to his Clay and Wheel; and so are all Workmen and
Artificers to their several Manufactures and Employments.

So that the Rich and Wealthy have, by this means, their Time at their own
disposal, (God having prevented them with the Blessings of his Goodness) but
must be accomptable to God how they have employed it; that is to say, what part
or portion has been by them set apart for private and public Devotions, and
what for reading of the Holy Scriptures; what has been spent in lawful or
unlawful Pastimes, and what in sloth and idleness; what in gratifying Pride and
Vanity, or indulging any manner of Excess.

Besides all this, as the Inclinations and Aversions of great Princes, are very
much imitated by their Courtiers and Attendants* (Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur Orbis) so have the Examples of Persons of Quality of both Sexes, no
small Influence upon the Actions and Behaviors of their Inferiors, and those
of lower Ranks; and therefore they are highly concerned, throughout the whole
Course of their Lives, to become eminent Patterns of Pie^y and Godliness.

A Prayer for the Youth of both Sexes.
MOst gracious God, and merciful Father in Christ Jesus, who, while he was here
on Earth, took little Children in his Arms, and blessed them: Be graciously
pleased to have a particular Regard to the Youth of both Sexes; but in a more
especial manner, to bestow a larger portion of Spiritual Graces, and Heavenly
Benedictions, on those whom thou have placed in higher Ranks and Degrees; let
no Wind of false Doctrine blast those fragrant Flowers in their blooms, nor any
Composers of Leviathans, or other Impostors, beguile them of Eternal Life and
Happiness: Let them remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth, before
the Evil Days come, and the Years when they shall say, We have no pleasure in
them. Ere ever the silver Chord be loosed, or the golden Bowl be broken, make
them truly sensible that there is a Maker of all things, and Judge of all Men;
(at the Bar of whose Tribunal all Men must one Day appear) that there is verily
a Reward for the Righteous, of Eternal Joys; and as verily a Punishment for
Reprobates, of endless Miseries. That the Sentence being once past, (be it for
Good or Evil) must stand for ever fixed, and be irrevocable: That all the Riches
and Honors which this World affords, can never counterballance the least or
meanest of Rational Souls; that ten Thousand times ten Thousand Years, either
in Happiness or Misery, neither make nor measure the least imaginable part of
Eternity: That no Person of any Sex or Age, in the ordinary way of Providence,
has any Assurance of Life, for so much as one Hour or Minutes space: That
whoever harbors in his, or her bosom, any one known or habitual Sin, is for
every Moment of that time, liable to Eternal Damnation.

That to trust, either to a Deathbed Repentance, or to be encouraged by the
Example of the Thief upon the Cross, is very unsafe and dangerous: The first of
which may be obstructed by Lethargies, Megrims, Bodily-pains and anguish, and
many other Accidents; and the last, can afford no hopes, forasmuch as, before
Christ's Passion, it never was, and afterward it neither could, nor ever can
be any other Man's case. And lastly, That as the Tree falls, so it lies; and
after Death, Judgment follows, and there can be no place for Repentance, or
Believing, in the Grave, whither (sooner or later) some are hastening, and all
the rest are going.

Be pleased therefore, Gracious Father, to guard and protect them, from all the
malicious practices of that invisible Enemy of Souls; and to plant thy true
Fear in their hearts, now in their youthful Days, and tender Years; that so
they may hereafter become burning and shining Lights in their Generations. And
having finished their Course, and run their Race, and been faithful to Death,
they may wear the Crown of Life, and their Souls be safely conveyed by their
Tutelar and Guardian Angels, to the place of everlasting Rest and Happiness:
And all for the sake of thy dearly beloved Son, and our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

THE Fourth Question.
Q. Whither art thou going?
Answer.

To the Land of Darkness, and the Shadow of Death.

The Truth is, this is a Question, in one sense, very easy to be answered by a
Man, who is already past the Seventieth Year of his Age; since the Age of a
Man, in the ordinary Course of Nature, is but Threescore Years and Ten; and
though there should be Ten (or Ten times Ten) more added to it, yet would his
Life be but Labor and Sorrow, so soon passes it away, and he is gone to his
long home.

Che noi siamo cenere e polve! Che breve e questa vita; Ch'al girer di poc
hoar, il Ci'el risolve la vanita.

Alas, Man that is born of a Woman, has but a short time to live; he is but of
very few days, and those full of Disquiet and Troubles: He comes forth like a
Flower, and is cut down; he flees also like a Shadow, and continues not; his
Days are but a Span long, and swifter than a Weaver's Shuttle, or a Post that
hastes by; and at his best Estate, is altogether Vanity.

Who is he that can deliver himself from the hand of the Grave? One dies in
his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet, his Breasts are full of
Milk, and his Bones are moistened with marrow: And another dies in the
bitterness of his Soul, and never eats with pleasure.

This made the Son of Sirach Oratorically reflect.

O Death! How bitter is the Remembrance of Thee, to a Man that lives at rest
in his Possessions, unto the Man that has nothing to vex him, and that bath
prosperity in all things, yea, unto him that is able yet to receive Meat. And
again, O Death! how acceptable is thy Sentence unto the Needy, and unto him
whose strength fails; that is now in the last Age, and is vexed with all
things, 41 Ecclesiasticus 1, 2.

This made eloquent Job cry out in the height of his Affliction.

Let the Day perish wherein I was born; let Darkness and the shadow of Death
stain it, and a Cloud dwell upon it: Let also that Night be solitary wherein I
was conceived, and no joyful Voice come therein: Let the Stars of the Twilight
thereof be darkened; let it look for Light, but have none, neither let it see
the Dawning of the Day, because it shut not up the door of my Mother's Womb,
nor hid Sorrow from mine eyes. Wherefore is Light given to him that is in
Misery, and Life unto the bitter in Soul? Who long for Death, but it comes
not, and dig for it more than for hidden Treasures? Who rejoice exceedingly
when they can find the Grave, 3 Job 3. 5. etc.

O that I might have my Request, and that God would grant me the thing that I
long for; even that it would please God to destroy me; that He would let loose
his hand, and cut me off, 6 Job 8, 9.

Thus is Death to some the King of Terrors, and to others, a kind Friend, and a
welcome Guest.

However, be it Welcome, or not welcome, it is the Sentence of God upon all
Living, For all Flesh is as Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof, as the
Flower of the field: Dust we are, and to Dust we must return.

Reflection.
How weak are then the Projects, and how vain the Imaginations of poor Mortal
Wights?

To day, there is nothing but Feasting, Music and Dancing in their stately
Halls, and Banqueting-Rooms: To morrow, they are languishing upon their sick
Beds, given over by their Physicians, the Curtains drawn upon them by their
Friends and Acquaintance, and in their last Agonies.

To day, they purchase Lands of Inheritance, and call their Mansion-Houses by
their own Names: To morrow, all that parcel of Ground or Earth, of which they
can be truly called Masters, does not exceed four Cubick yards.

To day, they are sitting at their Toilets, consulting with their Glasses, and
admiring their own Shapes and Features; and cannot with any patience, endure
the least speck or spot upon their shining and costly Garments: To morrow, they
are dressed from Head to Foot in grave Clothes, and their loathsome Carcasses are
given for food to the nauseous and greedy Worms.

To day, they are Lords of Manors, and by their Deputies and Stewards, appoint
their respective Courts: To morrow, they themselves are no more than mere
stewards, and must, in the presence of a most righteous and impartial Judge,
give a strict Account, to the value of two Mites, as well of all their
Disbursements, as their Receipts.

But now, in another sense, there is no problematick Question has ever been
proposed to poor Mortals, neither in former nor latter Ages, that has given
them greater Difficulties, or begot in the Minds of Thinking-Men, more anxious
and doubtful Thoughts.

(Whither art thou going?) is an Interrogative, to which, neither the learned
Philosopher, nor the wisest Senator in the whole World, has ever been able, as
yet, (or, as I presume, ever will be) to make a direct, positive, or categorick
Answer: Forasmuch as we have never received any News from the Dead, since the
World was created, of which we can be infallibly assured; or Letters of
Intelligence* from any One of those innumerable Thousands of departed Souls
that have gone before us.

St. Paul was caught up into the Third Heaven, but, at his coming down again,
he gives no other Description of the Place, or of the Dwellers in those upper
Regions, than by mere Negatives.

Lazarus was dead and buried four days; but where his wandering Soul had its
Abode, in that interval of Time, I do not believe there is left upon Record, an
Account, or so much as the least mention in any History, whether Sacred or
Profane.

If a young Traveller, quitting his Native Soil, to visit some remoter Parts of
the habitable Earth, be extremely surprised, when he meets with Climates much
hotter or colder than his own* with longer and shorter Days and Nights, with
Persons of different Complexions and Humors, with variety of Customs and
Manners of foreign Nations, with Sea Monsters, strange wild Beasts, and
creeping Things of diverse kinds; How much more must the Soul of a dying Man be
infinitely surprised, in the critical Moment of its passage into the Regions of
the other World, and sudden stepping from off the Bank of Time and Mortality,
and taking its flight into the wide Expanse, and vast Abyss of Eternity? where
shortly it expects to meet with innumerable Myriads of incorporeal Beings, with
which it had never before the least Converse or Acquaintance.

Upon this Bank or Shore, must Kings and Emperors leave behind them their
Crowns and Scepters, Prelates and Judges their Mitres and Scarlet Robes,
Rich-men their Houses and Lands; the Covetous their Heaps of Gold and Worldly
Treasures, and the Voluptuous, their Dalilahs, and all their sensual Delights.

O Eternity! Eternity! It is a vast Ocean, of which the Depth can never be
fathomed, by any humane Artifice.

Eternity! Is a round Figure, of which, cannever be found, either by
Algebraist, or Geometer, the Area, or superficial measure, of which the
Diameter is a long Line, neither terminated by Points, nor divisible into any
Number of Parts.

Let us suppose, with Archimedes of Syracuse, (that Prince of Mathematicians) a
Globe of Sand, of such a Magnitude, Ut Diametrum habeat centum Myriadas,
Myriadum, Stadiorum.

Or, which is somewhat less, Let us suppose a Globe of Sand, equal in
Magnitude, to the Sphere of the Fixed Stars, according to the Opinion of
Aristarchus, and the number of Grains contained in that Globe, to be as great
as the said Archimedes has Calculated and Computed it in his Arenarius.

And let us suppose one single Grain of that vast Globe, to be removed, or
taken away, at the end of every Thousandth Year: What a prodigious Length of
Time would be expired, before that great Mass, or Globe of Sand, would be
removed? And yet, when all this Time shall be expired, the Damned in Hell will
be as far from an End of their Miseries, as they were the first Hour, or
Moment, they were thrown into that dreadful place of Torment.

There is yet a third Sense, in which this Question (Whither art thou going?)
nearly concerns all good Christians, and should, every Morning and Evening of
their Lives, be seriously proposed to, and cautiously answered by their own
private Consciences.

Now what has been said in the two foregoing Senses, serves only to inform, and
to help us, to make suitable and timely Reflections.

This last concerns the Duties of a Christian's life, and his daily practice,
which have been laid down already in the foregoing Discourse.

Our blessed Savior informs us of Two very different ways, (a Broad, and a
Narrow,) in which all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, in their several
Generations, from time to time, have traveled and conversed, as they now do
travel and converse, and so will do to the end of the World. As likewise of a
Wide and a Strait Gate, through which they (sooner or later) have heretofore
passed; and so must pass, both now, and in after Ages, so long as the Sun and
Moon endure.

The one of these Ways and Gates, leads to Eternal Life and Happiness; the
other, to endless Miseries and Torments, with the Devil and his Angels.

Ejaculation.
O blessed Savior! It is the Narrow Way that I choose, and the Strait Gate,
through which I would fain get a safe passage.
I am going! But as Travelers use, when they are going long Journeys into far
Countries, and are uncertain of their Returns, to take their solemn Leaves of
all their Acquaintance: So do I, being a Stranger and Sojourner here, and
engaged in a much longer Journey, than any that can be made upon this
Terrestrial Globe, namely, to a City situated in the upper Regions, think my
self obliged, in Honor and Conscience, to take my final Leave of all sublunary
Things.

Away then! ye worldly Pomps, and Lying Vanities; ye Blazing-stars, and
shortliv'd Meteors; ye golden Dreams, and visionary Phantasms; ye False Gods,
and airy Goddesses; ye fine spun-Cobwebs, and gaudy Peacocks Tails; ye fickle
and inconstant Weather-cocks, and wavering half-toucht Magnetick-needles; ye
pleasing Troubles, fading Flowers, and deceitful Pleasures, that make as false
Representations of true Content and Happiness, as the shadows of Human Bodies
that are cast at different hours, when the Sun shines, give false measures of
their respective Statures, being sometimes of such prodigious Lengths, as
though they were the Bodies of Giants, or Sons of the Anakims; and at other
times, so extreme short, as though they were Dwarfs, or Pigmies.

What advantage is it now to me, or what addition does it make to my inward
Peace, to have seen, in my youthful Days, the Riches, Glory and Magnificence of
King's Courts, with their numerous Guards, and Royal Attendance?

What have I gotten, in my riper and more mature Age, by turning aside out of
my way, to gaze about, and to observe, how the Balls of Honor, Interest and
Power, have been tossed and banded to and fro, and struck from hand to hand, with
the Rackets of Fas and Nefas, and alternatively rebounded from Kingdoms to
States, as from the Walls of Tennis Courts, by the World's Great Hero's,
Master-Players, and skillful Gamesters?

What satisfaction have I now? Or, What pleasure can any reasonable Man think I
take, in calling to remembrance, how many Balls and Banquets, Plays and
Musick-meetings, public Shows, or other vain and sinful Pastimes I have been
present at, either to please my self, or to gratify others?

On the contrary, What would I now give? (or rather, What would I not give,) to
have spent the greatest part of those precious Hours, in private Prayer and
Meditation: And the expense of all, in casting my Bread upon the Waters, and
administering to the Necessities of the Poor, the Widow, and the Fatherless?

As for Stage Plays, (not to mention other vain and unnecessary Divertisements)
I am inclined to believe, that the Original intent of them, was to applaud
Virtuous Actions, and to discountenance Vicious Livers. But I appeal to all
sober Persons, whether the Practice of this last Age, has not produced contrary
effects.

And I crave leave to ask one short Question of young Gentlemen and Ladies, and
their Inferiors of both Sexes, What satisfaction they hope to have, when they
come to lie on their sick or Deathbeds (none of them knowing how soon they may
receive the fatal Summons) for having been the Auditors and Spectators of so
many Profane and and Obscene Plays: Or to have read so many vain and idle
Romances, where they learn little else, than to make or receive unlawful
Courtships; or to gain such a kind of Knowledge, as their Mother Eve got by
eating the Forbidden Fruit, or to be instructed in those Intregues, which
otherwise, its possible, they had never known, or thought of all their lives.

I would also demand of the Authors and Actors of some certain Plays, with what
face they can ask of God from day to day, a Blessing upon their Labors and
Endeavors? Or what Account they will one day give, at the Bar of his Tribunal,
for having been the unhappy Instruments of corrupting and debauching so many
hopeful Persons of both Sexes; who, otherwise might have been eminent Examples
of Piety and Godliness in their several Generations.

Prayer.
And I beseech God Almighty, of His infinite Goodness and Mercy, to incline the
Hearts of all those Writers and Readers, Authors and Actors, Auditors and
Spectators, while they have Time and Opportunities, to make suitable and
seasonable Reflections.

I am going! But O blessed Redeemer, How shall I ever find the way, or get to
my Journeys end with safety. unless Thou be pleased to send some Guardian
Angel, as well to lead and guide, as to aid and assist me?

When I stumble, in rugged and uneven Ways; to hold me up in his Arms.

When I turn aside, into crooked and bypath; to pull me back by force.

When I am near a Pit or Precipice; to give me a friendly Item, and timely
notice.

When I am dull and heavy, and grow slothful in the performance of my Duty; to
stir up, and awaken me.

When I am Hungry and Thirsty, as Travelers are led by their Guides into their
Oberges for a Viaticum, and there refresh themselves; to conduct me to thine
House, and holy Place, there to sit down at thine own Table, and be fed with
the true Bread which came down from Heaven, and to drink of the Fruit of the
true Vine, and the Water of Life, of which, whoever once drinks, shall never
thirst again.

Parlate, Parlate, i cadaveri sepolti!
When I am assaulted with Enemies, from without, or from within, whether they
be my own private Lusts and Passions, or whether they be Principalities or
Powers, the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, and spiritual Wickednesses in
high Places, (those invisible Enemies of mighty Power, and perfect knowledge,
of wonderful Subtilty, and long Experience) then, gracious Father, let me be
furnished with all sorts of spiritual Armor; the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of
the Spirit: That so, as a valiant Soldier, I may sight under thy Banner, and
be able to resist all the Wiles, Assaults, and fiery Darts of the Devil, and
all his Infernal Spirits; and to subdue, and bring under, my own unruly Lusts
and Passions.

When I meet with Troubles and Afflictions, Crosses and Disappointments, Wrongs
and Injuries; let me be armed with such a measure of Humility, Meekness,
Long-suffering, Patience and Equanimity, as may bear me up through all the
Changes and Chances of this Mortal Life, and during my earthly Pilgrimage.

When I fall into Fainting-Fits, through Age and Bodily Distempers; let thy
blessed Spirit administer to me such comfortable Cordials, as may support my
drooping Spirits.

Reflection.
Why then art thou cast down so often, O my Soul? And why, for the Trifles of
Mortality, art thou so disquieted within me? Trust still in God, who will never
leave nor forsake thee: For sure I am, that I shall yet praise Him, for His
loving Kindness and tender Mercies to me, the least and meanest of all his
Servants.

When I draw nigh to my last Agonies, then blessed Lord, O then be pleased, of
thy infinite Mercy and Goodness, to chain up that great Enemy of Souls, and
Prince of Darkness, with all his Infernal Legions; (who always make their most
furious and fierce Assaults upon poor departing Souls) that so neither Height,
nor Depth, nor Things present, nor Things to come, may ever be able to separate
me from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, or make me let go
my hold, or quit my hope of Eternal Life and Happiness.

In the last, and critical Moment of my departure out of this troublesome
World, let my Soul be safely conveyed, by some Guardian Angel, to the place
appointed for the Spirits of God's Elect; there to rest with cheerfulness, and
to wait with patience, for a joyful Reunion with this Body of mine at the
Resurrection, when it shall be raised out of the Dust with Immortality and
Incorruption: And then let both Soul and Body, thus united, be received into
that Celestial Paradise, where (being very far from imitating the rebuked
Ambition of Zebedee's two Children) to be the meanest and lowest of all the
Redeemed, and happy Individuals of Human Race, is the height of my Ambition,
and the utmost of my Desires.

A MORNING-PRAYER FOR Ordinary Weekdays.
LET now the Words of our Mouths, and the Meditations of our Hearts, find Grace
and Favor with Thee, O LORD our Strength, and our Redeemer.

Almighty GOD, and most merciful FATHER, who, of thy wonted Goodness and Mercy,
have protected and preserved us this last Night, from many calamitous
Accidents, which otherwise might have befallen us, and safely brought us to the
Light of another Day, defend us, we pray Thee, in the same with thy mighty
Power, and so prevent us with thy gracious favor, and further us with thy
continual help, that in all our Works begun, continued and ended in Thee, we
may ever seek thy HONOR and GLORY, and finally by thy Mercy obtain Everlasting
Life, through JESUS CHRIST our blessed LORD and SAVIOR:

For whose SAKE We humbly pray Thee, to blot out of thy Remembrance all our
past Sins and Provocations, and to work in our Hearts a godly Sorrow, and a
sincere Repentance, with a steadfast and firm Resolution to reform and amend our
Lives.

Bless us in our going out, and our coming in, when we are upon the Way, when
we lay us down, and when we rise up.

When we are in our private Closets, lend an Ear to our Prayers, and answer the
Desires of our Souls.

When we are employed about our Lawful Callings, give success to our honest
Labors and Endeavors.

When we are conversing with others, let us behave our selves with all humility
and meekness in all our Words and Actions, esteeming others better than our
selves, and doing to others, what we would be willing they should do unto us.

Being patient, gentle, and easy to be entreated, slow to wrath, and ready to
forgive all those who have trespassed against us, until seventy seven times,

Loving our Enemies, doing good, and showing kindness, as we have
opportunities, to those who hate, persecute, and despitefully use us.

Living in humble Obedience to, and heartily praying for Him who has the
supreme Power over us, together with all those who are related to Him, or who
are in Authority under Him.

Being no Busy-bodies in other Men's Matters, no Whisperers, Tale-bearers,
Slanderers, or Back-biters.

No Deceivers, or Covenant-breakers, but sincere and upright in all our
Dealings and Transactions.

No lovers of Earthly Treasure, no Worshippers of Gold or Silver, or greedy of
filthy Lucre.

With all cheerfulness and alacrity, dealing our Bread to the Hungry, giving
Drink to the Thirsty, Clothing the Naked, visiting the Sick, relieving
Prisoners, redeeming Captives, helping the Fatherless and Widows, comforting
and assisting the Desolate and Oppressed, and never shutting up the Bowels of
our Compassion from any who want our Help or Assistance.

And forasmuch as we are here but Strangers and Pilgrims, let thy good Spirit
guide and conduct us in our Way to our long Homes, through the vast and wide
Wilderness of this sinful World, where there are so many Turnings and Windings,
Cross-ways and Bypath, Thorns and Briars, Pits and Precipices, Traps and
Snares laid for us by the Devil and his Emissaries, to entice us to Sin and
Wickedness, and then to plunge us into endless Woe and Miseries: Where there is
no true content or Satisfaction to be found, and where the most refined of
Human Pleasures and Delights are allayed with the mixture of Cares and
Troubles, Fears and Jealousies, Sicknesses and Diseases, Crosses and
Disappointments; where Love and Kindness is often repaid with Hatred and
Malice, and the most bountiful Actions with ungrateful Returns: Where the Poor
are oppressed by Men of Power, and innocent Lambs made a prey to ravenous
Wolves, where our Eyes are too often entertained with doleful Spectacles, and
our Ears filled with Sighs and Groans, and bitter Lamentations.

And therefore, Gracious FATHER, be thou pleased to give us such a measure of
Faith, Hope and Patience, as may bear us up in all the Changes and Chances of
this Mortal Life* and enable us in whatever State* or Condition we are,
therewith to be content; as well to be abased* as to be exalted; to want, as to
abound* to have nothing, as to possess all things* And though the Fig Tree
should be withered, and no Fruit be found on the Vine, the labor of the Olive
fail, and the Field yield no increase; though there should be no Sheep in the
Fold, or Herd in the Stall, no Cattle in the pasture, or Stores in the Garner,
no Water in the Bottle, or Oil in the Cruce, yet still to trust in that GOD,
who feeds the Ravens, and the young Lions, when they call upon him; who can
make Rivers to flow out of hard Rocks, and furnish a Table in the Wilderness:
With whom the very Hairs of our heads are all numbered, and in whom none ever
trusted and were confounded.

That so having finished our Course, and run our Race, and lived the Life of
the Righteous, our last END may be like unto his. And whenever these Houses of
Clay shall be dissolved, our Souls may be safely conveyed, by some blessed
Guardian Angels, to the place appointed for the Spirits of GOD's Elect, there
to wait with patience for a joyful Reunion with their respective Bodies at the
Resurrection, and second coming of CHRIST in Glory, with all his holy Angels,
in whose Name and Words we farther desire to call upon Thee, Saying

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy NAME, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven* Give us this Day our daily Bread,
and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us, and
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil, for thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
AN EVENING-PRAYER FOR Every Day in the Week.
MOST Glorious LORD GOD, and merciful Father in Christ Jesus, who inhabitest
the highest Heavens, and yet art pleased to dwell in the lowest Hearts; and
have graciously promised, That wherever Two or Three are gathered together in
thy Name and Fear, Thou will be there in the midst of them.

Look down in mercy upon us, who are now before Thee, and dare not give sleep
to our Eyes, or slumber to our Eyelids, till we have renewed our Covenant with
the GOD and FATHER of Mercies, and have humbly offered unto Him, our Selves,
our Souls, and Bodies, as a reasonable service.

Be therefore pleased, O Lord, to forgive all the Sins of our past Lives,
particularly the Omissions and Commissions of this Day, for which alone,
should Thou enter into Judgment with us, Thou might justly condemn us to
the lowest Hell, and give ns our portion with Hypocrites in utter Darkness.

Blessed LORD, we desire, from the bottom of our Hearts, to be sensible of our
manifold Frailties and Infirmities, and of that Law in our Members, that is
always Warring against the Law of our Minds; so that whenever we would do Good,
Evil is present with us, and intermingles with our very Prayers, and disturbs
our most religious Duties and Performances.

And therefore it is, that utterly renouncing our own Righteousness, as Dung
and Dross, we fly to Him, who is our Advocate: with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous, to wash away our Sins with his own precious Blood, and to
present us unto Thee, our GOD pure and spotless.

And for his sake, we humbly beseech Thee, O LORD, to lighten our Darkness, and
by thy great mercy; to defend us from all perils and dangers this Night, giving
us a moderate and refreshing Rest* free from frightful Dreams, and sinful
Imaginations, which are the evil Effects of our corrupt Natures.

When we awake, let our Souls be filled with heavenly Thoughts, and pious
Meditations, always remembering, That we are in the presence of a God, who knows
our down-sitting and our up-rising, who understands our Thoughts a far off,
and is acquainted with all our ways.

If we should be so vain and foolish, to believe that the Darkness would cover
us, the Night shall be light about us, the Darkness hides not from Thee, but
the Night shines as the Day* The Darkness and the Night are both alike to Thee.

And forasmuch as the closing of our Eyes to Rest, so nearly resembles Death,
and our Beds are but models of our Graves, out of which we must one Day be
called, by the sound of the last Trump, to Arise and come to Judgment: Let
this, and every Evening, and every Morning of our Lives, put us in mind of our
dying Hours.

And let no worldly Affairs hinder us, from being always in a readiness, for
our last and final Conflict with the Prince and Powers of Darkness, who knowing
their time is but short, will be sure to make their fiercest Assaults upon
Departing-Souls, when they find them struggling with Bodily pains, and sharp
Diseases, and drawing nigh to their last Agonies. And sometimes, to terrify
them with frightful Dreams and Visions, to make them, if possible, utterly to
despair of God's Mercies, and to let go their hold, and quit their Hopes of
Eternal Life and Happiness.

Make us therefore sensible, how highly it concerns us, while we have Health of
Body, and soundness of Mind, to arm our selves, like good Soldiers, with
Christian Courage and Resolution, for those Deathbed Combats, and critical
Hours, Minutes, and Moments of our Lives.

And because we are to wrestle with invisible Enemies, of mighty Power and
wonderful Knowledge, great Subtilty and long Experience, who know too well our
Tempers, Inclinations, and Infirmities, and where, and how to set upon us with
the greatest Advantage: Be pleased to send thy blessed Angels, and
Ministring-Spirits, to comfort and assist us, in all those siery Trials and
Temptations.

That so Death, which is to so many others, the King of Terrors, may be to us a
kind Friend, and a welcome Guest; and we may, with all cheerfulness, quit these
Houses of Clay, and fleshy Tabernacles, and exchange the Troubles and Sorrows
of a painful Pilgrimage, in a Valley of Tears, for the Joys of Heaven, and
Everlasting Happiness, with blessed Saints and Angels in the highest Heavens.

All which, with whatever else Thou know to be needful, either for us, or
for any of ours, or for any of Thine, we humbly beg in the Name, and for the
sake of the blessed Jesus, who, in compassion to our Infirmities, has taught us
thus to pray.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy NAME, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven: Give us this Day our daily Bread,
and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us, and
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil, for thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
A MORNING-PRAYER FOR Sundays, Fasts and Festivals.
LET us now fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

Most Holy, Blessed, Glorious and incomprehensible Triniry, Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, Three Persons, and One God Almighty, Maker of all Things, and Judge
of all Men, Have mercy upon us miserable Sinners; who are by Nature, Children
of Disobedience, and by our actual Sins, every Day and Hour of our Lives,
liable to Divine Wrath and Vengeance.

Remember not, O Lord, the many Follies and Vanities of our Childhood and
Youth, nor the innumerable Transgressions of our riper Years, and how we have
always erred and strayed from the Ways of Truth and Righteousness, and trod in
forbidden Paths, through the several Stages of our Lives, leaving undone those
things which thou have absolutely commanded, and doing those things which thou
have exprelly forbidden; and many times drawing upon our selves the guilt of
other Men's Sins, by our Encouragement, Connivance, or ill Examples, breaking
the solemn Vows and Promises, either made for us by others, in Baptism, or by
our selves, in Times of Danger or Sickness; unthankful for Mercies, and
incorrigible under Judgments; rejecting the Motiors of thy blessed Spirit, and
following the Devices, Desires, and vain Imaginations of our own Hearts, and so
running the hazard of losing our precious and immortal Souls, for the enjoyment
of a few sinful, and short-lived Pleasures.

Blessed LORD, we cannot but confess and acknowledge, with shame and confusion
of face, that it is a wonder of thy patience and forbearance, that we are yet
alive, and that thou have not cut us of in the midst of our Sins, and Doomed us
to dwell with everlasting Burnings, among damned Souls and Spirits* But this is
our hope, and humble confidence, that we have to do with the God and Father of
Mercies, who takes no delight in the death of Sinners, but is slow to Anger,
and ready to forgive all those who sincerely repent, and truly believe in our
blessed Lord and Savior CHRIST JESUS; for whose coming into the world to save
lost Sinners, and to open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers, with Angels
and Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven, we laud and magnify thy great
and holy NAME; as we likewise do for thy other Mercies and Favors, daily and
hourly bestowed upon us.

We bless and praise Thee for giving us a* Being in the World, for that
admirable Frame and Structure of our Bodies, while we lay enclosed in our
Mother's Wombs* for breathing into us the Breath of Life, and enduing us with
reasonable Souls, after thine own Image and Likeness; for being Born where the
Gospel of thy SON is openly preached, and professed, and not among Heathens,
Turks, or Infidels,: For the unparalled Pattern of all Goodness, in the Life
of the holy JESUS, and for the pious Examples of the blessed Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apost^^s and Martyrs who are gone before us, and with their own Blood
have traced out for us, the true Way to Life and Happiness; beseeching thee,
that we following their good Examples, may, with them, be made partakers of
Everlasting Life in the World to come.

We thank Thee, LORD of Heaven and Earth, for the wonderful Works of the
Creation, of which we all enjoy our shares and proportions; for the Sun that
shines by Day, and for the Moon and Stars That rule by Night, and by their
regular Motions, and sweet Influences, serve for Signs and Seasons, Days, and
Years; for the Clouds that give Rain, and drop Fatness upon our Fields and
Pastures; and for the Springs that go up by the Mountains, and run down among
the Valleys; for reserving to us the appointed Times of Harvest, and giving us
the kindly Fruits of the Earth in their due and proper Seasons; for our Food
and Raiment, and all the good things of this Life, and our manifold
preservations from sundry D^^^^ and Dangers, ever since we hung upon our
Mother's Breasts; for protecting us this last Night from many calamitous
Accidents, which in a Night might have befallen us, and bringing us safely to
the light of another Day, and so giving us a longer time and space for
Repentance and Amendment of our Lives; most humbly beseeching Thee to continue
these thy Mercies and Favors to us, and to keep us the remainder of this Day,
and of our Lives, from all Things that may be hurtful either to our Spuls, or
Bodies.

From all Evil and Mischief, from Sin, from the Grafts and Assaults of the
Devil, from thy Wrath, and everlasting Damnation, Good LORD deliver us.

From saying in our Hearts that there is no God, or openly denying the Divine
Essence, and glorious Attributes, (of which either the highest Presumption, or
utmost Desperation, are the usual and woeful Effects.) Let the visible things of
the Creation, and the Restections of our own Consciences, in our Solitudes, and
private Retirements, be sufficient to dissuade and restrain us.

Against Idolatry, and having other Gods besides Thee, and from bowing down to,
and Worshipping, either Idols made with hands, or those of our beloved Lusts,
Lord strengthen us by thy Grace.

To keep us from taking the NAME of the LORD our GOD in vain, in our ordinary
Discourses, or profaning it with wicked Oaths, on bitter Curses: Let us
remember that the same LORD has assured all such Offenders, that he will in no
wise hold them guiltless.

To observe religiously the Lord's Day, and all other Times solemnly set a part
for Divine Worship and Service; not following our own Ways, nor speaking our
own Words, nor thinking our own Thoughts: Let thy good Spirit dispose and
incline our hearts.

Let us never attempt to sow Discord and Divisions in the Church, or to offend
our blessed Savior's Little Ones, or any way to disturb the Communion of
Saints, as knowing who has told us, That it would be much better for us to be
thrown into the midst of the Sea, with Millstones hung about our Necks, than
to be guilty of such Offenses.

Let us always be conscientiously careful to Honor and Obey our Parents, and
all others, under whose Rule and Government thou have placed us; behaving
ourselves with all humility and singleness of heart, not as Eye-servants or
Men-pleasers. And whenever Pride and Vainglory would puff us up, and make us
become wise in our own Eyes, let the remembrance that we are but Dust and
Ashes, and born like the wild Asses Colt, pull down our haughty Looks, and
abate our swelling Thoughts.

From sinful Anger, and unbridled Passion, from provoking Language, and
reviling Speeches, from Envy, Hatred and Malice, and all the mischievous and
fatal consequences, that may thereby happen, either to our selves, or others;
LORD ever keep us by thy restraining Grace.

From Rioting and Drunkenness, from Chambering and Wantonness, from Adultery,
Fornication and Uncleanness, or living in any known Sin: Let the fear of thy
Wrath, and the Vengeance of Eternal Fire deterr us.

To wrong our Neighbors by open Violence, or by Secret and fraudulent
Practices: Let it never enter into our Thoughts.

That we may never Slander, speak Evil of, or rashly censure others, or bear
false Witness against them: Let us set a watch before our Mouths, and strictly
guard the Doors of our Lips.

Let us be afraid of oppressing the Poor and Needy in the Gate, or ploughing in
the field of the Fatherless, because their Redeemer is mighty; or of devouring
Widow's Houses, lest the Stones out of the Walls should, one Day, be our
Accusers, and the Beams out of the Timber make Answer, and testify against us.

To covet our Neighbor's House, to covet our Neighbor's Wife, his
Manservant, his Maidservant, his Ox, his Ass, or any thing that is his: Let
no worldly Advantage, or carnal Delight be ever able to tempt or allure us.

From Thieves and Robbers, from the Hands of bloody Men and Murderers, from
Invasion of foreign Foes, from the Conspiracies of Domestic Enemies, and
Treachery of false Friends; do Thou, O LORD, to whom alone all Hearts are open,
all Designs known, and from whom no Secrets are hid, defend us by thy good
Providence, confounding their Counsels, and bringing to naught their Devices.

From Plague, Pestilence and Famine, from bodily Torments, Tempests and
Earthquakes, and all the sad Accidents of Fire and Water, for thy Mercies
sake, save and protect us.

Neither do we pray for our selves alone, but for the whole Race of Mankind,
now living upon, or working within the Bowels of the habitable Earth, or else
floating upon the face of the deep Waters; and particularly for the Church
Militant, wherever scattered or dispersed, that the Gates of Hell may never
prevail against it: Look down with the Eye of pity upon all, who in this
transitory Life, are in Trouble, Sorrow, Need, Sickness, or any other
Adversity, more especially upon those thy Servants, on whom thou have laid
thine afflicting Hand, either for a Trial of their Patience, or a Punishment of
their Disobedience: Make them sensible that Affliction comes not forth of the
Dust, neither does Trouble spring out of the Ground, but that the Hand of the
LORD has done it, to whom alone belong the Issues of Life and Death, and who
does whatever pleases him in Heaven and in Earth, but never willingly asslicts
or grieves the Children of Men, and then Why should we receive Good Things at
the hands of the LORD, and not Evil things? And, Why should a living Man
complain for the punishment of his Sins. In the mean time be thou graciously
pleased, who art the great Physician of Soul and Body, to mitigate their Pains,
and to assuage their Griefs, and to lay no more upon Dust and Ashes, than thou
enablest them to bear with Christian patience, and a lively Faith in the Merits
and Mediation of JESUS CHRIST the Righteous, for the Remission of their Sins,
and the Salvation of their Souls: That so thy Fatherly Chastisements may have
their blessed Effects; and those thy Children may come out of the Furnace of
Affliction, like Gold and Silver that has been tried in the fire, and purified
seven times.

Be merciful to these Kingdoms, and avert those heavy Judgments, which we have
done as much as in us lay, by our crying Sins and Provocations, to pull down
upon our Heads.

Let the choicest of thy Blessings descend upon the Head and Heart of Him, whom
by thy especial Providence, thou have placed in supreme Authority over us;
together with all His Royal Relations.

Give Grace and Wisdom to all the Senators and great Counselors in all their
Debates and Consultations.

Clean Hands, and clear Consciences to the Judges and chief Magistrates, that
so they may help the Fatherless, and hear the Cause of the Widow, and upon all
occasions, act in their several Places, without the least partiality, or
respect of Persons.

Spiritual Gifts and Graces to the Ministers of thy Word and Sacraments,
however Dignified or Distinguished, that they may truly and faithfully feed the
Flocks committed to their Charge.

Sobriety and Godliness to the Governors and Inhabitants of foreign
Plantations, that by their good Conversations and Examples, they may convert
Pagans and Insidels to the Faith of JESUS, and turn many Souls to Righteousness.

The Dew and Blessing of Heaven to Schools and Universities, that out of those
Seminaries and Nurseries may grow up Plants, that may be useful both to Church
and State, in their several Capacities and Generations.

Health and Happiness here, and the Joys of Heaven hereafter to our Parents,
Brethren, Sisters, Kindred, or Christian Acquaintance, and to all our Friends
and Benefactors, who have at any time generously and readily showed us Kindness
in our Distress, and when we truly stood in need of their Aid and Assistance.

A Spirit of Reformation to the whole Commonalty, within these Realms and
Dominions, that so they may live in the true Faith and Fear of Thee our GOD, in
humble Obedience to their Superiors, and in Brotherly Love and Charity one
toward another.

Finally, we beseech Thee, to be present with us, and all those who shall this
day meet in any of the public Assemblies, to assist at thy Divine Worship and
Service. Let our Prayers come up before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of
our hands as an acceptable Sacrifice. Touch, with a Cole from thine Altar, the
Tongues of those who are to speak, that they may not spare, but cry aloud, and
lift up their Voices like Trumpets, and show the People of England their
Transgressions, and tell every Congregation their Sins: And let us, and all
their Hearers, receive the Word with meekness and pure Affections, laying it up
in our Hearts, and bringing forth the fruit thereof in our future Lives and
Conversations, All which (with what ever else thou know to be needful for
us) we humbly beg in the Name, and for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST the Righteous,
concluding these our imperfect Prayers with that absolute Form, which he
himself, while he was yet upon Earth, taught his Disciples, saying.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy NAME, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven: Give us this Day our daily Bread,
and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us, and
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil, for thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

