A LETTER Written by the Bishop of Winchester TO HER HIGHNESS THE Duchess of
York Some few Months before Her DEATH.

LONDON: Printed for Joanna Brom. 1683.

A LETTER TO HER Royal Highness FROM THE BISHOP of WINTON.
MADAM,
THE relation of Friendship I have had to Your Father, (before and ever since
You were Born) and the relation of Service I have had unto Your Self (ever
since it pleased God to advance you to your present Grandeur) will not suffer
me to be altogether Unconcerned in any Thing, wherein I think Your Highness to
be Concerned very much; especially in regard of Your Spiritual and Everlasting
condition, in order whereunto I have had the honor to be more particularly
Employed by You for many Years together.

It was upon this Consideration, Madam, that in Lent last I did presume to
acquaint Your Highness with a Report I had met with in many Places, and from
several Persons, as well within as without the Court; and some of them neither
Yours, nor Your Fathers Enemies, but rather very Well-wishers to You both, that
Your Highness was generally suspected to be at least wavering in Your Religion,
if not totally alienated in Your heart from it. And of this (besides the Brags
of some Papists to that purpose) they alleged, to make the Suspicion the more
probable, two Reasons; of which the One was of Your absenting your self from
two or three Monthly Communions together, which you never had done so much as
once formerly: the Other, that in matters of Difference both of Opinion, and
Practice betwixt Us and the Papists, Your Highness had often, and openly
declared Your self in favor of Them against Us. Which though You might do, (as
I told them I suppose you did) by way of Discourse, or for Dispute sake only;
yet because it was otherwise Interpreted and Reported by Those that heard it,
and otherwise Believed and Talked of by the Generality of the People,
especially in and about London, to the very great Grief and Trouble of those
that are indeed Your Friends, and to the very great Joy and Exultation of those
that may seem perhaps to be your Friends, but are indeed your Mortal Enemies,
and have sufficiently declared themselves to be so: I could not choose but let
Your Highness know what I had heard, that I might have from Your own mouth
wherewithal to stop Theirs, that were so loudly and so maliciously opened
against You. And so I thought I had, when Your Highness was pleased to tell me
that the Report I spoke of (whomsoever it came from) was false and groundless.
For as to what was said of your omitting to Receive twice or thrice, though it
were true in point of Fact, yet the Conjecture that was made upon it had no
Truth in it; for it was (as you said) an Indisposition in your Body, and not
any Change in your Mind, that kept you from it, as it shall (said you) appear
by my receiving of it at Easter, which was then near, and when indeed you did
receive it; adding, that you would not receive the Sacrament, no not so much as
once, (though it were to save your life) if you were not of that Church wherein
you did receive it; so that your receiving with us, (as you said you would) the
Easter following, after such and so solemn a Protestation as You then made, I
could desire no greater an Evidence for mine own Satisfaction, nor no stronger
a Proof to convince others, that Your Highness was still the same you had been
always formerly, in point of Religion; and consequently, enough to silence all
Discourses, and to stifle all Reports, whereby Men were made to believe or
suspect otherwise of You. But when after all my Endeavors to that purpose I
found I could not, I began to Consider with my self, and to Enquire of others
that were your Friends, what might be the true Cause and Ground of the
continuance and increase of those false and malicious Misreports of You,
notwithstanding your own open Profession and Practice to the contrary. And we
were all of that Opininion, that it was partly the Malice of your Enemies, and
partly the Vanity and Artifice of the Romish Party, and Romish Priests
themselves.

And first the Malice of your Enemies, who thinking Themselves to be in Danger,
as long as You are Safe, and knowing how great an Interest you had gotten in
the hearts of the People, by being so glorious a Professor of the Protestant
Religion, and withal so great an Ornament and Support to it, and consequently
that it would be a vain and desperate Attempt to endeavor to ruin you in your
Person, and in your Relations, before they had first ruined you in your
Reputation and Esteem with the People: they thought it their surest and their
readiest way, and the safest too, to give it out, and to make it to be
believed, that whatsoever you had been heretofore, or seemed to be now, you
were indeed a Papist, or at least Popishly affected in your heart, and would
shortly declare your self to be so. This they at first gave out in Whispers,
but such as were to be whispered from Ear to Ear, until it became the common
Discourse in Coffee Houses, and consequently the public Talk of all sorts of
People in all Places, thereby intending (as much as in them lay) to make as
many as were either averse from Popery, or afraid of it, (which I take to be 99
Parts in a hundred of the whole Nation) to be as much your Enemies, as they
were themselves, and consequently not to care what should be done to You, or
become of You, or of your Children.

Thus the Rebels stole away the hearts of the People from the late King of most
blessed Memory, who though he was so sincere, and so zealous a Professor and
Assertor of the Religion of the Church of England, that at length he became a
Martyr for it, yet his Enemies by raising and spreading such malicious and
scandalous Reports against him, (as are now raised and dispersed against You)
made the credulous People believe, that he was indeed a Papist and intended to
bring in Popery: upon which account only they raised many Thousands against
him, without whose assistance they could never have overpowered and oppressed
him as they did. And the Success they had thereby against the Father,
encouraged them to make use of the same Engine against his Son, by giving it
out that the KING by living so long abroad in Popish Countries was so corrupted
in his Religion, that if he were suffered to return he would bring home Popery
along with him. So that with this groundless Fear, I found many very
Considerable and very much Interested Persons to be possessed, when I was sent
into England, about two months before the Kings return; most of which time I
spent in undeceiving all I met with, especially the Heads and Leaders of the
Presbyterian and Independent Parties (who seemed to be most afraid of such a
Change) by assuring them that those Misreports they had heard of the KING and
his Brothers, were nothing else but the malicious Inventions of those, that
were either in fact, or in consent, the Murderers of their Father, and
consequently irreconcilable and implacable Enemies unto his Children. For
(said I) to my certain Knowledge, who was almost always an Eyewitness of their
actions, the KING and both his Brothers did not only by their Profession, but
by their Practice declare and testify themselves to be true Sons of the Church
of England (even in the midst of its Enemies) by coming daily to our Prayers,
and weekly to our Sermons, and frequently to our Communnions. Which I do not
now Repeat by way of Boasting of what I did; for though it was all I could do,
yet perhaps it was less, I am sure it was no more than I am bound to do. But I
repeat this, and what I said before of the late King, to let your Highness see,
how dangerous a thing it is for any of the Royal Family to suffer themselves to
be traduced to the People by any such Reports and Discourses, as now are made
of your Highness: which certainly ought not to be despised or neglected, but
carefully and seriously to be inquired into, and speedily to be suppressed by a
severe and exemplary Punishment of the Authors and Abettors of them.

It was very well and wisely done therefore of our present Sovereign,
(remembering his Fathers Fate and the Cause of it) to pass an Act of Parliament
presently after his coming home, whereby, the saying that the King is a Papist
or that he endeavors to introduce Popery, is made punishable in a very high
degree. And it is observable, that this Act wherein this Clause is, is in the
Title of it called An Act for the safety and preservation of the KINGS Person
and Government; thereby implying that the raising and spreading of such
Reports, must needs be very Dangerous, and consequently, those that raise or
spread them very Criminal; as being indeed the greatest Enemies both of the
King and Kingdom: which though it be most true, when such Reports reflect
immediately on the KING himself, yet is it in proportion true likewise, when
any of the Royal Family are concerned in it. So that they are the Kings and
Kingdoms Enemies, as well as Yours and your Husbands, and your Childrens, that
were the Authors, and are the Abettors of what is so generally spoken, and
seems to be so generally believed of your Royal Highness in this particular: to
the divulging and the belief whereof, I do verily think that none have been
more Active, nor so much Instrumental, as some of the Popish Party, and amongst
them especially the Popish Priests themselves, and that partly out of Vanity,
and partly out of Cunning. For, as some of our Secular Gallants do, out of
Vanity only, sometimes boast of favors, they have received from such or such
Women of known Honor and Virtue, though they never did nor ever durst speak so
much as one word to any of Them to any such purpose, so do many of the Clergy
Cavaliers of the Church of Rome, as vainly vaunt, how Many and how Great
Proselytes they have made, and of how many considerable Persons, of both Sexes,
they have gained from our Church unto theirs; which though it be too true in
too many, yet as to some whom they most boast of, and would fain have it
believed they have prevailed with, (as particularly and especially with your
Royal Highness) I am confident it is but a vain Brag; and yet I do not think
it is done out of Vanity only, but out of Artifice and Cunning also; because
they have good Reason to hope, that if they can make it to be believed that
they have gained but one such Proselyte as your Highness, it would be the most
effectual Means, they can make use of, to persuade Others; and consequently the
most compendious way they can take in Order to their main End.

In the mean time, it is another notable Effect of their Fineness and Subtilty,
that when They themselves have been the Authors and Divulgers of such a
malicious and scandalous Report, and done You all the Mischief they can by it,
than if they find Those that are most Concerned in it, to be Alarmed with it,
and to resent it with that indignation as so bold and so injurious a Practice
ought indeed to be resented withal; then, I say, the next thing they do, is by
such Instruments (as they never want about great Persons upon such Occasions)
to persuade the Parties concerned in such Reports, that all the Noise which
they hear, and which seems to disquiet them so much, is not from the howling of
those Wolves, but from the barking of their own Dogs, who being as they say
more afraid than hurt, do by giving too soon and too loud a Warning of a Danger
which they think to be greater and nearer than it is, rather increase than
lessen the Noise which was made before, and which perhaps would have ceased of
it self, if too much Notice had not been taken, as there was of it.

And such an Artifice as this it was to inform your Highness (as some body
did,) that this Clamor against your Highness from whomsoever it had its first
Rise, it had its Growth from some of our Clergy, and particularly from Me for
One; as if I had given some body or other some Cause to Believe it, and
consequently made it more to be Suspected and Spoken of by others than it was
before; which, (as I then said) I hope there is none knows me, can think Me
(though I was never so Wicked) to be so very a Fool, as to believe of me. For
what End could I have, (especially having had such, and so long a Relation to
your Highness, as I had) what End (I say) could I have in making your Highness
Believed, or Suspected to be a Papist, unless it were to make my self to be
believed to be a Papist also? and consequently to be an old arrant Hypocrite;
seeing I always did, and do, and ever shall, by the Grace of God, profess the
contrary, though I were to dye at a stake for so doing. No, no, Maddam! it was
neither I, nor, as I verily believe, any of our Priests or Bishops but as I
then said, they were some of the Priests of the Church of Rome, that in all
probability were both the Authors and Abettors of this Scandal: and that I was
told no longer ago than the night before, by a Person of Honor and Title, that
the very day before he came to me, he was told by a Romish Priest, that your
Highness was already of their Church, and would very shortly declare your self
to be so: Whereunto my Reply was, that although I did believe his Lordship, yet
I did not, and hoped he would not believe the Priest that told him so; because
your Highness had been pleased, (as I told his Lordship) not long before, to
give me all the Assurance I could desire to the contrary; with which Answer I
sent him away very well satisfied; for he came to Chelsey on purpose to enquire
of me, whether what the Priest had newly and confidently told him were true or
no. And so did many other of Quality, both Men and Women, to whom I gave the
same Answer, and (as I believe) with the same Success. And this is All that
either before or since I have done, to Increase or Countenance that Report.

But (as I presently after informed your Highness your self) it was not, nor
ever would be in my power, nor in the power of any, or of all His or Your
Highnesses Friends or Servants, to silence this Report, or to hinder the People
from giving credit to it; unless You your self would appear in it, and would
openly upon all occasions declare your Detestation of it, as of a most false
and a most malicious Slander, devised and designed by your Enemies to do you
all the Mischief they could, without any ground or color of ground for it; and
that you would not nor could not take them for your Friends, that either did
believe it Themselves, or that did not do what they could, that it might not be
believed by Others. For without some such Protestation as this (as I then told
your Highness) seriously and seasonably Made, and publicly and frequently
Repeated by You to such Persons of Quality and Interest of both Sexes, as came
daily to wait upon you, I did then, and do still think it almost, if not
altogether Impossible to undeceive the People, or to make them think otherwise
than your Enemies by their malicious Reports have made them to think and to
speak of You: though nothing but your own Declaration of your self to be as
they report you (which I hope I shall never live to see or hear of) shall ever
make me believe, that you are not still in point of Religion the same that you
were when I had the Honor to wait upon you, and as I am sure You was, when I
left you.

And this I am the rather obliged to believe, because the last time I had any
discourse with your Highness of things of this nature, you did seriously affirm
to me, that never any Priest of the Church of Rome had ever been so bold as to
enter into any discourse of Religion with you. Whereupon when I humbly besought
your Highness, that if any of them should be so bold at any time afterward,
and you should think fit to hear what they could say either for their own
Church, or against ours; your Highness would be pleased to command them to give
it you in Writing, and that you would be pleased to show me, or my Lord of
Oxford, any such Papers or Paper, they should give you to consider of, and to
reply to: the which because You were pleased to promise me you would do and
have never as yet done, (not to Me I am sure, nor to Him neither, for ought I
know) I cannot believe that any thing of that Kind has been as yet said to
you, at least not so, as to make any Impression in you; and much less to gain
an absolute Belief from you, that there is no Salvation to be had but in the
Church of Rome only; and consequently, that if ever you mean to be saved, you
must of necessity quit our Communion, and embrace theirs. I cannot believe (I
say) that any such Discourse has as yet been made to You, because whatsoever
is talked of by Others, you have said nothing Your self to me of it, which
certainly you would have done, (if there had been any such thing) having
obliged your self by promise to do so, and having had several opportunities of
so doing; especially, when you were pleased to honor my House at Farnham with
your Presence for so many days together, where and when I did indeed expect You
would have said something to me (according to your promise, if there had been
cause for it) which because You did not I concluded there had been no such
Attempt made; and consequently, that there was no need of my saying any thing
to You of it, as if I had doubted whether you had or would keep your Word with
me or no.

And truly, Madam, though you had made no such Promise; I cannot but believe
that if there had any such Scruple been suggested to you from within, or
offered to you from without, you would have acquainted Me or the Bishop of
Oxford, or some other of our Order or Profession with it; especially if the
Doubts or Scruples had been such as you your self could not answer. For though
God has given you an extraordinary good Understanding, yet I am sure, you have
not so high an Opinion of it, as to conclude, that what You cannot answer, is
therefore Unanswerable in it self; or that it cannot be answered by Others; and
particularly by some of Those, whose Profession and Office it is to defend the
truth of our Church, and the truth of the Doctrine that is professed in it, and
taught by it, against all Objections that either by Schismatics or Heretics
are or can be made against it; so that whatsoever they may whisper in Corners
to the contrary, neither the One, nor the Other shall ever be able to prove
either that there is any thing necessary to be Believed or Practiced for the
saving of Souls which we do not teach, or that we do teach any thing that is
destructive of Salvation, or which is inconsistent with the Rule of Faith, or
Holiness of life, which was at first delivered by Christ and his Apostles, and
which was afterward held by the Primitive Fathers, in the most ancient and
purest Ages of the Church; and consequently whatsoever may be pretended, it
never was nor ever can be proved, but that those that live and die in the
Profession and Practice of what they are taught to believe and to do by the
Doctrine of our Church, must needs be in the right way, which will undoubtedly
bring them into Heaven, if they continue in it. Whereas if they depart from it,
they will be in a worse, and in a much more dangerous condition than if they
had never known it.

For although we have so much Charity for some that live and die in the Belief
and Practice of some erroneous Doctrines, and of some superstitious Usances of
the Church of Rome; supposing they do both the one and the other out of
invincible Ignorance, and supposing too, that they would have continued in
neither, if they had known or suspected them to be either erroneous or
superstitious, and consequently, that they had a preparation of mind to
believe, and practice the contrary Truths, if they had been made known unto
them, or rather, if they had not by their false Teachers been concealed from
them: and lastly supposing likewise that as they do actually and particularly
repent of all their known sins, so they do habitually, or in the general, truly
and heartily repent before they die of all their unknown sins also; or of all
such sins of theirs which God knows to be sins, though they do not; and
consequently of all such Errors and Superstitions as they have ignorantly, and
unwittingly, and unwillingly lived in. Although (I say) we have so much Charity
for some that have been born, and lived, and died in the Communion of the
Church of Rome as not to deny upon the aforesaid Suppositions they may be
Saved, not Because but Notwithstanding they lived and died in that Church,
which is no more than the Charity which upon the same supposition they have for
us, or for those that live and die in our Church: yet we have not, nor cannot
have the same Hope for Those that having been born and bred in our Church, and
sufficiently instructed in the Doctrine of it, do afterward become Apostates
from it, and Proselytes to the Church of Rome, by renouncing those Truths they
were taught in the one, and professing those Falsities they are made to believe
in the other: for whom (as I said) we have no such hope, nor indeed any hope at
all, unless they do actually and particularly repent of this, as well as of all
other their known sins, and withal do testify the truth of that Repentance,
by returning again unto Us, and by asking God and the Church forgiveness for
the Sin against the one, and for their Scandal against the other, by their
going away from us, if at least they have time and opportunity to do it.

Now this (according to our Opinion) being the difference betwixt those that
after the Knowledge and Profession of the Truth, go out from us, and those that
would (if they had known the Truth) have come over to us, it is manifest, that
the Charity we have for the One, though they live and die in the Church of
Rome, can be no Motive or Encouragement for those of the Other sort to go and
live and die there, no more than it can be any Warrant for a Sound man to go
out of an healthy Air and to put himself in a Pesthouse, because there is a
possibility that some one or a few may not die of the Plague there. And this I
do the rather Observe, because, from this Charitable opinion of ours toward
some that live and die in their Communion, they usually infer (as a Preface to
their making of Proselytes) that it must needs be much better and safer to be
of Their Religion than of Ours, because we confess that some may be saved among
Then, but they do all deny there is any Salvation to be had amongst Us. Which
if it were true (as indeed it is not) they might from thence infer as well that
it was better and safer to be of the Donatists Religion, who were condemned
Heretics, than of St. Austins; because that St. Austin did not deny that some
among the Donatists could be saved, but all the Donatists did affirm that none
that were not, or would not be Donatists could be saved. Which is the very same
which the Papists affirm now, and for which they may as well now, as the
Donatists were then, be called Heretics; for excluding as the Donatists did
all Christians but themselves, from a capacity or possibility of Salvation. And
why so? because (forsooth say they) there is no Salvation to be had but in the
Catholic Church, and no man is of the Catholic Church, that is not of their
Church, because the Catholic Church is their Church, and their Church is the
Catholic Church; and consequently he that is not of the one, cannot be of the
other. And did not the Donatists say so too? and was it not for their so saying
that they were pronounced Heretics? And the Papists may as well and truly say,
that because a man is not in Rome, therefore he is not in Italy, or because he
is not in London, therefore he is not in England; or because this Part is not a
part of that part, therefore it is not a part of the whole, which they must
prove before they can make any reasonable man to believe that we cannot be
Catholics, unless we will be Papists, or which is all one that we cannot be
Catholics at all, unless we be Roman Catholics. Whereas we may be Catholics,
by submitting to the Laws of Christ contained in the Gospel: but we cannot be
Roman Catholics, but by submitting to the dictates of the Pope, and Popish
Councils, particularly to that of Trent and the Canons thereof, which are many
of them nothing akin to the Canon of the Scriptures. For drink ye all of this,
says the Canon of Scripture, but you shall not drink all of this, says the
Pope and the Canons of his Councils; and many other the like Instances might be
given in other particulars.

But I forget what I was a doing, which was not to dispute with Them, 'till
they have been so bold as to dispute with You; which I do all this while
suppose they have not done yet, because you have not yet given me any
Intimation of it, as I am confident you would have done, not only because you
promised you would do so, but because without any such Promise, I presume you
would have thought your self concerned in point of Prudence and Equity, and of
Conscience too, having heard what could be said by any of them to draw you from
us, to hear likewise what could be said by some of Us to keep you with us. For
to conclude in favor of one side without hearing of the other, is that which
cannot be done either in Equity or Conscience, though you your self were to
gain never so much by it; whereas in this Case if you should be surprised and
prevailed with for want of Advice or Counsel to assist you, you might have lost
Your self and your soul by it, which is too precious a Gage, and cost too dear
to be hazarded upon Confidence of Ones strength against such subtle Gamesters
as they are. For what would this have been, but to do as Eve did? who entering
alone into the Lists with the Serpent (though she had much more wit than any of
her Sex had since) she was easily foiled by him, as perhaps she would not have
been, if it had not been in the absence of her Husband; or if after she had
heard what the Tempter could say, she had afterward suspended, at least her
Consent to the Temptation until she had acquainted the Man with it, and heard
what he was able to reply to it; which because (relying too much upon her own
Judgment) she neglected to do, we see she did as much as in her lay to undo,
and undo for ever, Herself and her Husband, and all their Posterity by the loss
of all their Enjoyments for the present, and of all their Hopes for the future
also. so rash and so dangerous a thing it is for any (though of never so great
a Sufficiency) to rely too much upon Themselves, when all their Concerns, both
here and hereafter, are at stake.

And therefore, Madam! being so prudent a Person as you are, and knowing so
well as you do, how great a Hazard you may run of losing all that is or ought
to be Dear to you, I am confident, you will not suffer your self to be disputed
out of your Religion for want of Seconds to assist you; which seeing you have
not hitherto called for, or made use of, I do and must concluded, that hitherto
the Adversaries of our Church have either made no Attempt upon you, or have
been rejected with Indignation by you. And in this Belief I am more and more
confirmed, because you still join with us in the Prayers of the Church, as
having them daily by your own Appointment read in your Hearing; which though
Some perhaps of those that are departed from Us with their hearts, may be
content to do, in Compliance with some present worldly Interest; yet I am sure
you cannot dispense with Your self, nor suffer Your self to be dispensed with,
in any thing of that nature; because You your self have told me more than once
(even since this false Report has been raised of you) that you would not do
any thing, whereby you might seem to be of a Church, or of a Religion which you
are not of indeed; no, not for any worldly Consideration whatsoever. Which is
indeed such an Ingenuity as well becomes a Christian, especially of your
Quality, and such as gives me an Assurance, that You are still ours; and that
you will continue to be so, until You your self by your Words or Actions shall
declare the contrary, which I hope you never will, and I am sure you never can
with a good Conscience, until you have heard and considered all that can be
said on both sides. For if your should do otherwise, it will never be believed
that your leaving of Our Church, wherein you were born and bred, to go to
Theirs, is only out of love to the Truth; or because They, and not We, are in
the right way to Heaven; (of which without hearing what we can say for our way,
and against theirs, it is Impossible for you to judge) but from some Byas or
by-end from without; which because I know it is that which you abhor should be
thought or suspected of you, therefore (as I have said often already) I will
not, I cannot believe that you have or ever will make any such Change without
hearing what we have to say against it; because that will be not only an
Argument, but almost an Evidence that it is from some other Motive, rather than
Conscience, because you did not all you might and ought in Conscience to have
done, to warrant such a Change before you made it; nay, it will be thought, and
said, You were afraid to hear what could be said against it, lest thereby you
might be diverted from it.

Which Consideration I beseech you to remember, whenever there shall be,
(though I hope there never will be) an Occasion to make use of it; yet, in the
mean time, there being no such Change made yet, I humbly conceive your Highness
is obliged in Conscience as well as in Prudence to make some such Declaration
(as I before spoke of) namely, that the Report of your being changed in your
Religion, or that you intend any such Change, or are at all inclined to it, is
false and scandalous, devised and published by the Malice of your Enemies to
make you lose the Affections of your Friends, and to alienate the hearts of the
People from You and from your Children: and that You never did nor ever will
give any just Cause for the Belief of it.

Some such Declaration I say (as I humbly conceive) your Highness is bound in
conscience, as well as in prudence to make, to prevent such Mischiefs as the
Continuance and Increase and Belief of this odious Report may bring upon You,
and upon all your Relations. For although that be true which you are wont to
say, that no worldly, either Advantage or Prejudice, is to be considered, when
the gaining of the One, or the avoiding of the Other comes into Competition
with the hazarding or securing of our spiritual and everlasting Interest, of
our Souls; and consequently, that if you were Convinced there were no Salvation
to be had but in the Church of Rome, no Consideration either of Loss or of
Danger here in this World you might incur by it, should keep you from it: yet
when you are not so persuaded, (as I do all this while suppose You are not)
then I hope you may and ought to do what you can, that you may not be believed
or suspected to be so; especially if it being but suspected to be so, will in
all probability do You and all that relate to you every whit as much Mischief
in the opinion of the People, as if really and indeed you were so; wherewithal
I will conclude. Humbly begging your Highnesses pardon, for having given you so
great a Trouble, the rather because considering my great Age, and consequently
my near approaching End, it may be (besides my Prayers) the last Service that
may or can be done by

Your Highnesses most humble and faithful Servant, GEOR. WINTON.
Jan. 24. 1670.
FINIS.

