AN EXPLANATION OF The grand Mystery OF GODLINESS; OR, A True and Faithful
Representation OF THE EVERLASTING GOSPEL Of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST,
the Only Begotten Son of GOD and Sovereign over Men and Angels. By H. More, D.
D.

1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy great is the Mystery of godliness: God
was manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.

Acts 1.10, 11. And while they looked steadfastly toward Heaven, as he went up,
behold, two when stood by them in white apparel;

Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? this
same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner
as ye have seen him go into Heaven.

Gal. 1.8. Though an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel then this, let
him be accursed.

LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher, for W. Morden Bookseller in Cambridge, 1660.

To the READER.
READER,
1. IF thine own Curiosity has given thee the trouble of perusing what I have
wrote hitherto, The Authors natural averseness from writing of Books.
that thou may not suspect thy task will prove endless, give me leave to
inform thee that there is no small hopes that this Discourse may prove the
last from my hand that shall exercise thy patience. In which if thou will not
believe me on my bare word, the better to ease thee of thy fears I shall back
it with some reason.

I must indeed confess, That free Speculation and that easy springing up of
coherent Thoughts and Conceptions within is a Pleasure to me far above any
thing I ever received from external Sense; and that lazy activity of Mind in
compounding and dissevering of Notions and Ideas in the silent observation of
their natural connexions and disagreements, as a Holy Day and Sabbath of rest
to the Soul. But the labor of deriving of these senses of the Mind with their
due advantages and circumstances to the Understanding of another, and to find
out Words which will prove f^^thful witnesses of the peculiarities of my
Thoughts; this verily is to me a toil and a burden unsupportable: besides the
very writing of them a trouble so tedious, that if any one knew with what
impatience and vexatiousness I pen down my Conceptions, they might be very well
assured that I am not only free from, but incapable of the common disease of
this Scripturient Age.

2. No small Engines therefore could ever move so heavy and sluggish a Soul as
mine to so ungrateful a piece of drudgery; That there was a kind of necessity
urged him to write what he has wrote hitherto.
as thou thy self may collect from my very Writings themselves, the subjects
of them being matters of the highest consequence that the Mind of man can
entertain her self withal. The writing whereof was in a manner a necessary
result of my natural Constitution, which freeing me from all the servitude of
those petty designs of Ambition, Covetousness, and the pleasing entanglements
of the Body, I might either lie fixed for ever in an unactive idleness, or else
be moved by none but very great Objects. Amongst which the least was the
Contemplation of this Outward world, whose several powers and properties
touching variously upon my tender senses, made to me such enravishing music,
and snatched away my Soul into so great admiration, love, and desire of a nearer
acquaintance with that Principle from which all these things did flow; that the
pleasure and joy that frequently accrued to me from hence is plainly
unutterable, though I have attempted to leave some marks and traces thereof in
my Philosophical Poems.

3. But being well advised both by the Dictates of my own Conscience, The
occasion of writing his Psychozoia.
and clear information of those Holy Oracles which we all deservedly reverence,
That God reserves his choicest secrets for the purest minds, and that it is
uncleanness of Spirit, not distance of place, that dissevers us from the Deity;
I was fully convinced that true Holiness was the only safe Entrance into
Divine knowledge: and having an unshaken belief of the Existence of God and of
his Will, that we should be holy, even as he is holy, there was nothing that is
truly sinful that could appear to me, assisted by such a power, to be
unconquerable. Which therefore urged me seriously to set my self to the task.
Of the Experiences and Events of which Enterprise my Second and Third Canto of
the Life of the Soul is a real and faithful Record.

As also of his Poem Of the Immortality of the Soul.
4. My enjoyments then increasing with my Victories, and Innocence and
Simplicity filling my mind with ineffable delight in God and his Creation, I
found my self as loath to die, that is, to think my Soul mortal, as I was when
I was a child to be called in to go to bed in Summer evenings, there being
still light enough as I thought to enjoy my play. Which solicitude put me upon
my first search into the Nature of the Soul, which I pursued chiefly by the
guidance of the School of Plato, whose Philosophy to this very day I look upon
to be more then Humane in the chief strokes thereof. But launching out so very
early into so deep a Theory, I think it not amiss to advertise the Reader that
he would do well, where he finds a difference in my discoveries, to interpret,
and also rectify if need be, my First thoughts by my Second, my Philosophic
Poems and whatever is writ in that Volume, by my later and better concocted
Prose.

These were the first Essaies of my Youth; and how great and serious the
Objects of my Mind were therein thou can easily judge.

His Satirical Essays against Enthusiastic Philosophy.
5. And after this, where I seem most light and trivial and play the sportful
Satyrist against Enthusiastic Philosophy, my design even then was as
seasonable, serious and of as grand importance as I could possibly undertake;
which I have more then sufficiently demonstrated in those Writings themselves.
And though some over-subject to the Fanatic disease have looked upon that
unexpected sally of mine as a very extravagant exploit; yet I did easily bear
with their ignorance, deeming it in my silent thoughts in some sort parallel to
that of the peevish Hebrew who reproached Moses for slaying of the Egyptian,
not knowing that it was a preludious act to his delivering of his whole nation
from the bondage of Egypt.

The great usefulness of his Enthusiasmus Triumphatus and of this present
Treatise for suppressing Enthusiasme.
6. And I hope I may speak it without vanity, that what is discovered
concerning Enthusiasme in my Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, together with that which
is comprehended in this present Volume, will contribute no small share to a
rightful and justifiable subduing of so dangerous a distemper, and to the
slaying or at least fettering that wild Beast that the Devil himself rides
upon, when he wars against the Lamb, whose Throne I have seen shaken with the
pushings of this monsters horns for these many years together, though never
clearer then now of late. And I dare pronounce with a loud voice aforehand,
That if ever Christianity be exterminated, it will be by Enthusiasme. Of so
great consequence is it rightly to oppose so deadly an evil.

Which cannot better be done then by showing the Reasonableness and important
Usefulness of Christian Religion in the Historical sense thereof, and in
reference to the very Person of Christ our Savior; which I have, I hope,
abundantly performed in this present Treatise: and by discovering the Natural
Causes and imposturous Consequences of Enthusiasme, which I had done before in
Enthusiasmus Triumphatus. Which two Treatises I hope will prove two invincible
Fortresses against all the force and fury of the Fanatical spirit.

7. After this the bold impiety of this present Age engaged my Thoughts in a
Subject of no less moment then the former: The occasion and preparations to his
writing his Antidore against Atheism and his Threefold Cabbala.
For I saw that other abhorred monster, Atheism, proudly strutting with a
lofty gate and impudent forehead, boasting himself the only genuine offspring
of true Wisdom and Philosophy, namely of that which makes Matter alone the
Substance of all things in the world. This misshapen Creature was first
nourished up in the stie of Epicurus, and fancied it self afterward grown more
tall and stout by further strength it seemed to have received from some new
Principles of the French Philosophy misinterpreted and perverted by certain
impure and unskilful pens.

Which unexpected confidence of those blind boasters made me with all anxiety
and care imaginable search into the power of Matter and mere Mechanical motion,
and consider how far they might go of themselves in the production of the
Phenomenon of the World. But as for the Philosophy of Epicurus, it seemed to me
at the very first sight such a foolery, that I was much amazed that a person of
so commendable parts as P. Gassendus could ever have the patience to rake out
such old course rags out of that rotten dunghill to stuff his large Volumes
withal. But I must confess I did as much admire Descartes Philosophy as I did
despise the Epicurean, who has carried on the power of Matter for the
production of the Phenomenon of Nature with that neatness and coherence, that
if he had been as ignorant in other things as skilful in Mechanics, he could
not but have fancied himself to have wone that crown that many wits have
striven for, that is, the honor of being accounted the most subtle and able
Atheist of both the present and past Ages.

This made me peruse his Writings with still more and more diligence: and the
more I read, the more I admired his Wit; but at last grew the more confirmed
That it was utterly impossible that Matter should be the only essential
Principle of things, as I have in several places of my Writings demonstrated.
And therefore having clearly vanquished this difficulty, I betook my self with
greater alacrity to the writing of my Antidote against Atheism. To which
presently after I added my Threefold Cabbala as an Appendix to the same design,
being well advised what a homely conceit our high Wits have of the Three first
Chapters of Genesis, though they do betray their own ignorance by their mean
opinion of them.

8. And possibly then I had left off, The urgent occasion of writing this
present Treatise, as also of his Discourse Of the immortality of the Soul.
had not a dangerous Sickness, that made me suspect that the time did near
approach of quitting this my earthly Tabernacle, urged me more carefully to
bethink my self what reception I might have in the other world. And, praised be
God, such was the condition of my Soul, though then much overrun with
Melancholy, that my presages concerning my future state were very favorable
and comfortable, and my desire was to be gathered to that body of which Jesus
Christ is Head, even he who was crucified at Jerusalem, and felt the pangs of
death for a Propitiation of the sins of the world, who was then represented to
me as visible a Prince and as distinct a person and head Politic as any King
or Potentate upon earth. And therefore being thus fully convinced with my self
that He whose Life was ever to me the most sweet and lovely of any thing I
could see or taste, was indeed even in his Humane nature made a King and Priest
for ever, and constituted Sovereign over men and Angels, my Heart was full of
Joy; but withal accompanied with a just measure of shame, that I had spoken
hitherto so sparingly of his Royal Office and of the homage due to so Divine a
Potentate, whose Subject to my great satisfaction I found my self to be, and
whose presence I did not at all despair of approaching in due time to my
eternal comfort and honor. Which sense of things made me conceive a solemn Vow
with my self, if God gave me life, to write this present Treatise. Which
occasion I thought fit not to conceal, though I be much averse from speaking
any thing over-particularly of my self, that the high-flown Fanatics of this
Age may consider more carefully what I have writ, and take heed how they either
slight or revolt from their Celestial Sovereign.

But I thought it very convenient before I put in execution this great design,
to take again into consideration that other weighty Subject, The Immortality of
the Soul, being better appointed and provided for the clearing of that Truth
then I was when I first adventured upon the Theory. And thus having fully
convinced my self (and I hope as many else as are capable of judging of the
more choice and subtle Conclusions of Reason and Philosophy) That there is a
God, and That the Soul of man is immortal, which are the two main pillars upon
which all Religion stands; I advanced forward with courage, having left no
Enemy behind, and betook my self with great confidence to the finishing and
publishing of this present Treatise Of the Mystery of Christianity. Which I
look upon as the most precious and the most concerning piece of Wisdom that is
communicable to the Soul of Man, the very chief and top* bough of that Tree of
Knowledge whose fruit has neither poison nor bitterness. And therefore being
come to my journeys end, I will here sit down with thanks, and enjoy my self
under this comfortable shade, and do assure thee, Reader, that I am not likely
to weary thy eyes with the descriptions of any further discoveries by my pen.

His account of the Inscription of this present Treatise.
9. Only that thou may view this with the better ease and satisfaction, I
shall, according to my usual manner, endeavor to remove all rubs of offense
out of thy way, by giving thee an account aforehand of whatever may seem to
thee a considerable either Superfluity, Defect, or Aberration in my
Performance, not omitting to impart to thee the right and proper meaning of the
very Title of my Discourse.

Thou must therefore expect from my terming of it, An Explanation of the
Mystery of Godliness, not a mere verbal Exposition or Declaration what is
signified therein, but such an orderly Exhibition of the Truths thereof, that
the Scope of the Whole being understood, the Reasonableness of the Particulars
thereunto tending may clearly appear. And the End to which all Parts of the
Christian Mystery point at is the Advancement and Triumph of the Divine Life.
In the exaltation whereof God is the most highly and most truly magnified and
glorified, and not in the dark and unintelligible exercise of an irresistible
Power. By which no other acts of Devotion can be stirred up in us then Fear and
Stupour, such as seizes upon poor astonished cattle in storms and lightnings,
or mighty landflouds, that carry them they know not whether.

I have styled it also A true and faithful Representation of the Everlasting
Gospel, etc. True, as intermingling no humane inventions no^ deductions
therewith, but contenting my self with what is expressly declared in the
Scripture. The Truth of which things I think I have demonstrated beyond all
exception in the Third part of my Discourse. I add also, Faithful, I having
wrote impartially, setting down nothing out of any Passion, Interest or
Side-taking, nor out of the spirit of opposition or vainglory, but speaking
the Truth freely without any respect to persons or factions; not minding either
to sooth the one or displease the other, but delivering my message so as one
that is sensible he must give account thereof within a small space of time
before them in the other World. And as I profess my self that I have done all
things herein with a faithful heart, so I doubt not but the Effect will witness
for me, that what I profess is true.

For whereas some in an Hypocritical flattery of the External Person of Christ
shuffle out all obligation to the Divine Life, that Mystical Christ within us,
and pervert the grace of God in the Gospel to looseness and Libertinisme; and
others on the contrary (whether out of the power of Melancholy that calls the
thoughts inward, or the scandal they take from abuse of the personal Offices of
our Blessed Savior, (they seeing the generality of Christians make the
external frame of Religion but a palliation for sin) or whether from the
obscurity of some Articles of the Christian Faith) have become plainly Infidels
and misbelievers of the whole History of Christ, and will have nothing to do
with his Person, but look upon the Mystery of Christianity as a thing wholly
within us, and that has no other object then what is either acting or acted in
our selves: I have with all earnestness of endeavor and with undeniable
clearness of Testimony from Reason and Scripture demonstrated the Truth and
Necessity of both Christ within and Christ without, and have plainly set out
the wonderful Wisdom and Goodness of God in contriving so powerful a means as
the very exterior Economy of Christianity is for the renewing of our natures
into the glorious image of his Son, who is the Life of God and the Soul's sure
pledge of an happy Immortality. Besides that there is no Article of the
Christian Faith, nor any particular Miracle happening to or done by our Savior
or to be done by him, mentioned in the Gospels or any where else in the New
Testament, but I have given so solid and rational an account thereof, that I am
confident that no man that has the use of his Understanding shall be able ever
to pretend any Reason against Christian Religion, such as it is exhibited in
the Holy Writings themselves. And what is, if this be not, to set out a
Faithful Representation of the Gospel?

Which I have not rashly termed The Everlasting Gospel of our Lord and Savior,
etc. being warranted thereto by that of Daniel, who styles Christian Religion
(...) The Everlasting Righteousness, or The Everlasting Religion, as Grotius
has well interpreted it. Which Religion is denoted by the suffering of the
Messiah, and began from thence, and is to remain till he return again visibly
in the Clouds of Heaven and put a period to this Stage of things. I was also
thereunto provoked in way of express opposition to that bold Enthusiast of whom
I have spoken so much in the ensuing Treatise, who seems to endeavor to
superannuate Christianity as it is founded upon the Person of our ever-Blessed
Savior the crucified Jesus, and to introduce another Evangelie, as he calls
it, which he pretends to be the Everlasting Gospel, Revelat. 14.
and fancies himself that flying Angel in the midst of heaven that is the
preacher of it to every nation and kindred and tongue and people.

His Apology for his so copiously describing the Animal Life.
10. As for my Discourse it self, I having adventured there to determine none
of the more nice and intricate Opinions of Theology, but kept my self within
the bounds of the confessed Truth of our Religion, I hope very few things will
occur that shall not be found inoffensive and perspicuously consonant to
Scripture. That which I imagine most liable to censure is, that in some matters
I may seem over-copious, in others too scant. As for example, my Description of
the Animal Life, my Display of Paganism, and my Parallelisme betwixt our
Savior and Apollonius, may happily seem to some set down over-largely and
luxuriantly. But truly I thought I could not be too punctual in describing the
Animal life, it being so serviceable for our better understanding the Divine,
whose nature and properties by how much more clearly and distinctly any one
conceives, and withal has a savoury and experimental relish thereof, with the
greater satisfaction shall he peruse what I have writ, and understand the
Reasonableness, and be assured of the Truth and Solidity of the Christian
Religion. For the Divine Life is in a manner the deepest bottom of this whole
Mystery of Godliness we treat of.

Moreover, The more perfect understanding of the nature of the Animal life
makes us the abler to judge of the sundry Superstitions of Paganism, wherein
though by their subtle Apologies they could clear themselves from Atheism and
the worser sort of Idolatry, and could make it good that it was One Eternal
Deity, be he never so Philosophically defined, that was the Chief and Ultimate
Object of their Worship; yet it is hereby apparent that the best of them
exceeds not the Animal bounds, forasmuch as they worshipped God in these rude
Religions only out of the sense of the gratifications of the Animal life: And
if I have more copiously set down how foully and sordidly they have done it, my
pains therein I hope may be interpreted to very good purpose, it being manifest
thereby how just a victory Christianity had over Paganism.

And for his large Parallel betwixt Christ and Apollonius.
11. And for that continued Parallel I have made betwixt the Life of Christ and
Apollonius, besides the pleasure the Peruser may take, in receiving an account
of the character and actions of so noble a person as that Pagan was, (whom his
fellow-Heathens did either equalize to or else prefer before our ever-Blessed
Savior, and who was not a mere Enthusiastic whifler with a raised style and a
canting eloquence, but was exemplarily just, chaste and generous, and did such
Miracles as nothing but Magic and the assistance of some of the invisible
Powers he was in league with could bring to pass) I say, beside the pleasure,
there will accrue to him also the advantage of a more clear and distinct
knowledge of the right Idea of a person truly Divine, by discovering of a
counterfeit that in outward appearance came so nigh the true. For those things
though they dazzled the eyes of the better sort of the Heathen, as Hierocles and
others, in such sort that they took him to be at least as sacred a person as
our Savior himself; yet I doubt not but that by this Parallelisme of mine I
have proved the Comparison to be very vain and presumptuous, and have made it
appear to as many as are competent judges of what is truly divine, that our
Savior Christ does exceed the character of Apollonius (though it is very
probable Philostratus has taken the liberty to add more Miracles and
Perfections then he ever was guilty of) as far as Apollonius did the brute
beasts. And therefore I hold the making of this Parallelisme of very great use
and consequence for the enabling us to distinguish the Divine life from the
Animal even then when it is dressed up in its most commendable ornaments. Of
which this in Apollonius is a very illustrious Example.

12. And though there be no great exercise intended of curiosity of judgment
in my bringing up Mahomet and that grand Enthusiast of Amsterdam upon the stage
as being bold Corrivals with Christ himself; The reason of his bringing also
Mah^^et upon the Stage and H. N. and of his so large ^xcursions and frequent
Expostulations with the Q^akers and Familists.
yet it is no supervacaneous action to draw them into sight, though it be but
that their own looks might condemn them. For that also tends to the
confirmation of our Religion, that she has no actual competitors but such as
bear upon them their self-condemnation at the very first view. Which is
easilier obtained of Mahometisme, their success and victories having made them
bold and careless to lay out themselves to the World. But Familisme is a more
various, a more obscure and sculking monster, though she mutter in her dark
hole that she has right to the dominion of the whole Earth, and that
Christianity and Mahometisme are to give place to her. And therefore truly it
might have been judged a defect, if I had not thus haled her out of her den
into open day, that the world once having seen her may say they have enough of
her, unless God out of his wrath has given them up to a reprobate sense, for
their abuse of the solid Truth of the Gospel.

I confess my so large Excursions and frequent Expostulations with the
Familists and Quakers are not very ornamental to my Discourse, and may go off
but heavily with such persons as peruse men's Writings more for pleasure then
service, and rather for private satisfaction then for public usefulness, which
they neither intend themselves, nor do easily spy out or relish in the
intentions of others. But the public interest of the Church of Christ being
the scope and measure of my writing this Treatise, it was sufficient that I
kept faithful to my own design, not heeding the gratification of more trim and
elegant fancies, who are so nice and finical that they would not come near a
sore, though they could heal it by touching it, nor approach a sick person,
though the cast of their shadow were a cure.

Wherefore to give an account of my so sedulous and copious Reprehensions and
Convictions of these two Sects, who have an over-near affinity one with
another, and were growing apace into one Body of Familisme, (which made me
represent that Sect so formidable as I have) The first reason of my so
industriously accosting them is the either certain knowledge or strong
presumption I have that there may very well be extraordinarily sincere and
wel-meaning men adhering to their way. For though the depth of the Mystery of
Familisme, and I doubt of Quakerisme too, be that which every good Christian
ought from his very heart to detest and abhor, namely The slighting, nay, I
may say, the utter rejecting of the Person of Christ as to his Humane nature,
with all his Offices assigned to him by his Father; yet this is an Arcanum that
is kept hid from their Novices, (and if a man continue conscienciously good, he
may be a Novice with them as long as he lives) to whom they propound nothing
but the most weighty Precepts of the Gospel, and charm their attention with
finely-contrived Allegories of the History of Christ, interpreting all to a
spiritual or mystical sense of things to be done in us: With which these
yonglings are not a little tickled, as thinking themselves adorned with a
special piece of divine knowledge; and then they being marvellously sincere,
and having from an Enthusiastic complexion or some better principle a very
eager thirst after real goodness and righteousness, the relish of these
Moral allusions must needs become still the more savoury to them. Whence it
does appear that the best and most serious tempered men may be the easiliest
drawn to the liking and adhering to so fair and cunning a Faction, and that
consequently a man cannot be over-careful and solicitous in trying all means
possible to undeceive them and set them in the right way.

But then again further, Our design was not only in the behalf of these who
really deserve to be pitied, but was aimed also against their obdurate
deceivers, who being deeply baptized into this accursed Apostasy from the
Person of Christ, led multitudes along with them, the Kingdom swarming with
those that for no good purpose so peremptorily distinguished themselves from
other men, by a resolved coursness and crosness of deportment. What therefore
could I do more seasonably, when not only my self but even almost all men were
afraid that this sort of people would overrun all, then to expose to the eye of
the world the Bottom of so damnable a Conspiracy, which was no less then
Rebellion against their celestial Sovereign Christ Jesus, and the undermining
or tearing in pieces of his Kingdom upon Earth under pretense of beginning the
Reign of his Saints and holy ones? This made me so careful and explicit in
discovering the whole Mystery of Familisme, and so free and vehement in my
Expostulations both with them and the Quakers in this Treatise of mine, being
very impatient whatever Variegations an ill-managed Liberty should run the
Nation into, that they should ever become Pagans.

That the wonderful hopes and expectations of the Religious of the Nation, yea
of the better-meaning Fanatics themselves, are more likely to be fulfi^led by
this happy restoring of the KING then by any other way imaginable.
13. But to the eternal laud and praise of our infinitely-merciful God, whose
eye of Providence ever watches over his Church, when things were most
desperate, he was pleased to answer the prayers and well-meant endeavors of
his faithful servants with not only hopes but enjoyments more sudden and more
ample then could then be imagined, in restoring our Gracious Sovereign CHARLES
the Second, to whom God give a long and prosperous reign, so unexpectedly to
his rightful Government, to the unexpressible joy and comfort of all his Three
Kingdoms. The excellent endowments of whose Royal person are such, that
whatever grand matters the fervid Parturiency and amuzed Expectation of the
very Fanatic part of this Nation was big withal, may come to a more safe and
mature birth by the restoring this long-afflicted Prince to his ancient Right,
then by any other way conceivable. For those words of so great sound, and of no
less import, namely the Millennium, the Reign of the Saints, the New Jerusalem,
and the like, to them that are not very wild or ignorant can signify nothing
else but the recovery of the Church to her ancient Apostolic purity, wherein
nothing shall be imperiously obtruded upon men but what is plainly discoverable
to be the Mind of Christ and his Blessed Apostles. There shall be nothing held
Essential and Fundamental but the indispensable Law of the Christian life, and
that Doctrine that depends not upon the fallible deductions of men, but is
plainly set down in the Scripture; other things being left to the free
recommendation of the Church, ensnaring no man's Conscience nor lording it over
the flock of Christ.

14. Which certainly they do that call those things Antichristian that are not,
Wherein consists the very Essence and Substance of Antichristianisme.
and thereby make more Fundamentals then Christ or his Apostles; which Error
is the very Essence and Substance of Antichristianisme, and of the grand
Apostasy of the Church. As methinks should appear plainly to any man that
considers it from the description of the New Jerusalem, whose Foundation and
whole Fabric runs so upon Twelve. For truly it seems to me very unsafe and
over-near the brinks of reproach to the Spirit of God, to conceit that Wisdom
which dictated this Prophecy so shallow and trifling, as to mean nothing by
that so industriously inculcating the number Twelve but the Churches proceeding
first from the preaching of the Apostles; a Truth that no man never so
destitute of the spirit of divination could miss of, or possibly think
otherwise. Wherefore the meaning of the Prophecy questionless is, That after
the Church has added false Fundamentals to the Christian Faith, and as bad
Superstructures, the time will come when it shall be again restored to its
former purity: and That as the root Twelve is the Emblem of the pure Church;
so there is also a root of a number that will discover that Church which is the
Mother of this great Apostasy, as really in my judgment Mr. Potter in the
number 666. has ingeniously demonstrated.

But it is manifest that all the zealous Corrivals for the Government of this
Nation, by either decrying things for Antichristian that in themselves are
innocent and of an indifferent nature, or by obtruding Opinions that are worse
then indifferent, have but showed themselves Branches of that great Stock of
Apostasy, and are too far removed from the reputed merit of either being or
beginning of a Church that is purely Apostolical.

15. This Honor therefore seems to have been reserved by Providence for the
eternizing the happy Reign of our Gracious Sovereign; That the Honor of
beginning that pure and Apostolic Church that is so much expected seems to
have been reserved by Providence for CHARLES the Second our gracious Sovereign,
with pregnant arguments of so gl^rious ^n hope.
and all the parturient Agonies and zealous presages of the people of this
Nation, as if there was an approach of some extraordinary Good to be revealed
suddenly to the World, to have been nothing else (if they knew their own
meaning) but a less explicit presensation of the return of CHARLES the Second
to the rightful Government of his Kingdoms. And truly it will be the
greatest Miracle to me in the world if he can frustrate our expectation.

For whether we consider the excellent Qualifications of our Gracious Prince,
whom Providence has so long time disciplined in the most effectual method of
Prudence and Virtue, besides the express Declaration of His own Royal
inclinations this way; or whether we look upon the Reasonableness of the thing
it self, it being not only recommended to us both by Precept and Prophecies,
but also offering so irrefragable evidence from its own nature of the
indispensableness of the duty; there being no other possible means to reduce
the World to a right Christian tenor of Spirit, and to recover it to a due
strength and soundness of complexion, but by shearing off those large
excrescencies of either useless or scandalous Ceremonies and Opinions, the
foments of strife and palliations of Hypocrisy, men seeking by these to be
excused from the most weighty Precepts of the Gospel; or lastly we take notice
of the great Interest the wise and reverend Clergy of this Nation cannot but
discover herein even in reference to themselves: it is almost impossible to
doubt of either endeavor or success in this so important affair. For certainly
nothing can so well secure their peace and make them impregnable, as the using
of their Power and exercising their Discipline in the behalf of such Truths and
Rites as are plainly and confessedly Apostolical, and the being more facil and
easy in additional circumstances, and cutting quite off all useless and
entangling Opinions. For hereby will their Opposers be manifestly found to
fight against God and his Christ, while they contest with his Ministers who
urge nothing upon the People but what was plainly taught and practiced by
himself and his Apostles, whose Ways and Doctrines are so sacred, that they
ought to be kept up with all lawful severity. Which one plain and generous Rule
of Government, if faithfully kept to, is the most effectual means imaginable of
making the world good, and for both the Unity and Enlargement of the Church,
infinitely above all those many fine artifices and small devices of the most
professed Politicians in the Church of Rome; provided we be not course and
sordid, but reverent and comely in our public Worship.

The reasons why he did not cast out of his Discourse what he had written
concerning Quakerisme and Familisme, notwithstanding the fear of these Sects
may seem well blown over through the happy settlement of things by the
seasonable return of our Gracious Sovereign to his Throne.
16. But to return. In the third and last place, Although the exigency of the
Times which then urged me to write thus carefully touching the Quakers and
Familists is now (God be thanked) changed into a more safe Scene of things, and
the resettlement of our Gracious Sovereign in his Throne does again secure the
Scepter of Christ to his Church; yet I thought it fit not to ex^unge what I had
wrote concerning these Sects. For for the present, It cannot but contribute
considerably to an unfeigned composure of their Spirits and peaceful
acquiescence in the known Christian Truth, their minds being more at leisure
now and better fitted to consider what is true then they were before, when the
heat of Enthusiastic hopes of I know not what great success inflamed them and
blew them up so high, that the voice of sober Reason could not well be heard in
that fanatic storm and Bluster, nor an Error easily let go, which seemed a
pledge of the sudden approach of so great advantages to the entertainers of it.
And then for the future, So fundamental a discovery of the unsoundness and
madness of these Sects cannot, I think, but be very effectual for the
preventing their spreading hereafter; that it will not be any longer in the
power of their false Teachers to befool well-meaning men with fine words, and
make them unawares countenance a Faction, the deepest Arcanum whereof is
absolute rebellion against the Person of Christ and an utter abrogation of
Christian Religion.

Which task though others heretofore have undertaken, and I question not but
with like faithful and zealous regard to the good of the Church; yet their
discovery could not be so perfect, they not living in an Age of such liberty,
which has tempted all sorts of men to show themselves in their own colors.
Besides that what they wrote being only concerning this Sect of Familisme in
Pamphlets apart by themselves, the matter was not of such general concernment
as to invite or engage men to read. But the Subject of this present Treatise
being of so Universal and so Weighty importance, it cannot fail to prove a more
effectual Monitour to the World of the deadly danger that lies under that fair
enticing Title of The Family of Love.

17. Nor ought my earnest diligence against Familisme embolden you to think me
partial or defectuous, The reason of his opposing the Familists and Quakers
above any other Sects.
in that you observe me so eagerly opposing no other Sect; for the design of my
Discourse leads me not to such Particularities as are controverted amongst
Christians that still hold the Fundamentals of our Religion: against whom I
profess my self eager in nothing so much as in hearty Exhortation that they
would not make their Difference of Opinion any breach of Friendship, but an
exercise of their Christian Charity and tender forbearance one of another: not
insulting over one another supposed ignorance, nor forcing one another to
external compliance and profession of what they do not believe, by harsh
Antichristian compulsions; but by calm reasoning and kind treating one another
with mutual love and patience, which is an exercise more pleasing in the sight
of God then the exactest Uniformity of Opinions and Worship that the greatest
Formalist can propound or desire. This is all that I find my self bound in
conscience to be earnest in against such like Sects as these. But Familisme is
no such Sect, nay, to speak properly, and to yield them their own boast, they
are no Sect at all, I mean of Christians, but a total Apostasy from
Christianity, as you may easily understand out of what I have writ in the
following Discourse. And therefore my present purpose being The Demonstration
of the Solidity of the Fundamentals of Christianisme as it is apparently
comprehended in the Holy Writ, it was proper and unavoidable for me to deal
with all such as did oppose or undermine those undispensable Truths of our
Religion; and therefore I had been wanting to the Cause, if I had not thus
industriously set my self against this dangerous and mischievous Mystery of
Unbelief which is ordinarily called Familisme.

And as I have not spared them, so there is no Sect that has stolen away any one
Essential of Christianity, whether appertaining to Life or Speculation, but I
have bid them battle, and I hope rescued the prey out of their hands and led
them Captive into the Truth; at least they have not escaped their share of
chastisement for their committing of so heinous a crime. And this is all that I
could in reason attempt, unless I would break all the Laws of Method, and make
useless Excursions beyond the set limits of my Discourse.

18. My forbearing therefore to squable with every petty Sect I hope will be
accounted no part of defectuousness. His excuse for being less accurate in the
computation of Daniels weeks.
But there are other Omissions I must confess that may seem more justly liable
to that imputation. As for example, in that I have not endeavored to clear the
Prophecy of Daniel's weeks to that accuracy, as to bring the Passion of our
Savior to the middle of the last week, as the Prophecy seems most naturally to
imply; but have contented my self with that Chronological account of Funccius
that suffers it to fall in the last day of the week. But as I have already
intimated in the place, there may be that latitude of the meaning of the middle
of the week, that it may signify any time of the week begun and not yet
expired. In which sense Funccius his account is within a year or thereabout of
the exact completion of the Prophecy. Which is so near the matter, that one may
easily suspect that it is some mistake in their computations that it does not
happen just according to the Prophecy, so little time being easily misreckoned
in so large an account. Besides, it was sufficient for my purpose only to take
notice and to make evident, That this Prophecy of Daniel is understood of the
Messiah, and That the weeks are long ago expired. For by this alone we may
demonstratively conclude That he is already come; which was the only thing
pertinent to my present Subject. And lastly, for thy further satisfaction, as
the task thou expectedst had been too laborious for me to perform, so thou thy
self wilt hold it needless when thou shall understand with what accuracy and
solidity it is already perfected by the learned Master of our College Dr.
Cudworth in his public Lectures in the Schools: wherein he has undeceived the
world, misled too long by the overgreat opinion they had of Joseph Scaliger,
and taking Funccius his Epoch has demonstrated the Manifestation of the
Messiah to have fallen out at the End of the sixty ninth week, and his Passion
in the midst of the last, in the most natural and proper sense thereof. Which
demonstration of his is in my apprehension of as much price and worth in
Theology, as either The Circulation of the Blood in Physic, or The Motion of
the Earth in natural Philosophy, as I have already noted in its proper place.

As also for being less copious in the proving the expected restorement of the
Church to her pristine purity; together with a Description of the condition of
those happy ages to come.
19. Again, I may happily seem unto thee defectuous in that I have so expressly
professed my hope and expectation of Better times in the Church, and yet not
gone about to produce that copiousness of Arguments that might have befitted
the management of so desirable a Truth. But I have to answer for my self, That
that subject was too big for my hands, especially being as full already as they
could grasp; and That the Theory also was not essential to the scope of my
present Discourse; and lastly, That certain friends of mine (whose more then
ordinary skill and happy relish of the best and choicest things has made them
fit undertakers of so useful a design) will, I hope, ere long gratify the
world with their excellent performances in that subject. The promotion of which
Opinion cannot but be profitable to the Church of Christ, provided the case be
rightly stated, namely, That these good Times, which we expect and hope for,
will not be the exaltation of this or that Sect. For the childish conceit of
some is, that the future prosperity of the Church will be nothing but the
setting up this Form or that Opinion, and so every Faction will be content to
be Millennists upon condition that Christ may reign after their way or mode,
that is in Calvinisme, in Arminianisme, in Papisme, in Anabaptisme, in
Quakerisme, in Presbytery, in Episcopacy, in Independency, and the like. But
the true happiness of those days is not to be measured by Formalities or
Opinions, but by a more corroborated Faith in Christ and his Promises, by
Devotion unfeigned, by Purity of Heart and Innocence of Life, by Faithfulness,
by common Charity, by comfortable provisions for the poor, by cheerful
Obedience to our Superiors, and abundance of kindness and discreet
condescensions one to another, by unspotted Righteousness and an unshaken
Peace, by the removal of every unjust yoke, by mutual forbearance, and bearing
up one another as living stones of that Temple where there is not to be heard
the noise of either axe or hammer, no squable or clamor about Forms or
Opinions, but a peaceable study and endeavor of provoking one another to love
and good works. Provided this be the Idea of those happy Ages to come, the
inculcating of this belief in my judgment cannot but be very useful, it
bearing along with it both a detection and reprehension of the degeneracy of
the present Age, and a warmth and encouragement to hasten those good times by
endeavoring to correct our lives according to this Pattern we have of them.

20. That also will be accounted a Defect by some, That this Discourse was
mainly intended for the information of a Christian in his private capacities.
that I have said no more of Public worship, and nothing at all of
Church Government. But I must again answer, That it was beside my Scope to
meddle with such things. To which I may add, That the world is full of such
Controversies, and as much said already as either Wit or Zeal can excogitate.
My design was only to represent Christianity in the Fundamentals thereof, with
that purity and clearness as might most of all conciliate belief and strengthen
our Faith in the most necessary points, such as concerned every private
Christian to believe and to live accordingly; to the end that though the
iniquity of the times should have proved such that he knew not whither to turn
him or whom to join withal in any public worship or profession, yet he might
rest satisfied in this, that he was immutably grounded in the saving Truths of
the Gospel, and was able to give an account of his Faith to himself and to as
many as were fit to receive it; and living uprightly might not be afraid to
find himself alone, knowing that every single man is a Church, if his Body once
become the Temple of the Holy Ghost. My only solicitude therefore was to
corroborate that Faith that is plainly propounded to us out of the Scripture,
which is sufficient to Salvation, and to exalt that Life that has lain dead and
buried for these many Ages under a vast heap of humane Inventions, useless and
cumbersome Ceremonies and unpeaceable Opinions: not at all doubting but that if
the Life of Christ were once awakened in the world, he that clothes the lilies
of the field and adornes the birds of the air with their several comely and
orderly-disposed colors, will not be wanting to such a Church as has the
principle of life in it self; but that it will grow up into such an external
form and comeliness in all points as most befits and are the most proper
results of those Vital operations in it. Whenas the best Externals without
these are but as the skin of an Animal stuffed with wool or straw.

21. But besides that it was beyond my scope, What points he had most probably
touched upon if his design had urged him to speak any thing of
Church Government.
it was also above my abilities to give judgment concerning the curiosities of
Church Government, it depending upon studies too tedious and voluminous for the
strength of my Body, as also very little grateful to the rellishes of my Mind,
whose Genius has irresistibly carried me captive into another country and a
quite different scene of Speculations and Objects. All therefore that I could
with confidence and safety have pronounced is, That in general
Church Government and Discipline is as assuredly jure Divino as the Civil
Magistrate; and, it may be, should have adventured to add, That in a Christian
polity the power of appointing and ordering things in the Church is lodged in
the Supremacy of every such Body Politic, and that all degrees Ecclesiastic
are but Under-ministers to this Supreme Power, who is Head of all next to
Christ.

That this Supreme Power is to regulate the affairs of the Church as near to
the Prescripts and Practices of the Apostolic times as they can guess, unless
those Practices and Prescripts may be conceived to have been founded upon such
a constitution of the Church as is not in the present affairs of this or that
part of Christendom which is concerned.

That if the External form of Church Government were of such mighty
consequence, as that this ought to be called Antichristian, that reputed jure
Divino, and that it were essential to a true Church to have such or such a kind
of Government rather then another, Christ would have left more express command
and direction concerning it; that the Church might not be liable to err in so
fundamental a matter.

That the main end of Church Government and Discipline is the countenancing and
promoting the Christian Life and an holy observation of such Precepts of Christ
as do not make men obnoxious to the secular Law by the transgressing of them,
to keep out also Idolatry and every error or superstitious practice that tends
to the supplanting or defeating the Power of the Gospel; and that therefore we
ought rather to be solicitous about managing this government to the right end,
then disturb the peace of the Church by over-scrupulous examination of the
exterior frame thereof.

That if Christ had left an exact Platform of Government, and the Church kept
to it; if the abovesaid end were not aimed at in the management thereof, but
in stead of being a countenance and encouragement to real Godliness it should
be directed to the upholding of useless or mischievous Opinions, scandalous
Ceremonies and ensnaring Inventions of men; the more exactly they kept to this
outward platform of Christ, the more plainly they would discover themselves to
be Antichristian, (that is, a pretended Christian power against the real
interest of Christ) and that conjunction of the Horns of the Lamb with the
voice of the Dragon would more evidently appear. Revelat. 13.11.


That Church Discipline and Government is as a Fort or Castle, of excellent use
if it be in the hands of the faithful soldiery of Christ, or as a safe
Vessel for precious liquour, or as restringent and corroborative Physic where
there is an unexpected evacuation of the serviceable supports of life. But if
Traitors to the Kingdom of Christ get possession of this Castle, poison be
mingled with this precious liquour, and foul and malignant humors be lodged in
the Body; it were more desirable the Castle were ruined, the Vessel broken,
the Physic cast down the sink, and the Body left free to the course of Nature,
then that things so hateful and pernicious should be continued and conserved
by them: that is to say, It were better that Christian Religion were left to
support it self by the innate evidence of its own Truth, then being
sophisticated with vain lies and wicked inventions be forcibly maintained for
other Ends then it was intended for, nay be made to serve contrary Ends, and
prove a Mystery of tyranny and ungodliness: and that therefore the first and
chief point is to make a right choice of the Object of this Church Discipline,
which is to comprehend nothing but what is sound and purely Apostolical, that
is, the indisputable Truths of our Religion, such as we are sure to be the mind
of Christ and his Apostles; namely the generally-acknowledged Articles of the
Christian Faith, and plain and indispensable Duties of Life. For these are such
as deserve to be held up with all possible care and strictness, other things so
gently recommended that no conscientious man may be pinched thereby.

That nothing can conciliate more authority to the Church nor more assured
peace and tranquillity, then to deal bona fide with the People; and not to make
them more foolish and superstitious then they would naturally be, and then to
pride and please our selves in the sweet relish of that false satisfaction we
find in feeling our power over them, and in fansying our selves such mavelous
Church-polititians, that we can by crafty delusions lead about those whom we
should make it our business to undeceive and free from all vain mistakes, and
set before them the naked Truth and pure light of the Gospel, whereby they may
become really good, and therewith bear a more unfeigned respect to the
Ministry and show more sincere obedience to the Church, then they can by being
kept to that blind way of admiring outward Formalities and useless Opinions and
Ceremonies, out of which cannot arise so natural a tie of love and honor to
the Priest as by his discovering his faithfulness to his Charge in showing them
the very truth and substance of the Religion he ministers to them, and by being
instrumental in deriving of the same Christian spirit upon them which he ought
to have in an higher measure himself.

That they may well hazard goodly Structures of Truth by building them upon
doubtful and controvertible Foundations; such is the setting such a kind of
Episcopacy or Presbytery upon the Basis of a Divine right; besides their making
themselves thereby obnoxious to the suspicion of a design of unmerciful riding
and galling the people when they have once by this device so safely locked
themselves into the saddle: As if that were not true which I noted before, That
the exactest platform of Church Government, by directing or using of it to
other Ends then it was instituted by Christ, did become thereby the more
perfectly Antichristian.

That Episcopacy simply in it self is not Antichristian, as appears even out of
that Book which Fanatic Hot-spurres so much abuse to the disturbance of the
Church, I mean the Apocalypse, compared with the acknowledged Church History
concerning this ancient Government, which was in use when the Church was most
exactly Symmetrall. And therefore if this or that Form of Government were
essential to the purity of a Church, Episcopacy would not have obtained in that
State when she was most pure, if it had been Antichristian. From whence it also
necessarily follows That Presbytery is not jure Divino.

That if any Mode or Platform of Church Government be jure Divino, I should
sooner venture upon Mr. Thorndike's way then any, which in my apprehension he
has made out with much solidity and freedom of judgment, and is not only
truly serviceable to the design of Church Government in general, but also
very accommodate to the present constitution of things, it being such a mixture
of Episcopacy and Presbytery together, as may justly, if they would be modest
and ingenuous, satisfy the expectation of both parties.

That upon an account of Reason and of the nature of the Thing it self,
Episcopacy joined with Presbytery is better then Presbytery alone; forasmuch as
it is easier to find one man fitted for so sacred an office then many. And
there is more ingenuous shame and sense of honor in a single person then in a
multitude, whose number makes them more bold and daring to pass any thing, such
as if it were in the power of one single person to stop, he could not in point
of reputation and self-security fail to use his Negative voice. But where the
power is in a Multitude without any restraint, there cannot but be the hazard
of very gross transactions, they bolstering up one another by reflection upon
their numerosity; and every man, in shuffling off the odiousness of the
miscarriage to the rest of the lump, conceits himself to bear a very
inconsiderable share of either the shame or danger of whatever is voted.
Wherefore there must be a great deal of either Ignorance or Malice to style
that Function Antichristian, that is thus recommended to us both from the
practice of the Primitive Church and the light of Reason.

A Description of such a Bishop as is impossible should be Antichristian.
22. Nor can I understand why an ample and honorable Revenue should be
accounted Antichristian; especially by those whose ordinary ambition and
endeavors are to grow rich. And for Honor it self; it seems to me a symptom
of secret Atheism and Profaneness in the minds of men, while they are so
prone to think a man less honorable by being in a more special and nearer
manner the Servant of God and of his Son Jesus Christ who is Lord over all.
Wherefore whosoever has not a very venerable esteem of these peculiar Servants
of Christ, ought to suspect himself that he is also guilty of some latitant
averseness or enmity to Religion it self; unless that he can clearly deprehend
that his disrespect or disgust arises from the overlong continued fraud and
Histrionical imposture of such Functions in the Apostatized Church; the gayest
Idol being more odious and contemptible then the rudest and most unpolished
piece of Timber that pretends to be nothing but what it is. Which yet will not
excuse him from doing his outward respect to such personages, much less
encourage him to personal revilements, a disorder that S. Paul to an high
Priest in a Religion superannuated could not allow himself in. Otherwise where
they are not Idols, but fill out their titles, I think no man, unless it be out
of envy or want of judgment, will conceive their Dignities and Revenues ill
placed. For supernatural Miracles having ceased, there is but this one moral
Miracle left that I know, to awaken the world into a serious belief of the
Truth of Christian Religion, namely a Bishop refulgent with honor and
overflowing with wealth, and yet exemplarily humble, meek and temperate, not
thinking himself overgreat for the personal discharge of his Office he is
entrusted with, nor so lulled asleep in ease and affluency as to let fall the
Scepter of Christ out of his hands to be taken up by such as cannot wield it
with that paternall affection and judgment that a true Bishop and careful
Watcher over the Souls of men would be sure to do.

Wherefore to speak out plainly and at once, if I had said any thing of
Ecclesiastic Policy, I should not have forborne to pronounce, That such a
Bishop as I have hitherto described, and that rules his own family well, not
allowing any scandalous servants to attend him, but being a pattern in himself
and in all his house of unblamable Godliness and Christianity; that makes his
Visitations in his Diocese in his own person, and vibrates that sacred thunder
and lightning, the truely-dreadfull sentence of Excommunication, by no other
arm but his own, nor to any other aim then the dissipating of Vice and
Wickedness and all Rebellion and Disobedience to the known and acknowledged
Laws of Christ; that inflicts no Mulcts but what are bestowed in relief of the
poor of the respective Parish and the needful repairs or comely adornings of
the Church; that is watchful, prudent and compassionate, and has the art and
patience of conversing with the meanest capacities, and the skill and sagacity
of finding out the reason where he finds the End of the Gospel notoriously
defeated in any place; that has counsel in readiness and fit applications
whether the Pastor or his charge be discovered to be in fault; that exhorts
every where to sobriety and brotherly-kindess, and is diligent to pluck up or
prevent the growth of such Opinions as serve the end of Sin, and encourage men
to leudness; that gravely and severely rebukes the bold offender, and
affectionately bewails the failings of the weak, and cheerfully expresses his
sincere joy wherever he finds a people live orderly and unblamably, and gives
the best countenance and encouragement he can devise for the furthering the
same; I say, I could not have forborne to pronounce, that to decry such a Bishop
as this for Antichristian, were an unpardonable piece of Antichristianisme; and
to murmr against his Visitations, to repine at the annual return of the Sun,
by whose warmth all things live and flourish. For there is not any effectualler
means imaginable to make the People believe in good earnest that Religion is
worth the looking after, then to find themselves looked after so carefully and
affectionately in reference to Religion by persons of so honorable rank and
quality.

23. Lastly, Why he omitted to treat of the Reasonableness of the Precepts of
Christ.
That will also be added to the number of Defects by some, that I have not as
well endeavored to show the Reasonableness of the Precepts of Christ as of his
Actions and Miracles. To have done this I confess had been pertinent enough,
had it been needful. For I could not imagine that the Precepts of Christ could
seem unreasonable to any that did not pervert the meaning of them. They may
seem indeed severe and difficult at first sight; but the Severity is no greater
then the cure of the Disease requires. Ut valiant homines, ferrum patiuntur and
ignes.
And to deny thy self and to mortify thy self is neither the killing nor
denying of any thing in thee but thy Vices; upon which there accrews unto thee
unspeakable joy and ease. Nor are thy Difficulties in these undergoings so
great but that thy Helps are far greater, provided thou be an unfeigned
Believer. For what Lust can thou stick to part withal for his sake who
parted with his life for thee? or what present enjoyment can not thou easily
quit, if thou believe that future Happiness that attends thee in the other
world? and how can thou fail to fly fornication, whilst thou considerest
that by practicing this unclean vice thou make a vile strampet corrivall with
the holy Ghost, whose Temple thy Body is if thou be a Christian, and whose
Temple it cannot be if thou indulge to thy self so dangerous a liberty; there
being nothing that does more extinguish the operations of the Spirit, then the
letting thy self loose to lawless lusts? But the Reasons of Christ's Precepts
are so obvious in Theory and so faithful in Experience, that I think it
needless to insist upon this Theme, assuring every one that he shall best
understand their solidity by life and practice.

That the pains he took in writing this Treatise were especially intended for
the Rational and Ingenuous.
24. But there are others whose reprehensions I shall hardly escape, for that I
have gone about to render the Reason of any thing in Christian Religion:
Religion seeming to them in the best dress when it appears most unreasonable.
Which humor is the most treacherous to true Christianity that any thing can
be, and a sure bar to her progress amongst free and ingenuous persons. But
truly whenas the Efficacy of the Gospel is not deemed hopeless, no not upon the
coursely covetous, enormously ambitious, and sottishly sensual; I could see no
cause why Freedom, Ingenuity, Reason and Philosophy should be such crimes as
to make men less capable of the benefit thereof: and therefore, I must profess
that for their sakes chiefly that are over-prone to these more noble
infirmities of the Mind, I have represented Christianity no less Reasonable
then it is; and that is, I hope, as Reasonable as any judicious spirit could
desire or expect.

His Apology for the sharpness of his style in some places.
25. And if in my Discovery of the Reasonableness of things a more then
ordinary heat has accompanied that light, and may seem to have armed my Style
in some places with overmuch sharpness and vehemence; I would desire so soft
and prudent a Soul to consider with himself whether there be not men in the
world as bad as I describe, and whether he ought in charity to conceit I mean
any other then those; and being such as they are, whether they can deserve
less; and if he be none of them himself, why he should partake of their sins
by disallowing of their deserved chastisement and rebuke. Against which there
can be no colorable reason, unless that these which deserve this punishment
may have grown past feeling. Which insensibleness is more to be deplored and
pitied then their being exposed to the search of a faithful Surgeon, the
method of whose Art forces him, if he could possibly, to lance them to the
quick. But those that have digested Wickedness into Principles, and framed
Religion it self into a compliance and furtherance to the foulest conversation;
it is no wonder, while they can upon such fantastic grounds conceit themselves
the darlings of Heaven and children of the most High, that they look for
proportionable honor and respect from men; An Objection against Mr. Mede 's
Apocalyptick Interpretations from the supposed sad condition of all Adherers to
the Apostate Church; with the Answer thereto.
and would march on, though in these ill ways, as solemnly and securely as the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, of whom it is said, that not a dog should
move his tongue against any of them.

26. Concerning that sense of the Apocalyptick Visions which Mr. Mede has hit
upon, and which for the main I have professed my self to conceive to be true,
there is nothing seems to me so harsh therein as that Objection of some, who
contend that it implies that all the Adherers to the Roman Church after this
her Apostasy will be certainly damned. The concocting or ruminating on which
sad sentence cannot but be to a benign nature like the eating of the little
book which contains the Visions of this Apostasy, bitter in the stomach, though
the first pleasures of unriddling these prophetic aenigmes may be as honey to
the mouth. And to speak freely, for a man to be easily contented that another
should be damned, is no good sign that himself is in the way of Salvation. That
was a witty decision of Solomon in defining her to be the true Mother that
could not endure that the Child should be divided and killed. And whatever
Church is cruel and remorsless in either Temporal persecution or the Eternal
damnation of such men as believe in Christ according to the plain and easy
meaning of the Scripture, and live accordingly; she may approve her self to be
an imperious Harlot, but no discerning spirit will ever take her for the true
Mother, that new Jerusalem, which is the Spouse of Christ or Wife of the Lamb.
Wherefore those are very weak Christians that are so low-belled by this terror
as to be taken up and captivated by the Church of Rome, and acknowledge her the
Mother Church by force of that Argument that demonstrates the contrary: to say
nothing of their disingenuous abuse of the Charity of the Reformed Churches.

But for my own part I confess that for sureness I had rather exercise my
Charity in wishing them Converts from Popery, then express any great confidence
of their being safe in that Religion. Not that it is possible for me (who
cannot infallibly demonstrate to my self that all that lived under Paganism
are certainly damned) to imagine that all that have gone under the name of
Papists have tumbled down into Hell. But the case is much like that in
Shipwreck on the sea, or Pestilence in a City where we will suppose not a house
free; no man can pronounce that it is impossible that such or such a person
should escape, nor that any of them are in any tolerable safety. The danger is
alike to them that adhere to the Apostate Church: for though there be a
possibility of some men's being saved by an extraordinary or miraculous
Providence, they breaking through all those impediments and snares that are
laid in their way, and attaining to a Dispensation above the Church they live
in, (as happily some under Paganism did;) yet it cannot be denied but that the
Oeconomie of that Church naturally tends to the betraying of Souls to Eternal
destruction; that falling out which our Savior said of old of the Pharisees,
They compass sea and land to make one profelyte, and when he is made, he
becomes twofold more the child of the devil then themselves. For he will not
stint his Hypocrisy in Religion by the measure of their gain that invented the
form, and submit to it for their End, but for his own, namely that he may
excuse himself from all real holiness by keeping to the observation and
profession of their vain inventions. And thus are the Commandments of God made
of none effect by their Traditions. In brief, the whole frame of that Church is
fashioned out so near to the ancient guise of Idolatrous Paganism, or else to
the liveless and ineffectual form of Judaisme, (both which Christ appeared on
purpose to destroy, as either contrary or ineffectuall to Salvation, and does
explicitly recommend to the world a pure and spiritual worship, that we should
worship the Father in Spirit and in truth;) or lastly is so full of
Contradictions and Impossibilities in their feigned Stories and
imperiously-obtruded Opinions; that the natural result of being born under such
a Religion or of turning to it, is either to become a besotted Superstitionist
to believe or do any thing that others will have him to do, (which is a sign
the Spirit of Regeneration has not yet passed upon him, and that there is no
life nor light in him,) or else (which is too frequent) to turn downright
Atheist; it being so grossly discernable that the Tenants of their Church are
impossible, and their Practices fraudulent, fitted chiefly for filthy lucre,
and their Ceremonies useless, thankless and ridiculous. And therefore if any be
saved in the Church of Rome, they are such as are not truly of it, but above
it, and fend for themselves as well as they may by some pardonable sleights of
Prudence accompanied with an impregnable innocence of Spirit, and readiness of
doing all possible good they can; they sparing their own lives and liberties
upon no other account then that, and out of a persuasion that he that commanded
them to be wise as Serpents as well as innocent as Doves, has given them no
commission inconsiderately and to no purpose to betray themselves into the
power of his usurping Enemy.

But for others that are perfect Papists, and swallow down all that Church
proposes to them, without chewing or distasting any thing; it is a
Demonstration there is no Principle of life in them, but that they are like
dead earthen pitchers, which receive poison and wholesome liquors with a like
admittance. And if there be no principle of life, there is no seed of Salvation
in a man. For it is most certainly true, and the Scripture it self does witness
to it, That unless a man be born from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit
is Spirit. This is the new Creature that is created in wisdom, righteousness
and true holiness. The first of which the Church of Rome expunges, in that it
gives no leave to a man never so regenerate to judge for himself, but he must
say as the Church says, right or wrong: and for the other two all their
superstitious Ceremonies put together add nothing to them, but rather stifle
and sufflaminate them. Again, S. John tell us, That he that hates his brother,
is in the dark, and walks in the dark, and knows no whither he goes. But
others may know it, as appears by another saying of the same Apostle, Every one
that hates his brother, is a murderer; and no murderer has eternal life
abiding in him. But on the contrary he affirms, That Love is of God, and that
he that loves, is born of God, and knows God.

Now to apply the Case to these Rules, If Love be an essential Character of a
Regenerate soul, and Hatred of Error, Darkness and Eternal Death; or, to come
yet closer, If Hatred it self be Murder; what will Murder it self be, added
thereunto? And if any thing be Murder, I demand whether this be not, namely to
take away the life of a member of Jesus Christ who does fully and freely
profess the Ancient and Apostolic Faith according to the Letter or History of
the New Testament, and does seriously compose his life according to the
Precepts therein contained; and does only declare against and reject the
Contradictious Opinions and Idolatrous Practices that have no ground at all in
Scripture nor Reason, but are quite contrary to both. I say, if this be no
Murder, there is no Murder in the world: and how guilty the Church of Rome is
of this Crime, all the world knows. Wherefore this being one of the Principles
of that bloody Church, and he that is a perfect Papist being of one mind and
suffrage with his Church in all things, (for she will be held no less then
Infallible) it is apparent that no through-paced Papist can ever go to heaven
while he is such; this murderous disposition being a demonstration that he is
not born of God, but of him that was a murderer from the beginning. For Love
being the very Heart and Center of Regeneration, if there be no Antipathie in
us against that which is so contrary to the deepest Principle of the Divine
life, it is a sign there is none of that Life in us.

Wherefore this Hypothesis of Mr. Mede cannot be made harsh or odious by the
Opposer's surmise, there being a capacity of being saved in such as I have
above described, though of the Papal denomination, which are as it were the
Woman in the wilderness. And for that incapacity of being saved in the other,
there wants no Apocalypse to reveal the certainty thereof. Nor do I know a more
uncharitable opinion in the World, then that which promises them Salvation that
are so far from Charity themselves, that they are professedly persecuters and
murderers of the innocent, nay of the sincere and faithful members of Christ.

27. But the Subtilty of our Adversaries is such that they will reply, The
Adversaries Reply to the foregoing Answer, with a brief Attempt of satisfying
the same.
That there are as many snares and impediments in the Reformed Churches to true
Holiness, if not to all Holiness, in the Opinions of Solifidianisme and
Eternal Decrees; and as great a demonstration of their utter insensibility of
that Principle of the Divine love into which every true Christian is
regenerated, in their doctrine of Absolute Reprobation and inevitable damnation
of innumerable myriads of men, Providence determining them upon all the ways
and means thereto; as in the Romanists either censuring all out of their Church
to be in a state of perdition, or in their inflicting a Temporal death upon
them that gainsay the Articles of their Church. For what is this in comparison
of being content that all the World in a manner should be adjudged to
everlasting torments for doing such things as they were from all Eternity
decreed to do, nor could any way possibly avoid it?

This Objection I must confess is very shrewdly levelled at the mark; nor can I
well undertake within the narrow limits of my now almost-ended Preface, to make
a full and direct Answer to the things themselves: Only I shall return thus
much.

First, That all of the Reformed Churches are not Solifidians, nor hold any
thing concerning the Divine Decrees inconsistent with either the Goodness of
God or the Advancement of Godliness; and that for my own part I am one of that
number.

And then Secondly, They that do, do not profess themselves infallible in their
opinion, nor judge others to be in a damnable condition that are not of it; and
therefore do not low-bell men into their own error by either uncharitable
censurings or bloody persecutions, nor become incorrigible themselves upon
pretense of Infallibility, but are in a fair way of acknowledging the Truth
when it shall be rightly and advantageously proposed.

Thirdly, Their errors are not so many nor managed with that meditated craft
and design as in the old Apostate Church; they being not invented to serve some
avaritious or ambitious end, but fallen into (if I may so speak) by chance,
upon reading some passages of Scripture, (that looked upon alone may seem to
favor their Conclusions) and by reason of the obscurity of the things
themselves such as have puzzled contemplative men in all Ages and Places.

And fourthly and lastly, If they have made their own Inventions and
argumentative Conclusions Articles of Faith, it is because they are not yet
sufficiently cleansed from the corruption they contracted under the Mother of
Apostasy: which mainly consists in this, in adding the fallible deductions of
humane Reason to the infallible Articles of the ancient and Apostolic Faith.
So that whatever hazard of Salvation there is in the Reformed Churches, it is
by reason that they do still Romanize, and do not clear up into a certain and
uncontroverted Apostolic purity, exhibiting nothing for Fundamentals but what
is expressly so in the Text it self, without the slipperyness of humane
Ratiocination. Which certainly as it is their Duty, so is it also their
greatest Interest, and the most effectual way for Peace and Righteousness upon
Earth.

An Apology for his free dislike of that abused Notion of Imputative
Righteousness.
28. As for that abusable Opinion of Imputative Righteousness, that I have shown
my dissatisfaction touching that point, (which ordinarily the worst of men most
of all build upon; though I do not deny but well-meaning and piously-disposed
persons may also heedlesly take up the form) I hope the judicious will not
misconstrue it, nor take it ill that I have been so free and faithful as to
discover the danger and groundlesness of this overmuch Idolized doctrine. For
indeed it is a very Idol, that is Nothing, as the Apostle describes an Idol to
be; I mean nothing of it self but a mere Phrase, if you prescind it from what
is comprised in Remission of sins through the blood of Christ shed upon the
Cross. For this Remission of sins contains in it such a reconciliation with
God, that we are safe from all the Effects of his wrath both concerning this
state and that which is to come; that is to say, we shall not be punished by
his withholding his Grace from us here, or that Glory which is expected in the
other Life. For these deprivements being the results of sin, if we were not
secured from them, our sins were not remitted; which is against the Hypothesis.
Now I appeal to the judgment and conscience of the most zealous assertour of
Imputative Righteousness, if he can find any thing more comprised therein then
such a remission of sins as we have defined; and whether when he talks of being
clothed with Christ's righteousness in this imputative sense, he can understand
any thing but being as it were armed and defended from the wrath of God and all
the ill consequences thereof. For if this Righteousness we are thus clothed
with were a Righteousness that really kept us (suppose) from Envy, from
Drunkenness, from Adultery, and made us Charitable, Sober and Chaste; it were
not then imputative, but inherent. From whence it plainly appears that if you
prescind it from remission of sins through the sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross, this Phrase of Imputative Righteousness has no signification at all; and
that therefore there is no loss or damage done to our Religion, if it be not
accounted a distinct Article from the remission of sins in the blood of Christ.
For it cannot afford any true and useful sense distinct therefrom, nay I may
say any that is not very mischievous and dangerous, and such as tends to that
loathsome and pestilential error of Antinomianisme.

But if you will understand by it Remission of sins; I do again appeal to the
sagacious, if there may not yet be a great deal of fraud and hypocrisy in
making choice of such an Expression as does easily insinuate to overmany a
needlesness of seriously endeavoring to be really righteous, (we being so
warmely secure by the imputation of another*) and does omit such circumstances
of the Meritorious cause of the Remission of our sins (namely the Blood of
Christ hanging upon the Cross) as are not only the plainest pledge of that
inestimable favor of God, but the strongest engagement imaginable and greatest
endearement of our affections to Christ; that we may be the more willing to
mortify our corruptions for his sake, and to eschew Sin, which was so hateful
to God, that he would not remit it without the atonement of the most precious
blood of his onely-begotten Son. Which admirable artifice of the Divine Wisdom
and unspeakable power of the Gospel in the Passion of Christ for the remission
of sins is very cunningly and fraudulently declined in this new Phraseology of
Imputative Righteousness, which is but a dry Scene, and works not at all upon
our Affections, unless to a carelessness and dissoluteness of life. And
therefore I cannot but set the easy entertainment of such a pretended doctrine
upon the same score with the rejectment or neglect of the Anniversary
Celebration of the Crucifixion of Christ, though it was a Solemnity of more
importance then any Festival of the Year. As if the tendency of Reformation
were to slur and defeat the chiefest arts of the Gospel, and cut away the
strongest ties to the most indispensable duties of a Christian.

29. But the last and greatest Exception I presage will be against what I have
wrote for Liberty of Conscience, His Defense for so expressly declaring himself
for a duly-bounded liberty of Conscience.
especially considering what a foul face of things the late pretense to this
right had superinduced upon this miserably-distracted Kingdom. But this
aggravation will really be found to have no weight, if indifferently examined.
For if every Right should be forfeited, or rather be accounted no right at all,
because it has been contended for in an undue manner, or brought much calamity
and confusion upon a nation; not only Liberty of Conscience, but all Civil
Rights also, nay the Gospel of Jesus Christ it self, would be forfeited; War,
Bloodshed and Confusion being as frequently introduced upon these pretenses as
upon any. Besides, there was not a simple Permission of Liberty of Conscience,
but an Encouragement and Fomenting of Sects and Factions, and an unworthy
prostitution of this Sacred Right to the base Political designs of ambitious
persons; they that were in power conniving at the most uncouth and unseemly
miscarriages out of a sense and consciousness that they had no right to rule,
and a desire of making their usurpation as sweet to the people as they could,
by forbidding them nothing but disobedience to themselves. So that the gross
disorders that had grown and were still growing more and more upon us, are not
to be imputed so much to Liberty of Conscience, as to the unhinging of all
Civil government, and removing of the ancient and undoubted Sovereignty over
the People. And lastly, what I have defined concerning Liberty of Conscience,
to those that would abuse that Right, will seem rather the taking of it away
then a patronizing of it. But I must confess I have endeavored as well to
establish it upon its justest and clearest grounds, as to circumscribe it
within its due limits.

Which performance of mine cannot but be distastful to two sorts of men. The
one are such as being very cold at home, letting their Hearts freeze to the
indispensable duties of a true Christian, which is to be conformable to the
life of Christ in Humility, holy Love and unspotted Purity of conversation, do
in stead thereof with zeal scalding hot seek to hale and force other men by
external compulsion to a Conformity to their foolish and useless Opinions and
Ceremonies, loving to order other folks with great Rigor and Lordliness, to
make amends, as they think, thereby for their own disorder and conspicuous
impotency in not being masters of themselves. When as yet they exercise the
worst of Vices even in the actions whereby they would make an atonement for
their other gross miscarriages. For what is it but a notorious specimen of
Pride thus to force others to acknowledge their Wisdom by making them profess
to be of their opinion? and what but Injustice and barbarous Cruelty to afflict
men for what they cannot help, and in what they do not sin? and what but
plain Rebellion against God to wrest his Scepter out of his hand by which he
rules in the consciences of men, and to usurp this Empire unto themselves? To
say nothing how often they sacrifice here also to Mammon and the belly. But to
have such enemies as these to our Conclusion I hope will be thought one
Argument added to the rest of the truth thereof; nor ought I to be
over-solicitous if what I have writ scandalize those that in their principles
and practices are so scandalous.

To the other sort I ought to bear a more tender respect, to those, I mean,
that out of no corrupt principle, but out of a sincere affection to Christian
Religion, dislike our Plea for Liberty of Conscience, as being afraid that
Christianity it self will be prejudiced thereby. But to these I answer, That as
I highly commend their care and solicitude for the best of Religions, so I must
humbly crave leave to dissent from their judgments in managing the Interest
thereof. For I dare pronounce, That there is nothing would make so much for the
Interest of Christianity, as if this Right of Liberty of Conscience were known
and acknowledged all over the world. For then assuredly by how much more
manifest the Truth and Authority of every Religion is, by so much more
certainly would it prevail; as we may observe that every Religion by how much
more false it is, by so much the more severely and tyrannically it is supported
by external violence. Wherefore if it could be agreed upon to take away this
external support, false Religion and vain Superstition would sink, those
bladders and bulrushes being taken from under them, and that only would be
found to swim whose innate Truth was able to bear it up of it self. And such
certainly is the naked Simplicity of Christian Religion, divested of those many
encumberments of humane inventions both false and useless, wherewith it is so
laden, that it could not choose but sink notwithstanding any external support,
did not the force of the undeniable Truths therein bear up all that luggage
which Ignorance, Hypocrisy and Covetousness has cast upon it. How free and
quick passage then would it have if this burden had once sunk from it, and it
were restored to the Primaevall purity thereof? Surely, That Religion that got
ground so fast, though cruelly persecuted and opposed, could not but make
admirable progresses, might it but once upon equal terms grapple with other
Religions. I am prone to believe that it would not be long till all the
Kingdoms of the Earth would become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ.

So great an Interest has the True and Primaevall Christianity in this common
Right of Liberty of Conscience; which though Christians might imagine
extendible no further then to themselves, yet to be so straight to one another
as not to acknowledge that mutual Right, seems enormously harsh and
unchristian. For we all agreeing in the Truth of the Scriptures, which
certainly are sufficient to Salvation, (since the Belief and Practice of what
is plain in them will not fail to carry a man to Heaven,) what an unreasonable
thing is it that there should be that hatred and persecution against those that
God so well approves that he will save them, and Christ so dearly loved that he
gave his life a ransom for them? Again, there being also a necessity, as I
have said, in the Persecuted of thinking as he does, and an uncertainty in the
Opinions that the Persecutour would promote, as being demonstrable by neither
Reason nor Scripture; how unwarrantable an action is it to do a certain injury
for an uncertain conceit? To all which you may add, That the Love of Knowledge
is but the work of the Devil: how much more then is bitter Zeal and brawling
about it? but the depretiating of humane devices tends much to the exaltation
of true Sanctity, that mask of Hyprocrisie patcht up of empty Opinions and
Formalities being by this means torn off and leaving the face bare, that their
Complexion may be more discernable how pure and sincere it is, or how unsound,
cadaverous and deformed. And lastly, a mutual agreement of bearing with one
another dissents in the Non-fundamentals of Religion is really a greater
Ornament of Christianity then the most exact Uniformity imaginable, it being an
eminent act or exercise of Charity, the Flower of all Christian graces, and the
best way, I think, at the long run to make the Church as Uniforme as can justly
be desired.

For if true Christian Love could once get the rule in the Hearts of men, the
Apostle will undertake for her that she shall do nothing unseemly. For Charity
is indeed the Mother of Unity and bond of Perfection; and he that is really
spirited thereby, I dare promise for him that he will never oftentate his
Sanctimony by a pretended queziness of Conscience, as if he had a more delicate
sense and a more peculiar discernment in things appertaining to Godliness then
others have. But whatever a good round force would urge him to, out of love to
himself and his own safety, he would not fail of his own accord to comply
therewith, out of the love of Order and the Reverence he bears to the authority
of the Church he lives under. Nor on the other side would the Church ever offer
to obtrude upon her children what is either false or useless. For they both of
them being once imbued with that Divine sense we speak of, cannot but be well
assured That neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing; but
Faith working by Love. And whosoever walks by this Rule, peace be upon him
and upon the true Israel of God.

H. M.
From my Study at Christ's Coll. in Cambridge June 12. 1660.
AN EXPLANATION OF The grand Mystery OF GODLINESS.
CHAP. I. 1. The Four main Properties of a Mystery. 2. The first Property,
Obscurity. 3. The second, Intelligibleness. 4. The third, Truth. 5. The fourth,
Usefulness. 6. A more full Description of the Nature of a Mystery. 7. The
Distribution of the whole Treatise.
1. EVery legitimate Mystery comprehends in it at least these Four Properties.
It is a piece of Knowledge, First, competently Obscure, Recondite and Abstruse:
That is, It is not so utterly hid and intricate, but that, in the Second place,
It is in a due measure Intelligible. Thirdly, It is not only Intelligible, what
is meant by it; but it is evidently and certainly True. Fourthly and lastly, It
is no impertinent or idle Speculation, but a Truth very Useful and Profitable:
We may well add also, for some Religious End.

2. This Obscurity and Abstruseness makes not only the Mystery more solemn and
venerable to those to whom it is communicated, but hides it also from their
eyes that are not worthy to partake thereof. From whence some Critics have
derived Mysterium from the Hebrew word (...), which is from (...) to hide:
Which is well aimed at as to the sense. But others, with more judgment in
Grammar, acknowledge (...) to be a proper Greek word, and fetch the Derivation
of it from (...), because they to whom it is communicated are to keep silence,
and not to impart it to unmeet persons. And in this sense Chrysostom expounds
Mysterium, (...) (...), A matter wonderful, unknown, and not to be easily or
rashly communicated to others.

3. Nor indeed could it be at all* if it were utterly Unintelligible. Wherefore
Intelligibleness adds this further requisite also to a Mystery, that it thereby
becomes Communicable to such as are fitly prepared to be instructed therein.
For which reason the Etymologists give also this Notation of (...), that it is
from (...), which is to teach and instruct a man in Divine matters so far forth
as the party is fit to receive. Hence is also (...), Mysta, a Scholar or
Commencer in Divine Mysteries, one that is more slightly imbued in the
knowledge of such Holy things.

4. But there is afterward a clearer manifestation and a fuller satisfaction,
and the (...) then becomes (...) or (...), being now more firmly ascertained of
the Truth which he did but obscurely apprehend before. From which Clearness and
Certainty of the thing represented there necessarily arises a full and free
assent of his Understanding without any further doubt or hesitancy; the Proverb
being made good in this case, That Seeing is Believing.

5. But that there may not be a mere dry Belief without any love or liking of
the Object thereof, we added also that this Mystery is not only certainly True,
but very concerningly Useful and Profitable; which though the word (...) it
self does not implie, yet another in the same language and of the like sense
does, which is (...), i. e. Initiations into sacred Mysteries. The Usefulness
whereof a Platonist admirably well describes, not without a verbal allusion, in
this manner, (...), Which, if we would render it in our more familiar language,
sounds thus; The scope or aim of all Religious Mysteries is the bringing back
fallen man into his pristine condition of Happiness, and to lead him again to
that high station which he then first forsook when he preferred his own Will
and the pleasure of the Animal life before the Will of God and that Life and
Sense which is truly Divine.

6. Wherefore not to dwell too long on the threshold, we conclude briefly and
in general, that a Mystery is a piece of Divine knowledge measurably Abstruse,
whereby it becomes more Venerable, but yet Intelligible that it may be
Communicable, and True and Certain that it may win firm Assent, and lastly very
Useful and Effectual for the perfecting of the Souls of men, and restoring
them to that Happiness which they anciently had fallen from; that so near a
Concernment may as well gain upon their Affections as the Evidence of Truth
engage their Understandings; and so the whole man may be carried on to a devout
embracement of what is exhibited unto him by the knowledge of his Religion.

7. What we have thus Generally proposed we shall now apply more Particularly,
and more fully prosecute those Four primary Properties in that Grand Mystery of
Godliness which we call Christianity: distributing our Discourse into these
Four main Parts; The First whereof shall insist somewhat upon the Abstruseness
and Obscurity of our Religion, the Second upon the Intelligibleness of it, the
Third upon the Certainty of it; and the Fourth on the great concerning
Usefulness thereof. To which we shall add what Considerations we think fittest
concerning the Secondary Properties which emerge out of these Primary ones.

CHAP. II. 1. That it is fit that the Mystery of Christianity should be in some
measure Obscure, to exclude the Sensual and Worldly. 2. As also to defeat
disobedient Learning and Industry: 3. And for the pleasure and improvement of
the godly and obedient. 4. The high Gratifications of the Speculative Soul from
the Obscurity of the Scriptures.
1. THat there is a considerable Obscurity and Abstrusenesse in Christian
Religion is easily made evident as well from the Cause as the Effects of this
Obscurity. For besides that from the common nature of a Mystery Christianity
ought to be competently Obscure and Abstruse, that it may thereby become more
Venerable and more safely removed out of all danger of contempt; we cannot but
see what a special Congruity there is in the matter it self, to have so holy
and so highly-concerning a Mystery as our Religion is, Abstruse and Obscure.
For that Divine wisdom that orders all things justly ought not to communicate
those precious Truths in so plain a manner that the Unworthy may as easily
apprehend them as the Worthy; but does most righteously neglect the Sensual
and Careless, permitting every man to carry home wares proportionable to the
price he would pay in the open market for them: And when they can bestow so
great industry upon things of little moment, will not spare to punish their
undervaluing this inestimable Pearl by the perpetual loss of it. For what a
palpable piece of Hypocrisy is it for a man to excuse himself from the study
of Piety, by complaining against the Intricacies and Difficulties of the
Mystery thereof; whenas he never yet laid out upon it the tenth part of that
pains and affection that he does upon the ordinary trivial things of this world?

2. Thus are the careless voluptuous Epicure and over-careful Worldling justly
met with. But not they alone. For the Obscurity of this Mystery we speak of is
such, that all the knowledge of Nature and Geometry can never reach the Depth
of it, or relish the Excellency of it; nor all the skill of Tongues rightly
interpret it, unless that true Interpreter and great Mystagogus, the Spirit of
God himself, vouchsafe the opening of it unto us, and set it on so home in our
Understandings, that it begets Faith in our Hearts, so that our Hearts misgive
us not in the profession of what we would acknowledge as True. For as for the
outward Letter it self of the Holy Scriptures, God has not so plainly delivered
himself therein, that he has given the staff out of his own hands, but does
still direct the humble and single-hearted, while he suffers the proud searcher
to lose himself in this Obscure field of Truth. Wherefore disobedient both
Learning and Industry are turned off from obtaining any certain and
satisfactory Knowledge of this Divine Mystery, as well as Worldliness and
Voluptuousness. According as our Blessed Savior has pronounced in that devout
Doxology, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes:
Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

3. Nor are the Wicked only disappointed, but the Godly very much gratified by
the Intricacy of this sacred Mystery. For the Spirit of man being so naturally
given to search after Knowledge, and his Understanding being one of the
chiefest and choicest Faculties in him, it cannot be but a very high delight to
him to employ his noblest endowments upon the divinest Objects, and very
congruous and decorous they should be so employed. Besides, the present
Doubtfulness of Truth makes the holy Soul more devout and dependant on God the
only true and safe guide thereunto. From whence we should be so far from
murmuring against Divine Providence for the Obscurity and Ambiguity of the Holy
Scriptures, that we should rather magnify his Wisdom therein; We having
discovered so many and so weighty Reasons why those Divine Oracles should be
Obscure: The wicked thereby being excluded; the due Reverence of the Mystery
maintained; and the worthy partakers thereof much advantaged and highly
gratified.

4. For what can indeed more highly gratify a man, whose very Nature is
Reason, and special Prerogative Speech; then by his skill in Arts and
Languages, by the Sagacity of his Understanding, and industrious comparing of
one place of those Sacred pages with another, to work out, or at least to clear
up, some Divine Truth out of the Scripture to the unexpected satisfaction of
himself and general service of the Church; the dearest Faculty of his Soul and
greatest glory of his Nature acting then with the fullest commission, and to so
good an end, that it need know no bounds, but Joy and Triumph may be unlimited,
the Heart exulting in that in which we cannot exceed, viz. the Honor of God and
the Good of his people? All which gratulations of the Soul in her successful
pursuits of Divine Truth would be utterly lost or prevented, if the Holy
Scriptures set down all things so fully, plainly and methodically, that our
reading and understanding would every where keep equal pace together. Wherefore
that the Mind of man may be worthily employed and taken up with a kind of
Spiritual husbandry, God has not made the Scriptures like an artificial Garden,
wherein the Walks are plain and regular, the Plants sorted and set in order,
the Fruits ripe, and the Flowers blown, and all things fully exposed to our
view; but rather like an uncultivated field, where indeed we have the ground
and hidden seeds of all precious things, but nothing can be brought to any
great beauty, order, fullness or maturity, without our own industry; nor indeed
with it, unless the dew of His grace descend upon it, without whose blessing
this Spiritual Culture will thrive as little as the labor of the husbandman
without showers of rain.

CHAP. III. 1. The Obscurity of the Christian Mystery argued from the Effect,
as from the Jews rejecting their Messiah; 2. From the many Sects amongst
Christians; 3. Their difference in opinion concerning the Trinity, 4. The
Creation, 5. The Soul of Man, 6. The Person of Christ, 7. And the Nature of
Angels.
1. HItherto we have argued the Obscurity of the Christian Mystery from the
Reasons and Causes thereof, whereby we have evinced That it ought to be
Obscure, and that therefore in all likelihood it is so. But the Effects are so
manifest, that if we do but briefly point at them, it will be put beyond all
doubt That it is so indeed.

Let us now instance in some few. Why are the Jews yet unconverted, or rather
why did they at first cast off their Messiah; but because the Prophesies in
Scripture were so Obscure, that they had taken up a false Notion of him and of
the Condition he was to appear in? For they expected him as a mighty Prince
that should restore the kingdom to Israel, and that Victory, Peace, Prosperity
and Dominion should be accumulated upon the Jewish nation by his means. Which
opinion I conceive the Lowness of the Mosaical dispensation under which they
lived, that perpetually propounded to them worldly advantage as a reward of
their obedience, and the Obscurity of the Predictions of the Messiah, engaged
them in. For they being either Figurative and Allegorical, or mingling
sometimes the state of his Second coming with his First; their eager eye being
so fully fixed upon what sounded like worldly happiness, they could mind no
other sense but that in these Enigmatical writings: Which yet proved clear
enough to as many as God had prepared, and belonged to the election of Grace.
But he might, if it had pleased his Wisdom so to do, have made all things so
plain, that we should not need at this day to expect the calling of the Jews,
but they might have been one Body with us long since. But their Rejection is a
greater assurance to us of the Truth of our Religion, we being able to make it
good even out of those Records that are kept by our professed Enemies. Besides
a man can no more rationally require, that all Israel should have flowed in at
the first appearance of Christ, then that his Second coming should be joined
with his First, or his First drawn back to the next Age after Adams fall, nor
that more rationally, then that Autumn should be cast upon Summer, and both
upon Spring. The Counsels of God are at once, but the fulfillings of them ripen
in due order and time.

2. But though we let go the Jews, and contain our selves within the compass of
those that either are or would be accounted Christians, their Opinions and
Sects both have been and are so numerous, that the very mention of so confessed
a Truth may sufficiently evince the Obscurity of those Divine Oracles to which
they all appeal. I will instance only in things of greater moment, which will
be a sure pledge of the certainty of their innumerable dissensions in smaller
matters.

3. Wherefore to say nothing of that more intricate Mystery of the Triunity in
the Godhead, where the curious Speculators of that difficult Theory are first
divided into Trinitarians and Anti-Trinitarians, and then the Trinitarians into
Heterusians, Homousians and Homoeusians: we shall see them disagreeing not
only in the Distinction of the Persons, but concerning the Essence it self:
Some affirming God to be Infinite, others Finite; some a Spirit, others a Body;
othersome not only a Body, but a Body of the very same shape with man's. Of
which opinion the Egyptian Anthropomorphites were so zealously confident, that
they forced the Bishop of Alexandria out of fear of his life to subscribe to
their gross conceit.

4. Again concerning the Creation of the world, some affirm That God made it
of Matter coaeternal with, and independent of, himself: Others that he created
it of Nothing: Others that he made it not at all; but that it was made, as some
would have it, by good Angels, others, by the Devil.

5. Concerning the Soul of man, some say it subsists and acts before it comes
into the Body; Others only in the Body, and after the solution of the Body:
Others in the Body alone; Others not there neither, as holding indeed no such
thing as a Soul at all, but that the Body it self does all: Which some hold
shall rise again, others not; but that the whole Mystery of Christianity is
finished in this life.

6. Concerning Christ, some were of Opinion that he was only God appearing in
humane shape; others only man: others both; others neither.

7. Concerning Angels, some affirm them to be Fiery or Aerie Bodies; some pure
Spirits; some Spirits in Aerie or Fiery Bodies; Others none of these, but that
they are momentaneous Emanations from God; Others that they are only Divine
Imaginations in men: which can be by no means allowed, unless we should admit
the Holy Patriarch Abraham to have arrived at such a measure of dotage, as to
provide cakes and a fatted calf to entertain three Divine Imaginations which
visited him in his tent. But certainly such slight and exorbitant glosses as
these can argue nothing else but a misbelief of the Text, and indeed of all
Religion, and that the Interpreter is no Christian, but either Atheist or
Infidel. Wherefore to leave such Spirits as these to the confident Dictates of
their own foul Complexion, we shall rather take into consideration some Few,
but Main, points wherein certain men, otherwise Rational enough in their
sphere, and hearty Assertors of the Authority of Scripture, disagree from the
Generality of other Christians.

The first of them is Concerning the Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the
Godhead.

The second Concerning the Divinity of Christ.

The third and last Concerning the State of the Soul after Death. Which Points
though I must confess they are of subtle speculation, yet they seem so
necessary and essential, the two former especially, to Christian Religion, that
I think it fit not to pass them over with a bare mention of them, nor yet to
speak much in so profound and Mysterious a matter.

CHAP. IV. 1. That the Trinity was not brought out of Plato's School into the
Church by the Fathers. 2. A Description of the Platonic Trinity and of the
difference of the Hypostases. 3. A description of their Union: 4. And why they
hold All a due Object of Adoration. 5. The irrefutable Reasonableness of the
Platonic Trinity, and yet declined by the Fathers, a Demonstration that the
Trinity was not brought out of Plato's School into the Church. 6. Which is
further evidenced from the compliableness of the Notion of the Platonic
Trinity with the Phrase and Expressions of Scripture. 7. That if the Christian
Trinity were from Plato, it follows not that the Mystery is Pagan. 8, 9, 10.
The Trinity proved from Testimony of the Holy Writ.
1. NOw concerning the First, The Trinity, say they, objecting against it in
general, is nothing else but a Pagan or Heathenish Figment brought out of the
Philosophy of Pythagoras and Plato, and inserted into the doctrine of the
Church by the ancient Fathers who most of them were Platonists. But to this I
answer, That it is very highly improbable that the Fathers borrowed the Mystery
of the Trinity from the School of Plato; which you shall easily understand when
we have so far as serves to our purpose explained the doctrine of the
Platonical Triad, which is briefly thus.

2. There are Three Hypostases, say they, in the Deity, namely (...) that is,
The Good, or First self-originated Goodness; Intellect, or the Eternal Mind;
and lastly Soul or Spirit. Their (...) is also their (...), and they
distinguish all Three after this manner: (...). (...). (...). The Good.
Intellect. Soul. (...). (...). (...). The First One. One All. One and All.


If we would ease our Apprehension here by the help of our Phansy, we might
compare the First to Simple and pure Light; the Second to Light variegated into
Colors, as in the Rainbow; the Third to those Rays of light (for all is
Light) that receive and carry down these Colors to the ground, and impress
them and reflect them from some standing pool or plash of water. Again the
First Hypostasis is (...), Essentially the Good, Causally the Intellect. The
Second is (...), Essentially Intellect, Causally Soul, Participatively the
Good. The Third is (...), that is (...), Essentially Soul, that is Love and
Operation, Causally Matter and the World, Participatively the Good and
Intellect.

3. Now for the Union of the Three Hypostases, we shall understand the accuracy
thereof by degrees. As first, That the proper life and energie, as I may so
say, of each Hypostasis is not contained within it self, but, like a vocal and
audible Sound in a still silent Night, perpetually re-ecchoes through the whole
Deity: Or as when a Song of Three parts is sung, each Musician enjoys the
harmony of the whole.

But this I must confess looks more properly like Communion then perfect Union:
we step therefore a degree further, and affirm, That as Body and Soul is
conceived to make up one man, and this Individual Body and this Individual Soul
to make up this Individual man: so these Three Hypostases to make up one
Individual Deity, their Union and Actuation one of another being infinitely and
unspeakably more perfect then in any other Being imaginable. And as the Motions
of the Body are perceptible to the Soul of man, and the Impressions of the Soul
upon the Body would be perceptible to it, if it had of it self a Faculty of
Perception: So likewise by this ineffable close Union and mutual Actuation of
the Three Hypostases, all their proper Energies become fully perceptible to one
another. And the Life of the first so infinitely and unexpressibly gratifying
the Second, and Both the Third by an immutable necessity and congruity of
nature, it is evident they can have but One Will, which is as it were the
Heart, the Center or Root of the Deity, the Eternal Self-originated Good.

But thirdly and lastly, These three Hypostases are not One only by this
actuating Union which may seem to admit of a real separability; but there is
also a real Unity or Identity in them: the distinction among them being, as
Tatianus speaks, (...), like the Rays of the Sun in respect of the Sun; or, if
you will, as the Center, Rays and Surface of a Globe, which implies a
Contradiction to be conceived without them; or, as the Faculties of the Soul
are to the Soul, which are as inseparable from her as she is from her self.

The Union therefore of them all, and the Emanation of the Second and Third
from the First being so Necessary, Natural, and Inevitable, (For the First can
be no more without the Second, or the Second without the Third, then the Sun
can be without his Rays, or the Soul without her Faculties;) there is no
scruple, say they, but we may call all this the Godhead or Deity, the Second
and Third coming so unavoidably out of the First Root, and being so inseparable
from it. And therefore there is nothing here properly Creature; Creation being
a free act: and if not Creature, what can it be but God?

4. And since from these Three are all things that are made, and in their hands
is the guidance of all things; Nothing less then Divine Adoration can of right
belong unto them. For though there may be some allay of Excellency in their
descent from the First, yet they being all our Creators and Governors, none
ought to fall short of Divine worship.

5. This is a brief Sum of the Platonists Doctrine concerning the Triunity of
the Godhead: Which, as it seems in it self Rational enough, so it is not
obnoxious to several bold cavils that over-daring Wits make against the Sacred
Mystery of the Trinity; alleging against Distinction of Persons without
difference of Essence, That there are only Three Logical Notions attributed to
one single and individual nature: and against Three Essences of the same
Nature, That it looks like an unnecessary and groundless repetition, and That
that great Chasma betwixt God and Matter will be as wide as before; That it is
unconceivable but, the Last being of the same nature with the First, that it
should be also Prolifical, and so in infinitum: That these Three must of
necessity be Three Gods, if any of them be God; because they are all exquisitly
of the same Kind; whenas in the Platonic Triad the First is only the (...), as
some have also ventured to affirm in the Christian Trinity. Now I say all being
so easy and unexceptionable in the Platonical speculation of this Mystery, it
seems almost impossible but that if the Fathers had borrowed this Notion of the
Trinity from the Platonists, they would have explained it in this more facile
and plausible way.

6. But you will object, That though it may seem more Rational in it self, yet it
might not be so happily applied to Places of Scripture; and that is the reason
why the Fathers, though they took the Mystery from Plato in the gross, yet did
not particularly explain it after the way of the Platonists. But without doubt
there is not only no place of Scripture that plainly clashes with the
above-described Mystery, but sundry Places that may be very speciously alleged
for it. It is plain that as the Second Hypostasis in Platonisme is called (...)
and (...), so it is in Christianity called (...) and (...), as if Wisdom and
Intellect were acknowledged his proper Character in both. They might also
plausibly enough draw to their sense what Christ speaks, John 14.28. My Father
is greater then I; and what he utters concerning the Spirit, chap. 16.14. He
shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you.
Wherefore, I say, the Fathers being every way so fairly invited to bring the
Platonic Notion of the Trinity into the Church, assuredly if themselves had
been Platonists, and had fetched the Mystery from that School, they would not
have failed to have done it.

7. Secondly, Admit that the ancient Fathers were Platonists, and brought the
Mystery of the Trinity into the Church of the Christians, it does not straight
follow That it is therefore a Pagan or Heathenish Mystery: Pythagoras and Plato
having not received it from Pagans or Heathens, but from the learned of the
Jews, as sundry Authors assert; the Jews themselves in long succession having
received it as a Divine Tradition; and such is Platonisme acknowledged to be by
Iamblichus, who says it is (...). And assuredly if there had not been some
very great reason for it, men so wise and profoundly knowing as Pythagoras,
Plato, Plotinus and others, would never have made so much ado about it.

8. Thirdly and lastly, I say it is not only impious, but vain and foolish, to
asperse that Mystery with the reproach of Paganism, that is so plainly, to them
that be not prejudiced, set down and held forth in the Holy Scripture. For the
very Form of Baptism prescribed by our Savior evidently enough denotes Three
Divine Hypostases. Of the Father there is no question. Concerning the Divinity
of the Son we shall speak more fully in the Second point we proposed. That
the Holy Ghost is not a mere Power, Property or Attribute of God, but an
Hypostasis, one free enough from being swai'd by Tradition or Authority of any
Church, and (as himself conceits) a very close and safe adherer to Scripture,
does grossly enough acknowledge, while he makes it some created Angel that bears
the sacred Title of the Holy Ghost, and undergoes those Divine functions that
are attributed to him.

But we need not maintain Truth by any man's Error, it being sufficiently able
to support it self; and therefore we will make use of no advantage, but what
Scripture it self offers us. And this Form of Baptism affords us something to
the evincing that the Holy Ghost is not an Attribute, but an Hypostasis. For
since that (...), is to give up a man's self to the Discipline, Government and
Authority of this or that Person; it is the most natural sense to conceive that
all Three mentioned in the Form are Persons, we being so well assured that two
of them are.

But there are other passages of Scripture that will make the point more clear.
Romans 15.13. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that
ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost. Now if the Holy
Ghost were but a Power, not a Person, what a ridiculous Tautology would it be?
for the sense would be, through the power of the holy power. Again, John 16.13.
(...), etc. (...) and (...) are very ill Syntax, were it not that there is a
Personality in the Holy Spirit, which by what follows is most undeniably
evident; For he shall not speak of himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that
shall he speak. To receive of one and communicate to others by way of hearing
and speaking, what can that belong to but a Person or Hypostasis? To this you
may add also Mark 13.11. Whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that
speak ye: for it is not you that speak, but the Holy Ghost.

Now that this Hypostasis is not a created Angel, amongst other Reasons the
Conception of Christ may well argue, it being more congruous That that spirit
that moved upon the waters and created the world, should form that holy Foetus
in the womb of the Virgin, then that any created Angel should apply himself to
that work; for he had not then been the Son of God, but of an Angel, as in
reference to his birth in time.

9. Besides, this one Individual Spirit in Scripture in represented as every
where ready to sanctify, to regenerate, to distribute various gifts and graces
to the Church, to have spoke by the mouth of the Prophets, to be a (...) or a
discerner of the thoughts of the heart. Baptism also and Benedictions are
imparted in his name; he is also called to witness, which is a piece of Divine
worship: all which seems more naturally to be understood of him whom we
properly call the Spirit of God, then of any particular created Angel
whatsoever.

10. We shall only add one place more, which will put all out of doubt to
them that do not doubt of the Text it self; 1 John 5.7. There are three
witnesses in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit: and these three are
One. What can be writ more plain for the proof of the Triunity of the Godhead?
But for those that suspect the Clause to be supposititious, I shall not trouble
my self to confute them; that task being performed so solidly and judiciously
by a late Interpreter, that nothing but Prejudice and Wilfulness can make a man
depart unsatisfied with so clear a demonstration. Wherefore secure of this
Point Concerning the Trinity, we go on to the next concerning The Divinity of
Christ.

CHAP. V. 1. That the natural sense of the First of S. John does evidently
witness the Divinity of Christ. 2. A more particular urging of the
circumstances of that Chapter. 3. That S. John used the word (...) in the
Jewish or Cabbalistical notion. 4. The Trinity and the Divinity of Christ
argued from Divine worship due to him, and from his being a Sacrifice for sin.
5. That to deny the Trinity and Divinity of Christ, or to make the Union of our
selves with the Godhead of the same nature with that of Christ's, subverts
Christianity. 6. The uselesness and sauciness of the pretended Deification of
Enthusiasts, and how destructive it is of Christian Religion. 7. The Providence
of God in preparing of the Nations by Platonisme for the easier reception of
Christianity.
1. THat Christ is not (...) or a mere Creature, but a divine Hypostasis, or
truly, really and Physically (not Allegorically and Morally) joined with that
Divine Hypostasis which is called (...), if men would not bring their own
sturdy preconceptions, but listen to the easy and natural air of the Text, the
Beginning of S. John's Gospel would put out of all controversy. For I Will appeal
to any, supposing the Union of Christ's Humanity with the (...) to be true, in
what fitter, more significant or better-becoming way could it be expressed then
already it is in the Beginning of that Gospel? Wherefore to interpret it in any
other sense, is to delude themselves, and to abuse the Scripture through the
prepossessions of their own Prejudice. Of which violence they do thereto they
cannot well be sensible, they thinking they have full commission to distort it
into any posture, rather then to let it alone in that which so plainly points
to a Mystery which they hold impossible and self-contradictious. For so has
their bold and blind reasoning concluded aforehand concerning the Trinity, and
Divinity of Christ. But to those that are indifferent this Text bears such
evidence with it, that it cannot but settle their belief.

2. For why should the Evangelist omit the manner of Christ's Birth as he was
Man, but that he was intent upon his Eternal Generation as he was God? Or why
should he not call him by that name that was given him at his Circumcision, or
by the name of Crist or the Messiah who was a Person expected in time, but that
his thoughts were carried back to that of him which was from all Eternity? Nor
is it imaginable that he should be here called (...) instead of Jesus or
Christ, unless there were some valuable Mystery in it, which the learned easily
unriddle from Jewish Interpreters, they speaking often of The Word of the Lord
as an Hypostasis distinguishable from God, and yet that by which he created
Adam and the rest of the Creatures. And for my own part I make no question but
that the Greek Philosophers, as Pythagoras and Plato, had not only their
(...), but the whole Mystery of their Trinity from the Divine Traditions
amongst the Jews. Philo the Jew speaks often of this Principle in the Godhead,
calling it The Word of God.
(...), or The Divine Word.
(...), or sometimes God.
(...), other sometimes The Firstborn Son of God.
(...) and attributes unto it the Creation of the World, as also the Healing of
the diseases of our Minds, and the Purging of our Souls from sins; insomuch
that this Author might be a good Commentator upon this first Chapter of S. John.

3. Wherefore there being this Notion of (...) amongst the Jews, to which the
Creation and Government of the World is attributed, the same also being done
here, what can be more likely then that S. John means the very same (...) that
is Creator and Governor of all? Which the very Phrase and Posture of things
will yet further confirm. For assuredly this (...) in the Gospel is the same
with that (...) in the first Epistle of S. John: and what (...) signifies the
same Epistle will explicate, chap. 2.14. I write unto you, Fathers, (...),
because you have known the Eternal: and Christ by the Prophet Esaias is called
(...) the Eternal Father. For that is the most proper meaning of (...), as
appears Esaias 57.15. Thus says the high and lofty one who inhabits Eternity,
(...), inhabiting Eternity. Nor is it incongruous for the same Being to be the
Son of God and the Father and Governor of all the Creatures. And the Prophet
Micah chap. 5. prophesying of Christ, describes him thus, (...), His emanations
are from the Beginning, from the days of Eternity. Which agrees well with what
Christ professes of himself, John 8. John 8.58.
(...) for if he was before Abraham, there is little question but he was before
all things; and that of the Psalmist is but his due attribute, (...), Before
the mountains were brought forth, or the Earth was formed, even from
everlasting to everlasting Thou art God.

And now for the Posture of things, after the Evangelist has twice asserted
That he was from the beginning; that you may not mistake and think he means the
beginning of his Ministry, as the Messiah, he tells you, according to the
Doctrine of the Jews, That all things were created by him: and at the tenth
verse, that you may have no subterfuge, he says, That even that world that was
made by him knew him not: which excludes all Moral and Mystical
interpretations, and shows plainly that wicked men, though not their
wickedness, are his Creation, and consequently all the world besides. And the
Author to the Hebrews is a farther witness of this Truth, citing that of the
Psalmist concerning the Son of God, Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the
foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands.

There is yet another argument of the Divinity of Christ, which I need not
prove, it being acknowledged even by our Adversaries, and it is Religious
worship due to him, which I conceive is due to none but God.

4. The Holy Trinity and Divinity of Christ we have hitherto proved out of the
Scriptures, and might add many places more; but the Reason and Nature of the
thing it self shall be the last Confirmation. That Christ is to be worshipped
is acknowledged of all hands. But to worship one that is not God, is to relapse
into the ancient rites of the Pagans, who were Men-worshippers and eaters of
the sacrifices of the dead. For Jupiter, Belus, Bacchus, Vulcan, Mercurius,
Osiris and Isis, and the rest of the Gods of the Heathen, what were they but
mere men, whose Benefactions extorted divine honors from Superstitious
posterity after their Death? Wherefore Christ ought not to be a mere man, but
God, that is, he ought to be really and physically united to the Deity; it
being present not by Assistance only but by Information; that as Body and Soul
are one Man, so God and Man may be one Christ. But if there were no Trinity,
but One Hypostasis in the Deity and the Humanity of Christ thus joined with it,
How could he be a Sacrifice for sin, there being none beside himself to whom he
should be offered? or How could he be sent by another, when there is none other
to send him? and the Son of God out of the bosom of his Father could not be
said to suffer, but he that is offended to be sacrificed to pacify himself:
which things are very absurd and incongruous.

But you will say, the Absurdity still remains in the Second Hypostasis. For was
not Sin as contrary to Him as to the First and Third, and consequently He as
much offended? and therefore He dying in our nature, was sacrificed to pacify
Himself. In answer to this I admit that all Three Hypostases were alike
offended at Sin, and withal alike compassionate to Sinners. Which Compassion
was in the Deity toward Mankind before the Incarnation and Death of Christ.
But the formal Declaration and visible Consignation of this Reconcilement was
by Christ according as he is revealed in the Gospel, whose Transactions in our
behalf are nothing else but a sweet and kind Condescension of the Wisdom of
God in this Mystery accommodating himself to our humane capacities and
properties, to win us off in a kindly was to Love and Obedience. And therefore
all the Three Hypostases being alike offended at Sin, and alike prone to pardon
the Sinner and recover him to Obedience, contrived such a way of declaring
their pardon, as might show their highest dislike of sin, and win most upon the
Sinner by moving his affections to a serious Sorrow and Remorse. Wherefore the
Divine complotment was this; That the Eternal Son of God should be made Flesh,
and to testify the Hatred of God to Sin and his Love to mankind, should be
sacrificed for an Atonement for the sins of the world: Then which a greater
Engine cannot be imagined to move us to an Abhorrence of sin, and to the Love
of his Law that thus redeemed us and wrought our reconciliation with the
Father. To whom being, as I may so say, the Head in the Divinity and of all
things, and having in his Paternal right the First power of punishing and
pardoning, this Pacification is naturally directed. For it is as if a Father of
a Family or the Prince of a Nation having a mind to pardon some Malefactor,
that he might not seem too prone to Mercy, and so encourage men to Rebellion,
should plot with his Eldest Son to be an earnest Intercessor in the behalf of
the party, when yet the Son disrelisheth the crime of him he intercedes for as
much as his Father did. There is the same Reason in the Intercession of Christ
with the Eternal Father, saving that it was with more earnestness and greater
agony, even unto death, and of far higher consequence. But that such an
Intercession and Pacification as this should be made up in the solitary Scene
of one Person, is impossible.

5. Wherefore the denying of either the Divinity of Christ or the Trinity seems
a Subversion of the Christian Religion. And not only so, but that Fanatical
piece of Magnificency of some Enthusiasts, who would make their Union with God
the same with that of Christ's. For then were they truly God, and Divine
Adoration would belong unto them; or if not, it is a sign they are not God, and
that therefore Christ is not: Either of which confounds or destroys our
Religion. But if you demand what the Difference is betwixt the Union of Christ
and Ours with the Divinity, I have intimated it before. In one the Divinity is
Forma informans, in the other but Forma assistens: in the one it is as Lux in
Corpore lucido, in the other as Lumen in Corpore diaphano. The Divinity in
Christ is as the Light in the Sun; the Divinity in his Members as the Sunshine
in the Air.

6. And this distinction and due distance being kept, which some saucy and
high-flown Enthusiasts do not observe, there is yet scope and encouragement
enough for them to strive to be full as good as they pretend; I am sure far
better then they are: there ordinarily being no difference betwixt them and the
meanest Christians, but that their Tongues are swelled with greater tumor and
turgency of speech, and their Minds filled with more vain phantasyes and
exorbitant Lunacyes; whenas the other speak conformably to the Apostolic
Faith, and with less noise live more honestly. But that no less Union with God
then Real and Physical Deification must make them Good, is a sign they are
stark naught, and that Pride has laid wast their Intellectuals. For is not that
Spirit that created and framed all things able to reform us unto the most
unblamable pitch of Humility, Self-denial, Dependency upon God, Love of our
neighbor, Obedience to Magistrates, Faith, Temperance and Holiness, without
being any more Hypostatically united with us then with the Earth, Sea, Sun,
Moon and Stars, and the Natural parts of the Creation? Wherefore we conclude
That to assert, That the Union of any true Christian with God is the Same with
that of Christ's, is a bold, useless and groundless Opinion, and inconsistent
with and destructive of the Christian Religion.

7. We have seen How Necessary and Essential to Christianity the Doctrine of
the Divinity of Christ is, See further of this Subject book 9. c. 1. sect. 6.
and chap. 2. throughout.
and consequently of the Trinity, without which the other cannot be rightly
conceived: and therefore we do not only disapprove of those frivolous slanders
and cavils that would brand that Sacred Mystery with the infamous note of
Paganism; but highly magnify and humbly adore the Providence of God that that
Truth should be kept so long warm and be so carefully polished by those
Heathens that knew not the main Use thereof, or to what end the Tradition was
delivered to the ancient Patriarchs, Prophets or holy Sages of old in either
Egypt or Iudaea, from whence Pythagoras and Plato had it, and prepared those
parts of the World where their Philosophy had taken foot-hold, to an easy
reception of Christianity: but this we have glanced at elsewhere.

CHAP. VI. 1. The danger and disconsolateness of the Opinion of the
Psychopannychites. 2. What they allege out of 1 Cor. 15. set down. 3. A
Preparation to an Answer advertising First, of the nature of Prophetic Schemes
of speech. 4. Secondly, of the various vibration of an inspired Fancy. 5.
Thirdly, of the ambiguity of words in Scripture, and particularly of (...) and
(...). 6. And lastly, of the Corinthians being sunk into an Unbelief of any
Reward after this life. 7. The Answer out of the last and foregoing Premisse.
8. A further Answer out of the first. 9. As also out of the second and third,
where their Objection from verse 32. is fully satisfied. 10. Their Argument
answered which they urge from our Saviors citation to the Sadducees, I am the
God of Abraham, etc.
1. WE proceed now to the Third and Last Point propounded, which is Concerning
the state of Souls departed, which we assert not to sleep, that is, not to be
void of all Operation and Sense of Joy or Punishment, but that they have a
Knowledge and Apprehension of their own condition, be it Good or Bad. Which
Article I hold as undoubtedly True, though not so indispensable, as the Two
former, and though not so Necessary, yet exceeding Convenient to be
entertained: It being a great Abater to our zeal and fervency in Religion to
think that in the end of our life we shall be dodged and put off by a long
senseless and comfortless Sleep of the Soul under the sods of the Grave for
many hundreds, if not for some thousands, of years.

Besides, an indulgence to such a Dullness and Heartlesness of Spirit, as to be
content to intermit the Functions of Life for so long a time, may at last work
the Soul into a sottish mistrust of ever being awaked, and make her conclude
the Mystery of Christianity within the narrow verges of this mortal life; as
David George and other Enthusiasts did, who were more in love with many Wives
then with any Article of Faith that promised such pleasures as might not be
reaped in this Flesh.

2. But we are here to deal (not with such vain Fanatics, but) with
severely-devoted Sons of Reason, who pretend not to dictate but demonstrate out
of Scripture the Sleep of the Soul; confidently suggesting to the better
gaining Proselytes to their own, that the contrary opinion is not Christian but
Heathenish, derived from the Philosophy of Plato (which the Greek Fathers had
imbibed) and thence introduced into the Church of Christ. To the First of which
I answer, That our Adversaries Demonstrations for the Sleep of the Soul are but
their own Imaginations and Dreams upon the mistaken Text. It is beside my scope
to insist long on this matter: I shall only give you a taste of the weakness of
the rest of their Arguments by proposing and refuting of those that seem the
strongest. Their main proof is from the whole tenor of the 15 of the 1 Cor. and
more particularly from the 32 verse; If after the manner of men I have fought
with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? Hence
they think may certainly be concluded, That the Soul before the Resurrection of
the Body has not the Perception or Enjoyment of any thing; otherwise the very
Remembrance of those sufferings for Christ might be a solace for Paul when he
was out of the Body.

3. But to answer this Difficulty with the fuller satisfaction, let us premise
some few things to prepare the way to it: As first, That the Schemes of speech
in Prophets and men inspired are usually such as most powerfully strike the
Fancy and most strongly beat upon the Imagination, they describing things in
the most sensible, palpable and particular representations that can be.
According to which Figure the General Resurrection is set off by men's awaking
out of the dust of the Earth and coming out of the Graves, when as yet many
thousands have wanted Burial, their bones rotting on the surface of the Earth,
and as many thousands have had their intombement in the Waters.

4. Secondly, That the Holy Writers do not pen down their Conceptions in so
strict a Scholastic Method, that they keep precisely and punctually to one
Title; but by a free vibration of Fancy give a touch here and a touch there,
according as they were moved and actuated by that Spirit that exhibits more to
their Minds at once then their Tongue has leisure orderly and distinctly to
utter; and are more earnestly taken up in making good the main and most useful
scope of their discourse, then to satisfy men's Curiosities in particular
Niceties.

5. Thirdly, That many Words in Scripture have a lax and ambiguous sense, and
that therefore they are to be understood according as Circumstances and
Likelihood of Truth determine: and that these Terms (...) and (...) are of
that nature; they sometimes signifying the raising up again of a Body out of
the grave, sometimes merely vivificating of the Body, or recovering a Person to
life, other sometimes (...) is the very same with the Jews (...), as Grotius
observes, which signifies nothing else but Eternal life, or a Blessed
Immortality. Others enlarge the Signification further, and make (...) and (...)
the same that (...), Conservation in Being: And Death seeming to us so
dangerous a passage, as if we were in hazard of either falling asleep or
sliding into a Non-subsistence, Divine Conservation, because we begin then a
new state of life, is not unfitly termed (...), as giving us as it were a new
Subsistence, setting us upon our feet again; and (...), as keeping us awake
when we seemed in danger of letting go all functions of life. Which meaning of
the words a late Interpreter handsomely makes good, comparing (...), Romans 9.17.
with (...), Exodus 9.16. which the Seventy render (...). The manner of which
(...) or Conservation is excellently set out by this word (...), which may
imply a kind of jogging or stirring up which is used to recover or prevent
ones falling into a swoon; and God is the grand Author of Life and Motion, as
the Apostle speaks.

6. Fourthly and lastly, That the Corinthians being a people given notoriously
to the pleasures of the Flesh, there is no question to be made but the
Temptations of the place had also drawn away some Members of the Church there
at Corinth, and made them also (...). Now there being nothing that does so much
extinguish all Hopes and Apprehensions of a Life to come as Carnal and Sensual
pleasures; it is very likely that those corrupted members fell away in their
own judgments from the belief of any Reward after this life, and so with
Himeneus and Philetus, or with the David-Georgians and our modern Nicolaitans,
allegorized away the real meaning of the Resurrection or the Blessed
Immortality into a mere moral sense, under pretense whereof they might
ostentate themselves more Spiritual and knowing Christians then the rest; and
yet with less fear and remorse of conscience indulge to themselves all looseness
and liberty of enjoying every tempting pleasure of this mortal life.

7. Wherefore to the present Argument I answer in general out of this last and
the foregoing Premiss, That the purpose of the Apostle in this 15 to the
Corinthians is to show That there is a Life after the death of this Body, and a
Blessed Immortality to be expected. A palpable pledge whereof was God's raising
of Christ's body out of the grave, and exhibiting him alive to his Disciples.
Which was a Sign very significant and expressive of the thing; this Blessed
Immortality mainly consisting in being clothed with those Heavenly, Ethereal
and Paradisiacal bodies which Christ will bestow upon those that belong to him
at the last day.

8. Out of the First I answer, That though S. Paul speak in such a Phrase as
fixes our Imagination on the Earth only, as is plain from that comparison of
seed sown and rotting in the ground (for men sow not seed upon the Water) yet
in whatsoever Element the Souls or Bodies of the Saints be found, Earth, Water
or Air, nay though we should grant with some that sundry Souls of holy men act
in Aerie vehicles in this interval betwixt their Death and the Day of Judgment;
yet it is no more prejudice to them, then to those that are found alive in the
flesh; For none are excluded from the enjoyment of their glorified bodies.

9. Out of the Second and Third I answer, That S. Paul might very well have
Three conceptions vibrating in his mind, while he wrote concerning this
Mystery: the one more Simple and General, of the Life and Subsistency of the
Soul out of this Earthly Body; the other more Special, of a Blessed
Immortality; and the Third most Determinate of all, which represented the
manner of this Blessedness, in being invested with glorified bodies. And out of
this General I shall direct a more Particular answer to that of the 32 of this
Chapter, where (...) may be either interpreted, if the Souls of just men
deceased obtain not their glorified or heavenly Bodies: (For though it were
granted that they did in the mean time live and act in Aerie vehicles, yet that
State and Region, as the Earth, being common to good and bad, they had yet
obtained no peculiar reward for their hardship and toil here) Or else, which is
the more safe sense by far, it may be interpreted at large of the life and
subsistency of the Soul after its departure, according to the last
signification of (...), in the third Premiss. And thus is the strength of the
main proof of the Psychopannychites utterly enervated.

10. But there are other places of Scripture which they misapply to the same
purpose, as the Answer of our Savior to the Sadducees question concerning the
Resurrection, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob;
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Hence our Adversaries would
conclude That the Souls of the departed do not live; because if they did, our
Savior's argument would be invalid for the Resurrection. For if Abraham's
Spirit were now alive, God might be his God, though his Body never rise. But
this is easily satisfied out of the second Premiss: By Resurrection there being
understood a Life hereafter, and the Opinion of the Sadducees being That there
is neither Angel, nor Spirit, nor Life to come, he does not exactly tie himself
to that particular circumstance of a blessed Immortality that consists in the
enjoyment of glorified Bodies; but answers more at large concerning the
subsistence of Souls of men departed, that they are and live, and that
therefore there are Spirits; and so handsomely confutes the whole Doctrine of
the Sadducees by that citation out of their own Pentateuch, and a skilful
application thereof.

CHAP. VII. 1. A General Answer to the last sort of places they allege that
imply no enjoyment before the Resurrection. 2. A Particular answer to that of 2
Cor. 5. out of Hugo Grotius. 3. A preparation to an Answer of the Author's own,
by explaining what the Greek word (...) may signify. 4. His Paraphrase of the
six first Verses of the forecited Chapter. 5. A further confirmation of his
Paraphrase. 6. The weakness of the Reasons of the Psychopannychites noted.
1. THE third and last way of proving the Sleep of the Soul, is from such
Passages in Scripture as seem to join the Hour of our Death immediately with
the Day of our Resurrection, as in 2 Cor. 5. Where the Apostle seems to
intimate that there does nothing intercede betwixt the solution of our Earthly
Tabernacle, and being clothed with the Heavenly; which not being till the Day
of Judgment, it is a sign that the Soul is in no condition unless that of Sleep
till then. So likewise in 2 Timothy chap. 1. and chap. 4. In the former he speaks
of his Depositum, Chap. 1. v. 12. Chap. 4. v. 8.
which he intrusts God with till that Day, and prays that Onesiphorus may find
mercy at that Day: and in the latter he speaks of a Crown of righteousness that
the Lord the righteous Judge will give him at that day, as if all were deferred
till then. But in my conceit it is a weak kind of Argument, Because the Souls
of the Saints receive not their great reward till the Day of Judgment, that
therefore they receive nothing at all; nay that they are in a worse state then
in this life, as having lost all Sense of Existence or Being. Their opinion to
me seems more tolerable then this, who, though they do not presently mount them
up in their Ethereal Chariots to Heaven, yet permit them to move and to act in
their Aereal Vehicles at a less distance from the Earth. But that Last day
being a day of that high Solemnity, dreadful Glory and Majesty, it is no wonder
that for the better moving of the Minds of men, he so often mentions that time
without taking any notice of the interceding Space: For thereby it also seems
more nigh, as a distant Object does to the sight, no visible thing coming
between.

2. Now for the second to the Cor. 5. chap. There be two ways of clearing that
difficulty there: The one of Hugo Grotius, in which a late learned Interpreter
of our own does also insist, expounding (as they may well) the third verse
((...)) thus, If so be we shall be found in the number of those that are still
clothed with these Earthly bodies, not stripped naked of them by death. This
Interpretation the word (...) going before makes still the more warrantable; as
also that following phrase, (...), which is used by the Apostle in a parallel
case. This Exposition utterly destroys all the force of the Psychopannychites
Argument taken from this place: For whereas the Apostle seems to speak as if
immediately upon the solution of this Earthly, they were to be invested with a
Heavenly Tabernacle, (which is mainly to be gathered out of the second and
fourth verses) it is only upon the supposition that the day of the Lord might
come while they were yet clothed with flesh.

3. But because this Interpretation may seem to be something derogatory to the
Apostle's Knowledge, as if he were pendulous and uncertain whether the day of
Judgment might not be in his time; which some men will not bear: I shall
propound another, that they may take their choice. The former seems to have a
special advantage in the proper sense of those two words, (...) and (...) and
if we can but come off well here, we shall carry on the rest handsmooth. We
premise therefore thus much concerning the meaning of those two words, That as
(...) signifies simply to put on a garment, so (...) may well signify to put
on an inward garment. For (...) will signify within, in composition, as the
Latin word In does in Inducula, Inducium, and Interula; all which signify an
inward Garment, and the two former they ordinarily derive from (...) or (...)
in this proper signification of the word. And as (...) may signify to put on
an inward garment, so (...) may signify an addition of an inward garment to an
outward, for so (...) will signify in composition; as if the sense were,
(...), not to be content to wear an upper garment only, but to put on also an
inward; as we do in winter add an half-shirt or a wastcoat. Or if this look
like too curious a Criticism, let (...) be the same with (...), and (...) the
same that (...) would be: which would signify then at large only the adding of
further clothing, whether within or without, but is to be expounded as
circumstances require.

4. Being thus fitted for the purpose, we shall now briefly paraphrase the six
first verses of the 15. chap. which they allege against us, thus; 2 Cor. 5.
1. For we know, that if this Earthly and Mortal Body of ours were destroyed,
that yet we have an Heavenly one whose Author and Maker is God. 2. And for this
cause is it that we groan so earnestly to be clothed also with our Heavenly
Body within this Earthly: 3. Because we being thus clothed, when we put off our
Earthly Body, we shall not be found naked, nor our Souls left to float in the
crude Air. 4. For we that are in these Earthly Bodies groan earnestly being
burdened, not as if we had a desire to be stripped naked of all Corporeity, or
that we should be presently rid of these Earthly Bodies before God see fit; but
that we may have a more Heavenly and Spiritual clothing within, that mortality
may be swallowed up of life. 5. Nor do we arrive to this pitch by our own
power, but it is God who works upon us (as I said) both Body and Soul, and
frames us into this condition by the operation of his holy Spirit, which he has
given as a pledge of our Eternal Happiness. 6. And therefore we are always of
a good courage, not discontented at any thing. For whether we be in this
Earthly Body, it is tolerable, as being our usual and natural home; or whether
we go out of it, which is most desirable, we shall then go to the Lord, our
inward man being so fitly clad for the journey.


5. That this is the genuine sense of these verses, the 16 verse of the Chapter
immediately going before will further confirm, where the Apostle says, That
though his outward man perish, yet his inward man is renewed day by day, which
is, Though his Earthly Body be in a perishing and decaying condition, yet his
Spiritual and Heavenly gets strength and flourishes every day more and more.
Now the Resurrection and Attainment of the Heavenly Body being all one, it were
worth the while to enquire into the meaning of the Apostle, Philipp. 3. v. 11.
where he professes his unwearied endeavors to attain to the Resurrection of
the dead: where presently it follows, Not as if I had already attained it, or
as if I were already perfected. For if he meant not this Inward Spiritual body
inveloped in the Earthly, he need not tell the Philippians that he had not yet
attained it. But the Point in hand is sufficiently plain already.

6. We have seen what weak Demonstrators the Psychopannychites are against the
Life and Operation of Souls out of the Body, in their appeals to Scripture: We
shall now see how improbable their aspersion is of the Opinion being a Pagan or
Heathenish invention derived, as they say, merely from the School of Pythagoras
and Plato, and from thence introduced into the Church.

CHAP. VIII. 1. That the Opinion of the Soul's living and acting immediately
after Death, was not fetched out of Plato by the Fathers, because they left out
Preexistence, an Opinion very rational in it self, 2. And such as seems
plausible from sundry places of Scripture, as those alleged by Menasseh Ben
Israel out of Deuteronomy, Jeremy, and Job. 3. as also God's resting on the
seventh day. 4. That their proclivity to think that the Angel that appeared to
the Patriarchs so often was Christ, might have been a further inducement. 5.
Other places of the New Testament which seem to imply the Preexistence of
Christ's Soul. 6. More of the same kind out of S. John. 7. Force added to the
last proofs from the opinion of the Socinians. 8. That our Savior did admit,
or at least not disapprove the opinion of Preexistence. 9. The main scope
intended from the preceding allegations, namely, That the Soul's living and
acting after death is no Pagan opinion out of Plato, but a Christian Truth
evidenced out of the Scriptures.
1. AND I think it is not hard for a man to prove that this sinister conceit of
theirs is almost impossible to be true. For if the ancient Fathers by virtue of
their conversing so much with Plato's writings had brought this opinion, of the
Souls living and subsisting after death, into the Christian Religion, they
could by no means have omitted the Preexistence of it before, which is so
explicit and frequent a Doctrine of the Platonists; especially that Tenet
being a Key for some main Mysteries of Providence which no other can so
handsomely unlock, and having so plausible Reasons for it, and nothing
considerable to be alleged against it. For is it not plain that the Soul,
being an Indivisible and Immaterial Substance, can not be generated? Now if it
be created by God at every effectual act of Venery, (besides that in general it
is harsh that God should precipitate immaculate Souls into defiled Bodies) it
seems abominable that by so special an act of his as Creation, he should be
thought to assist Adultery, Incest and Buggery. Of this see more at large in my
Trestise Of the Immortality of the Soul, Book 2. chap. 12, and 13.

But they will still urge, That it was not the Unreasonableness of the Opinion,
but the Uncompliableness of it with Scripture, that made them forgo the
Preexistency of the Soul, though they retained her Subsistency, Life and
Activity after death.

2. But it had assuredly been no hard matter for them to have made their Cause
plausible even out of Scripture it self. The Jews would have contributed
something out of the Old Testament. Menasseh Ben Israel cites several places to
this purpose, as Deuteronomy 29.14, 15. insinuating there, that God making his
covenant with the absent and the present, that the Souls of the posterity of
the Jews were then in Being, though not there present at the Publication of
the Law: For the division of the Covenanters into absent and present naturally
implies that they Both are, though some here, some in other places. This Text
is seriously alleged by the generality of the Jews for the (...) of Souls, as
Grotius has noted upon the place: Also Jeremy 1. verse 5. The forenamed Rabbi
renders it, Antequam formassem te in ventre, indidi tibi sapientiam, reading
(...) in Piel, not in Call. Before I formed thee in the belly, I had made thee
of a wise ingenie, fitted thee to all holy Knowledge, Job 38.19, 21.
etc. We will add a third place, Job 38. He renders it, Nosti te jam tum natum
fuisse, Know thou that thou wast then born, and that the number of thy days
are many? Then, viz. from the beginning of the Creation, or when the Light was
made (a symbol of Intellectual or Immaterial Beings). The Seventy also plainly
render it to that sense, (...), I know that thou wast formed then, and that the
number of thy years are many. The Author of the Book of Wisdom (who though he
be not Canonical, yet is acknowledged a very venerable Writer) speaks out
plainly concerning the Soul of Solomon, chap. 8. v. 19, 20. For I was a witty
child, and had a good Spirit: Yea, rather being good, I came into a body
undefiled.

3. Besides, they might have alleged how inconsistent the daily Creation of
Souls is with God's resting on the Seventh day, as having then finished the
whole work of his Creation.

4. Moreover, their inclination to think that in sundry of those Apparitions of
Angels to the ancient Patriarchs, it was Christ himself that appeared, would
further have enticed them to retain this Doctrine of Preexistence of Souls,
that that opinion of Christ's appearing then might be more entire and
determinate; as it would be also in those that hold Melchisedec that blessed
Abraham to have been Christ: which opinion Cunaeus looks upon as true; nor can
Calvin look upon it as strange, if he do but hold to his own words in his
readings upon Daniel, In eo nihil est absurdi, quod Christus aliquam speciem
humanae naturae exhiberet antequam manifestatus esset in carne. And that the
Angel that led the Israelites into the land of Canaan was Christ, seems plainly
asserted 1 Cor. chap. 10. v. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them
tempted him, and perished by Serpents. But Christ is a complexion of the Humane
nature with the Divine. Consider also Hebr. 11.26. which seems to implie that
the Soul of the Messiah was a Patron and Protector of the Holy seed betimes,
and had a special relation to the Jews above any other Nation. And therefore
when he came into the world, (i. e. was born, brought up and conversed among
the Jews,) he might the more properly be said to come to his own, though his
own knew him not, John 1.11.

And verily that the Soul of the Messiah was in Being before he took upon him
our flesh, the most easy and natural meaning of 1 John 4.2. seems also to
import, (...). Here S. John seems to cabbalize, as in several places of the
Apocalypse, that is, to speak in the language of the Learned of the Jews: For
the genuine sense is, He that confesses that Jesus is the Messiah come into the
flesh, or into a Terrestrial Body, is of God: Which implies that he was, before
he came into it. Which is the doctrine of the Jews, and expressed so exactly
according to their sense, that themselves could not have uttered it more
naturally and significantly, and therefore, might they say, it is unnatural and
violent to put any other meaning upon it.

5. Again, He being happily (before the Generation of men and the peopling of
the earth) the Messiah Elect, (as I may so speak) united also with the (...),
and resplendent with Celestial glory and beauty amongst the Angels in Heaven;
this Hypothesis will give a very easy and natural sense to sundry places of
the New Testament that otherwise seem very obscure. As that of Philipp. 2.6, 7,
8. For it has racked many men's minds to conceive how an Exinanition of himself
can belong to the Eternal and Immutable God by becoming man; which the Text
seems to point at. But it may very properly belong to the Soul of the Messiah,
who was yet truly God by a Physical union with the Godhead. So likewise John
17.4, 5. I have glorified thee upon earth, for which purpose I was sent down
thither. And now, Father, bring me up back again to thy self, that I may again
enjoy that Glory which I had with thee in the Heavens, before the world and
Generations of men were. This is the easy meaning of those two Verses: For
that this is to be understood of the Humanity of Christ, Grotius is so
confident, that he is fain to turn (...), which I was to have, or which I was
designed to have, before the world was. But this present gloss needs no such
distortion or force done to words, but is very natural and genuine.

6. Again, John 6.38. I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own will, but
the will of him that sent me: and chap. 3.31. He that comes from Heaven is
above all: and yet clearer, chap. 16.28. I came forth from the Father, and am
come into the world; again I leave the world, and go to the Father. But
clearest of all, chap. 3.13. where speaking of his Ascension (and that was
Local) he mentions also his Descension, which it is most natural to understand
in the same sense. No man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down
from Heaven, even the Son of man who is in Heaven; i. e. whose mind and
conversation is there, though his Personal and visible presence be here on
earth, as Grotius also interprets these last words. To all which you may add
John 6.26. What if you shall see the Son of man ascend where he was before?

7. These Scriptures which we have cited bear so strong toward a Local
descending from, as well as ascending up to, Heaven, that some have thought
that Christ was, besides his Ascension after his Resurrection, bodily taken up
into Heaven, and that he there received instructions from God, and was then
sent down to publish the Gospel. But certainly so notable a Transaction of
Christ then in the flesh would never have been omitted by the other three
Evangelists, nor so slightly and obscurely intimated by this.

8. But this Evangelist flying higher then to be kept within the compass of the
time since his Incarnation, it had been very easy for the Fathers to have
pleaded for the Preexistence and Descent of the Soul of the Messiah from Heaven
into an Earthly Body from those passages of Scripture which we have quoted. And
to make all sure, they might have further alleged for this opinion of the
Soul's Preexistence, that it was at least unreproved, if not approved of, by
our Savior himself; as appears out of John 9. where he being asked by his
Disciples, whether it was the blind man's own fault, or his parents, that he was
born blind (which question plainly implies a Preexistence before this life) he
seems to admit, it is certain he does not reprehend, the Hypothesis: No more
then he does, Mark 8.27, 28. or Matthew 16.14. where his Disciples telling him,
that some took him for Elias, others for Ieremias, or for some one of the old
Prophets or other; he there again admits or not gainsaies the opinion of the
Jews concerning the Preexistence or Transmigration of Souls, (as Grotius
himself acknowledges that of Jeremy to be referred ad (...),) but passes to a
questioning of them, whom they thought him to be.

9. I conclude therefore, there being such plausible pretensions to prove the
Preexistence of Souls, not only out of Reason but Scripture it self, if the
Fathers had been imbued with that Heathenish and Pagan opinion (as our
Adversaries term it) of the Soul's being able to act after the death of the
Body, from the Philosophy of Plato, it had been even impossible for them to
forgo the latter part concerning the Preexistent life of the Soul before she
comes into these Bodies; which is the thing I have all this while driven at.

CHAP. IX. 1. Proofs out of Scripture That the Soul does not sleep after death:
as 1 Peter 3. with the explication thereof. 2. The Authors Paraphrase compared
with Calvin's Interpretation. 3. That Calvin needed not to suppose the Apostle
to have writ false Greek. 4. Two ways of interpreting the Apostle so as both
Grammatical Soloecisme and Purgatory may be declined. 5. The second way of
Interpretation. 6. A second proof out of Scripture. 7. A third of like nature
with the former. 8. A further enforcement and explication thereof. 9. A fourth
place. 10. A fifth from Hebr. 12. where God is called the Father of Spirits,
etc. 11. A sixth testimony from our Saviors words, Matthew. 20.28.
1. BUT that this so Useful and Comfortable a Doctrine of the Soul's living
and subsisting after the shipwreck of this Body may be firmly established, I
shall further add what plain Evidences there are in Scripture for the proof
thereof (For as for those of Reason, I shall refer you again to my abovenamed
Treatise, Book 2. chapter 16, 17, and 18.)

And I conceive that of 1 Pet. 3. v. 18, 19, 20. is none of the meanest, if
Prejudice and Violence wrest it not out of its genuine sense, which any man may
easily apprehend to be this; For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the
just for the unjust, (that he might bring us to God,) being put to death as to
his Body or Flesh, but yet safe and alive as to his Soul and Spirit. By which
also he went and preached unto the separated Souls and Spirits in prison, which
sometimes were disobedient, viz. in the days of Noe.

2. That solid interpreter of Scripture John Calvin expounds it in the main
according to this Paraphrase; only for being alive as to his Soul or Spirit, he
reads it, vivificatus Spiritu, meaning by Spirit the Spirit of God. But it is
plain that the Antithesis is more patt and punctual as we have rendered it, and
(...) is as warrantably interpreted to be alive as to be made alive: as (...)
is to be grave, not to be made grave. Beside, (...) as well as (...) in the
Greek Septuagint signifies not only to revive one dead, but to save alive,
according to which sense we have translated (...).

There is also another slight difference betwixt us, in that he had rather have
(...) translated a watchtower then a prison: Which we should easily admit, who
allege this place against the Sleep of the Soul; but he acknowledging also
that the other sense is good, we have not varied from the common Translation.
The greatest discrepancy is, that he conceives that (...) is put for (...), a
Dative for a Genitive absolute: but I leave him there to compound that
controversy with the Grammarians. The truth is, the learned and pious
Interpreter thought it more tolerable to admit that the Apostle writ false
Syntax then unsound Doctrine; the fond opinion of the Papistical Purgatory
being a worse Soloecisme in Religion, then to Latinize in Greek, or put a false
Case, is in Grammar.

3. But this being too loose a Principle, and wholly unsatisfactory to our
Adversaries, to fancy the Holy Writers to soloecize in their language, when
we do not like the sense; he had better have taken some other course more
allowable to save us from the peril of Purgatory: and in my judgment there are
two, either of which will suffice to fence us from the Assaults of the
Romanists.

4. The first is, By observing a latitude of sense in the word (...). For, as
Aristotle notes in his Metaphys. lib. 4. cap. 12. the particle (...) in
composition does not only signify perfect privation, but also (...) from
whence we may well translate (...), who in times past were not so obedient or
so believing as they should be; and who were so bad, that they might be
punished in their bodies and perish in the Deluge, but yet so good, that at
length they must attain to an higher degree of eternal life by Christ's
preaching to the dead, as is also intimated in the following chapter of this
Epistle ver. 6. Wherefore acknowledging but Two states, viz. of either Hell or
Paradise, we say, that these (...) were in the very lowest degree of Paradise,
in which they were kept as in an inferior Mansion, which was as a kind of
prison or close custody unto them, (their desires aspiring higher,) till there
was made a great accession unto their happiness upon Christ's appearing and
preaching unto them. And this is the very sense that Calvin aims at in his
Commentary upon this place.

5. But there is yet another Interpretation, which we will propound in the
second place, as free from the fear of any Purgatory as the former, and
requires no immutation at all in our foregoing Paraphrase. We'll admit
therefore that these Disobedient Souls were in Hell, not in the lowest Region,
but in the more tolerable parts thereof: It does not at all from hence follow,
because Christ in his Spirit exhibited himself to these, preached to them, and
prepared them by the glad tidings of the Gospel, and after carried them to
Heaven with him in Triumph as a glorious spoil taken out of the jaws of the
Devil, that there is any Redemption out of Hell now, much less any Purgatory.
For there were two notable occasions for this, such as will never happen again:
For it respects the Souls of them that were suddenly swept away in the Deluge,
and the Solemnity of our Saviors Crucifixion and Ascension; He even in the
midst of Death undermining the Prince of Death, and at his Ascension
victoriously carrying away these First Fruits of his Suffering, and presenting
them to his Father in the highest Heaven. But to expect from this, that there
should be still continued a daily or yearly releasment out of Hell or
Purgatory, is as groundlesly concluded as if, because at the solemn Coronation
of some great Prince all the prison-doors in some City were flung open,
Malefactors should infer, that they will ever stand open all his whole Reign.

Thus we see how safe also the easy and obvious sense of this place is; which I
thought fit to rescue from the torture of other more learned and curious
Expositors, that it might be able to give its free suffrage for the
Confirmation of a Point so useful as this we have in hand. For it is plain
that if Christ preached to the dead, they were not asleep at so concerning a
Sermon.

6. Again, 2 Cor. 5. v. 8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be
absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord. Here (...) plainly
intimates a going out of this Mortal Body, not a change of it into an Immortal
one: therefore we may safely conclude that this courage and willingness of the
Apostle to die implies an enjoyment of the presence of Christ after death
before the general Resurrection: Else why should he rather desire to die then
to live, but that he expects that Faith should be presently perfected by Sight,
as he insinuates in the foregoing verse? But assuredly better is that enjoyment
which is only by Faith, then to have no enjoyment at all; as it must be if the
Soul cannot operate out of this Body.

7. A like Proof to this and further Confirmation of the Truth is that of
Philipp. 1.21, 22, 23, 24. where the Apostle again professing his courage and
forwardness to magnify Christ in his body, whether by life or by death, uses
the like Argument as before; For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
But if I live in the flesh, it will be worth my labor; yet what I should choose
I wot not. For I am in a strife betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to
be with Christ; which is far better: Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is
more needful for you.

8. The genuine sense of which Place is questionless this; That while he lived,
his life was like Christ's upon Earth, innocent, but encumbred with much
hardship and affliction, bearing about in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus;
but if he died, he should then once for all seal to the Truth of his
Martyrdom, and not only escape all future troubles (which yet the love of
Christ, his Assistance, and Hope of Reward did ever sustain him in) but, which
was his great gain and advantage, arrive to an higher fruition of him after
whom he had so longing a desire. But if to be with Christ, were to sleep in his
bosom, and not so much as to be sensible he is there; it were impossible the
Apostles affections should be carried so strongly to that state, or his
judgment should determine it (...) so exceedingly much better; especially his
stay in the flesh being so necessary to the Philippians and the rest of the
Church, and what he suffered and might further suffer in his life, no less a
Testimony to the Truth, then Death it self.

9. Fourthly, Those phrases of S. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.13. Yea I think it meet, so
long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up and put you in remembrance:
Knowing that I must shortly put off this Tabernacle, etc. And so verse. 15.
(...), in all likelihood alludes to the same; as if his Soul went out of the
Body as out of a Tabernacle. All these Phrases I say seem to me manifestly to
indicate that there is no such necessary Union betwixt the Soul and the Body,
but she may act as freely out of it as in it; as men are nothing the more dull,
sleepy or senseless by putting off their clothes, and going out of the house,
but rather more awakened, active and sensible.

10. Fifthly, Hebr. 12. Heb. 12.9.
There God is called the Father of Spirits, the Corrector and Chastiser of our
Souls, in contradistinction to our Flesh or Bodies: and then verse. 22. lifting
us up quite above the consideration of our Corporeal condition, he brings us to
the Mystical mount Sion, the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem,
and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the Universal assembly, and Church
of the firstborn which are enrolled in heaven, and to God the Judge of all,
and to the Spirits of just men made perfect. Now I demand what Perfection can
be in the Spirits of these just men to be overwhelmed in a senseless Sleep: or
what a disproportionable and unsuitable representation is it of this throng
Theater in Heaven, made up of Saints and Angels, that so great a part of them
as the Souls of the Holy men deceased should be found drooping or quite drowned
in an unactive Lethargy? Certainly as it is incongruous in it self, so it is
altogether inconsistent with the magnificency of the representation which this
Author intends in this place.

11. Sixthly, Matthew. 10.28. The life of the Soul separate from the Body is
there plainly asserted by our Savior. Fear not them that kill the Body, but
are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear him who is able to destroy both
Body and Soul in Hell; i. e. able, if he will, to destroy the life both of Body
and Soul in Hellfire, according to the conceit of those whose opinions I have
recited in my Treatise Of the Immortality of the Soul, Book 3. chap. 18. or
else miserably to punish or afflict both Body and Soul in Hell, the torments
whereof are worse then Death it self. For as (...) and perire signify to be
excessively miserable, so (...) and perdere may very well signify to make
excessively miserable. But now for the former part of the verse [ but are not
able to kill the Soul] it is evident that they were able, if the Soul could not
live separate from the Body. For killing of the Body, what is it but depriving
it of life? wherefore if the Soul by the death of the Body be also deprived of
life, it is manifest that she can be killed; which is contrary to our Savior's
Assertion.

CHAP. X. 1. A pregnant Argument from the State of the Soul of Christ and of
the Thief after death. 2. Grotius his explication of Christ's promise to the
Thief. 3. The meaning of (...). 4. How Christ with the Thief could be (...) and
in Paradise at once. 5. That the Parables of Dives and Lazarus and of the
unjust Steward implie That the Soul has life and sense immediately after death.
1. WE have yet one more notable Testimony against our Adversaries. Our Savior
Christ's Soul and the Thief's upon the Cross did subsist and live immediately
upon the death of the Body, as appears from Luke 23.42, 43. And he said unto
Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said
unto him, Verily I say unto thee, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise:
As if he should thus answer, Thou indeed beggest of me that I would be mindful
of thee when I come into my Kingdom, but I will not defer thee so long;
only distrust not the unexpected riches of my goodness to thee: For verily I
say unto thee, That this very day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And there
is no evasion from this Interpretation, the Syriack, as Grotius notes,
interpointing betwixt [ I say unto thee] and [ Today,] and all the Greek
copies, as Beza affirms, joining (...) with (...), one of them also having
(...) betwixt (...) and (...) so that all subterfuge is quite taken away.

2. Grotius his Commentary upon this place is very ingenious, wherein he
supposes Christ to speak to the Thief being a Jew according to the Doctrine of
the Hebrews, who called the state of the piously-deceased (...) the garden of
Pleasure or Paradise: where though they enjoyed not that consummate Happiness
which they were in expectation of at the Resurrection, yet they were at the
present in a great deal of Joy and Pleasure; so much indeed that they held none
to arrive to it after their death but such as had their Souls well purified
before they departed their Bodies: whom he parallells to The Spirits of just
men made perfect.
(...) above mentioned out of the Author to the Hebrews chap. 12. and therefore
there was great cause, says he, that our Savior said, This day, thereby
signifying that he should not be any longer deferred, according to the Doctrine
of their Rabbis, notwithstanding the vainness of his life, but upon this his
Repentance should immediately be with Christ in Paradise, even that very day he
spoke unto him.

3. Nor need we with S. Austin sweat much in laboring to make that Article of
the Apostles Creed, He descended into Hell.
(...), agree with his being in Paradise in the Intervall betwixt his Death and
Resurrection. For Hades, ordinarily translated Hell.
(...) in general, as this Expositour makes good, signifies nothing else but
the invisible state of Souls separate from the Body: nor does He descended.
(...) restrain it to a descent into Hell. For as for this phrase, To descend
into Hell.
(...), because it is spoken of the whole Person of Christ, as it is also of
others that enter into the state of the dead; by the defixion of our Phansy
upon what is most gross and sensible, viz. the going down of the body into the
grave, we are easily drawn to make use of it to express the whole business both
of the Body's and the Soul's receding from amongst the number of the living:
as Jacob does, Genes. 37.35. For I will go down into the grave to my Son,
mourning.
(...) when notwithstanding his Son was not buried, but torn in pieces with
wild beasts, as he thought. Wherefore the sense is, my Body descending into the
Grave, with my Soul shall I go unto my Son into the Region of the dead.

4. Again, Though (...) usually signifies to descend or go downwards, yet it
signifies sometimes merely to vanish or go out of sight; and very often, as in
other words, so in this, (...) has no signification at all, but (...) is all
one with (...) to go: of which it were easy to give plenty of Examples out of
the Septuagint, but that I account it needless. Wherefore (...) may very well
be rendered, not that he descended into hell, but that he went into the Region
of Souls separate, or of the Spirits of men departed this life. And that (...)
bears this General sense, Grotius makes good not only from the forecited place
of Genesis, but from the use of the word in sundry Greek Authors, as Diphilus,
Sophocles, Diodorus Siculus, Josephus, Plato and others. That of Plutarch is
very remarkable, where he expounds that verse of Homer, (...).
To H^ll, or Ha^^^.
(...), that is, says he, Into an obscure and invisible, whether the air, or
some subterraneous place.
(...). And the same Author elsewhere, The invisibility and uncolouredness of
the Air is called Hades or Hell.
To (...) intimating that the Air is that Invisible Region of the dead, into
which the Spirits of dying men depart. And it is confessed of all sides that
whereas those other Elements, Fire, Water, Earth are visible, that the Air and
Ether are utterly invisible; and therefore Hades.
(...) may very well contain in it both Hell and Paradise. Whence it is plain
that Christ might be at the same time both (...) and in Paradise, as a man may
be both in England and in London at once. And his Promise to the Thief of the
immediate enjoyment of that Bliss, was as it were a Proclamation from the Cross
to all the World, That the Souls of men live and subsist out of their Bodies.
Which he further demonstrated by reassuming his own, and ascending with it up
to Heaven in the sight of his Disciples.

5. Which Truth he seems to me also plainly to suppose in the Parable of Dives
and Lazarus, as also of the Unjust Steward. For Dives his desiring Abraham to
send Lazarus to his brethren, to inform them of his sad condition, in what
trouble and torment he was, does manifestly imply That the Souls of the Wicked
are in Torment and in Trouble before the Day of Judgment, yea immediately upon
their Death; and That the Souls of the Godly are forthwith in Joy after their
departure out of this life: as is intimated by the Transportation of Lazarus
his Soul into Abraham's bosom, and our Savior's application of the Parable of
the Steward, exhorting us to be liberal of these worldly goods, that when this
life and the pleasures thereof fail, we may be received into joy everlasting.

But we need not insist upon what is more obnoxious to the Cavils and Evasions
of our slippery Adversaries, we having produced already so many and
unexceptionable Testimonies of Scripture for the Confirmation of the present
Truth, viz. That it is no Paganism, but sound and warrantable Christianity, to
assert That the Souls of the deceased do not sleep, but do live, understand and
perceive what condition they are in after death, be it good or evil.

BOOK II.
CHAP. I. 1. He passes to the more Intelligible parts of Christianity, for the
understanding whereof certain preparative Propositions are to be laid down. 2.
As, That there is a God. 3. A brief account of the Assertion from his Idea. 4.
A further Confirmation from its ordinary concatenation with the Rational
account of all other Beings, as first of the Existence of the disjoynt and
independent particles of Matter.
1. WE have at length passed through the most dark and doubtful part of our
journey, and have given what Account we were able of the most Obscure and
Abstruse points in Christianity: We begin now to enter into a more lightsome
Region and easier prospect of Truth, the day breaking upon us and the
morning-light tinging the tops of the mountains, from whence we are ascertained
of a further and a more full discovery of that Grand Mystery we seek after;
which the Spirit of God in the plain Records of Scripture will afterward so
ratify and confirm, that to those that have a judgment to discern, it will be
secured from all future controversy. But in the mean time we are to
contemplate the Reasonableness and Intelligibleness thereof from some chief
Heads or eminent and known Aphorisms in Philosophy and free Reason, which will
no less gratify our Understanding in this present pursuit after Truth, then
the pleasant reflections of the Sun's beams from the tops of the hills do the
eye of the early traveller. But we shall only rehearse, not insist much upon
the proof of these Conclusions, they being either so fully and irrefutably
demonstrated in other writings (See my Treatise Of the Immortality of the Soul,
and my Antidote against Atheism) or else of that Evidency in themselves, that
they want nothing but simple perception for their Demonstration.

2. The First and Chiefest is The Existence of God, that is, of a Being both
infinitely Wise, Good and Powerful. Which, it is manifest, cannot be Matter or
Body, grind it as thin as you will in your Imagination; and therefore he must
be a Spirit, Omnipresent, pervading and penetrating all things. Which
Conclusion is so agreeable to the Natural Faculties of our Mind, if we were
once acquainted with them. (For some men are become even strangers to the
better part of themselves) that any thing contrary or on this side of this
Po^ition will certainly lie very unevenly and untowardly in our Conception.

3. For whereas it is impossible but Something must be of itself; is it not far
more congruous to our Reason That that be of itself whose very Nature and Idea
imports so much, then that not only This should not be at all, but also some
other thing should be of itself, whose nature imports no such matter. Wherefore
it is most easy and most suitable to the Dictates of our own Faculties to
admit the Existence of God. From whence we are enabled to give a rational
account of the most considerable Objects that fall under our Contemplation. For
if any man will dare to assert That Matter exists of it self, his Assertion is
at random, nor can he render any Reason for it, there being no such thing
contained in the Idea thereof. But if he asserts God to exist, and any should
further demand How it comes to pass, the very Idea of God represents his Nature
to be such, that he cannot fail to be. For the Idea of the most Absolute and
Perfect Essence cannot but represent it to our minds to be such as has the most
Absolute and Perfect relation to Existence. From whence it follows, if we
believe our own Faculties, That he does exist. Otherwise, when our Faculties
tell us That Necessary Existence belongs to him, we shall notwithstanding
affirm That it does not belong unto him, (as certainly it does not, if he exist
not at all;) which is a palpable Contradiction.

4. But what a madness were it in a man to deny the free Dictates of his own
Reason in a Point not only so plain in itself but so serviceable and
delightful in the Contemplation of the Works of Nature and that Corporeal
Matter of which they are made? For as for the Existence of the very Substance
of Matter, we cannot be at a loss in the search of the Cause thereof, though it
contein no reason of its Existence in its Idea. For though every part thereof
be independent of the rest and separable, and therefore there might have been a
Want of Matter in the world, or it may be an Overplus; yet neither of these
have fallen out: but how Matter came to be produced such, and so much, as it
is, we have already found out a true and sufficient Cause, an Omnipotent Deity,
that can perform any thing that implies no Contradiction; and such is the
Production or Emission of Matter into Being.

CHAP. II. 1. That the wise contrivances in the works of Nature prove the Being
of a God; 2. And have extorted an acknowledgment of a General Providence, even
from irreligious Naturallists. 3. That there is a Particular Providence or
Inspection of God upon every individual person: Which is his Second Assertion.
BUT we proceed to that which is most curious and admirable, namely, The
Contrivance of this Matter into such various forms of living Creatures, wherein
there is such excellent and accurate Wisdom and Skill discovered, that it is
utterly impossible that the mere motion of the Matter should ever reduce it,
without an Intellectual Guide, into such perfect form and order. But to call
the First Cause of all this, Nature rather then God, is to talk either very
ignorantly or very humorsomely. For if they make Nature a blind and unknowing
Principle, how can she keep so constant a tenor of such cunning artifice in all
kinds of living Creatures? But if they will admit in her Knowledge and Skill,
it is then a frivolous and an humorsome controversy, whether the First
Principle of all things should be deemed a God or a Goddess, and be called Deus
or Natura. But they that are not wilfully ignorant, may understand That there
is That Order and Contrivance in the works of Nature, that the First Original
cannot but be Intellectual or Rational; and That all things are ordered for the
best purpose and greatest happiness of the Creation. So that what we find in
the Idea of God, that is, Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, we find also reflected
from the Objects of Nature, and can thence with a great deal of the highest
Devotion and pleasure, both further confirm that Innate Notion we have of God,
and ease our Minds in resting in so full and sufficient a Cause of those
exquisitely-framed Phenomenon that daily appear unto us in the World.

2. And verily the Species of things are so excellently-well provided for, that
it has extorted an acknowledgment of a General Providence even from such men,
as if their Intellectuals would have permitted them, their Morals would
scarcely have upheld them from sinking into the dullest degree of Atheism. But
seeing things so framed in Nature as they are, they could not but affirm That
they came from an Intellectual Principle, which is God; allowing him an
ineffable happiness in contemplating of Himself and His own Wisdom in forming
of the World and the various kinds of Creatures therein; but phansying him
withal so fatally affixed to his own seat, that he cannot bow himself to look
so low as to take notice of any Particular or Personal carriages of men, nor
stretch forth his arm either to reward or punish them. An Opinion that seems
either to arise out of a desperate inability of giving a Reason of sundry
accidents that happen to particular Creatures in the world, or else out of a
tender regard to their own Interest; they being afraid of any other God then
such as they have promised themselves will act nothing above or contrary to the
ordinary and known course of Nature, which, as they think, is a very certain
assurance of future Impunity.

3. But to me it seems impossible that so excellent a Being as the Deity is,
should be ignorant of any thing that implies no Contradiction to be known. And
therefore our Second Assertion shall be, That there is a very exquisite
Particular Providence reaching to every Individual thing or Person in the
world: It being as easy for God to see all things, as to see any one thing;
his Perception being Infinite, and therefore Undistractable and Indefatigable.
Now his Goodness and Power being no less immense, it will necessarily follow
That there is not any thing that befalls the meanest Creature in the whole
Creation, but that it was suitable to the Goodness of God either to cause it or
permit it. For though it may seem at the present harsh to that particular
Being, yet at the length it may prove for its greater Advantage; at least it
may be deemed good for the Universe, as Marcus Aurelius solidly and judiciously
ever and anon does suggest: and I think he is but a shallow Philosopher that
cannot maintain this Cause against all Atheistical surmises and cavills
whatsoever.

CHAP. III. 1. His Third Assertion, That there are Particular Spirits or
Immaterial Substances, and of their Kinds. 2. The Proof of their Existence, and
especially of theirs which in a more large sense be called Souls. 3. The
Difference betwixt the Souls or Spirits of Men and Angels, and how that Pagan
Idolatry and the Ceremonies of Witches prove the Existence of Devils. 4. And
that the Existence of Devils proves the Existence of Good Angels.
1. MY Third Assertion is, That there are Particular Spirits or Immaterial
Substances. Which will easily flow from what is so firmly proved already, That
there is one Omnipotent, Omniscient and infinitely-Benign Spirit, which we call
GOD: who therefore acting according to his nature, we cannot doubt but that he
has created innumerable companies of Spirits to enjoy themselves and their
Creator. Which are either purely Immaterial, having no communion at all with
Matter, with the Greeks again divide into (...) and (...), into pure Intellects
or Minds and simple Unities: or else such as (although according to their very
Substance or Essence they be Immaterial, yet) have a property of being vitally
united with, and also affected by, the Matter. To these Spirits, for want of a
better term, I must take the boldness to abuse a known word to a greater
latitude of sense, and give the name of Souls to them all, because they do
vitally actuate the Matter, be it Ethereal, Aereal, or Terrestrial. Whether
there be not also a middle sort betwixt these Souls and pure Intellects, a man
may well doubt, which differ from Intellect in having an immediate power of
moving the Matter, and from Souls in not being vitally joined therewith, but
acting merely as Assistent Forms, such as the Aristoteleans fancy their
Intelligencies to be.

2. For the Existence of the Three first Orders we have intimated already a
considerable Argument which reaches all the Orders of Spirits indifferently.
The last Order falls not only under the knowledge of more abstracted Reason,
but also under Experience it self. For that there is a Spirit in the Body of
Man is evident to us, because we find such See my Treatise Of the Immortality
of the Soul, Book 2. chap. 2, 4, 5, 6.
Operations in us as are incompetible to Matter, if we more closely and
considerately examine them. This Spirit that thus acts in us is called a Soul.
But that there is some such analogical Principle in the Aereal or Ethereal
Genii, the actions and conditions of some of them do confirm. For if their
Nature were not such as we have described, that is, if they did not inhabit and
vitally actuate corporeal Vehicles, how could they ever sin or fall? For it is
out of the conjunction of these two Principles, Spirit and Vehicle, that there
ever could be brought in any inward Temptation, Distraction or Confusion in any
of the Orders of the Genii or Angels. But Pure and Simple Abstract Beings seem
utterly Impassible, and therefore Impeccable. Wherefore it is very highly
probable That all fallen Angels, which we ordinarily call Devils, are of the
Fourth Order of Spirits which we have described.

3. Which Spirits of the Genii, fallen or not fallen, notoriously differ from
these Spirits of men, in that they are not capable of informing an Humane or
Terrestrial Body, and therefore bear themselves above them as a Superior Being,
and out of their pride and scorn have ever since their fall, either by fraud or
force, universally entangled poor contemptible Mankind in sundry performances
of Idolatrous worship unto them; which they could not have done, if men were
not lapsed as well as they. Wherefore the Pagans Superstitions and the History
of Witches will make good that there are Devils, and that they are of that
nature we speak of.

4. And I think this being evinced, no man will question but that there are
also Good Angels to conflict with and moderate the Bad. For God will not let
the great Automaton of the Universe be so imperfect, as to be forced to step
out perpetually himself to do that which some Noble part of his Creation might
perform; nor set those things one against another that are quite of another
kind. Besides, those Philosophers that have wrote of these things with most
judgment, do not easily conclude, That there are any other created Intellectual
Beings but such as are capable of being vitally united with some Vehicle or
other. Which, if it were true, is nothing prejudicial to us, the admission of
the Three First Orders being little or nothing serviceable to our design. And
lastly, it is improbable but that, the Fall of the Angels being from a Free
principle, as some fell, so others stood, and that there has ever been since
their fall both Good and Bad Angels in the world, in that sense as I have
explained the Nature of the Angels or Genii, whether Good or Bad.

CHAP. IV. 1. His Fourth Assertion, That the Fall of the Angels was their
giving up themselves to the Animal life, and forsaking the Divine. 2. The
Fifth, That this fall of theirs changed their purest Vehicles into more gross
and feculent. 3. The Sixth, That the change of their Vehicles was no extinction
of life. 4. The Seventh, That the Souls of Men are immortal, and act and live
after death. The inducements to which belief are the Activity of fallen Angels.
5. The Homogeneity of the inmost Organ of Perception. 6. The scope and meaning
of External Organs of Sense in this Earthly Body. 7. The Soul's power of
Organizing her Vehicle. 8. And lastly, The accuracy of Divine Providence.
1. WE add Fourthly, That these Angels before their Fall had a twofold
Principle of Life in them, Divine and Animal; and that their Fall consisted in
this, In leaving their obedience to the DIVINE LIFE, and wholly betaking
themselves to the ANIMAL LIFE without rule or measure.

2. Fifthly, That this Rebellion had an effect upon their Vehicles, and changed
their pure Ethereal Bodies into more Feculent and Terrestrial, (understanding
Terrestrial in as large a sense as Cartesius does, which will take in the whole
Atmosphere.) They have forfeited therefore these more resplendent mansions for
this obscure and caliginous Air they wander in, and have now in their polluted
Vehicles less of Heaven then the meanest Regenerate Soul that dwells in these
Tabernacles of Earth: and that of the Prophet is most true of them, that their
Sun is gone down at midday.

3. Sixthly, That the Destruction of these Ethereal Vehicles was not an utter
Extinction of life to them, but only an Exclusion from the life and pleasures
of that Supernal Paradise which they enjoyed in those Heavenly Vehicles. For
that they now live and move and act is manifest, in that the whole World rings
of their exploits and villainies.

4. Seventhly, That the Souls of men, which are as much Immortal (they being
Spirits) as those of the fallen Angels are, are not devoid of life after the
death of this Body. For as the Souls of the fallen Angels descended from
thinner to thicker, without the loss of Sense and Life; so do our Souls ascend
from thicker to thinner habitations, with the like (if not greater) security of
acting and living after the Death of the Body.

5. Which we shall the easilier believe, if we consider how contemptible and
homely a thing that Organ is which is the ultimate and immediate conveigher of
whatever we perceive in the outward world (and which is most remarkable) in
which alone the Soul has any Sense at all of any thing that arrives to her
cognoscence. See my Treatise Of the Immortality of the Soul, Book 2. chap. 7.
sect. 16, 17, 18. and chap. 8. throughout.
Which (if it be not the Animal Spirits within the Brain, which makes most of
all for us) I confess with Cartesius I think it most probable to be the
Conarion, then which nor Water, nor Air, nor Ether, nor any other Element else
seems more Simple and Homogeneal. So that the advantage seems not to be in the
nature of that Organ, but it is because the Soul by those laws that brought
her into the Body, has placed her Center of Perception there.

6. Which little Pavilion of the Soul's Center of Perception, being of so gross
consistence as it is, and becoming thereby less Passive and Alterable; it was
very requisite that there should be that curious frame of the external Organs
of the Eye, the Ear, the Nose and other parts, to strengthen those motions and
impressions that they transmit; so that they may be able forcibly enough to
strike upon the Conarion, or at least strike through the Organs, and penetrate
to the Animal Spirits in the Brain, supposing them the most inward and
immediate Organ of Perception. And that the Conformation of the external Organs
of Sense is such, that they are to admiration fitted to this end, is a thing so
well known amongst the Anatomists, that I need not insist on the proof of it:
as it is also among Physicians, That none of the external Organs have any Sense
at all in them, no more then an Acousticon or a Dioptrick glass. From whence is
discovered the Unreasonableness of their Despair, that conceit that when the
Soul is divested of her Organical Body, she can have no Sense nor Perception of
any thing. For this curious Organization tends to nothing else but the
proportionating the vigor of Motion to the difficulty of its passage through
the Nerves, or to the grossness of the consistency of the Conarion. Which
Organical contrivance therefore may not be at all needful in the Soul separate
from the Body, the Center of Perception being placed bare in a more tender and
passive Element, such as Air, Ether, and the like. So that it will be the
greatest wonder in the world, that the Soul should sleep after death, so small
a thing being able to waken her.

7. Besides, it is not Unreasonable but that She and other Spirits, though they
have no set Organs, yet for more distinct and full perception of Objects may
frame the Element they are in into temporary Organization, and that with as
much ease and swiftness as we can dilate and contract the pupil of our Eye, and
bring back or put forward the Crystalline humor.

8. And not only to respect the Natures of Humane Souls but also the Will and
Purpose of God, there was never any yet that pretended to knowledge in
Philosophy, that denied the Immortality of the Soul in this sense which we
contend for, but they denied first a Particular Divine Providence; which for my
own part I think it is impossible for any one to deny that will diligently and
indifferently search into the matter. And therefore this Seventh Assertion may
very well stand, That the Souls of men are Immortal, and act and live after
Death. Of this Subject I have wrote more lately and more fully in my Treatise
Of the Immortality of the Soul, Book 2. chap. 17, 18.
to which the Reader may have recourse.

CHAP. V. 1. The Eighth Assertion, That there is a Polity amongst the Angels
and Souls separate, both Good and Bad; and therefore Two distinct Kingdoms,
one of Light and the other of Darkness: 2. And a perpetual fewd and conflict
betwixt them. 3. The Ninth, That there are infinite swarms of Atheistical
Spirits, as well Aereal as Terrestrial, in an utter ignorance or hatred of all
true Religion.
THE Eighth Assertion is, That every Angel, Good or Bad, is as truly a Person
as a man, being endued also with Life, Sense and Understanding; whence they are
likewise capable of Joy and Pain, and therefore coercible by Laws. And mutual
Helps being able to procure what Solitude cannot, they must of necessity be
Sociable and hold together in Bodies Politic, and obey, for either hope of
advantage or fear of mischief. Out of the whole mass therefore of the
Angelical Nature (taking in also according to Philo the Souls of men, be they
in what Vehicles they will) there arise since their Fall two distinct Kingdoms,
the one of Darkness, (whose Laws reach no further then to the Interest of the
Animal life,) the other of Light, which is the true Kingdom of God, and here
the Animal life is in subjection, and the Divine life bears rule; as the Divine
life is trodden down in the other Kingdom, and the Animal life has the sole
Jurisdiction.

2. Now the inward life and spring of Motion in each Kingdom being so
different, it follows that these two Kingdoms must always be at odds, and that
there must be a perpetual conflict till victory. Which we shall still more
easily conceive, if we admit what is very reasonable, That the Kingdom of Light
reaches from Heaven to Earth, that is, That as there are found on the same
surface of the Earth Animals both wild and gentle, harmless and poisonous, and
men good and bad, pious and impious; so likewise even in the same Regions of
the Air, that there are scattered Spirits of both Kinds, good and evil,
Subjects of the Kingdom of Darkness and the Kingdom of Light. In the order of
those Aereal Angels the ancient Philosophers ranked the Souls of men deceased
whether Virtuous or Wicked, unless they had reached to an extraordinary and
Heroical degree of Purity and Perfection; for then they conceited that they
were carried up to those more high and Ethereal Regions.

3. Ninthly, That there are infinite swarms of Atheistical Spirits, as well
Aereal as Terrestrial, belonging to the Kingdom of Darkness, that either
absolutely deny God, or at least particular Providence; and look upon the
Divine life as a tedious and troublesome fancy and destitute of all future
reward: and if there be any present contentment in it, they reckon it amongst
such as accrews to men mad and distracted, whose Imagination makes them many a
fools Paradise to please themselves in; and so, say they, does this Religious
Lunacy to them that are tainted with it; it having neither any real Object nor
solid fruits but what a beguiled Phansy mocks their superstitious minds
withal. And though these Rebels may be well enough seen in the knowledge of
Nature and Mathematical subtilties, as also in all manner of Craft and
State Policy, yet their desires being so fully lulled asleep to all Divine
things, they can neither excogitate ought themselves, nor allow of any Reasons
from others, whereby they might be brought off from that state of Darkness and
Rebellion they are in, to the true worship of the living God. Nay it is
probable they are obdurated to that height of boldness, that they think
themselves able to grapple with the Powers of the Kingdom of Light; and that
Superiority was theirs of old, and is yet their due, and may come into their
hands again; and that their Chieftain is the elder brother, though cast thus
low by the envy of the younger: which was the wild conceit of the Euchites,
Ophites, or Satanians.

CHAP. VI 1. His Tenth Assertion, That there will be a final Overthrow of the
Dark Kingdom, and that in a supernatural manner, and upon their external
persons. 2. The Eleventh, That the Generations of men had a beginning, and will
also have an end. 3. To which also the Conflagration of the world gives witness.
1. NOW, in the Tenth place, it is very uncouth and unusual that so resolved
and unreconcileable opposition as there is betwixt the Two Kingdoms we speak
of, should not end at last in some signal overthrow, with Victory on the one
part or other. But besides, the undeniable right and justness of the cause
which the Powers of the Kingdom of Light contend for, will not only procure
of Him that fits Judge an End to their toil and conflict, but they will
certainly carry it on their side, and that not only in a still, Mystical,
Allegorical sense, (which these Atheistical Spirits will have no sense at all
of nor any perception; for they will resolve all into Nature, Policy and good
Fortune, it may be into some more then ordinary influence of the Stars that
begin to set a golden Age on foot again; so little would a Reign of righteous
men upon Earth convince the obdurately wicked) but by a powerful Miraculous
appearance, whereby they shall be confounded in their outward Senses; there
being nothing else left for Divine Providence to work upon; the Divine life and
touch of Conscience being utterly lost in them, and their Reason being
perfectly lulled asleep to whatsoever concerns the true Knowledge of God and
duties of Religion.

2. Eleventhly, The Generations of men had a beginning, and will also have an
end. That they had a beginning, is the general consent of all Philosophers,
Poets and Historians. The Aristoteleans indeed dissent, but upon such weak
grounds that it is not worth the while to confute them. But Cartesius his
Philosophy is so favorable to this Opinion, that necessarily it inferrs it.
Besides, the History of Nature seems to confess it, in that the Earth cannot
bring forth such perfect Animals as she did at first, as Lucretius has noted
Lib. 2. de Rerum Natura. Iamque adeo fracta est Aetas, effoetaque Tellus,
Vix animalia parva creat, quae cuncta creavit
Secla, deditque ferarum ingentia corpora partu.
The Earth who of her self at first brought forth
Huge lusty men of Stature big and bold,
And large-limb'd beasts, she grown effete and old
Hardly bears small ones now, and little worth.
Which as it must needs be an infallible sign of her Age, so it is also of her
once being young and having a beginning.

3. Now, besides that Axiom in Philosophy, That what has a beginning, will also
have an end; That Generation shall at last cease upon the face of the earth,
that ancient fame of the Conflagration of the world gives further witness to.
Of which direful fate the Sibylls have sung long since, and See The
Immortality of the Soul, Book 3. chap. 18.
Pythagoras and Heraclitus given Testimony, whom Ovid also has followed: And
the Stoics, men slow enough to believe great things upon slight grounds, have
taken it into their Philosophy; adding also that the Souls of men subsist till
then, but that at the last they are extinguished in this Final Conflagration.
Others phansy a more benign use of this Fire, that it shall purge and
fertilize the Earth, and prepare it for a more happy Habitation: as if the
Divine Nemesis had a kind design for the whole, when she seems so cruelly
severe to some part of the Creatures; and that she did in this not only an act
of Justice, but of skillful Husbandry, burning up the barren ground with all
the vermin therein, to make the Field the more fruitful; according to that of
Virgil in his Georgicks, Lib. 1.
Saepe etiam steriles incendere profuit agros,
Atque levem stipulam crepitantibus urere flammis:
Sive inde occultas vires ac pabula terrae
Pinguia concipiunt; sive illis omne per ignem
Excoquitur vitium, atque exudat inutilis humor.
The fruitless field with its dry standing straw
It Is fit sometimes to burn with crackling fire:
For whether hence the Earth hid virtue draw
And oily moisture, or she does perspire
And sweat out all corruption; by this Law
The bettered soil answers the swain's desire.
But God forbid that any mortal man should be so bold and unwise as to profess
he understands so profound a Mystery of Providence. All that I aim at is this,
That it is not only the Opinion of Christians but of ancient Heathens and
Jews, that the Earth at length will be all set on fire, and that there will be
a period put to this present stage of things; which I shall make a solid use of
in the behalf of our Religion against them both.

CHAP. VII. 1. His Twelfth Assertion, That there will be a Visible and
Supernatural deliverance of the Children of the Kingdom of Light, at the
Conflagration of the World. 2. The Reason of the Assertion. 3. His Thirteenth
Assertion, That the last vengeance and deliverance shall be so contrived, as
may be best fit for the Triumph of the Divine life over the Animal life. 4.
Whence it is most reasonable the Chieftain of the Kingdom of Light should be
rather an Humane Soul then an Angel. 5. His last Assertion an Inference from
the former, and a brief Description of the General nature of Christianity.
1. MY Twelfth Assertion is, That there shall not only be a sensible and
palpable Overthrow of the Kingdom of Darkness, (such as themselves shall feel
with a vengeance, a whirlwind of destruction rattling about their ears, as I may
so speak; the visible wrath of God seizing upon their external persons,) but
there shall be also a visible deliverance of the other Kingdom from this
storm of fire and brimstone, from this fierce anger of God and the rorings and
boilings of incensed Nature against the Wicked. For who can imagine the horror,
the stench, the confusion, the crackling of Flames of Fire, those loud murmurs
and bellowings of the troubled Seas working and smoking like seething Water in
a Caldron, the fearful howlings and direful groans of those rebellious
Ghosts, who besides the general defacement of whatsoever they heretofore took
pleasure in, are in an unexpressible torture of Body, with an unimaginable
vexation of Mind; Self-love then (the center of the Animal life) proving the
depth and bottom of Hell, as being inflamed and boiling up with the highest
indignation and vengeance against it self, that when it had so many
opportunities, it provided no better for its own happiness; being now convinced
that there is a Special Providence over the Good, and that Righteousness has
its Eternal Reward? For in that day shall all the Faithful renew their
strength, and shall mount up with wings as Eagles, and be carried far above the
reach of this dismal Fate; that is, they shall ascend up in those Heavenly
Chariots or Ethereal Vehicles (the ancient Philosophers speak of) and so enter
into Immortality and Eternal rest.

2. But if there were not this Visible deliverance of the Powers of the
Kingdom of Light, the Powers of the contrary Kingdom, let them suffer what
they would, they would imagine it a piece of blind and inevitable Fortune, as
well as partial Earthquakes and Inundations and particular Conflagrations,
which have destroyed Towns and Countries heretofore; and therefore deem their
ill condition a fad Calamity indeed, but no Punishment. Which will seem the
more probable if we consider that Epicures and Atheists themselves admit of a
Final Destruction of the World, as you may see in Lucretius, who speaking of
the Earth, the Sea and the Heavens, presages thus of them, Lib. 5.
Tres Species tam dissimiles, tria talia Texta,
Una dies dabit exitio; multosque per annos
Sustentata ruet moles and machina mundi.
Three Species of things so different,
Three such contextures, shall one fatal day
Ruin at once; and the world's Machina
Upheld so long rush into Atoms rent.


3. My Thirteenth Assertion is, That this palpable and visible Difference which
Divine Providence is to make betwixt the Evil and the Good, will be, and is,
so wisely contrived, that it shall not only be a manifest Conviction and
Confutation of Atheists and Epicures, and an undoubted Revelation of God's
Existence and Sovereignty in the world, but in a special manner for the high
Honor and Triumph of the Divine life over the Animal life. Which through so
many Sorrows, Afflictions, Temptations, scornful Reproaches of the Wicked,
their cruel and barbarous usages, shall at last with all the Embraces of her be
enthroned in Everlasting Peace and Glory.

4. And that this may be done more exquisitely, That Wisdom that contrives all
for the best, was to lay aside all those things that seem so goodly and
precious to the Animal life, such as are, The outward Power and Pomp of the
world, Highness of Rank, Transcendency in natural Knowledge, Beauty, Birth,
bodily Strength, or whatsoever the Animal life, divided from the Divine, takes
pleasure in, and can perform by it self: all this, I say, was to be laid aside
in the choice of that Person by whom this great conquest over the Kingdom of
Darkness was to be achieved; as it is written, He has no pleasure in the
strength of an horse, Psalm 147.10, 11.
neither delights he in any man's legs: But the delight of the Lord is in them
that fear him and put their trust in his mercy. Which I only cite for
illustration sake, it being undeniably true in it self, That God preferres his
own Glory, that is the Divine life, or the Image of himself shining in his
Creatures, before any Natural accomplishment whatsoever. Thus therefore it was
to fare in the choice of the Chieftain of the Powers of the Kingdom of Light:
As if some great Prince being highly displeased at the general Luxury,
Rebellion, and Persidiousness of his Nobles, to show how little he esteemed the
Highness of their Ranks in respect of true Virtue, should take some one of the
Lowest of the Commons, yet endued with eminent Prudence, Loyalty and Valor,
and set him next to himself in Honor, Trust and Power in the administrating
the affairs of his Kingdom: So the Almighty passing by those more Superior
Orders of Angels, that his high esteem of the Divine life might be more
apparent and conspicuous, was to make his choice in the rank of Humane Souls,
and to lay the Government upon some one, who being designed to that Office from
the beginning of the world, should win notorious victories against the Kingdom
of Darkness, and rescue at last all such as the Devil has held captive, into
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.

5. Lastly therefore (to make an end at length of my Preparatory Assertions)
the main Mystery of Christianity consists in this, That it is a wise
contrivance of Providence upon the lapse of Men and Angels, to slur and defeat
all the Pride and practices of the Devil and his accomplices, and to reduce all
Penitent and Regenerate Souls to that Glory and Happiness they heretofore
forfeited and fell from: Or, if you will briefly, but more significantly, thus;
Christianity is that Period of the VVisdome of God and his Providence, wherein
the Animal life is remarkably insulted or triumphed over by the Divine.

CHAP. VIII. 1. That not to be at least a Speculative Christian is a Sign of
the want of common Wit and Reason. 2. The nature of the Divine and Animal life,
and the state of the World before and at our Savior's coming, to be enquired
into before we proceed. 3. Why God does not forthwith advance the Divine life
and that Glory that seems due to her. 4. The First Answer. 5. A Second Answer.
6. A Third Answer. 7. The Fourth and last Answer.
1. WE have now laid down such Conclusions, either so Evident from themselves,
or Demonstrable from Reason, or so Allowable by the Authority of the wisest men
that have been in the world and yet uninterested in Christianity; that, the
hardest difficulties thereof being resolvable into these, it will appear that
it is not only an Indisposition to all Religion whatever, but the Want of
Common Wit and the laudable parts of a man, that keeps any one off, at least
from being a Speculative Christian.

2. There are only Two things more for a further Preparation to be proposed to
our view, before we come to a Particular application of the several Branches of
Christianity to the foregoing Theorems. The One is Concerning the Animal life
and the Divine; The other is Concerning the Condition of the World upon these
times, and before the Prince of the Kingdom of Light began that great
enterprise of redeeming of lapsed mankind out of the bondage of Satan.

3. Concerning the First it is likely some will be forward to enquire, What is
this Animal life, and what the Divine, that this must so pompously triumph over
the other? and why, if the one be so much more precious in the eyes of God then
the other is, does he not without so long ambages and tiresome circumstances
enthrone her at once, giving her her due honor without delay, and mistaken and
lapsed Souls that happiness they are capable of, without so tedious and irksome
trouble?

The rudeness and unmannerliness of this latter Question, or rather bold and
unskillful Expostulation, provokes me beyond the laws of Method to dispatch it
before the former; especially we wanting nothing further to answer it then what
is supposed in the very Expostulation, viz. That the Divine life is more
transcendently excellent and precious then the Animal life is.

4. But as Transcendent as it is, if we understand it aright, that of it which
is kept from us, is not any thing of it self, but an high and precious
modification of our own Minds, whereby we become unspeakably Good and Happy,
and are made thereby capable of enjoying God, the Highest Good that is
conceivable. But the Divine life in God is impassible, and cannot by any means
be disturbed, diminished, or incommodated any way: and That Life in us, viz.
that Divine modification of our Souls, when it is not in us, is not at all, and
therefore by not being bears no calamity, nor indeed being in us does it feel
any either pain or pleasure, gratification or discontent. For it is the Soul it
self that has the sense of all, and it is She that feels this Divine sense or
life; but there is no Sense feels it self, else there would be as many Persons
as Senses. Wherefore the Divine life it self is not injured, troubled, nor
pained by any impatiency or expectance of that Honor and Triumph that is
intended.

5. Secondly, That estate that the Souls of the Blessed at last arrive to,
which is the crowning of the Divine life in them with Glory and Immortality, is
so Excellent and Transcendent a Condition, that it is very just and congruous
that no free Agent should ever arrive to it but through a competent measure of
Tribulation and Distress, as a Trial of that Loyal affection he owes to so fair
and lovely an Object. And if the Ways of Providence be something tedious and
tiresome in bringing the Souls of men to this haven of rest and quietness; yet
because we are so certainly and highly rewarded at the last, if Self-love do
not blind our eyes, we cannot but confess that the whole progress was very
becoming and decorous, and that things were carried on as they ought to be: as
Aristotle notes of Poetical History, where laborious and calamitous Virtue ever
at last attains to Victory and Glory. And therefore in that regard the
Philosopher prefers the reading of Epick Poets before Historians, because they
write of Affairs as they ought to be, but Historians only as they are, which do
often seem not to be so well as they should be. But Fools and Children, as the
Proverb is, are unfit Spectators of things in motion and transaction, they
knowing not at all whither they tend. And it is no wonder if the stupid World
be much amuzed at Providence, till that great Dramatist, God Almighty, draw on
the Period toward the last Catastrophe of things. For then certainly Heaven
and Earth will ring with this Plaudite or Acclamation, Verily there is a Reward
for the righteous; doubtless there is a God that judges the Earth.

But it is a wayward and impatient Temper in us, that we will neither expect
nor approve that Method in the full course of Providence, which the most
curious and judicious Phansies have set out to the great Gratification of our
Faculties, though but in feigned History: as if Humane contrivance could be
more just and exact then Divine Wisdom it self. Wherefore I say again, That
assuredly at the last, Passive and Perseverant Virtue shall ascend her
Triumphant Chariot, and be drawn through the wide Theater of the world in all
imaginable pomp and glory.

6. Thirdly, There is not only a due price set upon the Reward by this long
Trial and Probation; but there are Peculiar Virtues very noble and laudable
that are exercised therein, which might for ever have lien asleep without this
occasion: Such are Heroical Fortitude, unconquerable Patience, sedulous and
watchful Prudence, dexterous and subtle Invention, and clear and solid
management of Reason against the perverse suggestions or more impudent
declarations of the Sophisters of the dark Kingdom. Besides, we are in a more
sensible School of profound Humility and Submission to the will of God in all
things, and have the opportunity cast upon us of so strong Trials of our
Loyalty in the times of Desertion, that the remembrance of that Fidelity
cannot but make us find our selves far more dear to God, and raise an ineffable
Joy and Content to our Minds, that we have had such Occasions to show our
Faithfulness and Constancy to him whom our Soul loves. Wherefore from the
going on thus by degrees there seems to arise a natural accrewment of greater
Happiness. But to require of God, that he should at once command the Soul into
that state that it is thus kindly to ripen into in succession of time, is to
expect that the Seasons of the Year should be thrown headlong one upon another
on an heap, and that there neither should be Buds nor Blossoms (though they
have their peculiar Use, Beauty and Fragrancy) but that it should be Autumn
all the year long; as I have answered already in the like case. But the Divine
Wisdom is the best dispenser of his Goodness, who to set all the Powers of
Nature aworking, brings in Monsters as well as Hercules into the world, that
Valor may have a proportionate Object. And were not the Kingdom of Darkness
it self some way useful, and did not some Homage or other to the high
Sovereignty of Divine VVisdome and Goodness, I dare pronounce, it would not
subsist one moment, but be quite exterminated out of Being.

7. Fourthly and lastly, There being nothing detrimented but our selves (if we
be detrimented) by this delay of our Happiness, as I have already demonstrated,
and our selves being lapsed and revolted from God; it is very just that we do a
very competent Penance in that regard; that that Divine excellency that we are
to return to, may not be dishonored by so vile and cheap a prostitution, and
too easy and sudden reconcilement. For though God be at once reconciled to us
in his Son, yet it does not excuse us from undergoing a due order of Penalties
before we enjoy the full fruit of Reconciliation. And this is no new Doctrine,
but what the Apostles themselves have taught, That through much tribulation and
affliction we are to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; and, That whom the Lord
loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. Therefore
there is no returning to our lost Happiness or being received again into the
favor of God but in a durable way of Nurture and Trial. So that we see
sufficient reason why Providence should not bring on all that Happiness of the
Faithful at once, which at last will fall to their shares; but use some Delay
and Circumstances (as the Expostulator presumptuously calls them) before all
things be finished and completed.

CHAP. IX. 1. What the Animal life is in General, and that it is Good in it
self. 2. Self-love the Root of the Animal Passions, and in it self both
requisite and harmless in Creatures. 3. As also the Branches. 4. The more
refined Animal properties in Brutes, as the Sense of Praise, natural affection,
Craft: 5. Political Government in Bees 6. And Cranes and Stags, 7. As also in
Elephants. 8. The Inference, That Political Wisdom, with all the Branches
thereof, is part of the Animal life.
1. NOW to return to what we should have spoke of first, The Animal Life and
the Divine, and to declare What they are, not in a scrupulous Philosophical
way, but so far forth as will serve for use and the guidance of our lives; we
say first in General, That the Animal life is that which is to be discerned in
Brutes as well as in Men, which at large consists in the Exercise of the
Senses, and all those Passions that Nature has implanted in them, either for
the good of them in particular, or for the Conservation of their Species. Which
will be better understood, if we instance in some, wherein, as in the rest, the
Wisdom of God in Nature is easily to be traced. Whence it will likewise appear
That there is simply no Evil but Good in the Animal life it self; but that our
undue use of, or immoderate complacency in, such Motions is the only Sin: which
is plain in the outward Senses. But we shall chiefly, though very briefly,
consider the Passions of the brute Creatures.

2. The general Root of these questionless is Self-love, which though it sound
odiously (as it ought to do taken in the worst sense) amongst men, yet it is a
right and requisite Property of life in every brute Animal. For they not being
endued with the larger and more free Faculties of Reason and Understanding, if
that intense love which each bears to it self should have been equally carried
forth to the rest of the Creatures, what a puzzle and distraction would it have
made in every single Animal? care and solicitude being so redoubled upon
external considerations in the behalf of others, that it would force them every
one to be regardless of its own safety and welfare; or at least make them less
able to provide for it, they having their Animadversion fixed elsewhere, and
upon such as they cannot by reason of distance of place or like disadvantage
conveniently succor. And thus their Affection would prove as well fruitless to
others as unprofitable to themselves, it not being directed thither nor
concentred there where it may do most good, viz. to themselves; whom yet they
are always most able and most in readiness to help and assist, they being
nighest at hand and most present to themselves. Wherefore it is upon very just
grounds that every Animal should bear the strongest love toward it self,
because it is better able to attend its own welfare then another's, or can be
attended by another. Nec tam praesentes alibi cognoscere Divos.
There is therefore no Vitiosity in Self-love, as it is a mere Animal
affection, but it is a warrantable Principle of life implanted by God in Nature
for the good and welfare of the Creature.

3. And the Root having no poison in it, the Branches in themselves are pure
and innocuous. Which Branches are all the Animal Passions, such as Anger, Fear,
Sorrow, Joy, all the necessary Desires of the Body, to keep it in Being, such
as are Hunger, and Thirst, and Sleepiness. Nor does the effect or influence of
Self-love rest here in providing for the Individual; but that Wisdom that works
in Nature has so contrived it, that these brute Creatures when they seek their
greatest content and pleasure, they do then the most serviceable act that can
be done to the Universe, which is the Conservation of those Species of Animals
which are so perfect, that they cannot be continued in the world without this
manner of propagation, which is by union of Male and Female.

It is not my purpose to make an exact enumeration of all the Animal
affections, much less to declare the Use of them; in which Divine Providence
does as plainly appear, as in the Anatomy of the parts of the Body, and
therefore gives Testimony that they are all good in their kind, as being
inserted into the Animal Nature by so Wise and so Benign an Artificer.

4. I will only mention some few of the more refined Passions that are
observable in some Brutes: such as are, The sense of Praise and glory, The
strength of natural affection, The exercise of craft and subtilty for
self-preservation, Their real and effectual Policy for common safety, and an
obscure Imitation of some acts of Religion. We shall not make any tedious
Excursions upon these Particulars; we will only name some Animals, as a pledge
of the Truth we intimate. As for example, That there is the sense of praise,
glory and victory in Brutes, is evident in the Peacock, Elephant, Horse, and in
Cocks of the game. That there is natural affection in them to their young ones,
almost all Creatures witness; but of reciprocal affection of their young to
them that brought them forth the most eminent Example is in the Stork, whence
(...) is to do the duty of an affectionate child to his aged Parent. Gratitude
also of another kind is very conspicuous in other Animals, in Dogs especially,
who have often interposed their lives for the defense of their Masters, and
have had so deep a sense of Sorrow at their death, that they have thereupon
voluntarily pined away themselves and died. So that these very Brutes seem to
have arrived to that Pharisaical perfection that reached no further then loving
their friends, or doing good to those that did good to them. As for the Craft
and skill in shifting for one, as they say, and saving a man's own carcass,
though we might instance in many others, yet I shall content my self in only
naming that one Animal so well known for his wiles and subtilties, the Fox.

5. And for Political order and government, the exactness thereof in the
Commonwealth of Bees is not only noted by great Naturalists, such as Aristotle
and Pliny, but vulgarly known to every Countreyman that has Hives in his
garden; where he may observe, how some one Be by his humming, as by the sound
of a Trumpet, awakes the rest to their work; how fitly the whole Company
distribute the several tasks of Mellification amongst themselves; how severe
punishers they are of Drones, ejecting them out of their Hives; how loyal they
are to their King or Captain, moving as he moves, and sustaining him with their
own bodies when he is weary with flying; how wise they are to keep themselves
from being dispersed in a storm of wind, by taking little pieces of Stones in
their feet to ballast their light Bodies: which is also reported of the Cranes,
though they be not agreed to what end; some affirming that the Stones they
carry in their claws are to discover, when they fly, whether they fly over
water or dry ground; for by letting them fall, by the distinction of the sound
they will discern which it is. But I believe they may as easily discover it by
their sight, and therefore I should rather think that the use of these Stones
is the same with those of the Bees.

6. But that which seems more Political in the Cranes is this, that they have
one Captain amongst them, who, when they rest upon the Earth, watches over the
whole company, holding a Stone in one foot, that if he should by chance be
overcome by drowsiness, the falling thereof might waken him: the rest in the
mean time sleep with their heads under their wings; but if any danger approach,
the Captain gives notice by crying out, and so away they fly. This office of
Precedence they have by turns, and that as well in the Air as on the Earth; and
he that is placed in the van and cuts the Air first, in due time retires. As is
also eminently observable in the Sicilian Staggs in their passing through the
straight betwixt Sicilia and Calabria, which they were wont to do in
Summertime to seek new pastures: He that follows lays his head on the hinder
part of him that goes before; he therefore that goes first comes back into the
rear when he is weary and eases his head upon the hindmost: Which they do by
turns, and so the weight of their horns proves no great impediment to their
swimming.

7. That also is very exquisite Policy, which Apollonius in his Travels into
India observed in the Elephants while they passed the River; the least went
first, and so proportionably the rest followed, the greatest passing over the
last of all. Which order Damis his disciple and fellow-traveller disallowing as
rude and inept, his master Apollonius informs him of the right reason thereof,
showing him how they were now in chase and hunted after, and being in retreat,
according to military discipline the strongest were to march last. Besides, if
the greatest had marched foremost, the weight of their bodies would have made
the passage more deep, and more difficult and inconvenient to the lesser that
should follow.

8. Wherefore it is evident that Political Wisdom is a Branch of the Animal
life and such Virtues as are comprehended under it, such as Political Justice,
Temperance, Fortitude or Courage, a sense of Friendship, Fame, or Glory; with
several other Affections that are contained in the Political Spirit, and which
are discoverable in several other brute Animals, as well as in the Elephant:
but I must not expatiate.

CHAP. X. 1. That there is according to Pliny a kind of Religion also in
Brutes, as in the Cercopithecus; 2. In the Elephant. 3. A confutation of
Pliny's conceit. 4. That there may be a certain Passion in Apes and Elephants
upon their sight of the Sun and Moon, something akin to that of Veneration in
man, and how Idolatry may be the proper fruit of the Animal life. 5. A
discovery thereof from the practice of the Indians, 6. whose Idolatry to the
Sun and Moon sprung from that Animal passion. 7. That there is no hurt in the
Passion it self, if it sink us not into an insensibleness of the First
invisible cause.
1. THE last Affection we named was Religion, or rather the shadow of it. The
Egyptians figure out the rising of the Moon by a Cynocephalus, who
sympathizeth so with that Planet, that while she is in Conjunction that
Creature loses its sight, being blind till the Moon has recovered her light:
The menstruous flux of the Female is also exactly in the Interlunium. Whence
the Egyptian Priests kept these Animals in their Temples for the more exact
observation of the course of the Moon, and made them Hieroglyphics to
represent the rising thereof; drawing a Cercopithecus in this posture, viz.
standing upon his hinder feet, and lifting up his fore-feet toward Heaven, with
his face directed up to the Moon. And Pliny does plainly affirm that they do
Novam Lunam exultatione adorare. Which yet I must confess I look upon to be no
more an act of Adoration, then the fawning and leaping of a Dog at the return
of his Master, or the manifold incurvations or prostrations of his body at his
feet. Whence the Critics endeavor to give a reason of the Greek word (...),
which signifies Adoration.

2. The same Author, amongst other Properties of the Elephant, says there is
this in him also, Religio siderum, Solisque ac Lunae veneratio, a religious
observance of the Stars, and Veneration of the Sun and Moon; and that in
Mauritania, every New Moon when it begins to shine, the Elephants repair to the
river Amilus, where, after a solemn purification and washing of themselves,
having first done their salutations to the Moon, they return into the woods.

3. That the two great Luminaries of the world have a very strong influence
upon all sublunary bodies is very plain, and upon some more peculiarly then
others; and yet without any suspicion of Religion in them. For what Religion
can there be in the Heliotropium that winds about so with the Sun? Or what so
early Devotion is that in the Cock, whom yet Proclus will needs fancy to sing
his Morning-hymn to Apollo or the Sun at the first sense of his rays at break
of day? Or what Evening-Devotion is that in Crows or Rooks, that a man may
observe roosting on the tops of trees with their bills turned toward the Sun
setting? The general life and motion in the world has (as I said) its
particular effect according to this or that Animal. And so the presence of the
Moon that is received with so much exultation by the Cercopithecus, with so
solemn a show of devotion by the Elephant, is notwithstanding barked at by the
Dog, as the Sun is cursed by a certain people of Libya for his troublesome
heat. But I think no man that is not very rash will admit, that that kind of
Ape and the Elephant do any more by their actions and gestures adore the Moon,
then the Dog by his barking does blaspheme her.

4. I will not deny but in Apes and Elephants, and such like brute Creatures
that bid nearer toward humane perfection, that the sight of the Sun and the
Moon may sometime cause a strange kind of Sense or Impress in them, some
uncouth confounded Phantasm consisting of Love, Fear, and Wonderment, near to
that Passion which in us is called Veneration. So great power have the more
notable Objects of Nature upon the weak Animal senses. And therefore though
Religion be not, yet Idolatry may be the proper fruit of the Animal life, as is
handsomely discoverable in the Worship of the Sun and Moon.

5. For what the Apes and those Elephants in Mauritania do, the same is done by
the Idolaters of the East Indies in the two Islands of Tidor and Ternate, where
they sing hymns to the rising Sun, and pray to the Moon by night for the
increase of Children, Cattle and the Fruits of the Earth: conceiving these Two
to be the great Deities of the world, the Sun the Male and the Moon the Female,
and that these Two begat the Stars, which they look upon also as petty Deities.

6. That they sought out a First Cause on whom the Order, Economy and
Government of the world should depend, proceeded from the Sagacity of the
Superior Faculties of their Souls: but that they so vainly pitched upon the Sun
and Moon, proceeded from the brutish admiration and dull astonishment of the
Animal Senses in them. Which Animal propensity and enticing Power of these
Objects are lively set down in Job. Job 31.26, 27, 28.
If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness; And my
heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hands: This also
were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge; for I should have denied the God
above. Wherefore, as I said before, though Religion be not, yet Idolatry may
rightly be deemed the fruit of this Animal passion, which is a natural
Veneration of glorious astonishing Objects.

7. Not that it is any hurt to be sensibly struck with the most illustrious
Phenomenon of Nature, but that we should not sink so far in or stick so fast
there, as not to proceed further to the knowledge of him who is Invisible and
cannot be seen with the Outward eyes of the Body. Otherwise Transportation of
mind and Wonderment at the more noble Objects in the world is so far from
having any harm in it, that it is an usual Property of the Philosophical and
Religious Complexion, and has its great pleasure and use. As there is indeed
some use and advantage in all the Animal affections; and therefore if we
relinquish any of them, unless it be for an higher good, we are made thereby
more maimed and imperfect.

CHAP. XI. 1. Of a Middle life whose Root is Reason, and what Reason it self
is. 2. The main branches of this Middle life. 3. That the Middle life acts
according to the life she is immersed into, whether Animal or Divine. 4. Her
activity, when immersed in the Animal life, in things against and on this side
Religion. 5. How far she may go in Religious performances.
1. WE have now competently set out the Nature of the Animal life: but before
we pass to the Divine, it will be needful to us to take notice of a Middle
life or Faculty of the Soul of Man betwixt the Divine and Animal; which if we
might name by the general Principle or common Root thereof, we may call it
Reason: Which is a Power or Faculty of the Soul, whereby either from her
Innate Ideas or Common Notions, or else from the assurance of her own Senses,
or upon the Relation or Tradition of another, she unravels a further clew of
Knowledge, enlarging her sphere of Intellectual light, by laying open to her
self the close connection and cohesion of the Conceptions she has of things,
whereby inferring one thing from another she is able to deduce multifarious
Conclusions as well for the pleasure of Speculation as the necessity of
Practice.

2. From this single Faculty or common Root of emproved Knowledge shoot out
many Branches: but I shall name only some main ones; such as are The skill of
Natural Philosophy, of Arithmetic and Geometry; the Power of Speech, whether
merely Grammatical, or also Rhetorical; A capacity of Civil Education, and an
ability of discoursing and acting also after an exterior way in matters of
Religion.

3. This is a short Description of the Middle life which is neither Animal nor
Divine, but is really (what the Astrologians phansy Mercury to be) such as
that with which it is conjoined, whether Good or Bad, Divine or Animal.

4. For if Reason be swallowed down into the Animal life, it ceases not to
operate there, but all her operations then are tinctured with that life into
which she is immersed: So that she will be active there, either in crafty
contrivances for the getting of Wealth, or in merry wiles for the enjoyment of
Pleasure; or else be plotting designs to satisfy Ambition; or at least be
perpetually taken up for the getting of a necessary livelihood. Nor does she
contain her self within the bounds of mere dry Action, but, according to the
Genius of the party, discovers her self in the Power of Speech and Eloquence:
She enabling some to write very sage Political Discourses, employing others in
framing out very curious Conclusions in Matters of Religion; others she busies
as much to excogitate all the Cavils they can against the Religion they are
born under, and indeed against the whole profession of Piety in general,
endeavoring to make the Belief of a God and his Providence ridiculous to the
world. Sometimes she further associates to her self the help of Poetry, the
more winningly to recommend her own Conceptions to those to whom she
communicates them. Hence are so many melting Elegies upon the unexpected death
of some famous Beauty, Triumphant Songs upon cruel and barbarous Victories in
bloody war, Impure Sonnets to that polluted Goddess the terrestrial Venus,
wild Catches that applaud and encourage exorbitant abuses of the blood of the
Grape.

5. Nor is this all that Reason and Phansy can do, while they are inspired
merely from the Animal life with a competent advantage from Education and
Complexion: but they will also adventure to compose Devout Hymns in honor of
the Saints, to the blessed Virgin especially, nay to Christ himself, and to the
Holy and Eternal Trinity; describe to us the Pleasures and Riches of Paradise,
though they never came there, nor it may be never will do. And if these things
may seem more slight, because Poetical, those more seeming Substantial
performances in solid Prose, I mean ardent and prolix Prayers, long and fervent
Preaching, backed with much affection and winning Eloquence, I must pronounce
of these also, That they may, and do too often, arise from no higher a
Principle then what we have described, and are the Results of such Powers as
may reside in the mere Natural man.

CHAP. XII. 1. The wide conjecture and dead relish of the mere Animal man in
things pertaining to the Divine life, and that the Root of this life is
Obediential Faith in God. 2. The three Branches from this Root, Humility,
Charity and Purity; and why they are called Divine. 3. A Description of
Humility. 4. A Description of Charity, and how Civil Justice or Moral Honesty
is eminently contained therein. 5. A Description of Purity, and how it
eminently contains in it what ever Moral Temperance or Fortitude pretend to. 6.
A Description of the truest Fortitude: 7. And how transcendent an Example
thereof our Savior was. 8. A further representation of the stupendous
Fortitude of our Savior. 9. That Moral Prudence also is necessarily comprised
in the Divine life. 10. That the Divine life is the truest Key to the Mystery
of Christianity; but the excellency thereof unconceivable to those that do not
partake of it.
1. AND now I have advanced the Animal life so high, by adding this Middle
Nature to it, that you may perhaps marvail upon what I shall pitch that may
seem more precious and desirable, unless it be some wonder-working Faith,
whereby a man might cast out Devils and command mountains to remove and be
carried into the midst of the Sea. But it is so far from proving any such like
privilege that the Tumor of the natural Spirit of man would please it self
in, that I am afraid when I shall describe it, he will have no relish at all of
it, scarce understand what I mean; and if he do, yet he will look upon it as a
dry insipid Notion without any fruit or pleasure therein. But however I will
declare it to him as well as I can; and that nothing may be wanting, I shall
First give a short glance at the Root of this Divine life also, which is an
Obediential Faith and Affiance in the true God, the Maker and Original of all
things. From this Faith Apostate Angels and lapsed Mankind are fallen; but the
Soul of the Messiah ever stood upright, wading through the deepest Temptations
that humane Nature could be encumbred with.

2. But this Holy and Divine life to such as have an eye to see, will be most
perceptible in the Branches thereof, though to the Natural man they will look
very witheredly and contemptibly. These Branches are Three, whose names though
trivial and vulgar, yet if rightly understood, they bear such a sense with
them, that nothing more weighty can be pronounced by the tongue of men or
Seraphims: and in brief they are these, Charity, Humility, and Purity; which,
wherever they are found, are the sure and infallible marks or signs of
either an unfallen Angel or a Regenerate Soul.

These we call Divine Virtues, not so much because they imitate in some things
the Holy Attributes of the Eternal Deity, but because they are such as are
proper to a Creature to whom God communicates his own nature so far forth as it
is capable of receiving it, whether that Creature be Man or Angel, and so
becomes a divine Man.
(...), or a divine Demon.
(...), that is a divine Angel.
(...). For such a Creature as this (and Christ was such a Creature in the
highest manner conceivable) has conspicuously in it these three Divine Virtues,
namely, Humility, Charity and Purity.

3. By Humility I understand such a Spirit or gracious property in the Soul of
man or any Intellectual Creature, as that hereby he does sensibly and
affectionately attribute all that he has or is or can do to God the Author and
Giver of every good and perfect gift. This is the highest piece of Holiness,
and the truest and most acceptable sacrifice we can offer to God, thus lively
and freely to acknowledge that all we have is from him: From whence we do not
arrogate any thing to our selves, nor contemptuously lord it over others. In
this Grace is comprehended an ingenuous Gratitude, which is the freest and most
Noble kind of Justice, that is, A full renouncing of all Self-dependency, a
firm and profound Submission to the Will of God in all things, and a Disgust or
at least a Deadness to the glory of the World and the applause of men.

4. By Charity I understand an Intellectual Love, by which we are enamoured of
the Divine Perfections, such as his Goodness, Equity, Benignity, his Wisdom
also, his Justice and his Power, as they are graciously actuated and modified
by the forenamed Attributes. And I say that to be truly transformed into these
Divine Perfections, so far forth as they are communicable to Humane nature, and
out of the real sense of them in our selves, to love and admire God in whom
they infinitely and unmeasurably reside, is the truest and highest kind of
Adoration, and the most grateful Praising and Glorifying God that the Soul of
man can exhibit to her Maker. But in being thus transformed into this Divine
image of Intellectual Love our Minds are not only raised in holy Devotions
toward God, but descend also in very full and free streams of dearest
Affection to our Fellow Creatures, rejoicing in their good as if it were our
own, and compassionating their misery as if it were our selves did suffer; and
according to our best judgment and power ever endeavoring to promote the one
and to remove the other. And this most eminently conteins in it whatever good
is driven at by Civil Justice or Moral Honesty. For how should we injure those
for whose real welfare we could be content to die?

5. By Purity I understand a due moderation and rule over all the Joys and
Pleasures of the Flesh, bearing so strict an hand and having so watchful an eye
over their subtle enticements and allurements, and so firm and loyal affection
to that Idea of Celestial Beauty set up in our Minds, that neither the Pains
of the Body nor the Pleasures of the Animal life shall ever work us below our
Spiritual Happiness and all the competible enjoyments of that life that is
truly Divine. And in this conspicuously is contained whatever either Moral
Temperance or Fortitude can pretend to. For ordinarily he is held Temperate
enough, that can but save his brains from gross sottishness and his Body from
diseases; but this Purity respects the Divine life it self, and requires such a
Moderation in all the affairs of the Flesh, that our Bodies may still remain
unpolluted Temples and meet Habitations for the Spirit of God to dwell in and
act in, whether by way of Illumination, or Sanctification and Animation to
interior duties of Holiness. And as for Fortitude, it is plain that this
Purity of the Soul having mortified and tamed the exorbitant lusts and
pleasures of the Body, Death will seem less formidable by far, and this mortal
Life of lesser value.

6. But the greatest Fortitude of all is when Love proves stronger then Death
it self even in the deepest and most bitter sense of it: and not so much the
weakness and insensibleness of the Body, nor yet the full carreer or furious
heat and hurry of the natural Spirits makes Pain and Death more tolerable; but
the pure courage of the Soul her self animated only by an unrelinquishable
Love of the Divine life, and whatever design is imposed upon her by that
Principle.

7. The Example of this Fortitude is admirable in our blessed Savior, and
transcends as much the general Valor recorded by the Pens of Poets and
Historians, as the valor of those Heroes does exceed the salvage fierceness
and boldness of Bears, Wolves and Lions. For a man to encounter Death in an
exalted heat and fire of his agitated Spirits, is not much unlike a mere
drunken fray, where their blood being heated with the excess of Wine, the
Combatants become unsensible of those mortal Gashes they make in one another
bodies. But to fight in cold blood, is true valor indeed, and the greater, by
how much more the occasion of the enterprise approves it self noble, and the
parties are not at first engaged by any rage or passion. For then they
sacrifice their lives but to a rash fit of Choler, or at least to, that Tyrant
in them, Pride, which they for the better credit of the business ordinarily
call The sense of Honor; else they could willingly upon better thoughts save
themselves the pains and danger of the Combat.

8. But to speak of Valor more lawful and laudable, which is to meet the
enemy in the field, where their minds are enraged and heightened by the sound of
the Drum and the Trumpet, (which are able to put but an ordinarily-metall'd man
out of his wits) it is yet counted a very valiant and honorable Act, if a man
in this hurry and tumult of his Spirits makes his sword fat with the blood of
the slain, and mows down his Enemies on every side as a Sacrifice to his
Country and Friends, I mean to his wife and children, and all that are near
unto him. Which yet may be paralleled with the Courage and Rage of Wolves and
Tigres, who will fiercely enough defend their young by that innate valor and
animosity in them, without help of any external artifice to heighten their
boldness. But the Valor and Fortitude of the ever-blessed Captain of our
Salvation has no parallel, but is transcendently above whatever can be named.
For what comparison is there betwixt that Courage which is inspired from the
pomp of War or single Combat, from the heat and height of the Natural
Spirits, from the rage and hatred against an Enemy, or from the love to a
Friend; and such a Fortitude as being destitute of all the advantages of the
Animal life, nay clogged with the disadvantages thereof, as with a deep sense
of Death, Fear, Agony and Horror, yet notwithstanding all this, in an humble
Submission to the Will of God and a dear Respect to that lovely Image of the
Divine life, wades through with an unyielding constancy, and this (which is not
to be thought on without astonishment and amazement) not to rescue or right a
Friend, but to save and deliver a malevolent Enemy?

9. We have seen how Justice, Temperance and Fortitude are in a supereminent
manner comprehended in the Divine life, which taking possession of the Middle
life or Rational powers, must needs beget also in the Soul the truest ground of
Prudence that may be. For this Divine life is both the Light and the
Purification of the Eye of the Mind, whereby Reason becomes truly illuminated
in all Divine and Moral concernments. See further of this, Book 8. chap. 11.
Which Mystery though it cannot be declared according to the worthiness of the
matter, yet some more external intimations may serve for a pledge of the Truth
thereof. As for Example, in that it does remove Pride, Self-interest and
Intemperance that clog the Body and cloud the Soul, it is plain from hence, of
what great advantage the Divine life is for the rectifying and ruling our
Judgments and Understandings in all things.

10. I have endeavored according to the best of my Abilities briefly to set
before you the Excellency of that Life which we call Divine. But it is
impossible by words to conveigh it to that Soul that has not in her in some
measure the Sense of it aforehand. Which if she have, it is to her the truest
Key to the Mystery of Christianity that can be found; and in this light a man
shall clearly discern how decorous and just a thing it is that This Life which
is transcendently better then all, should at last after long Trials and
Conflicts triumph over all; and that for this purpose Jesus Christ should come
into the world, who is the Author and Finisher of this more then Noble and
Heroical Enterprise.

BOOK III.
CHAP. I. 1. That the Lapse of the Soul from the Divine life immersing her into
Matter, brings on the Birth of Cain in the Mystical Eve driven out of Paradise.
2. That the most Fundamental mistake of the Soul lapsed is that Birth of Cain,
and that from hence also sprung Abel in the mystery, the vanity of Pagan
Idolatry. 3. Solomon's universal charge against the Pagans, of Polytheisme and
Atheism, and how fit it is their Apology should be heard for the better
understanding the State of the World out of Christ. 4. Their plea of
worshipping but one God, namely the Sun, handsomely managed by Macrobius. 5.
The Indian Brachmans worshippers of the Sun: Apollonius his entertainment with
them, and of his false and vain affectation of Pythagorisme. 6. The Ignorance
of the Indian Magicians, and of the Demons that instructed them. 7. A
Concession that they and the rest of the Pagans terminated their worship upon
one Supreme Numen, which they conceived to be the Sun.
1. HAving with a competent clearness, as I hope, set forth the Nature of the
Divine life (to such as have a Principle to judge thereof) as also of the
Animal, we shall the more fully understand wherein consists the lapse or revolt
as well of the rebellious Angels as of fallen Man. Which was in that they
forsook the Law of the Divine life, and wholly gave themselves up to the Animal
life, ranting it and revelling it there without any measure or bounds. Of which
this seems to be the sad effect, that the Soul of man had quite forgot his
Creator, being fully plunged and immersed into the very feculency of the
Material world. For that Faculty in him whereby he is capable of Corporeal joy,
which is the Sea Cabbala Philosophica on Genesis chap. 2, and 3.
Mystical Eve, had grown so rampant and lawless, that it had quite devoured and
laid waste those more noble and delicate Senses of the Mind; and had so
intimately joined him in love and dependence on the Matter, that his Soul
having forsaken God her true Lord and Husband, by a lively adhesion stuck so
close to this gross Corporeal Fabric, this outward sensible Universe, that in
this near and affectionate conjunction with it, she made good in the Mystery
that which is said in the Letter concerning Eve, after she was driven out of
Paradise, She brought forth her firstborn Cain, whose birth in the Mystical
sense is nothing else but that false conceit that the reason of his name
imports, (...), I have got a man, or an husband, who is the very Jehovah,
according to the most easy and natural meaning of the particle (...).

2. This therefore is the First and most Fundamental mistake of lapsed Mankind,
that they make Body or Matter the only true Jehovah, the only true Essence and
first Substance of whom all things are, and acknowledge no God but this Visible
or Sensible world. And therefore stop not here, but naturally proceed to the
Birth of Abel, which Josephus interprets (...), sorrow. Which certainly the
Soul of man in this condition is abundantly obnoxious to. But the word may as
well, and does more ordinarily, signify Vanity, according to that of the
Apostle concerning the Heathens and their Religion, that they were grown vain
in their imaginations. And so that came to pass which the Author of that pious
Book entitled The Wisdom of Solomon so sadly complains of.

3. Surely vain are all men by nature, who are ignorant of God, and could not
out of the good things that are seen, know him that is; nor by considering the
works, acknowledge the work-master: But deemed either Fire or Wind, or the
swift Air, or the Circle of the Stars, or the violent Water, or the Lights of
Heaven, to be the Gods that govern the World.

The Charge is laid home by this Writer upon Universal Paganism. But it is but
a just thing to give them a little scope to plead for themselves, that thereby
Truth may be the better discovered and the more firmly established, and the
Natural state of Mankind, before Christ came into the world, be more fully
understood; which is the present business in hand, and the last Point we
propounded by way of Preparation to our main work.

The Crime they are accused of here is Polytheism, which necessarily includes
in it Atheism. For to say There are more Gods then one, is to assert There is
none at all; the notion of God, in the strictest sense thereof, being
incompetible to any more then One. Wherefore the Heathen being Polytheists in
profession, by undeniable consequence are found Atheists.

4. But here some of them apologize for themselves after this manner; affirming
that they acknowledged one only Supreme Deity, viz. the Sun: and that the
several worships which were exhibited were to this One, though under several
names, by reason of the several powers or virtues observed in him. This is the
plea of Macrobius, and he manages it under the person of Vettius Praetextatus
very handsomely and wittily, reducing from either Properties of Nature, allusion
of Names, the likeness of Statues or Images, the conformity of Ceremonies, or
testimony of Oracles, no less then sixteen Deities of the Heathen (that to the
vulgar seem distinct) to this One of the Sun, namely Apollo, Bacchus, Mars,
Mercury, Aesculapius and Salus, Hercules, Isis, Serapis, Adonis, Attin, Osiris,
Horus, Nemesis, Pan, Jupiter, Saturnus. And I doubt not but with the like
windings and turnings of wit and imagination he may reduce the worship of the
rest to the same Deity; he having let fall an ominous word taken out of the
mouths of the Ancients at the very entrance of the Discourse, (...) which if it
be well followed, will not fail to make good That the Heathens worship was
terminated upon one Supreme Object, which Macrobius will have to be the Sun.
And he concludes all, for a fuller confirmation thereof, with a double
citation. The one is of a short Invocation of the Heathen Theologers, the form
whereof runs thus, (...) i. e. O Sun ommnipotent, the Spirit of the world, the
power of the world, the light of the world. The other is out of the Hymns of
Orpheus, (...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
Thou that do guide the ever-winding gyre
And wide Rotations of the Ethereal fire,
O Sol, great Sire of Sea and Land, give ear.
Omniparent Sol with golden visage clear,
All-various Godhead, Bacchus, glorious Jove,
Or whatever else thou 'rt styled, my vows approve.
In which Verses the Government and Generation of all things are attributed to
the Sun, who (that it may be less incongruous) is allowed to have Sense and
Understanding in him, as you may see in the same Author, Saturnal. lib. 1. cap.
23. which is also asserted cap. 18. where he proves Bacchus and the Sun to be
all one. For he gives the reason of the name (...) as if it were (...), i. e.
Men's Iovis, understanding by Jupiter The Natural Jupiter.
(...), which is the Air or liquid part of the world, as Theon explains it upon
Aratus. And here Macrobius says that Jupiter signifies Heaven. i. e. The
Natural Philosophers called the Sun the Mind or Soul of the world. But the
world is called Heaven, which they name Jupiter.
Physici Solemn Mundi mentem dixerunt: Mundus autem vocatur Coelum, quod
appellant Iovem.

5. That the Sun is the Supreme Numen of the Heathens, may be further evinced
from the Ceremonies and Worship the Indian Brachmans did to him, who were also
called the Priests of the Sun, whom Apollonius Tyaneus, that industrious
restorer of Paganism, so loudly extols, and so far preferrs before the
Babylonian Magi, Gymnosophists and all the Wise men of the world besides. But
the circumstances of his entertainment there according to Philostratus is an
argument only of their being more able Magicians or Conjurers then the rest of
the world, not more truly Wise, as we that worship the true God must of
necessity conclude. For what else can we gather from that black swarthy Page
with a golden Anchor in his hand and a Crescent like the Moon shining upon his
forehead, that met Damis and Apollonius in the way, told them their purpose
aforehand, and conducted them to the Magi? What from that ever-smoaky Mount,
guarded or enveloped with a perpetual thick cloud or mist, so that these Sages
could not be found without some such black guide of their own sending, nor
their Habitation entered, though there be neither man nor ditches to defend
them? What from their manner of entertainment of this zealous Greek that
traversed so great a part of the world to find them out? whom they received at
a banquet where wine and viands were conveyed to the table without the help
of the hand of any Mortal. What from their Hymns and frantic dances in a round
by way of Divine worship done unto the Sun, when striking the ground with a
rod, the earth would rise in waves under them, while they danced thus and sung
their Morning Songs to their supposed Deity as he appeared above the Horizon?
What, I say, can be gathered from all this, but that they were a Conventicle of
Witches or Conjurers? though I will not deny but they might be the most
accomplished Priests that Paganism at that time could vaunt of, and the fittest
Instructers of Apollonius, whose purpose was with all care and diligence to
restore the Heathenish rites, and thereby stop the growth of Christianity.

And surely the Devil made Paganism as desirable and lovely as he could in
those notable ornaments of Wit and Manners and other more miraculous
accomplishments that were found in that person. But his constant devotions he
did to the Sun, though they show him to be a very skilful and orthodox
Hierophanta in the Pagan Superstition; yet his ignorance in Philosophy
demonstrates him no genuine Pythagorean, but that he did craftily abuse that
name and profession, the better to promote his Heathenish design.

6. It seems those Spirits that the Indian Magicians and Apollonius were
acquainted withal, were either very Envious or very Ignorant, or at least
Philostratus that wrote their Story. For in the opening of their Mysteries such
things fall from them as are inconsistent with the most Essential parts of
Pythagoras his Philosophy and Truth it self. But as for this of making the Sun
the Supreme Numen, these lapsed Spirits being happily as much concerned in the
benefit of it as we Mortals (as Homer intimates, (...),
He rose to shine to Gods as well as men;)
it is not improbable but being fallen so low from the true God, that
themselves make this the Object of their Worship from whom they find the most
sensible good, and are kept from that utter darkness that a sad fate at the
long run may bring upon them.

7. All which things considered, we may well grant what Macrobius so
industriously drives at, That the worship of the Heathen was terminated in One
Supreme Deity, which the profounder Mystagogi conceived to be the Sun; and they
were taught by the Clarian Oracle to call him Iao, as if he were the true
Jehovah.

CHAP. II. 1. That the abovesaid concession advantages the Pagans nothing, for
as much as there are more Suns then one. 2. That not only Unity, but the rest
of the Divine Attributes are incompetible to the Sun. 3. Of Cardan's
attributing Understanding to the Sun's light, with a confutation of his fond
opinion. 4. Another sort of Apologizers for Paganism, who pretend the Heathens
worshipped One God, to which they gave no name. 5. A discovery out of their own
Religion that this innominated Deity was not the True God but the Material
world.
1. BUT it is easily demonstrated that they get nothing by this grant: For
whereas they please themselves most of all in the Unity of this Numen, there
being as they fancy but one Sun in the world, as the Latin word Sol implies,
and See book 5. chap. 16. sect. 5.
(...) in Greek (Nay Macrobius dotes so much on this Notion, that he will not
have him called Apollo Delphicus from the place of his worship, but from (...)
an old Greek word which signifies Unus, from whence (...) must be derived quasi
jam non unus:) yet the noble and free Spirit of Philosophy will not be carried
captive with these cobweb-fetters of Superstition and verbal Criticism; and
therefore those that are more knowing in Nature boldly point us to as many Suns
as there are discovered Fixed Stars in the Firmament; as is to admiration made
clear in that never-sufficiently-extolled Philosophy of Descartes. Then which,
if rightly understood, there cannot be found a stronger bar against either the
Folly of Paganism, or the Profaneness of Atheism.

2. But not only this obvious Attribute of Unity is wanting to this Pagan
Deity, but several others also that are as necessarily included in the Notion
of a God: such as are Sprituality, Immensity, Omnipotency, Omnisciency and the
like. For the reflection of his beams is a demonstration that Light is a Body;
and therefore unless all Bodies were Light or at least diaphanous, he cannot be
Immense, but he must be excluded by other Bodies. And hence he is not
Omnipotent, no not so much as in his most eminent Property. For he cannot
illuminate both sides of the Earth at once, nor free his own face of those
importunate spots that ever and anon lie upon it like filth or scum maugre all
the power of his Divinity, as Scheiner and Descartes have diligently observed.
He is also so far from being Omniscient, that he has no knowledge at all, a
Body being incapable, of Cogitation, as the Cartesian School judiciously
maintains, and I have fully demonstrated in my Book Of the Immortality of the
Soul.

3. But Cardan attributing Understanding to this Luminary, writes more like a
Priest of the Sun (as indeed both himself and his Father have been suspected
for Magicians) then a man of Reason or a sound Philosopher. But that the charge
may not seem incredible, I will produce his own words. Cumque Sol luceat
intellectu, says he, qui ei est tanquam anima; si ab eo secedere posset
Intellectas, non aliter luceret Sol quam Terra: That is, And whereas the Sun
shines by Understanding, which is to him as a Soul; if so be that Understanding
should recede from him, the Sun would shine no otherwise then the Earth.

In which he plainly makes Visible light and Intellect all one. From whence yet
it would follow That the Sun discerns nothing done in the dark, and that
therefore he is not Omniscient, and that a Glowworm or Rush-candle are better
witnesses what is transacted in the Night then he can be. For if Visible light
and Intellect be all one, every new-lighted Lamp or Taper will prove an
Intelligence: So vain is this Supposition, that the Sun is the supreme Numen of
the World.

4. But there is another sort of Apologizers for Heathenism, that frame their
Defense more cautiously, averring only in general That the various Rites done
to Particular Deities were meant to One Supreme Cause of all things, though
they have the discretion not to venture to name him. For the proof whereof they
allege, First, that when they invoked any particular Deity that was proper for
them then to invoke, the Priests afterward added an invocation of all the
Deities in general, as Servius notes upon that of Virgil, Diique Deaeque omnes,
studium quibus arva tueri.


Secondly, that all the Deities were (...), that is, there were Altars that
were consecrated to them all in general, with such Inscriptions as these, DIS
DEABUSQE OMNIBUS, and DIBUS DEABUSQE OMNIBUS, and the like.

Thirdly, that they had one common Feast for them all, which was called (...),
or rather (...), as Mr. Seldom notes.

Lastly, The Egyptians, a people more infamous for Polytheism and variety of
Religions then any nation under the cope of Heaven, yet their Priests are
observed more compendiously to do their Ceremonies to certain Spheres or round
Globes, whereof there was one in every Temple, but kept very close from the
sight of the vulgar; the Priests reserving the knowledge of the Unity of the
Object of their worship as an Arcanum only belonging to themselves.

5. But that This One Object of Worship was not the true God, but the Material
World, the very figure they make use of does most naturally intimate; and I
have noted above that Mundus and Jupiter in the Pagan Philosophy is one and the
same. And Plutarch speaks expressly concerning the Egyptians, (...), That they
account the World or Universe to be the same with the prime God or First Cause
of all things. Him the Egyptians worshipped under the name of Serapis; who
being asked by Nicocreon King of Cyprus, what God he was, the Oracle gave this
Answer, (...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
Such is my Godhead as to thee I tell:
The Heaven's my Head, the Seas my Belly swell;
The Earth's my Feet, my Ears lie in the Air,
My piercing Eye's the lamp of Phoebus fair.
From which Hypothesis is most easily understood what is meant by that
Enigmatical Inscription in the Temple of Sais in Egypt; (...), I am all that
was, and is, and is to come, and my veil no mortal ever did yet uncover. A
venerable Riddle under which there lies not one grane of Truth, unless there be
nothing but modified matter in Being. But thus to make the World God, is to
make no God at all; and therefore this Kind of Monotheisme of the Heathen is
as rank Atheism as their Polytheisme was proved to be before.

CHAP. III. 1. The last Apologizers for Paganism, who acknowledge God to be an
Eternal Mind distinct from Matter, and that all things are manifestations of
his Attributes. 2. His Manifestations in the External World. 3. His
Manifestations within us by way of Passion. 4. His more noble emanations and
communications to the inward Mind, and how the ancient Heathen affixed personal
Names to these several Powers or manifestations. 5. The reason of their making
these several Powers so many Gods or Goddesses. 6. Their Reason for worshipping
the Genii and Heroes.
1. THE last and best sort of Apologizers for Paganism are those who profess
one Eternal Spiritual and Intellectual Being, the Governor and Moderatour of
all things. Such as Plutarch a Pagan Priest defines God to be, (...), Wherefore
God is a Mind or Intellect, an Abstract Form or Being, pure from all Matter,
and disintangled from whatever is passible. Which he sets down according to the
mind of Socrates, Plato, and his own. The most subtle therefore and ingenious
among the Heathen defend themselves thus;

We acknowledge (say they) One Eternal Deity, infinitely Holy and Benign,
Omniscient, Omnipotent, which is the First Cause and Original of all things in
the world, as well Spiritual as Corporeal; and that there is nothing in the
world but what is a Manifestation of the Presence and precious Attributes of
this one Deity. And therefore we look upon the vast capacity of the wide
Universe as a most august and most Sacred Temple of His Divine Majesty, who
fills and possesses every part thereof: every appearance to our outward Senses,
every motion and excitation within our own bodies, every impression upon our
Minds, being nothing else but so many Manifestations of either the Wisdom,
the Goodness, the Power, the Justice, or the Wrath of that One God; whose
appearances we are every where ready to adore.

2. Whether therefore our Eyes be struck with that more radiant luster of the
Sun, or whether we behold that more placid and calm beauty of the Moon, or be
refreshed with the sweet breathings of the open Air, or be taken up with the
contemplation of those pure sparkling lights of the Stars, or stand
astonished at the gushing down-falls of some mighty River, as that of Nile,or
admire the height of some insuperable and inaccessible Rock or Mountain, or
with a pleasant horror and chilness look upon some silent Wood, or solemn
shady Grove; whether the face of Heaven smile upon us with a cheerful bright
azure, or look upon us with a more sad and minacious countenance, dark pitchy
Clouds being charged with Thunder and Lightning to let fly against the Earth;
whether the Air be cool, fresh and healthful, or whether it be soultry,
contagious and pestilential, so that while we gasp for life we are forced to
draw in a sudden and inevitable Death; whether the Earth stand firm and prove
favorable to the industry of the Artificer, or whether she threaten the very
foundations of our buildings with trembling and tottering Earthquakes
accompanied with remugient Echoes and ghastly murmurs from below; whatever
notable emergencies happen for either Good or Bad to us, these are the Jove's
and Vejoves that we worship, which to us are not many but one God, who has the
only power to save or destroy: and therefore from whatever part of this
magnificent Temple of his, the World, he shall send forth his voice, our Hearts
and Eyes are presently directed thitherward with Fear, Love and Veneration.

3. Nor does our Devotion stop here, or rather stray only without, but those
more notable Alterations and Commotions we find within our selves, we attribute
also to him whose Spirit, Life and Power fills all things. And therefore
those very Passions of Love and Wrath, on the former whereof depends all that
kindly sweetness of affection that is found in either the friendship of men or
love of women, as on the latter all the pomp and splendor of war; these,
with the rest of the Passions of the Soul, we look upon as the Manifestations
of His Presence, who works every where for our Solace, Punishment, or Trial.

4. Nor can we omit those more noble Communications of His and Heavenly
emanations into our Minds, such as are Wisdom, Justice, Political Order, and
the like; all which, with the former and an innumerable company more which we
have passed by, the Religion of our Ancestors framed into Personal Gods and
Goddesses; calling Wisdom, Minerva; Justice, Dice or Themis; Political order,
Eunomia: to Love is to be referred Cupid and Venus; to Wrath, Mars and the
Furies. That Power which shakes the Earth is termed Enosichthon. The Sea they
call Neptune; the Air Juno; the Sun Apollo; the Moon Diana; the Earth Vesta;
the Corn Ceres; Wine Bacchus; and so of the rest.

5. Of which certainly there can be no other Reason, then that the ancient
Instituters of Paganism were so Enthusiastically transported in the single
contemplation of every Divine power or Manifestation in the world, that being
rapt with admiration of the great consequence thereof, they were resolved in
their Devotional thoughts and Meditations to dwell on every one singly alone,
and not to huddle up all those Excellencies in one general worship; they having
so reverent esteem of every Attribute of God, that they thought it sufficient
of it self to constitute a Deity. And therefore they understood by these
Personal Appellations, whether Male of Female, (for God, say they, is (...))
one and the same Deity under This or That manifestation of himself in the
world, according to which they gave him a proper name, as if he were a
different person; when as it is but with him as with the Ocean, who changes his
name according to the Coasts he beats upon. (...)
as Dionysius notes in his Geographicall Poem.

6. And if they took into their Religious consideration the worship of the
Genii or Spirits, whether such as whole appearance was so horrid and terrible
that it caused affrightment, or such as whose benign aspect was accompanied
with a more pleasing wonderment and joy; these they looked upon also as eminent
manifestations of that One Eternal Deity which runs through all things, giving
life and Being to all, whom therefore they called (...) and (...) whom though
they make three, viz. Jupiter coelestis, Jupiter marinus, and Jupiter
infernalis, the latter two whereof they also call Neptune and Pluto; yet it is
one Eternal Spirit (say they) which we worship in these Three, whose Kingdom
and Dominion is over all, though the administration thereof differ according to
the nature and merit of them that are Governed. The same Apology we may make
for that Honor we do to the deceased Heroes, whose noble persons and refined
Spirits the Divine excellencies more illustriously shone through then ordinary.
For in truth we do not so much worship them as God shining through them; as he
that bows to the Sun or Moon through a glass-window, intends not his obeisance
to the glass, but to those Celestial Luminaries; nor do we bow our body to
those Luminaries, but to God who to us appears through all things.

CHAP. IV. 1. The Heathens Festivals, Temples and Images. 2. Their Apology for
Images. 3. The Significancy of the Images of Jupiter and Aeolus. 4. Of Ceres.
5. Of Apollo. 6. Their Plea from the significancy of their Images, that their
use in Divine worship is no more Idolatrous then that of Books in all
Religions; as also from the use of Images in the Nation of the Jews. 7. Their
Answer to those that object the Impossibleness of representing God by any
outward Image. 8. That we are not to envy the Heathen, if they hit upon any
thing more weighty in their Apologies for their Religion; and why.
1. NOW according to the various appearances of This One Divinity, that puts
forth it self every where, our Ancestors instituted various Religious Rites and
Ceremonies, appointed sundry sorts of Festivals and Sacrifices, built Temples,
set up Altars with several inscriptions, and erected Images proper and
significative of that or this Divine Power, which at set times and places they
were to worship. To which Religious Customs under which we were born we
submitted our selves without being obnoxious, as we conceive, to any just
imputation of Idolatry.

2. For we worshipped not those Images which were thus erected, no more then
any other Nation does the Holy Volumes of their Law or Religion, when either
they pray out of them, have them read, or use them in the administering of an
Oath. For that reverence that is done, is not done to the Book, but to him
whose Word it is said to be, to him whom they pray to or swear by: and those
Images to us are not unlike the Religious Books of others, they being very
expressive of the circumstances of the exertion of that Divine Power which we
at any time adore. As you may see in the Images of Jupiter, Aeolus, Ceres,
Apollo and the rest.

3. For Jupiter, who was their God of Thunder, as he bore in his left hand a
royal Scepter, his right hand was charged with Thunder, according to that of
the Poet, -- Cui dextra trisulcis
Ignibus armata est --
Aeolus, the God of the Winds, he was made standing at the Mouth of a Cave,
having a linen garment girt about him, and a Smiths bellows under his feet: at
his right hand stood Juno covered with a cloud, putting a Crown upon his head,
as having given her Kingdom to him; and on his left hand stood a Nymph up to
the middle in Water, which Juno gave him to wife. Which Image is very
significative of the Nature and Causes of the Winds, and so intelligible, if
we do but take notice that Juno is the Air, that it wants no further
explication.

4. Ceres was made in the figure of a country-woman sitting upon an Ox, having
in her right hand a Plough-share, and a basket of Seeds hanging from her arm,
in her left hand a sickle and a flayle: Juno the Goddess of the Air and of the
Clouds was on one side, and Apollo or the Sun on the other; intimating how the
warmth of the Sun and kindly showrs are to second the labor of the Husbandman,
or else nothing will prosper.

5. The figure of Apollo or the Sun was thus; His Image had a Youthful
countenance: in his right hand he held a Quiver of arrows and a Bow, in his
left an Harp; under his feet was a terrible Monster, in the form of a Serpent
having three heads, viz. of a Wolf, of a Lion, and of a fawning Dog: on the Top
of his head was a golden Trivet, and about his temples a Crown of Twelve
precious stones. The meaning whereof, though it may seem abstruse at first
sight, yet if you consider it a while, it very fitly sets out the nature of the
Sun, and of Time whose knowledge depends on him, and of Knowledge which depends
on Time. His Bow and Arrows signify nothing but the darting of his Beams from
so far a distance, whence he is called (...) by the Poets: and his youthful
countenance nothing but his unfading vigor, which Age seems not at all to
diminish. His Harp signifies the dance of the Planets about him, as if he sat
and played to them, or at least, according to the other Hypothesis, as if he
led the dance himself, playing on his Harp, and the rest of the Planets
followed him. The twelve precious stones signify the twelve signs of the
Zodiac, with which he is incircled; and the three-headed Serpent deciphers
Time in the threefold notion of it, Past, Present, and to come. The time past,
as Macrobius notes, like a ravenous Wolf devouring the memory of things: the
time present being urgent and raging like a Lion through its instant actuosity;
and the time to come flattering us with hopes like a fawning Dog. And lastly
the golden Trivet or Tripod denotes the Threefold object of Knowledge which
Time affords them that are wise, such as Homer makes Calchas the Priest of
Apollo to be, (...),
Who knew what was, what is, and what is to come.
So that it is apparent how strange soever the use of these Images may seem,
that it was no other then that of Books; they raising our minds (and it may be
with a greater advantage of devotion and admiration) into the sense and
consideration of that Divine Power which we were to adore.

6. Wherefore that imputation is very unjust that would charge us with Idolatry
properly so called, as if we did worship the Idols themselves. But to use
Images in Divine worship, (there being that convenience of them which we have
alleged,) we question not but that it is lawful in it self, where there is no
Command from God to the contrary. And where his Command is most express, as it
is to the Nation of the Jews, yet it is very well known that there was also
there a religious use of Images; as is plain in the Cherubims that covered the
Mercy-seat, and the Brazen Serpent which they were to look up to in the
wilderness. For through that did the Almighty exert his healing power upon
those that were stung with fiery Serpents. See further of this, Book 8. chap.
15.
For such Effects as these are not from Nature or Art, but from the efficacy
of Religion, as the very word Telesme does plainly bewray. Now it seems to us a
thing incredible that God should command any thing absolutely evil in it self,
and therefore undeniable but that the use of Images in Divine worship is not in
it self evil.

7. Nor does that which is mainly and most ordinarily alleged against Images
in Religious worship (viz. That it is impossible to represent God by any
outward figure) seem of any weight at all to us. For neither do we admit that
these Images are intended for Figures and Representations of God, but only for
the Sensible setting out to our sight the Effects and Objects of those Powers
and Attributes which we adore in him: And if we did admit it, yet we have
wherewith to defend our selves. For it we are not to use Images in Divine
worship, because they cannot set out the Nature of God as he is in himself, we
are not at all to think of him when we worship him; the Thoughts concerning his
very Nature or Person which we frame of him (though happily they be not without
some truth) having yet as little similitude with him whom we worship, as the
Imagination of a man born blind has with the glorious Image of the Sun: He
feels indeed the comfortable Effects of his presence upon his body, but his
Eyes did never see, nor can his Mind conceive how illustrious he is to look
upon.

8. To this purpose the most witty, cautious and subtle sort of the Pagans
apologize for themselves: nor are we to envy them, if they hit upon any thing
more weighty and substantial in their Apology. For Christianity is so
excellent in it self, that we need not phansy any Religions worse then they
are, the better to set off its eminency. Besides, the more tolerable sense we
can make of the affairs of the ancient Pagans, the easier Province we shall
have to maintain against profane and Atheistical men, to whom if you would
grant, That Providence had utterly neglected for so many Ages together all the
Nations of the world, except that little handful of the Jews, they would
whether you would or no from thence infer, That there was no Providence over
them neither, and consequently no God; it being a thing incredible, that there
should be any Providence at all in things of the highest concernment, unless it
dispread it self further then into such an inconsiderable part of the World as
some imagine. But that the Heathen were not so utterly destitute of means as
some would make them, S. Paul seems largely enough to declare in his Epistle to
the Romans. Romans 1.19, 20.
And that their condition was not so horridly desperate, he may perhaps seem to
intimate from that favorable expression in his Speech to the Athenians, Acts
17.30.
where he says, God connived at the times of their Ignorance. But I had almost
forgot my self, my design being not to apologize for the Heathen, but to answer
what they apologize for themselves: which I shall do very briefly.

CHAP. V. 1. An Answer to the last Apology of the Pagans; as first, That it
concerns but few of them, 2. and that those few were rather of the (...), then
pure Pagans. 3. That the worship of Images is expressly forbid by God in the Law
of Moses. 4. That they rather obscure then help our conceptions of the Divine
Powers. 5. That there is great danger of these Images intercepting the worship
directed to God. 6. He referrs the curious and unsatisfied to the fuller
Discussions in Polemical Divinity.
1. FIrst therefore we are to consider that what has been here alleged in
defense of the Pagans, concerns but very few of them, the generality of them
being Idolaters in the grossest sense, as is manifest out of the complaints of
David, Psalm 135. as also out of the Epistle of Jeremy, and other places.

2. Secondly, It is questionable whether those few, such as Pythagoras,
Socrates, Plato, Plotinus, Plutarch, and the like, are to be reputed mere
Pagans, or whether they came nearer to the nature of the (...), having been
imbued with the Knowledge of that one Eternal Spirit which is the Creator and
Governor of all things, by conversing with the Jews, or by conversing with them
that had conversed with them. And that they had the Knowledge of Him by the
communication of some such hidden Tradition or Cabbala, seems manifest in that
these more holy and more expert men in Divine Mysteries amongst the Heathen
taught also the Triunity, as well as the Immateriality, of the Godhead; I mean
the First and Chiefest of them, such as Pythagoras and Plato: which being a
reach above humane wit, and a thing so useful to be taken into Christianity,
is to me a strong Argument that it was none of their own invention, but that
they had it either from those that were inspired themselves, or had received it
from those that were inspired.

3. Thirdly, The making of graven Images and falling down before them is a
thing expressly forbidden to the people of God in that Religion where himself
thought fit to appear in the framing of it; which is an evident sign of the
faultiness of the Use of Idols in Divine worship.

4. Fourthly, The pretended serviceableness of Images for the instructing the
people and the setting out to them the nature of that Divine Power which they
are to adore, seems very questionable. For the presence of so strange an object
before their eyes striking the outward Sense so strongly, may rather hinder the
inward operation of their Mind from more pure and genuine conceptions of God,
then at all further them in the framing of them; and as Memory is too often
lost by the use of writing, so the power of Imagination as to Divine things may
be spoiled and enfeebled by these false props of external representations.

5. Fifthly and lastly, There is a great danger, of which the Jealousy of God
seems very sensible, that these Vice-Royes and Representatives of the Divine
Majesty, as they would have them to be, may prove treacherous to the highest
Sovereignty, intercepting and keeping to themselves all those Prayers and
Praises, all those immolations and sacrifices that are offered by the people.
For the unskilful Multitude seeing the Priest sacrifice and all the people
pour forth their devotions with their eyes fixed on the Idol, set upon some
high place, carved into all the members and organs of life and sense so
artificially that he seems to sight to be a living Person, are easily driven
through the weakness of their wit to imagine him to be such indeed, and to
adore him as a living and powerful Deity, such as is able to do them good or
hurt according to his own pleasure, as Grotius well observes out of S.
Augustine.

6. But if this our Answer shall seem liable to a further Reply, I shall remit
the disputacious, to the mercy of School-Divines, and the rack of Polemical
Theology, my self being better employed in laying on a charge upon universal
Paganism so evidently true, that the craftiest and most refined wits of them
all shall not be able to elude it.

CHAP. VI. 1. A new and unanswerable charge against Paganism, namely, That
they adored the Divine Powers no further then they reached the Animal life, as
appears from their Dijoves and Vejoves, 2. Jupiter altitonans, Averruncus,
Robigus and Tempestas. 3. From the pleasant spectacle of their God Pan: what is
meant by his Pipe, and Nymphs dancing about him. 4. What by his being deemed
the Son of Hermes and Mercury, and what by his beloved. Nymph Syrinx, his wife
Echo, and daughter Iambe. 5. The interpretation of his horns, hairiness, red
face, long beard, goats feet, and laughing countenance.
1. THat heavy accusation of Polytheisme, Atheism and Idolatry which was laid
upon the Heathen you have already heard, and with what sleights of wit they
have endeavored to defend themselves, pretending that in the variety of their
worships, it is but one Eternal Deity that they adore according to the
Manifestations of his presence who works all in all. The Charge we shall lay
upon them now is not, I confess, so grievous, but more devoid of all show of
any solid Answer whereby they may quit themselves thereof. And in brief it is
this, viz. That though we should admit that they did worship one Eternal and
Incorporeal Deity, infinitely Wise, Good and Powerful; yet it is evident that
they worshipped him only in such manifestations of him that nearest concerned
the Animal life; that is, in such as were most dreadful and terrible, or alse
most pleasing and agreeable thereunto. Hence it is, as I said before, that they
had their Vejoves as well as Dijoves, both which was but Apollo, or the Sun who
is the visible Diespiter or Lucetius: but because he also sometimes by the
soultry heat he causes in the Air raises also Plagues and Pestilences, he was
worshipped also under the name of Vejovis, whose Temple was of old to be seen
in Rome, and his Image holding Arrows in his hand as being ready to hurt; as
you may see in Gellius.

2. The horror of Thunder also made them worship Jupiter under the notion or
title of (...) or (...), of Jupiter altitonans, as the Latins call him; and
the Scripture it self forbears not to call Thunder the voice of God. The
forenamed Critic adds to this (...) (as the Greeks would style him)
Averruncus and Robigus; the latter whereof, he says, is to be pacified for the
security of our Corn, the other for the safety of our selves. But the former
seems rather a general name belonging to every Divine Power that is to be
attoned to keep off mischief, then to any one particular Manifestation of the
wrath of God in the World. Such as is a Storm or Tempest at Sea, whom the
Romans made a particular Deity after their Consul Cornelius Scipio had escaped
the danger.

Te quoque, Tempestas, meritam delubra fatemur,
Cum pene est Corsis obruta classis aquis.
3. Such instances as concern the pleasure and gratification of the Animal Life
are innumerable; but some we must produce, that thereby you may the better
judge of the rest. And it seems their God Pan, by whom, as his name denotes,
they understood the Universe, was a very pleasant Spectacle to them, both by
his picture, and other conceits they had of him. For why was he pictured with a
Pipe in his hand and a laughing countenance? why were the Nymphs imagined to
dance about him at the sound of his music? but that they did acknowledge that
all things in the world are ordered with an excellent Congruity and Harmony; so
that the Inhabitants thereof, that is, the Souls of living creatures, which are
the Nymphs here mentioned, being touched every one with the sense of what is
most grateful and agreeable to it self, are conceived to skip and dance for
joy. That they meant the Material or Visible World by Pan, is apparent as well
from what they write of his birth and amors, as from other observables in his
Image.

4. For he is said to be the Son of Mercury or Hermes, which is the Divine
(...), the The inward Word.
(...) of God, as the World is the The outward Word or Speech.
(...). Now the Universe being but one, Pan is rightly exempted from that
rabble of Sweet-hearts that the other Deities are feigned to have had; for
there is no body for him to love, only the reflection of himself from the Minds
of men that contemplate him. This, when his Nature is returned most truly, and
the Order of things and Ends of Providence are rightly understood, is his
beloved Nymph Syrinx; if more rudely and brokenly reflected, his Wife Echo, of
whom was born Iamble a tattling gossip full of ridiculous stories and old-wives
tales, full of scoffs and cavils and misrepresentations of those things that
are observed in the World. By which reputed Daughter of Pan may be well
understood the false Sects of Philosophy and vain Superstitions that ever
abounded in all Ages, which though they may please the ignorant, yet seem
either idle or impious to them that know better.

5. But it is most manifest by his Image, that they understood the Universe by
him. For what could be meant by his acute horns and the Hispidity or Hairiness
of his skin, but the Effluvium of Particles or the Rays of things, burring out
from all Bodies that act at a distance? which is most conspicuous in the Lights
of Heaven, which are so far removed, and which yet we see, as also all other
Objects of sight, by virtue of a Pyramid, whose Basis is in the Object, and
Cuspis is in our Eye. These in general are the horns of Pan: and the bright
Redness of his face denotes that color in the Sky; as his prolix beard the
streaming light of the Sun and Moon; and his being clothed with the spotted
skin of a Leopard the Stars; it may be also the spottedness of the Sea and the
Earth, the one with Islands and the other with Flowers. That he is partly Man
and partly Beast, denotes the comprehension of all living creatures as well
Irrational as Rational; and that he stands on the feet of a Goat, that the
Species of things could not subsist without proclivitie to lust, of which the
Goat is a notorious emblem. And that he is made laughing, signifies that the
whole World is Res ludicra, as that merry Prophet Mahomet speaks; to whom we
may adjoin the suffrage of the Poet who makes man's life a Stage Play.

(...)
(...).
This Life's a Scene of fools, a sportfull Stage,
Where grief attends him that is over-sage.
But this I have touched upon already. We pass therefore to their particular
Deities.

CHAP. VII. 1. That as the World or Universe was deified in Pan, so were the
parts thereof in Coelius, Juno, Neptune, Vulcan, Pluto, Ops, Bacchus, Ceres,
etc. 2. That the Night was also a Deity, and why they sacrificed a Cock to her,
with the like reason of other Sacrifices. 3. Interior Manifestations that
concern the Animal life, namely that of Wrath and Love, which are the Pagans
Mars and Venus. 4. Minerva, Mercurius, Eunomia, etc. Manifestations referred to
the Middle life. 5. The agreement of the Greeks Religion with the Romans, as
also with the Egyptians. 6. Their worship of the River Nilus, etc. 7. That the
Religion of the rest of the Nations of the world was of the same nature with
that of Rome, Greece and Egypt, and reached no further then the Animal life.
8. And that their worshipping of men deceased stood upon the same ground.
1. THis Universal specimen of the Divine Power, the World, as they have
deified the Whole, so they have also made Deities of the Parts thereof. For
their Uranus or Coelius, what is it but the Heavens; their Jupiter and Juno,
the Air and Clouds; Neptune the Sea; Vulcan (that limping Deity) the Fire? who
is said to halt, quod sine ligneo tanquam baculo progredi nequeat, as Phornutus
notes, meaning by his going with a stick the fuel he is sustained by. By Pluto
they mean the interior parts of the Earth, out of which Gold and Silver and
other precious commodities are dug. By Ops or Bona Dea the exterior parts
of the Soil in general, that afford the necessaries of life to both man and
beast. Hither also is to be referred Bacchus, Ceres, Pomona, Flora, and such
like Deities; as to Coelius the Host of Heaven, and in special the Sun and
Moon, the most famous Deities among the Pagans: The latter goes under the name
of Diana, the former of Apollo, and it may be of Vesta. For her Temple was
round, and a fire kept there constantly by the Vestal Virgins in the midst of
the Temple; which denotes that the Sun is in the midst of the world: and her
name (...), which is from (...), that he stands still, according to that more
accurate Hypothesis.

2. Neither were they sensible only to the pleasure of the Lights of Heaven,
but also of the convenience of Night, that dark shadow of the Earth, within
whose Sable curtains all living creatures so sweetly repose themselves:
wherefore they made Night also a Goddess, under the name of Latona or Nox; and
they sacrificed a Cock to her, as Ovid tells us in his Fastorum, because he was
a disturber of that rest and silence the Night is the bestower of to wearied
mortals. So they sacrificed a Dog to Diana for his bold barkings at the Moon, a
Goat to Bacchus for brouzing on the Vine, a Sow to Ceres for rooting up her
Corn. Such obvious reasons as these brought in an infinite number of
Ceremonies, which will not be worth the while to run over. The Nature of the
Deities themselves which the Pagans worshipped being a sufficient Argument of
the sense and meaning of their Religion, and that it reached no further then
the Animal life.

3. We have named the most eminent exterior Manifestations of the Divine Power
in the World: we shall now give a few instances of the Interior. And the most
notable, I conceive, are those Two Natural Passions of Wrath and Love; which
Powers they adored under the names of Mars and Venus. The Schoolmen would call
them the Irascible and Concupiscible, to which Two they reduce the rest of the
Passions of the Mind: but we cannot insist upon these things.

4. There are also other Interior Deities, as I may so call them, such as
Pallas or Minerva, Mercurius, Eunomia, and the like: all which reach no further
then the Middle Life I speak of, and are the improvements of man's Reason in the
knowledge of Nature, the discipline of War, Political Justice, skill in Trades
and Traffic, the Invention of Letters, of Music, of Architectonicks, and (if
you will) of all kinds of Mathematics (an instance whereof you have in that
Precept of the Oracle, that bad them double the Cube;) which because they may
be in us without any sense of the Divine life at all, I think we may also
venture to call Animal or Natural. For as for him that is the best accomplished
in these, yet that of the Apostle may be still true of him, Animalis homo non
capit quae sunt Spiritus Dei, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The Natural man is incapable of Spiritual and Divine Matters.

5. That the Religion of the Romans, in which we have chiefly instanced
hitherto, reached no further then the Animal life, is plain. The Greeks
differed little or nothing from them, their (...) being intended to Twelve of
those Deities which were acknowledged by the Romans, and such as we have named
already. And for the Egyptians it is evident also that their Religion was no
better, if not worse; their Serapis being the same with Pan or the Universe,
according to the concession of his own Oracle; and their Osiris and Isis but
the Sun and the Moon, Deities scarcely left out of the worship of any Heathens.
It is true there is a People in Africa that curse the Sun by reason of his
immoderate Heat; but it is the stronger argument where the comfort of his rays
is felt, (and in what nation are they not?) that the rude people did as much
bless him and adore him.

6. The River Nilus was a great God with the Egyptians too, as Ganges with the
Indians, they both of them fattening the Soil by their overflowings. The
Divinity of Nilus Apollonius also that rambling Greek did supersti^iously
acknowledge, by doing his devotions to the River within the sight and noise of
his roaring Catarracts, after he had visited the Gymnosophists. But for
themselves it is no wonder they should deify so grand a Benefactour, they
worshipping such things as lived on his benevolence. For such were the living
creatures, Birds, Beasts, and Creeping things, to which they did divine honor;
nay you may add Trees and Plants, Onyons and Garlic not excepted, as every one
casts into their dish.

7. What we have said of Rome, Greece and Egypt, may be made as manifest
concerning the Religion of all the parts of the world beside, as of Arabia,
Persia, India, China, Tartary, Germany, Scythia, Guinea, Aethiopia, and in the
Newfound world, as in Virginia, Mexico, Peru and Brasilia. But it would be as
tedious as needless to harp so long on one string by so voluminous an
Induction; and it is more warrantable to be sparing then over-lavish in so
copious and confessed a matter. Whoever reads those Writers, which are numerous
enough, that can inform them in this inquiry, he will assuredly find, That the
Religion of the Heathen reached no further then the Objects of the Animal life;
and that though they may go under several names, yet that they are the same
things every where, viz. Wrath, Lust and Sensuality; or such things as are in
subserviency to these, as Corn, Wine, and other Requisites for the necessities
or delights of Man; as also those Powers that have an influence upon these, as
the Sun, Moon and Stars, Fire, Water, Air, and the like.

8. We may add to these Inanimate things, Eminent persons whom they could not
but acknowledge as their great Benefactors. Such were their Lawgivers, Kings
and Commanders that fought their battles successfully; the first Inventours of
Arts or any useful contrivance for the convenience of life. Wherefore the most
subtle defenders of the worship of the Pagans, let them elude the charge of
Idolatry as well as they can, or Polytheism, yet they can never avoid the
imputation, That their serving of God in the Heathens Ceremonies, is not any
thing more then the acknowledging that Power that is able to gratify or grieve
the Spirit of the mere Natural Man.

CHAP. VIII. 1. That Judaism also respected nothing else but the Gratifications
of the Animal life, as appears in all their Festivals. 2. That though the
People were held in that low dispensation, yet Moses knew the meaning of his
own Types, and that Immortality that was to be revealed by Christ. 3. That
their Sabbaths reached no further then things of this life; 4. Nor their
Sabbatical years and Jubilees; 5. Nor their Feasts of Trumpets; 6. Nor their
Feast of Tabernacles; 7. Nor their Pentecost; 8. Nor lastly their Feast of
Expiation.
1. AND truly that the absolute Transcendency of the Christian Religion may be
the better understood, I cannot here omit that Judaism does very much symbolize
with Paganism in this point we are upon. For though the Jews were very right
and orthodox in this, in that they did direct their worship to that One and
only true God that made Heaven and Earth, and is the Author and Giver of every
good gift; and that without the offense and scandal of Idolatrous worship: yet
under this dispensation of Moses, he seems openly to promise nothing more to
the people of the Jews then the present enjoyments of this Natural life, nor
threatens any thing but the plagues thereof, as seems manifest, Deuteronomy 28.
where the Blessings of obedience to Moses his Law, and the Cursings of
disobedience are largely set down.

2. Not but that I can easily believe, that Moses himself understood the
Mystery of Immortality, and the Promise of those Eternal joys to be revealed
by the Messiah in the fullness of time, as also the meaning of all the Types
that refer unto him; and that his Successors also in that nation, their Holy
Men or Prophets, had some measurable Knowledge thereof: But my meaning is, that
the Generality of the Jews were locked up in this lower kind of Dispensation,
and that Moses his Law in the Externals thereof drives at no higher then thus;
as is apparent from all the Festivals thereof, they none of them concerning any
thing more then the enjoyments and conveniences of this present life.

3. For as for their Sabbaths, they were but a Memorial of the Creation of this
visible world, the belief whereof the Sadducees embraced as well as others,
though they denied that there was either Angel or Spirit; for there is not any
mention of the Creation of any such thing in the external letter of Moses, and
therefore the Appearances of Angels they looked upon as only present Emanations
from God, which ceased as he disappeared.

4. And for their Sabbatical year, as also the year of Iubilee, which was
celebrated at the end of seven times seven years, besides that they are not
without a reflection upon the Creation of the World, which was completed at
the seventh day, wherein therefore God rested; the other reasons, according to
the Text of Moses, reach no further then the things of this present life. For
as concerning the Sabbatical year, the Precept runs thus: Six years thou shall
sow thy land, and gather the fruits thereof; but the seventh year thou shall
let it rest, and lie still, that the poor of thy people may eat: in like manner
thou shall deal with thy vineyard and with thy olive-yard. And for the Iubilee,
it is evident that it had a secular use, for the releasment of Servants, and
restoring of lands to their first owners who were necessitated to sell them.
Those Feasts therefore were instituted in order to a Political good.

5. Their Feasts of Trumpets and their New Mons seem indeed to have an higher
use, to call the people together to hear the Law: but I told you before that
the Blessings and Cursings of the Law were merely Temporal. And for their
Sacrifices of Thanksgiving and of Atonement, they were in reference to what is
Good or Evil to this life of the Flesh.

6. Their Feast of Tabernacles was instituted in remembrance that the Children
of Israel dwelt in Tabernacles and Boothes, when God brought them out of the
land of Egypt. As also their Passover was a more particular representation of
the manner of their delivery out of the hands of the Egyptians; as you may see
Exodus the 12.

7. Their Pentecost, that is, the fiftieth day after the Passover, in this
they offered two wave-loaves; as upon the second day of the Passover they
offered a sheaf of the first fruits of their Harvest: so that those Solemnities
respected merely the Fruits of the Earth.

8. And lastly, as for the Feast of Expiation, wherein the Scapegoat carried
away the sins of the people and the evils deserved thereby into the wilderness;
being, as I have already intimated, that those plagues or evils denounced in
Moses his Law be but of a secular consideration, it is plain that this
particular Ceremony in the Religion of Moses, in the letter thereof, reaches no
further then the Pleasures or Aggrievances of this mortal life: It being
reserved for Christ alone to bring the most certain and most comfortable News
of that Eternal Joy which we shall be made partakers of with him for ever in
the Heavens, 2 Timothy 1.10.
who was to abolish Death, and to bring Life and Immortality to light through
the Gospel, as S. Paul speaks.

CHAP. IX. 1. The Preeminency of Judaism above Paganism. 2. The Authors of the
Religions of the Heathen, who they were. 3. How naturally lapsed Mankind falls
under the superstitious Tyranny of Devils. 4. The palpable effects of this
Tyranny in the Nations of America. 5. That that false and wild Resignation in
the Quakers does naturally expose them to the Tyranny of Satan. 6. That their
affectation of blind impulses is but a preparation to Demonical possession,
and a way to the restoring of the vilest Superstitions of Paganism.
1. WHat shall we say then? is there no real difference at all betwixt Judaism
and Paganism? Yes a great deal. For though they both seem to agree in this,
that they neither reach further in their End then the gratifications of the
Animal life (it being indeed incredible, that their Souls, that are so low sunk
that they cannot see beyond this present state, should emerge to so high a
pitch of Sanctification as is understood by that life we call Divine:) yet
Judaism has the preeminence far above Paganism. First, In that those rich
discoveries of the Gospel are so exactly adumbrated and shadowed out in the
Mosaical Types, that a man may be assured that they were prefigured by them.
Secondly, That the worship of God according to the Rites of Moses is more pure
and devoid of all suspicion of Idolatry, which the Religion of the Heathen was
not, as has been already declared.

2. Lastly, In that God himself was the Institutour of the Religion of the
Jews, whenas the Rites of the Heathen were found out and appointed either by
Angels, as some would have it, such as were the Overseers and Guardians of
several Nations and Countries, (who if they were good, the Inhabitants of the
earth it seems revolted from them, and corrupted their primitive institutions
so long ago, that the knowledge of them never arrived to or hands;) or else at
the best they were but the better sort of lapsed Spirits, or crafty Political
men, or impure and malicious Devils. And so far as History will give us light,
all the Religions of the World, saving those of Moses and Christ, have no
better Authors then those of the Three last kinds, as you may gather out of
what has been already spoken; and too many of them, I suspect, have been
ordained by the foulest and wickedest of all the lapsed crew.

3. For Mankind being so much sunk and fallen from God by the temptation of
the Devil, like a Bird or prey he follows his prize, and hunts there where his
game is most, hovering over the sons of men, whom he having struck down to the
earth, lets not his hold go, but having once seized upon them, keeps them as
long as he can within his own power; it falling to his share to domineer over
men as naturally as wicked men to circumvent and domineer one over another, I
mean the more powerful and subtle over the more weak and unwise.

4. Of which the whole Newfound World seems to be an ample Testimony; there
being very few places in America, but such as were discovered to be palpably
and visibly under the power of the old Serpent, their religious Rites and
Ceremonies being as uncouth and antic and more bloody and cruel then those
that Witches are known to be tied to here. For the mind of these Apostate
Spirits is, that the Remnant of the Law of Nature and Light of Reason in man
should be quite obliterated, and that mankind should be wholly their Vassals,
and that they should forget the Nobleness of their own condition, and stoop to
whatsoever they require of them, which are commonly such things as become none
but Madmen and Beasts.

5. And therefore it is a very dangerous and false kind of Resignation in those
that would pretend to a more then ordinary pitch of Religion, to bid adieu to
the Rules of Humanity and Reason under the pretense of the exercise of
Self-denial. For thus giving away their own Will in those things that are
laudable and good, they give room for the Devil to enter and to possess them
Soul and Body, and to drive them to the most vile, sordid, the most uncivil and
ridiculous, nay the most wicked and impious, actions that Humane Nature is
liable to; as is too much already found in some of that Fanatic Sect of the
Quakers, who under pretense of crucifying the Dictates of Reason and Humanity
and every thing they find their Spirit carried to, smother that Lamp of God in
them: and being thus got in the dark, are the scorn and laughing stock of
Satan, that sworn enemy of mankind the Devil; and delusive Spirits, like so
many Ignes Fatui, lead them about in this bewildring Night that they have
voluntarily brought upon themselves, by not making use of that Talent that God
already had given them, but flinging of it away as an unholy thing.

6. This is true of several of them by their own Confessions; and things of a
like Nature to these are evident in most of them, whether themselves will
confess it or no: but let them pretend what they will, most certain it is, That
that Spirit that leads them from the Scriptures, from the use of Reason, from
common Humanity, from their Loyalty to Christ that died for them, and whom God
has exalted above all powers and principalities whatever, either amongst men or
Angels; that Spirit, I say, that seduces them from such indispensable points as
these, is none other then he that seduced man at first, and would again bring
him into a slavish subjection to himself by despoiling of him utterly of all
those tender touches of Spirit, and warrantable suggestions of Reason and
Natural Conscience, or the laudable Customs of his Education, to act merely
upon blind impulses, of which no account is to be given, that thereby he may be
the easier possessed by him, and be hurried to any vileness of wickedness, to
any cruelty or uncleanness without stop or resistance; and that the Law of
Christ being extinguished, the most foul and barbarous form of Religion
amongst the Gentiles may be restored. For the virulent enmity of this Sect
against the Ministers of the Gospel is no obscure argument that they are acted
by the Envy of the Devil, whose Kingdom already has in part, and shall still
fall more and more by the hand of our Savior: whose Triumphs that we may see
how just they are, we must not pass over Paganism so favorably as we have,
but discover the beastly and bloody Tyranny of Satan upon the Nations of the
Earth in his more execrable Rites and Ceremonies, the abominableness whereof
demonstrates That they had no other Institutour but himself.

CHAP. X. 1. The Devil's usurped dominion of this world, and how Christ came to
dispossess him. 2. The Largeness of the Devil's dominion before the coming of
Christ. 3. The Nation of the Jews, the light of the world; and what influence
they might have on other Nations in the midst of the reign of Paganism. 4.
That if our Hemisphere was any thing more tolerable then the American, it is to
be imputed to the Doctrine of the Patriarchs, Moses and the Prophets. 5. That
this Influence was so little, that all the Nations besides were Idolaters, most
of them exercising of obscene and cruel Superstitions.
1. THat the Kingdoms of the Earth are, or rather were, at the disposal of the
Devil, was his own boast to our Savior when he would have tempted him to fall
down and worship him: and it is observable that our Savior disputes not his
Title, though he denies him that Homage; nay he seems to acknowledge his
present possession and dominion over this world, by calling him The Prince
thereof, though an Usurper, and such as himself came to deliver the nations
from. Now is the Redemptiom of this World, (for so (...) signifies, as Grotius
has noted) now is the Prince of this World cast out; John 12.31.
and I when I am lifted up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me.

2. Now how absolute and universal his Dominion was before Christ came into the
World, we shall easily understand if we consider that he had one Hemisphere
entire, viz. America with the adjacent Islands; and this other wherein we live,
and that contains those three great Continents, Europe, Asia and Africa,
(saving the little that that handful of the people of God did possess,) what of
it was not his?

3. This Family therefore of the Faithful has in all Ages been, as our Savior
speaks, The light of the World; though never so visible and so spreading as
after his coming: and it is not to be doubted but Wise men of several Nations
communicating with the Jews, whether in Palestine or Egypt, carried something
away with them whereby they might better the Laws and Rites of those Countries
wherein after they did for any time reside. So that if the Examples of the
Tyranny of Satan, or the Impurity of his Institutions and Ceremonies be not so
many, nor so heinous and abominable in these Parts of the World as in the other
Hemisphere, it is not to be referred to any Tolerableness of his Malice or
Wickedness, but to the Efficacy of that Light whose appearance very often is so
grateful and congruous to the Soul of man, that though it have been nursed up
in vain and unclean Superstitions, and bloody and beastly Rites of a false
Religion; yet so soon as a purer Form is propounded, with confidence it
closes with what is Better, and resists the power both of a bad Custom and
an ill Master at once.

4. I speak not this as if the Knowledge of God in the ancient Patriarchs,
Moses and the Prophets had any such considerable influence upon the Inhabitants
on this side of the Earth, as that we were at a loss for examples of what was
sufficiently abominable amongst the nations; but that if we may seem to have
been in any more tolerable condition then the Americans, that it may not be
imputed to any Remisness in that Hater and Contemner of Mankind, but to the
Providence of God and the Power of Truth, the light whereof at so great
distances, and so many reflections and refractions, is not without some Effect.

5. But scarce any where at all of that Efficacy, as to keep off the grosness
of Idolatry: but in many places it was so perfectly absent, that Beastliness,
Obscenity and execrable Cruelty was added to the other unpardonable parts of
their Superstitions. It would be an endless business to bring in all the
Instances we may, but some we must, as a pledge of the rest, and in what order
it happens; and that with all briefness possible, only naming their
abominations, not insisting upon them.

CHAP. XI. 1. The villainous Rites of Cybele the Mother of the Gods. 2. Their
Feasts of Bacchus: 3. of Priapus, and the reason of sacrificing an Ass to him.
4. Their Lupercalia, and why they were celebrated by naked men. 5. The Feasts
of Flora. 6. Of Venus, and that it was the Obscene Venus they worshipped. 7.
That their Venus Urania, or Queen of Heaven, is also but Earthly lust, as
appears from her Ceremonies. 8. That this Venus is thought to be the Moon. Her
lascivious and obscene Ceremonies.
1. THE First that comes to my thoughts is the Mother of the Deifyed Rabble,
Cybele, matter Deorum, the celebration of whose Rites had so much villainy and
debauchedness in it, that the more ingenuous of the Roman were ashamed of the
Office. The Priests clad in party-colored coats danced antic dances, writhing
about their heads ilfavouredly, and keeping time with their hands upon their
breasts to the tune of the tabret, pipe and cymbals, footed it thus from house
to house through the streets, begging money of the people to the use of Cybele
the Mother of the Gods. From whence they were called Metragyrtae as well as
Menagyrtae; but they were such noted Beasts and Drunkards, that their gross
misdemeanors gave an occasion to that byword, Circulator Cybeleius, whereby
they understood a lewd dissolute villain, given wholly up to drunkenness and
debauchedness.

2. I cannot name the Bacchanalia, but your phansies will prevent me, where it
seems (and it is the complaint of that sober Writer Livy) that though the Title
of the Feast be Bacchus, yet the conlusion is promiscuous Lust and Venery, nay
violent force and fightings and frequent Murders. For the opportunities of
Night, and the mixture of men and women together of several ages and orders,
and the incitation of Lust through the intemperance of Wine made them
transgress all the bounds of Shame and Modesty; so that with unresistible
violence they would force whom they could, and falling out about their prey,
wound and kill one another; the noise and groans of the dying parties and the
shreeks of the ravished women not being heard by reason of the rattling and
tinckling of their Tabrets and Cymbals which sounded all the while: so that it
seems the Romans as well as the Sicyonii worshipped (...). But to let that go
uninterpreted;

3. Priapus, what a filthy Deity was he? His Image so obscene, as you may see
in the Poets, that no chaste pen would describe it after them, though their
description be but a testimony of the truth of the abomination. To this impure
God they sacrificed an Ass: the reason Ovid in his Fastorum tells at large;
but it is so lascivious, that it will be sufficient only to have hinted it. It
seems the God was in love with the Nymph Lotis, who lying with the rest of the
Rural Deities in the grass in a moonshine night, and being fallen asleep,
Priapus by stealth intended to have deflowred her: but when he was over-near
the perpetrating of his Villainy, old Silenus his Ass chanced to bray so rudely
and loud that he wakened the Nymph and defeated the God of his lewd purpose,
debarring him of his desired pleasure, and exposing him to the derision of all
the Rural Deities by the mishap. Omnibus ad lunae lumina risus erat.
And therefore the Heathens sacrifice an Ass to Priapus, as a reiterated
revenge upon that Beast for doing him so great a displeasure.

4. Some such Reason as this the same Prophet of the Heathens, as I may so call
him, gives of men's running up and down stark naked in the Lupercalia, which
were celebrated to the honor, or rather dishonor, of Pan, Lycaeus, Faunus or
Sylvanus; for it is nothing but a memorial also of his defeated lechery. For
Hercules having retired into a wood with his wife Omphale, a fair and goodly
person and richly attired, this Rural God by chance espying her, fell in love
with her, watched where they took up their lodging, and silently stole into the
Cave by night: where Hercules and Omphale having changed garments, he lying in
his wives clothes, and she in his Lions skin, made the lustful God mistake so
unluckily, that it cost him, besides the shame, the bruising of his Body
against the sides of the Cave, where the enraged Heroes cast him, discharging
himself of so uncouth and unsuitable a Bedfellow. And this is the Reason why
Sylvanus will have his Ceremonies performed by naked men in detestation of that
deceit and mistake that may ly under clothes. Vest Deus lusus fallentes lumina
Vestes
Non amat, and nudos ad sua sacra vocat.
The God abused by cloths that hinder sight,
Unto his Feasts the naked does invite.
So lascivious are the Rites, and so frivolous the Theology of the ancient
Pagans.

5. Flora is a name that sounds more innocently, but yet her Solemnities are
not performed without shameless wantonness and uncivil mirth; lewd Harlots
being appointed to run up and down naked, pleasing the Spectators with their
obscene gestures and Meretricious disportments.

6. Their Goddess Venus can be no sooner mentioned then suspected, and that
deservedly. For though Plato and Plotinus acknowledge a Twofold Venus, the one
Heavenly, the other Popular and Carnal; yet that Distinction in the true
meaning thereof seems only to be lodged amongst the better sort of
Philosophers, the people doing their devotions to that lower Deity, as it
appears by the Epithets they give her, and the Ceremonies they perform to her.
For (...) which the Argivi, (...) which the Athenians, and (...) which the
Syracusans worshipped, can be no other but that Power which is the President of
Lust, as the meaning of those unchaste Epithets does plainly demonstrate. And
that Venus which was worshipped at Cyprus, the Phallus which was shown amongst
other of her Ceremonies evidently declares her Nature to be of the same kind.

7. There was indeed an Urania, a Celestial Venus, she is called the Queen of
Heaven in Scripture, Venus Mylitta in Profane writers, ( Mylitta signifying
(...), as if it were from (...)) which was worshipped as well in some parts of
Africa as in Babylonia; but the reason of her name, which we have already told,
as also the manner of her Ceremonies, do manifestly show that she was but that
Popular Venus we spoke of before. For young Women sat in her Temple, their
places being distinguished by certain lines or threads, which any stranger that
would make use of their bodies, broke, and so carried her apart that he had a
mind to deal with from the rest, and gave her a piece of money for a requital;
and after this superstitious kind of fornication she was permitted to marry
whom she pleased. The better sort of Women made their abode near the Temple in
certain Wagons covered like Tents: from whence the abomination was called
Succoth Benoth, and the Goddess her self Benoth for shortness, whence the
Critics with great probability derive the Latin word Venus.

8. This Venus which was worshipped so in several places, is conceived by some
to be the Moon, as by Philochorus, who affirms her to be sacrificed to, if by
men, in women's apparel, if by women, in men's apparel: Which Planet is rightly
called the Queen of Heaven, and under the name of Hecate is also Maleficarum
Venus, as Seldom notes. Astarte also is the same Numen, served by her impure
Priests, men of filthy and effeminate manners. The abominableness of the
Worship of this Goddess of Lust is lively set out by Eusebius in the life of
Constantine, Nemus erat and delubrum extra publicam viam spurco Veneris daemoni
in part verticis montis Libani in fruticeto positum. Erat hic malitiae Schola
omnibus lascivis, ubi viri non viri muliebri morbo daemonem placabant. And
besides this, it was, as he says, the Rendezvous of all lewd persons, men and
women given to wantonness, where they committed adultery, fornication and
Sodomy with impunity, because no man of any repute would come amongst them.

CHAP. XII. 1. Of their famous Eleusinia, how foul and obscene they were. 2.
The magnificency of those Rites, and how hugely frequented. 3. That the bottom
thereof was but a piece of Baudery, held up by the Obscene and ridiculous story
of Ceres and Baubo. 4. Of their foul superstitions in Tartary, Malabar,
Narsinga, and the whole Continent of America.
1. THat so villainous doings are found under so bad a title as this Goddess
bears, may seem less marvel; but such Solemnities as have had the greatest fame
for Mysteriousness and Sanctity are not found clear of this course kind of
filthiness. We will instance in one example for all, in the Sacra Eleusinia
instituted to the honor of Ceres, whom one would expect that she should
approve her self an honest country Matron; whenas some of the sights to be seen
in her Temple (as holy as they made those Mysteries) were but the ensigns of a
Bawdy House, which was the cause I suppose that made Socrates and Demonax not
care to be initiated.

2. But what by the power of delusive Spirits or the fraud of the Priests, that
caused unexpected flashings of light and astonishing thunderings, besides other
strange sights which they exhibited to them that were come to an (...) and were
called (...), these Mysteries were in so great request, that they were honored
sometimes with the presence of no less then thirty thousand persons. Lib. 1.
Claudian in his de Raptu Proserpinae sets out the solemness of these Rites
very livelily.

Iam mihi cernuntur trepidis delubra moveri
Sedibus, and clarum dispergere culmina lumen,
Adventum testata Dei: jam magnus ab imis
Auditur fremitus terris, Templumque remugit
CECROPIDUM --
Now do I see the trembling Temple move
From the foundation, and the Roof all bright
To send down sudden day shot from above,
Sign of the Gods approach; Now strange affrights
Of bellowing murmurs echoing under ground
Fill the CECROPIAN structures with their sound.
3. But this magnificent description of the Poet will be quite dashed out of
countenance, if we do but produce that smart taunt to their foul Superstition
set down by the pen of one of the ancient Fathers, Tota in Adytis divinitas,
tota suspiria Epoptarum, totum signaculum linguae, simulacrum membri virilis
revelatur. To this of Adversus Valent. cap. 1.
Tertullian we might add out of Theodoret, or rather (as some would have it)
correct Tertullian's mistake. For they did (say they) exhibit to the eyes of
the Epoptae (...), not (...). But the (...) being part as it were of this
Solemnity, Tertullian's mistake is not quite so wide as they would make it, but
the peoples eyes were befooled with the sight of them both (...), says Therap.
l. 7.
Theodoret; and Clemens gives a reason of it, because Ceres after her long
travail in seeking Proserpina, being weary and very sad, sat in that heaviness
on a certain stone, the Greeks call it (...), Ovid translates it, Saxum triste,
the sad stone; Hic primum gelido sedit maestissima saxo,
Illud Cecropidae nunc quoque TRISTE vocant.
The Goddess being in this disconsolate condition, one Baubo, says In Protrepi:
Clemens, an old countrey-woman, offered her to drink: but the Goddess being
overcome with sadness and refusing it, (...), and afterward it should seem more
cheerfully took off her Cup.

4. Thus filthy and impure is the Religion of the Pagans all over, whose nasty
Ceremonies had not been recorded by the pens, nor uttered by the mouths of the
holy Fathers, had not necessity done violence to their modesty. Nor will I
detain you any longer in so unsavory a subject, though we might travail
further in this mire, relating to you the unclean customs of Candu in Tartary,
where they prostitute their Sisters, their Daughters, nay their own Wives to
strangers by way of honor to their Idols: Of Calecut in Malabar, where the
King strains courtesy with the High Priest, and will needs have him reap the
primitiae of the pleasures of his new-married Bride; in that City also is there
a Temple dedicated to the Ape, an animal of noted lechery: Of Narsinga, where
women prostitute themselves to get money for their Idols: Of the whole Continent
of America, where besides that their common Lust and Venery has no bounds, they
also offer their Daughters to be deflowred by their Priests, and dedicate young
Boys to Sodomy; particularly at Old Port and Puna in Peru, where the Devil so
far prevailed in their beastly devotions, (as Purchase relates out of Cieza)
that there were boys consecrated to serve in the Temple, and at the times of
their Sacrifices and solemn Feasts the Lords and principal men abused them to
that detestable filthiness; and generally in the Hill-countreys the Devil under
show of holiness had brought in that vice. For every Temple or principal house
of Adoration kept one man or two or more, which were attired like women even
from the time of their childhood, and spoke like them, imitating them in every
thing; with whom under pretext of Holiness and Religion their principal men on
principal days had that hellish commerce. But enough and too much of the
foulness of the Pagan Superstition.

CHAP. XIII. 1. The bloody Tyranny of the Devil in his cruel Superstitions. The
whipping of the prime youth of Lacedaemon at the Altar of Diana. 2. The
sacrificing to Bellona and Dea Syria with the Priests own blood. The blood of
the sick vowed to be offered in Cathaia and Mangi, with other vile and
contemptuous abuses of Satan. 3. Other scornful and harsh misusages in Siam and
Pegu. Men squeezed to death under the wheels of an Idols Chariot in the Kingdom
of Narsinga and Bisnagar. 4. Foul tedious Pilgrimages in Zeilan, together with
the cuttings and slashings of the flesh of the Pilgrim. 5. Whipping, eating the
earth, plucking out eyes before the Idol in New-Spain, with their antic and
slovenly Ceremonies in Hispaniola. 6. The intolerable harshness of their
Superstitious Castigations in Mexico and Peru. 7. That these base usages are an
infallible demonstration of the Devil's Hatred and Scorn of Mankind.
1. HAving given you a competent view of the Misgovernment of the Prince of
this world in the lawless extravagancies of unclean Lust; we shall now consider
his cruel insolences and despightful usages of contemned mankind, which we may
call the Bloody Tyranny of the Devil over men. And there are not a few Examples
thereof: we shall not omit to produce such as are on this side Murder, and yet
are manifest arguments of that Envy and Scorn he bears to man. As the whipping
of the prime youth of Lacedaemon before the face of their friends at the Altar
of Diana: a custom so barbarous, that Thespesion the chief of the
Gymnosophists thought fit to object it to Apollonius that great Reformer of
Paganism. But he is fain to excuse the Lacedaemonians, as doing that which was
the more tolerable; the Scythian Goddess rigidly exacting of them the effusion
of man's blood at her Altar.

2. The sacrificing to Bellona was with the Priests own blood, which was also
done to Dea Syria by hers at the Fire-Feast, where also young men in a
superstitious rage, (who after ran through the City with that in their hand
which they had cut off from their body, See Purcha^ his ^ilgrim. Part 1. Book
1. Chap. 15.
and cast into some house or other, thereby to oblige them to give them their
womanish habit and attire) dismembered themselves in honor to the Goddess. The
sick in Cathaia and Mangi (as is recorded by Paulus Venetus) were taught to vow
the offering of their blood to their Idol, if they recovered. And what had less
pain (but more contempt and scorn with it) the Priest used to besprinkle his
congregation before he dismissed them, with blood, milk, earth and cowes-dung.

3. In Siam the Religious Orders are held under very hard laws, it being death
to speak to a woman, and to drink wine no less then stoning. That also is a
base abuse of the people in Pegu, as Purchase relates out of Gasp. Balby, who
drink the water wherein the Priest has washed himself. In the kingdom of
Narsinga and Bisnagar there is an Idol to which they make long Pilgrimages, and
when they appear before him, come with their hands bound, or with ropes about
their necks, or with knives sticking in their arms or legs, or else cut their
flesh, and cast the pieces into the Idol's face. The Idol being drawn in solemn
procession, the more Zealous of the people lie in the way to be squeezed to
death by the wheels, as both Balby, Odoricus and Linschoten write. I might add
other examples of this kind, but I will not overmuch transgress my proposed
Method, not intending for the present to speak of any cruelties of Satan but
such as are on this side Murder.

4. In Zeilan they make Pilgrimages of incredible tediousness; For having
travailed many hundred miles, they are fain to wade near twenty miles together
in stinking mire, besides their clambering up an Hill of many miles ascent by
the help of ropes and hooks and bushes that they are to take hold of: and when
they are got up to the top, and have fed their eyes with the print of his foot
that was their ancient Lawgiver, they complete their penance with pricking and
cutting their own flesh.

5. In New-Spain they sought pardon of their Idols by whipping themselves on
the naked shoulders, and taking up earth and eating it. In Peru they lay
prostrate on the ground before their Idols, the more Zealous not sparing to
pluck out their own eyes in a blind devotion. In Hispaniola, when they
sacrificed, they were wont to thrust a consecrated hook down their throats to
fetch all out of their stomachs; which done they sat round their Idol in an
antic posture, wry-necked and cross-legged, praying for the acceptance of
their Sacrifice.

6. The Priests and religious at Mexico were wont to rise at Midnight, having
cast incense before their Idol, to retire into a large place where many lights
were burning, and there with lancets and bodkins to pierce the calves of their
legs near to the bones, anointing their Temples with the blood. They would also
slit their members in the midst in a frantic pursuance of a thankless
Chastity. They whipped themselves also with cords full of knots, besides their
tedious and destructive fastings. These sad Ceremonies they also used in Peru,
where they swinged themselves with stinging Nettles, and struck themselves over
the shoulders with hard stones.

These and the like abuses (that you may meet withal in Writers) which Satan
has put upon Mankind, are a demonstration of his great contempt and hatred of
us. But we shall come nearer now to make good that charge, which our Blessed
Savior, who came to destroy his dominion, most justly has laid upon this
Usurper, That he was a Murderer from the beginning: which is most evident from
that execrable custom of Sacrificing of men to him under what account or title
soever: which was an abomination practiced of old in most parts of the World,
as the Testimony of Historians will make good.

CHAP. XIV. 1. Men sacrificed to the Devil in Virginia, Peru, Brasilia. They of
Guiana and Paria also eat them being sacrificed. The Ceremony of these
Sacrifices in Nicaragua. 2. The hungry and bloodthirsty Devils of Florida and
Mexico. 3. Their sacrificing of Children in Peru, with the Ceremony of drowning
a Boy and a Girl in Mexico. 4. The manner of the Mexicans sacrificing their
Captives. 5. The huge numbers of those Sacrifices in Mexico, and of their
dancing about the City in the skin of a man new flayed. 6. And in New-Spain in
the skin of a woman.
1. THE knowledge of this is fresh concerning the Americans, as that they in
Virginia sacrificed Children to the Devil, as also in Peru for the health and
prosperity of the Ingua, and for success in war. The same they do in Brasilia.
The People of Guiana, of Paria and other adjacent parts do not only sacrifice
men, but some of them after feed upon the sacrifice. The Priests of Nicaragua,
as Purchase relates out of Gomara, after the Ceremony of a mournful sound and
going thrice about their Captives, of a sudden rip up their Breasts with
certain knives of flint, and then after the distribution of the Body to the
King, their high Priest and him that took the Captive in war, they set their
Heads upon Trees, under which they sacrifice also other men and children.

2. In Florida the Devil appears to them and complains that he is thirsty: But
nothing quenches his thirst but the blood of men. Acosta relates of the
Mexicans, that their Priests would tell their Kings that their Gods died for
hunger: the meaning whereof was, that they must forthwith go out to war to get
Captives for Sacrifices to their Gods.

3. In Peru, at the Inauguration of their new Ingua, they sacrificed two
hundred children; they either cut off their necks, anointing themselves on the
face with their blood, or drowned them and so buried them with certain
Ceremonies. And the Mexicans also are reported at a Feast which they keep in
their Canaoes on the Lake, to drown a Boy and a Girl, to keep the Gods of the
Lake company. They of Peru would also sacrifice Virgins out of their
Monasteries, as the same Author writes: and ordinarily any Indian of Quality,
and those too of mean sort, would sacrifice their firstborn to redeem their
own life, when the Priest pronounced that they were mortally sick.

4. The Mexicans indeed, if Acosta does not them overmuch right, sacrificed
only Captives to their Idols. But they were unmercifully lavish of the blood of
their conquered enemy, their Sacrifices being often repeated, and they
sacrificing at least forty or fifty at a time, making them to ascend to the top
of an high Terras in the Court of the Temple, where the chief Priest (as also
his assistants) being clad in most ugly and diabolical dresses to astonish the
people, opened the Breast of the Captive with a wondrous dexterity, pulled out
the Heart with his hands, and showed it smoking to the Sun, to whom he did
offer this heat and fume of the Heart, and then cast it at the Idols face, and
with a spurn of his foot tumbled the Body of the Sacrifice down the stairs of
the Temple.

5. So prodigal was their abominable Religion of humane blood, that some days
they have sacrificed five thousand or more, and in diverse places above twenty
thousand, as Acosta relates from the reports of the Indians. There is one nasty
piece of Cruelty that he says was used in Mexico, which was the flaying of a
Slave, and apparelling another man with his skin, who was to go dancing and
leaping through all the houses and marketplaces of the City to beg money for
the Idols; and they that refused to give, he was to give them a ^lap on the
face with the bloody corner of the skin.

6. This is ill enough; but that something worse in New-Spain, where they
flayed a woman, and covered a man with her skin, who was to dance about the
streets two days together. So despightfully Cruel and Tyrannical has the Rule
of the Devil been in the Newfound Pagan world; and yet we shall not find him
much better in the Old. For there we shall also find him a bloodthirsty
murderer in most of the parts thereof.

CHAP. XV. 1. The sacrificing of Children to Moloch in the valley of Hinnom, 2.
That it was not a Februation, but real Burning of them. That this custom
spread from Syria to Carthage. 4. Further Arguments thereof, with the mistake
of Saturn being called Israel rectified by Grotius. And that Abraham's offering
up Isaac was no occasion at all to these execrable sacrifices. 5. Sacrificing
of men in Britain, Lusitania, France, Germany, Thrace and in the Isle of Man.
6. In sundry places also of Greece, as Messene, Arcadia, Chios, Aulis, Locri,
Lacedaemon. 7. That the Romans were not free neither from these salvage
sacrifices. 8. To which you may add the Cimbrians, Lituanians, Egyptians, the
Inhabitants of Rhodes, Salamis, Tenedos, Indians, Persians, etc.
1. SYria is famous, or rather foully infamous, for that cruel God of the
Ammonites, Moloch, to whom they sacrificed their Children burning them in the
fire. This was, as in other places, so also done in the Valley of Hinnom, so
called, a rugitu seu lamentis puerorum dum exurebantur, from the roarings and
cryings of the children whilst they were a burning, or else from the
possessours of that field, the sons of Hinnom. It is also named Tophet, from
the beating of the drums they then used to drown the cries of the poor Infants
that were sacrificed. Some are of opinion that it was only a Februation,
purification, or consecration of their children, not a sacrificing of them: But
Mr. Seldom has sufficiently confuted that conceit, to whom I remit the Curious,
De Diis Syris, Syntagm. 1. Cap. 6.

2. Gaffarel indeed, though he will admit that certain Persian Colonies seated
in Samaria sacrificed their children to Adramelech and Anamelech the Gods of
Sepharvaim, yet he will not allow by any means that Children were sacrificed to
Moloch, but only februated: and this he does in favor to the Jews whom he
would not have to stand guilty of such a detestable piece of Idolatry. But it
is beyond all exception plain, that they did sacrifice their sons and
daughters to Devils, Psalm. 105. and Josephus himself acknowledges of Achaz, i.
e. That he burnt his own son, offering him as an Holocaust, according to the
customs or supersti^ious rites of the Canaanites.
(...). See Grotius upon the 18. of Deuteronomy, where he does plainly enough
prove that children were really sacrificed to Moloch, though he does not deny
but in process of time the rigor of this cruel custom might be changed into
what was more tolerable, viz. the traduction of their children between two
fires; later ages finding out such (...), for the mitigating of the
barbarousness of their ancient rites. And it is not unlikely but that before
this cruelty was quite laid aside, there was first a seldomer use of it, and
that at last it vanished into simple Februation; which is the best way I know
to save Solomon's credit, and vindicate him from the suspicion of so barbarous
a piece of Idolatry, though he reigned long before Achaz.

3. That this Custom of sacrificing Children spread it self out of Syria into
Europe I cannot say: but it is likely that the Carthaginians had it from
thence, they being a Colony of that nation; and Lactantius charges them with
this cruel Superstition, that they used to sacrifice men to Saturn; and that,
being overcome by Agathocles King of Sicilie, and suspecting their God was
angry with them, they sacrificed ducentos nobilium filios, two hundred
noble-mens sons at once. This abomination of sacrificing their children Ennius
also had noted of old, Poeni sunt soliti sos sacrificare puellos.


4. The Cretians also as well as the Syrians sacrificed to Saturn, however they
took up the custom. But a further evidence that the Carthaginians had theirs
from the Syrians is that the name of the God they sacrificed to was called
Amilcas, as Seldom notes out of Athenagoras, which comes very near to Moloch or
Milcham, and that they used also drums and pipes to drown the noise and cries
of the sacrificed. Porphyrius out of the Phoenician Chronicles tells us that
this Saturn the Phoenicians call Israel, who was their ancient King, and
sacrificed his onely-begotten son to deliver his Kingdom from a present danger
of war. His sons name also, he says, was Ieoud, which has near affinity with
the Hebrew (...), unigenitus; and the whole narration seems to some a depraved
story of Abraham's sacrificing Isaac, though Grotius be of another mind, and
happily out of a true conjecture: The mistake being in some Scribe, who finding
(...), which was the name of the King that sacrificed his son, ((...), as Philo
Byblius has it out of Sanchuniatho) thought it the usual contraction of (...),
whenas that Phoenician King was called (...) (which the Syrians use for (...))
as Enoch bore the name of (...), as Grotius will more fully inform us upon
Deuteron. 18. But though that way that Seldom recites out of Porphyrius were
true, I do not see that this occasion should need to have any influence on
remoter parts in Europe, they of Peru without any such invitation being lavish
of the blood of their children in sacrificing them to the Devil. But if it had,
it were no excuse, but a greater reproach to them and their ill Master, that
God's refusal of so high and rigorous an homage (though he had an indisputable
right to it) could not bind their hands from either offering or receiving such
bloody sacrifices.

5. Wherefore, without any such animation or emulation, I believe, the Apostate
Spirits every where full of Scorn and Cruelty, did of themselves set up such
abominable Rites in most parts of the old world. As here in Britain, where they
were wont to sacrifice Captives to foretell things to come, as Tacitus writes.
Strabo affirms the same of the Lusitani, who for the same purpose sacrificed
their Captives to Mars. Diodorus writes the same concerning the Gauls, and
Suetonius of the Germans; Eusebius of the Thracians, who sacrificed men, to be
better ascertained of their success in war: and Tacitus concerning the Isle
of Man near us, says, that it was the seat of the Druids who were great
Men-sacrificers, which they performed in Woods. Lucos saevis superstitionibus
sacros, that Author calls them.

6. Neither were the Greeks free from this bloody Superstition. For Aristomenes
Messenius sacrificed three hundred men to Jupiter Ithemius. The Arcades also
sacrificed Boys to Jupiter Lycaeus, and the Inhabitants of Chios a Man to
Diomedes. The Locri were commanded by their Oracle, for the asswaging of a
Pestilence, so send every year two Virgins to Troy, which had their throats
first cut, and then were burnt in sacrifice to Pallas Trojana: And Iphigenia,
the butchering of her (under the pretense of marriage) by the hand of the
Priest at the altar of Diana in Aulis, is notoriously known, and lively set out
by Lucretius, with this Epiphonema at the end of the Narration, Tantum Relligio
potuit suadere malorum.
The Lacedaemonians also sacrificed Men to Mars. Phylarchus affirms all the
Greeks to have done the like.

7. Pliny boasts that the Romans were free from those cruel and impious
Superstitions: but if he mean they were always so, it will be found but a
boast. For of old they sacrificed men to Saturnus and Jupiter Latialis, as
Tertullian and Lactantius have noted; and it was usual with them to give men
to be devoured by Beasts in their great Festivals, which they celebrated to
this or the other Deity. Besides, they are said to have sacrificed at Rome two
Greeks and two Gauls, a Male and Female of each, every year. And throughout
Sicily and Italy those barbarous Sacrifices were very frequent according to
Pliny's own Testimony, and were not abrogated at Rome till about six or seven
hundred years ab urbe condita.

8. We might reckon up more Nations polluted with this execrable impiety, as
the Cimbrians, Lituanians, Egyptians, the Inhabitants of Rhodes, Salamis,
Tenedos and Cyprus, also those of Laodicaea, besides the Indians, Persians,
Arabians, Albanians, and others* but these may suffice which we have already
named for remarkable examples of Satan's villainous miscarriages in his usurped
Rule over the Sons of Men.

CHAP. XVI. 1. Four things still behind to be briefly touched upon for the
fuller Preparation to the understanding the Christian Mystery; as First the
Pagan Catharmata. The use of them proved out of Caesar; 2. As also out of
Statius and the Scholiast upon Aristophanes. 3. That all their expiatory
Men-sacrifices whatsoever were truly Catharmata. 4. The Second, their
Apotheoses or Deifications of men. The names of several recited out of
Diodorus. 5. Of Baal-Peor, and how in a manner all the Temples of the Pagans
were Sepulchers. Their pedigree noted by Lactantius out of Ennius. 6. Certain
examples of the Deification of their Lawgivers.
1. WE have clearly and fully enough set out unto your view the Uncleanness and
Cruelty of the Pagan Superstitions: there are only Four things behind which we
will lightly touch upon, and then I think we shall sufficiently have prepared
the way to give you an easy and intelligible representation of the whole Frame
of Christian Religion, as it is set out in the Holy Scripture.

The First of the Four things I were a mentioning is their (...), Purgamenta,
Piacula: but the Greek word is more proper, which signifies the death of some
man which the Pagans sacrificed for the expiating of their faults, and saving
themselves from the rigor and vengeance of their Gods. This Reason was
acknowledged plainly by the Gauls, amongst whom this (...), this mactation of
men was so frequent, as Caesar has observed. Pro vita hominum nisi vita hominis
reddatur, non posse Deorum immortalium numen placari arbitrantur: i. e. They
think that unless the life of a man be given in lieu of the life of men, the
Majesty of the immortal Gods cannot be pacified. And therefore, in gravioribus
morbis, praeliis, periculis, homines pro victimis immolant aut immolaturos
vovent, as Ortelius cites it out of Caesar, And therefore in more grievous
diseases, wars, dangers, they either sacrifice men, or at least make a vow
they will sacrifice them.

2. This kind of Sacrifice because it was made ordinarily of the vilest sort of
people, Slaves or Captives or other contemptible persons, the Apostle, to show
how vilely himself was esteemed of by men, set off his condition by a phrase
borrowed from thence, (...), 1 Cor. 4.13. To this custom Papinius Statius
alludes, where he brings in Meneceus his mother speaking to him thus,
Lustralemne feris ego te, puer improbe, Thebis
Devotumque caput, vilis ceu matter, alebam?
Have I, o wicked child, thee nourished
Like mother poor, for cruel Thebes to be
A lustral wretch, a vile devoted head?
This is noted also by Servius upon Virgil. But there can be nothing more
pertinent either for the explaining of that Phrase of the Apostle, or for a
clearer witnessing of this Heathenish custom, then what Grotius adds upon the
place out of the Scholiast upon Aristophanes his Plutus, (...) i. e. Men that
were sacrificed to the Gods for the clearing of a city or people from the
pestilence or any other disease, were called Catharmata, which custom also
obtained amongst the Romans. And on another Comedy the Scholiast asserts it to
have been also the custom of the Athenians, and that they made choice of some
poor useless wretches for that purpose. (...) i. e. For the Athenians also g^t
certain base and useless persons, and in the time of any Calamity coming upon
the city, as of pestilence and the like, they sacrificed these, thereby to be
cleared of their piacular crime, for which cause these men were called
Catharmata: Which in Latin is Piacula or Purgamenta.

3. We might allege other Testimonies, as that out of Suidas upon the word
(...), and others; but these may suffice for so easy a matter. For all the
Expiatory sacrifices wherewith they would appease the wrath of the Gods, as
often as they were (...) or mactations of men (which were too-too frequent all
over the World,) these men that were thus sacrificed were indeed Catharmata
properly so called.

4. The Second thing we would have noted is, Their Apotheoses, then which
nothing was more frequent amongst the Gentiles, there scarce being any of the
Immortal Gods so deemed amongst them, but some Mortal man there was also that
bore the same name, and had the same worship also done unto him. Diodorus
instances in Sol, Saturn, Rhea, Jupiter, Pan, Ceres, and others, whose
Genealogies, inventions, or famous exploits that Historian pursues in his First
Book of his Bibliotheca Historica. He names also Belus the Sun of Neptune and
Libya, as the Captain of an Egyptian Colony into Babylon, with whom it fared
as with innumerable others, who were considerable Benefactours to the Country
they lived in, or people with whom they did converse: They had Altars and
Temples erected to their memorial, and Sacrifices and Religious ceremonies
appointed to be done to them as to the immortal Deities.

5. And Baal-Peor to whom Israel joined, where they are said to eat the
sacrifice of the dead; Bid upon the Text expounds it to this sense, Initiati
sunt and sacrificaverunt Baal qui colebatur in Phegor, Belus enim fuit pater
Nini, etc. and that is the reason that they were called The sacrifices of the
dead.
(...), because they were sacrifices offered to the Soul of the deceased Belus.
Clemens Alexandrinus upbraids to the Heathen, that in a manner all their
Temples were nothing else but the Sepulchers of some famous men, whose Memory
was the first occasion of those Religious solemnities and ceremonies that were
performed there. Lactantius also out of Ennius and Cicero plainly demonstrates
that the generality of the Pagan Deities, such as we have already named out of
Diodorus, were once Men living here on Earth, and produces out of Ennius their
pedigrees, counsels and transactions in this life. Cicero makes a kind of
distinction in his de Legibus, where he makes this decree concerning Religion:
Divos and eos qui Coelestes semper habiti sunt, colunto, and eos quos in coelo
merita locaverunt, Herculem, Liberum, Aesculapium, Pollucem, Castorem,
Quirinum, i. e. Let them worship the Gods, both those who were ever accounted
Celestial, and those whom their merits have placed in Heaven, as Hercules,
Bacchus, Aesculapius, Pollux, Castor, Quirinus.

6. For the Romans worshipped Romulus, as the Babylonians Belus, like as other
Nations also have Deified those that have first given them Laws and Religious
rites; as the Scythians Zamolxis, and the Chinese their Kings, and in
particular their Lawgiver Confusius. Minos also, Aeacus and Rhadamanthus, for
their singular Justice while they lived, were by the Greeks assigned to the
honor of being Judges amongst the dead in the other World. But of this enough.

CHAP. XVII. 1. The Third Observable, The Mediation of Demons. 2. This
Superstition glanced at by the Apostle in (...). And that Demons are the Souls
of men departed, according to Hesiod. 3. As also according to Plutarch and
Maximus Tyrius. 4. The Author's inference from this position.
1. THE Third thing Observable is their (...). By (...) or Demons I mean their
Dii Medioxumi, or rather Those Spirits that were Mediators (as I may so call
them) betwixt the Supreme Deities and Men. According to this sense is that of
Plato in his Symposion, (...) i. e. God intermingles not himself with man, but
all the Converse and conference betwixt the Gods and Men is performed by
Demons. And the same Philosopher says plainly and expressly, That these (...)
receive the prayers and oblations that men make, and present them to the Gods,
and bring back from them rewards and injunctions which they communicate some
way or other to men. But this is not Plato's opinion alone, but of most of the
ancient Philosophers that would venture to say any thing at all in Religion; as
of Zoroaster, Thales, Pythagoras, Celsus, Plutarch, Apuleius, and who not? Nay
this conceit is so natural, that it is found among the rude Americans, who
profess that their Zemes are no other then Mediators and Messengers from the
great God that is Eternal and Invisible, as Peter Martyr relates in his first
Decad, lib. 9. concerning the Inhabitants of Hispaniola.

2. This opinion of the Heathen was glanced at by the Apostle, Coloss. 2.18.
(...), as Grotius observes upon the place. Nor does the difference of the
words (...) and (...) make any difference in the thing, the Greek word (...)
being the same with (...), as Philo has noted; and either of them is competible
to the Soul out of the Body, as the same Author also acknowledges. But (...)
signifies also the Soul in the Body according to Xenocrates in Aristotle, (...)
i. e. In like manner that he is (...) (i. e. happy) who has a good (...) or
Genius, as Xenocrates says, that be is happy or has a good Genius that has a
good Soul. For the Soul is every man's Demon or Genius. But the more proper
sense, and that which we mean in this place, is that of Philo: to whom we may
add the suffrage of Hesiod, out of Plutarch; (...) i. e. But Souls that have
quit themselves from Generation, and are for the future free from the
encumbrances of the Body, become Demons, careful Inspectours over mankind,
according to Hesiod. From whence happily (...) may be from (...) divido, it
signifying the very same that Anima separata.

3. And Plutarch himself subscribes to Hesiod's opinion, That Souls freed from
their Bodies become Demons or Genii, and that they go up and down the Earth
as being observers and rewarders of the actions of men; and that though they be
not actors themselves, yet they are abbettors and encouragers of them that act;
as old men that have left off the more youthful sports, love to set the
younger sort to their games and exercises, themselves in the mean time looking
on. So Plutarch in his De Genio Socratis and Maximus Tyrius endeavor at large
to prove that the (...) or Genii are naught but the Souls of men departed, who
are occupied much-what in such emploiments as they were in the flesh.

4. From whence it will follow that Good men that were full of humanity and
love to mankind, will prove good Genii: and by how much their Love is greater
and their Spirits more free and universal, that they will have a more general
inspection, or at least they will be more fit for it; were they but armed with
sufficient Power and Authority from above answerable to that noble dear
affection they bear to man: and in that themselves have been in the flesh, and
tasted what belongs to our condition, they will be the more kindly Mediators
and Negotiatours in our affairs. So reasonable is this opinion of the Pagans
concerning the Intercession of their Genii, but their Worshipping of them as
rash, they having no sufficient warrant thereunto.

CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Fourth and last thing to be noted, namely their Heroes,
who were thought to be either begot of some God, or born of some Goddess: the
latter whereof is ridiculous, if not impossible; 2. The former not at all
incredible. 3. Franciscus Picus his opinion of the Heroes (feigned so by the
Poets) as begot of the Gods: that they were really begotten of some impure
Demons, with Josephus his suffrage to the same purpose. 4. The Possibility of
the thing further illustrated from the impregnation of Mares merely by the
Wind, asserted by several Authors. 5. The application of the History, and a
further confirmation from the manner of Conception out of Dr. Harvey. 6.
Examples of men famed for this kind of miraculous Birth of the Heroes, on this
side the tempus (...) or (...).
1. THE Fourth and last thing I would propound to your view is their Heroes,
which are (...) also, that is, the Souls of men departed this life: but there
was something special in their Birth, in that they were conceived to be born of
some Goddess impregnated by a man, or of some woman impregnated by some God.
From whence Plato would give the reason of the name (...), as if it were from
(...), Love, Because the Heroes were begot by some God or Goddess falling in
love with Mortals. Such was the birth of Aeneas, as Antiquity has conceited,
who was begot on Venus by Anchises, and of Achilles the Son of Thetis by
Peleus. But that Goddesses, that is, Spirits susteining the person of Women,
should bring forth Children; though there be pretended true stories of such
things, and that it may be it is not impossible, yet it seems to me very
incredible.

2. But that the Genii or Spirits which Antiquity called Gods, might impregnate
Women so, that they might bring forth children without the help of a man, seems
not to me to be at all incredible; and most of your Heroes have been reported
to be such, the greater number of the most famous of them being certain
By-blows of Jupiter upon several women he fell in love with. For he is said to
beget Hercules upon Alcmena, Pelasgus of Niobe, Sarpedon of Laodamia, Dardanus
of Electra, Amphion of Antiope, Minos and Rhadamanthus of Europa, of Leda
Castor and Pollux, and Perseus of Danae. His four last Adulteries are
handsomely comprised in a Distich by the Epigrammatist, with the fashion or
fraud he used in his assaults upon those women.

(...)
(...).
3. Which I could not forbear to rehearse, the first transformation there named,
viz. of Jupiter's becoming a Swan (when he had to do with Leda) putting me in
mind of Ludovicus the Familiar of that Witch whose story Franciscus Picus so
fully prosecutes, whom he confessed to have to do with her, though in the rest
of his parts in the shape of a Man, yet with feet fashioned like a Goose. But
the main thing observable in that Dialogue is Picus his ingenious conjecture
concerning these supposed Fables of the Poets, as some would have them. But he
conceives there may be a considerable truth in them as concerning the
Generation of the Heroes, and that in rude Antiquity, when the Dominion of the
Devil was more free, and mankind more idle and ignorant, there were really and
frequently such congresses or Venereous conjunctions of unclean Spirits with
women, according to that practice which to this day is confessed by Witches,
especially in their meetings and joviall Revellings in the Night at that
Solemnity which they call our Lady's play, the Ancients called it Ludum Dianae
or Ludum Herodiadis; where the Witches, as themselves confess, do eat and drink
and dance, and do that with these impure Spirits which modesty would forbid to
name. Which dalliance had sometime such real effect with them of ancient times,
that the women, as Picus would have it, were impregnated by the Daemones or
Genii, the deemed Gods of the Heathen. From whence came Famous men, that were
not only reputed but really sprung ex stirpe Deorum, according to their
opinions they had of the Gods. Josephus a sober Writer acknowledges the birth
of the Giants of old to be after this manner, to whom he ascribes all the
impiety and injustice that had crept into the world before Noah's Flood. Many
Angels of God having to do with women, begot insolent and injurious children,
and despisers of all goodness, by reason of their confidence in their own
strength.
(...), as he writes in his First book of Jewish Antiquities.

4. And though this may seem incredible to others, yet stranger matters have
been asserted concerning the Conception of Females without the help of a Male
in the perfectest kind of living creatures: as that which Virgil affirms in his
Georgicks concerning some metal'd Mares that have conceived of the Wind. Lib. 3.
Ore omnes versae in Zephyrum stant rupibus altis,
Exceptantque leves auras; and saepe sine ullis
Conjugiis, vento gravidae (mirabile dict^!)
Saxa per and scopulos fugiunt --
They all standing on high crags with turned face
To gentle Zephyr, the light air they draw;
And often, (O wonder!) without Venus law,
Quick with the wind over Hills and Rocks they trace.
Which Silius Italicus expresses also very livelily of the Spanish Gennets of
his Country; Et Venerem occultam genitali concipit aura.
Which that you may not suspect to be only the levity and credulity of Poets to
report such things, I can inform you that S. Austin and Solinus the Historian
write the same of a race of Horses in Cappadocia. Nay, which is more to the
purpose, Columella and Varro, men expert in rural affairs, assert this matter
for a most certain and known truth.

5. Wherefore if the free Air by the advancing of the pleasure of the Spirits
of these Animals, or actuating them by a volatile Salt, will fill them so full
of life and joy, that it will make their Wombes blossom, as I may so say, and
after bring forth fruit; why may not an Aerie Spirit transforming himself into
the shape of a Man, supply his place effectually, he being able, as Witches
have confessed, to raise as high pleasure and indeed higher then any man can
do; and so to loosen the body into a transmission of such principles and
particles as will prove in their conflux in the womb vital and prolifical?
Which may be the easilier admitted, if we consider that the Seed of the Male
gives neither Matter nor Form to the Foetus it self; but like the Flint and
Steel only sets the Tinder on fire, as Dr. Harvey expresses it. So that the
Pagan Gods, when they would have to do with women, needed no such ambages as
ordinarily men imagine, viz. first to play the Succubi, and then the Incubi,
that is, first to receive the Seed of man, having transformed themselves into
the shape of a woman, and then to transfuse the Seed into the womb of a woman,
after they had changed themselves into the form of a man. For it is not the
Matter of the Seed, but a grateful contact or motion fermenting or spiriting
the place of conception, that makes the Female fruitful. So great a
probability is there that there is some truth in that fame concerning the birth
of the ancient Heroes, though their time by reason of the uncertainty of the
story is called The fabulos time.
(...) as well as Heroical.
(...) by Historians.

6. But there is so strong a suspicion in the minds of men that there are such
Events in the world, that they venture upon some Examples within the compass of
more approved History, as Alexander and Scipio, whom many conceited to be the
Sons of Jupiter. And Diogenes Laertius tells a formal story of Perictione
Plato's Mother being impregnated by Apollo, which he confirms by the Authority
of three several Writers, Speusippus, Clearchus and Anaxilides.

CHAP. XIX. 1. That out of the Principles we have laid down, and the History of
the Religions of the Nations we have produced, it is easy to give a Reasonable
account of all matters concerning our Savior from his Birth to his Visible
return to Judgment. 2. That Christianity is the Sum and Perfection of
whatever things were laudable or passable in any Religion that has been in the
world. 3. The Assertion made good by the enumeration of certain Particulars. 4.
That our Religion seems to be more chiefly directed to the Nations then the
Jews themselves. 5. An Enumeration of the main Heads in the History of Christ,
that he intends to give account of.
1. I Have now omitted nothing of considerable moment to our present purpose,
having laid down by way of Preparation such Grounds as will enable us to give a
solid account of whatsoever occurrs in the History of Christ, whatsoever
happened to him, was done or is to be done by him, from his Birth to his
Visible return to Judgment. For besides that there are no Effects so Miraculous
there recorded, as to exceed the efficacy of those Invisible Powers which we
have demonstrated to be in the world; so the Reasonableness of every thing will
be easily illustrated by what we have discovered concerning the Nature and End
of Christianity, which is to advance the Divine life upon Earth, and to bring
the partakers thereof to Eternal happiness, and in the mean time to redeem the
world out of the dominion and tyranny of the Devil, and to bring in the Worship
of Christ as the lawful owner of all Sovereignty in Heaven and in Earth: and
that not by external force and violence, but by the wonderful Wisdom of God
discoverable in the Gospel; there being such winning compliances and
condescensions to the Faculties of Man, and so powerful endearments upon his
Affections, that at the first hearing it is able to carry away the ingenuous
captive into obedience to it, with joy in their hearts and tears in their eyes,
their whole man melting into an easy pliableness to this new gracious law in
the sense of so great Joy, Love and Sorrow: besides their being surprised with
a just slighting or indignation against the Religions they were formerly
engaged in, for either their beggarly Elements or abominable Sacrifices and
Ceremonies.

2. For whatsoever is defective in any, Christ makes a full supply; and where
their Rites are execrable and detestable, he treads quite contrary there to
both the foul obscenities and bloody cruelties of Satan. But what Propensions
in Mankind were more warrantably natural, he gratifies them in a truer and
higher manner then ever they were yet in the World. So that of a very truth
Christianity is not only the Compleatment and Perfection of Iudaisme, but also
of universal Paganism; the Sum or Substance of whatever was considerable in
any Religion being comprehended in the Gospel of Christ, which was reserved to
the last Periods of time as an (...) or summing up of all that went before,
Ephesians. 1.10.
as the Apostle speaks in his Epistle to the Ephesians, That in the
dispensation of the fullness of times he might sum up all together in Christ,
whether things in Heaven or things in Earth.

3. For as for Things in Heaven, whether it be the Objects of the worships of
the Heathen, namely their (...), men canonized for Gods and their Heroes, or
the trust they had in their Dii Medioxumi, in the mediation and intercession of
their Demons, or whatsoever obscure hopes they had of enjoying the life of the
Gods themselves in Heaven after the dissolution of the Body; all these things
are more compendiously, and yet more truly, plainly and warrantably,
comprehended in Christ. As also the Things in Earth, as the Jewish Sacrifices
and the Pagans (...), so many and so curious Ceremonies of expiation and
purification, they are all more fitly and more effectually contained in the
Sacrament of Baptism and in the celebration of the Death of our Savior then
in any of the Rites of the Nations.

4. And truly all things are so shrewdly levelled at the Religion of the
Heathens in the transactions of Christ and matters belonging to him, that he
may rather seem to be meant for them then the Jews themselves, though they had
the first refusal of him; so that the counsel of God is made evident as well in
the Contrivance as the Effect thereof. And this may serve for a General hint
concerning the Nature and Composure of Christianity.

5. But we shall not content our selves therewith, but descend to a more
Particular account, applying the Grounds which we have laid down to all the
Considerable matters contained in the History of Christ; which we shall refer
to these Heads: His Birth; His Life; His Crucifixion; His Resurrection; His
Ascension; (...) Intercession; Principality over Men and Angels; His Mission of
the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles; The Success of all this in changing of the
affairs of the World, and ruining of the Kingdom of the Devil; His visible
returning again to Judgment to take vengeance of the wicked, and to complete
Redemption to the faithful, crowning all their labors and sufferings with
Glory and Immortality, and reestablishing of them in those Paradisiacal Ioys
which they had forfeited and fallen from by the Envy and Subtilty of the Devil.
Of all these we shall speak with what brevity we can.

BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. 1. That Christ's being born of a Virgin is no Impossible thing. 2.
And not only so, but also Reasonable in reference to the Heroes of the Pagans.
3. And that this outward birth might be an emblem of his Eternal Sonship. 4.
Thirdly in relation to the Sanctity of his own person, and for the
recommendation of Continence and Chastity to the world. 5. And lastly for the
completion of certain prophesies in the Scriptures that pointed at the Messiah.
1. COncerning the Birth of Christ, or whatsoever else happened miraculously to
him, or was done by him, I conceive I shall give a sufficient account, if I
show not only their Possibility, but their Reasonableness. And it is not at all
Impossible that a Virgin should bring forth a Son, if we understand the meaning
of that term aright, which signifies a Woman that never had any thing to do
with a Man. For it implies no Contradiction for her to conceive from some other
hidden cause, and therefore at least the Omnipotent Power of God can bring it
to pass. For whether is it easier to create all things of nothing, to make
Plants and Animals to spring out of the Earth without the help of either Male
or Female, or to prepare the womb of a woman so, as to make her conceive
without the help of a man? Wherefore to deny the Possibility thereof is to deny
the Existence of God in the world.

2. But it is not only Possible, but Reasonable. For besides that in general it
is fit that so extraordinary a person as our Savior in his coming into the
World should be accompanied with miraculous indications of his eminency, there
is a peculiar accommodation in this of his being conceived and born by a
supernatural Power to those either true stories or strong suspicions of the
Pagans, who did so easily believe that their famous Heroes, whose memory
continued so long with them, and was so sacred, that they did divine honors to
them, were not sprung of mortal race, but were ex stirpe Deorum, as you have
already heard; which is in a most true and eminent manner accomplished in the
Birth of our Savior.

3. Again, Christ considered out of the body, he being not a mere humane Soul,
but being truly, livingly and really united with the (...), is by union the
Eternal Son of God. Now that being to come to pass which S. John speaks of in
the beginning of his Gospel, (...), The word was made flesh; he that was to be
born of Mary (the Spouse of Joseph) he being, I say, the true and genuine Son
of God, begotten of the Father from all eternity, when he was to be born here
into the world in time; who was so fit to be entitled to his procreation as he
that was the Author of his Eternal generation? and therefore he was to be born
of a Virgin, and to be conceived by a supernatural way, that his visible
Humanity as well as his inward Divinity might have a just occasion of being
called the Son of God, and that the one might be the Emblem as it were of the
other.

4. Thirdly, you have seen how full of abominable obscenity and uncleanness the
Superstition of the Heathen was; to say nothing of the carnality and
uxoriousness of the Jews, and of that impuritie which by almost all nations
(unless where Superstition has emboldened them to Beastliness) is confessed to
be in the acts of Venerie; they commonly concealing those parts which Nature
ordained for such uses from the eyes of men, as being ashamed to acknowledge
themselves subject to so low a kind of sense. It was therefore unfit that
Christ should be born according to that common way of generation, that he might
give no encouragement to that which men are so madly set upon, notwithstanding
that bridle of shame that Nature would curb them in by; especially himself
coming into the world to be the highest Pattern of Purity that can be exhibited
to Mankind: for which reason he also abstained from Marriage, and commended the
Virgin-life; which he might do with better reason then any, he being a more
certain pledge of those holy, heavenly and eternal joys, then ever was yet
manifested to the world. Wherefore partly in opposition to the uncleanness of
Paganism, and partly for an invitation to his followers to set a due price
upon Continence and Chastity as great helps to the purifying of the Soul, and
the making of her relish those delights which are truly divine, himself did not
vouchsafe to take our flesh upon him in that way which is accompanied with the
height of gross carnal pleasures; nor when he had taken our flesh, to reap the
Joys thereof, no not so much as upon those allowable terms of Marriage; he
coming into the World on purpose to slight and slur that which is to the
greatest esteem and sweetest relish with the Natural Man.

5. Fourthly and lastly, the being born of a Virgin being one of the notes of
the Messiah, as the very first prophecy of him in the more proper and
emphatical sense thereof seems to imply, That the seed of the woman (in
opposition or exclusion of the man's seed) should break the Serpents head, as
also that more plain allusion and lively Type in the Prophet Isaiah of a Virgin
conceiving of a Son whose name was Immanuel, does exquisitely prefigure; This,
I say, adds also to the congruity of this miracle of Christ's conception in the
Womb of a Virgin. All which things put together are more then enough to
sufflaminate those blasphemous suspicions of witless and ungodly men, and to
convince them that it was not the coloring of some casual miscarriage in the
Mother of Christ, that he was said to be begotten of the Holy Ghost; but that
it was so indeed, and so determined by the Wisdom and counsel of God. The
greatest reason whereof was (as I conceive) the Sanctity of our Savior's Soul,
and his purpose of discountenancing of the pleasures and pollutions of the
flesh, and the drawing of men's minds to the study of Purity, a very
considerable branch of the divine life which he came to raise in the World.

CHAP. II. 1. That as the Virginity of Christ's Mother recommended Purity, so
her Meanness recommends Humility to the world; as also other circumstances of
Christ's Birth. 2. Of the Salutation of the Angel Gabriel, and of the Magi. 3.
That the History of their Visit helps on also belief, and that it is not Reason
but Sottishness that excepts against the ministry of Angels. 4. His design of
continuing a Parallel betwixt the life of Christ and of Apollonius Tyaneus. 5.
The Pedigree and Birth of Apollonius, how rank they smell of the Animal life.
6. The Song of the Angels and the dance of the musical Swans at Apollonius's
birth compared.
1. NOW as his being born of a Virgin is a recommendation of Purity, so his
being born of so mean a Virgin as the Spouse of a Carpenter is a recommendation
of Humility. For it is observable that Christ on set purpose vilified and
slighted that which is most esteemed and most dear to the Animal life, and such
are all those things that make for our honor and reputation amongst men; And
Nobleness of parentage is not one of the meanest of them. Other circumstances
of his Birth tend also to the same scope; for no sooner came he into the world,
but he practiced that which he after taught others, he took the meanest place
in the Inn: and though he were heir of all things, and the designed Sovereign
of Angels and Men; yet he was shouldered out from amongst them, and was fain to
take his lodgings in the Stable amongst the brute beasts. But in this low
condition while he is taken no notice of by supercilious mortals, yet the
Angels celebrates his Nativity with an Heavenly carol, imparting the good news
of his Birth not to the wise or noble of this World, not to the learned Rabbis
or Rulers of the People, but to men of a lowly and innocent profession, to
Shepherds attending their flocks by night. All which circumstances of his
Birth you see how reasonable, how significant and decorous they are.

2. Nor is that Salutation of the Angel Gabriel concerning it, and his
prediction to Mary, an useless and idle complement: but it was requisite that
what was to happen to her should be foretold her, that the modest Virgin might
not be abashed to see her womb swell, she not knowing the cause of it. The same
may be said also of the journey of the Magi, that it is not a thing vainly
inserted into the History to make a show, but that the fame of the Jews
expectation of their Messiah about that time being spread all over the East,
these Genethliaci that loved to busy themselves about Nativities and strange
events in the World, amidst their viewing the Constellations, discovering a New
star as it seemed to them, and observing its motion, were led to the very place
where the young King of the Jews lay, where they worshipped him, not as the Son
of God, but as one that they expected would be a mighty secular Prince; and
therefore to engage him to favor themselves and their Country, they did unto
him this timely homage.

3. But though they intended no more then thus, yet it being so famous an
accident could not but further the faith of those that were to be called in to
the belief of the Gospel. Besides that, it was a prelusion to and prefiguration
of the forwardness of the Gentiles above the Jews to receive Christ as their
Sovereign and Redeemer, as also a prelibation of that glory that should at last
accrue to Christ for the great debasement of himself and unparalled
humiliation. So that nothing can make the circumstances of the History of his
Birth incredible, unless it be the mention of the ministry of Angels in it,
which none can cavil at but such as believe no Angels at all, neither good nor
bad: nor can any be of this unbelief but such as prefer the sottish suggestions
of their own dull temper before the perpetual testimonies of all Ages and all
Nations of the World; who have ever and anon had new Instances of Apparitions
and Communications with evil Spirits, and fresh occasions of executing the Laws
they had made against Witches and wicked Magicians.

4. I should now pass to the second head I propounded, could I abstain from
touching a little upon the circumstances of the Birth of that famous Corrival
of our Savior, Apollonius Tyaneus; whose story writ by Philostratus, though I
look upon it as a mixed business partly true and partly false, yet, be it what
it will be, seeing it is intended for the highest Example of Perfection, and
that the Heathen did equalize him with Christ, you shall see how rank his
whole History smells of the Animal Life, and how hard a thing it is either in
actions or writings to counterfeit that which is truly holy and divine. For
which end I shall make a brief Parallelisme of the Histories of them both in
the chief matters of either, that the Gravitie and Divinity of the one and the
Ridiculousness and Carnality of the other may the better be discerned.

5. As in this very First point is plain and manifest, which is dispatched in a
word. For in that Philostratus writes how Apollonius was of an ancient and
illustrious Pedigree, of rich Parents, and descended from the founders of the
City Tyana, where he was born, is not this that which is as sweet as honey to
the Natural man, and such as an holy and divine Soul would set no esteem upon?
Like to this is his Mother's being waited upon by her Maidens into a Meadow,
being directed thereto by a Vision, where while her servants were straying up
and down making of posies and chaplets of flowers, (O what fine soft pompous
doing is here!) and her self disporting her self in the grass, she at last
falls into a slumber, the Swans in the mean time rangeing themselves in a row
round about her, dancing and clapping their wings, and singing with such shrill
and sweet accents that they filled the neighboring places with their pleasant
melody, they being as it were inspired and transported with joy by the gentle
breathings of the fresh and cool Zephyrus; whereupon the Lady awaking is
instantly delivered of a fair Child, who, after his Fathers name, was called
Apollonius.

6. The amenity of the story how grateful and agreeable it is to flesh and
blood! But how ridiculous is that dance and rountlelay of the musical Swans
compared with that Heavenly Melody of the holy Angels at the Nativity of
Christ! For that, if it could be true, is but a ludicrous prodigy and
presignification that Apollonius would prove a very odd fellow and of an
extraordinary strein, and serves only for the magnifying of his person. But
this is a grave and weighty indication of the Goodness of God and the Love of
his holy Angels to men, and a prediction of that peace and grace which should
be administered unto them through Jesus Christ that was then born. Behold, said
the chief Angel whose glorious presence surrounded the shepherds with light,
Behold, said he, I bring you good tidings of Great joy which shall be unto all
people; For unto you is born this day a Savior, which is Christ the Lord:
whereupon there was suddenly with this Angel a multitude of the heavenly Host
praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good
will toward men.

CHAP. III. 1. That whatever miraculously either happened to or was done by our
Savior till his Passion cannot seem impossible to him that holds there is a
God and ministration of Angels. 2. Of the descending of the Holy Ghost, and the
Voice from Heaven at his Baptism. 3. Why Christ exposed himself to all manner
of hardship and Temptations. 4. And particularly why he was tempted of the
Devil, with an answer to an Objection touching the Devil's boldness in daring
to tempt the Son of God. 5. How he could be said to show him all the Kingdoms
of the Earth. 6. The reason of his forty days fast, 7. And of his
Transfiguration upon the Mount. The three first reasons. 8. The meaning of
Moses and Elias his receding, and Christ's being left alone. 9. The last reason
of his Transfiguration, That it was for the Confirmation of his Resurrection
and the Immortality of the Soul. 10. Testimonies from Heaven of the Eminency of
Christ's person.
1. WE have done with the Birth of Christ, we proceed now to his Life: wherein
we shall consider only those things that extraordinarily happened to him, or
were miraculously done by him, till the time of his Passion; wherein nothing
will be found impossible to them that acknowledge the Existence of God* the
active malice of Devils, and the Ministry of Angels. But that which I intend
mainly to insinuate is, the comeliness and sutableness of all things to so Holy
and Divine a person; which that it may the better appear, I shall after show
the difference of this true example of solid Perfection, Christ, and that false
pattern of feigned holiness in that Impostour Apollonius, whom the later
Heathen did so highly adore.

2. The chief things that happened in an extraordinary way to Christ before his
Passion are these Three. 1. The descending of the Holy Ghost upon him in the
shape of a Dove at his being baptized, and the emission of a Voice from Heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. 2. The Temptation of
the Devil upon his fasting: and 3. His Transfiguration upon the Mount.

Concerning the First, there is great reason for that Miracle. For God having a
design to set on foot the Divine life in the World by his Son Jesus Christ, why
should he not countenance the Beginning of his Ministry by some notable sign,
by which men might take notice that he was the Messiah, John 1. v. 32.
sent of God? And John the Baptist confesses himself assured thereof by this
Indication. And being there was to be some extraordinary appearance, what could
be more fit then this of a Dove, a known emblem of Meekness and Innocence,
inseparable branches of the Divine life and Spirit? and at what better time
then when Jesus gave so great a Specimen of his Meekness and Humility, as to
condescend to be washed, as if he had been polluted, when he was more pure then
light or snow; and to be in the form of a disciple to John, when he was able to
teach him and all the world the Mysteries of God? Which may be noted to the
eternal shame of our conceited Enthusiasts, who phansying they have got
something extraordinary within, contemn and scorn the laudable Institutions of
the Church; which is an infallible argument of their Pride, as this of our
Savior's Humility. But while he humbled himself thus, God did as highly
advance him, adding to this silent show an articulate voice from Heaven, the
better to assure the bystanders that he was the Messiah, the Son of God.

3. As for his being tempted of the Devil, it has the same meaning that the
hardship of his whole life. For being that the Kingdom of God on earth, which
is the Church, was to overcome the kingdom of Satan by suffering; our Savior
Christ gives himself an example of all manner of trials and troubles, of the
most tedious difficulties that could occur: like a wise and courageous
Commander animating his Soldiers by his own willingness to suffer as deeply as
they that he commands. Which Polyaenus relates to be the stratagem of
Iphicrates, who when he saw it convenient to draw out his soldiers in a cold
frosty night to assault the enemy, and observed their aversness by reason of
the bitterness of the season, and the thinness of their clothing, he straitway
clad himself more thin then the thinnest of them, and on his bare feet trudged
from tent to tent to show himself to his Camp: which did so encourage the
soldiers, that they set upon the enterprise without delay under the conduct of
so wise and valiant a Commander.

4. And therefore Christ in like manner for the encouragement of his followers
went before in all manner of difficulties, not only in poverty, in reproach,
and in a constant refusal of all the pleasures, riches and honors of this
present World, as being to establish the faith of a better; but he was given up
also to be tempted of the Devil, that we may not be dismayed by such
encounters, and know how to behave our selves when we are engaged in them. For
his being transported thus securely in the air by the hand of Satan, like some
innocent bird in the talons of a rapacious Hawk, and yet not fainting under it,
what can it be but an eminent effect of his Faith in the living God, which is
the very Root and inmost original of the Divine life? The same may be said of
his miraculous Fast; For himself in answer to the Tempter did profess, man
lived not only by bread, but by Faith in that Word that sustaineth all things.
That also is worth the noting that Grotius observes upon the place, That this
Threefold temptation wherewith the Devil tempted Christ is the most usual and
most prevalent that he assalts mankind withal, viz. Need, Security or
Confidence in Predestination or the Decrees of God, and Hope of worldly honor
and preferment.
Egestas, Confidentia Praedestinationis, and Spes splendoris humani,
(especially those that have disentangled themselves from the more soft and
sensual desires of the Flesh:) and the advantage of Christ's Temptation is, that
we are punctually instructed aforehand how we are to oppose. Wherefore this
History of his Temptation is very decorous and agreeable to Reason. Nor does
the relation of the Devil's assalting of the Son of God make it the less
credible: for it is most likely that he was not sure yet he was such in that
sense that we understand the Son of God; and a question whether all the Devils
be yet convinced that he is what we rightly believe him to be. But for his own
curiosity to try what he was, as well as out of a malicious design to pervert
him, if he could, he assalted him after this manner in the Wilderness.

5. That of showing him all the Kingdoms of the Earth from an exceeding high
mountain, seems to have some difficulty in it. For if it was only a
prestigious representation of the glory of the Kingdoms of the Earth, what
needed a transportation of him to the top of a mountain, or at least of a
mountain so exceeding high? But if it was a real view of them, the highest
mountain in the world will not enlarge our prospect so as to take in one
ordinary Kingdom under our sight. But to this I answer, That this cunning
Prestigiator took the advantage of so high a place to set off his
Representations the more lively, and to make them the more probable to be true.
For the Prospect seeming so great to the eye, and ruder phansies imagining the
Earth a round flat, this old Jugler might easily hope that he might delude the
Carpenters son with so large a show, and persuade him that what was so great,
was all; especially perstringing his sight so, as that the whole Horizon should
seem full of the pompous varieties of the Powers and Principalities of the
world.

6. As for the long and solemn Fast of Christ and his retirement into solitude
for forty days, after notice was given from Heaven that he was the Messiah
the Son of God, this was very seemly and convenient to sharpen the desire of
the people to receive him when he did return, and to gain more Authority to his
doctrine which he was to teach them, and to inculcate to his successors by his
Example how fit it is to starve the Animal Life, and quite vanquish all the
pleasures of the Body, before they take upon them to be instructers in Divine
matters, which are of eternal concernment to the Soul. When as now-a-daies by
how much more a man's skin is full treg'd with flesh, blood and natural Spirits,
and by how much the more eager appetite he has to the things of the World, by
so much impatienter he is to get into the Pulpit to exercise his voice and
lungs, and thereby to approve himself for a preferment: whenas Christ would not
exercise this office of preaching the Kingdom of Heaven, before he had at once
despised all the riches, pomp and pleasures of the Earth. And as his Wisdom is
discovered in undertaking this solemn Abstinence and Retirement; so is also his
Humility in affecting no innovation therein, but he took up the example of
Moses and Elias, who after conferred with him in the mount at his
Transfiguration: which is the Third and last eminent accident which happened to
our Savior before his Passion, and which is not recited to fill up the Story,
but is of very deep and weighty consequence.

7. Our Savior takes unto him Peter, James and John, three of the prime of his
Apostles, to be spectatours and witnesses of what they should see on the Mount,
whither he carried them, where he was transfigured before them, his face
shining like the Sun, and his raiment becoming as white as the light; where
Moses also and Elias talked with him concerning his Death and glorious
Resurrection. Which conference was First a great Cordial to animate our Savior
the better to go through his heavy sufferings; and Secondly a great
Satisfaction to as many of the Jews as should be converted to Christianity,
that Moses and Elias, that is, their Lawgiver and there chiefest of their
Prophets, were abettours to Christ in this new Dispensation he was to set up in
the World; and Thirdly, there was a particular injunction (even while Moses and
Elias were present with him face to face) to hearken and yield obedience now to
Christ as to the beloved Son of God, and to let Moses and Elias go, Luke 9.34.
all things being completed in him. For a cloud overshadowed them, and a voice
came out of the cloud, saying, This is my wel-beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased: hear ye him.

8. And the very Vision was a representation of what was to come to pass: For
after this, Moses and Elias vanished, and his disciples, when he had raised
them up from the ground, (for they had fallen flat on their faces out of fear)
lifting up their eyes, saw no man save Jesus only.

9. Fourthly and lastly, It was a very fit and powerful Instance to assure men
of the Immortality of the Soul, and to beget a more unshaken belief of the
Resurrection of Christ out of the grave: and therefore Christ bad his disciples
tell no man of the Vision, but reserve it till its due use and time, that is,
till Christ had risen from the dead, to be added as a further confirmation of
that mystery of enjoying of Life and Immortality in a glorified Body, against
that dull infidelity of Atheistical men that think the Soul of man cannot act
unless in the flesh.

10. In the First and Last of these memorable accidents we rehearsed, there is
an eminent witness from Heaven of the Excellency of Christ's person, to which
that nothing remarkable may be omitted, we shall add also that recorded in
John 12. where Christ praying, Father, glorify thy name, there came a voice
from Heaven saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again.

CHAP. IV. 1. What miraculous accidents in Apollonius his life may seem
parallel to these of Christ's. His superstitious fasting from flesh and
abstinence from wine out of a thirst after the glory of foretelling things to
come. 2. Apollonius a Master of Judiciary Astrology, and of his seven Rings
with the names of the seven Planets. 3. Miraculous Testimonies given to the
eminency of Apollonius his Person by Aesculapius and Trophonius how weak and
obscure. 4. The Brachmans high Encomium of him, with an acknowledgment done to
him by a fawning Lion. The ridiculous Folly of all these Testimonies.
1. WE have now gone through the chiefest things that happened to Christ in an
extraordinary manner before his Passion. Before we proceed any further, being
mindful of our promise, we shall give a glance at what may seem parallel in the
life of Apollonius. And to the miraculous Fast of Christ undergone for so sober
purposes, which he was carried to by the power of the Spirit, I find nothing
to be compared in that famous Philosopher, if he deserved so solid a Title, but
his continual voluntary abstinence from flesh and wine. Which needless
Superstition is colored with as contemptible an End, that is, a vain
affectation of glory by foretelling of things to come; a faculty that mightily
pleases and tickles the natural man: and the affectation thereof shows the
Levity and Pride of Apollonius his Spirit, as also of his grand Instructers in
that Science the Brachmans of India, who having asked Damis if he had any skill
in Divination, and he professing that his study and knowledge reached no
further then to things useful and necessary, laughed him to scorn.

2. But Philostratus writes of Apollonius as wholly giving himself up to the
study of Divination and Judiciary Astrology, and how Iarchas the chief of the
Brachmans gave him seven Rings with the names of the seven Planets inscribed
upon them, as also that Apollonius wrote four books of this Art. Which things
are a demonstration of his gross ignorance in Nature and Philosophy, and of the
petty temper of his Spirit; and that there was nothing truly divine in him,
though the deceived Pagans adored him for a God. For those that descend to such
Arts, it is a sign there is no solid knowledge in them, much less any
supernatural principle either in them or assisting to them; but that their
predictions are Diabolical, or else that they are mere Whiflers and Juglers,
and have no extraordinary assistance at all.

3. I shall add but another parallel and so proceed; and that is the
Testimonies concerning the Eminency of their persons, in which there is as
great a difference as of their persons themselves. The person of Christ being
witnessed to by an audible voice from Heaven, God affirming thereby to the
World that he was his beloved Son, and requiring their obedience to him; but
the Eminency of Apollonius being recommended by none but the Ghost of
Aesculapius and Trophonius, whose den he entered, and (as it became a
Necromancer) confabulated there a long time with him, as he did also with
Achilles at his tomb, who employed him to renew his annual Rites and Honors
in Thessalie. But this recommendation of his was not immediate from either, but
by their Priests, who being informed, the one by a dream, the other by some
obscure voice in the Temple (of which there was no witness but the Priest
himself) gave out great matters of Apollonius.

4. We may add also the Testimony of the Brachmans those famous Magicians,
whom Apollonius so much applauding, they clawed him again, and concluded among
themselves that he was worthy to be honored as a God, both alive and after
Death. Nay we will give him in all to make up the weight. A certain tame Lion
in Egypt seemed also to acknowledge his Divinity, coming to him as he was
sitting in the Temple and crouching under him; who when Apollonius told the
people that he was that ancient Egyptian King Amasis come into a Lions body,
the Beast began to roar, and lament and weep bitterly, as begging his succor
in so bad a condition: Which Apollonius being sensible of, got the Lion to be
sent to Leontopolis a City of Egypt, and there to be kept in such sort as was
more suitable to his Royal Soul. How obscure, confounded and ridiculous are all
these Testimonies of the Eminency of the person of that subtle Impostor! So
base and evanid is all humane contrivance against the Glory and Sovereignty of
Christ the true Son of God.

CHAP. V. 1. Three general Observables in Christ's Miracles. 2. Why he several
times charged silence upon those he wrought his Miracles upon. 3. Why Christ
was never frustrated in attempting any Miracle. 4. The vanity of the Atheists
that impute his Miracles to the power of Imagination. 5. Of the delusive and
evanid viands of Witches and Magicians.
1. WE come now to what Jesus miraculously did in his lifetime. We may
refer the most of his Miracles to these four heads; His feeding the hungry
multitudes: His healing the sick: His raising of the dead, and his
dispossessing of Devils. In all which you may observe

First, That his wonder-working power was exercised upon known and familiar
objects, such as often occur amongst men. For such are Hunger, Sickness,
Death, and Possession of Devils or Witchery; not that I think them both one,
but that sundry persons are possessed that way, and it may be most frequently.

Secondly, That Christ puts forth his power no where out of any levity or vain
ostentation, but as the necessities of men required it: all his Miracles being
a perpetual exercise of love and compassion to mankind. To which we might add
also in the Third place, what is likewise general to them all, his purpose of
glorifying God by them, and laying foundations of Faith for the people to
believe in him, as the true Messiah.

2. Which belief yet he would not accelerate too fast, that it might not
prevent his Suffering; nor yet accelerate his Suffering too fast, before he had
done the due preparatory works which he had to do. Which made him sometime to
seem unwilling to do over-publick Miracles, as that at the wedding of turning
water into wine; and after he had fed the multitude, he hid himself that they
might not make him King; and several times when he miraculously healed men with
more privacy, he strictly charged them that were thus healed to tell no man; as
well that he might not over-hastily precipitate belief in men, as I have
already intimated, as also to keep himself from the rage of the Pharisees till
the due time of his Suffering was at hand. In the mean while his Miracles and
Doctrine was to distill into the minds of men by degrees, to prepare them for
a fuller belief upon his Resurrection from the dead.

3. It would be too voluminous a business to rehearse the story of every
particular Miracle, and to descant upon it. What we have thus advertised in
general, is most considerable and most profitable to be noted. Nor need we add
any thing to facilitate the belief of them to those that are not such Infidels
as not to believe the Existence of either God or Spirit. For others will very
easily conceive that Christ being joined with that Eternal Word that heals
all things, might heal those that are absent either by his word, or by the
Ministry of Angels who were always to attend him. And it is no wonder that
Christ should never be mistaken in any attempt or presage, he being so livingly
united with the Eternal Wisdom of God, and being of one Will and Spirit with
him, not disturbed or distracted with any excursions or impetuosities of his
own Will.

4. The whifling Atheists impute all to the natural power of Imagination, and
please themselves mightily in the abuse of those passages in the Gospel that
seem to assert that Christ was hindered from working of Miracles because of the
Unbelief of the people, as it is said in the Gospel of S. Mark, Mark 6.5, 6,
that he could do no mighty works, because of their unbelief. But it was not a
natural but moral impossibility; he could not induce his mind thereto, he
being provoked to so just indignation against his own Country that despised
him. But say in good sadness, poor blind and baffled souls, How can the natural
strength of Imagination heal the absent? to say nothing of the present sick of
ordinary diseases, such as the Leprosy, Palsy and Dropsy; who ever cured those
by mere Imagination? How then shall Imagination recover Sight even to them that
were born blind? how shall it raise the dead in whom there is no Imagination at
all? as in Iairus his daughter, and Lazarus who had lien four days in the
grave. Can Phansy feed five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes? or
four thousand besides women and children with seven loaves and a few little
fishes, being almost hungerstarv'd by three days recess into the wilderness?

5. Which things though not so substantially performed, are notwithstanding in
some measure imitated by Witches and Magicians, I mean in their junketings;
whose viands are observed to afford so little satisfaction to nature, that they
leave oftentimes the partakers of them as weak and faint almost as if they had
eaten nothing (as Bodinus relates of the Magical entertainments of that
Nobleman of Aspremont, whose guests by that time they had rid a little space
from his house were ready to faint and fall down both horse and man for
hunger;) and also to be of such a fugitive consistence, that they ordinarily
vanished at the taking away of the cloth: whenas in both these Miracles many
Baskets full of the fragments were reserved.

CHAP. VI. 1. Of Christ's dispossessing of Devils. 2. An account of there being
more Daemoniacks then ordinary in our Saviors time. As first from a possible
want of care or skill how to order their Madmen or Lunaticks. 3. The second
from the power of the Devil being greater before the coming of Christ then
after. 4. That not only Excommunication but Apostasy from Christ may subject a
man to the Tyranny of Satan, as may seem to have fallen out in several of the
more desperate Sects of this Age. 5. An enumeration of sundry Daemoniacal
symptoms amongst them. 6. More of the same nature. 7. Their profane and antic
imitations of the most solemn passages in the History of Christ. 8. A further
solution of the present difficulties from the premised considerations. 9. A
third and fourth Answer from the same of their cure and the conflux of these
Daemoniacks into one Country. 10. A fifth from the ambiguity of the word (...).
11. The sixth and last Answer, That it is not at all absurd to admit there was
a greater number of real Daemoniacks in Christ's time then at other times, from
the useful end of their then abounding.
1. AS for our Saviors dispossessing or ejecting of Devils out of men; as his
raising of the dead was a pledge and prefiguration of that power he professed
was given him of crowning them that believed on him with life and immortality
at the last day, so was this a very proper Prelude to that utter overthrow he
was to give the Kingdom of Satan, he being to dispossess him of all places at
last. There Is nothing can seem harsh to them that believe there are Spirits
(and none but sensual, profane and foolish men will misbelieve such things)
there is nothing, I say, can seem harsh in this kind of Miracle, unless it be
the multitude of persons then possessed, or the multitude of Devils in one
possessed person whose name was Legion.

2. But as for the First, there may be many Answers, none whereof want their
use and weight. We Will begin with what seems of meaner consideration first:
where we will not omit to mention that the Redundancy of Daemoniacks in Christ's
time above what we observe in later Ages, may proceed from the differences of
the skill and care that was then had of Madmen and Lunaticks in Judea and the
adjacent Countries of the Gentiles from whence no small part of them came, and
what is used now a-daies. It is, I say, questionable whether they had so good
provision for distracted people at those times and in those places for keeping
them within and ordering their distemper to the greatest mitigation they were
capable of. For the stronger it is, the more effectual allurement is there to
bring some evil Spirit or other into the body of a man. For he ceasing to be
his own, another does the more naturally become the master of him. As he that
is not his own man through the sovereignty of drink, will find also many other
masters buisy about him; all the boys in the town stocking after him, and
heightening his intoxication by their apish injuries. But I will not insist
upon this.

3. Secondly, It is not so strange that there should be a greater number of
possessed in Christ's time then now, because since Christianity the power of the
Devil is much more curbed. For it is plain that where Paganism rules, the
persons of men are more subject to the cruelty of the Devil. As appears by what
is recorded in History concerning the Inhabitants of several Countries; as of
Madagascar, where the Devil afflicts them bodily: in Florida he astonishes them
with dreadful Apparitions, and cuts their very flesh off in his approaches:
they of Guiana are beat black and blew by him, and the Brasilians so grievously
tormented, that they are ready to die for fear upon the very thought of him. The
Apostate Jews that they fell under his power is the opinion of their own
Rabbis: and the primitive Christians delivered to Satan felt to their smart
the rigor of his lash. All which may go for a sufficient proof, That the
profession of Christianity and the worship of the true God in that way that he
will be worshipped, is a personal protection from the gross assaults of the
Devil.

4. A man might add further, That not only they that are duly excommunicated
by the Church are made obnoxious to his Tyranny, but also those that revolt of
themselves, and deny the Lord that bought them, by their misbelief of the
sacred History of the Gospel, and the Personal office of Christ, even of him
that died betwixt two thieves at Jerusalem. As is notoriously apparent in some
of the forlorn and giddy-headed Sects of these times, amongst whom, I dare say,
a man may find out a greater number of true Daemoniacks then Christ and his
Apostles are said to cure.

5. For to what more rationally then to the possession of these deceiving
Spirits can be attributed those wild ecstasies they are in, their falling down
dead, the swelling of their bodies and foaming at the mouth, their
neglectedness, sordidness, and abhorring from all order and humanity, their
antic postures and gestures? one going in the open Marketplace with his head
lift on high and his arms spread out, roaring and mouthing out fanatical
denunciations; and another following him at the heels with a soft sneaking
pace, his head hanging down as if his nose bled, and his hands pressing his
navel, as if he were troubled with the Belly-ach; others creeping on all four
like brute beasts, and wallowing and tumbling on the ground like dogs or swine.
Others taken with the expected power they lay vacant for, were hurried on in a
very swift pace on tip-toes, with their hats inverted on their heads, and yet
not falling off, and their arms stretched directly upwards with their
fore-fingers pointing to the Zenith; and this for so long a space as no
ordinary man could do the like.

6. Add to this their being troubled with Apparitions, their fearful and
hideous howlings and cryings, their wild and extatical singings and frantic
dancings, their running naked through Towns into Churches and private houses,
their violent and irresistible shakings to the utter weakening of nature and
making their very bodies sore: and all this transacted by a Power or Spirit
which themselves confess distinct from themselves, which also speaks distinctly
and audibly in them, and uses their arms and hands to the beating their head
and body, which imposes upon them very absurd commands, macerating most,
killing some with fasting, tyrannizing over them all in every thing, almost as
much as the Devil does over the poor Indians.

7. Creeping, crouching, licking the dust, eating of Butterflies, feeding of
naught but crumbs and bones, such as we fling to dogs, Cabbage stalks and leaves
of Coleworts scattered and cast away by the Market-women; these are smaller
services of that imperious fiend within them. But this new guest countermanding
the allowable voice of Nature so as scarce to suffer a man to take four and
twenty hours rest in five and twenty days, to condemn him to the guidance of
every foolish fly that comes in his sight, and so to adjudge him to hold his
leg so long and so close to the fire (the fly guiding him the time) that it was
scorched from the knee to the foot, in such grievous manner that it was not to
be cured in less then a quarter of a year; these are more severe and rigid
services of that infernal Task-master. Besides that, ever and anon this inward
voice, and sometimes outward, utters very audibly to them some place or other
of Scripture to a ridiculous abuse and profanation of it; and not that only,
but enforces the poor captivated vassal in scorn and contempt of the person of
Christ to act some remarkable passages in his story, such as his Death, and
Triumph at Jerusalem; the former by James Milner and John Toldervy, the latter
by James Naylor, who had his horse led in triumph by two women trudging in dirt
at his entering Bristol, with Holy, Holy, and Hosanna's sung to him by the
Fanatical company that attended him; garments also in some places being strowed
in the way. Such wild tricks as these are these deluded Souls made to play, to
make sport for those aerial Goblins that drive them and actuate them.

8. I might enlarge further upon this matter: but this short glance at things
might be enough to induce any indifferent man (that can at all believe That
there is any such thing as Witches and possession of Evil Spirits) not easily
to mistrust but that the distemper of this present Age has been such (and it
may be still is) that if there were any such Venerable person as could command
them from under this Power by which many of them are so madly actuated, there
would plainly prove a more plentiful harvest of Daemoniacks in these times
then in our Savior's; and a number more besides John Gilpin and John Toldervy
would acknowledge themselves to have been possessed by the Devil. But at least
we will gain this reasonable Observation from our Digression we have made,
which will be succedaneous to what we mainly aimed at, viz. That if one Age be
so exceeding Fanatical above another, why may not one Age be as much more
Daemoniacal then another?

9. Thirdly, Such distracted and Epileptical persons, as also Daemoniacal,
would not be talked of unless they were miraculously cured; which not happening
in other Ages, they are not so much taken notice of. Fourthly, Our Savior
going from place to place, and his fame flying further then the motion of his
person, he was likely to meet with and to have brought to him more of such
persons by far from the Pagan nations about him, then otherwise at any time
could in any likelihood have been taken notice of, though there were in other
parts of the World and in other Ages as many.

10. Fifthly, Those (...) so called in the Scripture, there is no need to take
them all in the strictest sense: Madmen, Lunaticks or Epileptical men, or any
men extraordinarily distempered with Melancholy, being by the Jews deemed and
called Daemoniacks, the people being as much over-prone to ascribe natural
diseases to the Devil, as many Physicians are to ascribe Diabolical distempers
and vexations to Nature. But Christ cured the diseases by his word, ( Luke 4.39.
(...)) suffering the people to call them by what title they pleased: as he
that has a Catholic Medicine, is not very curious of either the name or the
nature of Malady. But there is no question but that there was a competent
number of Daemoniacks properly so called.

11. Sixthly and lastly, Supposing all so called were properly Daemoniacks, and
that there were a greater number of them in Christ's time and in those parts
then there elsewhere has been at any time, what inconvenience is there in this,
if Providence would so dispense, for so good a purpose? as Christ intimates in
the case of the man that was born blind, where he professes, That it was not
his Parents fault nor his own that he was born blind, but it was the will of
God it should be so, that he might have the occasion of doing the more glorious
miracle. And there wanted nothing then but the Divine permission to make so
many Daemoniacks, no more then there was any thing more requisite but the
permission of Christ for the Gadaren Devils to take possession of the Swine,
and so to hurry them into the midst of the Sea. And certainly they are very
captious that will not permit so free a Sovereignty to the Almighty to lay some
hardship on some few of his Creatures for the general good of the rest,
especially when those Creatures themselves may have deserved infinitely worse
at his hand then he inflicts upon them, and are compensated with a peculiar
advantage for their sufferings. Some one of these Answers or several of them
put together are sufficient, if not more then sufficient, to satisfy this
first Difficulty.

CHAP. VII. 1. That the History of the Daemoniack whose name was Legion has no
incongruity in it. 2. That they were a Regiment of the Dark Kingdom that
haunted most the Country of the Gadarens: and that whether we conceive their
Chieftain alone, or many of his army to possess the man, there is no absurdity
therein. 3. How it came to pass so many Devils should clutter about one sorry
person. 4. The Reason of Christ's demanding of the Daemoniacks name, and the
great use of recording this History. 5. The numerositie of the Devils
discovered by their possession of the Swine. 6. Several other Reasons why
Christ permitted them to enter into the Gadarens herds. 7. That Christ
offended against the laws of neither Compassion nor Justice in this permission.
1. THE Second Difficulty, concerning that fierce Daemoniack that had so many
Devils in him, that he thought fit to call himself by the name of Legion, as
being possessed by such a multitude of unclean Spirits, though it bears at the
first view the face of an extravagancie, yet if it be thoroughly examined it
will prove a very weighty History; all being found congruous to the nature of
things, and decorous and beseeming so Divine a person as our Savior, who was
to conquer the Devil and ruin his Kingdom, as we see he has in some measure
done at this very day. That there should be such an Army of Spirits in one
place ought not to seem strange to him that will believe the sight and report
of the young man whose eyes were opened at the prayer of Elisha, whereupon he
saw the mountain full of horses and chariots of fire round about the Prophet.
Nor is it any real incongruity, that there should be a multitude of Demons or
Spirits within the compass of one man's Body, though it may be so many of that
Legion were not entered into him, but that he was actuated principally by the
Captain thereof, he being rebuked by Christ in the singular number, and he
answering as one in the name of many. Which we may as well understand of those
that were near him and followed him, and had some malign influence its likely
on the Daemoniack by way of Obsession, as of such only as were entered into him
and properly did possess him.

2. For it seems by their petition to Christ, they were a Regiment of the Dark
Kingdom, that use to rove and ramble about in the Country of the Gadarens,
out of which they had no mind to depart; those parts being more obnoxious to
the Infernal powers, they abounding so with Apostate Jews, who being fallen
from the holy Covenant became more subject to the Tyranny of the Devil.
Wherefore there is no necessity of granting^ a whole Legion of Fiends in this
Daemoniack, but a competent multitude or some Chief one of the Legion. Though
without any violence to their natures, there may many lodge in the Body of a
man; these Spirits being able to draw themselves out of their usual extent into
a far narrower compass, and perhaps wholly to quit their own Vehicle to make
use of another; and so many may unite with the Blood and Spirits of a man.

3. Nor need it seem so harsh that so great a number should be busied about one
sorry Wight. For that military word Legion suggests unto us a very fit and
easy solution of this Difficulty, viz. That this did not happen primarily,
but by consequence; the Chief commander of this dark Regiment having his usual
haunt and recourse to him, and therefore the obsession of this numerous rabble
is only by sequel: as if some Captain should make his stay for his own pleasure
in some blind solitary cottage in the field; it would be no wonder to see the
house beset with the multitude of his Soldiers, they being there in attendance
on him, rather then in any satisfaction or advantage to themselves, there being
not a proportionable booty for so great a company; but the place
notwithstanding would not fail to be foully pestred by them. After this sort it
fared with this miserable Daemoniack, who could not but be even stifled with
the throng of this hellish Legion.

4. Nor is it any question but that Christ knew how strong they were and
numerous: and therefore that the greater glory may accrue to himself and to him
that sent him, he makes them confess their numerosity by asking the possessed
his Name. And it was more fit that the Power of Christ should be demonstrated
and the Divinity of his person, in chasing a whole Host of Devils relating to
one possessed, then that there should be as many possessed as there were
Devils, for him to show his power on: For the victory is never the less, (the
Devils being nothing the weaker for not appearing harnessed with humane flesh)
and a great deal of inconvenience to Mankind was declined; besides the great
noise and turbulency in the world which would have risen thereupon, which
Christ ever avoided. But it was fit that this History should be recorded as
well as transacted, that the Church might have the more strong Faith in the Son
of God, who even while he was in the flesh had such Noble victories over the
Powers of the dark Kingdom, putting to flight many thousands of Devils at once.

5. The truth whereof was very handsomely assured by Christ's permitting what
these unclean Spirits desired, which was to go into a heard of swine, which,
the Text says, was about two thousand; which was a very fair pledge of their
numerosity to them that will not cavil; these impure Spirits, as both
Trismegist and Psellus have observed, pleasing themselves to dabble in the
blood of Brutes as well as of Men, and therefore to lodge themselves in their
Veins and Arteries. And Malice being as sweet to them as the refreshing of
their other foul appetite, every soldier of this dark Regiment would be very
nimble at seizing of his prey; and so they dividing their booty amongst them,
every one reaped the satisfaction of his own foul and malicious mind, by
entering the swine and hurrying them into the midst of the Sea: which they
indeed had not been able to do, had not Christ permitted them. But Christ was
not at all overshot in this concession or permission to effect their project:
For though they desired it for mischief sake, that they might incense the
Gadarens against him, yet he plainly outwitted them in their project, it being
more serviceable to him then to them.

6. For hereby was the foulness and mischievous virulency of the Devils more
plainly demostrated. Whence his mercy to the possessed was the more fully
illustrated: and by the loss of the Swine the Temper of the Gadarens was also
discovered, the Mosaical abstinence seasonably coutenanced against the Apostate
Jews of that Country, the swinish nature of men aenigmatically perstringed, and
the Divine power of Christ, as I said, who alone could deal with such numerous
troops of Infernal Spirits, manifested to the world; and the mouth of such
frivolous Allegorists stopped, as would make the Devils that Christ is said to
cast out of the possessed, to be no Essential Spirits, but only depraved
Affections, as Calvin observes upon the place. Wherefore there is nothing of
Levity, Injury or any Extravagancy in the whole Story, but all Circumstances
therein are sober, just and useful.

7. For Christ was not bound to hinder the loss of the Swine, their perishing
being for so public a good and of so great importance, as to assure us of the
vast power he has who shall one day be Judge, and do final vengeance upon all
the Infernal powers at once; and that, though he be so full of compassion
toward Mankind as to lay down his life for the World, that through belief in
him he may save them from eternal destruction, yet no softness or effeminacy of
Spirit, or unseasonable pity to the brute creatures, shall hold his hands from
doing execution upon unbelieving and obdurate persons; but that as here the
Devils and the Swine were plunged together into the bottom of the Sea, so a
deludge of fire shall be poured out upon the Earth at the Last Judgment,
wherein all terrestrial Animals together with the Devils and the Damned shall
burn in flames unquenchable.

CHAP. VIII. 1. Of Christ's turning water into wine. 2. The Miraculous draught
of Fish. 3. His whipping the Money Changers out of the Temple. 4. His walking
on the Sea, and rebuking the Wind. 5. His cursing the Fig Tree. 6. The meaning
of that Miracle. 7. The reason why he expressed his meaning so aenigmatically.
8. That both the Prophets and Christ himself (as in the Ceremonies he used in
curing the man that was born blind) spoke (...), in Typical Actions. 9. The
things that were typified in those ceremonies Christ used in healing the
blind; as in his tempering Clay and Spittle. 10. A further and more full
Interpretation of the whole Transaction. 11. Some brief touches upon the
Prophesies of Christ.
1. BEsides those Miracles which are referrable to the Four general heads we
noted, there be also other Single Examples of different natures: such are His
turning water into wine; The Miraculous draught of Fish; His driving the buyers
and sellers out of the Temple; His walking on the Sea, and his rebuking of the
Winds. To all which it is common with the rest, That they were not done out of
any Vanity or Ostentation, but out of a Principle of Love and kind affection,
being always invited by some present exigency to show his wonder-working
power. As in that of turning water into wine at a wedding in Cana of Galilee,
which he did at the solicitation of his Mother, though with some reluctance,
because of the Envy of the Pharisees that sought to kill him; as also out of a
principle of Humanity, they being at a loss for Wine (more company its likely
for Jesus his sake coming to the Marriage Feast then was expected;) nay I may
say out of a frame of Spirit becoming the Divinity of his Person. For what is
more Divine or God-like, then himself being utterly exempted from the pleasures
of this life and the knowledge of the Nuptial bed, yet wholly laying aside all
superciliousness and exprobrations to others, to countenance necessary
Marriage, gratifying their lawful desires (who could not well be disentangled
from these things) in the ordinary and natural enjoyments of the Body?

2. The miraculous draught of Fish Simon pulled up after he had cast his net at
our Savior's appointment, it was partly a compensation of their long toil all
night, when they caught nothing, and partly a prefiguration of Peter's
excellent success when he was become a fisher of men.

3. That Miracle of whipping the Money Changers out of the Temple, (for so
Grotius will have it to be esteemed, Christ performing it, as he writes, nulla
vi externa, sola divina virtute venerabilis) though it seem full of
unwarrantable passion or fury, yet the Provocation was very just, and the
Principle from whence this fit of Zeal did flow, the best that could be, viz. a
dear regard to the despised Gentiles, (whose Atrium or place of worship the
Jews did thus contemptuously profane) and a just indignation against the Jews,
who out of a fond pride and conceit of their being the seed of Abraham, though
they proved themselves the sons of the Devil, scorned and despised the poor
Gentiles for whom Christ was to die; and it was an Act full of Love and
Heroical affection to right them thus while he lived.

4. His walking on the Sea it was to come to his Disciples that were toiling
and rowing against the wind and the stream, he having in all likelihood not
the convenience of taking boat any where to come unto them. And lastly, His
rebuking the Wind and the Sea in a mighty storm, necessity plainly extorted
that Miracle, the Ship being covered with waves, and his disciples, as they
conceived, ready to be cast away, which made them awaken him, crying out, Lord
save us, we perish. So natural, decorous and becoming are all the Actions and
Miracles of Christ.

5. There is only one behind, Instantia monodica, as a man may call it, an
Example not paralleled in the whole History of the Gospel, which is The cursing
of the Fig Tree: the meaning whereof has puzzled many, as the narration it self
has scandalized some; as if this act was guilty not only of Levity but of a
ridiculous kind of Ferocity, with a semblance of Injustice, if Injustice can
be committed against a Tree. For was there any reason that a Tree should be
cursed for not bearing fruit, when the time of year was not yet for the bearing
thereof? This seems very odd and preposterous. But if it be rightly understood,
there is nothing more grave, more sober, nor more weightily mysterious.

6. For my own part, I make no question but that the genuine meaning of it is
this, and what it signifies it sets out to the very life, viz. That the most
acceptable and desirable fruit of the everlasting Righteousness was not then
found in the Iudaical dispensation: nay, I add further, That it was never
intended that that Tree should bring forth any such fruit, but only the fair
Fig Leaves of an External and Ceremonial Righteousness, and a more overly and
Legal kind of Morality; but the more perfect fruits of the regenerating Spirit
were not to be found there, though Christ came into the world to exprobrate to
them the want thereof, and so to put a period to the Iudaical dispensation, so
as that it should quite wither away and fall to nothing, as we find it come to
pass at this very day. Which Consideration, amongst others that occur in
Scripture, more evidently confirms what we find true in effect, That according
to the Eternal counsel of God, Christ was mainly intended for the Gentiles,
and that breaking this shell of Iudaisme in which he was brooded, under so many
Types and Shadows, he should take his flight thence, and after spread his wings
from one end of the Earth to the other.

7. But this Mystery having something of seeming harshness in it to men of less
profound minds, such was the sweetness and inoffensiveness of our Savior's
temper, that he would neither scandalize them, nor grate too hard against the
Iudaical Economy, which that Nation so highly reverenced, and therefore
recorded this Truth only in this Enigmatical miracle.

8. And thus to speak in types.
(...) as well as in words.
(...) was not only usual with the Prophets, but practiced also by our Savior
himself in other cases as well as in this: As in the manner of his healing him
that was born blind, John 9. where the Ceremonies he uses seem very uncouth
and strange before one knows the meaning of them, but rightly understood they
must be acknowledged admirably fit for the purpose: I mean, not for curing of
the blind, (For what can clay and spittle and the water of a pool avail for
the restoring of Sight to one that was born blind?) but for mysteriously
setting out some grand Truths concerning Jesus.

9. As that he was the Son of God, or that Eternal Word, whereby God created
the World and framed man of the Earth, in token whereof he tempers Clay and
Spittle, he being about to rectify and amend the workmanship of his own hands.
To which Erasmus seems plainly to allude in his Paraphrase upon the place; It
is for the same Author to restore what had perished, who had made what before
had no being.
Ejusdem autem Autoris est restituere quod perierat, qui condider at quod non
erat. Besides another Truth of very great importance which is set out to the
very life in this Typical cure, viz. That we are to expect the Renovation of
our minds and our Regeneration from that power that created us; That no man can
come to Christ, as he is a visible person, unless the Father, that is, the
Eternal Divinity, 1 Cor. 12.3.
draw him, or, as the Apostle speaks to the Corinthians, That no man can say
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

10. Now I say, That Christ's tempering Clay and Spittle does emblematize the
Eternal Deity that created all things; and his acting first upon the blind man
and so sending of him to the pool of Siloam (by which undoubtedly is meant
Shilo or the Messiah) this does plainly figure out the forementioned Truths;
That those that do come to Christ, and faithfully adhere to him, are prepared
and given to him of God; and that by Faith in him, they are purged and purified
from all blindness and filthiness by the assistance of that Spirit which is
promised to all that believe in him: according to what Christ himself has
pronounced, He that believes on me, John 7.3^.
out of his heart shall flow streams of living waters: which he understands of
the Spirit, of which these waters of Siloam are therefore a very fit Figure or
Emblem, they fitly denoting even from the very name, as I have already
intimated, the clearing and healing Spirit of Christ, who is the Shilo or
Siloam wherewith we are to be washed and cleansed from that foulness and
earthly-mindedness which we had contracted in the state of Nature or First
creation, before the act of Regeneration has passed upon us.

11. We have considered the Miracles of Christ; let us give a short glance on
his Prophesies. In which, that which is mainly considerable is, that they are
very few. Which I look upon as a reprehension and reproach of that natural itch
in mankind to Divinations and Predictions; of which Impostors usually much
boast, and a Nation of America, though more Atheistical then all the rest, are
so vehemently set upon, that they often even grow mad again with that study.
But very little fell from our Savior's mouth by way of Prophecy, but what was
in a manner of indispensable concernment to be foretold. Such as his own
Sufferings and Resurrection, the Destruction of the City, and the General
Judgment. He exercised also his power of Divination in his conference with the
woman of Samaria: but his applications there were so serious that he forgot the
sense of hunger, being more pleased with the attempts of her conversion and her
Countrymen, then with the most delicate junkets that could be set before him.
He foretold also who should betray him: but it was to demonstrate that both his
Betraying and all his Sufferings else, they being foreseen, might have been
avoided; and therefore that he underwent them willingly. To which also those
Predictions tend, When I am lifted up, I shall draw all men unto me; as also of
the good Shepherd laying down his life for his sheep, and then presently
adding, And other sheep I have which are not of this fold, meaning the Gentiles
who were to be brought in by his Death. Which is a plain Demonstration that
Christ suffered death See Book 7. chap. 17. sect. 8.
voluntarily out of his entire love to the World, and that he knew aforehand
what an Effectual instrument his Passion would prove for the conversion of the
Gentiles to the true knowledge of God.

CHAP. IX. 1. The Miracles of Apollonius compared with those of Christ. 2. His
entertainment at a Magical banquet by Iarchas and the rest of the Brachmans. 3.
His cure of a Dropsy and of one bitten by a mad dog. 4. His freeing of the City
of Ephesus from the plague. 5. His casting a Devil out of a laughing
Daemoniack, and chasing away a whining Spectre on Mount Caucasus in a
Moonshine night. 6. His freeing Menippus from his espoused Lamia.
1. WE have now done with the Actions of Christ, such as were more
extraordinary and miraculuos: we will proceed to his Passion after we have made
a short comparison of the most famous exploits of Apollonius with these of our
Savior, according to those Heads we have already insisted upon; His miraculous
feeding of the People; His curing diseases; His casting out Devils; His raising
of the dead, and His predictions of things to come.

2. As for the First, I do not remember any example of it in Apollonius his
life; only Philostratus writes that Apollonius himself was entertained by the
Brachmans at such a banquet as was provided in a miraculous manner, together
with the King of Media, where three-sooted tables were brought in and placed in
the midst without the help of any man's hand; as also the floor spread with
odoriferous herbs and flowers; and bread, wine, fruits and sweetmeats on
plates conveyed through the air and set upon those tables without any
servitours to carry them. Which story being so very like the junketings of
Witches, and the behavior of Iarchas and his brother Brachmans being so full
of scorn and insolency toward the King and the very chief of his retinue, his
brother I mean and his sons, may fully confirm any man that they were no better
then Magicians; nor their great Favorite and disciple Apollonius any other
then a Wizzard and a Necromancer, as his conjuring up of the Ghost of Achilles
does further prove.

3. As for his Cures, I do remember but Three, the First of which seems to have
more of the power of Nature and Morality then of a Miracle; he curing a young
man of a Dropsy by precepts of Temperance in the Temple of Aesculapius. The
other was of one bitten by a mad Dog, who was so distempered therewith, that he
would bark, go on all four and couch on the ground like a Dog: But it looks so
like a piece of Witchery, and Apollonius was so punctual in discovering what
the Inhabitants of the place (which was Tarsus) could not inform him of, as of
the color, shaggedness and other qualities of the Dog, as also where he was,
that it is a suspicion that he that cured the disease did inflict it himself,
or rather his Familiars for him; and so it is likely that the dog as well as
the man was bewitched. For he came along from the riverside (where he was
shivering as if he had an ague) so soon as Damis had whispered in his Ear that
Apollonius would speak with him: who told the people also while he was
cherishing him and stroaking him, that the Soul of Telephus the Mysian was
entered into him; which is a further confirmation of our conjecture. But indeed
all the circumstances of the Story are either ludicrous and ridiculous, or else
impious; As his making the Dog cure the man by licking of him, and then himself
curing the Dog by praying to the River Cydnus and slinging the Dog into the
stream.

4. But the most famous cure of all is that, when he freed the City of Ephesus
from the plague. But it being discovered already what a kind of man this
Apollonius was, viz. a mere Magician, I cannot but suspect that the case is the
same with that former, and that the whole City suffered so direful a disease
as the devouring pestilence by the hand of the Devil, to get the greater renown
to Apollonius that stout Hyperaspistes of Paganism, who for the advancing of
his own credit was to free them from this raging evil. Of which opinion of ours
there are two grand Arguments: The one his assembling the people in the
Theater, and there encouraging them to stone an old ragged Beggar, which he
persuaded them was the plague, but it seems it was (...), a destroying Demon;
as it appeared by his eyes as he was a stoning, and by that delusion of a
shagged Dog as big as a Lion found under the heap of stones, when the people
had thought to have seen him there in his former shape of a patched Beggar. The
other Argument is the Ephesians erecting the Image of Hercules Apotropaeus in
the place where this old Mendicant was stoned, which is a sign that Pagan
Idolatry was the upshot of the plot. Wherefore I look upon these two last Cures
as done out of suspicable Principles and upon extravagant Objects.

5. As for his casting out Devils, I do not remember any example thereof saving
one, and that was of a young man of Corcyra who was a laughing Daemoniack, out
of whom at Athens, by a many repeated menaces and imperious railings, he at
last ejected the Evil Spirit, who for a sign of his departure made a great
Image tumble down from the royal Porch in the City with a great noise and
clatter. To this Head we may refer also, though by an improper reduction, his
conjuring of a Phantasme that appeared to him and his fellow-travellers as they
were journying on Mount Caucasus in a bright Moonshine night: Which Phantasme
went before them sometime in one shape and sometime in another; but by many
vehement chidings, by many railings, reproaches and execrations, was made to
disappear at last, and to depart, crying and whining at the discourteous usage.

6. We may add to these the story of Menippus and the Lamia: Who in the form of
a beautiful young woman made love to Menippus, and at last persuaded him to
marry her. But Apollonius being at the Nuptials, discovered the illusion, and
by reproaching the Bride, made, I think, the whole Edifice, (which was supposed
to be placed near Corinth) I am sure the furniture and riches thereof, all the
movables, the Tapestry, the gold and silver vessels, nay the pages, servants
and officers of this fair Lady to vanish at once, and her self only left was
compelled to confess her self a foul carnivorous Fiend. So either frivolous or
exorbitant are all the miraculous exploits of this deified Impostor. But all
the Objects of our Savior's Miracles were, as I at first noted, more obvious
and familiar: which is the greater assurance as well of the Innocence and
Sincerity of his Person, as of the Truth of his History.

CHAP. X. 1. Apollonius his raising from death a young married Bride at Rome.
2. His Divinations, and particularly by Dreams. 3. His Divinations from some
external accidents in Nature. 4. His Prediction of Stephanus killing Domitian
from an Halo that encircled the sun. Astrology and Meteorology covers to Pagan
Superstition and converse with Devils. 5. A discovery thereof from this
prediction of his from the Halo compared with his phrantick Ecstasies at
Ephesus. 6. A general Conclusion from the whole parallel of the Acts of Christ
and Apollonius.
1. THat Exploit at Rome, which was the raising of a young woman to life that
was carrying to be buried, had been indeed a more solid Miracle, if it had been
any at all. But the time not being set down how long she had been dead, it was
most likely that it was no more then is competible to a Trance. But the
Knowledge of the Devil extending further then his Power, he might easily inform
Apollonius what a seasonable opportunity he had to do a seeming Miracle. But
our Savior's raising of Lazarus after he had been four days buried, gives
sufficient credit to his other two Miracles of that kind, that they were real
and true. This Re-enlivening therefore of the new-married bride at Rome is
rather to be referred to the Predictions or Divinations of Apollonius then to
his Miracles, which were very few in comparison of the other: Of which yet we
will give you some Examples, for it would not be worth the while to reckon up
all, nor to rehearse these at large, but only briefly to name them.

2. Such therefore was the Discovery of the unclean lust of Timasion his
mother-in-law in Egypt, and the Prediction of a foul act in an Eunuch upon one
of the King of Babylon's Concubines; as also of saving Pharion at Alexandria
from being executed amongst other Robbers that were led along to die, by
keeping the Executioner in discourse till a messenger on horseback galloping
with all speed seconded Apollonius his Divination with a clear demonstration of
Pharion's innocence. You may add to these his Divinations by Dreams, as that of
the suppliant Fishes that besought the Dolphin's favor, which he interpreted
to the advantage of the Eretrians, for whom he interceded with the the King of
Babylon: and another by which he was diverted from going to Rome till he had
seen Candy; a woman with a rich crown upon her head, who told him she was the
Nurse of Jupiter, embracing him in his sleep, and desiring him that he would
first come to converse a while with her before he went to Rome: Which woman he
interpreted to be Crete, where Jupiter was born and brought up.

3. There were also several of his Divinations which he seemed to gather from
some external accident in Nature. Such was that from the chirping of the
Sparrows in the midst of his Speech to the Ephesians, whereupon he broke off,
to tell them that not far off a young man had spilt a sack of Corn in the
street. And that from the Lioness the Hunters had slain in Babylonia, as
Apollonius was in his journey to India, which having eight young lions in her
belly, he presaged from thence that it would be a year and eight months till
their return. A third from a terrible thunder at an Eclipse at Rome; whereupon
he lifting up his eyes toward Heaven, said that it were a great marvail indeed
if this should end in naught. But his meaning was known by the after-clap, for
Nero's Cup was struck out of his hand, as he was drinking, by a flash of
lightning, while he sat at table. A fourth from a monstrous birth in Syracuse,
a woman of quality being brought to bed of a child with three heads, which he
interpreted of the three Roman Emperors, Galba, Otho and Vitellius.

4. The fifth and last we shall mention is an Halo which was observed about the
Sun in Greece; which Meteor being round like a Crown, but much obscuring the
light of the Sun, Apollonius his prediction was, that one Stephanus (which
signifies a Crown) should kill the Emperor Domitian. But for my own part, I
conceive that the Observation of Prodigies can as little help a man in such
punctual Predictions, as of the Figurations of the Stars: but that these
things are pretenses and covers of a baser Art, or rather of some wicked
Superstition and unlawful familiarity with the Apostate Spirits. Which a
notorious circumstance of the event of this last Prediction will demonstrate to
the indifferent. For while Domitian was a murdering at Rome, Apollonius being
at Ephesus, sees the transaction of the business so plainly as if he had been
there, and at the very hour it was done encouraged Stephen to the act; and
starting backwards and forwards, and staring terribly with his eyes, bad him
stab the Tyrant, as if he had been present by to assist. Which phrantick and
ghastly Ecstacy is an argument that he was then possessed of the Devil that
raised this Theater of things in his mind, and therefore in all likelihood
foretold him them also before they came to pass.

6. Wherefore briefly to conclude concerning the Extraordinary acts of Christ
and Apollonius; in the one there is nothing but what is sound and necessary, of
weighty and useful importance and from a divine and irreprehensible principle;
in the other nothing but what is either vainly affected, slight and frivolous,
or else infernal and diabolical; that of Pharion not expected, which looks the
most plausible of them all. For that Divination is no more then is performed by
ordinary Witches; and that act of justice which was the reskuing of the
innocent from death, though good in it self, was prostituted by him to base
purposes, to the gaining of credit to a grand Restorer of Paganism, and
industrious upholder of the Kingdom of the Devil.

CHAP. XI. 1. A Comparison of the Temper or Spirit in Apollonius with that in
Christ. 2. That Apollonius his Spirit was at the height of the Animal life, but
no higher. 3. That Pride was the strongest chain of darkness that Apollonius
was held in, with a rehearsal of certain Specimens thereof. 4. That his whole
Life was nothing else but an exercise of Pride and Vainglory, boldly
swaggering himself into respect with the greatest wherever he went. 5. His
reception with Phraotes King of India, and Iarchas head of the Brachmans. 6.
His intermedling with the affairs of the Roman Empire, his converse with the
Babylonian Magi and Egyptian Gymnosophists, and of his plausible Language and
Eloquence. 7. That by the sense of Honor and Respect he was hooked in to be so
active an Instrument for the Kingdom of Darkness. 8. That though the Brachmans
pronounced Apollonius a God, yet he was no higher then the better sort of
Beasts.
1. WE have made a Parallel of the Miracles and Prophesies of Christ and
Apollonius, and have spent our judgments upon them; the truth of which censure
that it may the better appear to all, we shall briefly compare their Temper or
frame of Spirit.

2. Which I confess is as Brave in Apollonius as the Animal life will reach
unto. But that Animal life at the best falls short of the saving knowledge of
God, and is but that which in a manner is common to Beasts, Devils and Men.
This therefore we will acknowledge to be in Apollonius a generous sense of
Political Justice, a severe profession of Temperance, and a great affectation
of Knowledge, especially of things to come. But as for Political Justice and
Civil Agreement and Concord, which he seems often to be very sensible of, and
earnestly to exhort the Cities to, where he went, no less then this can be
entertained in the very Kingdom of Satan; which, if it were divided against it
self, could not stand. And for his vehement affectation of Knowledge, it is
evident that it is a mere branch of the Natural life, and such as is as
competible to the Apostate Spirits, nay more by far then to an ordinary good
man: and Apollonius his Temperance aiming but at this which is so low and vile,
how far short does it fall of what is truly Heavenly and Divine? This
therefore is observable in him, that if he quitted one Entanglement of the
Animal life, it was the more fully and willingly to be fettered by another.

3. But the strongest chain of darkness that he was caught in, is that of
Pride, which though it be made of more subtle and small links, yet holds us
longer captive then any. This is that which blemishes the History of his Life
more then any Immorality else whatsoever. For to what but this can be reduced
that scornful and ridiculous Prayer he made to Apollo at Antioch, that he
would turn the countrey-people into Cypress-trees, that the wind taking their
branches, they might at least by that means make some sound, they being as yet
quite mute and not able to discourse with so sage a Philosopher? To what but
this can we impute that magnificent answer he gave the keeper of the bridge as
he passed into Mesopotamia, when he was demanded what merchandises he brought?
To whom he replied, That he brought along with him Justice, Temperance,
Fortitude, Continence, Tolerance, Magnanimity and Constancy. He adds Modesty
to the rest; but it was ill placed in so flaunting a display of his own
praises. To what but this can you refer his cavilling with the sober
questions asked him by the Captain of the guards on the confines of Babylon,
where he takes upon him as if himself was King of every country he came into?

4. But what need we recite particulars? his whole Life being nothing else but
a lofty strutting on the stage of the Earth, or an industrious trotting from
one Nation of the World to another, to gather Honor and Applause to himself,
by correcting the Customs of the Heathen, or renewing their fallen Rites, and
playing the uncontrollable Reformer wherever he pleased: Which is a very
pleasant thing to flesh and blood. Besides the bold visits he gave to Princes
and Potentates, with the greatest confidence and ostentation of his own Virtues
that could be imagined, making himself the measure of others worth, insomuch
that he would not do the ordinary homage to Bardanes King of Babylon, til he
was certified whether his Virtues deserved it or no. With whom, as also with
other Princes, he treated of Political affairs, not detrecting to intermeddle
with the present administration of Justice. But this unexpected audacity of his
proved ever succesful, he always, by I know not what luck or power, swaggering
himself into Respect, by despising the both pomp and persons of the greatest.
So that he was ever hail fellow well met with the highest Kings and Emperors,
they being ever taken with great admiration of his Wisdom. And therefore
Bardanes is brought in in the Story courting of him at last, and earnestly
entreating the beggarly Philosopher to take his lodging in his Palace, showing
him all the glory and pomp of his Kingdom, offering him great sums of gold
and precious stones. The former whereof though he refused, yet he could not
well abstain from fingering the latter, under pretense forsooth that there was
some strange Philosophic virtue in them, as also that they should be an
offering to the Gods at their return into their own country.

5. So also Phraotes King of India is said to receive him with very great
Respect, he carrying him to bathe himself in his Royal bath, and after
receiving him at a Feast, and placing him next himself, above his Nobles.
Beside the great Honor he had from Iarchas and the rest of the Brachmans, to
whom the King of India wrote in his behalf. Where in conference with those
Sages he was placed in Phraotes his chair of State, forbad also to rise up at
the coming in of the King of Media; with whom (at that banquet which I have
already mentioned) he having some contestation, the King became at last so much
his friend, that he was almost uncivilly importunate to see him at his own
Court in Media at his return.

6. Add unto these his busy intermedling in the affairs of the Roman Empire;
his large Political conferences with Vespasian; his abetting conspiracies
against Nero and Domitian; his learned discourses with the Babylonian Magi,
concerning whom he told Damis, that they were not so perfect but that they
wanted the benefit of some of his instructions, as he confessed that something
he learned from them; his campling and cavilling with the Gymnosophists, who
though they seemed not so great Wizzards, yet were not less virtuous then
either the Brachmans or himself; and lastly, his plausible language and great
Eloquence, he making in several places very winning Orations and Exhortations
to Morality and the observance of the most behooffull Laws and Institutes, such
as would tend most to Civility and the Peace and Security of the People.

7. From all which it is most evident, That a natural sense of Honor and
Gallantry was the wing and Spirit that made Apollonius such a great stickler in
his time; and that, he being of a lofty and generous nature apt to reach out at
high things, the Kingdom of darkness hooked him in, to make an Instrument of
him for their own turn, and so to dress up Paganism in the best attire they
could, to make it, if it were possible, to vie with Christianity: and that
there should be nothing wanting to this Corrival of Christ, the Indian
Brachmans pronounced him of that eminency, that he deserved to be reputed and
honored as a Deity, both living and dead, as I have already related to you.

8. But if the Excellency of his Person be better examined, he will be found so
far from being in the rank of a God, that there can be no more acknowledged of
him then that he was of the better sort of Beasts, that is, that he was a mere
natural man, only dressed up and disguised by his Pythagorick diet and habit,
and a Magical power of doing of Miracles; as is demonstrable from the whole
tenor of his Story, there being nothing in it that relishes or savours what is
above the Animal life. From whence we may safely conclude there is nothing in
him Divine.

CHAP. XII. 1. The Contrariety of the Spirit of Christ to that of Apollonius.
2. That the History of Apollonius, be it true or false, argues the exquisite
Perfection of the Life of Christ, and the Transcendency of that Divine Spirit
in him that no Pagan could reach by either Imagination or Action. 3. The Spirit
of Christ how contemptible to the mere Natural man, and how dear and precious
in the eyes of God. 4. How the several Humiliations of Christ were compensated
by God with both suitable and miraculous Privileges and Exaltations. 5. His
deepest Humiliation, namely, his Suffering the death of the Cross, compensated
with the highest Exaltation.
1. WHerefore we shall find the Life of our Savior quite contrary to his,
there being nothing recorded in him that is plausible to flesh and blood, no
splendor of Parentage, no streams of Eloquence, no favor of Potentates, no
affectation of any Peculiarity to himself in any thing; but being every where
reproached and despised, he ceased not to do good without any man's applause.
And whereas the very Spirit and life of all Apollonius his Actions is a gallant
sense of Glory, which the Devil befooled him by; so that which perpetually
breathed in the Actions of our Savior was a passive, loving, profound Spirit
of Humility, which is the most certain character of the Divine life, of any
thing that is.

2. So that let the History of Apollonius be wholly true, or partly false, or
wholly false, it is all one to me. For if it be True, this grand example of
Divine virtue, as he is pretended, falls infinitely short of the truth of the
Divine life manifested in Christ, there being indeed nothing found in
Apollonius that is truly Divine. But if it be a Figment, in whole or in part,
how transcendent then is that Divine worth in Christ, and how lovely and
illustrious is the Beauty of his Image, that the pens and pencils of the most
learned and accomplished Pagans cannot draw one line thereof, nor give one
touch or stroke near his resemblance?

3. And indeed how should it ever come into the mind of a mere natural man to
think of an humble, passive, Soul-melting, self-afflicting and self-resigning
Divinity lodging in any Person; or if it did, that there was any such great
price upon that Spirit more then on that which seems to the world more gallant
and generous? But certainly this is more precious in the eyes of God then all
things in the world beside; and whatsoever injury is done to this, it is like
the touching of the Apple of his own eye. And so tender was he over our
Savior, in whom this was so transcendently found, that he ever compensated his
Sufferings with a proportionable Triumph, and his willing Submissions and
Debasements of himself with an answerable Exaltation.

4. And therefore his humble Birth he honored with the Music of a Quire of
Angels from Heaven, and the Homage of the Wise men from the East who brought
presents to him, as to a newborn King. So his long Fasting in the Desert was
compensated by the power not only of curing diseases, but of turning water
into wine, and of miraculously feeding of multitudes in the wilderness. As also
his refusing of all the pomp and glory of the World, (which was shown him from
the top of a mountain) by the Transfiguration of his person on the top of mount
Tabor into so great a glory as all the speciosities of the world could not
equalize, his face shining as the Sun, and his garments being bright as the
Light. And lastly, his being carried from place to place by the hand of Satan,
as an innocent Lamb in the Talons of an Eagle, this Temptation also was amply
recompensed by having a palpable power over the Kingdom of Satan, and
dispossessing Daemoniacks, and putting to flight many thousands of Devils at
once, as you heard concerning him whose name was Legion.

5. But the emergency of the greatest Honor that accrew'd to him was from the
deepest Sufferings, even from his bitter Passion on the Cross: Which was fully
remunerated by so glorious a Resurrection and Ascension, by his Session at the
right hand of God, and his Exaltation above all principalities and powers,
whether in Heaven or Earth; he being made Head and Sovereign over Men and
Angels, and endued with a power of crowning all believers with a glorious
Immortality at the last day. Of all which we shall speak in order, showing the
Fitness and Reasonableness of every thing in its place.

CHAP. XIII. 1. The ineffable power of the Passion of Christ, and other
endearing applications of him, for winning the World off from the Prince of
Darkness. 2. Of his preceding Sufferings and of his Crucifixion. 3. How
necessary it was that Christ should be so passive and sensible of pain in his
suffering on the Cross; against the blasphemy of certain bold Enthusiasts. 4.
Their ignorance in the Divine life, and how it alone was to triumph in the
Person of Christ unassisted by the advantages of the Animal or Natural. 5. That
if Christ had died boldly and with little sense of pain, both the Solemnity and
Usefulness of his Passion had been lost. 6. That the strange Accidents that
attended his Crucifixion were Prefigurations of the future Effects of his
Passion upon the Spirits of men in the World. 7. Which yet hinders not but that
they may have other significations. 8. The third and last Reason of the
Tragical unsupportableness of the Passion of Christ, in that he bore the sins
of the whole World. 9. The Leguleious cavils of some conceited Sophists that
pretend That it is unjust with God to punish the Innocent in stead of the
Guilty. 10. The false Ground of all their frivolous subtilties.
1. FIrst therefore as concerning his Passion, I say, it is an enravishing
consideration to take notice how this humble Candidate for so great an Empire
as I have described, applies himself to his design, giving an infallible proof
not only of his Power, that he is able to protect, but of his dear affection
and entire Love to his people, in that he can undergo so horrid agonies in
their behalf; and being to win the Kingdoms of the Earth out of the possession
of the Devil, how he uses no other Engine then the displaying of his own
Nature, and the endearing Loveliness and Benignity of his own Spirit, to shame
and confound the ugliness and detestableness of his usurping Competitor.
Wherefore he did not only tread counter to the ways of Satan in Humility and
Purity and continual Beneficency in his lifetime: but further to show the vast
Disparity or Discrepancy betwixt that old Tyrant and this gracious Prince that
is so succeed; whenas the Devil, as you have already heard, inflicted
unsupportable penances upon his abused Vassals, engaging them to cut and slash
their own flesh, and frantickly to dismember themselves, to whip themselves
with knotted cords or stinging nettles, to wound themselves with sharp flints,
and to fast and macerate themselves so as to pine away in deserts, or break
their necks down some steep rock or precipice, as Acosta reports of them;
Christ, quite conttary to this, is so far from such like Tyranny and cruel and
handling of others, that to satisfy us concerning the justly-suspected wrath
of his Father, he undergoes all this load himself, to win us off to a more
perfect and cheerful Obedience to his holy Precepts, by so great and sensible
an Engagement. The weight and power of his Scepter being mainly to be felt in
the sense of Love, which is the strongest ^ie imaginable even to natural
Ingenuity. But the power of the old Serpent was exercised in fear and terror
and despightfull scorn upon poor distressed mankind. There being this great
advantage therefore of winning of the Hearts of men from the Kingdom of
Darkness to the power of God by Christ's afflictions and sufferings; it is no
wonder that he submitted himself to them, though they were so unspeakably
grievous.

2. And indeed what can be imagined more grievous then that lively
Representation of his bitter Passion (unless the Passion it self,) When in the
Mount of Olives, at his devotions, he was in such an Agony, that he sweat as it
were great drops of blood that fell from his face to the ground? Besides the
despightfull mockings and spittings in his face, with cruel and bloody
scourgings: The consideration whereof would drive a man to any hardship to
approve himself faithful and thankful to so loving a Savior. What then will
the contemplation of his direful and Tragical Crucifixion? where so Divine a
person, nay, where the Son of God in the flesh, being disgracefully placed
betwixt two thieves, his holy and spotless Humanity was so deeply pierced with
the present sense and real Agony of Death, that the weight and burden thereof
enforced him to cry out, Eloi, Eloi, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me?
And here he may appeal from the Cross to all the World in the words of
Jeremiah, Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow.

3. Which Sorrow and Passion had it not been as real and as great as it is
recounted, how slight and ludicrous a matter would the Mystery of Christianity
be? How profane therefore and execrable are those wretches, that would turn
that to the disgrace of Christ, which is the Glory of the Gospel? as if our
Savior was less Perfect by being thus Passive and so sensible of pain. But it
is plain that these bold and insolent Enthusiasts, which boast so much of
Perfection as to equalize themselves or their blind guides with Christ, nay,
prefer them before him, I say, it is plain they are so ignorant, that they do
not know in what the true Perfection consists.

4. For I have already declared, That in the person of Christ, that only which
was truly Divine was to have the triumph and victory, unassisted with any thing
that is precious and praiseworthy in the eyes of the world. And the true
Perfection approveable before God is found only in that which is Divine, not
Natural or Animal, such as would be applauded by a mere Carnal man. And such is
Stoicism and Spartanism, a power as well relished by wicked men and Apostate
Angels, nay, I may say, better, then by the holy and regenerate. And it is an
Exercise of far greater Faith and Obedience to the Divine will, to undergo
pain and affliction, when it searches us so deep, and stings us so vehemently;
then when by any forced Generosity and Stoutness of Spirit, or any Natural or
Artificial helps whatsoever, we bear against the sense thereof, and quit our
selves in this heat and stomachfulness, as if we were invincible and
invulnerable Champions.

5. If it had fared thus with Christ at his Death, the Solemnity of his Passion
had been lost. Indeed it had been no Passion, nor would have caused any in them
that read the Story. But his Sufferings being so Great and so Real as they
were, it is the greatest Attractive of the Eyes and Hearts of men toward him
that could possibly be offered to the World: Which himself was very well aware
of, and did foretell it in his lifetime; When I am lifted up, I shall draw all
men unto me.

6. Which Effects of his Passion, those Miraculous Accidents that attended it
seem also to presage. For what was that rending of the vail of the Temple from
the top to the bottom at Jerusalem? what were those Earthquakes in more remote
places out of Judea, and the torn or cloven Rocks, but a Presage how the
Earthly Minds and Stony Hearts of all men in time, as well Jews as Gentiles,
would be shaken and broke in pieces with sorrow and grief at his Sufferings who
is the Savior of the World? Nay, what did the Sun, the very life and Soul of
the natural world, what did that deliquium or swounding fit of his betoken,
but that this sad spectacle of the Crucifixion of Christ would so empassion the
minds of all ingenuous men, and so melt their Hearts with love and affection to
this universal Savior, that they would willingly die with him, that they might
also live with him and rejoice with him for ever in Heaven?

7. I speak not this to exclude other Significations of these Prodigies. For
they may also have their truth and use as well as these, especially some of
them: as That of the Eclipse of the Sun, which may also signify that the true
light of the world (he that was termed by the Prophet The Sun of Righteousness)
was then a suffering; and That of rending the vail of the Temple, which no
question denoted the rescinding of the Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies, and the
abrogation of the Highpriests office, Christ now having taken away the
partition wall, and given every Believer free access to the presence of his
Father by his own Death whereby he has reconciled us to God.

8. Which offers us a third Reason why this Passion of Christ should be so
Tragical as it was, and the weight thereof so unsupportable. For he bore then
the wrath of God for the sins of the World, being smitten, as the Prophet
speaks, for our transgressions, and the iniquities of us all were laid upon
him; that is, he was an Universal Sacrifice for all Mankind. Which the proud
and self-conceited Enthusiast, that phansies himself so well within, that he
contemns all external Religion (unless it be of his own invention) being not at
leisure to consider, boldly and blasphemously traduces him for weak and
delicate, that willingly underwent the greatest pain that ever was inflicted
upon any mortal, that bore a weight more heavy then mount Aetna, and too big
for the shoulders of any Atlas to bear.

9. As little to the purpose are the leguleious Cavils of some Pragmatical
Pettifoggers, as I may so call them, in matters of Divinity, who though they be
favorable enough to the Person of Christ, and seem to condole his ill Hap that
he fell thus into the hands of Thieves and Murderers; yet set no price at all
upon his Death, no more then upon theirs that died with him, accounting his
Blood as common and unholy as that of the malefactors that were crucified with
him; the Wrath of God being not all atoned, as they say, by his suffering,
because it is unjust that an Innocent man should be punished for those that are
guilty. But what Unjustice is done to him that takes upon him the debt or fault
of another man willingly, if he pay the debt or bear the punishment; provided
that he that may exact or remit either, will be thus satisfied?

10. But such trivial and captious intermedlers in matters of Religion, that
take a great deal of pains to obscure that which is plain and easy, deserve
more to be flighted and neglected then vouchsafed any answer. For all their
frivolous Subtilties and fruitless intricacies arise from this one false
ground, That the Sovereign Goodness of God and his kind condescensions and
applications to the affections of man are to be measured by Iuridical niceties,
and narrow and petty Laws, such as concern ordinary transactions between man
and man. But let these brangling Wits enjoy the fruits of their own elaborate
ignorance, while we considering the easy air and sense of Sacrifices in all
Religions, shall by this means be the better assured of the natural meaning of
it in our own.

CHAP. XIV. 1. That Sacrifices in all Religions were held Appeasments of the
Wrath of their Gods. 2. And that therefore the Sacrifice of Christ is rather to
be interpreted to such a Religious sense then by that of Secular laws. 3. The
great disservice some corrosive Wits do to Christian Religion, and what
defacements their Subtilties bring upon the winning comeliness thereof. 4. The
great advantage the Passion of Christ has, compared with the bloody Tyranny of
Satan.
1. HOW General the Custom of Sacrificing was in all Nations of the World is a
thing so well known, that I need not insist upon it; and That their Sacrifices
were accounted an Appeasment of the Wrath of the Gods and Expiation for their
faults, is also a Truth so conspicuous that it cannot be denied. Hence these
Sacrifices we speak of were called (...) in Latin Placamina, Februa, Piamina.
Much of this nature you may read in Grotius, De Satisfactione Christi, cap. 10.
where he does not only make good by many Expressions and Examples That the
Sacrifices of the ancient Heathen pacified the Anger of the Gods, but also
(which is nearer to our purpose) That the Punishment of those that were thus
reconciled and purged was transferred upon the Beast that was sacrificed: for
the clearing whereof he alleges many citations; and these two amongst the
rest. One out of Cato; Cum sis ipse nocens, moritur cur victima pro te?
Since thou thy self art guilty, why
Does then thy Sacrifice for thee die?
The other out of Plautus, Men' piaculum oportet fieri propter stultitiam tuam,
Ut meum tergum stultitia tuae subdas succedaneum?
that is to say, Is it fit that I should be made a piacular Sacrifice for your
foolishness, that my back should bear the stripes that your folly has demerited?

2. Wherefore this being the sense of the Sacrifices we speak of in all the
Religions in the World, it is more fit to interpret the Death of Christ, who
gave himself an Expiation for the sins of the World, according to that sense
which is usual in the mysteries of Religion, then according to the entangling
niceties and intricacies of secular laws.

3. But as for those busy and Pragmatical spirits, that by the acrimonie of
their wit eat off the comely and lovely gloss of Christianity, as aqua Fortis
or rather aqua Stygia laid on polished metal, what thanks shall they receive of
him whom yet they pretend to be so zealous for? the most winning and endearing
circumstances of his exhibiting himself to the World being so soiled and
blasted by their rude and foul breath, that as many as they can infect with the
contagion of their own Error, Christianity will be made to them but a dry
withered branch; whenas in it self it is an aromatic Paradise, where the
Senses and Affections of men are so transported with the Agreeableness of
Objects, that they are even enravished into Love and Obedience to him that
entertains them there. And nothing can entertain the Soul of man with so sweet
a Sorrow and Joy, as this Consideration, That the Son of God should bear so
dear a regard to the World as to lay down his life for them, and to bear so
reproachful and painful a Death to expiate their sins and reconcile them to
his Father.

4. But this is not all the Advantage he had to win the Government of the World
unto himself. For not only his exceeding Love to Mankind was hereby
demonstrated, but the cruel and execrable nature of that old Tyrant the more
clearly detected. For whereas the Devil, who by unjust usurpation had got the
Government of the World into his own hands, tyrannizing with the greatest
cruelty and scorn that can be imagined over Mankind, thirsted after humane
blood, and in most parts of the World, as I have already shown, required the
sacrificing of men; which could not arise from any thing else but a salvage
Pride and Despite against us: This new gracious Prince of God's own
appointing, Christ Jesus, was so far from requiring any such villainous Homage,
that himself became a Sacrifice for us, making himself at once one Grand and
All-sufficient (...) or Piamen to expiate the Sins of all Mankind, and so to
reconcile the World to God.

CHAP. XV. 1. An Objection concerning the miraculous Eclipse of the Sun at our
Savior's Passion, from its not being recorded in other Historians. 2. Answer,
That this wonderful Accident might as well be omitted be several Historians as
those of like wonderfulness; as for example the darkness of the Sun about
Julius Caesar's death. 3. Further, That there are far greater Reasons that
Historians should omit the darkness of the Sun at Christ's Passion then that at
the death of Julius Caesar. 4. That Grotius ventures to affirm this Eclipse
recorded in Pagan writers; and that Tertullian appealed to their Records. 5.
That the Text does not implie that it was an universal Eclipse, whereby the
History becomes free from all their Cavils. 6. Apollonius his Arraignment
before Domitian, with the ridiculousness of his grave Exhortations to Damis and
Demetrius to suffer for Philosophy.
1. WE have seen how Reasonable the History of Christ's Passion is; neither do
I know any thing that may lessen the Credibility of it, unless it be the
miraculous Eclipse of the Sun. Not that the Eclipse it self is so incredible,
but that it may seem incredible that so wonderful and so generally-conspicuous
an Accident of Nature should be recorded by none but by the Evangelists
themselves, Learning and Civility in those times so universally flourishing,
and there being no want of Historians to recount such things. This Objection
makes a great show at first; but you will see at length it will come to nothing.

2. First therefore let us set down the like Accidents to this that have fallen
out, and been as conspicuous to all the World: As that Sensible obscurity and
languor of the Sun in Julius Caesar's time, as also in Iustinian's time, and
lastly that Bloody dullness in the face of that Luminary for four days together
in the times of Carolus Quintus; things as remarkable in themselves as this
Eclipse at the Passion of Christ, and all it is likely proceeding from like
Causes. But the moderating of these Causes so, as that the Effect should take
place just at the time of our Savior's suffering, this was miraculous and by
special Providence. Now I demand for that First observation of the Sun, that
endured a whole year together, and was a concomitant of Julius Caesar's death;
when there were so many Historians in the after-Age till Suetonius his time,
viz. Livy, Strabo, Valerius, Maximus, Velleius Paterculus, Philo, Mela,
Plinius, Josephus, Plutarchus, Tacitus, how many of these recorded so great a
Prodigy. I do not find any Historian alleged but Pliny, who likely had it
from Ovid and Virgil, who after the manner of Poets pleasing themselves to
record strange things and to magnify great men, recite this Accident in Nature
in honor to Julius Caesar. Ille etiam extincto miseratus Caesare Romam,
Cum caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit,
Impiaque aeternam timuerunt secula noctem.
At Caesar's death he Rome compassioned,
In rusty hue hiding his shining head,
And put the guilty world into a fright
They were surpised with an eternal Night.
As Virgil has it in his Georgicks. Lib. 1.
And Ovid in his Metamorphoses to the same purpose, -- Solis quoque tristis
imago
Lurida sollicitis praebebat lumina terris. Lib. 15.

The Sun's sad image Caesar's fate to moan
With lurid light to anxious Mortals shone.
Which condition of the Sun, Pliny writes, lasted for a whole year. The like
Cedrenus reports to have happened in Iustinian's time. But there were nigh
twenty considerable Writers from Iustinian's time till Georgius Cedrenus. I
would therefore remit the Caviller to peruse these Historians, and observe in
how few of them this Prodigy in Iustinian's days is recorded. The same may be
said of what happened under Carolus Quintus. And then if he deprehend that so
remarkable Accidents be taken no notice of by many Writers that had a capacity
of recording them, I would have him also to consider that such like Reasons
that might cause them to omit the writing of those Prodigies, might also fit
those that omitted the setting that down that happened at our Savior's
Passion; and to rest contented that he finds it recorded by them that are most
concerned in it, that is, Three of his faithful followers, Matthew, Mark and
Luke, who bearing a truer respect to Christ's person then those flatterers of
Princes, Virgil and Ovid, to the deceased Julius, recorded this Miraculous
Eclipse to his Honor, as they did that long obscuration of the Sun to the
honor of their adored Caesar.

3. Neither is this all; for I may further add, That there are greater Reasons
why all, saving Christ's own Followers, should omit the recording that Eclipse
at his Passion, then that those Writers we speak of should the continual
obscurity of the Sun, that was to be observed for a whole year together about
the Exitus of Julius Caesar's Reign. For the noveltie of that in Caesar's time
might make the greater impression upon men's Spirits; whenas that obscurity of
the Sun at our Savior's suffering (though I doubt not but that it was so great
as that the Stars appeared through the defect of the Sun's light, so as they
may do in a Summers night) might well be neglected by the Nations of the
World, they having noted already that the Light of the Sun is obnoxious to such
obfuscations and dulnesses, and that for so long a time together. So that
although this lurid deadness of the Sun at the Passion was far greater then
that at Caesar's death; yet it being shorter by far, as lasting not above three
hours, it might seem to them less considerable; especially they not knowing
what was the meaning of it. And when they did, they had the less encouragement
to record it, it making for a new Religion contrary to their own. So that even
that Consideration may seem a sufficient Reason why this notable Accident may
be pretermitted by both Jewish and Heathenish Historians.

4. But Grotius out of Phlegon a Pagan writer ventures to answer more
point blank, namely, That the said Author does affirm that in the fourth year
of the two hundred and second Olympiad, (which is the year wherein Christ
suffered according to the usual opinion) there was the greatest Eclipse that
ever was known; night surprising men at the sixth hour of the day (which is at
noon,) and being so dark that the Stars were seen at that time of the day. He
mentions also therewith a mighty Earthquake in Bithynia, and how the greatest
part of Nicaea was ruined thereby. To this purpose is there also recited out of
another Pagan writer by Eusebius; whom Grotius discovers to be one Thallus.
Which Testimonies will stand good till the Opposer of the Truth of the
Narrations of the Evangelists shall either prove infallibly by Chronology, That
Christ did not suffer that year, or else by Astronomical calculation, That
there was a natural Eclipse of the Sun in that year he suffered, so horrid and
dismal as Phlegon describes. But Phlegon confining it to no place, intimates it
was Universal, and therefore not Natural. Tertullian also speaking to the
Pagans concerning this matter, appeals to their own Records concerning the
Truth thereof. And for my own part, I make no question but that it is true in
the very sense we speak of, viz. that it was an Universal Eclipse, whatever
becomes of the testimonies of Thallus and Phlegon.

5. But being the Text does not necessarily implie thus much, we may with
Calvin restrain it to Iudaea, God miraculously intercepting the light of the
Sun from those parts only, by the interposition of some conspissated body, or
by raising a black caliginous mist, such as he caused in the land of Egypt.
For the Scripture will suit well enough with any of these senses; so little of
any just occasion is there left to the Caviller and Infidel. So that the
Credibilitie and Reasonableness of the chief Circumstances of our Savior's
Passion is sufficiently cleared.

6. To which we have nothing to parallel in Apollonius his life, except it be
his Arraignment before Domitian: Where Domitian quitting him from the charge
that was laid against him, yet he for ostentation sake, to show what an expert
Magician he was, vanishes in the midst of the Court, to the great amazement of
the Emperor and the rest of his Judges. But in the mean time he having such a
trick of Legerdemain as this, to keep himself from peril; it makes all his
magnanimous Precepts concerning the Contempt of Death that he so gravely
imparts to Damis and Demetrius (encouraging them to suffer any thing for the
cause of Philosophy) hypocritical and ridiculous. So whifling and ludicrous is
every thing of Apollonius, if compared with that solid Truth and real
Excellency that is discoverable in Christ.

BOOK V.
CHAP. I. 1. Of the Resurrection of Christ, and how much his eye was fixed upon
that Event. 2. The chief Importance of Christ's Resurrection. 3. The World
excited by the Miracles of Christ the more narrowly to consider the Divine
quality of his Person, whom the more they looked upon, the more they disliked.
4. Whence they misinterpreted and eluded all the force and conviction of all
his Miracles. 5. Gods upbraiding of the World with their gross Ignorance by the
raising him from the dead whom they thus vilified and contemned. 6. Christ's
Resurrection an assurance of man's Immortality.
1. WE have done with the Passion of Christ: we come now to his Resurrection
and Ascension; and First his Resurrection. Concerning which it is observable,
That our Savior's eye was fixed upon nothing more then it; He prophesying of
it in his lifetime under that Parable of destroying the Temple, John 2.19.
and then raising of it up within three days, meaning the Temple of his body;
as also in the application of that strange Accident that befell Jonas: Matthew.
12.39, 40.
For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so the son
of man should be three days and three nights in the belly of he Earth. He
deferred also the divulging of his Transfiguration in the mount till his
Resurrection, as not being of any such efficacy to beget Faith in the people,
till this also had happened unto him.

2. Now the grand importance of this so wonderful an Accident consists chiefly
in these Three things.

First, In that it is a very eminent Triumph of the Divine life in the Person
of Christ. Secondly, In that it is so plain an assurance of a blessed
Immortality. And Thirdly, In that it is so sure a Seal and so clear a
Conviction of the truth and warrantableness of all the Miracles Christ did in
his lifetime.
3. That our Savior Christ was the most illustrious Example of the Divine life
that ever appeared in the world, cannot be denied by any but such as are
blind, and have no eyes to behold that kind of splendor. But that the
judgment of the world might be the more notoriously baffled, God assisted this
Divine worth with many strange Miracles, that they might more fixedly and
considerately contemplate this so holy and lovely a person. But the more it
seems they looked upon him, the more they disliked him, the whole World being
so deeply lapsed into the Animal life, (the Jews themselves not exc^pted,) that
they had no knowledge nor relish of the Divine. Nay, they had an Antipathy
against him, Wisdom, chap. 2.14, 15.
as the wise man expresses it, He is grievous unto us even to behold, His life
is not like unto other men's, his ways are of another fashion: He was made to
reprove our thoughts.

4. Wherefore they having so settled an hatred against him, all the Miracles
that he did, or whatsoever happened miraculously unto him, did but set a more
venomous edge of their spleen against him. From whence it was easy for them to
misinterpret and elude every thing, imputing his casting out Devils to a
contract with Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils; The Testimony from Heaven,
That he was the Son of God, to the delusion of evil Spirits that would lapse
them into Idolatry; His feeding the multitudes in the Wilderness, to Witchcraft
and Sorcecery; and his raising of men from the dead, to the nature of some
Lethargical or obstupifying disease, that may seem to make a man devoid of life
for four days together. The Eclipse of the Sun indeed was a very strange
thing, if the darkness was in the Sun it self: but they might remember, at
least from the relations of others, that it was strangely obscured for a whole
year together about the death of Julius Caesar, and so interpret this at the
Passion as a mere casual coincidence of things; or that some delusive Spirits
intercepted the light of the Sun in favor of the great Magician whom they
thought just to crucify betwixt those other two Malefactors.

5. But he whom they numbered amongst the transgressors, and took to be the
vilest of men, because he was not recommended by any thing that the Animal life
likes and applauds, (as Nobleness of Birth, the power of popular Eloquence,
Honor, Wealth, Authority, high Education, Beauty, Courtship, Pleasantness of
Conversation, and the like;) he is, I say, notwithstanding this general
contempt from men, very highly prized by him who is the infallible Judge, whose
ways are not as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts; But that he might
conform our apprehensions to his own, raised Jesus Christ from the dead,
bringing that passive, contemptible Divinity that lodged in him into a deserved
victory and triumph; exprobrating to the blind world the ignorance of that Life
that is most dear and precious to himself; making him alive whom they
maliciously killed, and preparing a way to an universal Homage for him, who was
universally scorned and became (...), the offscouring of all, though his
Spirit, Life and Nature was of more worth then all the things of the World
beside.

6. Nor is this Resurrection of Christ only a particular honor and high
Testimony given to the person of Christ, who was so splendid an Habitation of
the Divine life; but it is also an assurance of a blessed Immortality to all
those that will adventure to follow his Example, that their labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord. 1 Cor. 15.58.
And therefore he is not said here to rise alone; but in token of what a
general concernment his Resurrection was, the Monuments of some lately-deceased
Souls flew open, and themselves appeared to several in the Holy City. Which
things were a palpable Prohetical prefiguration of that blessed Immortality
that Christ has purchased for all men that believe in him and obey him.

CHAP. II. 1. The last End of Christ's Resurrection, the Confirmation of his
whole Ministry. 2. How it could be that those chief Priests and Rulers that
hired the Soldiers to give out, that the Disciples of Christ stole his body
away, were not rather converted to believe he was the Messiah. 3. How it can be
evinced that Christ did really rise from the dead; and that it was not the
delusion of the some deceitful Demons. 4. The first and second Answer. 5. The
third Answer. 6. the fourth Answer. 7. The fifth Answer. 8. The sixth and last
Answer. 9. That his appearing and disappearing at pleasure after his
Resurrection is no argument but that he was risen with the same Body that was
laid in the grave.
1. THE last End of Christ's Resurrection is the Confirmation of his whole
Ministry. For assuredly the Jews dealt with him as with some Magician and
Impostour, who though he did very strange things whilst he lived, yet if he
were once judicially tried, condemned and put to death, they did not make any
question but that it would be with him as with other Malefactors, the trouble
of him would end with his life; as is usually observed in matters of this kind:
otherwise it would be a great flaw in Providence, and the generations of men
would not be able to subsist for the insolences of Witches and Sorcerers. But
God thus extraordinarily and miraculously interposing his power, in raising
Jesus from the dead, gave the most certain and most confounding Testimony
against the malicious cruelty of the Jews (if we may call that Malice which
the love and Candor of Christ in the midst of his bitter sufferings named only
Ignorance) that possibly could be given. For their judicial proceedings are
hereby not only in an extraordinary way made suspicable and taxed of injustice,
but by such a miraculous means, that it is manifest that none other but God
himself is their Accuser, as well as the Acquitter of the innocent whom they
put to death, and did so thoroughly martyr, that none but the hand of God could
recover him to life. The same therefore of so notable an Accident the chief of
the Jews very well knowing, and that it would, if believed, demonstrate that
all he did or said before in his lifetime was right, and from an undeniable
principle; that the people might not receive him for their Messiah now, whom
three days ago they had crucified; hired the Soldiers that watched his
Monument, to tell abroad that his Disciples stole him away by night while they
were asleep.

2. But here happily some may demand, how it came to pass that these chief
Priests and Rulers, being so punctually informed by the Soldiers (which
watched the sepulcher of Christ) that he was risen from the dead, were not
converted to the Faith themselves, and convinced that Jesus was indeed the
expected Messiah. But we may very well conceive, that what might prove very
effectual to move others to believe in Christ, might yet take no hold upon
them; Partly because they were further engaged in this bloody and direful
Tragedy then others were; and having a deeper sense of honor and repute with
the people, then of the favor of God and love to the Truth, they might in a
desperate and obdurate condition venture, as the saying is, over shoes over
boots; being more willing to expose themselves to any thing, then to that shame
and reproach that would attend the acknowledgment of so heinous an error. And
then partly because though this Accident may seem very strange, yet they might
conceit that it was not above the power of Evil Spirits to perform, who might
change themselves into the luster of Angels of light, and therefore that it was
but a greater temptation upon them to try their faithfulness and obedience to
the Law of Moses. For what would not they think rather then find themselves
guilty of so grand ignorance, as not to know the promised Messiah when he came
into the World, and of so gross a crime as to be murderers of him that from
Heaven was declared the Son of God?

3. But out of this Solution you will say arises as great a Difficulty as the
former, viz. How we can be ascertained that Christ is really raised from the
dead: Because some delusive Spirits might open his Sepulcher, and carry him
away, and afterward appear in his shape, making use of his Body to show to
Thomas, or changing their own vehicles into the likeness of flesh and bones, so
that no man's sense may discover any difference. But to this many things may be
answered: and

4. First, That that which may be an Exception or Evasion in any case, is of
consequence in no case. For what does there at any time really happen, but Evil
Spirits have a power to imitate so near, that our Senses may well be deceived?

Secondly, Though they have this power in themselves, yet I deny that they can
exert it when, and so far as they please; and therefore God would not permit
them to add so irresistible credit to the whole Ministry of Christ by this last
Miracle, if Christ had not really been the Messiah: but he being the Messiah,
it was no delusion of theirs, but a real transaction by that hand that is
Omnipotent.

5. Thirdly, Every thing was exactly as if he had risen from the dead: the
Watch saw the Earthquake, and the stone rolled from the door of the Sepulcher
by an Angel from Heaven: Peter looked in and beheld the linen clothes lying by
themselves, the Body of Christ was missing there. He appeared to his Disciples
elsewhere, he discoursed with them, eat and drunk with them, they felt his
flesh, and put their very fingers into his wounds. What greater demonstration
then this could there be that he was really risen from the dead? And therefore
by men indifferent it must needs be acknowledged to be so, though there be a
possibility of being otherwise.

6. Fourthly, Those Miraculous things, either happening to him or done by him
while he was alive, they being so real as they were, must needs beget Faith in
the unprejudiced, that this Accident was real also. For is it so strange a
thing that that Divine power should raise Christ from the dead, that enabled
him to raise Lazarus out of the Grave when he had been four days buried? to
say nothing of his other Miracles, and those evident Testimonies from Heaven
that he was the Son of God. For though there was some room left for the
shuffles and subterfuges of the blinded Jews; yet to those that are free and
piously disposed, the Resurrection of Christ compared with what either
supernaturally was done by him, or happened to him in his Life and at his
Passion, they do so bind and strengthen one another, that there is no place
left for misbelief.

7. Fifthly, Besides the Testimony of the Angels that told Mary Magdalen,
Ioanna and others, that Christ was risen, and that they did fondly to seek the
living amongst the dead, our Savior's own Prophecy concerning his rising the
third day could not but make the thing undoubtedly sure to his Disciples, and
all such as were concerned in it, and had believed on him before, whereby they
became zealous assertors and witnessers of it to the World.

8. Sixthly and lastly, All these things happening thus extraordinarily and
supernaturally to a person that professed himself the Messiah, See Book 7.
chap. 4.
at that very time that the Jewish Prophesies foretold the Messiah would come;
it is an unanswerable Demonstration that this was he, and that therefore all
things that he did, spoke, or happened unto him, were no vain Illusion, but
Reality and Truth.

9. Neither does his appearing and disappearing at pleasure, and coming in to
his Disciples when the doors were shut, at all weaken the truth of his
Resurrection and vital actuating that very Body that lay in the grave. For he
gave a Specimen of a wonderful power residing in him in his Transfiguration on
the Mount; and that he carried that about him then that was able to swallow up
mortality into life, though it was usually restreined as a light in a dark
lanthorn. His Divinity therefore with his inward exalted Humanity, I mean his
Soul, took hold again of His Body, and did vitally irradiate it, so that he was
as naturally united with it as any Angel is with his own Vehicle, or any Soul
of man or any other Animal with their Bodies. Nor was it any greater wonder
that Christ should rarifie his Body into a disappearing Tenuity, then that
Angels and Spirits condensate their Vehicles into the visibility and
palpability of a Terrestrial Body, the same Numerical Matter still remaining in
both.

CHAP. III. 1. The Ascension of Christ, and what a sure pledge it is of the
Soul's activity in a thinner Vehicle. 2. That the Soul's activity in this
Earthly Body is no just measure of what she can do out of it. 3. That the Life
of the Soul here is as a Dream in comparison of that life she is awakened unto
in her Celestial Vehicle. 4. The activity of the separate Soul upon the Vehicle
argued from her moving of the Spirits in the Body, and that no advantage
accrews therefrom to the wicked after death.
1. THere is no reasonable allegation therefore against the Resurrection of
Christ: And as Useful and Intelligible a Mystery is his Ascension. For we are
not less assured by his ascending into Heaven of the life and activity of the
Soul out of an organical terrestrial Body, then by his Resurrection of her
Immortality. For the body of Christ in his Ascension, though it left the earth
in all likelihood organized and terrestrially modified, yet passing through the
subtle Air and purer Ether, it cannot be conceived but that it assimilated it
self to the Regions through which it passed, and became at last perfectly
Celestial and Ethereal, whatsoever was Earthly or Feculent being absorp't or
swallowed up into pure Light and Glory.

2. Nor can it seem harsh to any that has well considered these things, that
the Soul freed from this Terrestrial dungeon should have so great power and
activity over a thinner Vehicle; the subtlety thereof in all likelihood
contributing much to this activity and vigor: Of which though she have but a
small spark at first, yet the power of the Mind being kindled therewith may,
as she pleases, convert her whole Vehicle into an Ethereal flame. For we are
no more to measure what she can do being rid of the fatal Entanglements of
this Earthly prison, by what she does in it, then we can of the prowess and
activity of some Captive Champion when he is set free, by what he does in
fetters and hard bondage; or of her own agility, reason and perspicacitie when
she is awake, by her stupidity and inconsistency of thoughts while she is
asleep.

3. For the whole life of man upon Earth day and night is but a Slumber and a
Dream in comparison of that awaking of the Soul that happens in the recovery of
her Ethereal or Celestial body: Which though it be (unless it please her
occasionally to mould it into any organized shape) one Simple and Uniform
Light, which we may call an Ethereal star, as Ficinus calls those of less
purity stellas aereas; yet all the more noble functions of life are better
performed in this Heavenly Body then in the Earthly, such as Intellection,
Volition, Imagination, Seeing, Hearing, and the like. The same may be said of
the Passions of the Mind, they being more pure, more pleasing and more delicate
then can possibly happen, or at least for any time continue with us, in this
life.

4. What I have affirmed of this Ethereal Body, this Uniform and Homogeneal
Orb of Light, cannot seem rashly spoken to them that understand the immediate
Organ of Sense in those Bodies we are now united with: Which I have already
intimated to be either the Animal Spirits or the Conarion, as unlikely a seat
of Sense as the Air or Ether, and either of these as unlikely to be
disobedient to the power of the Soul as the Animal Spirits now are in the state
of conjunction. See my Discourse Of the Immortality of the Soul, Book 2. chap.
8.
And therefore it being undeniable but that the Soul does move them some way in
the Body, I see no difficulty but in her releasement from the Body, she may be
able to act upon her Vehicle of like Tenuity with them, so as to mould and
transfigure it even as she pleases: that natural charm that lulled her Active
powers asleep while she was in the Body, loosing its force now she is out of
it. Which notwithstanding will prove no advantage to the wicked, they being
thereby awakened into a more eagre and sharp torment and more restless Hell.

CHAP. IV. 1. Christ's Session at the Right hand of God interpreted either
figuratively or properly. 2. That the proper sense implies no humane shape in
the Deity. 3. That though God be Infinite and every where, yet there may be a
Special presence of him in Heaven. 4. And that Christ may be conceived to sit
at the Right hand of that Presence, or Divine Shechina.
1. TO the Ascension of Christ we are to add his Session at the Right hand of
God, his (...), and his Intercession with God for his Church. And for the First
there is no difficulty therein, whether we understand the phrase Figuratively,
as Calvin seems to do, (For then by his Sitting at the Right hand of God
nothing else is signified, but that he is next to God in the administration of
his Kingdom, that he is as his Right hand to sway his Scepter over men and
Angels, to bruise the wicked as with a rod of Iron, and to receive the
righteous into favor;) or whether we understand it Properly, as some others
would have it to be understood. For there is no inconvenience to acknowledge
the Glorified body of Christ to be in humane shape, and that this organized
light will sit as steadily on an Ethereal throne, as a Body of flesh and bones
on a throne of Wood or Ivory.

2. Nor does that expression of the Right hand of God implie any absurdity in
it, as if God himself were an Essence also in Humane shape, and that he had a
Left hand as well as a Right, and the rest of the parts of the Body of a man.
For from the words of the Text, Mark 16.19.
(...), a man may as well prove that he has many Right hands as any at all:
which shows plainly that the Anthropomorphites have no ground for their fond
conceit from such passages of Scripture as these.

3. But yet though God be Infinite, and consequently every where at once,
nothing hinders but that there may be some special presence of him in one place
more then another, whither if a man had access, he may be truly said to
converse with God face to face. We will grant therefore a Divine Shechina and a
peculiar visible Glory of God which no creature can imitate residing in the
Heavens, which Presence he may manifest in many places at once if he please:
But wherever it discovers it self, it is a most certain and infallible sign
that God himself is in a special manner there. Which ineffable and unimitable
Glory is of this great consequence, that the holy Saints and Angels receive
commands from thence as from the very mouth of God, are recreated more by that
wonderful luster then we Mortals are by the light of the Sun, and that it is
an Oracle with whom they may consult, and receive answers of clear and
indubitable certitude, and do divine worship and honor to the external
Substance and visible Presence of the Deity.

4. At the Right side of this Glory might Christ in his humane shape be placed,
as at the Right hand of his Father that sent him into the world, to whom also
he prayed with his eyes lift up to Heaven, and to whom he said that he was to
return when he left the Earth, with whom also Steven saw him standing, and
comforting him at his Martyrdom: whether his Visive faculty was in a
wonderful and stupendous measure fortified to discern so distant an Object,
or whether that Object was not so distant as the false conceits of some vain
Philosophers would determine; For for my own part, I think that if the true
Philosophy were known and rightly understood, there would nothing more
facilitate the belief of Christianity then it.

CHAP. V. 1. The Apotheosis of Christ, or his Receiving of Divine Honor, freed
from all suspicion of Idolatry, forasmuch as Christ is God properly so called,
by his Real and Physical union with God. 2. The Real and Physical union of the
Soul of Christ with God being possible; sundry Reasons alleged to prove that
God did actually bring it to pass. 3. The vain Evasions of superficial
Allegorists noted. 4. Their ignorance evinced, and the Apotheosis of Christ
confirmed from the Immortality of the Soul and the political Government of the
other World. 5. That he that equalizes himself to Christ is ipso facto
discovered an Impostour and Lier.
1. THere is nothing therefore harsh or incongruous in the Session of Christ at
the Right hand of God the Father, the Mystery being fitly explained: His (...)
will be found as Reasonable, if rightly understood. By his (...) I mean his
Residence in Heaven, and his receiving of Divine Honor and adoration from the
Church. In which there can be nothing suspicable, unless there be any danger of
Idolatry there where he that is truly God is worshipped. The Sea Book 3. Chap.
3.
Apology of the Gentiles you have heard already, and how far guilty they were
of that miscarriage in the worshipping of Creatures under the pretense of their
being only more eminent manifestations of that One Eternal Deity which they did
adore. But the immediate Object of our worship is not simply a Creature, but
God properly so called; forasmuch as he is as Really and Physically united with
God as our Soul is with our Body. Now as a man is truly said to be a Body or a
Corporeal substance because of the real or physical union of his Soul with the
Body; so Christ is truly and properly said to be God, because his whole
Humanity is joined with God. This is a very easy and intelligible way of
conceiving this Mystery; neither does it implie any contradiction or
inconsistency in it, no more then is found in the natural Union of Soul and
Body; God being as able to find fitting means of really and vitally uniting the
Soul of the Messiah to himself, as of uniting an Humane Soul to a Terrestrial
Body.

2. Now this which was in the power of God to do, we may be the better
ascertained that he did do it, or is to do it some time, (For I will not
anticipate and fall upon the Third part of my Discourse, before I come at it,)
if we consider the Congruities thereof. I have recited to you Examples of the
Pagan Apotheoses, how they did Divine honor to men that lived amongst them,
and were considerable to their Generations for several benefactions and
gratifications of the Animal life, whether they were the improvers of their
pleasures or their profit, Lawgivers, successful Commanders in War, or happy
Inventours of some useful things to supply humane necessities. Hence it came
to pass that Venus, Mercurius, Zamolxis, Mars, Bacchus, Ceres and others were
deified by them. Now there being so transcendent an advantage to accrue to
Mankind by the coming of the Messiah into the World, and he being to suffer for
the Sins of the people, and so by his Death to vanquish the power of Death, and
to set open the gates of Heaven to all believers; that that strong, natural,
and at least pardonable propension in Mankind of exhibiting the highest honors
they can to their most Heroical benefactors might not be frustrated and seem
ever to be in vain; as also that the great humiliation and reproachful Passion
that the Messiah was to undergo might be largely compensated; and that that
which is most lovely of all things, and yet in the eyes of men most despicable,
I mean the Divine life, might be exalted, even in an outward Homage and
Worship, as high as ever the Animal life was, in the World, and that
warrantably and without any guilt of Idolatry: God, when he sends the Messiah
into the World, is so to communicate his own Nature to him, or so really and
physically to unite himself with him, that he may be a lawful Object of Divine
worship. Which he is, if not only by a Moral adhesion, or Political
institution, but by a Natural and Real union with the Divine (...), he truly
become the Son of God.

3. We see then upon what warrantable and rational grounds the Messiah is
exalted to so high a pitch of honor, God having made him supreme head over Men
and Angels: I speak of the very Person of Christ as well as his Nature. For the
shuffling and superficial Allegorist will acknowledge that the Divine Nature or
upright Being, as some of them call it, is above all. But that they are so shie
of taking any notice of the Person of Christ, is either out of ignorance in
their understanding, or out of a total misbelief of the History of Christ,
wherein is asserted the Existence of Angels and the Immortality of the Souls of
men.

4. Now if there be Angels, and if the Souls of men subsist and act out of
their Bodies, they must also (as I have already demonstrated in my preparative
Assertions) needs fall into Political order and government, and therefore must
have some Head over them: Which here the Scripture does plainly assert to be
Christ, who is the Captain of our Salvation for to assist, direct and encourage
all the Powers of the Kingdom of light to defend themselves and rescue others
out of the captivity of the Kingdom of darkness and Tyranny of Devil.

5. Wherefore if any man start up and pretend an Equality with Christ, he is
ipso facto convinced of ignorance in the Mystery of Godliness, and deprehended
to be an Impostour and a Liar; or he is happily a Beast and an Epicure, denying
the Immortality of the Soul, and thereupon building all his slights and
contempts of the Personal knowledge of our Savior; he deeming him as all men
else wholly Mortal, and therefore utterly to have perished above sixteen
hundred years ago.

CHAP. VI. 1. An objection against Christ's Sovereignty over Men and Angels,
from the meanness of the rank of Humane Spirits in comparison of the Angelical
Orders. 2. An Answer to the objection so far as it concerns the fallen Angels.
3. A further inforcement of the Objection concerning the unfallen Angels, with
an Answer thereto. 4. A further Answer from the incapacitie of an Angels being
a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. 5. And of being a fit Example of life to
men in the flesh. 6. That the capacities of Christ were so universal, that he
was the fittest to be made the Head or Sovereign over all the Intellectual
Orders. 7. Christ's Intercession: his fitness for that Office. 8. What things
in the Pagan Religion are rectified and completed in the Birth, Passion,
Ascension and Intercession of Christ.
1. BUT it may be further objected, That although it be very Reasonable that
the Angels and the Spirits of men, whether in the body or out of the body, be
reduced under some Political form of Government; yet it seems very incongruous
and disproportionable that some one of the lowest rank of all the Orders of
Rational Creatures should be made the Sovereign over all, over Angels and
Archangels, and all Principalities and Powers whatsoever, whether in Heaven or
in Earth.

2. But to this I answer, That though the Superior Orders of Intellectual
Beings may have far more strength and natural Understanding in them then Man;
yet the Humanity of Christ may not be inferior to them in Humility and an holy
adhesion to God, in Self-resignation, and Faith in him who is the Root of all
things, in Love also and dear Compassion over the whole Creation, and, in a
word, in whatever appertains to the Divine life. But as for the lapsed Angels,
let them be otherwise as cunning and knowing in all Arts and Subtilties of
Nature, let them be as powerful and as Gigantick as they will, even to the
overturning mountains and striking down steeples at a blow; yet Christ has
infinitely the preeminence of them in those Divine accomplishments I have
recited; nay, he has a Principle beyond them, removed above their Sphere, as
man has a Principle beyond Beasts. And therefore it is no more wonder that God
has constituted him Lord over these rebellious Titans, then that Man is made
superior to Lions, Elephants, Whales, and other mighty and monstrous Creatures.

3. But you will say, Though it seem just that the usurped Empire of the Devil be
taken from him, and given to Christ, yet there is no reason that the unfallen
Angels should be brought under his scepter, they being naturally of an higher
order then himself, and having forfeited nothing by rebellion or disobedience
to God: And therefore it had been more Reasonable for God to have united
himself Hypostatically (as they call it) with some Angel then with Humane
nature. But what art thou, O man, that pretendest to be so wise as to give laws
to God? may not he dispose of his own and of himself as he pleases? Besides,
there being so great a Revolt in the Angelical Orders, who tempted also Mankind
into their lapse, the pretermission of them all in the conferring of so great
an Honor as was conferred upon Christ, was but a just check and slight cast
upon all their Orders at once; the Angelical blood, as I may so say, being
tainted with Treason. Again, the revolt and rebellion of the Apostate Angels
being nothing else but a wild and boundless giving themselves up to the
pleasures and suggestions of the Animal life, and Christianity (as I have
already defined it) nothing else but a Triumph of the Divine life over the
Animal; this Triumph, Scorn and Insultation over the Animal life is more
exactly pursued, by how much in every place those things that seem of most
value to it are left out, as slighted and disregarded; and the whole Mystery of
the Recovery of the lapsed Creation to God performed by him who undertook it
without the false pomp of those needless circumtances of highness of Order,
Nobleness of Birth, worldly Authority, Strength and Beauty of body, Subtilty of
Wit, Knowledge of Nature, Plausibility of Eloquence, or whatsoever else seems
precious to the mere Natural or Animal Spirit. So that upon this very account
the Angels were to be excluded from this function.

4. But fourthly and lastly, If any Angel would have been competitour with our
Savior in this Honor, that question put to Zebedee's Children might well have
dashed him out of countenance in his competition: You know not what you ask:
Matthew. 20.22
can you drink of the cup that I am to drink of, and be baptized with the
Baptism that I am to be baptized with? that is, Can you undergo that
shameful and scornful death of the Cross? Certainly an Angel cannot. For if
he could be born into the World in Humane flesh, and suffer those agonies the
Soul of the Messiah did, this Angel were no Angel, but an Humane Soul. But
perhaps you will reply, that though an Angel cannot suffer death in an Humane
body, yet he is so capable of torment and punishment, that he may be made an
Expiation for the Sins of the World. But I demand how we that are so much
concerned in it shall know of that suffering. For the Transactions of men are a
spectacle to the Angels, but the Transactions of Angels are not discerned by
men by reason of the Tenuity of their Vehicles. But this suffering Angel would
have appeared on purpose: Yet how unsatisfactory and fantastical would this
have been conceived in comparison of the real and assured Passion of our
Savior Christ.

5. Besides, If an Angel had undertaken this office, he could not have been so
fit an Example of life to us as Christ, who was a man subject to the same
infirmities with our selves, and who really felt what belonged to the
imbecility of our natures. For the Passions of his Mind were no more abated
nor destroyed by his union with the Deity, then the Passibility of Matter is by
being united with a Soul. Wherefore Christ wading thus faithfully without sin
or blame throughout all the encumbrances of the Flesh, which are greater then
those that the Angelical Orders are liable unto, is a very concerning spectacle
of both Men and Angels: But what an Angel could do, would but very little
concern us men.

6. Wherefore he who was of so universal a capacity, as to be an Example of
Good and a Reprover of Evil to all the Orders of Intellectual Beings that are
pe^cable and mutable, and of so general a kindness and compassion to all
rational Souls, that he could die a most shameful and bitter death, to reduce
them from their rebellion and confederacy with the Kingdom of darkness, to
return to the Kingdom of God; this person, I say, whose influence is so great
upon all, is fit to be made Head over all, Matthew. 28. 18.
according as himself has declared, To me is given all power in Heaven and in
Earth. Whence it is plain that there is none save God himself above him, at
whose right hand he fits, and intercedes for his Church.

See Book 3. chapter 17. sect. 4.
7. Which is the last thing I propounded, His Intercession; upon which I need
make no stay, there being no difficulty at all in it, but a very great
congruity, and such as is incompetible to any Angel, as I have already
intimated. The Author to the Hebrews takes notice of it, Chap. 4. For we have
not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities;
Heb. 4.15.
but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Who therefore
must needs prove a very compassionate and potent Intercessour for us with his
Father, not only for forgiveness of sins, but for all needful supplies of
grace and assistance to his Church Militant here on Earth.

8. Thus we have seen how in the Birth, Passion, Ascension and Intercession of
Christ is comprehended a full and warrantable completion of those four notable
parts of the Pagan Religion which relates to their Heroes, to their Catharmata,
their Apotheoses, and Intercessions of their (...) or Dii Medioxumi. For what
they were naturally groping after and mistaken in, in these points, all that is
rectified here and made lawful and allowable, nay meritorious and effectual
for both present and future happiness, I mean in Christ Jesus; all businesses
betwixt God and us being to pass through his hands, if we look for grace and
success. Which accommodation contrived by the wisdom of God was of very great
virtue for the bringing of the Nations of the World to close with the Truth of
the Gospel, they being invited to that upon good grounds, which their blind
propensions carried them out to in a way of error and mistake

CHAP. VII. 1. That there is nothing in the History of Apollonius that can
properly answer: to Christ's Resurrection from the dead. 2. And that his
passage out of this life must go for his Ascension; concerning which reports
are various, but in general that it was likely he died not in his bed. 3. His
reception at the Temple of Diana Dictynna in Crete, and of his being called up
into Heaven by a Quire of Virgins singing in the Air. 4. The uncertainty of
the manner of Apollonius his leaving the World, argued out of Philostratus his
own Confession. 5. That if that at the Temple of Diana Dictynna was true, yet
it is no demonstration of any great worth in his Person. 6. That the Secrecy of
his departure out of this world might beget a suspicion in his admirers that he
went Body and Soul into Heaven. 7. Of a Statue of Apollonius that spoke, and of
his dictating verses to a young Philosopher at Tyana, concerning the
Immortality of the Soul: 8. Of his Ghost appearing to Aurelian the Emperor. 9.
Of Christ's appearing to Stephen at his martyrdom, and to Saul when he was
going to Damascus.
1. WE have spoken of the Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ; we will come to the Three last things we propounded, when we have
briefly considered what in Apollonius is parallel to Christ's Resurrection and
Ascension: For there is always some glance or other in his Life at the most
notable passages in our Savior's. But I can find nothing that must go for
Apollonius his Resurrection from the dead, but his escaping out of the hands of
Domitian: which danger was so great, that all men took him for a dead man. See
Book 4. Chap. 15. Sect. 6.
But what a whifling business it was and a mere piece of Magical ostentation, I
have already noted.

2. His real passage therefore out of this World must go for his Ascension, as
his escape out of that desperate danger for his Resurrection. But the reports
concerning his departure are various; some affirming that at a full Age, being
fourscore or an hundred year old, he died at Ephesus. But it seems not likely,
Philostratus professing that he had travailed the greatest part of the
habitable world to enquire of his Sepulcher, and that he could hear no news of
it any where. But so grave and divine a person as Apollonius was reputed, could
not fail to be honored with a very pompous Funeral and sumptuous Monument
wherever he happened to die, he being so famously known over all the World:
wherefore it is likely that he did not die, as they say, in his bed, but in some
solitude, either by a sudden surprizal of death, or on set purpose, as
Empedocles, who cast himself into the flames of Aetna, that he might be thought
what Apollonius professed himself before Domitian, an Immortal God.

(...).
3. Others report that having entered into the Temple of Minerva at Lindus in
Rhodes, he suddenly disappeared before the people, and went no man knows
whither. Others affirm that he left this mortal life in Crete, where
approaching the Temple of Diana Dictynna, the doors flew open of themselves, to
the admiration of the Keepers of the Temple: who suspected him for a
sacrilegious Enchanter, in that the fierce Mastives that kept the Treasury
fawned on him with more kindness and familiarity then on them that fed them.
Wherefore the Sextons bound Apollonius with fetters to secure the Treasury; but
about midnight he set himself free, and calling the guards by their names, that
they might not think he would steal away privately, he went to the door of the
Temple, which, as I said, opened of it self, and when he had entered in, shut of
it self again: Whereupon were heard voices from Heaven as it were of young
girls singing melodiously and chanting forth a Stanza to this sense, Come from
the Earth, come, leap hither up to Heaven, mount from the earth on high.

4. But concerning this History of his leaving of the World two things are
observable. First, that Philostratus does invalidate his Narration by varying
the story so much as he does: For he professing that he made it his business to
enquire of this matter, travailing most part of the habitable world for his
better satisfaction, and not determining which of these three reports is the
truest; it is a sign that he was not ascertained of the truth of any of them,
but that his end may be such as I at first intimated.

5. But suppose the last and most glorious of these Three stories was the
truest; yet Apollonius his credit is much obscured by parting thus in the
night, though we allow him a moonshine night for his voyage: For then the
highest Mystery (if it be not a mere forgery) that may be in it, is but thus
much; That these young girls, the Nymphs of Diana, called and carried away the
old Wizzard to the enjoyment of those disportments and pleasures that such
ludicrous Spirits, together with old Hags and others of the fraternity, use to
make with one another in far remote solitudes under some broad-spred Oak, or
on the top of some steep Mountain environed with woods and shady Trees, (which
Solemnity is called Ludus Dianae by the Ancients, as I have noted already out
of Mirandula:) where out of a special favor to him for the great service he
did the Powers of darkness, they might break his neck in a frolic from some
precipice, cracking the shell to enjoy the Kernel, or some more handsome way
or other uncase him of his wrinkled and loathed vestments of mortality; that so
being stripped more naked then when he appeared before the Tribunal of Domitian,
he might be entertained with the more loving embraces of the Officers of the
dark Kingdom, and receive the wages thought due to so faithful and
industrious a servant; which were but such, though it may be in an higher
degree, as other Magicians and Enchanters do receive. So vain, so frivolous and
vulgar are all things in the life of Apollonius, if compared with what is
recorded in the life of Christ.

6. But be his departure out of this world what way it will, it is likely that
the secrecy thereof conciliated much credit to his person; and by adding to
his Pagan zeal the spurious pretenses of Abstinence, Chastity, Contempt of the
World and other plausible shows of Morality, besides those Miracles (as a man
may call them) which he did by the assistance of the powers of the dark
Kingdom, he did not fail to be thought by some to have been carried Body and
Soul into Heaven, as Enoch and Elias were, and to have obtained an happy (...)
among the Gods. In confidence whereof they erected Statues to him here on
earth, as Philostratus relates, and particularly in Tyana the town where he was
born.

7. Grotius relates out of an Ecclesiastical Writer, that there was a Statue of
his that spoke, being actuated by some assistent Demon; but that his mouth was
soon stopped by the power of Christ and the preaching of the Gospel. He
dictated also certain Verses to a young Student of Philosophy in Tyana,
concerning the Immortality of the Soul, who had for some ten months together
earnestly prayed to him to resolve him of that point: which Verses he recited
to his fellow-students in a frantic posture, starting out of his sleep, and
averring Apollonius was there present, though none see him but himself: Which
would make a man think it was nothing else but the continuation of a confused
dream, which he completed betwixt sleep and waking; it being no rare thing for
men asleep to answer to more questions then his fellow-students put to this
young Philosopher.

8. But his real appearance to Aurelian the Emperor seems more probable. For
his forces, as Vopiscus writes, marching against Tyana, and the Citizens
shutting the gates of the Town against him, incensed the Emperor so, that he
made a rash vow that he would not leave one Dog alive in the City. But
Apollonius his Ghost appearing to him in his tent, and dehorting him from so
great a cruelty, and threatening him into a better mind, prevented the
mischief; so that the town being taken, he merrily interpreted his resolution
to the destruction of the dogs only, but strictly charged his Soldiers to
spare the Citizens. This story if it was not true, it was handsomely contrived,
both for the keeping up of the honor of the deified Apollonius, by making him
so seasonably deliver his native Town in so great an exigency, and also for the
saving of the Emperor's Credit with the Soldiers, that he might seem by the
Divine powers to be absolved from that rigid vow of giving the whole Town up to
the slaughter and plunder of the Soldiery.

9. These are the main things I have met with concerning Apollonius his manner
of leaving of the World, and the Effects of his supposed Divinity after he had
left it. But (besides the uncertainty and suspicability of the Story) it is
evident that they are very sorry and obscure indications thereof, if they be
compared to the evidences that are produced for the real (...) of Christ. For
Stephen while he was a stoning, to the great corroboration of his Spirit in his
cruel Martyrdom, saw the Heavens opened, Act. 7.56.
and Christ standing at the right hand of God in glory and great majesty. And
Paul, as he was going to Damascus to persecute the Disciples of Christ, was
struck off from his furious purpose by the glorious appearance of Christ from
Heaven: For there shone a very great light about him, and a voice was heard
from Heaven, Act. 9.4.
saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? etc. His fellow-travailers saw
also the coruscation of the light and were astonished, and heard the sound from
Heaven, though they understood not the meaning of it; they hearing it not so
articulately as he that was most concerned in it. Which are Two notable
demonstrations of the truth and legitimateness of Christ's Apotheosis, to which
there is nothing comparable in the story of Apollonius.

CHAP. VIII. 1. The use of this parallel hitherto of Christ and Apollonius. 2.
Mahomet, David George, H. Nicolas, high-pretending Prophets, brought upon the
stage, and the Author's Apology for so doing. 3. That a misbelief of the
History of Christ, and a dexterity in a moral Mythology thereof, are the
greatest Excellencies in David George and H. Nicolas. 4. That if they believed
there were any Miracles ever in the world, they ought to have given their
reasons why they believe not those that are recorded of Christ, and to have
undeceived the world by doing Miracles themselves to ratify their doctrine. 5.
If they believed there never were, nor ever will be any Miracles, they do
plainly betray themselves to be mere Atheists or Epicures. 6. The wicked plot
of Satan in this Sect in clothing their style with Scripture Language, though
they were worse Infidels then the very Heathen. 7. That the gross Infidelity of
these two Impostours would make a man suspect them rather to have been crafty
profane Cheats then honest through-crackt Enthusiasts. 8. That where Faith is
extinct, all the rapturous Exhortations to Virtue are justly suspected to
proceed rather from Complexion then any Divine principle.
1. WE have now stretched the Parallel as far as it will go, the line failing
on Apollonius his side: but so long as the matter would afford, we thought it
worth our pains to continue the Comparison, that the Excellency of our
Savior's Person might more clearly appear, so illustrious a Counterfeit
becoming his competitour; and that all the world may be satisfied, that it was
not chance or luck, but the incomparable Dignity of the Person of Christ, and
the weighty circumstances of Providence, that gave such ample testimony to him,
which made the world turn Christians rather then Apollonians, that is, made
them rather embrace the Gospel then continue in Paganism, though reformed
after the neatest and most refined manner by the noblest and gallantest
personage that ever was purely Pagan, the famous Apollonius.

2. But that he may have the field clear to himself, it will not be amiss to
digress a little further, and take notice of some few others that put in for an
Equality with him or a Superiority above him: and the chief of them are these
Three, Mahomet, David George, and the begodded man of Amsterdam; whom I dare
not venture to bring into the list without a Preface for pardon and excuse for
that which looks so like a piece of dishonor and disrespect to our blessed
Savior. But Duessa till unstripped will compare with Una; you know the story
in Spencer: and the bold ignorance of some does ordinarily make others take a
great deal of pains to explain and evince that which to any indifferent man is
usually true at first sight. Which kind of undertakings though they be no great
arguments of a man's wit, yet they are of his faithfulness and sincere love to
the Truth, which is far better.

3. First therefore to speak a little of the two latter, David George and him
of Amsterdam, those two mealy-mouthed Prophets that court the world to follow
them by so many mystical good-morrows, making the whole Gospel but as one
long-winded Fable, and themselves the only inspired and infallible Lights of
the World, because they fancy they have found the right the moral meaning of
a Fable.
(...) of it. So that their excellency seems to consist mainly in these Two
things; in a resolved infidelity or stout misbelief of the History of Christ so
far as it is Miraculous, and a dexterity in a moral Mythology thereof: whereby
the Gospel is utterly abrogated, and more fundamentally destroyed then the Law
of Moses is by the Gospel. For there was never any Christian so immodest as to
deny the Miracles of Moses, and so consequently the Truth of the History of the
Old Testament, which these do in the New; by which you may judge what they do
concerning the Old also. For it is most likely they believe there were never
any such things as Miracles done any where.

4. But if they believe there were Miracles, let them show their Reasons why
they distrust that what is recorded of our Savior is but a Fable, and let them
produce Miracles themselves to demonstrate to us that we believe a falsehood,
and that God has sent them upon such a special errand as they pretend. If they
can do no Miracles, God is no witness unto them, but they witness only of
themselves, and therefore are mere Fanatics and distempered Enthusiasts,
having nothing to drive them forwards to so bold and prodigious an enterprise
as the superannuating of Christianity and the abrogating of the office of the
Person of Christ, but the pride and fury of their own inflamed Spirits, and a
fantastical conceit of themselves, as if God had enlightened them more then
all the world besides.

5. If, according to the impulse of that Spirit of infidelity in them, they
conceive there never was nor ever will be any Miracles done in the world, but
that all things are carried according to the course of Nature; they betray
themselves in this, that they are so far from being extraordinarily
illuminated, that they are more blind and blockish then every ordinary man
that has the fear of God before his eyes; and that they are, what some suspect
them to be, a skulking kind of Epicureans and Atheists. But this I dare boldly
say, that strip their style of all Scripture-phrases, and all allusions to the
History of Christ and of the old Testament, you shall find nothing affirmed in
these Authors that will rise higher then the faith of Epicurus, Democritus or
Lucretius; they positively affirming nothing but what any ordinary moral Pagan
would affirm, nay not so much as the Better sort that held the Immortality of
the Soul.

6. But this is the wicked plot of the Devil in this Sect, that he clothes
their Style with Scripture Language, that they may as it were wear the colors
of the Kingdom of Light, and so covertly destroy or win the Christian
Soldiers from their allegiance to Christ, and lapse them into the bondage of
the dark Kingdom. So that that mighty prop of Faith in those precious promises
of the Gospel being taken away, their heart may fail them in the hour of
temptation, and they may be wrought by degrees into a full compliance with
every transitory pleasure which the natural man relishes, whether in riches,
honor or satisfaction of the flesh; and that upon whatever terms the world
shall propound it to them. So far therefore are those two forward fellows of
Delph and of Amsterdam from approving themselves so great lights of the World
as they pretend, that they are more dark in their Understanding then many of
the Heathen, who had some kind of glimpse of a world to come, believed the
Existence of Spirits and the power of Miracles.

7. Which Consideration would make a man think that they were not so much as
honest through-crackt Enthusiasts, but rather knowing Cheats and Impostours,
who being downright Epicureans, but of something a finer contexture, could
abuse their rapturous and Enthusiastic complexion to deceive the whole
Christian world, calling them off from Christ to an admiration of themselves:
which might be a considerable profit, as well as no small pleasure to them; and
under pretense of teaching them the Great Mystery of the Gospel, might
endeavor to undermine the Gospel by taking away the Substantial History of it,
wrapping up ordinary Precepts of life, such as any moral Pagan can give
concerning Virtue, in the mysterious dress of the Birth, Death, Resurrection
and Ascension of Christ; making the whole Mystery of Christianity nothing but a
finely-contrived Fable to set out some trivial moral Truths, such as are
acknowledged by almost every Atheist and Epicurean, and the practice whereof
reaches no further then the more advantageous managements of the pleasures and
enjoiments of this present life.

8. I do not deny but that the frequent use of Scriptural allusions and phrases
in their writings may raise in well-meaning men a sense beyond the feeling of
them that wrote them. But where Faith in Christ is extinct and of those
promises that he made so clearly known to the world by his Resurrection and
Ascension, I conceive that this is an infallible argument that the Divine life
is extinct also; and that it is from some impurity of Body, Soul or Spirits,
that a man sinks below that belief; and that his Virtues then are but
Complexional or merely Moral, such as are found in a cicurated Beast or some
better-natur'd Brute. This in all likelihood was the utmost of that Light which
was in those two grand Boasters; which compared with that in Christ, bears not
so much proportion as the flame of a stinking Lamp to the glorious luster of
the Sun: Insomuch that if they had not been both by themselves and others
either equalized to, or preferred before our Savior, I should not so much as
have vouchsafed to have made any Comparison betwixt them, or ever to have
mentioned them in my Writings.

CHAP. IX. 1. Mahomet far more orthodox in the main points of Religion then the
abovenamed Impostours. 2. The high pitch this pretended Prophet sets himself
at. His journey to Heaven, being waited upon by the Angel Gabriel. His Beast
Alborach, and of his being called to by two Women by the way, with the Angels
interpretation thereof. 3. His arrival at the Temple at Jerusalem, and the
reverence done to him there by all the Prophets and holy Messengers of God that
ever had been in the world. 4. The crafty political meaning of the Vision
hitherto. 5. Mahomet bearing himself upon the Angel Gabriel's hand, climbes up
to Heaven on a Ladder of Divine light. His passing through Seven Heavens, and
his commending of himself to Christ in the Seventh. 6. His salutation of his
Creator, with the stupendous circumstances thereof. 7. Five special favors
he received from God at that congress. 8. Of the natural wilyness in
Enthusiasts, and of their subtle pride where they would seem most humble. The
strange advantage of Enthusiasme with the rude multitude; 9. And the wonderful
success thereof in Mahomet. Other Enthusiasts as proud as Mahomet, but not so
successful, and why.
1. THE Third pretended Prophet and Head of the Nations is Mahomet: who though
he happily be not so moralized a man, or at least not so cautious, as these Two
we last spoke of, but more openly entangled in the pleasures of the Flesh, if
he be not belied, then these two Sadducees, were, and more able to enjoy
himself in those pleasures; yet (be it luck or choice or mere policy,) he seems
more orthodox in the grand points of Religion then they; he holding not only
the Existence of a God and of Angels and Spirits, but also the Immortality of
the Soul, and a solemn Judgment to come, wherein every man shall receive
according to what he has done in the flesh, whether it be good or evil.

2. The Success of this pretender has been so wonderfully great in the world,
that I think it not amiss to make somewhat a longer stay upon him then upon the
two former. We shall therefore take notice what pitch he sets himself at, and
after endeavor to level him and reduce him to his due place.

If we will then believe his own testimony, we shall find him so much favored
by God and the Heavenly Powers, as to be carried up into the highest Heavens,
at least by Vision. But he tells the story of himself as if it was a real
transaction, viz. That once about midnight the Angel Gabriel knocked at his
door, and told him that he should travail up to Heaven, for God Almighty would
speak with him. That the Angel brought along with him a milkuwhite Beast called
Alborach, something bigger then an Ass, but less then a Mule, which the Angel
bad Mahomet get upon: but the Beast kicking and refusing his Rider, the Angel
asked him why he did so, for he never did nor ever could receive upon his back
a better man then Mahomet. But Alborach answered, he would not admit him,
unless he would promise to procure him an entrance into Paradise: which Mahomet
promising, he got up, and the Angel led the Beast by the rains of the bridle,
till they were come to Jerusalem. Now as they were in their way upon their
journey, Mahomet heard the voice of a certain woman crying to him aloud,
Mahomet, Mahomet; but the Angel forbad him to answer: and when they had gone
further, another woman called him after the same manner; but the Angel
commanded him to hold his peace. And that afterward he asked the Angel what
these women were: to which the Angel replied, that the First was the
Promulgatress of the Jewish, the Second of the Christian law; and that if he
had answered to the first woman, all the Mauri had become Jews, if to the
second, Christians.

3. When they had come to the gate of the Temple at Jerusalem, that Mahomet
lighted off from his beast Alborach, and that he and the Angel went into the
Temple, where all the Prophets and Messengers of God that ever came into the
world met him and saluted him, saying, Joy to the Messenger and honorable
Prophet of God. Afterward waiting on him in great pomp to the Chapel Mihrab,
with much reverence they desired him that he would pray for them all: which
when he had done, they besought him also that he would be mindful of them when
he came into the presence of God. This done, they all went away, and Mahomet
and the Angel were left alone in the Temple.

4. By which crafty figment Mahomet assuredly meant nothing else but a
justification of himself for beginning a Third Sect, distinct from the
Religions of Jews and Christians, and the recommendation of himself to the
World as the greatest Prophet that ever yet appeared on earth. But we are not
come to the height of the Vision yet.

5. The Angel and Mahomet afterward coming out of the Temple, found a Ladder
made of Divine light which reached from Earth to Heaven, whereby they both,
Mahomet bearing himself upon the Angels hand, ascended up thither, passing
through seven Heavens; The first of pure Silver where Adam was, the second of
Gold where Noah, the third of a certain precious Gemme wherein was Abraham, the
fourth of Smaragdus wherein Joseph, the fifth of Adamant wherein Moses, the
sixth of Carbuncle wherein John the Baptist was found, and the seventh of
Celestial light wherein was Jesus Christ. All these venerable personages
welcomed Mahomet with loving salutations and kind embraces, and commended
themselves to him; but in the seventh Heaven Mahomet seems to commend himself
to Christ. The infinite numbers, monstrous figures and immense bigness of
Angels that he sets off his Vision by, for the greater astonishment of his
Followers, I thought good to omit, as being too vile and tedious, and he is not
got to his journies end yet.

6. The Angel Gabriel takes leave of him in this seventh heaven, telling him he
may go no further with him, but that God alone now must be his guide. Mahomet
therefore holding on his journie, was carried on the tops of incredible heights
and sublimities, wading through much water and deep snow, insomuch that he had
been quite spent, had not a voice refreshed him, saying, Mahomet, come hither
and salute thy Creator. He following therefore the sound of this voice, saw so
great a Light, that he was almost blinded therewith: For the Face of God was
covered with veiles of Celestial light seventy miles thick; to which he
approached within the space of two flight shot, but could not see the face of
God by reason of the hot gleames and glorious rays that streamed from those
veils of light. But God laid his hand upon him to refresh him, which felt
exceeding cold.

7. In this congress he received the Law from God and many wonderful secrets:
but he glories most of all that in this night he had conferred upon him Five
things which no man before or after ever had.

First, That God then made him the first and most chief Creature in Heaven and
in Earth. Secondly, That he should be the most excellent and most honorable
amongst the Sons of Adam at the day of Judgment. Thirdly, That he should be the
general Redeemer of the World. Fourthly, That he should have the knowledge of
all tongues. Fifthly and lastly, That he should be victorious, and carry away
the spoils of war.
8. We see how high Mahomet has mounted himself, and how much Political craft
is intermixed with this fanatical figment. For Enthusiastic madness, as it is
never disjoined from the highest kind of pride, even there where it seems to
be most humble, (For the attributing nothing to it self, but that all its
knowledge and power is immediately from God, is nothing else but an ostentation
of an higher kind of Power and more infallible way of knowledge then other
Mortals have, of which this Vision of Mahomet's is a lively Representation) so
it has very often strange and unexpected fetches of fraud and guile in it, such
as would not easily come into the mind of an ordinary sober man. Whereby an
Enthusiast amongst rude people, if he be not quite cracked, but be of an active
spirit, and have opportunity offered him, may do wonderful things in the
world, such as no sober man could ever atchieve or dare to attempt. Such is the
case of this Mahomet, who in the midst of his fanatical madness, wild mirth,
insatiable lust and ambition, Poetical raptures and Martial fury, laid the
foundation of that mighty Empire that all the world stands amazed at at this
day. The first step to which was that Enthusiastic frenzy that emboldened
him either to think or at least to profess himself The Last and Greatest
Prophet that ever God would send into the World. For the bold inculcation of
this, seconded with many occasional fetches of wit to save himself when his
impostures were discovered, carried the business successfully with that rude
nation he had to deal with.

9. As for that Pride that accompanies Fanatical madness, I must confess there
were others had their minds set as high on that rack as he, I mean David
George, he of Amsterdam, the Peruvian Doctor, and others who affected the same
Title and Office with him, and it may be being more thoroughly mad (at least
some of them) did more firmly believe themselves to be That great Prophet God
would send into the world then Mahomet did. But Mahomet having a more
governable Enthusiasm in him, and a more Martial and Political Spirit, and,
what is chiefest of all, better opportunity of playing his game, as having to
deal with rude and illiterate people; his success did not only exceed theirs,
but proved so admirable, as it might have become a True Prophet indeed.

CHAP. X. 1. That Mahomet was no true Prophet, discovered from his cruel and
bloody Precepts. 2. From his insatiable Lust. 3. From his wildeness of Phansy,
and Ignorance in things. What may possibly be the meaning of the black speck
taken out of his Heart by the Angel Gabriel. 4. His pretense to Miracles; as
his being overshadowed with a cloud, when he drove his Masters Mules. 5. A
stock of a Tree cleaving it self to give way to the stumbling Prophet. The
cluttering of Trees together to keep off the Sun from him, as also his dividing
of the Moon. 6. The matters hitherto recited concerning Mahomet taken out of
Johannes Andreas the Son of Abdalla a Mahometane Priest, a grave person and
serious Christian.
1. BUT. that he was not a true Prophet, but a mere Political Enthusiast of a
vafrous and versatil wit, with a little smack of cracktness and Lunacy, is very
deprehensible as well from his Immorality as his Ignorance of things, and the
Wildness of his Phansy. I shall give some few Instances of each. And to the
First I refer his Cruelty, in giving Laws to butcher all men that would not
presently turn to his Religion. Which Precept is set down in the Alcoran, as
also in Zuna, Occidite homines, quousque omnes Mauri fiant. And that they may
act this Tragedy more zealously, and not be afraid of being killed themselves,
he promised them so great a joy in that death (besides their speedy entrance
into Paradise, and feasting it there with their Creator) that they would even
willingly leave Paradise, and come again into the flesh to be capable again of
so great joy as that kind of Death affords them.

2. Besides that he was thus Cruel, he was also insatiably Venereous, as may be
gathered by several acts of his; as his taking away his servant Zeydin's wife
from him, whenas himself had no less then nine at home already of his own, and
Zeydin but this one. In the book Azear and Assameil he is said to have fifteen
wives, and extolled for his virility in that he had to do with them all in one
hour. He committed Adultery also with one Marina, a Jewish girl, which was
given him of fifteen years of age; and being caught in the act by Axa and
Hafeza the two chiefest of his wives, and chid for it, he swore to them he
would never meddle with her again: but his Lust being stronger then the
obligation of an oath, his two wives found him at that unlawful game once
more: whereupon Mahomet enlarged the Laws of Matrimony, to save his own credit,
and made it lawful for all his followers to have to do with their
maidservants. He is said also when he had already seven wives, to have married
that Axa at six years of Age, and to have lain with her when she was but eight
years old. Finally at last he set no bounds to his lust, but taught the people
he might lie with whom he would, though he kept them within a certain stint:
whereby he was not so kind as See Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, sect. 34. art. 9.
David George, that permitted this freedom to all his followers as well as to
himself.

3. His Wildness of Phansy and Ignorance in things is evident in several
passages; as his making Mary the Mother of Jesus, the Sister of Moses and
Aaron; in asserting the Stars to be hung in golden chains, and that the biggest
of them are no bigger then a great mountain; in affirming that God has
established the Earth on a See Johan. Andr. Confus. Secta Mahometanae, cap. 5.
Bulls horn, and that the shaking of his head is the cause of Earthquakes. This
Mahomet delivers in the Book Zuna: where also he teaches how when a man is
buried, two black Angels come unto him, and force him to raise himself on his
knees, and to put on his Soul upon the outside of his Body as a shirt or
surplice; which done, they examine him whether he believe in the Law of
Mahomet, with a deal of other stuff to that purpose. That also is a wonderful
fine fiction of his, That when he was four year old, the Angel Gabriel took him
by the hand, and led him behind a Hill, and there with a sharp rasor cut up
his breast, and took out his Heart, which having cleansed of a black speck, he
after put it in again. But it is evident from the effect, that the Angel did
not use his incision-knife for the best advantage for preventing of those so
many and so enormous acts of Adultery which Mahomet was famous for: or it may
be the meaning is, that that black speck being taken out, he was then
impeccable, I mean, in that Fanatic sense, that do what he would, he could
not sin, no not though he lay with his own Mother or murdered his Father; a
wild conceit of some Enthusiasts of these days.

4. It would be an endless labor to record all the Follies of this Prophet,
the most judicious whereof is his Pretense to Miracles. For he that has neither
Miracles nor can feign any, what face has he to profess himself a Prophet? The
first Miracle he pretends to we have mentioned already, which was the cleansing
of his Heart of the black spot, which makes men obnoxious to be assaulted by
the Devil, as the Mahometans conceive.

The second happened when he was seventeen years old, when a Cloud like a
Canopy kept over his head in an hot day, as he travailed with his masters
Camels. To these you may add his being saluted by an Angel in the cave, and
spoken to by Stones and Trees and brute Creatures, with this compellation,
Hail MAHOMET, the Messenger of God, as also the weeping of a dry trunk of a
Palm Tree at his departure and exile from Mecha.

5. But the Three most notable Miracles are still behind. The First whereof is
the cleaving of the stock of a Tree by Mahomet's stumbling at it, as he was
walking with his eyes devoutly looking up unto Heaven. For the Tree clove of it
self, to give the holy Prophet passage; but when he was gone by, presently grew
together again.

The Second is the cluttering of Trees together to keep the Sun off from him,
and the retiring of them every one to his own place at his command. in Zuna,
Mahomet more particularly affirms, that on a day he doing the necessities of
Nature in an open place, he commanded two Trees to come to him to keep off the
heat of the Sun from him; which they did immediately, their roots being torn
out of the Earth: and that he commanding them to return, the Trees obeyed, and
were fastened into the Earth in their own place as before.

But the last and most notable Miracle, which equally argues his Ignorance of
Nature as well as the Wildness of his Fancy, is his dividing of the Moon into
two parts, and making one part go into one of his sleeves and the other into
the other, and both of them to come out at his neck, and then soadering of both
parts together, and so restoring her to the same place in Heaven from whence by
his prayer he made her to descend. Of which Miracles this is briefly to be
noted, That as some of them are not possible, so none of them that are, are
pretended to be done before witnesses; and that most of them are very foolish
and ridiculous.

6. These things are recorded by a very grave and pious person and a true and
sincere Christian, so far as I can discern, Johannes Andreas, the son and
successor of Abdalla a Mohammedan Priest, a man throughly-well skilled in the
Religion and Law of Mahomet, who after his conversion to Christianity wrote a
Book, and in my apprehension with a great deal of honesty and judgment,
concerning the Imposture of Mahometism; out of which I have recited what you
have heard, and might add much more both out of him and other Writers. But
this will suffice to demonstrate Mahomet to be such as I have characterized
him, and make us by such comparison as these the better understand, and the
more sensibly relish, the Sobriety, Decency, and unexceptionable Solidity of
our own Religion.

CHAP. XI. 1. Three main Consequences of Christ's Apotheosis. 2. of the Mission
of the Holy Ghost, and the Apostles power of doing Miracles. 3. The manner of
the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them at the day of Pentecost. 4. The
substantial Reasonableness of the circumstances of this Miracle. 5. The
Symbolical meaning of them. 6. What was meant by the rushing wind that filled
the whole house. 7. What by the fiery cloven tongues. 8. A recital of several
other Miracles done by or happening to the Apostles. 9. The Congruity and
Coherence of the whole History of the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles
argued from the Success.
1. AFter our something-long but needful Digression to view the false and
unsound ways that Mahomet, David George and his Fanatical fellow of Amsterdam
would lead men in, we return now to that faithful way and true guide Jesus
Christ, whose Resurrection, Ascension and Apotheosis we having passed through,
we shall now proceed to the Three last things we propounded, all which are very
natural and suitable Consequences of his Apotheosis, his sitting and ruling of
the world at the right hand of the Father: And they are these; His sending of
the Holy Ghost at the day of Pentecost, and enabling his Apostles and Disciples
to do Miracles: The great Success of their Endeavors in the World, they being
thus assisted by so Miraculous a power; And Christ's visible return into the
World, to judge the quick and the dead.

2. The First of these, which is The Mission of the Holy Ghost, and the
enabling of his Apostles to work Miracles, it was not only fitting to be
performed, as being first promised by Christ, while he was with them here on
Earth; but also needful to have been done, though it had not been promised,
that when they went out to preach the Gospel to the Nations, they might not
seem wholly ridiculous and contemptible in propounding such vain and incredible
things, (as they would seem to the World,) and such as had some kind of blemish
or reproach with them, recommending to them one for the Son of God whom the
Jews had crucified for a Malefactor betwixt two thieves. Certainly if an
extraordinary power had not assisted them, and they could not have done
something beyond Nature, they would have been laughed at and hissed out of
every place they came to. But having this supernatural assistance, both their
own Faith was the more firmly rooted thereby, they finding that Jesus approved
himself to the utmost to be all that with his Father which he professed himself
to be; and they were so exceedingly encouraged and emboldened through this
sensible presence of the Deity going along with them, that no dangers nor
affronts, no not the fear of death or torment, could hinder them from being
open witnesses to the World of all those things which they had seen and most
certainly knew concerning the crucified Jesus, the Son of God and Savior of
Mankind.

3. We have seen in general how requisite this Supernatural assistance was to
the Apostles; We shall now take notice in particular how congruous at least and
decorous the First appearance thereof was at the day of Pentecost. The Apostles
together with other Disciples being met in an upper room at Jerusalem, and
being all of one mind and of one faith and expectation of the promise of the
Spirit, at the abovenamed day of Pentecost, Acts 2.2, 3, 4.
of a sudden there came upon them a sound from Heaven, as of a mighty rushing
wind, which filled the house where they were sitting; and there appeared unto
them cloven Tongues, like as of Fire, which sat upon each of them: and they
all filled with the Holy Ghost began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit
gave them utterance.

4. Supposing a God, a Providence and the Ministry of Angels and Spirits, there
is not a jot of this impossible or incredible. But we shall also take notice of
the Congruity of circumstances, which are either for an handsome Symbolical
sense, or else for a more indispensable convenience; as I conceive the Day to
be, and their assembling thus together on this day of Pentecost in one place.
For their seeing what happened thus miraculously to every one of them is a
stronger confirmation of all their faiths, and they are the more sufficient
witnesses to all the World of what thus miraculously befell them. And the Day
of Pentecost was the most convenient time for this to happen, because of the
greater concurse of people on that day.

5. But it does not exclude that more Mystical and Symbolical sense of S.
Austine's; That as the written Law was given to the Jews on the fiftieth day
after the Passover, so the Law of the Spirit which was to be written in men's
hearts was thus wonderfully begun here on the same day, by the preaching of the
Apostles, on whom the Spirit descended in such an extraordinary manner. Nor
does that other sense concerning the Unity of place exclude that Moral
intimation of Grotius, Deus dona sua promisit unitati. That also of their being
seated in an upper room must signify Morally, or nothing considerable; for
else the more removed from the Earth, the never nearer to God, especially
within the smell of the Atmosphere. Which Philosophic contemplation Apollonius
pursues with a great deal of pomp and gravity, indoctrinating Damis, while they
were travailing on mount Caucasus, (which the neighbor Inhabitants looked upon
as the holy Mansion of the Gods, as other hills also are called (...) from that
opinion,) that a man is never the nearer the knowledge of Religion and Virtue,
if he were mounted upon the highest Athos, Olympus or all the Caucasus's in the
World, unless he contemplate religious and Divine matters, not so much in a
pure and subtle Air, as from an undeprav'd and sincere Spirit.

6. But that which is of the greatest significancy is the mighty rushing Wind
and the fiery cloven Tongues. The former whereof is an Emblem of the External
violence which God would do to the World in the introducing of the
acknowledgment of his Son into it. For without doubt those wonderful Miracles
that were done by the Apostles, beat so strongly upon the outward Senses of
men, that they were after a manner forcibly driven to acknowledge that the hand
of God was with them, and that the doctrine which they taught was true. The
knowledge whereof at last, with the fame of their Miracles, filled the whole
World, as that Sound from Heaven and mighty rushing Wind filled the whole house
where they sat. I am sure the chief Priests complained betimes that the
Apostles had filled all Jerusalem with their doctrines. Acts 5.28.


7. The latter, viz. the Fiery cloven Tongues; the fieriness of them intimates
the searching, penetrating, melting and purifying power of the Spirit; as their
being cloven or divided the effect of the living word which accompanied their
preaching, which we may better call (...), then the Stoics their meager
Reason. For this is that which is sharper then any two-edged sword, Hebr. 4.12.
dividing the very joints and marrow, and piercing to the inmost penetrals of
the heart, as may be observed at the preaching of Peter's Sermon. Or, not to be
altogether so Mystical or Spiritual, (...) these divided or cloven tongues may
be only an external symbol of that inward power given them to speak and
understand several Tongues, though they were never taught them. Which was a
gift of very sober and necessary use (as all the Miracles are that were done
either by Christ or his Apostles) they being to preach to men of several
Nations then sojourning at Jerusalem, and afterward to travail into several
Countries to convert men to the Faith.

8. This is a solid account of all the Circumstances of that great Miracle done
partly upon, and partly by the Apostles, after Christ's Ascension into Heaven:
Which Divine power ever after assisted them in all their travails and labors
in the Gospel, as you may see in the Acts. Where you shall find them not only
endued with this miraculous power themselves, but by Acts 8.15.
prayer and imposition of hands conferring it upon others for the benefit of
the Church: where you shall see them Acts 5.15.
healing the sick, making the Acts 3.6, 7.
lame to walk, Acts 9.40.
raising the dead, Acts 5.16.
casting out devils, and doing over again all the most considerable Miracles of
our Savior; and some which he never did, as the speaking with tongues, and
healing Acts 5.15.
by the mere shadow of their bodies, which seems more wonderful then by the
touching of the hem of Christ's garment. To which you may add what strangely
happened to them; as upon their prayers and devotions how the house Acts 4.31.
shaked under them, as in an Earthquake, through the sensible presence of the
Divine power attending them: Their being Acts 8.39.
transported through the Air by the hand of an Angel from one place to another:
Their being visited by Acts 5.19. and chapter 12. v. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Angels in prison, who opened the prison doors, and made the fetters fall off
from their bodies of their own accord: The Acts 6.15.
transfiguration of their countenances into an Angelical glory; and the Acts
7.55, 56. and chapter 9. ver. 3, 4.
appearance of Christ from Heaven to them in a splendor more bright and
radiant then the Sun at midday, as it happened to Paul as he was travailing to
Damascus. The Credibility of which things, as also of the Resurrection and
Miracles of Christ, the Success it self does plainly argue.

9. For it seems utterly impossible that Christ, a man cut short of all
accomplishments that are plausible to flesh and blood, being neither armed by
the power of Eloquence, the knowledge of Philosophy, the authority and honor
of the World, nor the advantages of Birth or Fortune; but on the contrary being
disadvantaged by leading a life and offering himself an example of manners that
are either scorned or hated by every natural man, who was still made more
odious and contemptible by his suffering a shameful death betwixt two gro^s
Malefactors; I say, if an high hand from Heaven had not carried on the affairs
of Christianity, that is, if Christ had not done some such Miracles himself as
are recorded, if he had not risen from the dead, ascended into Heaven, and
thence powered forth his Spirit upon the Apostles, and enabled them to do such
wonderful works as they did, See Book 7. chap. 13.
it had been utterly impossible that Christianity could have had any such
success in the world as we see it has at this day. So that the whole History of
Christ is very congruous and coherent, and such as according to the nature of
the thing ought to be whenever the Messiah was to come into the World.

CHAP. XII. 1. Three main Effects of Christ his sending the Paraclete, foretold
by himself, John 16. When the Paraclete shall come, etc. 2. Grotius his
Exposition upon the Text. 3. The Ground of his Exposition. 4. A brief
indication of the natural sense of the Text by the Author. 5. The Prophecy of
Christ fulfilled, and acknowledged not only by Christians but also Mahometans.
6. That the Substance of Mahometism is Moses and Christ. Their zealous
profession of One God. 7. Their acknowledgment of Miracles done by Christ and
his Apostles, and of the high privilege conferred upon Christ. 8. What
Advantage that portion of Christian Truth which they have embraced has on them,
and what hopes there are of their full conversion.
1. IT would be too tedious a business particularly to prosecute that ample
Success that the Passion, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ and his Sending the
Holy Ghost had in the World: but the most universal and farthest-spreading
Effects thereof we cannot pass by in silence; especially those Three which
himself foretells of, John 16. That when the Paraclete should come, he would
convince the world concerning Sin, Righteousness and Judgment.

Concerning Sin, because they believe not on me.

Concerning Righteousness, because I go to the Father, and you see me no more.

Concerning Judgment, because the Prince of this World is judged.

2. All which, as Grotius interprets the place in a Forensal sense, is of a
very large extension, and acknowledged as well by Turk as Christian. For that
learned Expositour makes Christ to send the Spirit as an Advocate to plead his
cause against the World, (and indeed (...) properly signifies so, and nothing
else) and thereby to convince the World, First, of that great Crime of
Infidelity, and of killing of their true Prophet, nay their expected Messiah.
This properly respects the Jews who crucified him: and they felt the Divine
vengeance for so heinous a fact, their City being sacked, their Temple
demolished, and themselves scattered and made underlings in all places of the
World.

Secondly, of the Equity and righteous dealing of the just God with Christ,
who, because he had suffered so wrongfully, made him a compensation, by making
him a partaker of his Heavenly glory for the reproach and injury he bore upon
the Earth.

Thirdly and lastly, of Justice betwixt party and party; and that therefore as
the Devil excited the Jews to put Christ to death, so by way of Retaliation
Christ should put the Devil out of his present dominion and rule in the world,
by the destruction of Idolatry and the worship of those Apostate Spirits:
though the (...) seems something lame here, the members being so heterogeneall
one to another.

2. But the Exposition will appear sufficiently ingenious for all that, if we
do but consider what he sets down for the ground of his interpretation; That
Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, (...), answer to the Hebrew (...). The first
(...) signifying publica judicia de criminibus; but the other two, privata
judicia, unum ex aequo and bono, which is (...), alterum certam ex lege
formulam habens, which is (...). Which assuredly comprehends such Laws as
concern the right of Possession as well as that of Retaliation, which Grotius
so specially aims at in his citing Levit. 24.20. The Devil therefore being a
mere usurper and having no right to the rule and dominion of the World, the
Action will lie against his Usurpation, and thus the Interpretation will be
unexceptionable. And that the action is of this kind is plain, in that Christ,
the Son of God, is heir of all things, as himself somewhere intimates, and the
Apostle also in plain terms Hebr. 1.2.
declares.

4. The sense therefore of the forecited Text in short is this, That the
Spirit, which is called the Paraclete or Advocate, when he comes should
convince the World of the Veracity of Christ, and the Infidelity and Cruelty of
the Jews that crucified him who was a true Prophet, neither Deceiver nor
deceived; and of the Equity of God that compensated his sufferings amongst the
Jews, by taking him to himself, and crowning him with immortal glory; and of
the Judgment of God against the Devil, John 16.11*
(...), that God has given sentence against him already that he shall be
ejected out of his usurped dominions, and that all the Pagan forms of worship
shall be abrogated and destroyed.

5. This the Paraclete or Spirit of God coming upon the Apostles and assisting
them and the Church so miraculously for many Ages, has with such undeniable
conviction made good, that not only all Christendom is assured thereof, but
that vast Empire of the Turks and all the Mahometans wherever dispersed in the
World. So that after a manner the whole Earth is filled with the belief
thereof: which I thought worth the taking notice of, that this Success may not
seem less ample then it is.

6. For though the Mahometans are not Christians but Pagans in too true a
sense, yet it is plain that much of the letter of their law is Moses and
Christ. And to the confusion of gross Idolatry and Polytheism they profess One
only God, Creator of Heaven and Earth; and their great stress of their
Religion lies upon this main Article, with which they are so transported, that
they spend a great deal of their time in their Mosco's in chanting out this one
Truth, See Chap. 16. Sect. 5. in the fifth-Trumpet Vision, where the Hypocrisy
of their zeal in this point is discovered.
La illa ilella, la illa ilella, that is, There is but one God, as Historians
relate. But this is no more then the Jews believe, nor upon so good grounds:
but they proceed further, as if they were ambitious to make out that broken
title that one gives them, who calls them Semichristianos, Half-christians.

7. For partly in their Alcoran, and partly in Zuna, it is recorded how Jesus
Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and so born of the Virgin Mary. That
the Gospel is the way, the light and salvation of men, and that they that obey
it not shall be damned. That Christ knew the very thoughts of men's hearts, that
he raised the dead, that he healed men of incurable diseases, See Johan. Andr.
Confus. Sectae Mahometanae, cap. 11.
that he gave sight to the blind, and made the dumb to speak. That the Apostles
of Christ, Matthew, Peter and Paul, healed one Habib Anaiar of the Leprosy at
Antioch, and raised the King's daughter from the dead; as also gave sight to a
child that was born blind. And lastly three Preeminences the Alcoran gives to
Christ, which it gives not to any other Prophet, to Abraham, Moses, no nor
Mahomet himself. The first is, That he was carried up to Heaven body and soul;
where it is expressly added in Zuna, that he shall return from thence to judge
the world with righteous judgment. The second, That he shall be called The Word
of God. The third, That he should be called The Holy Spirit of God. These
things you may read more at large in Johannes Andreas his Confusio Sectae
Mahometanae, as also in others; out of whom you may also add, that the Turks
have so venerable an esteem of S. John's Gospel, that they wear it next their
bodies as an amulet when they go to war to keep them from gunshot.

8. This I thought worth the noting, partly that that Honor which is due to
Christ may not be given to Mahomet, of whom the best that can be said is only
this, That he did not so utterly pervert and deprave the mystery of the Gospel
by either his ignorance, political tricks or fanatical humors and whimsies,
but that there was so much of the substance and virtue thereof left, as being
seconded with the dint of the Sword, was able enough to hew down the more See
Chap. 16. sect. 5. in the vision of the fifth Trumpet.
gross Heathenish Idolatry, chastise the disobedient and Hypocritical
Christians, and ruin the external dominion of the Devil in the World: and
partly that we may discern what great hopes there are that in due time, when
the chief scandals of Christendom are taken away, (they being so far prepared
already in their reverend opinion concerning our blessed Savior) the whole
Turkish Empire may of a sudden become true Christians; that which is vain and
false among them having no better prop then the foolish and idle Visions, false
pretended Miracles and groundless fables of a mere wily, phansifull and unclean
Impostour; whenas the pure Christian Religion comprehended in the Gospel is so
solid, sincere and rational, that no man that is master of his wits but may be
thoroughly satisfied concerning the truth thereof.

CHAP. XIII. 1. The Triumph of the Divine Life not so large hitherto as the
overthrow of the external Empire of the Devil. 2. Her conspicuous Eminency in
the Primitive times. 3. The real and cruel Martyrdoms of Christians under the
Ten Persecutions, a demonstration that their Resurrection is not an Allegory.
4. That to allegorize away that blessed Immortality promised in the Gospel is
the greatest blasphemy against Christ that can be imagined.
1. YOU see then how large the Success or Event of our Savior's coming into
the World is in reference to the external overthrow of the Kingdom of the
Prince of this World, that old Usurper over the sons of men. If you demand of
me how great the Triumph of the Divine Life has been in all this victory; I
must answer, I could wish that it was greater then it is, that it had been
larger and continued longer: but something has been done all this time that way
too.

2. For Faith in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, and a firm Belief of a Life
to come, and the Effect of this Faith which is the very nature and Spirit of
Christ dwelling in us, consisting of Purity, Humility and Charity, this sound
constitution was very much in the Church in the Primitive times, even then when
they had no succor nor support from the hands of men; nay when they were
cruelly handled by them: they choosing rather to be banished, imprisoned,
tortured and put to any manner of death, then to deny him who had redeemed them
with his most precious Blood, and had prepared a place of Eternal happiness for
them with himself in Heaven.

3. Here Faith and the Divine Life was very conspicuously victorious and
triumphant, in that in the eyes of all the world it set at naught all the cruel
malice of the Devil and the terror of death it self in the most ghastly vizard
he could put on; as you may see innumerable Examples in the Ten bloody
Persecutions under the Heathen Emperors. Which History must needs make a man
abominate such lightheaded and false-hearted Allegorists that would intercept
the Hopes of a future life by spirituallizing those passages in Scripture that
bear that sense into a present, Moral and Mystical interpretation; as if the
Gospel and the precious Promises therein contained reached no further then this
life we now live upon Earth.

4. Which is the highest reproach and blasphemy that can be invented against
Christ Jesus, as if he were rather a Betraier then a Savior of Mankind; and
that he was more thirsty after humane blood then those Indian Gods we have
spoken of, who were so lavish thereof in their sacrifices; and as if it were
not Love and dear Compassion toward us that made him lay down his life, but
hatred and a spightfull plot of making myriads of men to be massacred and
sacrificed out of affection to him that thus should betray them. Wherefore
whosoever interprets the New Testament so as to shuffle off the assurance of
Reward and Punishment after the death of the Body, is either an arrant Infidel
or horrid Blasphemer.

CHAP. XIV: 1. The Corruption of the Church upon the Christian Religion
becoming the Religion of the Empire. 2. That there did not cease then to be a
true and living Church, though hid in the Wilderness. 3. That though the Divine
life was much under, yet the Person of our Savior Christ, of the Virgin Mary,
etc. were very richly honored; 4. And the Apostles and Martyrs highly
complemented according to the ancient guize of the Pagan Ceremonies. 5. The
condition of Christianity since the general apostasy compared to that of Una
in the Desert amongst the Satyrs. 6. That though this has been the state of the
Church very long, it will not be so always; and while it is so, yet the real
enemies of Christ do lick the dust of his feet. 7. The mad work those Apes and
Satyrs make with the Christian Truth. 8. The great degeneracy of Christendom
from the Precepts and Example of Christ in their wars and bloodshed. 9. That
though Providence has connived at this Pagan Christianism for a while, he will
not fail to restore his Church to its pristine purity at the last. 10. The full
proof of which Conclusion is too voluminous for this place.
1. WE have given a light glance upon the condition of the Primitive Church
before Christianity became the Religion of the Empire: what change would be
wrought then, a man might discern out of the very causes. For whenas not only
the Fear of Persecution was taken away, but great Honors and outward
Advantages added to the Church, the very worst and most Atheistical of the
Pagans would be most forward to close with the Christian Religion; and if any
of the Heathen stood out, it is not unlikely but they were such as had most
conscience, though in an erroneous worship. So that the Net then drew up more
mud and dirt then good fishes. The garden of God which had before nothing else
but wholesome herbs and flowers, was all overrun with weeds. Or, if you will,
the true Church which was before as conspicuous as a City on an Hill, was now
hid and dispersed in the wide wilderness of the Roman Empire, which though it
bore the name of Christian, yet for life and manners was worse then Pagan.

2. But yet not to make things less considerable then they were; First, The
true Christian Church was, I say, but hid, not lost, as it fares at this very
day. For she is still hid in the Wilderness, and like that Voice in the
Wilderness complains and witnesses against the beastly, sensual and abominable
lives and salvage dealings in that part of the World which is called
Christendom. For there always were and still are in this great rude mass of
Christianity some that are truly regenerate and rightly formed by the hand of
God into the lovely image of Christ, who give witness of the loathsome and
detestable deviations of those that so impudently and imperiously boast
themselves to be the only Christians, when in truth they are not Christians at
all, that is, no true members of Christ, as having nothing at all of his
Spirit, as their works do evidently declare.

3. And Secondly, Though I must confess that the Divine life it self, as
communicable to the Church, is very much under the hatches since Christianity
and Political Interest went hand in hand; yet after the Church became so rich
and pompous, they have laid out their riches very much in honor not only to
our Savior, in whom the Divine Life dwelt in a transcendent manner, but to his
blessed Mother, to the holy Apostles and Martyrs, who were also great Examples
of it. And being that these generations were such that God could expect no
better of them, his Providence, I think, did wisely permit that they might be
so deeply engaged in their External homage to Christ and his most faithful
followers: that that might be fulfilled in some measure in the Martyrs also
which was prophesied concerning Christ, Isaiah 53.12.
Therefore I will divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong, because he has powered out his Soul unto death. And
therefore the Martyrs sharing so deeply in the sufferings of Christ, were
permitted also in a measure to partake of that glory and honor that is done to
great Princes and Emperors after their decease; to have Images and Temples
erected to their name. This makes me not so much wonder at that passage of
Providence which allowed so much virtue to the Bones of the Martyr Babylas once
Bishop of Antioch, as to stop the mouth of Apollo Daphneus, when Julian would
have enticed him to open it by many a fat Sacrifice: To say nothing of several
other memorable Miracles that were done by the Relics of Saints and Martyrs
in those times.

4. Hitherto therefore the Pagan World since they became Christians have been
very religiously complemental according to the ancient guize of Paganism,
devoutly cringing and courting with many sacred Rites and Ceremonies not only
Christ, but the blessed Virgin and all the holy Martyrs and Confessors, very
freely and forwardly bestowing upon them all external Reverence, consecrating
Chapels and Days to their honor and memories: So that the personal worship
of the Divine Life as it is seated in Christ, in the blessed Virgin, in this or
in that Saint or Martyr, is as punctually performed, as the worship of those
excellent dowries of the Animal Life in ancient Paganism, which they honored
in Belus, Bacchus, Ceres, Apollo, Venus and other Eminent persons amongst the
Heathens, who were great gratifiers of the natural life of man.

5. Methinks In his Fairy Queen, Book 1. Cant. 6.
Spencer's description of Una's Entertainment by Satyrs in the Desert, does
lively set out the condition of Christianity since the time that the Church of
a Garden became a Wilderness. They danced and frisk'd and played about her,
abounding with external homages and observances; but she could not inculcate
any thing of that Divine law of life that she was to impart to them. The
Representation is so lively, and the Verses so musical, that it will not be
tedious to recite some of the chief of them; as Stanza 11. where he makes the
Satyrs to lay aside their rudeness and roughness as much as they could, to
revive the dismayed Virgin after her great distress. Their frowning foreheads
with rough horns yclad,
And rustic horror all aside they lay,
And gently grenning, show a semblance glad
To comfort her, and fear to put away,
Their backward bent knees teach her humbly to obey.
And then again in the following Stanza, They, in compassion to her tender
youth,
And wonder to her beauty soverain,
Are won with pity and unwonted ruth,
And all prostrate upon the lowly Plain
Do kis her feet, and fawn on her with countenance fain.
13.
Their hearts she guesseth by their humble guise,
And yields her to extremity of time;
So from the ground she fearless does arise,
And walks forth without suspect of crime.
They all, as glad as Birds of joyous Prime,
Thence lead her forth, about her dancing round,
Shouting, and singing all a Shepherds rhyme,
And with green branches strowing all the ground,
Do worship her, as Queen with Olive girlond crowned.
14.
And all the way their merry pipes they sound,
That all the woods with double Echo ring,
And with their horned feet do wear the ground,
Leaping like wanton kids in pleasant Spring, etc.
But in all this alacrity and activity in their Ceremonies and complemental
observances, Una could beat nothing of the inward law of life into them, but
all was spent in an outward Idolatrous flattery, as the Poet complains Stanza
19. Glad of such luck, the luckless lucky maid
Did her content to please their feeble eyes,
And long time with that salvage people stayed,
To gather breath in many miseries:
During which time, her gentle wit she plies
To teach them Truth which worship her in vain,
And made her the Image of Idolatries.
But when their bootless zeal she did restrain
From her own worship, they her Ass would worship fain.


6. But though it has been thus so long, yet it seems incredible it should be
always so; and while it is as it is, yet the Divine life is in its personal
Triumph. And now the enemies of Christ even while they are such, (and such are
all unregenerate men, let them be called Christians never so loudly) do lick
the very dust of his feet, and they lout and ly prostrate to the names of those
men whose lives, if they were on the Earth again (they are so contrary to
theirs) they would unreconcilably hate, and scorn their persons for their
meanness, and tread them under feet; nay it may be with more shame and cruelty
then ever, make them suffer once again those bloody Martyrdomes.

7. So that it is an uncouth spectacle to consider what strange ridiculous work
these Satyrs, Monkyes and Baboons, (I mean the unregenerated Mass of Mankind,
who are enlivened with nothing but the mere Animal life) have made these many
hundred years in the Wilderness, with the most precious Truth of the Gospel;
what Sophistical knots and nooses, fruitless subtilties and niceties, what
gross contradictions and inconsistencies the Schoolmen and Polemical Divines
have filled the World with; what needless and burdensome Ceremonies, what
ensnaring new coined Articles, what setting up of self-flattering Sects and
Interests, what variously-carved Forms and newfangled Curiosities have been
contrived and shaped out by either Superstitious Churchmen or Carnal
Politicians.

8. But if there were nothing worse then this, though this be ill enough, the
Scene would seem only Comical in comparison: But at last the Ape cuts his own
throat with the shoomakers knife, and Christendom lies tumbling and wallowing,
I know not for how many Ages together, in its own blood. The reason of which
is, that in this long bustle for and great ostentation of an External Religion,
the inward life and Spirit of Christianity which consists in Humility, Charity
and Purity, is left out, and Pride, Lust and Covetousness are the first movers
in all our Actions: So that though we be called by the name of Christ, yet our
hearts and real services are grossly Pagan; we consecrating our very Souls with
all the Powers, Affections and Faculties of them to the worst-titled Deities of
the Heathen; and being strictly commanded by our Savior to love one another,
as it were in despite, to show what real Apostates we are to Paganism, rather
pour forth one another blood as a drink offering to Mars, then keep that
inviolable and indispensable Precept of his whom we profess to be our liege
Lord and Sovereign.

9. Thus has it pleased that ever-watchfull Eye of Providence to connive as it
were a while at this Pagan Christianisme, as well as he did in former Ages at
the ancient Paganism. But assuredly it will be better, and all the glorious
Predictions of the Prophets concerning Christ, even in this World will not end
in so tedious a Scene, where there is so little good, and such a flood of filth
and evil.

But the Spirit of the Lord will blow upon these dry bones, and actuate this
external form of Religion with life and power, and the scales will fall from
her eyes, and that load of scurf and ascititious foulness will fall from her
skin, and her flesh shall be as of a tender child, and she shall grow strong,
healthful and irreprehensibly lovely to look upon. When these things come to
pass, the Divine Life will be in her highest Triumph or exaltation upon earth;
and this excellent state of the Church will continue for a very considerable
time. Revel. 20. v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc.
But the wicked shall again assault the just, and Christ visibly returning to
judgment shall decide the controversy.

10. This is the truest and most faithful representation in general (so far as
my skill in Church History or Prophecies will reach) that I can make of that
Interval of time, betwixt Christ's pouring forth of the Holy Ghost on his
Apostles and his coming again to Judgment. But because it would be a
voluminous business more particularly to make good what I have asserted, and
that it is not so essential to the present purpose I have in hand, I hold it
not at all necessary to engage in any operose endeavors of demonstrating the
truth of the conclusion. I shall rather send him that doubts, to satisfy
himself in the perusing of the learned writings of that incomparable
Interpreter of Prophecies Mr. Joseph Mede: whose proceedings are with that care
and caution, with that clearness and strictness of reason, with that accuracy
of judgment and unparalled modesty and calmness, that the study and enquiry
into these matters, which had even grown odious and infamous by the wild and
ridiculous miscarriages of hot fanatic spirits, has in my apprehension gained
much credit and repute by the orderly and coherent methods and unexceptionable
ratiocinations of this grave and venerable Person. Upon whose account I am not
ashamed to profess, that I think it clear both out of Daniel and the Apocalypse
that the Scene of things Christendom will be in due time very much changed,
and that for the better.

And because there does nothing so much counterbalance the weight of Mr. Mede's
reasons as the authority and luster of that worthily-admired Name of the learned
Hugo Grotius, who has interpreted the Revelations to quite another sense; (the
ingenuities and prettinesses of whose expositions had almost imposed upon my
self to a belief that there might be some such sense also of the Revelation as
he drives at) to make all clear I shall take the pains of exhibiting both to
the view of the Reader. Who I hope will not take it ill that so pious, so
learned and judicious a person as Mr. Mede, and that in a matter to which he
may seem to be peculiarly selected and set apart to by God and Nature, to which
he mainly applied himself with all possible care, seriousness and devotion,
should see further then Hugo Grotius, who has an ample harvest of praise from
other performances, and who by reason of his Political emploiments could not be
so entirely vacant to the searching into so abstruse a Mystery.

CHAP. XV. 1. Grotius his reasons against Days signifying Years in the
Prophets, propounded and answered. 2. Demonstrations that Days do sometimes
signify so many Years. 3. Mr. Mede's opinion, That a new Systeme of Prophecies
from the first Epoch begins Chap. 10. v. 8. cleared and confirmed. 4. What is
meant by the Three days and an half that the Witnesses lie slain. 5. Of the
Beast out of the bottomless pit. 6. Of the First Resurrection. 7. The
conclusion of the matter in hand from the evident truth of Mr. Mede's
Synchronisms.
1. THE strongest Presumption that Grotius has against Mr. Mede's way is his
confidence that Days never signify Years. Which if he could make good, it
would utterly invalidate and make useless the whole frame of Mr. Mede's
Apocalyptical Interpretations. But he affirms it with all boldness imaginable;
Grot. in Apocal. cap. 2.10.
Dies etiam apud Prophetas dies sunt, non anni ut quidam somniant: And
endeavors to prove it, and pretends he has done it very plainly, from Daniel
8.14. And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and three hundred days; then shall
the Sanctuary be cleansed, compared with verse. 26. And the Vision of the
Evening and the Morning which was told thee, is true, that is, says he, has
nothing in it obscure, but is clear and plain. From whence he further inferres,
That it is plain every where that Days have never any hidden meaning in them,
but signify merely Days, not Years. Which in my apprehension is not at all
well argued by so learned an Expositour. For though we should admit that true
in this place signifies plain and clear without any figure or Aenigme; it does
not at all follow that wherever Day is used, it must be in this usual and
proper sense. Which answer were solid, though the very word (...) or (...) were
used here. But they are not, but the Text runs thus, (...), that is, unto two
thousand evenings-mornings, etc or two thousand (...). But elsewhere, as chap.
12. v. 11, 12. there (...) is put. And therefore it were a very groundless
inference to conclude, because where Day is so described by its natural parts
of Evening and Morning, there it signifies naturally and not figuratively, that
therefore it should do so where it is not thus described. To which you may
add, that the Angels telling Daniel, That this Vision of Evenings and
Mornings, that is, of Days, is clear, does plainly imply that the Visions of
the number of Days are sometimes not clear but obscure, and may signify Years;
otherwise this intimation had been in vain: As truly the very numbering thus by
Days also; whenas it had been more natural to have expressed the Prophecy by so
many Years, if it had not been of set purpose to make the Prophecies of Daniel
more obscure, and to hide them from such eyes as the Wisdom of God thought
fit, that they should not perceive their meaning. This is the utmost that
Grotius has to say against the expounding of Days by Years.

2. Let us see now what may be said for it. First, It is plain that the
Prophetical descriptions of Time do sometimes affect certain ambages and
obscurities to hide themselves in, which our adversaries themselves cannot
deny: Otherwise Daniel might have said more plainly, Three years and an half,
then Dan. 7.25. and chap. 12.7.
a Time and Times and half a Time. Wherefore why may not Years be signified by
Days as well as Time and Times signify Years, especially there being some
handsome analogy in the matter, they being both measured by a complete circuit
of the Sun, the one annual, the other diurnal?

Again, we see plainly That God himself has de facto in several places of the
Scripture made Days the compendious Representatives of Years. As Numb. 14.34.
Forty days, each day for a year; and Ezechiel 4.6. I have appointed thee each
day for a year. To which you may add, That the Jewish Doctors of old took it
up for a Principle to interpret Prophecies by; which reaches the case very
home, in reference to the Apocalypse, whose Author our Adversaries will
acknowledge not to abhor from Cabbalisme.

Thirdly, I shall urge that very Text which Grotius has so strangely perverted
to his own sense, Daniel 8. v. 26. where the Angel tells Daniel that the Vision
of the Evening and the Morning is perspicuous and clear. Which most certainly
is an intimation to Daniel, that some Prophecies imparted to him, where the
Time is numbered by Days, are not clear, but are to be looked upon as
Enigmatical and figurative. But here the mention also of Evening and Morning
shows plainly that natural days or ordinary (...) are to be understood, and yet
the Angel puts in this caution. Whereby it is still more evident that Days do
ordinarily in Prophecy signify Years.

Fourthly, The little Horn, Daniel 7. that rules for a time and times and half
a time, it is evident that it is not Antiochus Epiphanes, because this little
Horn is part of the Fourth Beast, namely the Roman; but Antiochus part of the
Greek Empire. For it is clear from chap. 8. verse. 21. that, the great Horn
being the first King, the four following Horns are of the same Kingdom; in the
latter time whereof Antiochus Epiphanes rises up, as appears v. 23. These
things are so plain that nothing can be plainer. Wherefore the little Horn in
the Seventh chapter is a part of the Roman Empire, a power there whose reign
cannot be circumscribed within the compass of Three years and a half, but these
Years must be resolved into 1260 days, and these 1260 days into so many Years,
or no sense can be made of the Prophecy. But this is done to our hand in the
Apocalypse, where the Woman in the wilderness is said to abide there for Chap.
12.14.
a time and times and half a time as well as Verse. 6.
1260 days. Which plainly shows the warrantableness of this solution.

See Mr. Mede De Numeris Danielis.
Fifthly, Those numbers of Daniel, chap. 12. v. 11, 12. namely, one thousand two
hundred and ninety days, and a thousand three hundred and five and thirty days,
they being so unapplicable to any thing in the sense of Days, but so exactly
pointing out the latter times in the sense of Years, is a further demonstration
that Days sometimes signify Years in the Prophetical writings.

Sixthly, It seems exceedingly improbable, a single day being so inconsiderable
a space of time to transact those things in that are prophesied of in
Scripture, that the Spirit of God should number out the time by Days, when it
might more compendiously be set down by Years; especially these pettinesses
being below the Divine Majesty to catch at, and there being no Examples of
Events that have been observed thus punctually to answer to a day where
Prophecies have been numbered by days, that would have filled up any number of
years. How unlikely then is it that Revel. 11.9.11
Half a day should come into compute, as it does in the slain Witnesses, if
Days be meant, and not some greater measures of time?

Seventhly, It is manifest, and confessed of all hands, That the Days of
Daniel's weeks are Years. Here Grotius would fain evade if he could, by
feigning a peculiar privilege of (...) to signify a week of years, unless
there be the mention of days added to determine the sense the other way: which
makes me wonder that a person otherwise so ingenuous should vent so groundless
and false a supposition. I dare say you can scarce believe me unless I produce
his own words, which are these; Grotius in Dan. 9.24.
Ubi de dierum hebdomade agitur, solet adjici dierum nomen: Whenas yet there
are but two instances of this addition of (...) to (...), the one Daniel 10. v.
2, 3. which is not done as usual, but to add light in all likelihood to the
precedent prophecy of the weeks of years, for distinction sake, and does imply
that they would also naturally signify weeks of days. The other, Ezechiel
45.21. where it is (...), and translated (...), as if they had read (...) seven
days, not, weeks of days. But quite contrary to what he has pronounced, (...)
or a week, without any thing added to it, does always signify a week of days,
unless in a Prophetical Scheme the Days of the week signify Years, as it does
here in Daniel. See Genes. 29. v. 27, 28. Exodus 34. v. 22. Levit. 12. v. 5.
Numb. 28. v. 26. Deuteronomy. 16. v. 9, 10, 16. 2 Chronicles. 8.13. Ierem. 5.24. In all
these places (...) signifies a week of days wihtout (...) added to it. Nor is
there any example where it has such an addition but these two produced by
himself, of which we have given an account.

Eighthly and lastly, Mr. Mede's Synchronisms are apodictically true to any one
that has but a competency of wit and patience to peruse them. But according to
these Synchronisms the continuance of the conculcation of the outward Court,
the mournful prophecies of the Witnesses, the Woman in the Desert, the
ten-horned and two-horned Beasts, the sealed Servants of the Lamb, the Whore of
Babylon, the Succession of the first six Trumpets, the continuance, I say, of
all these is circumscribed within the space of Three years and an half, if the
1260 days be but Days and not Years, as Grotius would have it. Which is a thing
impossible, especially if we consider that Beasts are, in the Prophetical
scheme of speech, Polities or Kingdoms, not Persons, and therefore
unconceivable to be so short-lived as to last but Three years and an half. To
which you may add, That the chief matters of the Apocalypse are comprehended
within this Synchronisme; and that it is a wonder that there is no mention of
Years in all this Book, saving of the Millennium, but only of Months or Days
and half a day: Which is a shrewd presumption that the computation of Years is
hidden under these Terms where they signify any definite time at all.
Wherefore I think it is as clear as the light, that Days in Prophecy do
sometimes signify Years. Nor see I any reason why Time may not as well as
Things and Actions be figuratively expressed by the Prophets.

3. The greatest cavils that can be made against Mr. Mede's way, I conceive,
are either against his dividing the Apocalypse from the Fourth Chapter to the
end of the Book into Two Systems of Prophetical Visions, the one containing the
Fate of the Empire, the other of the Church, and both beginning from one
Epoch; or else against his interpretation of the time of the killing of the
two Witnesses; or lastly against his making the Beast out of the bottomless pit
(chap. 11.) the same with the Beast out of the sea (chap. 13.)

The greatest thing objected against the first is, That one of his chiefest
marks of the beginning a new Series of Prophecies fails him. For whereas he
argues from chap. 10. verse. 11. (...), that there is a (...), a running over
the same space of time again and that a carceribus ad metam; and from v. 8. The
voice which I heard from heaven spoke unto me again; which he would parallel
with chap. 1. v. 10. and with chap. 4. v. 1. the former whereof is the
beginning of the Prophecy of the Seven Churches, the latter of the Seven Seals:
It is objected against the second mark, that it is defective, in that this
Voice is not joined with the mentioning of a Trumpet as those two to which he
would parallel it are. I confess if the mention of a Trumpet had been here
joined, the beginning of the Prophecy anew had been notoriously plain and
palpable. Indeed too plain for a book of Prophecies that the Wisdom of God has
used so much artifice to obscure. But this half-indication was enough to such
as God had made fit (and thought the time seasonable) to unriddle the mystery.

But methinks there are other indications of the beginning of a new Systeme of
Prophecies that may in a good measure compensate the imperfectness of this. I
shall but briefly intimate them. As First the extraordinary Majesty of that
Angel that has this opened Book of Prophecies in his hand; his description
being not unlike that of his that had the sealed Book, Revel. chap. 4 and 5.
And then Secondly, this new Book of Prophecies seems naturally to imply a new
Systeme of Prophecies distinct in kind as well as in volume; the one, suppose,
containing the Affairs of the Empire, the other of the Church. Which things
though different in nature, yet running parallel in time, it is reasonable to
conceive that the second Book of Prophecies reaches up to the same Epoch with
the first. Which in the Third place is further intimated by the oath of the
Angel who swears there shall be no more time, but that the Mystery of God
shall be finished at the sounding of the Seventh trump. Revel. 10.6, 7.
Which pronouncing that there will be no more time, certainly is meant of the
time and times and half a time which shall then be expired, and which was
pointed at by Daniel the servant and Prophet of God. Which is the reason of the
adding of those words, as he has declared to his servants the Prophets. And
lastly, that you may be still more sure that the Prophecy begins again from the
first Epoch, there is not only this more light and general mention of the
verse 7.
Seventh Trumpet, which is the last period of the sealed Book, but also a
distribution of it into verse 3.
Seven thunders, as there was of the chap. 8.1, 2.
Seventh seal into Seven trumpets. And this mighty and illustrious Angel, who,
though he be not one of the Seven properly so called (and here is only said to
be another Angel.
(...)) yet he immediately succeeding the Sixth, is in some sort the Seventh,
and may well sustain the person of the Seventh for this bout, he seeming also
to continue his roaring all the time the Seven thunders utter their voices. The
last of which it is likely may be Thunder properly so called, namely that final
Conflagration of the world and the setting the earth on fire by Thunder and
Lightning. And surely when the Prophecies of the Seals have reached to this
last Catastrophe, he must be very scrupulous that will make any doubt but that
the Prophecies of the opened Book begin again from the first Epoch of the
Revelation.

To all which you may add, That Mr. Mede's Synchronisms do not depend upon
this Hypothesis, but on the contrary, prove by undeniable evidence that it is
more then an Hypothesis, even a necessary Truth resulting from the
demonstration of the said Synchronisms.

4. As for the Three days and an half that the Witnesses are said to lie slain,
Rev. 11.9, 11.
there are scarce any now so ignorant as not to be ashamed to conceit these
days to be natural days, and these Witnesses to be any two particular men. But
the Objection is against them that will acknowledge them to be three years and
an half, as Mr. Mede does, how it can be likely that at the very last gasp of
the power of the Beast, the truest and most Apostolic Christians should be in
worse plight then ever before. But to this I answer, That the truth of Mr.
Mede's Synchronisms does not at all depend upon this, nor is his conjecture so
impossible to be true.

But I must confess I think there is still a better way of answering, namely,
That these Three days and an half are the same that a time and times and half a
time, that is, three times and an half. For it is unquestionable but that (...)
often signifies no more then (...) or (...). Now that it should signify so
here, (besides the improbability of an Effect answerable to the other
interpretation, or that the Witnesses should be otherwise slain then they have
been often or for a long time together) that mention of half a day answering to
half a time fairly invites us to believe; it being also unlikely that
Providence would affect the curiosity of counting by half a year, a thing not
to be sampled in all Divine Prophecies. These Three days and an half therefore
are first to be changed into Three times and an half, and then these Three
times and a half into Three years and an half, and these Three years and an
half into 1260 Prophetic days. Which ambages and circuits are not at all
improbable, if we consider what studied concealments and obscurities there are
in this Book of the Apocalypse, as particularly in the number of the Beast, and
of the new Jerusalem, upon which we shall touch a little anon. To say nothing
of a main usefulness of these Three days and an half to determine the true
number of a time and times. For how can we be assured how many times are
designed thereby, especially it being (...) in Daniel, which is the plural
number, not the dual, and therefore bids fair to be more then two times, at
least three? Whence it would be four times and an half. But these Three days
and an half correct or prevent the mistake, by fixing these Time and Times and
half a Time to Three Times and an half. Which I confess I do little doubt but
that it is the true meaning of the Mystery.

Nor does their being slain Revel. 11.7.
(...), at all prejudice our Interpretation. For it is not well rendered, when
they shall have finished, nor yet need be rendered, while they are making an end
of their witnessings, as if this should happen at the latter end of it; but may
very warrantably be expounded dum peragunt, while they are performing this
office of witnessing from the beginning of the 1260 days to the end thereof.
Nor yet is that a real but seeming absurdity that this Interpretation brings
along with it, as if the Witnesses could prophesy while their carcasses lie
dead in the streets. For it is plain that in that sense they are said to be
dead, they may prophesy in sackcloth, nay they will necessarily do so, I mean
perform their witnessing with sadness and mourning. For their death is nothing
else but a Political death, their want of power and rule in the World. For such
is their Resurrection, namely Political, they being raised to honor and
government, as Mr. Mede himself acknowledges. Wherefore there is no absurdity
neither in the inward meaning nor outward Cortex of this Prophecy.

For the inward meaning is such as I have told you: And the outward Cortex
framed with very graceful artifice, like that in the Image of Nebuchadnezar,
where merely for the decorum of the Type, the whole Image is represented as
standing and struck upon the legs, whenas yet that which was signified by the
head, by the breast and arms, and by the belly and thighs, to wit, the
Babylonian, Persian and Greek Monarchies, were passed away. So for the like
decorum in this Type of the Witnesses, if not for necessity, to avoid a seeming
gross incongruity, that the Witnesses might not be said to prophesy while their
bodies lay dead in the streets; the time of their death, which really pervades
the whole 1260 days, is concealed under and contracted into these Three days
and an half, and made not to appear, where in the things signified it is; as
those parts of the Image were represented as standing, when the things that
they signified ceased to be. Which Scheme is not at all more hard in the one
then in the other, and in this Type of the Witnesses more useful and necessary.

5. Concerning the Sameness of the Revel. 11.7.
Beast out of the Sea with the Revel. 13.1.
Beast out of the bottomless pit, there could have been no scruple, if
Translators had interpreted (...) out of the Sea, as it is very well capable,
(...) and (...) signifying the same very often in Scripture; as Job 38.30. and
chap. 41.23. (...) and Psalm 105. v. 10. (...). As also Isay 63.13. Ion. 2.6.
and other places.

Wherefore the Wisdom of God thought good to vary the phrase here, only for
concealment; as this whole Book of Prophecies is beset with many purposed,
though not invincible, obscurities and difficulties, to keep this treasure hid
till the time appointed. Or it may be the using of the word (...) here in stead
of (...) might be not to determine the sense to the ten-horned Beast, but to
give at least a liberty of interpreting it also of the two-horned contemporary
with him.

6. But in no aspect does this Book of the Apocalypse look so hopeless and
discouraging as in that of the First Resurrection, Chap. 20. But withal it is
to be noted, there is no difficulty here but such as will at least equally urge
those that begin the Millennium at Constantine's time: So that this can be no
prejudice to Mr. Mede's Interpretations and Synchronisms. For whether we will
go the Allegorical way with some, and understand this First Resurrection in a
Political sense like that of the Witnesses, this way is better accommodated to
Mr. Mede's Synchronisms then to the other Hypothesis. Nor were it any great
inconvenience to admit it as true, those phrases which at last will have a
Literal fulfilling, being often used in a Figurative; as we may observe in the
lake of fire, some descriptions of God's coming to particular judgments, the
six thunders, and the like: all which expressions will have at last a Literal
and Physical completion.

But though the Figurative sense of Resurrection may be passable and tolerable
in this place, yet I must confess I dare not avouch it to be wholly true. My
Reasons shall be suggested in the exposition of the Text, which runs thus, And
I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I
saw the Souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the
word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither
had received his mark upon their foreheads or in their hands; and they lived
and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not
again until the thousand years were finished. This is the First Resurrection.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the First Resurrection; on such the
second death has no power, but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and
shall reign with him a thousand years.

There was never any Book penned with that artifice as this of the Apocalypse,
as if every word were weighed in a balance before it was set down; which is
manifest out of other places as well as this. In which I conceive a double
design is aimed at, a prediction of a proper Resurrection of the Witnesses to
the Truth by their deaths, and of a Political Resurrection to the true and
Apostolical Church that does survive upon Earth. The former are the (...), the
latter those that worshipped not the Beast, etc. which if they were not
distinct from the other, it had been better to have omitted (...), and to have
read (...) or (...), etc. Wherefore this is the first intimation that there are
two Orders of men there set down, The one that suffered death for the cause of
the Gospel; The other that are still alive, but resolute Opposers of the Beast.
But there is also a second hint in the following words, (...), They lived and
reigned. The Spirit of God seems on set purpose to make choice of (...) rather
then (...), that he might not bear too hard toward the sense of a literal
Resurrection, and so urge the Reader too forcibly to understand both these
Orders above distinguished to be Candidates of a real and literal Resurrection
at this time. And therefore he uses (...), which in reference to the (...) will
naturally implie a literal Resurrection; and in reference to the other, no
literal Resurrection, (they being not supposed naturally dead,) but merely a
living upon Earth and reigning there with Christ, which is their Moral and
Political Life and Resurrection. The (...) shall reign with Christ in Heaven,
and those other with Christ on Earth, he being universal Prince over both
Churches: and therefore neither Heaven nor Earth is here mentioned, that the
sense may be accommodated to either the reigning with Christ in Heaven or in
Earth, according to the distinct capacities of the persons. And the like
caution is used in the prefiguration of the time; of which there is no
necessity to conceit that it signifies just a thousand years literally, but
that it signifies at least a thousand years, and certainly not more then there
are days in that thousand, nor in likelihood near so many. But the
signification is rather Symbolical, as the ten days are, chap. 2. v. 10. And
ye shall have the tribulation of ten days, that is, the utmost extent of
tribulation, beyond which there is nothing further, as there is no number
beyond Ten: by which therefore must be meant death. And that is the reason why
presently is added, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the
Crown of life. So this thousand years upon earth is a symbol of the Churches
stable duration to the end of the world, that there shall no Polity flourish
beyond it: it being a Cube whose root is Ten. And the application of it to the
reigning of the children of the Resurrection with Christ in heaven, discovers
the unshaken stability and endless duration of that celestial Kingdom also,
beyond which absolutely there is nothing at all.

But the rest of the dead (...), lived not again. The using of (...) here and
not (...) has plainly respect to the (...), and intimates that their
Resurrection was real and literal, to which others should not attain till after
the Thousand years upon earth. After which it is plainly said, that there is a
general Resurrection, and that all the dead do rise (ver. 12, 13, 14.)
Wherefore this general Resurrection being literal and real, it is too too harsh
and violent to understand this First Resurrection mentioned in this fifth verse
to be only Figurative and Mystical. But understanding it literally, that which
follows has a wonderful natural and easy sense. Blessed and holy is he that
has part in the first Resurrection (which he speaks thus in the singular
number, one would think, on purpose to keep men off from conceiting he means it
of the successive body of the Church during the thousand years) (...), upon
these the second death has no power, namely, The lake of fire (ver. 14.) into
which Hades or the whole region of mortality is cast, the Earth being all on
fire. But blessed are those that have part in the First Resurrection, for they
are sped already and safe, having obtained those celestial bodies that do
certainly exempt them from this Fate. For these and all such as God shall
afterward make partakers of this blessed kind of Resurrection, are naturally
free from the reach of the second death: But they shall be priests of God and
of Christ, and reign with him, not the thousand years upon earth.
(...), but for sureness and for distinction sake, simply, thousands of years
never to be ended.
(...) that is, They shall be holy, sacred and divine persons, and live with
Christ in his immutable and everlasting Kingdom in Heaven for ever and ever.

This I conceive to be the most easy and natural sense of this place, and that
the Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth and of his holy Martyrs is a very rash
and groundless and unsafe conceit, fit for nothing but heat and tumult both of
fancy and action. Nor do I think it necessary that the Sons of this first
Resurrection should at all appear to us, their celestial bodies, into which
they are vivificated, being naturally invisible, and therefore a kind of
miracle for us to see them, and no more necessary then the exhibiting those
Souls to view which Christ carried to Heaven in triumph after his Resurrection;
which yet he did not exhibit to the sight of the world. And if he do here, I
can imagine no better end then that of Mr. Mede's, that it may be for a sign or
beckening to the Jews, to help on their Conversion: but I can affirm nothing of
these things. Only I am well assured that if Christendom were once well purged
of all her Idolatries, foolish and contradictious opinions and wicked
practices, it would be a very great Miracle if the Jews could be kept off from
being converted.

7. Wherefore in brief to conclude, seeing the truth of Mr. Mede's
Synchronisms, as far as respects this present subject, is so apodictical, and
that there is nothing material to be alleged against them, and that the
numbers of days and months there mentioned are of necessity to be interpreted
years, and that according to this Hypothesis there can be no other sense of the
Woman in the wilderness, of Babylon the great city, of the two-horned Beast and
the ten-horned Beast, etc. then what Mr. Mede has given; it is manifest that
the Church of Christ would be lapsed into a degenerate condition for 1260
years: and as evident that there will be a recovery out of this Lapse, by
reason that there has been yet no room for the promised Millennium, persecution
dogging the Church till Constantine's time, after which the 1260 days were to
succeed, and therefore the Millennium is yet to come. As appears further in
that it is Synchronall to the Seventh trumpet, and that the Rev. 11.11, 12.
Resurrection of the Witnesses is after their lying dead either all the 1260
days, or at least the last three days and an half; in that the Chap. 19.
Marriage of the Lamb commences from the burning of Babylon, and the Chap. 7.9.
company of Palm-bearers from their victory over the persecuting Beast. These
things are so plain that they are not worth insisting upon.

And it is a great privilege of this Synchronical architecture of Mr. Mede,
that it is not built upon any Hypothesis but the innate Characters of the
Apocalyptical Visions themselves; whenas Grotius his way depends so on the
Chronology of the writing of the Apocalypse, that unless John received these
Revelations in Claudius his time, (which yet is against the common current of
all both ancient and modern writers) the fabric of his Expositions falls to
the ground. To which you may add, that he has no guide nor clue at all in this
prophetic Labyrinth, no not so much as that obvious, but fallible one, the
order of the Prophecies as they lie; but is forced sometimes to go back, as he
fancieth himself able to apply his Historical materials. So that he has indeed
no guide at all from the Apocalypse it self; whenas Mr. Mede is directed and
limited by the demonstrative law of those innate Synchronisms he has gathered.
Of whose truth this may be one general After-ratification, that the things that
are found to be Synchronal, have also a natural connection and complication one
with another, as he that but casts his eye upon his Scheme of Synchronisms, and
considers the natures of things, will easily deprehend.

CHAP. XVI. 1. Of the Four Beasts about the throne of Majesty described before
the Prophecy of the Seals. 2. Of the Six first seals according to Grotius. 3.
Of the Six first seals according to Mr. Mede. 4. Of the inward Court, and the
fight of Michael with the Dragon, according to Grotius and Mr. Mede. 5. Of the
Visions of the seven Trumpets. 6. The near cognation and colligation of those
seven Synchronals that are contemporary to the Six first Trumpets. 7. The
mistakes and defects in Grotius his interpretations of those Synchronals. 8. Of
the number of the Beast. 9. Of the Synchronals contemporary to the last
Trumpet. 10. The necessity of the guidance of such Synchronisms as are taken
from the Visions themselves, inferred from Grotius his errors and mistakes who
had the want of them. The Author's apology for preferring Mr. Mede's way
before Grotius's, with an intimation of his own design in intermedling with
these matters.
1. BUT for further conviction of the Excellency of Mr. Mede's way above that
of Grotius's, I shall compare some of their main Interpretations. For to meddle
with all would be too tedious and voluminous; but to give a specimen in some,
very commodious, if not necessary. First therefore, In the first six Seals, I
may add also in the first six Trumpets, Grotius fixes the Scene of all these
Visions in Iudaea, and ends them with the sacking of the City. Of which in
general it is to be noted, That his Applications are too small and petty
usually for these Prophecies; and that the Prophecies themselves, if they had
no other meaning, might very well have been spared; whatever is needful in
them to the Church having before more plainly been predicted by the mouth of
our blessed Savior, and therefore not likely to fill so great a part of the
Apocalypse by their more obscure prefigurations. But we will descend also to
their particular weaknesses and inconcinnities; and first of the Seals, with
the Session of Majesty prefixed before them. Revel. 4.
Where Grotius makes the Four beasts, the Lion, Calves, Man and Eagle, to be
Peter, James, Matthew and Paul. Which besides that in general it is a figment
at pleasure without ground, the applications I think are not so congruous. For
why should Peter, who out of fear denied his Master, be a Lion more then Paul,
whose heat assuredly was rather greater then the others? and why Paul an Eagle
rather then a Calf, who certainly labored like an Ox in the Ministry, and
compares himself to one that treads out the corn, 1 Cor. 9.9? And though he
took long journies, yet he did not fly in the Air, nor go faster by land or
water then other travelers did. And why should Matthew be a Man more then all
the rest, and rather then James, the brother of Jesus who was peculiarly styled
the Son of Man?

Wherefore Mr. Mede's account seems far more solid, as having an acknowledged
ground, the order of the Camp of Israel, which was distributed into Four parts,
each part being under a Standard or Ensign: those that lay on the East, of a
Lion; on the West, of an Ox; on the South, of a Man; and on the North, of an
Eagle. So that this glorious Session of the Divine Majesty is set out by the
order of the Israelitish Camp, where in the midst was the Tabernacle as the
Throne of God, and about it the Tribes of Israel so disposed as I have
intimated. Which is infinitely a more solid account then that of Grotius, as
you shall more distinctly understand in the opening the four first Seals, whose
applications are admirably fit to each Beast in Mr. Mede's way, but very frigid
and faint in Grotius's. For he thinks it reason enough of the Lion, that is,
Peter, his Rev. 6.1, 2.
calling to see the Rider of the white Horse, because Peter was the first that
preached the Gospel, and therefore he speaks first here. Whenas it does not
appear he spoke first of those that spoke the unknown tongues so fast, Acts 2.
who questionless preached the Gospel in them.

2. That this Rider of the white Horse is Christ, they both agree in; but why
the first beast should be the Praeco before this sight, Mr. Mede's reasons are
far more satisfactory, as you shall hear anon. The Praeco of the Verse 3, 4.
Rider of the red Horse he makes Matthew, because it is written Matthew. 24.7.
Nation shall rise against nation and Kingdom against kingdom. But this is not
Matthew's prophecy but our Savior's. The Vision he fansieth fulfilled in the
war betwixt the Beroeans and Philadelphians, but names no distinct time, nor
Prince that should be the Rider of this red Horse.

The Praeco of the Verse 5.
Rider of the black Horse he makes Paul, because Agabus foretold him this
famine which he fansieth signified here. But then Agabus should have rather
been the Beast then Paul. Beside that, Agabus told other Christians as well as
him of it. The fulfilling of this Vision according to him was in the reign of
Claudius.

The Praeco of the Verse 8.
Rider of the pale Horse he makes James, because he threatens rich men with
death, chap. 5. But himself acknowledges that by death here is meant plague and
pestilence, whenas that menace in James is war and slaughter, the taking and
burning Jerusalem by fire; as himself also interprets the third verse of that
chapter. You see by what small strings the applications of these four Beasts
are tied to these four Visions hitherto; to omit what is very inconcinne, the
breaking the order they were first named in, (chap. 4. ver. 7.) the first a
Lion, the second an Ox, the third a Man, and the fourth an Eagle. Which should
have answered to the first, second, third, and fourth Seals without any
misplacing; whenas the second Beast is here applied to the fourth Seal, the
third to the second, and the fourth to the third.

The Rev. 6.9.
Fifth Seal he interprets of the revenge of the blood of the Martyrs, as Mr.
Mede does, but restrains the Vision to Steven and James and some few else he
knows not who: and by this means leaves no Vision for the Ten bloody
Persecutions which were more then ten thousand times more considerable then
what he aims at.

The Verse 12.
Sixth Seal, which mentions a great Earthquake, the Eclipse of Sun and Moon,
the falling of the Stars, etc. he interprets literally of such Prodigies, quite
against the way of Prophetic interpretation, and without the application of
History to countenance it. Such is the inconcinnity and insignificancy of
Grotius his interpreting of the Six seals: Which is quite otherwise in Mr. Mede.

3. For first the application of the Four beasts to the Four first seals is
both orderly and very proper and articulate. For the Lion on the East side of
the Israelitish camp is applied to Christ the Prince from the East in more
senses then I will insist upon, they being ordinary and obvious. Besides that,
the nature of a Lion is suitable to the thing signified in the Vision, to wit
Victory to him on the white horse. And the like in the rest. For so the Ox on
the West side of the camp is applied to Trajan from West; the Man on the South
side, to Septimius from the South; and the Eagle on the North side, to
Maximinus from the North. The natures also of the Visions are suitable to the
things that came to pass under those Emperors. The mighty Slaughters under
Trajan and his successor Adrian are indigitated by the Ox. The exactness of
administering Justice and careful Provision of Septimius and Alexander Severus,
by a Man, to whom numbering and measuring and the administration of Justice is
so proper. The extraordinary raging of the Famine, Sword and Pestilence under
Maximinus, by the Carnivorous Eagle that feeds upon dead carcasses.

In brief, the meaning of the First six seals is this: That Prince of unspotted
Righteousness, the Rider of the white Horse, with his arrow and his bow in his
hand, aims at something of high importance, (and it is no less then what he
promised his followers at their lowest ebb, Fear not, Luke 12.32.
little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom:)
and he hits the mark in the Sixth seal, where the Pagan Empire of the Devil is
shattered to the purpose by Constantine's turning Christian. But to adorn the
course of time till then by some Prophetic remarks, the Riders of the red,
black and pale Horses are brought in: as also most concerningly the cry of the
Souls of the Martyrs under the Altar, whereby is denoted especially the reign
of Diocletian and that ten years unparalled persecution then commencing.
Which Fifth seal, the rescuing of the Empire into the hands of Christ by the
Subversion of the Pagan powers does immediately succeed, and is the matter of
the Sixth seal figured out by proper Prophetical expressions. So that all
things in Mr. Mede's way as they are easy, natural and distinct, so are they
very weighty and worthy the Spirit of God and his holy Prophets to predict.

Nor has Grotius so much as any seeming advantage of him in any thing, unless
in the interpreting of the Rider of the black Horse. Which, if History would
have complied, Mr. Mede could have been content to have interpreted of Famine
also. But in my apprehension nothing can be more significant of that which Mr.
Mede applies it to then this Vision is. For what color is more significant of
the Severity of Justice then black, whether we look upon the Temper of Spirit
wherein it resides, which is a grave, sad, rigid melancholy; or the Execution
thereof in criminal matters, which is death, whose mournful Emblem is black?
The black Horse therefore, with the pair of balances, argues the Rider severely
just, frugal and provident, and one that will have a special care, Revel. 6.6.
1. That if one Choenix of wheat be sold for a penny, that three of barley
shall be sold for a penny. 2. That men shall live by their honest labors, and
not by theft and rapine. For Choenix signifies (...), the food for a day, and
Denarius the wages for a days labor. 3. That there shall be no stealing nor
robbing (but buying by measure,) though it should be so hard a time that their
day-labour will but find them food. 4. He will provide that they shall have at
least a Choenix for a penny, that the price of bread-corn and necessary
victuals may not exceed a days wages. And so of Wine and Oil he will take
heed there be no fraud in buying and selling there neither, nor any spoil or
wast by the unruly soldiery.

4. I should now pass to the Trumpets, but I will rather deal with those
Visions first that are Synchronal to the time of these Six seals. And that is
Revel. 12.7.
the Fight of Michael with the seven-headed Dragon; and Revel. 11.1.
the Temple and Altar of God that are Symmetral or commensurable to the Angels
measure. Mr. Mede interprets this Fight of the seven-headed Dragon and Michael,
the conflict of the Church of Christ with the Pagan cruelty till Constantine's
and Theodosiu's times; which therefore as it is Synchronal, so has it also a
great cognation with the Visions of the Six seals. For the Archer on the white
Horse aims at that Effect all the time of this bloody battle, which he hits or
reaches in the completion of the Sixth seal.

But Grotius referres the Vision to Simon Magus and Peter, who brought him down
headlong out of the Air by his prayers, at which he supposes Revel. 12.10.
that acclamation of the Angels, who were the Spectators of this Cacomagical
Funambulo, and beheld him out of the windows of Heaven while he tumbled down to
the ground. But what a petty and ludicrous business is this in respect of that
Effect comprised in the Sixth seal, which is both the issue of this battle and
the mark the Archer on the white horse aimed at by all the labors and patience
of his Saints?

That of the Rev. 11.1, 2.
Temple of God or the inward Court of the Temple Grotius expounds only to this
sense, That it is thus measured, to signify that Adrian should not build upon
it, though he did upon the ground about it, and called the city Aelia, after
his own name. But he brings no express proof that the inward court was not
built upon; nor, if it were not, was it a thing worth Divine Prophecy taking
notice of: nor is there any likelihood that Providence regarded the place so
which God had utterly rejected, and See Book 7. chapter 9. sect. 10.
hindered the rebuilding of it by fire breaking from the foundation. Certainly
so Divine a Prophecy as this of the Apocalypse looks not at such petty matters
as these. Besides, the Angel's bidding John measure not only the Temple and
Altar, but also the men that worshipped therein, plainly intimates that there
was another kind of meaning in the thing then Grotius sought after, but is
certainly that which Mr. Mede has found, namely, that this inward Court that is
measured signifies the pure Christian Church before it was adulterated by a
kind of Christian-paganisme. Which condition also of the Church has a plain
cognation with other things Synchronal, as their Revel. 12.11.
resolute opposing the Dragon, and being so serious in their Religion that they
preferred it before their own lives.

5. We proceed now to the Trumpets. That Vision of the Revel. 8.7.
First Trumpet, Hail and Fire mingled with blood, Grotius (quite out of the
road of Prophetic exposition) interprets to a moral sense of hardness of heart
and bloody anger, which he applies to the Jews. Whenas Hailstones and Fire are
symbols of hostile vengeance executed upon others, not of anger burning and
consuming in ones self; and therefore these Hailstones and Fire are said to do
execution upon the trees and grass. Wherefore Mr. Mede does more fitly apply
it to the infestation of the Roman Empire from the year 395. to 406. partly by
Alaricus and the Goths, and partly by the Barbarous nations under Radagaisus,
and partly by the Vandals and Alani. These are the Northern storms of
Hailstones with blood and fire that fell upon the Empire.

The Vision of the Verse 8.
Second Trumpet, namely, the burning Mountain cast into the Sea, Grotius
expounds of the tower Antonia, whose fall notwithstanding was not accompanied
with burning, and therefore he rather understands it of the sallying of the
wrathful soldiers out of the tower upon the people of Jerusalem. Which is but
a petty matter in comparison of Alaricus his taking and firing of Rome, upon
which followed a continual spoil of the Empire till it was dilacerated into Ten
kingdoms; which is Mr. Mede's exposition of this Vision. But the other is
unsuitable to that expression especially, Verse 9.
and the third part of the ships perished. Which intimates that the Sea
signifies here far larger then the inhabitants of one City, or a crowd of
people in one street thereof. To say nothing how this book of Prophecies that
characterizes things so often by numbers, understands here as elsewhere by the
third part.
(...) the Roman Empire.

The Verse 10.
Third- Trumpet Vision is the great Star falling into the third part of the
Rivers, burning like a lamp, the Comet Lampadias, suppose, properly so called.
This Grotius applies to that Egyptian Impostour mentioned in the Acts and in
Antiq. lib. 20. cap. 6. Bell. Jud. lib. 2. c. 23.
Josephus. Acts 21.38.
But beside that (...) the third part here again characterizes the Roman
Empire, this Star is too big in my judgment for that Egyptian Vagabond and
easily-defeated Deceiver. Mr. Mede's interpretation is much more accommodate,
who applies it to the extinction of the Western Caesareate, which was grown
very low and obscure in those inconsiderable Emperors, Avitus, Majoranus,
Severus, Anthemius, Olybrius, Glycerius, Nepos, the immediate predecessors of
Augustulus; but fell quite and was extinct in this Prince of sorrow, bitterness
and sad misfortunes, whom Odoacer king of the Heruli pulled out of his throne,
Anno 476.

The Verse 12.
Fourth- Trumpet Vision, an Eclipse of the third part of the Sun and Moon and
Stars, proceeds further concerning Rome, and signifies that that light she
shone with under the Ostrogoth kings should be extinct, that she should be
despoiled of Regal Majesty, yea of Consulship and Authority of the Senate.
Which ill fate is very properly prefigured by the obscuration of Sun, Moon and
Stars, as Mr. Mede has undeniably made good, and accordingly applied the
History. Grotius interprets it only of the taking of certain Towns in Galilee
and other places by Vespasian, and the slaughter of the Jews. Which is a very
laxe and dilute interpretation in comparison of Mr. Mede's.

The Rev. 9.1, 2, 3.
Fifth- Trumpet Vision is the key-bearer of the bottomless pit, and the
Locusts. Which Grotius referrs to Eleazar the son of Ananias (though he
confesses the time does not agree) and to the faction of the Zelots. Whom he
cannot fancy to be those Scorpion-tail'd Locusts but in their general account
of being Robbers and Devourers, and the leisurely doing their mischief, the
poison of the Scorpion being three days a killing. But it does not appear that
that evil of the Zelots may be accounted leisurely in any such special manner,
the plague of them not lasting longer then such like barbarous tyrannizing of
masterless soldiers uses to do; and it is but Verse 5.
five months according to Grotius his account, but he does not so much as go
about to prove his account by History. Besides, how can Verse 7.
golden crowns belong to these Zelots? For Grotius his expounding (...), as if
(...) implied that they were the boasting of crowns and victory, not real
crowns, is very groundless, and confutable out of his own exposition of Verse 8.
(...), and (...), by which he acknowledges real mulierosity and voracity in
these Zelots. That concerning the Verse 10.
Sting in their Scorpiontails, Introibant ut defensores, exibant raptores, is
indeed witty, but not solid. For if you will have their form to figure their
behavior, they went in Robbers as well as went out. For the fore-parts of
these Scorpiolocustae represent Robbery more perfectly then the hinder-parts.

Mr. Mede's application of this Vision to Mahomet and the Saracens is in every
respect admirably natural and punctual. The mischief therefore of the Fifth
Trumpet is that false Light or Pseudo-prophet Mahomet, sent down upon earth by
the vengeance of God; whose doctrine is the fume of the bottomless pit, and his
followers the Saracens the Locusts here spoke of. As 1. coming out of Arabia,
as the Egyptian Locusts did that plagued the literal Egypt. 2. And then
hugely numerous, as the companies of Locusts use to be. 3. And also making
their stay (...), which you may turn menses quinos, by fives of months. Which
is an allusion to the usual continuance of Locusts ( Plin. 11.29.) and answers
in the Prophetical sense to the five months of years, that is, a hundred and
fifty years that these Locusts infested Italy; and to the twice one hundred and
fifty years that the Saracenical kingdom continued. So properly are fives of
months applicable to them. 4. As also the golden crowns to the multitude of
their conquests, they having subdued Palestine, Syria, both the Armenias, the
lesser Asia, Persia, India, Egypt, Numidia, Portugal and Spain, within the
space of fourscore years. 5. The Arabians, whence the Saracens were, tied up
their hair with an head-tire like women. 6. The sound of the wings of these
Locusts, which was Rev. 9.9.
as the sound of Chariots and of many horses running to battle, is too big an
expression for the faction of the Zelots, but fitly signifies the mighty and
swift victories of the Saracens. 7. As also their poisonous Scorpion-tails do
the venom of the old Serpent under the false Religion of Mahometisme. For all
those powers that are not under the Kingdom of Light are part of the powers of
the Prince of the dark Kingdom, the Devil. 8. As is here intimated very
clearly, the Verse 11.
King over them being the Angel of the bottomeless pit, though they pretend to
be such zealous worshippers of that See chap. 12. sect. 6.
One true God that made Heaven and Earth. Their pretense to which seems to be
perstringed in the very name of their Prince Verse 11.
Abaddon, alluding to (...) and (...), as Mr. Mede would have it.

That allusion of Grotius in Apollyon to (...) is more express, but not better
to our purpose then his; See Book 3. chapter 2. sect. 1.
(...) according to Chrysippus being from (...) and (...) or (...), and
therefore signifying Unus, as Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 23.
Adad also does, the God of the Assyrians. Which name is not so concealed in
Abaddon, but that by cutting it into (...) and (...), and taking away the
insignificant termination, and letting loose the two (...) held so hard
together by the dagesh, (...) immediately shows himself to make good the
Paronomasia. Which (...) therefore must be the Assyrians (...), as Philo
Byblius calls him; and he might with Homer as well have styled him (...), he
being the same with Apollo and Jupiter, whose titles in Orpheus his Hymns are
(...). And (...) in Hebrew signifies as well Sovereignty as Paternity, as
appears in that regal title Abimelek. Wherefore (...) is as much as (...), or
(...), the supreme Adad, the Father and Sovereign over all; and the Paronomasia
so palpable in (...) and Abaddon, that they have in a manner the very same
sound. Whence it is manifest that it is not for nothing the Prophet has pitched
upon this name Abaddon rather then As, (...), and others.
others which were more ordinary and signify a Destroyer as well as this, and
why he would interpret it rather (...) then (...) or (...) namely, to point at
the Saracens hypocritical ostentation of See chap. 12. sect. 6.
Monotheisme or worshipping one God, which they do mainly in envy and
opposition to the Christians profession of the Trinity, while themselves in the
mean time are under the Destroyer, and are still as truly Pagans as the
Assyrians and Greeks that worshipped Adad and Apollo.

The Ver. 14, 16.
Sixth- Trumpet Vision is the Euphratean Horsemen, which Grotius applies to the
Roman army that besieged Jerusalem, which he is content to be nominated
Euphratean, because some of the Roman forces, namely those of Syria, were
quartered near Euphrates. But why should the whole Roman army be denominated
from hence? And then the four Angels how can they fitly be referred to
Vespasian, Ver. 14, 15.
Titus, Mucianus, and Tiberius Alexander, being these Four were not of an equal
rank and power coordinate, and but one was the chief commander of the army? And
that several others might have as well been put in as some of these Four, may
appear from what himself writes on verse 16. Besides, he gives no account of
the time, namely, Verse 15.
a day, a month and a year; nor of their numerosity, Verse 16.
(...), and that of Horse. He interprets also their Verse 17.
breast-plates of Fire, and of Iacinth and Brimstone, of the colors of their
Horsemens coats, as if they were made of thread of either color de feu,
violet-colour, or a pale sulphurate color: which is too mean a business to be
taken notice of in so sacred a Prophecy. The applying of the Falaricae to the
fire, smoke and sulphur coming out of the Horses mouths, is ingenious if
considered alone. We shall compare it with Mr. Mede's anon. But the Footman
that the Romans sometimes placed behind a Horseman for readiness, especially
considering he rid not with his face backward, nor slipped off over the horse
tail, but lighted on one side, very hardly makes out the similitude of an
Amphisbaena; not to add that the Amphisbaena it self in his sense is but a
Fiction. His interpretation also of Verse 20.
worshipping the Daemonia and Idols of silver and gold to a mystical sense is
more faint and dilute then the literal meaning.

But in every one of these particulars Mr. Mede's interpretation has a fitness
unexceptionable: He referring the Verse 14.
Four Angels at the river Euphrates to the four Sultanies of the Turkish
dominion, Bagdad, Caesarea, Aleppo, Damascus, planted on this side and that
side Euphrates: He calculating the time of a Verse 15.
day, month and year (i. e. 396 years) from the inauguration of Togrulbec the
Prince of the Turks to the taking Constantinople, which is just 396 years: He
applying those Verse 16.
myriads of myriads of Horse to the known numerositie of the Turkish armies,
who being Persians by their long abode in that country, are called Persae in
the Greek History; so that the Foot are in this allusion Horsemen too, (...)
signifying Eques as well as Persia. Which allusion to names is used also by
Daniel in making the he-Goat stand for the Kings of the Aegeades, that is, of
the Macedonians.

Their Verse 17.
Breast-plates of Fire, Iacinth and Sulphur, he interprets of that aspect they
seem to have by discharging their carbines or pistols in fight, which makes all
their breasts for a time seem fiery, then of a blew Iacinth color by the
smoke, and the most lasting object of sense is the stinking of the Sulphur.
Which representation is to be understood of them nearer at hand. This invention
of Gunpowder (foreseen by that Providence that inspired John, and not vainly
pointed at in these Visions, but for the better assurance of what time they
belong to) is again intimated in that it is said, that Verse 17.
the heads of the horses were as the heads of Lions; which Grotius gives this
short account of, Rictus equorum sanguinolenti, qualis Leoni post devoratas
pecudes: as if these did eat flesh to bloody their jaws withal; else where is
the lion-like representation in them more then in others? I rather therefore
conceive that their heads are compared to the heads of Lions, because of the
terror of the noise, dreadful like the roaring of a Lion, when the horsemen
discharged together against the enemy. For presently follows, Verse. 17.
and out of their mouths came fire and smoke and brimstone; all were breathed
out together from their jaws at once. To which Grotius his application of the
Falaricae is not to be compared, as any one that considers their nature and the
manner of flinging them will deprehend at first sight.

Mr. Mede's exposition also of the Serpentine tails of the horses is both more
handsome and more important. Verse. 19.
(...), that is, The tails of the horses were as if they had been half a
Serpent clap' to and hanging out with his head. Which is an Emblem of that sad
after-clap of their victory over men. The Devil then, that old Serpent, being
ready to parlie with them and to seduce them to Mahometisme. And lastly his
interpreting of the Verse. 20.
worship of Demons and Idols in the proper sense, and applying it to the
residue of the Roman Empire infected with what we call Papal Superstition and
Idolatry, I could wish it were not so fit and appropriate as it is.

The application of these two last Trumpet-Visions is so particular and
exquisite, that though they were not necessarily enforced by virtue of his
Synchronisms, it would be very hard to doubt of them. Which would make a man
eager to consider the meaning of the Seventh and Last Trumpet-vision; which
consists of loud praises to God in Heaven for that Revel. 11.15.
the kingdoms of the world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ. This Grotius interprets of the liberty the Christians had to profess
their Religion at Jerusalem, when the Jews were all banished thence. But the
Vision certainly is far too big for so small a matter. (...). It is very
hard to interpret The world.
(...), and Kingdoms.
(...) in the plural number, of Iudaea only. And besides, how does Christ
reign for ever there, whenas his Subjects are now such miserable thrals to the
Turk? If he had taken Verse. 17.
the great power to himself in that place, he has lost it again, if this sense
of Grotius be true. But it is plain this Seventh Trumpet appertains to the
recovery of the Church out of Apostasy, by Verse. 19.
the appearing of the Temple of God and the Ark of the Covenant in Heaven,
which is a figure of the Political power that pure and Apostolic men will be
advanced to. For the Temple signifies the Church in its pure condition, while
it was Symmetral to the Angelical or Divine measure, verse. 1.

But the appearing of the Ark of the Covenant thus in Heaven is accompanied
with Lightnings and Voices and Thunders and Earthquakes and great Hail. As is
intimated also by the very title of the Seventh Trumpet, it being a Trumpet of
Verse. 14, 15.
Woe to the wicked and unbelieving: answerably to the Revel. 10.3.
Seven Thunders that filled the space of the Seventh Trumpet while that mighty
and illustrious Angel roars like a Lion, and is justly conceived to represent
our Savior Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who being once stirred up
will never cease pursuing the prey, till he has brought all under his feet,
Death it self not excepted.

6. But we return to those things that are Synchronal to the six first
Trumpets. Which Visions though they be more then any Synchronals besides, yet
they have all a very near cognation or manifest colligation one to another. The
general Summary of the condition of the times they point out, is the Apostasy
or Degeneracy of the Church; which yet is never conceived so ill, but that
there were some pure and Apostolic Christians in it; and therefore to
represent the two sorts of Professors of Christianity there are two sorts also
of Visions: Those of the Whore of Babylon, the Ten-horned Beast and the
Two-horned Beast, relating to the Degeneracy of Christendom; the Two Witnesses
mourning in sackcloth, the Virgin Company, the sealed of the Lamb, to those
that kept their Purity in the Church. All these synchronize with the six first
Trumpets, out of which is blown the wrath of God upon the Roman Empire, as is
but just, by reason of their Apostasy; as it is also equal with God to protect
his own then. And therefore the Company of the Lamb are Revel. 7.3.
sealed and marked to be kept from the common calamities. This general Apostasy
also could not have crept in, if the Ecclesiastic and Secular Power had not
conspired, and therefore there is the Two-horned Beast as well as the
Ten-horned. Against which are opposed the Two mourning Witnesses, the one
sustaining the person of the unpolluted Priest, the other of the faithful
Magistrate. And this Apostasy consisting much in gross Idolatry and vain
Superstition, which according to Scripture Language is termed Whoredom; this
State is set out also by the Vision of the Revel. 17.
Whore of Babylon, to which is opposed the Revel. 14.4.
Virgin Company.

There are yet Two Visions behind which are not properly to be referred to this
sort or that, but each of them to both, namely, Revel. 12.6.
the Woman in the Wilderness, and Revel. 11.2.
the Outward Court and holy City trodden down by the Gentiles. Which Visions
have the insinuation of both Piety and Profaneness in them at once: The truly
pious part of the Church being signified by the Woman; but by the Wilderness
the salvageness and brutishness of the rest of Christendom, they being wholly
given up to the Animal Life. By the Outward Court and holy City is noted the
Sanctity of the Christian Church set apart from the rest of the world; but by
the being trodden down by the Gentiles, the imitation of Pagan worship
introduced by the general Apostasy of Christendom. So that you see by what a
strong tie from the very nature of the Things themselves these Eight Synchronal
Visions are held together with, in one time.

7. Let us now consider Grotius his chief mistakes or defects in interpreting
of them. As in those of the Two Witnesses, and of the outward Court and holy
City being trodden down by the Gentiles for forty two months, which is, says
he, for about three years and an half. This City he interprets of Aelia built
by Adrian: which therefore in that regard is not to be looked upon as holy; as
indeed the City of Jerusalem ceased so to be, when the Jews had ceased to be
God's people. The trampling the holy City he interprets of the building of a
Temple there to Jupiter Capitolinus. As if that Temple stood but three years
and an half. But he would terminate these years from the beginning of the
building of this Temple to the sedition of Barchochab; but brings no History to
make good his device: and if he could make this time of Barchochab good, it
were yet good for nothing, unless he could also pull down the Temple at the
three years and an half's end. The Two Witnesses he would have the Two Churches
in Aelia, the one speaking Hebrew, the other Greek; as if the Spirit of God
divided these into Two that professed one faith and were of one mind, not
distinguished in any thing save in outward language. Verse. 8, 9.
The bodies of these slain Witnesses lying in the streets of the great City
three days and an half, this he interprets of the oppression and persecution by
Barchochab; which certainly was very short, if but three days and an half long:
neither does he here bring any proof of History, nor is it probable that divine
Prophecy would affect the preciseness of half a day or three days and an half
in such a general prefiguration of things as the Apocalypse is. Besides, how
unlikely is it that Jerusalem, that had now lost all its glory and power,
should be styled by the name of the great City?

The chiefest ground that they have to think so, is that expression, as if
Verse. 8.
our Lord was crucified there. But I answer, that our Lord in a literal sense
was not crucified either in Sodom or Egypt, which (...) immediately referres
to; nor in a spiritual sense more in Jerusalem then in the rest of the Roman
Empire. Wherefore this City is nothing else but the degenerate Polity of the
Apostate Church where Christ is persecuted (as he complained to Acts 9.4.
Saul) in his true and living members. Where also Christ according to the
Spirit, that is, the Divine life, is rightly said (...), to be crucified, not
in the time past only, but (...), indefinitely, was, is, and will be crucified
so long as this power of Apostasy holds up. For the Praeter Tense in Prophecy
is very usual for the Future. But if any one disrelish this more Mystical
sense, I shall substitute that of Mr. Mede's, which the coursest Literalist
cannot evade, namely that by (...) is understood the Extent of the whole Roman
Empire within which Christ was literally crucified. See Mr. Mede upon the Text.

The Vision of the Woman crowned with twelve stars (which number signifies
the pure and Apostolical Church) Rev. 12.6.
her being in the wilderness 1260 days, he interprets of the extinguishing the
Church, to outward sight at least, at Rome, by the Miracles and Sorceries of
Simon Magus, (which yet is a suspected History) and her appearing only in the
country and villages, which are but as a Desert in respect of the populosity of
that renowned City. But the time of 1260 days he makes out by no History. To
say nothing how this interpretation depends on another very harsh one, namely
the expounding, Verse. 5.
And her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne, of the disappearing
of the Church by the seductions of Simon. Whenas to be carried up to the throne
of God surely signifies Magistracy, as (...) Magistrates. As is intimated also
in the foregoing part of the verse, that he should rule the nations with a rod
of iron.

The Vision of the Rev. 17.3.
Whore sitting upon the Scarlet Beast with seven heads and ten horns, and, if
you will, of the Beast coming out of the sea, Chap. 13. (For we may put them
together, they being the same according to Grotius his own confession) This
Beast he makes the Sin of Idolatry. Which is quite out of the way of
interpreting Prophetic Schemes, where Beasts signify Kingdoms or Dominions,
as is plain out of Daniel. But the Ten horns he will allow to be Ten kings: in
which he were right, if he had acknowledged a body fit to bear them. The Seven
heads he makes the seven Caesar's, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
Vespasian, Titus. But if the Caesar's be heads, there must be more heads then
seven: for there were four Caesar's before Claudius, and I think thirty after
Titus that were not Christians. But Claudius, says he, is the first that
banished the Christian Teachers. Which act was yet so inconsiderable, that the
First persecution was fixed on Nero, and the other Nine noted persecutions were
after Titus, the last of them raging a little before Constantine the Great. So
that there is a juster reason that this Beast should have above thirty heads
then but seven.

Again, in this Beast which the Prophet John resembles to a Rev. 13.2.
Leopard in his body, and to have the feet of a Bear and the mouth of a Lion,
he will have Claudius, who before was one of the heads of the Beast, now to be
the Body thereof; and Domitian, who is later then the last of these Seven
Caesar's, and so in order more like the Tail, to be the Mouth of the Beast, and
in chap. 17. to be the Beast it self. So much of forcedness and incoherency is
there in the making out this false Hypothesis. That also is harsh in my
judgment, the making presently one of these Heads, which were before Caesar's,
to be the Capitol at Rome; though it be said to be Verse. 3.
wounded to death, and that by the stroke of a Verse. 14.
sword, and to be healed also: which methinks are very unnaturally applicable
to a Hill or a Tower. He pretends he has hit the time of Verse. 5.
the forty two months this Beast should make war: but he referrs to no
History; and Helvicus affixes the beginning of the Second persecution to the
Tenth of Domitian's reign: Whence it will not be Three years and an half, but
rather Six years, that he wars against the Saints.

But the chiefest artifice of his misinterpretation is upon Chap. 17. of the
Revelation. Where the Beast Rev. 17.8.
that was, and is not, and is to ascend out of the bottomless pit, and to go
into perdition, he again applies to Domitian, making nothing of transfiguring a
single Head into a whole Beast. But the description is more accurate, verse. 10,
etc. The seven heads are seven kings; five are fallen, and one is, and the
other is not yet come: and when he comes, he must continue a short space. And
the Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and
goes into perdition. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten kings, which
have received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the
Beast.

The five kings here that are fallen, says Grotius, are Claudius, Nero, Galba,
Otho, and Vitellius: which how fond a conceit it is, I have already
demonstrated. And one is, that is, says he, Vespasian, in whose reign it is
supposed, not proved, that John wrote these Visions. The other is not yet come,
namely Titus. And when he comes, must continue but a short time. But Galba,
Otho, and Vitellius much shorter. The Beast that was and is not, to wit
Domitian, who was Emperor while his father Vespasian was absent from Rome.
Which if he were really, and not styled so out of complement and flattery, the
application is handsome. For then it was sometimes true of him, that he was,
and is not, and shall be Emperor again. He is the eighth. Domitian is indeed
the eighth and so distinct an head and so considerable, as reigning longer then
any of his predecessors, that he quite spoils the interpretation. For thus the
Beast will be eight-headed, not seven-headed, contrary to the Vision: Which
those words, and is of the seven, do therefore correct, and show that the
eighth is not so the eighth but that there are still but seven heads: which See
Mr. Mede's Comment. Apocalypt. upon this 17. Chapter.
this exposition can never unriddle. To say nothing how if (...) signify he is
the son of some of the seven, it would have been less ambiguous to have said
(...), or rather (...). For he was not the son of all seven, but of Vespasian
only. Verse 12.
The ten horns are ten kings, which have received no kingdom as yet, etc. This
Grotius himself expounds of the Ostrogothi, Wisigothi, Vandali, Gepidae,
Longobardi, Heruli, Burgundiones, Hunni, Franci, Saxones. These are the ten
horns of the Beast Domitian, (for Grotius will have Domitian this Beast,)
growing up and acting some ages after the Beast ceased to be. Which is an
interpretation so extravagant, that nothing can be more.

The last Synchronal of the Six Trumpets that we shall touch upon, is the
Revel. 13.11.
Two-horned Beast: Which Grotius against all analogy of Prophetic
interpretation expounds of Art Magic, not of any Polity either Ecclesiastical
or Civil. The horns like those of a Lamb, are Two Christian Virtues imitated by
Magicians, Temperance in diet and Abstinence from Venery. But Abstinence from
Venery is common to other Religions with Christianity: and to abstain from
flesh and wine no Christian precept at all. His haling also of the Ghost of
Achilles and Statue of Apollonius to the making up an exposition of Verse. 14.
(...), understanding by (...) the Umbra of Achilles, which is unusual, or the
Statue of Apollonius made by his followers; and then presently in the same
breath to interpret (...) (when it had so often signified either the Statue of
Apollonius or Umbra of Achilles) concerning Images in general, is to make the
Scripture an Image of wax, and to mold it into what shape we please.

8. But there is yet a further and more substantial eviction of Grotius his
mistake upon the account of the number of the Beast. For certainly that must be
the Rev. 13.17. where it is the Beast, namely the Two-horned Beast, not the
Image of the Beast, to which the Number belongs.
Two-horned Beast to whom the number 666 can rationally be applied: which
Grotius would fit to Ulpius the known name of Trajan the Emperor, which he
reads OYLPIOC, making C stand for six. But considering it is called the number
of the name of the Beast, by this conceit Trajan would be the Beast. Which is
contrary to the law of Prophetic Schemes, where Beast signifies not any
particular man, but a State Politic, and also against his former exposition of
the Beast, which according to him must be either Idolatry or Magic. Wherefore
(...) is far more passable in that regard then this of OYLPIOC. To say
nothing how it is called the number of the Beast, without mentioning any name;
as also the number of a man, without intimating any thing to do with his name.
Which plainly imports that there is a further reach then an allusion to any
man's name or the name of any State. But the meaning of Verse. 18. For it is the
number of a man.
(...), is, That it is Numerus humanus, such a number as men usually deal with,
and may be numbered by humane Art. But it seems there is some skill to be used
therein, because he says, here is wisdom, and, let him that has
understanding calculate the number of the Beast. Which if it were but the
putting of the numeral letters of some Name together, would be but a very petty
piece of skill. All the skill or rather luck would be to find out the Name, but
there would be no skill at all in calculating of the Number. But the Text
says, Let him that has skill calculate the number of the Beast; and it sets
down the very number that is to be numbered. Which number yet cannot be numbered
after the manner of men (which way notwithstanding is intimated) but by
Extraction of the Root: and therefore undoubtedly Mr. Potter has found out the
true and solid solution of this Mystery.

Concerning which no man can fail to be satisfied, unless either ignorance or
prejudice make him incapable, if he consider, First, in general, what rich
mysteries the Spirit of God has been pleased to wrap up in Numbers. Of which
there are many pregnant examples in the Creation of the world distributed into
Six days. The meaning whereof is not otherwise to be understood but by the
nature and powers of Numbers, as I have clearly enough shown in the Defense of
my Philosophic Cabbala.

And then in the next place (which is closer to the purpose) if he take notice
of what the abovesaid Author urges most pertinently, That other Numbers in
Scripture are of necessity to be numbered thus by the extraction of the Root
either Square or Cubick, to know the particular dimensions of things numbered by
them. As those Stones mentioned 1 Kings 7.10. which are said to be some of
eight, others of ten Cubits: Which must needs be the Cubick sum of each
stone, as he has undeniably demonstrated. That Square numbers are also taken
notice of, is evident from Ezekiel 48.20. Five and twenty thousand by five and
twenty thousand. But to come nearer to the business in hand, the Cubical sum
of the new Jerusalem, namely, Twelve thousand furlongs, is set down in the
Chap. 21.16.
Apocalypse; of which there can be no sense in way of numbering but to find the
Perimeter thereof. Which is not to be done but by the extraction of the Cubick
root. The measure also of the Wall, Verse 17.
an hundred forty four cubits, is utterly unapplicable thereto if we look upon
it as the number of one Line. For it would be too little for the Perimeter by
far, and too great for the altitude thereof: wherefore the measure of the
thickness and height of the Wall is the Root of an hundred forty four, namely
Twelve.

Thirdly therefore, the applicability of the number 144 to the Holy City
appearing in the Root thereof, to wit 12, which is a number peculiarly
consecrated to signify the chief matters of the new Jerusalem; The
Chiliarchies also or Regiments, as I may so call them, of the Lamb being summed
up in this number in the very beginning of that Rev. 14.1.
Chapter that immediately follows the mention of the number of the Beast, and
being made up of twelve times twelve Chiliades, as appears chap. 7. how
unexceptionable a warrant and assurance is it, that the numbering of the number
of the Beast must be the finding out of the Root of his number also, and that
the (...) lies not betwixt 144 and 666 so much as betwixt 12 and 25, and that
as 12 is the number of the pure and Apostolic Church, so 25 of the lapsed and
Antichristian?

This is the clear and unbyassed reason of the thing in Abstracto, let it light
where it will. But it lights so pat upon the Romish Hierarchy, that a man
cannot but be amazed at so exact a Providence. For this lucky and learned
Writer has out of History made it even over-clear, that Twenty Five is a
character as essentially interwoven into the Hierarchy of Rome as Twelve is
into the State of the new Jerusalem. And those six main things that this holy
City is set out by in the Apocalypse, namely 1. Twelve Gates, 2. Twelve Angels
at the Gates, 3. Twelve Tribes written on the Gates, 4. Twelve Foundations with
names written on them, 5. Twelve thousand Furlongs, the solid measure of the
City, 6. Twelve manner of fruits of the Tree of life,
have their (...) exactly in the Roman Hierarchy and City, viz. 1. Five and
twenty Gates, whether taken literally, or mystically for Churches to baptize
in, 2. Five and twenty Angels, that is, Pastors, 3. Five and twenty Titles or
Parishes, 4. Five and twenty Cardinals, 5. Five and twenty thousand Furlongs,
the Perimeter of which Cube is the circuit of Rome, as the Perimeter of the
Cube twelve thousand Furlongs the circuit of Jerusalem, 6. Five and twenty
Articles of the Creed which should be the food of the Tree of life to all
believers.
In these essential matters and in many other things beside has he evidently
shown how exactly the root of 666 is applicable to the Roman Hierarchy; to
whose Treatise I must refer thee for further satisfaction. Which thou can not
fail of, if thou be free from prejudice, and furnished but with a tolerable
insight in Geometry and Arithmetic.

The greatest and most obvious Objection against his interpretation is, That
666 is not a perfect Square number as 144 is. For they will demand, if 25 be
the number aimed at, why was not the express number of the Beast rather 625,
the exact square of 25? or why not any other number betwixt 625 and 676 as well
as 666? To which I briefly answer, That as it was not expressed by the Root but
by the Square, for concealment sake; so for the same reason not by the perfect
Square, there being so smart a clang of the Root it self at the end of it,
which might have hindered the completion of the Prophecy, and awakened them into
an overgreat caution how they affected the number of 25, it being so
considerable a part of the number of the Beast, and might have betrayed or
discovered the mystery of numbering it also too soon to the world. And for the
numbers betwixt 625 and 676, I demand, why not 666 as well as any of the rest?
For having once passed by the true Square, for which there was so good reason,
any modest man might judge the choice of the rest free and indifferent.

But besides, that there may want no exactness in this mystery, the number 666
bears along with it very important significations and very apposite to the
matter it is applied to: As that noted by Mr. Mede, That the Idolatrous poison
of the Sixth head is signified thereby, pervading all the body of this
Antichristian Beast. That also of Grotius is ingenious, Senarius numerus res
hujus mundi significat, ut Septenarius res seculi melioris. So that by this
account both the outside and inside of this number of the Beast is worldly,
carnal and sensual. For the Root also, viz. 25, intimates the same nature; the
Root of that Root being Five, an Hieroglyphick of Sensuality and stupid
adhesion to the Objects of the outward Senses; which are the chief faculties of
the Soul that are caressed and employed in the Roman Religion. There their
Religion begins, and there it ends, as it is in this number 25, which is made
by 5 into it self, and ends in 5 again. This is the circuit of their
superstitious performances that reach not the rectifying of the inward, but are
mere fruitless, though bewitching, entertainments of the outward man.

And lastly, the above cited Author's own account is not only very witty, but
equally solid, in my judgment, concerning the nearer approximation of the Root
of 666 (taking in the fraction) to 26 then to 25, that both these numbers may
have a pretense to be the Root. For thereby the number 666 does more
exquisitely and unavoidably figure out the Papal Hierarchy. By its Root 25,
the twenty five Cardinals in distinction to the Pope, an Head above them. By
26, the twenty five Cardinals with the Pope, who pretends also when he pleases
to be one of the Cardinals. But he adds also another reason of this number,
which is not rashly to be rejected: That as 144, being a perfect Square, sets
out the figure of the Area of Jerusalem, so the most perfect figure of 666 has
the same proportion of length and breadth that the figure of the Area of Rome.
These argumentations will seem very strange and odd to such as are not so much
as acquainted with the first rudiments of Arithmetic and Geometry, or at least
have not taken notice that the ancientest and best Wisdom has been hid in the
Symbols of Numbers; which is notorius in Pythagoras his School. But he that
seriously considers what small sense can be made by a Philosopher of the Six
days Creation and God's resting on the Seventh, without this key of the
natures of Numbers and Figures, will be enforced to confess, That there is one
supreme Wisdom that has ever attended the Church and the holy Scriptures, from
end to end, which in the abstrusest mysteries thereof has been pleased to make
use of a method of concealment which is Numeral, or, if I may so speak,
Cabbalistical.

9. The last Synchronals are those that are contemporary to the Seventh
Trumpet, and commence at the ending of the Sixth, and end at the day of
Judgment properly so called, that immediately leads to Hell or Paradise. These
Synchronals are the Ligation of Satan, the blessed Millennium, or Reign of
Christ with his Saints upon Earth, the Bride of the Lamb, the New Jerusalem,
and the Company of Palm-bearers. The connaturality of the things comprised
under this Synchronism I have hinted already; I shall only here bring Grotius
his Expositions of the chief of them into view. The Rev. 19.7.
Bride of the Lamb, he interprets of Constantine's Family and Retinue; wherein
he commits a gross Parachronism. For it is plain this Spouse is to be married
to Christ after the destruction of the City by fire, as it appears both by the
order of these Visions, and by chap. 19. v. 2, 3. But the burning of Rome by
Totilas was after Constantine's time. The beginning of the Revel. 20.
Millennium Grotius affixes to an Edict of Constantine's, which Eusebius speaks
of, and wherein there is mention made of the Ligation of Satan. This makes a
pretty show, as also his interpreting the reign of the Martyrs with Christ, of
that honor they had done them at their Monuments. But it is to be considered
in how short a time that honor was turned into Idolatrous reproach, as also
how the thousand years according to his account are expired above three hundred
years ago; from whence commences the Devil's being let loose: Which we cannot
term Verse 3.
(...) a little time in respect of the Millennium, it being no less then a
third part; and it is no good sense, if it be not understood in respect of it.

But which is still worse, while he interprets the Devil's being let loose of
the invasion of the Ottoman Family upon Christendom, he reminds us of the
great victories the Saracens had, who were as very Devils as the Turks, and yet
had vexed the Christian world much, before the year 800. So that according to
this account the Devil was let loose in the midst of the Millennium, and has
been loose almost a Millennium already, which therefore in respect of the
Millennium cannot be (...). Upon this false Hypothesis hangs the conceit of the
Turks besieging Constantinople, to be the begirting of the holy City by the
numerous armies of Gog and Magog. For the Greeks themselves styled
Constantinople New Sion, as Grotius has noted. But it is plain the Exposition
is a mere hallucination, because the holy and beloved City in the Prophecy is
not taken, God interposing by fire from Heaven, and sweeping all away by that
final judgment. But the Turks have taken this Sion, and have peaceably
possessed it these two hundred years.

I shall conclude with the Revel. 21.2.
new Jerusalem, the Lambs Bride, adorned for her husband; which Grotius
interprets of the Catholic Church made now more splendid with outward
ornaments by the care and cost of Princes. Which in my apprehension is no good
sense; Marriage rather signifying the bringing in some people to Christ that
were not united to him before, or at least the appearing of a people that was
before hid, then the external adorning of them that were already the known and
professed people of Christ. Besides that the times that Grotius points at are
the most unlike that new Jerusalem, which is the Church recovered to her
Apostolical Symmetry again, and to be Verse 15.
measured by the golden reed of the Angel, and which runs all upon Twelves, to
show that it is purely Apostolic, and has no other foundation nor structure
then Christ and his Apostles. For the whole solid Content thereof, Length,
Breadth and Height, is Verse 16.
twelve thousand furlongs: the breadth of Verse 17.
the wall also and the height thereof is measured by Twelve. So that there is
nothing in this new Jerusalem but what is pure and Apostolical; which is not so
in the garishly-adorned Church that Grotius looks at. Besides that it is said
there was Verse 22.
no Temple there; whenas every Church is a Temple under the Roman Hierarchy.

10. I might have examined his Expositions of the Rev. 16.
Vials also with other passages, wherein I could have discovered the like
errors and mistakes. But what I have instanced in already, is sufficient to
show upon what unnatural, distorted, nay I may say impossible, applications
they are cast that would attempt the interpreting of the Apocalypse without the
guide of Synchronisms taken from the innate Characters of the Visions
themselves: but by the benefit of that Guide how easy and natural sense is
made of every Vision, and how perfectly answerable to History and Events, as is
manifest in the Expositions of Mr. Mede. Whom I have not preferred thus before
Grotius out of any ill will or disrespect to that Miracle of his Age for
Learning and Ingenuity, but merely out of love to the Truth, as I am verily
persuaded Grotius has framed his Interpretations; but withal (which is a
further commendation of him) out of a very deep sense of the advantages of
Peace, and out of a Spirit of Sweetness, Candor and Humanity, for which I do
believe him singular and eminent. And verily if I were not conscious to my self
that the very same spirit did in some measure act me in this discovery of his
mistakes, that did him in committing of them, I mean the sense of Peace and
Common good of the Church, I had rather be in his Errors accompanied with
Humanity and Kindness of Spirit, then be in a Truth that must needs be attended
with Salvageness, Ferocity and Fury. But as the Truth I stand for is above
Grotius's mistakes, so I hope the good of my design will not appear inferior
to his, after you have considered the Benefit of Mr. Mede's interpretations of
the Apocalypse, as well as the Truth thereof.

CHAP. XVII. 1. That (...) does not implie, That most of the matters in the
Apocalypse appertain to the Destruction of Jerusalem and to Rome Heathen. 2.
The important Usefulness of this Book for the evincing of a Particular
Providence, the Existence of Angels, and the ratification of the highest points
in Christianity. 3. How excellent an Engine it is against the extravagancy and
fury of Fanatic Enthusiasts. 4. How the Mouths of the Jews and Atheists are
stopped thereby. 5. That it is a Mirror to behold the nature of the Apostasy
of the Roman Church in. 6. And also for the Reformed Churches to examine
themselves by, whether they be quite emerged out of this Apostasy; with the
Author's scruple that makes him suspect they are not. 7. What of Will Worship
and Idolatry seems still to cleave to us. 8. Further Information offered to us
from the Vision of the slain Witnesses. 9. The dangerous mistakes and purposes
of some heated Meditatours upon the Fifth Monarchy. 10. The most Useful
consideration of the approach of the Millennium, and how the Time may be
retarded, if not forfeited, by their faithlesness and hypocrisy who are most
concerned to hasten on those good days.
1. AND truly the Benefit of the Apocalypse so interpreted as Mr. Mede has
expounded it, is invaluable. For the Visions are so perfectly and patly
applicable to acknowledged History this way that he goes; that he that will not
believe the Prophecies fulfilled in those things he produces, cannot believe
the fulfilling of any Prophecies at all: whenas on the other side, if the
Applications were no more weighty, nor clearer and fitter then they are
Grotius's way, this Book of Prophecies would be utterly Useless, it being in
the power of no man that is not extremely credulous to be satisfied with such
lame, imperfect, nay, as I said, impossible Interpretations. Wherefore the
Vindication of the Method of Mr. Mede in interpreting this Book, is really the
rescuing of the Book it self into that power and use it ought to have in the
Church: For it is a standing Light to all Ages thereof, and the greatest to the
last.

Nor do those Expressions of Rev. 1.1. and chapter 22.6.
(...), and Verse. 3.
(...), and Chapter 22.7.
(...), at all infringe the Truth we have declared, or import that all the
matters in the Apocalypse appertain to either the Destruction of Jerusalem or
to Rome Heathen. For as for the former, it seems very needless to spend many
Visions upon it; our Savior having prophesied of it so clearly before, and
with all useful circumstances that could be desired. How vain therefore is it
to imagine so many Visions spent thereupon in this Book, that are not only
obscurer then our Savior's Prophecy, but so obscure that they are now not
tolerably applicable to the known Events; and therefore must be utterly useless
to the Church, because they could neither forewarn them of any thing before the
Event, nor be a Record of God's foresight and Providence after it?

And for the latter, I say there are Visions plain and express enough
concerning Heathen Rome, and her bloody persecuting the Church, in the battle
of Michael and the Dragon. The first six Seals also appertain to that time
while Rome was Heathen; the Sixth whereof signifies the mighty change of things
to the advantage of the Church, the Empire becoming Christian. Wherefore there
is no want of Visions for Heathen Rome, nor any but what were very significant
and useful; as all the six Seals and the Vision of Michael and the Dragon are:
Which encourage the Church to be patient under those Ten bloody persecutions,
in assurance that at last they should have the victory over their persecuting
enemy. And what could they desire more to be signified then this in such
general Prophecies as these? Nay I say further, they might have counted the
nearness of their deliverance by the posture of the Beasts that were the
Praeco's of the four first Seals, observing from what quarter such Emperors
came as bore the greatest similitude with the Riders of the red, black and pale
Horses: and when the Persecution was the highest, their Hopes were the
clearest, and the Event nearest; as appears from the easy meaning of the Fifth
and Sixth Seal. So that there are Visions enough concerning the Roman Empire
while it was Pagan, so far forth as it concerned the Church.

And why should there not be Visions that concern the Empire when it was turned
Christian, and Paganized again under Christianity, and in this Apostasy
cruelly oppressed and persecuted the true members of Christ? Why should not
this State of things be prophesied of as well as the former? To this there are
but these two Answers to be given; Either that the Church is not apostatized,
or that those Phrases (...) and (...) do plainly signify that the scope of the
Apocalypse reaches not so far. The former answer I could wish were solid, but
have no leisure here to dispute it. The latter I conceive is very weak and
unsatisfactory, and from an inference as ridiculous as his would be, that upon
the report that such a Comedy or Tragedy was to be acted half a quarter of an
hour hence, which, I think, is very quickly, should conclude that all the Acts
and Scenes thereof would not be a quarter of an hour long. And to make use of
the suffrage of our very Adversaries, Grotius himself interprets (...) not of
the whole series of Visions, but of some of them only, and particularly of the
Destruction of Jerusalem; and othersome they are fain to expound of such Events
as have happened but two hundred years ago, and of such as are not to come to
pass before the End of the World. Which is a demonstration of the insolidity of
this Exception against Mr. Mede's method of interpreting this Book: Whose
meaning for the general we having cleared from all possible prejudices, let us
now consider the important Usefulness thereof.

2. In the first place therefore, in my apprehension it is the clearest and
plainest conviction that can be offered to the Understanding of a man, That
there is a special Providence over the Church of God, and That there are
Angels, the Ministers of this Providence, to consider how there has been the
communication of Prophecies concerning the affairs of the Church and Family of
God by the ministry of Angels appearing to his Servants the Prophets from
Abraham's time, the Father of the faithful, to this very age and onwards; the
truth of the Events plainly lying before our eyes, either in things that still
continue, or are to be read in undoubted History. Which is a sign that those
Prophets who said they did commune with Angels, did not commune with their own
Fancies, but had real conference with those Celestial Inhabitants. As Abraham
certainly had Genesis 18. where the Angel tells him, That in him all the nations
of the earth shall be blessed, namely, by Christ who was of his seed. Nor did
Daniel, when he was by the River Dan. 8.16.
Ulai, talk with his own shadow, as the truth of the Event proves, but with an
Angel; As also Gabriel was, who imparted to him the Prophecy of the Seventy
weeks, then which nothing can be more accurately answering to the Event. To
which you may add those Angels that appeared to him on the banks of the River
Chap. 10.
Hiddekel, the Event of whose predictions are partly come to pass and partly
now fulfilling under Chap. 12.7.
the Time and Times and half a Time, which also are almost expired, and are the
Period of the latter times pointed at by those Verse 11, 12.
numbers, 1290 days and 1335 days mentioned by the Angel on the banks of the
river Hiddekel, as Mr. Mede has I think very solidly interpreted. Which general
intimations in Daniel's Prophecies are more particularly and more fully set out
in the Apocalypse of S. John: who also plainly professes himself to have had
conference with Angels; and his Visions suting the Events so punctually, it is
a demonstration of both the continued Providence of God over his Church, and of
the Existence of those Angelical Beings. Which is the First great Fruit and Use
of this Book of the Apocalypse, that he that reads and rightly observes the
exact applicableness of the Visions to the Event, cannot doubt of the Existence
of God and of his Holy Angels, nor of his Special Providence over the Church.

I might add also, nor of the Souls Immortality; Christ appearing so plainly to
John, and speaking to him in these words, Rev. 1.18.
I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen:
and have the Keys of hell and death, that is, of raising men at the last day,
etc. To which you may add the Description of the General Resurrection, chap.
20. Which things being uttered by a Prophet whose Visions hitherto so
punctually answer the known Events of things, cannot but be an unexceptionable
Demonstration of the Resurrection of Christ and of our own Immortality: And
indeed of the whole Truth of Christianity, and especially of those two highest
points thereof, the Divinity of Christ and the Triunity of the Godhead. For it
being so generally acknowledged by the Church of God, That the Gospel and the
Epistles of S. John, and this Book of the Apocalypse, have all one Author, as
indeed the very matter and style of them do further argue, (the Phrases and
matter coming nearest the notions of the ancient Cabbala of the Jews, as in
particular, his using of the term (...) in them all concerning Christ;) it
cannot but be a great satisfaction that a person so highly honored with the
gift of Divine Revelation is so express an assertor of that holy Mystery, as
he is surely in the beginning of his Gospel. Which therefore even they are also
to believe with reverence that are not able to fit themselves with any easy
conception thereof; it being not at all unreasonable that one so highly
inspired as S. John, should have something communicated to him that passes the
understanding of ordinary capacities: So that Pride here must be the mother of
Unbelief. And this is the first and main general Use that may be made of this
eminently-Divine Book of the Apocalypse, and has reached I must confess further
then the order of things requires at this time: But I cannot but prefer the
Usefulness of my Discourse before the elegancy and accuracy of my proposed
Method.

3. But then secondly, There is also another excellent Use thereof even against
those whom either the pretense to or affectation of such kind of Knowledge has
made either to appear or really to be very mad and extravagant. For I think it
not improbable that some men may be content to appear this way minded upon
design and for advantage. Which political abuse of the holy Oracles of God is
in my apprehension one of the worst and the most execrable kinds of Sacrilege
that is. But by being well skilled in the meaning of the Visions of this Book,
we shall be the more able to defeat the evil purposes of such Enthusiasts and
Impostours, who being wholly ignorant of the affairs of the Kingdom of Christ,
will yet pretend to be the great Instaurators of his Empire, and the beginners
of the blessed Millennium, and of the Reign of the Spirit. Whose fraud and
villainy is easily discoverable from the solidly-framed Synchronisms of Mr.
Mede.

I speak chiefly in reference to that great Prophet of the Familists, whom I
have so often named, whose imposture is easily confutable out of the
Apocalypse. For the Church having continued for some Ages Symmetral, that is,
Revel. 11.1.
commensurable to the Reed of the Angel (which Ages were before the Apostasy
of the Church;) it is evident that the Faith and Practice of the Church
Catholic then is allowable and approvable by the rule of God, and therefore
not to be reproved by men, nor to be reformed any further then into that
Primitive state, when they held the Creed in the plain literal sense thereof
without any shuffling Allegories, as also the distinction of Laity and Clergy,
and met together in places set apart for public Worship. Which is an
undeniable testimony out of this so divinely-inspired Prophet S. John against
all those that would lay aside the Person of Christ, and deny his Divinity,
with the Triunity of the Godhead, antiquate his Mediatorship, make no
distinction betwixt Laity and Clergy, would pull down Churches, with the like
wild fanatical professions and intentions. Which certainly would have been
accounted abominable in those Ages that the Church was Symmetral, which lasted
till about four hundred years from the Birth of Christ; as appears out of that
ingenious inference of Mr. Mede from the proportion of the outward Court of the
Temple to the inward, which according to Villalpandus is as 7 to 2, and
therefore 1260 days of Apostasy implies 360 days of the Purity of the Church
foregoing this Apostasy, which added to the years from the Birth of Christ to
his Suffering make up 400 years or thereabouts. Or else, if you reckon from
these very times (wherein this period of Apostasy should be near its
expiration) backward, and take 1260 from 1660, there will remain 400 years
again: Till which time the Faith and Practice of the Catholic Church is out of
the Visions of the Apocalypse assured to us as approvable before God. Which I
look upon as a fit Engine to beat back the fury of such Reformers as those
Enthusiasts are I mentioned, and a demonstration that for all their heat and
canting they are but Demoniacks, and no divinely-inspired men.

But as in the times that the Messiah was personally to come into the world
many Impostours instigated by the Devil stood up to deceive the people of the
Jews, and brought them into much misery and mischief; so now the times being at
hand that Christ is to appear in the Spirit, and the dead Witnesses are to rise
up and rule, many false Dispensations will crowd in with fury, boldness and
tumult, and pretend to be the true Dispensation. Which will not be prevented by
slurring the main Scope of the Apocalypse, and pretending that all the matters
there are meant either of the Destruction of Jerusalem or else of Rome Heathen,
(this is but like the sprinkling a little water upon too violent a fire, which
will but make it rage the more;) but by applying our minds more thoroughly to
understand the meaning of these Divine Visions, that we may be the more able
thereby to steer the zeal of men off from doing so much hurt as they may be
instigated to do; that the wheat be not burnt up with the cockle, but that
what is pure and Apostolical may be preserved.

And so also in Secular affairs: Whereas the very Power of the Civil Magistrate
and his security is hazarded by wild and hot-spirited men, that would raise a
Fifth Monarchy by Blood and Rapine, and tumble down all Government, according
as either their own Enthusiastic heat shall instigate, or opportunity invite
or give leave; pretending that all Authority, all Orders and Degrees in this
Fourth Monarchy are unholy and profane, and that they are the Pioners to
level all plain, and break all Government in pieces, that Christ, the Fifth
Monarch, may personally come and begin his Millennial Empire upon Earth; it
behooves the Christian Rulers, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, to be so well
acquainted with the meaning of these Prophecies, that they may be able to stop
the mouths of these loud Fanatics by those holy Oracles they pervert thus and
abuse, and to show them that there is no proof at all of such things as they
thus vainly imagine: as assuredly there is not, as I have already shown in my
interpretation of the fourth and fifth verses of the Twentieth chapter; and
that it was both the Doctrine of the Apostles, and Practice of the Church,
while it was Symmetral, to obey the Magistrate and live peaceably under him,
though he were an Heathen: how much more then are they to obey them that are
Christians? That Superior and Inferior are as natural in a people as Head and
Feet in an humane body; and that therefore no man can decry Government but out
of madness or some villainous design to enthrall others at last under the yoke
of their own lawless Fury. That there are Kings and Governors under the
renewed state of things in the Millennium, as appears Revel. 21. v. 24. and
that no frame of Government can be evil, where Governors rule by a good law.
And lastly, That to make any thing essentially evil or good that is in it self
indifferent and left so by Christ and his Apostles, is a fundamental
Transgression against the Law of the New Jerusalem, whose Foundation and
Structure is all upon Twelve. But instead of convincing them by what is true,
to endeavor to stop their fury by imposing upon them by false Glosses, is the
next way to imbolden them the more, and make them contemn the authority of them
that should guide them and instruct them. For the prefiguration of the
Apostasy of the Church, and her Recovery out of it (which may be done, at
least without changing any Temporal Powers and Superiorities) is a thing so
plain, that it cannot be hid.

4. A third Use of the Apocalypse is the Answering a very crooked Objection
both from the Jew and Atheist. For seeing things have been so ill for so many
Ages of the Church together, that the World has grown Pagan again after a
manner, and that the Turk has also swallowed so great a part of the Church;
surely there is no true Religion at all, nor Providence, will the Atheist say;
and the Jew, at least that their Messiah is not yet come, Idolatry having in a
manner filled all the Nations that profess him. But to both we may answer, That
nothing has happened in all this but what was foreseen by God, and predicted
plainly in these Visions of the Apocalypse; to say nothing of what Daniel had
more generally adumbrated before. Which therefore is rather an Argument for
Providence then against it, and a demonstration of the Messiah's faithful
vigilancie over his Church, rather then of his not yet having gathered one in
the world. For it is plain that Christ is the Author of those holy Visions, and
that the great Plagues that have fallen upon the Church, either by the Turk or
others, have been by reason of their Apostasy from the Purity of the
Apostolic Faith and Practice.

5. A fourth Use, and that an eminent one, of the Apocalypse is, to be as a
clear Mirror of both the Apostasy of the Church and of the Way of her
Recovery. The Apostasy of the Church is intimated more generally in the number
of the Name of the Beast, whose Root being 25, as the Root of the Number of the
Apostolic Church 12, intimates that their Apostasy consists, in the general,
of adding to the Root and Foundation of Christian Religion supernumerary
Articles of their own invention and coining, being not contented with the
Essentials or Fundamentals of Faith, which were clearly and plainly delivered
by the twelve Apostles, and are easily without any dispute and contest
understood to be in the holy Scriptures. I intimated also before from the Root
of 666, being 25, resolvable also into 5 again, That their Apostatical Religion
was framed chiefly to gratify and entertain the external Senses, that it began
there and ended there, and let the Diviner and more heavenly motions of the
Mind lie asleep. But yet more particularly this Apostasy is indigitated by the
Square 666; as if the poison of the sixth Head of the Beast, that red bloody
Dragon, that is, cruel Persecution and Idolatry, were spread through the body of
the Apostatized Church: Whose chief part the Two-horned Beast must needs be,
Revel. 13.
who made the whole Roman Empire very lively resemble the Beast, whose deadly
wound he healed, that is, the ancient Pagan Power. But enough of this, it being
a Theme that will be over-eagerly listened to by some, and obstinately, without
any consideration and reason, rejected by others.

6. But this Apocalyptick Glass is not only for the Romanist but all the
Churches of Christendom to look their faces in, and to consider how much they
are still engaged, or how far emerged out of this Lapse and Apostasy, or
whether they be quite emerged out of it or no. For I must confess I do much
scruple the matter, and that upon account of the 1260 days, wherein the Woman
is in the Wilderness, and the Witnesses mourn in sackcloth. Concerning the
Epoch of which days the very highest Mr. Mede pitches upon is 365, namely,
from the death of Julian, which will end the 1260 days, Anno 1625. But many
years before this were there the same different Churches that there are now.
Wherefore it is a sign that the Woman was not then, nor yet is, out of the
Wilderness; but that the true Church is still hid in these divisions of
Churches, and that all hitherto for the outward face of things is but a wild
Desert.

Moreover those Divisions of Churches which were made about an hundred years
ago, and which immediately became the Churches of this or that Polity; if those
Alterations then had been into a way purely Apostolical, it had been plainly
the enlivening of the Witnesses, and the calling of them into Heaven, many
years before the expiration of the 1260 days. Which is a strong presumption all
is not yet right, and that the Witnesses are not yet alive, nor the Woman yet
out of the Wilderness.

7. Wherefore out of a due humility and modesty suspecting our selves not to
have emerged quite out of this General Apostasy of the Church, into which the
Spirit of God has foretold she would be lapsed for 1260 years; let us see if we
can find out what Remainders of this Lapse are still upon us. Which I suppose
we shall be the more ready to acknowledge, by how much more they shall be found
to symbolize with that Church whom we justly judge to be so manifest an
Apostate. Now I demand, Is not one Fundamental miscarriage in that Church, That
they make things Fundamental that are not, and mingle their own humane
Inventions with the infallible Oracles of God, and imperiously obtrude them
upon the people? We are very sensible our selves of this in Ceremonies. And are
not uncertain and useless Opinions as arrant a ceremony as Ceremonies
themselves, which we so kick against and fly away from, like wild horses? Nay I
may add also, That it will be hard to wash our hands clean from that other
badge of the Beast, Unchristian Persecution in points of Religion, and that for
differences where Christ himself has made none, but our selves only imagine
them.

Again, as for Idolatry, another known Character of the Beast, cannot we find
that also amongst our selves? I do not mean Covetousness only, which the
Apostle calls Idolatry, but the adventuring to erect Imaginations, if not
Images, of God, some more horrid and affrightful then those that stand in the
most polluted Temples of the Pagans, (the Statue of Saturn tearing his own
children a pieces with his teeth and eating of them, is but an Hieroglyphick of
Mercy in comparison thereof;) while in the mean time the mournful Witnesses
testify both out of Moses and out of S. John, That the nature of God is quite
another thing. God is Love, and he that abides in Love abides in God, and God
in him. The Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth. And yet what forcible assaults are there to set
up this Idol or false Image in the Temple of every man's Mind, which otherwise
should be consecrated to the Love of God and the warm and comfortable residence
of his Holy Spirit? That also is a blind Image of God, worse then the Pagan
Cupid, which some conceited Fondlings set up in favor of themselves, That God
sees no sin in his Elect, let them sin never so grossly; whenas the Scripture
expressly affirms, That his eyes behold, his eyelids try the Children of men,
and That he is of purer eyes then to endure iniquity any where. To say nothing
that Opinions themselves that are framed by humane curiosity in points of
Religion, though otherwise harmless, become Idols, and have the very same
effect that Idols have, that is, They lay asleep the Mind, and besot it so,
that it becomes senseless of the indispensable motions of the Divine life. And
further, That the tricking up our selves with such curiosities is but a
self-chosen holiness, and a worshipping and serving God after our own humor,
which assuredly is little better then Idolatry.

8. And lastly more compendiously and at once, Let us consider the nature of
the Witnesses slain by the Beast of the bottomless pit. Which is a childish
thing to conceit to be Two persons, forasmuch as they prophesy for 1260 years
together, as Mr. Mede has well defined; and I also add, that they are dead in
another sense even that time they are said to prophesy, as I have Chap. 15.
Sect. 4.
above noted, and I think there is very little doubt to be made of the
Interpretation. Let us therefore now consider what these Two Witnesses are. And
truly according to the richness of Prophetic expression I do not think they
are restrained to one single signification, but type out at least these two
things, The Old and New Testament, which by a Prosopopoeia are here called the
Two Witnesses; or else The Magistracy and Ministry, forasmuch as those things
they are described by are allusions to Moses and Aaron, and to Zerobabel and
Ieshua. The Concinnity of the former interpretation does not depend only on
that obvious allusion to that Latin word Testament, but is further ratified
from the Greek (...) frequently signifiing the Laws or Institutes of God,
rendered also for (...). Not to add, that the Old and New Testament are,
whether they were called so or no, Two eximious Witnesses of the Mind of God
unto the World.

Wherefore now, more Prophetico, making these Two Books Two persons, they may
be said to be alive, or slain, either in a Political, or Moral sense. They
would be alive in a Political sense, if they had the only rule in the
transactions of the affairs of Church and Commonwealth: that there should be no
injunctions as indispensable in matters of Religion, but such as they plainly
determine, much less any thing against them. And so likewise in State Affairs
all Oppression and Tyranny would be prohibited. Wherefore while the Inventions
of men rule in the Church instead of the Dictates of those holy Oracles, and
while course Oppression and Tyranny over the members of Christ is prevalent,
that is, while men think they have power and wealth and wit and policy, merely
to tread down the people, and not to succor them and guide them for their real
good, and to ennoble their spirits as much as they are capable, rather then to
make them besotted vassals and slaves, to put out their eyes, to make
mill-horses of them, that they may the better droile and drudge for the
satisfaction of their lusts; wherever things are carried on this way, the
Beast of the bottomless Pit has slain the Two Witnesses in the Political sense,
the Law of God in the mean time protesting against their proceedings, both in
the Old and New Testament, as is plain to every one that peruses those Writings.

The Witnesses also would be alive in a Moral sense, if those indispensable
Precepts of life witnessed by them were really turned into life and practice in
us. For the External Word is but a dead letter, but then is properly alive,
when that life is begotten in us whereof it testifies. Which if it be
neglected; as also their Rule, so far forth as it respects Ecclesiastic
Policy, be declined, and men act, both in Political affairs and in their
private capacities, according to the Rules of men and their unprofitable
Institutes, and thereby neglect the indispensable Commands of God; who cannot
but see that the Two Witnesses we speak of are plainly slain, and that the Old
and New Testament are but as two liveless carcasses, lying unburied indeed,
(for they will not burn them, and put their ashes into an urne, and hide them
under ground, for fear of the people) but useless and unactive, having no power
to curb the wicked enormities of the world, who have taken up another
self-chosen Law to themselves, minted and forged by the false Antichristian
Church, consistent enough with, nay very favorable to, all those pomps and
vanities that we are sworn against in our very Baptism? Whence it is said that
the Inhabitants of the World are so glad and triumphant and send gifts to one
another upon the slaying of the Witnesses, Revel. 11.10.
their death conducing so much to the uncurbed fruition of all worldly and
carnal enjoyments; but the Church in the mean time becoming no better then
Verse. 8.
Sodom and Egypt, a land of Tyranny and Beastliness, a City of Carnality and
Oppression.

Wherein (to proceed to the other sense) Moses and Aaron, Zerobabel and Ieshua,
the holy and legitimate Magistracy and Ministry are slain, that is, kept out
of all Political power by this Beast out of the bottomless pit, (...) Which as
it may signify the Sea, may be understood of the Ten-horned Beast; but as it
may signify a deep pit in the earth, such as that from whence Smoke came and
the Locusts, may signify the Two-horned Beast, who is said to come out of the
Revel. 13.11.
Earth, and is the Master of that Wisdom that is earthly, sensual and devilish,
and which is accompanied with bloody zeal and strife about their vain and
useless Opinions and Ceremonies.

This, I believe, we will be prone enough to acknowledge against others, namely
in those dominions wherein Popery has so great a stroke: but it is more to our
advantage to examine also what is amiss at home. For it does not follow,
because the Number of the Beast is not upon us, that we do not Bestianize; nor
is it the purple spots, but the disease, that is mortiferous. But the case is
as if a man not yet knowing Sheep from Goats, should be told that those in such
a pasture that had such a Mark or figure upon them, were Goats: It were a fond
thing for him to think that this mark or figure were so of the essence of a
Goat, but that, when in another place he met with a creature so shaped, of the
like bigness, and with such a cry as a Goat has, he might take the boldness to
pronounce that that was a Goat too, though the abovesaid Marks were wanting.
Wherefore let us impartially consider whether we be yet pure Sheep or no.

If the Witnesses be dead in both a Moral and Political sense amongst us, that
is, if we follow the name or authority of any man, and be ruled more by that
then the plain Scriptures; if we are not content with such a Faith as is plain
out of them, and was the Faith of the Church when it was Symmetral; if by
fulsome and course Antinomianisme, by the doctrine of the Needlesness or
Impossibility of being good and of living according to the Precepts of Christ,
we hinder the Scripture from being alive in us, and by mingling conceits of our
own and imperiously imposing of them upon others hazard with some the belief of
the whole, and keep others out of such place and authority as naturally falls
to their share, though never so cordial and exemplary Christians according to
the old Symmetral pattern; we, having thus transgressed that holy, ancient and
Apostolic Number (12) by our newfangled additions, and adding also
Persecution thereto, do as certainly become or continue part of the Beast, as
the Goat is a Goat without the abovesaid mark and figure upon him.

Nor shall we ever be quit from the crime of slaying the Witnesses, till we lay
aside all heat and pride in preferring our own Opinions, whereby we do but make
void the weighty Precepts of Life, and make the Commandments of God of none
effect by our Traditions; engaging the affections of the people in things that
are unprofitable, and inuring them to lie cool to the indispensable Law of
Christ. Which is truly to slay the Witnesses, and to let them lie stark dead
in the streets. And while those that govern, govern for themselves, and love to
feel their own power, and forget that the very Rule of their Government is the
comfort and ennoblement of the spirits of the people, (that they may be free
and knowing, faithful Christians and Subjects) and that whatever any one has,
it is given him for the good of another, and not for the satisfaction of his
own vain lusts: while such miscarriages as these are in either Ministry or
Magistracy, Supreme or Subordinate, in what measure these are, in that measure
is Moses and Aaron, Zerobabel and Ieshua, the Old Testament and the New
Testament slain and cast out dead into the streets; and all Power, (let it
change into what frame it will) but the playing of the Leviathan in the waters
of the Sea, making the deep boil before him, and leaving an hoary tract of
froth after him, boasting himself in his Power and Title, that he is the Prince
of the children of Pride.

9. Wherefore that Millennial Happiness that some men talk so loud of, is not
in demolishing of all Ranks and Orders of Superiority in Church or State, which
things are natural and necessary; but in the right administration of affairs in
both, by those Orders of men. Who if they would reform all things according to
the Apostolic Rule, and institute such a Discipline as would countenance the
indispensable life of God, not the unprofitable humors of rash and fallible
men; and every one in their rank would pay their duties of support and succor
to the people, that every man that is honest and virtuous might live according
to his quality in a Christian comfortable way; the Tributes of Honors and
Titles to such Orders of men are but their just due, and become as well useful
as ornamentall to the world. It is therefore but a Fanatic or Satanick fury in
such that under pretense of ushering in the Fifth Monarchy, as they call it,
would destroy all Orders and Ranks in Church and State, as if the Wrath of man
could work the Righteousness of God: when neither these Orders themselves have
any unholiness in them, nor the Persons happily in possession are less Saints
then they that would pull them down. For if the enriching a man's self by the
destruction of others entitle a man to Saintship, the greatest Robbers are in
the readiest way to enter into the Holy of Holies. But such Zelots as these,
what miserable Redeemers they are like to prove, is too sadly prefigured by
that Jewish faction at Jerusalem, more intolerable by far to the Inhabitants
then the Enemy that besieged them.

Wherefore the gaping after a Fifth Monarchy in this sense, can be nothing else
but the thirsting after spoil and blood, many men being stimulated thereto by
the secret sting of the old Serpent in Envy to the Church of Christ, hoping to
root out the Gospel by destroying of settled Authority and by starving the
Ministry, and so to bring in a rabble of Fanatical Superstitions or
Atheistical Prophanenesses. The most certain prevention whereof, in my
judgment, is the Reduction of the Church, by those that are in Authority, to
such a frame as is purely Apostolical. For then the constitution of things will
be so sacred and unexceptionable, that it will awe and keep off the Villainy
and Boldness of such men that are otherwise encouraged by the conspicuous
intermixture of things false, Idolatrous and impious, to fly against all at
once, and to rend all into pieces. Besides that they row with the stream, and
the tide of Divine vengeance will carry them along; which will ever and anon
flow in upon the Church, till a true and sincere Reformation. For there is no
Stability to be expected till that City be raised, whose not only Foundation is
laid in Twelve, but whose Gates, Tribes* Angels, the breadth and height of the
wall, and the solid Content of the whole City, are nothing else but the
Replication still of Twelve throughout, that is to say, till that Church appear
that is purely Apostolical in Life and Doctrine.

10. Which times being so very near at hand, as appears by compute of
Prophecy, it should be a great encouragement for every one to look
thither-ward, and to shake off that Dullness and Lethargicalness that has
possessed the world so long, as if it would never be better. For this Article
of Infidelity among the rest keeps the Witnesses still dead in all the senses
abovenamed. Wherefore let every man reform himself, and exhort and encourage
his neighbor, and witness the good witness of the power of God to the
conquering and subduing of all manner of Sin. For these times come not on by
Rapine and Violence, but by the increase of Righteousness upon Earth. For the
real and speedy advancement whereof there is nothing more effectual then the
belief That God will now, in these last times of all, give more then ordinary
assistance to them that will be faithful in his Covenant, and that the work of
Righteousness will go on with much more ease then heretofore and with
infinitely better success.

Wherefore it is good striking while the Iron is hot, and making use of this
Day of Salvation, lest such Prophecies of grace being conditional, it may fare
with us as it did with the Israelites whose carcasses fell in the wilderness,
in a tedious delay and a long leading them about, who otherwise had in their
own persons entered the promised Land. So I do not see that it is impossible or
improbable but this Prophecy of the Churches change into so excellent a state
may be foreslacked by the ill management and faithlesness of them from whom God
more peculiarly expects that they should be industrious Laborers in this white
Harvest of Apostolic Purity and Sanctity; they having now for some time
separated from the great Babylon to build those that are lesser and more
tolerable, but yet not to be tolerated for ever; it being more then high time
they should clear up into an holy City of God. Otherwise I do not see but the
success is likely to answer the endeavors of them that are chiefly concerned.
And the variety of numbering the period of time by Days, Months and Semi-Times,
seems to threaten some such matter. And therefore according to that laxer
computation by Months and Semi-Times there may lie hid a reserve of delay for
thirty, nay an hundred or two hundred years longer then God otherwise intended
to commence this glorious Dispensation. But the certainty of the Events of
other Prophecies that precede in order, if this Promise be not conditional to
both Jew and Christian, is a Demonstration that it will not fail to take effect.

This is the faithfullest Account that I can give of the affairs of
Christendom from the pouring out of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, till
Christ's coming again in the Spirit to renew his lapsed Church into true
Holiness and Righteousness in the rising of the Witnesses and the reigning of
the Saints upon Earth a thousand years. The close of which will be The Day of
Judgment properly so called, which, after this long but not impertinent
Digression, if it be a Digression, we shall now take into consideration.

BOOK VI.
CHAP. I. 1. Three chief things considerable in Christ's Return to Judgment,
viz. The Visibility of his Person, The Resurrection of the Dead, and the
Conflagration of the World. 2. Places of Scripture to prove the Visibility of
his Person. 3. That there will be then a Resurrection of the dead not in a
Moral but a Natural sense, demonstrated from undeniable places of Scripture. 4.
Proofs out of Scripture for the Conflagration of the world, as out of Peter,
the 3 Chap. of his second Epistle. 5. An Interpretation of the 12 and 13
verses. 6. A Demonstration that the Apostle there describes the Conflagration
of the World. 7. A Confutation of their opinion that would interpret the
Apostle's description of the burning of Jerusalem. 8. That the coming of Christ
so often mentioned in these two Epistles of Peter is to be understood of his
Last coming to Judgment. 9, 10. Further confirmation of the said Assertion. 11.
Other places pointed at for the proving of the Conflagration.
1. IN the Return of Christ to Judgment these Three things are to be considered
as very nearly annected and comprehended in it; The Visibility of his Person
and pomp of his coming, The Resurrection of the Dead, and Conflagration of the
World. But because all these things are doubted by some that do not profess
themselves Anti-Scripturists, I shall first produce such places of Scripture as
do plainly assert these Points, and then in the next place show how Reasonable
the Assertion is.

2. The Visible or personal Return of Christ to Judgment, though it may be
proved from many places, yet I shall content my self with a few. And I must
confess I look upon the 24 of Matthew. from the 30 to the 32 verse, (where the
Son of Man is said to come in the clouds of Heaven with power and great glory,
and to send out his Angels with a mighty sound of a Trumpet) to be a pregnant
Testimony thereof. But the 29 verse to be a description of the state of the
World, especially of the Roman Empire, till the appearance of the sign of the
Son of Man. But whether this sign of the Son of Man be the same with the Son of
Man coming in the clouds, or some sign in the Heavens to be given long before
his coming, for the Conversion of the Jews, I take not upon me to decide. But
from the 32 to the 36 verse, I think there our Savior may reassume his first
Subject, the Destruction of Jerusalem; and therefore being within the view of
the Temple and of the City, he uses the pronoun (...) these things, in his
prophecy of them. But in the 36 verse, pursuing his prediction of the end of
the World, he says, (...), but concerning THAT day: and so he gives wholesome
precepts of watchfulness to his Church, to the end of this Chapter. Which sense
is very agreeable to the following Chapter, which most easily and naturally is
wholly to be understood of the last Judgment. But from the 31 verse of that
Chapter to the end, even they that would wind the former part of the Chapter to
another sense, Matthew. 25.31.
acknowledge it to be understood of the last Day. And there the Visible Pomp of
Christ coming to judge the World is plainly set down, viz. his sitting upon a
throne with his holy Angels about him. To these you may add the Acts 1. v. 11.
Testimony of the two men clothed in white shining raiments, that told the
Disciples as they were gazing up into Heaven after Christ, as he ascended, that
he should come down again in the same manner as they had seen him go into
Heaven: As also that of S. Paul to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17.
For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the Archangel and with the Trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with
them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we be ever with
the Lord. These places are so plain concerning the Visible Appearance of
Christ's Person in his coming to Judgment, that no tolerable Allegory can
elude them.

3. That there will be a Resurrection of the dead (in a natural not a moral
sense) at the same time, is as evident from the very last words I cited. For
who but a madman will interpret the meeting of Christ in the air in a moral
sense? If it had been written [ in the Heavens,] they would have shuffled it
off, and said, in the Heavenly being or Heavenly nature mystically understood.
But will they have the impudence not to acknowledge the aieriness and phantastry
of their Mysteries of Incredulity, when they must according to the same analogy
be driven to say that we shall at the Resurrection meet Christ in the Aerie
Being mystically understood? But it is as false a gloss to interpret the
doctrine of the Resurrection 1 Cor. 15. so as to exclude the Natural and
Physical sense of it, it being plain that such a Death and such a Resurrection
is spoken of concerning us, as is argued from the Death and the Resurrection of
Christ, who is said to die (...), for our sins; which is impossible to be
interpreted mystically. Read from the first to the eleventh verse, it is a
plain History. From whence the Apostle inferres that there is a blessed
Resurrection or glorious Immortality in Body and Soul which Christ will bestow
on all true believers at the last day: As himself has promised over and over
again in the sixth of S. John's Gospel, [ and I will raise him up at the last
day.] Many other places there are to this purpose in Scripture which I
willingly omit.

4. The third and last is the Conflagration of the World, of which I hold that
of S. Peter an undeniable Testimony; 2 Pet. 3.10.
But the Day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night; in which the
Heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat, the Earth also and the works therein shall be burnt up. The explication
of which Prophecy Mr. Ios. Mede has set down with a great deal of caution and
judgment. To which I should wholly subscribe, did I not believe that this
execution of Fire were the very last visible judgment God would do upon the
Rebellious generations of Adam, leaving them then to tumble with the Devils in
unsupportable torment and confusion.

5. And therefore I would expound (...) verse 13. But yet Notwithstanding, or
Nevertheless, before this Conflagration of the Earth we expect a new Heaven and
a new Earth, in a Political sense, in which Righteousness shall dwell. Nor does
that phrase verse 12. (...) looking for and hastening the coming of the Day of
God warrant any one to restrain this Prophecy to a Moral meaning, as if it
were only high expressions signifying something in our own power and to be done
by us. For (...) may be either an (...), and denote no more then (...), that
is, with great earnestness and diligence to expect; or if so be you take them
for two several things, and (...) must signify hastening, that sense is also
consistent enough with our Interpretation. For being the Day of the Lord is a
day of great Joy and ample Remunerations to the Godly, as well as of
Destruction to the Wicked, (and suppose it also comes not till Righteousness
has had its reign upon Earth) we may well be exhorted by our prayers and
conversations to hasten and accelerate as much as in us lies the coming of
either.

6. But that by no such mystical Interpretation as this the Earth can be
excused from being burnt by a visible and palpable Fire, is clear beyond all
exception from the 5, 6 and 7 verses of this Chapter. Where the Apostle
alleges against that usual Refuge and Security of Atheists, to wit, The
sameness and immutableness of the Law of Nature and the order or course of
things, that all things are as they were from the beginning, and ever will be
so, and that therefore God will never step out in such an extraordinary way to
Judgment; To this the Apostle opposes that eminent Example of God's Vengance in
bringing the Flood upon the old World and drowning the Earth in an immense
Deluge of Water: But the Heavens and the Earth which are now, says he, are
reserved unto fire against the day of Judgment and perdition of ungodly men.
Were the Waters in Noah's time natural, when God had a controversy with all
flesh, and shall the Fire that the world shall be destroyed with be spiritual?
But light-minded men whose hearts are made dark with Infidelity care not what
Antic Distorsions they make in interpreting Scripture, so they bring it but to
any show of compliance with their own Fancy and Incredulity.

7. I know there be that would understand by this burning of Heaven and Earth,
the destruction of the City of Jerusalem. But the description is too big by far
for so small a Work, and not likely to be understood of them it was intended as
a comfort to, it being so exceedingly well fitted to the Conflagration of the
World, and so disproportionated to the other Event. Moreover it is manifest
from the Scoffer's arguing against the Promise of Christ's coming ver. 4. (
That nature keeps still the same course it did since the beginning) that this
Coming of Christ was not understood by them (and consequently not by S. Peter)
of the burning of a City by war, (For such things have happened often, and so
they might not think it improbable Jerusalem might be burnt in due time;) but
of that final glorious coming of Christ to judge the World, which Judgment the
Conflagration of the Earth is to attend.

8. And truly if a man will but weigh things without prejudice, he shall find
the main matter of these two Epistles to be nothing else but an Exhortation to
grow perfect and established in all Christian Virtues from the hope of that
excellent Reward that shall be bestowed at the appearing and coming of the Lord
Jesus: as you may see in this second Epistle, 2 Pet. 1.11.
the first Chapter, For so an entrance shall be administered unto you abundantly
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.4.
Which is parallel to that in his first, where the Promise is an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled that fades not away, reserved in the Heavens; and
so on to the thirteenth verse. Which verses doubtless no unbiassed judgment
will ever understand of a delivery from any Temporal calamity, much less the
destruction of Jerusalem, from which place those dispersed Jews were far enough
removed, as far as Pontus, Cappadocia, Asia, Galatia, Bithynia. To say nothing
that the so-carefull an Inculcation of that sad Theme of the fatal destruction
of the holy City would not so much become the pen of this venerable Apostle,
nor the gust of them he wrote to, being Jews by Nation as well as Christians:
to neither of which capacities could that fearful destruction of their City be
so comfortable a contemplation, whenas it drew tears from our Savior's eyes
though at a greater distance of time. And his great solicitude that they should
have these things always in 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 14, 15. and Chap. 3.1.
remembrance after his death, is a sign that what he insists upon is a matter
of more consequence and longer continuance then what respects the Burning of
the City.

9. Furthermore, the Argument whereby he would set on these things upon the
Spirits and belief of them he wrote to, that he was an Eyewitness of the
glorious Transfiguration of Christ, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18.
when his person appeared in that splendor which might become a glorified
body, such as himself will appear in at his return to Judgment, makes it still
more reasonable that that (...), that powerful coming of Christ there
mentioned, is his Final coming in Glory, when he shall change our vile bodies
into the similitude of his glorious body according to the working of his
mighty power. This chief Article therefore of the Christian Faith, in which all
Christians are the most highly concerned, was that which the Apostle did press
so earnestly and carefully upon them before his departure, which was the chief
Prop of their Faith and Patience, and which he affirmed from a special
experiment of his own in that glorious Transfiguration on the Mount, (where
Moses and Elias talked with Christ, which was a most certain argument of the
Soul's Immortality) to be no cunningly-contrived fiction, but a certain Truth,
both from what he saw there before his eyes, and what he heard discoursed at
that holy meeting. Where the Passion of Christ was treated of, and the
exceeding glorious consequences of it; of which the greatest of all is his last
Return to Judgment, when he shall consummate the Happiness of all Believers
with everlasting glory, and so restore the Creation to a perfect recovery into
what they had fallen from, and punish the obstinate with eternal Fire. Which
things being declared without the circumstance of the series of Time, it was
easy for those three Auditors on the Mount to conceive them to be very shortly
to come to pass, and therefore to make that Enquiry of Elias his coming first,
according as their Scribes taught them out of Malachi; if simply the Appearance
of Elias and his going away again, contrary to their expectation and desire,
did not put them upon that question.

10. But that the glorious Coming or powerful Presence of Christ, which he so
solicitously would ascertain them of, is not his coming to destroy Jerusalem,
appears further from the nineteenth verse of this Chapter; 2 Pet. 1.19.
where, after he has endeavored to establish them in the belief of that main
Article, from the resplendent Transfiguration of the person of Christ (of which
he was an Eyewitness on mount Tabor, as also as Ear-witness of that voice from
Heaven, This is my beloved Son, and of that precious Promise that he was to be
the Performer of at the last day; which Transfiguration was a visible pledge of
his being invested into that supereminent office of the glorious Judge of the
quick and the dead) and had recommended to them also the Prophecies of the Old
Testament as a light that shines in the dark to give some direction; yet he
insinuates further that they shall have a more clear and firm assurance of this
so concerning a Truth, the day dawning and the day star arising at length in
their hearts. Which is very harsh to apply to any thing but to the more clear
conviction, by the Spirit of God in their Souls, of the truth of this Promise
of an Eternal Reward, of that Crown of a blessed Immortality to be given at
Christ's Return to Judgment at the last day. These and such like considerations
make it seem to me utterly incredible that by this Fiery Destruction should be
understood the burning of Jerusalem, and not the Conflagration of the Earth;
and by the Appearing and Coming of Christ so often mentioned in these Epistles,
his Vengeance on the Jews, and not his final Return to judge the whole World:
a supposition in my apprehension far more agreeable to the weight and gravity
of this Apostles style.

Thus much by the way for the rescuing of these two excellent Epistles to that
more natural and more solemn and useful sense they were ever understood in,
till of late; though I must confess they have not depraved the meaning of the
seventh verse of the last Chapter of the second Epistle, it being indeed
impossible to interpret it otherwise then of the burning of the World, which
alone is sufficient for our present purpose.

11. We might add several other passages as well in the Prophets as in the
Apocalypse and other places, that tend to the same purpose with this of S.
Peter, for the proving of this final Judgment of God by Fire; as also such
places of Scripture elsewhere as implie that there is some notorious Punishment
reserved for the Devils, which shall be inflicted upon them at last. For when
and upon what occasion can it begin so fitly as at the Conflagration of the
World? That there is a certain horrible torment in store for them is plain from
Matthew. 8.29. Art thou come to torment us before the time? and 2 Pet. 2.4. (as
also Ep. of Jude ver. 6.) where the Devils are said to be reserved in chains of
Darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day, (...). That God has confined them
to this lower Region of caliginous Air as to a dark Prison till the great
Assizes, as some very judiciously expound it. With which places if you compare
that last Malediction or severe sentence of our Savior against the wicked, Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, it will
be very easy to infer what this final Punishment is, and when, and how it will
begin. But we need not insist upon these things, we having sufficiently proved
the point already.

CHAP. II. 1. The Fitness and Necessity of Christ's visible Return to Judgment.
2. Further arguments of his Return to Judgment, for the convincing of them that
believe the Miraculousness of his Birth, his Transfiguration, his Ascension,
etc. 3. Arguments directed to those that are more prone to Infidelity, taken
out of History, where such things are found to have happened already in some
measure as are expected at Christ's visible Appearance. 4. That before
extraordinary Judgments there have usually strange Prodigies appeared by the
Ministry of Angels, as before great Plagues or Pestilences. 5. As also before
the ruin of Countries by War. 6. Before the swallowing down Antioch by an
Earthquake. 7. At the firing of Sodom and Gomorrha. 8. And lastly, before the
destruction of Jerusalem.
1. IT remains now that we show, That these Three main Circumstances of
Christ's coming to Judgment (which we have proved to be contained in the
Mystery of our Religion) are in themselves congruous and reasonable. Which we
shall first make good concerning the Visible Pomp and glorious Appearance of
the person of Christ in the Air, attended by his holy Angels, he descending as
it were with the noise of Battle and Alarm of War, an Archangel sounding a
Trumpet before him as the Heavenly Camp marches on and moves. For he will
certainly appear in an Equipage most terrible and glorious, and in this solemn
and dreadful Order he will face the bold, profane and Atheistical World, See
Book 2. chap. 5. sect. 3. and chapter 6. sect. 1.
who by no other means would be convinced of either a Providence or a Deity,
but with supercilious looks and scornful speeches have contemned all the hopes
of future Reward, and laughed at the Religious for weak-brain'd Fools or
Madmen. But then shall the hearts of the faithful be filled with joy, they
seeing so comfortable an Appearance of him whom their Soul longed for; who will
reward all their Injuries, Sorrows and Reproaches with condign Honor and
Happiness. Nay I may say that Christ will then vindicate himself from all those
scorns and revilements that bold and profane Wretches out of their Sensuality
and High-mindedness have cast upon him from Age to Age, pleasing themselves and
gratifying other Epicurean Brutes of like impiety with themselves with their
ungodly jears and scoffs against him who was the highest Example of Divine
Perfection that ever appeared in the World. Nay I add further, That there is
in a manner a Necessity of this Personal Return of Christ thus in glory to
judge the World according to his promise, that these Blasphemers may not be
encouraged to reckon him with such Impostours as David George and Mahomet, who
though they prefixed a shorter time to their followers, shall not again be
heard of till they appear before his Tribunal of whom we speak.

2. And as for those that do believe that the Person of Christ does still
subsist, that he was so miraculously born, so gloriously transfigured on the
Mount, so wonderfully raised up from the dead, and did so conspicuously ascend
into Heaven, Act. 1. v. 10.
two Angels in bright garments affirming to them that beheld him, that he would
thus return again, viz. in a personal Visibility; what stranger thing is it
that he should return, then that which they acknowledge to be true of him
already? And how fit is it that he should still retain this Supremacy over the
World, none else having bought it so dearly as himself did by his most bitter
Death and Passion? and he that is so compassionate a Mediator by reason of his
Humane nature, will prove the more fit and equal Judge. And that there will be
a Period and full pause of the Generations of men upon earth, I have already
little less then demonstrated, though it be enough to show there is no
incongruity nor inconvenience in it. See Book 2. chapter 6. sect. 2.
For that is sufficient to stop modest men from either inventing or embracing
such evasive Allegories as do elude the Testimony of the Scripture in an
Article of so weighty a concernment as this.

3. And as for those that are greater Infidels, and look upon the above-framed
description of Christ's coming to Judgment to be exceeding improbable, if not
impossible, I say, nothing but the very dullness of Atheism it self can make
them conceit thus. For it being once admitted, That there are Angels as well as
men, this glorious Appearance of Christ with the holy Angels is as easy and
natural to admit, as the Martial Pomp of a mighty Army, or the Solemnity of a
great Assize. But that there are Spirits or Angels, and that they can appear to
men in what Region of the Air they please, History affords innumerable
instances. And how much for the miraculousness of it does this pompous Approach
of Christ in the clouds differ from those fightings and skirmishings of whole
Armies in the Air, of which all Ages almost and all Historians ring, as well
sacred as profane? The clattering also of Armor and the sound of the Trumpet
have been very frequently heard from the Heavens, as Pliny and other
Historians do report. Virgil and Ovid record these things with verses suitable
to the solemnity of the Prodigies. Armorum sonitum toto Germania coelo
Audiit. -- Georgic. lib. 1.
All over the Heavens the noise of Arms was heard
In Germany.
And Ovid concerning the same matter; Arma ferunt inter nigras crepitantia nubes
Terribilesque tubas auditaque cornua coelo.
Clashing of Arms amidst black pitchy clouds
Was heard, with Trumpets hoarse and Cornets loud.
So that the Apostles prediction of Christ's coming thus visibly to judge the
world, attended with the heavenly Hosts, and the Archangel sounding a Trumpet
before him, is so far from being impossible, that it has in some manner and
measure been already in the World, though those astonishing Prodigies fall
infinitely short of the Glory and Terror of the Day of Judgment.

4. Besides, if we may compare small things with great, as certainly we may,
the analogy being so conspicuous, what particular judgment and vengeance of
note has God done in the World, wherein there has not been a sensible
administration of Angels forerunning it? I might make a very copious induction,
but I will keep my self within measure. Before sweeping Plagues and Wars how
frequent are these Apparitions! Cardan makes mention of several of the first
kind. Cardan de Rerum varietate lib. 14. cap. 69.
Before the plague at Galaratum there appeared to a young man, as he was riding
thither in a rainy Night, a Cart all covered with fire, which, gallop he as
fast as he would, was ever over against him: he heard the voice also of
Rusticks saying, Cave, Cave, Take heed, Take heed. This Spectre attended him
till he got to the Temple of St. Laurence, which was without the town gate, and
there sunk into the ground both Cart, Oxen, Rusticks, and Fire and all.

The same Author relates also of a stranger prodigy of a Pestilence in Peru
upon the banks of the river Consote near Carthage, Idem lib. 15. cap. 81.
where there appeared to certain women washing there, as their custom was, a
man of a huge stature with his belly cut up and exenterated, and two children
in his arms: he spoke to them, and told them that all the Christian women
should die, and the greatest part of them also. This Spectre was also seen on
horseback on the side of the Hills, running swifter then the wind. A mighty
Plague followed, that destroyed almost all the Inhabitants of the place.

That also out of Fincelius is very remarkable, See Henningus Grosius his
Magica de Spectris, lib. 1. Sect. 124.
The appearing of twelve or fifteen men in Marchia of huge and horrid statures
in the corn field with sithes in their hands, mowing down Oats with might and
main, so that the very hitting of the sithes was plainly heard afar off, but
in the mean time no Oats were cut down. People endeavored to apprehend them,
but they ran too swift for them, and yet they nevertheless mowed as laboriously
in their flight as before. A great Plague ensued thereupon. I could add to
these what I have been credibly informed has happened in England.

5. But I shall rather pass to the other Prodigies of War; concerning which
Machiavel does plainly confess as well as Cardan, that before great Commotions,
Wars, and sacking of Cities, there have often appeared strange Prodigies, See
Machiavel de Republica, lib. 1. cap. 56.
and particularly the skirmishing of Armies in the Air, such as was seen over
Aretium before the coming of the French King into Italy, as Machiavel himself
testifies. And Cardan also does furnish us with farther examples, Cardan de
Rerum varietate, lib. 15. cap. 78.
as that of Mexico before it was destroyed, where the like Prodigies happened. A
Cross also was seen by the Mexicans in the East, and a man of so high stature,
that his head seemed to touch the Heavens, which much terrified them. He writes
also of the Picts in England, that before their destruction there were seen
fiery Armies in Heaven fighting with one another; and that in the confines
betwixt the Picts and Scots at midday there was so great a noise of armed
horsemen that encountered one another, that it almost frighted the poor
countrymen out of their wits.

See Joan. Garibus, de Phaenomenis System. 2.
6. That was also a terrible Prodigy that preceded that hideous ruin of
Antioch by an Earthquake. There was seen over that great City a Spectrum in the
Air of a vast stature in the habit of a Woman, but with an horrid countenance,
so that she frighted all that looked on her, but especially when she slashed a
whip which she had in her hand, the cracks thereof were so loud and dreadful.
This continued for fifteen nights together, from two a clock till four, in the
month of May, Anno 349.

7. But there is nothing more accommodate to our purpose then the destruction
of Sodom and Gomorrha with fire from Heaven, a compendious representation of
the final burning of the World. For before that vengeance was done upon those
two wicked Cities, three Angels appeared to Abraham, and revealed that design
to him: two also visited Lot, and by a main hand drew him out of the Fearful
destruction.

8. I might add many more Examples, but I shall content my self with the
superaddition only of that one and most eminent instance of the destruction of
Jerusalem, wherein the invisible Powers, I mean the Angels, were discerned to
act in a sensible and palpable manner. Which is deprehended not only by that
flaming sword that hung over the City for a whole year together, and a sudden
light in the nightime that shone about the Altar and the Temple, so that it
made it as light as day; as also the spontaneous opening of the East gate of
the Temple, which was so heavy and massy, as being made of brass, that it was
as much as twenty men could do to shut it, (to which you may add the Voice
that was heard by the Priests, as they went into the Temple by night at the
time of Pentecost, (...) Let us go hence:) but mainly, and what is most of all
to my purpose, Joseph. de bello Judaico, lib: 7. cap. 12.
by those (...), those chariots and armed companies of Soldiers which were
seen round about in the Air before Sunset to sally out of the clouds, and to
fill all with the numerosity of their troops. Wherefore if such particular
Judgments were executed with a visible attendance of the Angels of God; when
he shall execute Vengeance on the whole World, can we think it strange if he
then shall appear more then ordinarily glorious in his Heavenly Retinue,
thousand thousands ministering unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
standing before him, Dan. 7.
as the Prophet speaks? Which Prophecy if it could respect shorter Periods of
time, yet certainly the fullest and most proper Completion of it will be at the
last Judgment.

CHAP. III. 1. The Resurrection of the dead by how much more rigidly defined,
according to every circumstance and punctilio delivered by Theologers, by so
much the more pleasant to the ears of the Atheists. 2. That the Resurrection in
the Scholastic Notion thereof was in all likelihood the great Stone of offense
to those two Enthusiasts of Delph and Amsterdam, and emboldened them to turn
the whole Gospel into an Allegory. 3. The incurable condition of Enthusiasts.
4. The Atheists first Objection against the Scholastic Resurrection proposed.
5. His second Objection. 6. His third and last Objection. 7. That his
Objections do not demonstrate an absolute impossibility of the Scholastic
Resurrection, with the Author's purpose of answering them upon other Grounds.
1. WE come now to the second particular propounded, The Resurrection of the
dead, which I dare say the Atheist will listen to with more then ordinary
attention, and greedily suck in the Doctrine, provided it be stated with the
most curious circumstances that the rigidest of Theologers will describe it by,
and mainly by these two; That we shall have the same Numerical Bodies in which
we lived here on Earth, and That those very bodies, the molds being turned
aside, shall start out of the Grave. This doctrine the Atheist very dearly hugs
as a pledge, in his bold conceit, of the falseness and vanity of all the other
Articles of Religion. Wherefore he phansying the upshot of Christianity to be
so groundless and incredible, he fairly quits himself of the trouble of all,
and yields himself up wholly to the pleasures of this present World.

2. And I question not but that this is the great Stone of offense upon which
those two blind Enthusiasts of Delph and Amsterdam (of whom I have so often
spoken) fell and split themselves; the Rock which made them suffer the
Shipwreck of their faith, in allegorizing the Resurrection of the dead and the
last Judgment into a mere Moral sense, and in conceiting the last Trump to be
only their doctrine, and that Christ was come in them to judge the quick and
the dead; and that the happy Resurrection so much talked of and so long
expected, was nothing else but to be raised up into the like life and belief
with these Fanatics, as I must call them: and I would ask them, what is meant
by the Resurrection of the unjust, if this be the Resurrection of the just? or
if this be the Resurrection to life, what is meant by the Resurrection to
condemnation?

3. But in truth it is scarce fit to ask Enthusiasts any questions at all,
they, under pretense of inspiration, wholly disclaiming the use of Reason, and
imperiously dictating their own wilful Imaginations to the World for certain
and undisputable Revelations: And therefore in this regard there is more hope
of the Atheists then of them, who by propounding their Objections put men in a
capacity of finding out an Answer; but when men will haughtily and
superciliously deny a Truth under the pretense of the Spirit, without rendering
a reason, this Ignorance or rather Madness is utterly incurable.

4. Leaving therefore these men to the full enjoyment of their own phansies,
let us hear the Objections of the Atheists against this Article so stated as
has been above defined; which are chiefly Three.

First, against the numerical Identity of our Bodies in the Resurrection:
Because, say they, the Anthropophagi or Cannibals are continually fed with man's
flesh, as also they feed one upon another. To give therefore the highest
instance against this Assertion; How can that man, say they, that has been fed
with man's flesh in a manner perpetually, and at last himself fed upon by men,
have the same Body at the Resurrection? For he will be left as bare of flesh,
as the Crow was of feathers when every bird had pecked away what belonged unto
themselves. Besides the hazard of losing that flesh that was his own, (if any
was his own) by being himself devoured and digested into the flesh and body of
others.

5. Their second Objection is against men's Bodies rising out of their graves,
and runs thus; It implies, say they, that all men were buried: whenas Myriads
have been drowned in the seas and eaten by fishes. Besides infinite numbers
that have had the usual burial of their Nations, have had a very inconsiderable
part of their bodies committed to the ground; only a few ashes in an Urn; the
rest of their body, in the burning, vanishing into Air. Which in some sort
comes to pass in them that are wholly buried in the Earth. For the Body rots and
melts away there into fume and vapors, which the heat of the Sun exhales and
draws into the Air. Some it may be shoot up into the blades of Grass, which
either rots upon the ground, or is food for horses, to whose shares it does not
fall to have honest burial, but lie to rot also in the open fields, or else are
eaten by those Creatures that at length do so. So that the Soul, if she were
to seek for her Body, would hear more likely news of it in the Air then in the
Earth. So incredible is it, that it is kept circumscribed in so particular a
part of the Earth as the Grave.

6. And lastly, to make all sure, They endeavor to enervate the very grounds
and dig down the deepest foundation of this Assertion of Identity of bodies at
the Resurrection, by alleging that the very end thereof implies a
contradiction. For whereas the reason is given, That the Body that was partner
either in unlawful pleasures or the laudable pains and labors of the Soul,
might partake also of her Punishment or Reward: here they pretend that the
Body is not the same numerical body throughout the whole life of a man, no
more then a river is the same river, but that the Body wastes and is restored,
that the present Spirits, Blood and Flesh are passing, after the manner of a
river.
(...), as Heraclitus speaks, and new supplies are perpetually made by food;
and that therefore we have no more the same numerical body always then the same
numerical clothes, but that in both we wear out the old and get new, but in our
clothes at once, in our Bodies by degrees. Wherefore to contend that the same
numerical body shall rise that was buried, and that upon point of Justice, is
to contend for the greatest piece of Injustice that may be: For so shall the
Body of an old man be punished for the sins of that Body he had when he was
young.

7. These and such like are the Arguments of those that would overthrow
Religion upon this advange, as they deem it; and something they drive at that
seems to tend to a persuasion of some kind of incongruity and incredibility in
the matter, but it will not all amount to an utter Impossibility. But to me it
seems so inconsiderable, that I shall not vouchsafe it an Answer upon those
terms and that Hypothesis they go upon. I shall soar a little higher, that my
way being aloft, as the Wise man speaks, I may be free from the snares beneath.

But what I answer I would be understood to direct to the Atheist and the
Infidel, permitting them that already believe the substance, to vary their
phansies with what circumstances they please. But for these others I must hold
them to hard meat, and cut my skirts as short as I can, that they sit not upon
them.

CHAP. IV. 1. An Answer to their first and last Cavil, from those Principles of
Plato's School, That the Soul is the Man, and That the Body perceives nothing.
2. An Answer to their second, by rightly interpreting what is meant by Rising
out of the grave in the general notion thereof. 3. That there is no warrant out
of Scripture for the same numerical body, but rather the contrary. 4. The
Atheists Objection from the word Resurrectio answered, whose sense is explained
out of the Hebrew and Greek. 5. (...) and (...), what the meaning of them is in
that general sense which is applicable as well to the Resurrection of the
unjust as of the just.
1. I Answer therefore first out of the best sort of Philosophers, That Animus
cujusque is est quisque, and (...). That the Soul of every man is his
individual Person, and That she alone it is that hears, that sees, that enjoies
pleasure and undergoes pain; and That the Body is not sensible of any thing, no
more then a man's doublet when he is well bastinado'd. And this Answer takes
away all occasion of the First and Last Cavil. For why are men solicitous of
the same numerical body, but that they may be sure to find themselves the same
numerical persons? But it being most certain there is no stable Personality of
a man but what is in his Soul, (for if the Body be Essential to this numerical
Identity, a grown man has not the same individuation he had when he was
Christened;) it is manifest, that if there be the same Soul, there is exactly
the same Person; and that the change of the Body causes no more real difference
of Personality then the change of clothes. And why do men plead for the
consociation of the Soul's numerical body in Reward or Punishment, but that
they fancy the Body capable of pleasure and pain? But they err, not knowing
the nature of things, the Body being utterly incapable of all sense and
cogitation, as not only the best of the Platonists, but also that excellent
Philosopher Descartes has determined, and is abundantly demonstrated in my See
Book 2. chapter 2. of that Treatise, as also chap. 4, 5, 6.
Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul.

2. This therefore being cleared, I answer also to their second Cavil,
concerning men's rising out of the very graves they weary buried in, That the
expression is only Prophetical and Symbolical, (though I do not deny but that
in some it may happen literally to be true) and that it signifies no more then
thus, That the same men that die and are buried, shall as truly appear in their
own persons at the Day of Judgment, as if those Bodies that were interred
should be presently actuated by their Souls again, and should start out of
their graves; and to give an instance, they shall be as truly the same persons
as Lazarus, when he rose body and soul out of the Grave, after he had lien
there four days together. But that universal expression of men's rising out of
the Grave is but a Prophetical Scheme of Speech the more strongly to strike our
senses, as I have already intimated in my See Book 1. chapter 6. sect. 3.
exposition of the 15 of 1 Cor. against the Psychopannychites. And therefore
the greater accumulation of absurdities that can be made against that
circumstance, it will the more confirm that useful Interpretation of mine.

3. This succor we have against the Atheists out of Philosophy; but I answer
further as concerning the Scripture it self, (which is the only certain measure
of the truth of our Religion, and to which alone I dare finally stand, not
thinking my self bound to make good every conceit that either the Pride,
Precipitancie, Inadvertencie or Ignorance of fallible Teachers have obtruded
upon the World,) That I dare challenge him to produce any place of Scripture
out of which he can make it appear, That the Mystery of the Resurrection
implies the resuscitation of the same numerical body. The most pregnant of all
is Job 19, which later Interpreters are now so wise as not to understand at all
of the Resurrection. The 1 Cor. 15. that Chapter is so far from asserting this
curiosity, that it plainly says it is not the same body; but that as God gives
to the blades of corn grains quite distinct from that which was sown, so at the
Resurrection he will give the Soul a Body quite different from that which was
buried. Now if it be not the same Body that was buried, what need it run into
the Earth to come out again? Wherefore it is plain that the Apostle there
writes, as I said before, in a Prophetical and Symbolical style.

4. But the Atheist will still hang on and object further, That the very term
Resurrectio implies that the same body shall rise again, for that only that
falls can be said properly to rise again. But the Answer will be easy, the
Objection being grounded merely upon a mistake of the sense of the word, which
is to be interpreted out of those higher Originals the Greek and Hebrew, and
not out of the Latin, though the word in Latin does not always implie an
individual Restitution of what is gone or fallen: as in that verse in Ovid,
Victa tamen vinces subversaque Troja resurges.
But this is not so near to our purpose; let us rather consider the Greek word
(...) which Resurrectio supplies in Latin, and therefore must be made to be of
as large a sense as it. Now (...) is so far from signifying (in some places)
the Reproduction or Recuperation of the same thing that was before, that it
bears no sense at all of Reiteration in it. As Matthew. 22.24. (...). and Genes.
7. there (...) and (...) signify merely a living subsistence: and therefore
(...) in an active signification according to this sense will be nothing else
but a giving or continuing life and subsistence to a thing. The word in the
Hebrew that answers to (...) is (...), which Translators interpret a Living
substance: whence (...) according to this analogy may very well bear the same
latitude of sense that (...), they being both words that are rendered
Resurrectio, but simply of themselves signify only Vivification or erection
unto life, or the being made a living Creature.

But seeing that men are Creatures that have been once alive, and are to be
made alive again, and to become sensible and visible (...) at the day of
Judgment; therefore (...) and (...) are ordinarily translated Revivificatio,
and (...) and (...) are to be understood in the same sense that implies a
Recuperation of life.

5. Now the Jewish Rabbis, as Buxtorf has noted, are very critical in these
words, appropriating (...) to the Resurrection of the just, but the other to
the Revivification of the wicked; though they sometimes again confound them.
But that which is nearest to our purpose is to consider in what signification
of the words the thing signified is competible to the unjust as well as to the
just. And I conceive it is that which the Apostle Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 5.10. For
we must all appear before the Tribunal of Christ, that every man may receive
according to what he has done in his body, whether good or evil. But as well
the wicked as the just, before they thus appear, are really in life and Being;
though to us they be (...), dead, vanished and invisible. (...), Luke 20. But
all are alive and visible to God, even the bad as well as the good. Therefore
the Resurrection or Revivification (for the word signifies no more then so)
that is common to both, is this; That they become palpable and visible (...),
and appear at that general Assizes at the last Day. For then all the World good
and bad shall not only be alive to God, but also alive and visible to one
another. And this is that (...) or Revivificatio that is common to all. And
that this notion is solid appears from hence, in that Luke by saying, For they
all live to God, implies that they are dead in reference to men. Wherefore so
far forth as they are said to be dead, so far forth may they be said to be
revived or to be raised from the dead; as the Ghosts of men are said to be by
art Magic, because they are made to appear. But the Devil is not said to be
raised from the dead, because he was never properly said to be alive amongst
us, or to live amongst us.

CHAP. V. 1. An Objection against the Resurrection, from the Activity of the
Soul out of her Body, with the first Answer thereto. 2. The second Answer. 3.
The special significations of (...) and (...), the first belonging to the
unjust, the latter to the just. 4. That the life that is led on the Earth or in
this lower Region of the Air is more truly a Death then a Life. 5. The manner
of our recovering our Celestial Body at the last Day. 6. And of the
accomplishment of the Promise of Christ therein.
1. I Should proceed, but that I must be contented to be interrupted by one
Objection more, which is this; If the Souls of men live and act out of their
Bodies before the Resurrection, what need is there of any Resurrection of the
Body? For what want have they of any Bodies at all, if their Soul can live and
act without them? But I answer,

First, That we are not infallibly assured but that the Souls as well of the
Good as the Bad after Death have an Aereal Body, in which, if Stories be true,
they have sometimes appeared after their decease. And that they may act, think
and understand in these Aerie vehicles, as well as other Spirits do, is not at
all incredible nor improbable; the Faculties of an humane Soul being not
inferior to the Faculties of some Orders of Spirits, See my Treatise of The
Immorality of the Soul, Book 3. chapter 17.
whose Understandings are not so clear but that they are divided in their
judgments, some being of one Sect of Philosophers, some of another, as those
that appeared to Cardan's father professed themselves Avenroists.

2. But secondly, if it were granted that the Souls of the deceased were stripped
of all Corporeity, and yet could act, we may nothwithstanding very well
conceive that that which once had so intimate union with the grossest of
Bodies, has certainly a very strong propension, natural complacency or
essential aptitude always to join with some Body or other. Which power if we
may not infallibly affirm to be so catching, that the Soul is never
disappointed of some kind of Vehicle, yet we may safely pronounce, that when
that natural capacity is satisfied, there accrues a greater accomplishment and
more vigorous enjoiment to the Soul, her Operations thereby being made more
sensible and vivid. And therefore that great Reward of an Heavenly, Ethereal
or Immortal body, which shall be given at the last day, is of very high
concernment for the completing of the happiness of the Souls of the faithful,
whether we suppose them in the mean time to live without Bodies, or to be alive
only in Aerie vehicles; the Ibid. Book 3. chap. 1.
latter whereof if examined to the bottom, will appear the most
unexceptionable opinion, and least liable to the Cavils of Gainsaiers. But
whether of them be most true I leave to the grave and wise to determine.

3. This Rub being thus removed out of the way, we now proceed to the special
significations of (...) and (...). The former of which is called (...), the
Resurrection to Condemnation; the latter (...), and simply (...), the
Resurrection to life, the Resurrection of the just, and simply the
Resurrection, as it is 1 Cor. 15. and elsewhere. Wherefore (...) or (...) as
they belong to the wicked, have no further sense of Revivification then in that
general way we have explained, (...) implying that they were raised and made to
appear at this day of general Summons, merely to receive the sentence of
Eternal Death, Go ye accursed into everlasting fire, etc. But now (...) as it
is appropriated to the Resurrection of the just, and is termed (...), implies
in it a further and more peculiar Revivification or Re-enlivening, viz. into
that life which was lost by the first Fall, that Paradisiacal life, that
Ethereal and Heavenly life, which is unrecoverable unless we recover those
Heavenly glorified bodies which are promised to us by Christ at his coming.

4. For this muddy Earth, and vaporous polluted Air which is the very Region of
Death, wherein all the Pleasures, Joys and Triumphs of this Present Life are
but like the grinning laughter of Ghosts or the dance of dead men, these foul
Elements, I say, can afford no such commodious habitation for the Soul, as to
arrive any thing near to the height of that Happiness which she shall be
possessed of when Christ shall be pleased to change these our vile bodies into
the similitude of his glorious body, and so to recover us into the enjoiment
of that Heavenly Life which we unhappily forfeited by our first Fall. For which
purpose he came into the world, as himself professes John 6. v. 40. This is the
will of him that sent me, that whosoever sees me and believes in me, should
have everlasting life, and that I should raise him up at the last day.

5. And so certainly it will be at his coming to Judgment, that they that then
see him and firmly believe on him, ardently loved him and vehemently desired
his Appearing, shall find such a warming change in themselves, partly by the
glorious approach of his Person and Luster of his numerous Retinue, partly by
the wonderful secret workings of the Divine Presence in their very Bodies and
Souls, that at last there will be kindled such an irresistible Faith, so
rapturous a Joy and transportant Love, that breaking out upon the Body, be it
what it will, it will turn all into a pure Ethereal flame; and so Elias-like
in those Celestial chariots shall they ascend up to Christ, and meet him in the
Air, and join with his Army wherever it moves, as becoming then (...), their
Vehicles being transformed by the power and presence of Christ, and the working
of his Divinity, into a pure Paradisiacal and Angelical nature.

6. And thus shall he make his word good of raising us up at the last day, in
that he does re-enliven us, and restore us to that Life and Joy which we had
fallen from, re-enthrone us into that Glory we had defaced in our selves and
was lost in these dark Bodies of ours, and raise us up to that pristine state
of Happiness and that superior Paradise, which we could not re-enter into, or
be re-estated in, but by becoming wholly Ethereal or Celestial.

CHAP. VI. 1. That he has freed the Mystery of the Resurrection from all
Exceptions of either Atheists or Enthusiasts. 2. That the Soul is not incapable
of the Happiness of an Heavenly Body. 3. And that it is the highest and most
suitable Reward that can be conferred upon her. 4. That this Reward is not above
the power of Christ to confer, proved by what he did upon Earth. 5. That all
Judgment is given to him by the Father. 6. Further arguings to the same purpose.
1. AND now I think we have so disentangled the Mystery of the Resurrection
from all the Prejudices and conceived Difficulties that it was involved in,
that I may challenge all the World, the Atheist, Infidel and newfangled
Enthusiast, if they can frame any solid Exception against it, which they can
manage by Reason, and is not a mere sullen dictate of their own dark and dull
minds.

2. For this precious Crown of Immortality which Christ shall then crown us
withal, is neither beyond his power to give, nor our capacity to receive. For
the offers and fluskerings, as I may so say, of the Faculties of the Soul of
man, even in this state of Death and Imprisonment, are so High, so Noble and
Divine, as well in Speculation as Devotion, especially when our Spirits are
more then ordinarily pure, and come nearer to an Ethereal kind of defecacy;
that they that have the experience thereof cannot distrust but that, if she had
the advantage of an Angelical Body, her operations would prove little
inferior to theirs. Which is a demonstration that she is as well capable of
such Bodies as they; As also of the worth and value, and of the fitness and
accommodateness of so ample a Reward.

3. For Philosophy herself can witness, That according to the greater purity of
our Spirits, the Motions and Passions of our Minds are changed and become more
holy and divine, and our Thoughts and Apprehensions more clear, our Love to God
more ardent and sincere, our Benignity to men more free and general, and all
the Faculties of our Soul in a ready posture to comply with the best commands
or suggestions of Reason or Religion. Of what infinite importance therefore
must it be to have such a Body as is not only perpetually thus compliable with
the Best motions of the Soul, but by virtue of its Heavenly purity does
naturally incline the Mind to such Thoughts, Motions and Affections, as are
most acceptable to God and most enravishing to her self? Which consideration
does evidently demonstrate that high Reason that is in our Religion, in the
Promise of a glorified Body, as the greatest Reward of our earnest
colluctations and obedient endeavors in this life. For nothing but Divine
Inspiration or some infallible Method of Philosophy could discover to the Mind
of man so concerning a Point.

4. But to doubt whether Christ can cloth us with such Bodies as those, or
enliven our whole man, in whatsoever bodies we be found, into that Immortality
and Life which accrues to us by transforming our vile bodies into the
similitude of his glorious Body, is either to forget or not to believe what
mighty power he had when he was here upon earth; how merely by his word he
calmed the raging of the seas, silenced the tempestuousness of the winds,
multiplied a few loaves and a few fishes so, in the very eating of them, that
he fed many thousands therewith in the wilderness; which was an eminent
specimen of his power of transforming Matter into what modification he pleased:
besides his healing of the sick, not only those that were present and believed
on him, but also the absent; to which you may add the raising of the dead,
which comes nearer to our purpose, as also the Resurrection of those that rose
with him, to signify his enlivening power, who himself so miraculously rose
from the Grave.

5. By which wonderful works he did plainly demonstrate, That what he
professed of himself was true, See my Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul,
Book 3. chapter 18. sect. 15.
That as the Father has life in himself, so he has also given the Son to have
life in himself, that is, the power of vivification or enlivening of others, as
you may see by the context, John 5. v. 26. And not only so, but he has given
him also the power of punishing as well as rewarding, as it follows in the next
verse, And he has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the
Son of man, viz. That Son of man that upon his sufferings and after his being
risen from the dead should have all power given to him in Heaven and in Earth.
Which we may easily believe, whenas he had so vast a power in the lowest ebb
of his Humiliation, when he went up and down afflicted, despised and neglected,
being attended only by a few contemptible fishermen and others of like
inferior condition; and yet then he opened the eyes of them that were born
blind, and at a distance healed the sick, and being unaccompanied with any
visible pomp or power, with one word of his mouth drove away a Legion of Devils
at once. What shall he not then be able to do, when he shall return in the
highest Glory and Majesty that the visible Divinity can appear in? when the
Heavens shall be filled with the brightness of his Camp, and all the Nations of
the World shall be astonished at the dreadful splendor of his coming?

6. Shall not he then, who in his dejectment could raise to life not only a
faithless but senseless corpse, enliven those that at his glorious Appearance
are so filled with Faith, Love, Joy, Desire and Admiration, that their
empassioned Souls are ready to leave their Bodies, if it were possible, to come
and do their homage to their long-expected Savior and Redeemer? Shall not
that Divine and Omnipotent Power then that works round about him, so
cooperate with those kindled Affections, as to change their very Bodies into an
ability of naturally ascending up to him, and joining with him? Or is it hard
for him to convert Flesh or Air into a pure Ethereal Fire, and to awake such a
Faculty in the Soul as shall kindly and vitally inactuate it, who turned Air
into Flesh, and prepared the dead carcass of Lazarus so fittingly for reunion
with the Soul, that he raised him out of the Grave on the fourth day? Wherefore
this Resurrection, Life and Immortality we speak of, being neither impossible
for Christ to give, nor our nature incapable to receive, it remains that we
shall enjoy it, because Christ both himself and by his Apostles has so plainly
and expressly promised it.

CHAP. VII. 1. Caecilius his scoffs against the Resurrection, and Conflagration
of the World: That against the Resurrection answered already. 2. In what sense
the soberer Christians understood the Conflagration of the World. 3. That the
Conflagration in their sense is possible, argued from the Combustibleness of
the parts of the Earth. 4. As also from actual Fire found in several Mountains,
as Aetna, Helga and Hecla. 5. Several instances of that sort out of Pliny. 6.
Instances of Vulcanoes, out of Acosta. 7. The Vulcanoes of Guatimalla. 8.
Vulcanoes without smoke having a quick fire at the bottom. 9. Vulcanoes that
have cast fire and smoke some thousand of years together. 10. Hot Fountains,
Springs running with Pitch and Rosin, certain Thermae catching fire at a
distance.
1. THe Third thing we propounded comprised in Christ's Return to Judgment is
the Conflagration of the world, a Point as incredible to most of the Heathen as
the Resurrection of the dead; and the comparing of them both together made it
the more ridiculously-incredible to them, as you may see by that Jear that
Caecilius gives the Christians in Minucius Felix. Quid? quod toti Orbi and ipsi
Mundo cum sideribus suis minantur incendium, ruinam moliuntur? quasi aut
Naturae divinis legibus constitutus aeternus ordo turbetur, aut, rupto omnium
elementorum foedere and coelesti compage divisa, moles ista qua continemur and
cingimur subruatur. Nec hac furiosa opinione contenti, aniles fabulas astruunt
and annectunt. Renasci se ferunt post Mortem and Cineres and Favillas. Nescio
qua fiducia mendaciis suis invicem credunt. Putes eos jam revixisse. Anceps
malum and gemina dementia, Coelo and astris quae sic relinquimus ut invenimus
interitum denunciare, sibi mortuis and extinctis (qui sicut nascimur and
interimus) aeternitatem repromittere. To which you may add how they menace
burning and meditate ruin to the whole Earth and to the Heaven it self with
the Stars thereof; as if the Eternal Order constituted by the divine laws of
Nature could be disturbed, or that this huge Fabric wherein we are contained
and surrounded, by the breaking of that league amongst the Elements and
division of the celestial Compages could tumble down. And not content with this
furious opinion alone, they join and stitch to it old wives fables. They affirm
that they shall rise again after death, and live after the being turned into
embers and ashes. I know not upon what confidence they can thus believe one
another lies. You would think they were men started out of their Graves
already. A twofold mischief and double madness, to denounce destruction to the
Heavens and Stars which we leave in the same condition that we find them, and
to promise Eternity to our selves once dead and extinct, who as we are born
into the world, so we die. But the double sting of this twofold Jear is easily
pulled out; and that indeed concerning the Resurrection already; we having
plainly showed, That that mystery implies nothing more then this, That the
same individual Persons shall be revivificated body and soul, and made happy
with Eternal life. But the same individual Person does not involve any
necessity of the same numerical body, as has been shown at large.

2. The very point and sting of this Scoff against the Conflagration, is also a
presumptuous mistake as well as that against the Resurrection, (though I deny
the possibility of neither) and it lies in these words, ipsi Mundo cum
sideribus suis minantur incendium, ruinam moliuntur. Such a clatter as this
indeed (though some of the Pagan Philosophers, as Lucretius and Seneca, are not
afraid to admit, yet) might well scare the more sagacious from giving assent
to it. But the Conflagration of the World, according to the truth thereof in
the Christian Mystery, is limited with more modest and credible bounds, it not
concerning the Starry Heavens; unless you will call these Heavens Starry that
are the receptacle of Sublunary Comets and falling Stars. So that all the
destruction that is threatened by the better-knowing Christians is only to the
Globe of the Earth, and the circumjacent Air, with all the garnishings of
them, which shall be burnt up and destroyed: But the Air and Earth shall
continue Air and Earth still; but with such alteration as this terrible
Burning shall work upon them.

3. That this is possible many things may induce us to believe, which are to be
found as well in the Earth as in the Air. For what of the Earth is not
combustible? The exterior turfy part is ordinary fuel, and Stones themselves
are calcined into lime and chalk by fire. And the Pyrenean mountains betwixt
France and Spain took fire so (whether from thunder or by certain Shepherds)
that the Gold and Silver mines ran streaming down for many days together. From
which accident some will have these Hills to have their name from (...)
signifying Fire. Besides, there are many Mines of Minerals in the Earth that do
not only yield to the power of Fire, but covet it in a manner and catch at it,
as Naphtha, Sulphur and Bitumen; to say nothing of sundry sorts of Coals, vast
Woods and Wildernesses, which are so combustible, that the mere excess of the
heat of the Air has sometimes set them on fire, as it happened in several places
Anno 1474.

4. We may add to all this in how many places of the Earth there are found
actual Fires by Natures own kindling, as if she kept house under ground, and
made several Hills her chimneys: such as Vesuvius in Italy, Aetna in Sicily,
Helga and Hecla in Islandia, mountains so terrible for thunder, flamings out of
fire, casting abroad stones, ashes, stink and smoke, that the more phansifull
conceit that Hell is begun there aforehand. Which were more plausible if the
Apparitions that are seen there were as true as they are said to be frequent.

5. Pliny will furnish us with more instances of this nature, Plin. Natural.
Histor. lib. 2. cap. 106.
as of Chimaera a Hill of Phaselis in Pamphylia, the Hephaestian Mountains in
Lycia, Cophantus in Bactriana. Near Hesperius a Mountain in Aethiopia the
fields in the Night all glitter with light, as also a certain piece of ground
in Babylonia. Nymphaeus a Mountain of Apollonia flings out Fire and Bituminous
matter, the fury whereof is increased by rain: as also the fire of those
ignivomous Mountains in Lycia and Pamphylia. That Aeolian Island Hiera near
Italy was all on fire, and the sea round about it, for some days together;
which he reports as a known truth, and an instance near at hand. But he
concludes with the burning of that high and vast mountain in Aethiopia called
(...), that is, The chariot of the Gods, as the most famous example of this
kind; adding to all this short Epiphonema, Tot locis tot incendiis rerum Natura
terras cremat.

Joseph. Acost. Histor. of the Indies, book 3. chap. 24.
6. And yet these Vulcanoes are not less frequent in America, as Acosta writes,
and gives this description of them in general, That they be rocks or pikes of
very high mountains, having upon their tops a plain, and in the midst thereof a
pit or great mouth which descends to the very foot of the Hill, a thing very
terrible to behold, as he says. Out of those mouths is vomited smoke, and
sometimes fire, and sometimes neither, as it fares ordinarily with that of
Arequipa, as also with that of Mexico near the village of Angels, which sends
out smoke and ashes only by fits, but never fire; and yet the Inhabitants are
afraid it will sometime break out and burn all the Country.

7. The Vulcanoes of Guatimalla are more terrible. In the year 1586. almost all
the City of Guatimalla fell with an earthquake. This Vulcanoe had then for six
months together day and night cast from the top and vomited, as it were, great
floods of fire; a notable instance of what treasures of combustibles Nature is
stored with. As is also observable in the Vulcanoe of Quitto, which cast such
abundance of ashes, that in many leagues compass thereabouts it darkened the
light of the day.

8. There are also other kind of Vulcanoes which never cast either smoke, flame
or ashes, but in the bottom they are seen to burn with a quick fire never
dying. This imposed upon a greedy Priest, and made him think it was nothing
else but heaps of Gold melted in the fire, which he thought to have fetched up
by letting down an iron Kettle with chains. But his device was not fire-proof,
his kettle and chain melting so soon as they approached near the bottom.

9. But the greatest wonder of all is that which Acosta notes of some
Vulcanoes, that for some hundred, nay some thousands of years have cast out
continually smoke, fire and ashes. These visible instances of particular
burnings of the Earth are notable Presumptions that there are laid in in the
hidden Mines of Providence such a provision of Combustible matter as will serve
for that universal Conflagration we speak of, when the day of Vengeance shall
make use of those Treasuries of Wrath.

10. We might add further Arguments of Subterraneous fires and the fuel
thereof from Earthquakes and hot fountains; of which there are some in Peru,
Jos. Acosta lib. 3. cap. 17.
as the same Writer reports, that are so hot, that a man cannot endure his hand
so long as the repeating of an Ave-Marie. There be infinite numbers of these in
the Province of Charcas. He makes mention also in the same place of several
Springs and Fountains that run with Pitch and Rosin. Which yet seems nothing so
strange as those Thermae Fallopius speaks of, in the Territories of Parma,
whose Water catches fire at a distance: and as for hot Fountains they are more
ordinary in these known parts of the world then that we need at all insist
thereupon. See Plin. lib. 2. cap. 103.

CHAP. VIII. 1. A fiery Comet as big as the Sun that appeared after the death
of Demetrius. Comets presages of Droughts. Woods set on fire after their
appearing. 2. Of falling Stars. Of the tail of a Comet that dried up a River.
3. Hogsheads of Wine drunk up and men dissipated into Atoms by Thunder. 4. That
the fire of Thunder is sometimes unquenchable, as that in Macrinus the
Emperors time; and that procured by the Prayers of the Thundering Legion. 5. Of
conglaciating Thunders, and the transmutation of Lot's wife into a pillar of
Salt. 6. The destruction of Sodom with fire from Heaven. That universal Deluges
and Earthquakes do argue the probability of a Deluge of Fire. 7. That Pliny
counts it the greatest wonder, that this Deluge of fire has not happened already.
1. WE have seen how well stored the Earth is toward this general
Conflagration; let us now consider what the Heaven or Air may afford. Where
letting go other Fiery Meteors, we shall only consider some few instances of
Comets, falling Stars and of Thunder.

By Comets I understand only such new Stars as are Sublunary and of
combustible matter actually set on fire. Of which sort there was one of so huge
a magnitude which appeared after the death of Demetrius, that it was found no
less then the Sun to see to, and with the brightness of its fiery shining
turned Night into Day. But to speak more at large of this Meteor, Cardan and
other Philosophers would have them either Signs or Causes of great Droughts;
and they may well be both, these sublunary especially: such great fiery bodies
not being easily fed without wasting much of the kindly moisture of the Air,
which makes the season also unwholesome and pestilential. But for Droughts, it
has been observed that after the appearing of these Comets, the year has been
so excessive hot, that it has parched the Corn upon the ground, set whole Woods
on fire, and dried Fountains and Rivers; as it happened in the years 1477 and
1539.

2. The Stellae cadentes are either such as Virgil describes in his Georgicks,
Saepe etiam stellas vento impendente videbis
Praecipites coelo labi, noctisque per umbram
Flammarum longos a tergo albescere tractus.
Often may thou see upon approaching wind
Stars slide from Heaven, and through the Night's great shade
Long tracts of flaming white to draw behind.
(Which Meteors though they make a great show in the Night, yet do not
ordinarily much hurt, unless they should light upon the fields of Aricia, whose
Earth was so combustible that it would take fire upon the falling of any coal)
Or else they are such kind of Comets, as themselves become sometimes falling
Stars: Which Scaliger affirms to have been found true in his time: and
Fromondus out of Sennertus writes, that the Tail of a Comet in the year 1543
flew off, and falling into a River drunk up all the water of it.

3. But the Effects of no fiery Meteor are so frequent or so terrible as that
of Thunder. To which sulfureous Exhalations out of the Earth contribute
something, as well as moist Vapors for the generating of Rain: As is discovered
by the great frequency of Thunders about the Vulcanoes we spoke of.

One notable Effect which Pliny takes notice of is like that of the Tail of
the Comet. For he says there is one kind of Thunder, quo dolia exhauriuntur
intactis operimentis. Like to this is that which the abovenamed Writer recites
out of Wolfangus Meurerus, that a certain Minister as he was going from Lipsia
to Torga was so consumed by Thunder, that not a bit of him was to be seen, his
whole body being dissolved into Vapor and Exhalations, and blown away with the
wind. The closest texture of bodies will not hold, when this quick searching
Fire assaults them. For this Meteor is made of such subtle, glib and
furiously-agitated elements, that they will irresistibly pass wherever they
attempt, and disjoyn every congeries of Atoms, as Lucretius has well described
them. Quae facile insinuantur, and insinuata repent
Dissolvunt nodos omnes, and vincla relaxant.
Which easily pierce, and piercing straightway loose
All knots, and suddenly break every noose.


4. But that is as remarkable as any thing concerning Thunder, that the fire
thereof is sometimes unextinguishable; as it happened in Macrinus the Emperors
time, when the Theater was Thunderstruck in the very day they celebrated their
Vulcanalia. And such was that fire that fell from Heaven in Aurelius his time
by the prayers of a Legion of the Christians, which from this effect was called
Legio Fulminatrix, the Thundering Legion. A competent shower of such fire as
this, that is thus peremptory and importunate, what part of the earth is so
incombustible that it would not subdue?

5. I would not mention that strange and unexpected effect of Thunder whereby
it conglaciates or makes rigid, fluid or soft bodies, (which both Seneca and
Cardan takes notice of: The one gives an instance of hogsheads of wine turned
into ice by Thunder; Cardan. de Rerum Varietate, lib. 8. c. 43.
the other of certain mowers in the Island Lemnos, who being thunderstruck as
they were supping under an Oak, their bodies became so hard, rigid and stiff,
as if they had been so many Statues, which imitated the same actions they were
doing when they were alive, one seeming to eat, the other seeming to lift a
pot to his mouth, a third to drink, etc.) I say I would not mention this, did
it not give some light and credibility to that wonderful Transmutation of
Lot's wife into a pillar of Salt; the thundering and lightning that then fell,
some of it it seems being attempered to such an effect, and directed to strike
that refractory woman, that she might be not only a monument of God's wrath
upon disobedient curiosities, but also of the manner of his executing that
signal vengeance upon Sodom and Gomorrha with the neighboring Cities, viz.
That it was with thunder and lightning from above, as the Text witnesses, and
Solinus and Tacitus also agree to, and not only by subterraneous fire breaking
forth, and the absorption of Earthquakes that swallowed down the Cities, as
Strabo seems to insinuate.

6. This destruction of Sodom with fire from Heaven, assented to by Heathens as
well as Christians, is so ample a pledge of the possibility of the
Conflagration of the Earth, that though I could out of Pliny and others add
other such like instances of Cities being burnt down with Thunder, yet I shall
content my self with this so notable an example. And having shown that there
are such copious and rich treasures of the fiery Principle in Nature, I shall
make this brief demand, Why may not this Principle sometime so break out and
overflow, that there may be an universal rage of Fire upon Earth, as well as
there was once of Water? For the hidden causes and principles of Nature
sometimes work scantly, sometimes moderately, sometimes as if they had broke
all laws and bounds: as is observable in Torrents and Earthquakes; they
sometimes being kept within the compass of a very few miles, othersometimes
being in a manner universal, as those Earthquakes were that happened in the years
367, and 1289. So floods sometimes are so small, that they scarce cover a whole
Meadow; othersometimes so great, that they drown whole Towns; and
othersometimes they are either so large as to be universal, or at least to
cover vast Kingdoms and Continents at once. Such were the Deluges of
Deucalion, of Ogyges, and that of Noah. So likewise we see also in History what
particular executions the Element of Fire, either by fulgurations from Heaven
or eruptions out of the Earth, has done on this House, on that Town, nay upon
whole Countries: why may not the rage of it then at last so break out, that it
may be called even a general Deluge of fire?

7. This seems so far from an Impossibility to Pliny, that considering how
full fraught the World is with this Element, and how propagative it is of it
self, he says it is the greatest Miracle of all, Plin. Histor. Nature. lib. 2.
cap. 107.
that this universal Conflagration has not already happened. Excedit profecto
omnia miracula, ullum diem fuisse quo non cuncta conflagrarent.

CHAP. IX. 1 The Conflagration argued from the Proneness of Nature and the
transcendent power of Christ. 2. His driving down the Powers of Satan from
their upper Magazine. 3. The surpassing power and skill of his Angelical Hosts.
4. The efficacy of his Fiat upon the Spirit of Nature. 5. The unspeakable
corroboration of his Soul by its Union with the Godhead; and the manner of
operation upon the Elements of the World. 6. That the Eye of God is ever upon
the Earth, and that he may be an Actour as well as a Speculatour, if duly
called upon. 7, 8. A short Description of the firing of the Earth by Christ,
with the dreadful effects thereof.
1. THat therefore which Nature seems thus perpetually to threaten of her self,
can it be hard for us to believe that Christ and his glorious Host of Angels,
who have a power above Nature, will be able to effect when it shall seem good
to him whom God has made visible Judge of the World? Remember what command he
had over the Elements when he was in the Flesh in the lowest state of
Humiliation, and what power he had over them that for so long time have been
permitted to lord it in this grosser Elementary World, whose Chieftain is
called the Prince of the Air. Remember how by a word of his mouth he sent
packing a whole Legion of his Kingdom at once. What is it then that he cannot
do in His exalted estate, when he returns to Judgment in so exceeding great
Majesty and Glory, when he shall descend with the sound of the Trump, and face
the Earth with his bright squadrons, and fill the whole Arch of Heaven with
innumerable Legions of his Angels of Light, the warm gleames of whose presence
is able to make the Mountains to reek and smoke, and to awake that fiery
principle that lies dormient in the Earth into a devouring flame?

2. But besides this, By descending thus low they drive the old Usurper and his
dark Legions from that upper Magazine, and now can turn his Artillery against
himself, and make use of all the provision fit for Fireworks. For this is the
time that Diphilus the Tragedian prophesies of, (...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
To this sense, The time will come when as the golden Sky
His hidden fiery treasures shall let fly,
And raging flames burn up all and consume,
Filling both Earth and Air with noisome Fume.
And if there were not here already matter enough to contrive into the most
mischievous kind of fiery Meteors, such as will be sure to do execution, yet
that Word that created all things can easily change so much of any Matter into
such a modification as will most effectually serve for this heavy Vengeance.

3. But I make no question but that there are Second causes on this side that
Omnipotent Creative power of the Godhead, that are sufficient for such
ministries of Providence as this. As truly those innumerable bright Legions of
Angels may seem to be, whose Skill and power of Imagination upon the Elements
of Nature is certainly transcendently above what we can conceive; their
Faculties, at least some of them, as far surpassing ours, as ours do those of
brute beasts who have not the least conceit of our power and artifice in doing
things.

4. What power think you then is in the Head of these Heavenly hosts Christ
Jesus, who in the flesh, as I have often noted, showed such mighty specimens
thereof over the Elements of the world? The mere Fiat therefore of his
Imagination and Will acting upon the Spirit of Nature, whether nearer hand or
farther of, cannot but prove sufficient, if he so please, to undo that
universal coalition of particles out of which arises the Compages and
consistence of every earthly Substance, and to turn them into such a flame as
some would have the whole Earth anciently to have been, or so to moderate the
action, and fire it so deep, and with such a qualification of parts, as shall
be most suitable to his present and after-design.

5. This Effect will not seem beyond that inherent power in the Divine Soul of
Jesus, if we consider its unspeakable corroboration by his mysterious union
with the Godhead, and the obedience of the Spirit of Nature to the exalted
powers of the Soul, and the power of this See my Treatise of the Immortality of
the Soul, book 3. chap. 6. Sect. 6. also chap. 12. and 13.
Spirit upon the subtle matter of the World, and the force of that subtle
Matter to disjoyn all coalescencies; and then the promptness of these dissolved
particles to close again unto such a form as the regulated activity of the
Spirit of Nature shall command them into. For all this is but an higher and
diviner kind of Magic, working by the excitation of the Spirit of Nature upon
the changeable Elements of the world, no Creation nor Annihilation of any thing.

6. So that keeping our selves on this side the naked Deity, to the
consideration of Second causes, partly Natural and partly free Agents, amongst
whom the highly-exalted and supereminently-divine Soul of Jesus is the chief,
we discover a power able to effect more then we have declared concerning the
Conflagration of the Earth. And when this will suffice, how over-evidently are
we assured of the feisableness of this Achievement from what S. Peter has
suggested concerning the absolute power of the Word of God, 2. Pet. 3 5.
by whom all things are, and who is a perpetual Spectatour of his Works? For
the spirit of the Lord fills the world, Wisdom Chap. 1. v. 7.
as the Wise man speaks, and that which contains all things has knowledge of
the voice. And it is as true that all things lie open to his sight, and that
the Earth is always under the present eye of God. Wherefore he that
perpetually looks on, is it hard to conceive that at last, at some solemn
period of time, he may in a special manner step out into action, if need so
require, and he be invoked thereunto?

7. Wherefore the Faithful being gathered from all the corners of the Earth,
and carried up to See my Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul, Book 3. chap.
18. Sect. 15.
Christ their Savior, and joining with his Legions of Light; there being then
left in the Earth and in the inferior Parts of the Air none but obdurate
Adherents to the dark Kingdom, which shall now be made more externally dark
then ever, black pitchy clouds covering the whole face of the Sky, and making
Night fall upon the Inhabitants of the World even at midday: in the midst of
this sad, silent and louring aspect of the Heavens, He that in the flesh was
heard and answered by Thunder, when he prayed, John 12.28.
saying, Father, glorify thy name, shall by the same interest in the Eternal
God cause such an universal Thunder and Lightning, that it shall rattle over
all the quarters of the Earth, rain down burning Comets and falling Stars,
and discharge such claps of unextinguishable fire, that it will do sure
execution wherever it falls; so that the ground being excessively heated,
those subterraneous Mines of combustible Matter will also take fire: which
inflaming the inward exhalations of the Earth, will cause a terrible murmur
under ground, so that the Earth will seem to thunder against the tearing and
rattling of the Heavens, and all will be filled with sad remugient Echoes;
Earthquakes and Eruptions of fire there will be every where, and whole Cities
and Countries swallowed down by the vast gapings and wide divulsions of the
ground. Nor shall the Sea be able to save the Earth from this universal
Conflagration, no more then the Fire could preserve her from that overspreading
Deluge; for this fiery Vengeance shall be so thirsty, that it shall drink deep
of the very Sea; nor shall the water quench her devouring appetite, but excite
it. For such is the nature of some Fires, as history every where testifies.

8. Wherefore the great channel of the Sea shall be left dry, and all Rivers
shall be turned into smoke and vapor; so that the whole Earth shall be
inveloped in one entire cloud of an unspeakable thickness, which shall cause
more then an Egyptian darkness, clammy and palpable to be felt; which added to
this choking heat and stench will complete this External Hell, a place of
Torment appointed not only for the profane Atheist and Hypocrite, but also
for the Devil and his Angels, where their pain will be proportionated according
to the untamedness of their Spirits and unevenness of their perverse
Consciences.

CHAP. X. 1. The main Fallacies that cause in men the Misbelief of the
Possibility of the Conflagration of the Earth. 2. That the Conflagration is not
only possible but reasonable, The first Reason leading to the belief thereof.
3. The second Reason, the natural decay of all particular structures, and that
the Earth is such, and that it grows dry and looses of its solidity whence its
approach to the Sun grows nearer. 4. That the Earth therefore will be burnt,
either according to the course of Nature, or by a special appointment of
Providence. 5. That it is most reasonable that Second way should take place,
because of the obdurateness of the Atheistical crew. 6. That the Vengeance will
be still more significant, if it be inflicted after the miraculous Deliverance
of the Faithful.
1. I Hope by this time we have prevailed so far as to persuade the Possibility
of the Conflagration of the World, in that sense we have explained it. And
truly I know nothing that should keep a man from assenting to it as possible,
but that dull Fallacy, whereby we conclude That nothing can be done but what
we have seen done, or fancy we could do our selves. And this is the reason
that makes the Atheist misbelieve Creation, because he himself can make nothing
but out of prejacent Matter; and a settled course of things causes so deep an
impression in our Senses, that we can hardly fancy they will ever alter.
Which makes some men never think of Death, especially if they have never been
sick; a flattering impossibility, by reason of so long continuance of life,
stealing into their hopes, as if they should never die. And therefore that
great Monarch was fain to have one to rub up his memory every day with a (...),
Remember that thou art mortal. Well may we fancy then such unalterable Laws
of Nature as shall secure the Earth from such a destruction as we speak of,
when we are led unawares into so favorable a conceit of our own life or
fortune, after we have for a competent time been well settled in either, as not
at all to think of the mutability of our condition. Wherefore I hope any one
that is aware of this ordinary Fallacy, will easily recover himself into so
much use of his Reason, as not to conclude the Conflagration of the Earth
impossible, because he knows not how to burn it himself; or that it will
always continue unburnt, because it has been unburnt thus long.

2. But that which I drive at is, to show that the belief of a Christian is not
only of things possible, but reasonable; which I have in some sort made good
already by discovering the manifold treasures of the fiery and combustible
principles in Heaven and Earth: to which I add further,

First, That Providence ordering all particular corporeal things by number,
weight and measure, it is reasonable that the continuance of this present stage
of things be numbered, that is, have its number of years set, so that there be a
full pause or Period, a last Exiit and Plaudite, to this Tragic Comedy.

3. Secondly, Whatever particular corporeal structure has a Beginning (unless
it be a Body inacted with a glorified Spirit) will also have an End naturally
of it self, and that which will have an End, is subject to decaying. And for my
own part I question not but that the Earth is of such a nature, and See Book 2.
chapter 6. sect. 2.
that it waxes old by degrees, and will grow more and more dry and steril in
succession of Ages; whereby it will become more kexy, and loose of its
Solidity. For a Body that is porous and can imbibe moisture, the more moist,
the more solid it is, and the more solid the Earth is, the better it will keep
its distance from the Sun, as it is swung about him in this common Vortex of
the Planets. Wherefore the distance of the Earth lessening so, as Astronomers
observe, might it not come from other causes, would be a parlous Symptom and
sign that the Earth grows old apace, and much exhausted: And the more it is
exhausted, the nearer still it will be wrought toward the Sun, according to the
Cartesian Philosophy. So that at last, what by its over-drieness and what by
its approaching so near to the Fountain of heat, not only Forests and Woods,
which has happned already, but the subterraneous Mines of Sulphur and other
combustible Matter will catch fire, and set the whole Earth in a manner on
burning.

4. I say therefore, that the Earth will thus at the long run be burnt, either
according to the course of Nature, (of which manner of destruction these be the
main concomitants; That by reason of a long distemper and languishment, she
will be utterly unable or very wretchedly able to sustain either Man or Beast
for abundance of Ages together before she be ruined and burnt up by this
mortiferous Fever, and after this death and destruction of hers, far less able,
she becoming then but as a Caput Mortuum by reason of the long exhaustion of
the life and heart of the soil before this lingering Conflagration) or else by a
more special or solemn appointment of Providence, the Period of her
Conflagration shall be shortened. From which if any universal good does accrue
to the Creation, it is not unworthy of the Son of God and his mighty and most
glorious Host to be employed in so weighty a performance. For is not the whole
Earth the Vineyard of the Lord, a particular platt of his skillfull Culture and
Husbandry?

5. Thirdly and lastly, There being so many obdurate rebellious Spirits, as
well among the Apostate Angels as Men, that are so far revolted from God, that
they scarce retain any sense of him in their minds, that peremptorily deny a
particular Providence, and stoutly fancy that if there be a Deity, he takes
no notice of the affairs of any particular Creatures, that jear and flout at
Religion, and look upon the life of the Son of God when he lived in the world
as a poor and contemptible Example of Pusillanimity and Dejectedness of Spirit,
that contemn all his true followers for moaped Fools; but make their own Lusts
their law in all things, and therefore are insensible of whatever Injustice or
Cruelty they commit, or whatever Beastliness or Vileness they give themselves
up to; these being past all sense within, but all of them sensible enough in
their bodies or vehicles, the Devils themselves not excepted, how fitting, nay
how necessary is it, that a fiery Whirlwind and Tempest of Vengeance should
rattle upon their external persons, and that corporeal pain should pierce them
to the very quick, and that all whatever they took delight in should be
demolisht, and that they should be smothered in tormenting Heat and Darkness,
of which they know no end?

6. These Considerations which I have alleged make the Conflagration of the
World not only possible, but also very reasonable, especially with that
circumstance of not coming See Book 2. chap. 6. sect. ^
naturally, (for they would then look on it only as a common calamity) but of
being inflicted visibly by one whose Person and Laws are so much vilified and
scorned by all the Powers of the Dark Kingdom: And then again, for further
conviction and aggravation, after such a time as they have seen the
supernatural See the Immortality of the Soul, Book 3. chapter 18 sect. 15.
deliverance of the righteous before their eyes. For this makes good that
Promise and Threatening of our Savior, what difference he would make betwixt
the Sheep and the Goats, saying to one, Mat. 25.34, 41.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom; and to the other, Go ye
accursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

CHAP. XI. 1. A Recapitulation or Synopsis of the more Intelligible part of the
Christian Mystery, with an Indication of the Usefulness thereof. 2. The
undeniable Grounds of this Mystery, The existence of God, A particular
Providence, The Lapsableness of Angels and men, The natural subjection of men
to Devils in this fallen Condition. 3. God's Wisdom and Justice in the
Permission thereof for a time. 4, 5. Further Reasons of that Permission. 6. The
Lapse of Men and Angels proved. 7. The Good emerging out of this Lapse. 8. The
exceeding great Preciousness of the Divine Life. 9. The Conflagration of the
Earth. 10. The Good arising from the Opposition betwixt the Light and Dark
Kingdom. 11. That God in due time is in a special manner to assist the
Kingdom of Light, and in a way most accommodate to the humane Faculties. 12.
That therefore he was to send into the World some Venerable Example of the
Divine Life, with miraculous attestations of his Mission of so sacred a Person.
13. That this Person, by reason of the great Agonies that befall them that
return to the Divine Life, ought to bring with him a palpable pledge of a
proportionable Reward, suppose, of a Blessed Immortality, manifested to the
meanest Capacity by his rising from the dead and visibly ascending into Heaven.
14. That in the Revolt of Mankind from the Tyranny of the Devil, there ought to
be some Head, and that the Qualifications of that Head ought to be opposite to
those of the old Tyrant, as also to have a power of restoring us to all that we
have lost by being under the Usurper. 15. That also in this Head all the
notable Objects of the Religious propensions of the Nations should be comprised
in a more lawful and warrantable manner. 16. That this Idea of Christianity is
so worthy the Goodness of God, and so suitable to the state of the World, that
no wise and virtuous Person can doubt but that it is or will be set on foot at
some time by Divine Providence; and that if the Messiah be come, and the
Writings of the New Testament be true, in the literal sense it is on
foot-already.
1. WE have, I think, fully enough set forth the Reasonableness of Christian
Religion in the Idea thereof, it may be more fully then was needful, before we
come to prove That it is more then an Idea. We shall by way of Recapitulation
contract the more Intelligible frame thereof into a lesser model, that its due
symmetrie and proportion may be better seen at once. Which will be both a
relief to our Memory, and also a help to our Judgment, when we shall have a
more easy opportunity of considering the solid strength and handsome congruity
of the whole Fabric.

2. And I dare challenge the most maliciously-wise and skillful, if he can find
any rational exception against the structure of this so intelligible a Truth,
whose Foundation is no less firm then what is built upon these undeniable
Grounds; That there is a God, and a Perfect and Particular Providence, That
there are Angels, and Spirits of men really distinct from their Bodies, and
That the one as well as the other are lapsable. Which things I have
demonstrated See Book 2. chapter 1, 2, 3.
partly in this present Treatise, In my Antidote against Atheism, and my
Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul.
partly in other Writings; and I appeal to all the World if they have any thing
solid to oppose against what I have writ. Moreover, That this Lapse of Men and
Angels is their forsaking of the Divine Life, and wholly cleaving to the Animal
without any curb or bounds; whereby as well the fallen Angels or Devils as Man
himself are become, as much as respects the inward life, mere Brutes, being
devoid of that touch and sense of the Divine Goodness. And therefore their
Empire is generally merely like that of the Beasts, according to Lust and
Power, where the stronger rules with Pride and Insolency over the weaker; and
so the Devils being a degree above men, of more wit and power then they, it
naturally falls to their shares to tyrannize over Mankind, who were in the same
condemnation with themselves, having become Rebels to God as well as they.

3. And it is but a piece of Wisdom and Justice in that great Judge and
Dramatist God Almighty, to permit this to be for a season: And therefore the
generality of the World were to be for a time under the Religion and Worship of
Devils, who were wild and enormous Recommenders of the mere Animal life to the
sons of men without any bounds or limits; themselves in the mean time receiving
that tribute of abused Mortals which was most agreeable to their Pride and
Tyrannical natures, that is, Religious Worship and Absolute Obedience, as I
have proved by many Examples in History.

4. And that God should stand silent all this time is no wonder, partly from
what I have intimated already, and partly because he is out of the reach of any
real injury in all this; as also because the Object of this irregular Fury of
both Men and Devils, in which they please themselves so much, is but the Effect
of that one Power from whence are all things, or some shred or shadow of the
Divine Attributes. See Book 2. chapter 9.
For I have shown fully enough That all the Branches of the Animal life are
good and laudable in themselves, and that only the Unmeasurable Love and Use of
them is the thing that is damnable. The great Rebellion therefore of both Men
and Angels is but a phrantick dotage upon the more obscure, evanid and
inconsiderable operations or manifestations of that Power which hoots into all.

5. In this low condition is held the Kingdom of Darkness, who, maugre all
their Lawlesness and Rebellion, do ever lick the very dust of his feet from
whom they have revolted. For there is no Might nor Counsel against the Eternal
God, but his Will shall stand in all. That all-comprehending Wisdom therefore
was not outwitted by these Rebels, but she suffered them to introduce a
Darkness, out of which herself would elicite a more mavelous and glorious
Light, and let them prime the tablet with more duskish colors, on which she
was resolved to pourtray the most illustrious beauty that the eyes of man could
desire to look upon.

6. And that there is a Lapse of Men and Angels, is very manifest. That of Man
is so plain, that not only the better sort of Philosophers, such as the
Pythagoreans and Platonists, but the making of Laws and appointing of
Punishments and men's general confession of their Proneness to Vice and
Wickedness, does abundantly testify. And that there are wicked Spirits or evil
Genii, as well as good, the Religion of the Pagans, and the Confession of
Witches, and the Effects of them in the possessed are a sufficient argument.

7. Now that Wisdom, as I have said, that orders all things sweetly, is not in
the least measure baffled by this Misadventure of the fall of Angels and Men;
but looks upon it as fit fuel for a more glorious triumph of the Divine Life:
And that noted Aphorism amongst the Pythagoreans, who laid no Principles for
mean ends, comes in fitly here, (...), That the Worser is made for the service
and advantage of the Better. And the Kingdom of Darkness, no question, by Him
that rules over all is very dexterously subordinated to the greater advantage of
the Kingdom of Light, it yielding them a due exercise of all their Faculties
in the behalf of the Divine life, which God most justly does magnify above all
things; as also a most successful victory and triumph. So that the Period of
Ages ought to end (so exact a Providence attending things) as a very joyful
and pleasant Tragic Comedy. This the Reason of man will expect upon
supposition that there is a God and Providence, as most certainly there is
both; especially if one quality of Souls and Spirits be better and more
precious then another, and the Divine life the most lovely Perfection of all.

8. Which is as true as touch to all that have once tasted the Excellency of
it; and the Ignorance of the blind is no argument against the certain
Knowledge of them that see. For one Soul, Angel or Spirit (though they may be
the same in Substance, as all Corporeal things are the same in Matter) may
differs as much from another, as Gold, Diamonds and Pearls do from common Dirt
or Clay, or the most exquisite Beauty from the horriblest Monster. That
therefore that is base shall be rejected, and that which is precious and noble
shall be gathered up, in that day that the Lord shall make up his Jewels.

9. And that there will be such a visible Day of Vengeance wherein the whole
Earth shall burn with the wrath of God, not only the common Fame throughout all
Ages and Places, of the Final Conflagration of the World, and natural Reasons
in Philosophy, but also a necessity of some universal, palpable and sensible
Punishment on impudently-prophane and Atheistical People, is a warrantable
Inducement to believe.

10. The great Good therefore that does arise out of this Revolt of Men and
Angels, is a setting the Activity of the Creation at an higher pitch, and
making the Emanations of all manner of Life felt more to the very quick,
exciting and employing all the Faculties and Passions of Souls and Spirits in a
greater degree of life and motion, with more vigilance and a more favoury sense
of acquired enjoiments, then if there had been no such opposition betwixt the
Light and Dark Kingdoms.

11. Now therefore though God may seem at first to give the Dark Kingdom and
Animal life the start of the Divine, yet he is in due time, by some very
effectual means, so to raise up, so to back and assist the Divine Life against
the Powers of Darkness, that she may be found to have very visible Victories
against the usurpation of Satan over the sons of men. Wherefore the Divine
Wisdom that does not act according to absolute Power, but according to the
Congruity of the nature of things, is to wind off Mankind from the slavery of
the Devil, and reclaim them from the irregularities of the Animal life to the
embracement of the Divine, by such a way as is most accommodate to the humane
Faculties and Capacities.

12. And what do we think could work more kindly upon the Nature of man to
disenslave him from the bondage of Satan, and to make him close with the Divine
life which he had forsaken, then to exhibit a very visible Example thereof in
some venerable Person, who should earnestly exhort mankind to follow his steps
and practices, and whose Doctrine should be confirmed with sensible Testimonies
from Heaven, in approbation and exaltation of his person, showing that he is
the only Beloved, the Darling and Delight of the Eternal God, with some such
Expression as this from the very clouds, This is my beloved Son, hear him? In
brief, That his Birth, Life and Death should be adorned with such miraculous
and supernatural Circumstances, that it may be visible to all men that are not
willingly blind, that this man was a true and infallible Messenger sent from
God? Which would be a very forcible battery laid against their outward senses.

13. But being that this had been the sadder message by how much more they had
been ascertained it had been true, That they must forsake the exorbitant
pleasures of the Animal Life, and keep close up to the Divine; it was also
requisite that they might be assured of a proportionable Reward for so great an
Agony as they were to undergo in mortifying and castigating their natural or
habitual desires, and betaking themselves to the streighter way. And therefore
it is fit that that Truth that is so obscure and incredible to the generality
of men, should be made grossly manifest to the meanest capacities; I mean the
Reward of a blessed Immortality after this Life, and the regaining of Heaven or
Paradise which lapsed Mankind had lost. The Certainty whereof I cannot tell how
it may be better assured to them, then by the witness of one whom we are sure
is infallible, and who says expressly that he came from See Book 1. Chap. 8.
sect. 5, 6.
thence, and after Death is to go thither again, and does not only tell the
World so, but proves it to outward sight, he being raise out of his Grave after
he was perfectly dead, and ascending into the Heavens where flesh and blood
cannot inhabit. Which is a visible Demonstration of the Soul's Immortality, and
as feelingly accommodate to the slowest apprehension, as if some man, of whose
honesty the people were indubitably assured, should descend from some high
Hill, where none of the Country had had the hap to have been as yet, and should
tell them what pleasant Woods and Groves there were there, full of all manner
of delicious Fruit, a true terrestrial Paradise, and that it was not so steep
or inaccessible as they imagined; and therewith should return thither in the
very sight of those that questioned the Matter. This consideration would reach
their very inward Reason and indispensable Interest. For they that are the
lowest lapsed, are not fallen from the sense of their own good, and from a
desire of everlasting happiness if they find it possible.

14. This were enough to make mankind weary of the Devil's Tyrannical yoke.
But in all revolts there ought to be some Head; and no person is so fit for
such a purpose as he who is able to reward his followers, whose Virtues are
eminently opposite to the Vices of the Tyrant, and whose Rule, when he is
installed, will as little thwart the usual or natural and innocent propensions
of the People as may be.

Wherefore whereas the Devil's Government is notorious for unspeakable Pride,
Insolency and Cruelty to Mankind; (as has been at large discovered in those
bloody sacrificings and despightfully misusings of men in a way of
Superstition, which no man can doubt to have any better Author then Satan
himself) the Head of this warrantable Revolt must be singularly kind and
tenderly and affectionately loving and compassionate to the Generations of men,
as also very humble and lowly, and be so far from requiring such abominable and
bloody homages as the sacrificing of men to him, that he would willingly lay
down his life for their sake. Which must needs prove an unspeakable endearment
of the affections of his followers to him, and raise in them a more vehement
detestation of the Devil's Tyranny. But because Love is ineffectual that has no
power of doing good, this Head becomes the more perfectly complete, if he be
found not only so Kind as to be willing to lay down his life for his Subjects,
but also to be able to save them from all the inconveniences that opposite
Power entangled them in, whose wages were no better then Eternal death; and
therefore it was fitting that he should have a power from God of giving
Everlasting Life and crowning them with a blessed Immortality at the last day,
and of saving them from that general Destruction that will in time seize as
well on the rebellious Angels as the unreclaimed Souls of men.

15. Lastly, Those natural and innocent Propensions of Mankind are gratified in
this Head we speak of, if there be such Properties in him as are suitable to
their Opinions, Practices and Desires, in matters of Religion. And we know by
History that the Heathen were very prone to suspect those that were their
eminent Benefactors to have been born of more then humane Race; and that they
had so high sense of Gratitude toward them, that they Deified them after their
Deaths, and did them divine Honor. Add to this, their conceit of the
necessity of their (...) and (...) for the appeasing the Wrath of the Gods, and
of the convenience of their Dii Medioxumi. Wherefore if Divine Providence add
these Gratifications also, in the choice of the Head she shall appoint for the
opposing and beating down the Kingdom of Satan, the matter is still more
completely fitted and accommodated to the humane Faculties; which having been
long abused by idle mistakes, cannot but be highly transported with joy upon
the discovering their true and warrantable Object: and so the Nations will
find such a Prince and Leader, as the more they behold him and eye him, the
more they must become enravished by him; Divine Wisdom condescending by this
contrivance to the utmost curiosity of Courtship, to win off poor lapsed
Mankind from the Tyranny of Satan to the Kingdom of God.

16. This is a short Review of the more Intelligible part of Christianity; the
Reasonableness whereof I take to be such, that I dare appeal to the judgment of
any, if it be not so worthy of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, and so fitly
suited unto the nature and condition of things and the state of men upon earth,
that it is indispensable but that Providence some time or other should send
into the world such a Prince and Redeemer of his People out of the Captivity of
the Devil, as we have described: who having declared the Promises of Eternal
life to his faithful Followers, and so raised himself a party against the
Powers of the Dark Kingdom, should exercise the Creation with this noble and
high-concerning Conflict, and after a due time of trial of the Faith,
Resolution, Constancy, Love, and Obedience of his Adherents, return visibly
again at last, according to promise, giving Victory, Peace and a Blessed
Immortality to his own, and pouring down Wrath and Vengeance and utter
Destruction upon his implacable and contemptuous Enemies. This Providential
Contrivance, I say, looking upon it in the Idea, is so Congruous and Rational,
that there is no wise and virtuous man but will easily assent, that it will
some time or other be set afoot in the World. But I shall now endeavor to make
good That it is already on foot, and that this Period of Providence is begun in
the Appearance of Jesus Christ the Son of God and of the blessed Virgin: that
is, That our Christian Religion, as it relates to the Person of Christ,
according as I have propounded it and displaied it in the main Branches
thereof, is not a mere Idea, but a real and actual Truth. Which I think will be
sufficiently demonstrated, if I prove That the expected Messiah is come, and
That the Writings of the New Testament are true. For nothing then can defeat
our design, unless a man will be so wild as to pervert the Literal sense of
those Writings, and turn every thing miraculous there into an Allegory.

CHAP. XII. 1. That the chief Author of this Mystical Madness that nulls the
true and literal sense of Scripture is H. Nicolas, whose Doctrine therefore and
Person is more exactly to be enquired into. 2. His bitter Reviling and high
Scorn and Contempt of all Ministers of the Gospel of Christ that teach
according to the Letter, with the ill Consequences thereof. 3. The Reason of
his Vilification of them, and his Injunction to his Followers not to consult
with any Teachers but the Elders of his Family, no not with the Dictates of
their own Consciences, but wholly to give themselves up to the leading of those
Elders. The irrecoverable Apostasy of simple Souls from their Savior by this
wicked Stratagem. 4. His high Magnifications of himself, and his Service of the
Love, before the Dispensation of Moses, John the Baptist, or Christ himself. 5.
That his Service of the Love is a Third Dispensation, namely of the Spirit, and
that which surpasses that of Christ; with other Encomiums of his doctrine, as
That in it is the sounding of the last Trump, the Descent of the new Jerusalem
from Heaven, the Resurrection of the dead, the glorious coming of Christ to
Judgment, and the everlasting Condemnation of the wicked in Hellfire. 6. That
H. Nicolas for his time, and after him the Eldest of the Family of the Love in
succession, are Christ himself descended from Heaven to judge the World, as
also the true High Priest for ever in the most Holy.
1. THere being therefore this only obstacle to our prosperous procedure in
this Affair, and the spreading of this mystical Madness being most of all from
the esteem and Authority of that highly-adored Enthusiast, H. Nicolas of
Amsterdam; I find my self necessitated to make here some stop, to discover his
enormous doctrines, and the groundlesness of them; as well to undeceive his
seduced Admirers, as to justify my own Enthusiasm. Triumphat. sect. 40.
public Dislike of him, that I may not seem to have been in the least measure
either rash or injurious. And that we may the better proceed therein, I shall
first present him to you in all his ruff and glory, adorned with the
testimonies of his own style, such as he would appear to the World to be; and
then examine if there be any ground of believing him to be such; and lastly
offer reasons whereby I shall clearly demonstrate that he is not what he
pretends to be.

2. And that his Luster may seem as big as he desires, you shall first hear
what pitiful things all are that are not found of his Sect, if you will
believe his censure of them; namely, See his Introduct. chapter 8.56. and chap.
1.10.
That there is no Knowledge of Christ nor of the Scripture but in his Family;
That without his God-service of the Love all the God-services, Wisdom, and
Doctrine out of the Scripture, let them be taught by those that are never so
well learned therein, is but witchery and blindness. See his Prophecy of the
Spirit of Love chapter 10.7.
And that as many as misbelieve and oppose his Service of the Love, are earthly
and devilishly minded. His Exhort. chapter 7.4.
And that there is no Remission of sins out of his Communialty. chapter 16.17.
That it is assuredly all false and lies, seducing and deceitful, what the
ungodded or unilluminated men out of the Imagination or riches of their
Knowledge and out of the Learnedness of the Scriptures bring forth, institute,
preach and teach. That all Teachers and Learners out of his Communialty are a
false Christianity and the Devil's Synagogue or School, yea a Nest of Devils
and all wicked Spirits. And of their Knowledge compendiously and at once he
pronounces, It is a false Being, the Devil, the Antichrist, the wicked Spirit,
the Kingdom of Hell, and the Majesty of the Devil. No better then this is the
most sober and careful reasoning out of the Holy Scriptures, or the simple
apprehension of the History of Christ and all his Promises, be they by never so
sincere and devout Souls, if they be not of his blessed Family of the Love, who
have the luck to be the only-illuminated in the World. Of this you may read
more fully in his first Exhortation, Chap. 15. and 16. Which Ugly and
uncharitable Character he gives of all Christians besides his own Family (who
yet are indeed (as you shall hear anon) no Christians at all) must needs
imbitter the Spirits of his professed Followers, and envenome them beyond all
measure against the Ministry of the Gospel according to the Letter thereof.
Which yet clearly enough sets out to us the History of Christ, his Promises and
Precepts; neither is there any Mystical meaning that is true, that is not
literally set down in the Text. So that all their boast is but of Allusions and
Phrases, nor can they produce any thing that is not already plainly before our
eyes in the Letter it self. And therefore if they have any choice Secret to
themselves, it is the Mystery of Infidelity and Unbelief, a bold and groundless
Presumption that the History is not true.

3. Which Presumption makes them so peremptorily conclude all the
Scripture-learned under Ignorance, none of them hither to having been so nasute
as to smell out the least falsity in the oldness of the Letter. And therefore
that their Novices may not be entangled nor distracted through the simple
Belief or plain Doctrine of ordinary Christians, Chapter 12.37.
he exhorts them not to hearken to, nor believe any other Service or
Information but what is administered by the Elders in the house of the Love,
chapter 13.9. also 14.1.
enjoins them to give up their Understandings wholly to the Eldest of the
Family, and to give ear to none else but the Teachers of his own Sect. chapter
20.12, 13.
Nay he will not so much as suffer them to appeal to the Light that is within
them, nor to judge themselves nor be judged by their own Consciences, but only
by the Elders of the house of the Love, concerning whom they must not have the
least suspicion of Error or Unfaithfulness. Which is the greatest Tyranny and
Slavery upon the Soul of man that can be devised, and a shrewd Indication that
those Elders will approve and advise things against express Scripture, Reason
and Conscience. And thus is many a poor simple Lamb catched out of the Fold of
Christ, and carried quite away without recovery into the thickest and remotest
Woods and darkest Caverns or Dens to be devoured by this white Wolf, who by his
gracious speeches, heart-melting insinuations, soft-soothing language, that is
oiled and perfumed with nothing but Love, first intices the little ones, after
whom his mouth most of all waters, to a great esteem of himself, and then
utterly extinguishes in them, to their Eternal Destruction, all that Faith they
had in the Person and Promises of our ever-blessed Savior.

Which he does by intercepting all aid that the use of Reason and the Knowledge
of the Scripture could administer, giving them such hard language as we have
above recited; the civilest aspersion he bestows being, the Imagination of the
Knowledge: but magnifying himself and his Service of the Love, that is, his own
Doctrine, above whatever yet appeared to the sons of men, as you shall now hear.

4. For he sets himself above Abraham, Moses, David, and all the Prophets,
above John the Baptist, yea above the Person of Christ himself. For indeed he
will allow that the service of the Fathers in the Covenant of Circumcision
until Moses was the Forefront of the true Tabernacle; See his Evangelie, chapter 37.
and that Moses in figures and shadows set out the true being of the true
sanctuary of God in the Spirit; and that to David and the Prophets was shown
the true Being in the Spirit of their sight: That John the Baptist was a
Preparation by Repentance to an entrance into the Holy of the true Tabernacle;
and that this Holy of the true Tabernacle is the Service of Christ in the
Belief: But the Holy of Holies, or the Most Holy, this he reserves to himself
and his Service of the Love. chap. 3^.3.
Wherein, as he boasts, is the Perfection of Life, the Completion of all
Prophecies from the beginning of the World, the righteous Judgment of God, the
Throne of Christ before which all things must needs be manifested, the perfect
Being of the Godhead, and the true Rest of the chosen of God. He calls also
this his Service of the Love the Last Day, and the Perfection and Conclusion of
all the works of God. Whereby he would intimate it to be an everlasting Seventh
day or Sabbath. And yet he will have it also the Eighth Day, as if he affected
an holy day beyond that of God himself, and a time beyond Eternity.

5. Again, in his Prophecy of the Spirit of Love, he sets himself highest in
the enumeration of the Three principal Services, namely the Service of the Law
under God the Father, the Service of the Belief under Christ the Savior, and
the Service of the Love under the Holy Ghost. The affectation of which office
he learnt of his master David George, as is noted by them that have wrote of
these Enthusiasts. I omit to speak of lesser Encomiums of his doctrine; as That
it is the last Trump, that sure word of Prophecy; that his day of the Love is
that new day that the Lord has made, abundant in clearness and full of Eternal
joy, the new Jerusalem descending from Heaven, and the Inheritance of the
Right-perfection. We will conclude all with what he writes in his Revelation of
God. See Revel. D^i cap. 29. v. 3.
Behold presently in this day is the Kingdom of the God of Heaven and his
Righteousness, the godly Majesty and his Glory, as also the salvation of Christ
and the eternal life appeared in perfect Clearness, with great Triumph and Joy;
The Resurrection also of the dead, the cleansing of the Earth, the blessing of
all Generations, the righteous Judgment of God, the Glorious coming of Christ
with all the thousands of Saints, and the everlasting Condemnation of all
ungodly in the hellish Fire. What therefore can you expect more then is
accomplished in his Service of the Love? and what greater Person can there be
then he who sets so glorious a Dispensation on foot on the earth? Let us
therefore take notice what he makes himself in the midst of this Glory and Pomp
which he sets out.

6. As if it were a small thing for him to be raised from the dead, and to be
anointed with the holy Ghost, Evangel. chapter 38.
he boasts further that God has sealed in him the Dwelling of his Glory and
of his Holy Name; and elsewhere that he is Godded with God, and
consubstantiated with the Deity: and expressly in his Evangely, Chap. 34. he
declares how God has manned himself with him, and Godded him with his Godhead,
to a living Tabernacle, a House for his dwelling, and to a seat of his Christ
the seed of David; and how the Judgment Seat of Christ is revealed out of
Heaven from the right hand of God, and that on the same Judgment Seat of Christ
there sits one (meaning himself) in the Habitation of David which judges
uprightly, thinks upon equity, and requires righteousness, and that through
him God will judge the compass of the Earth. chap. 12.
This, in his Introduction to the Glass of Righteousness, is the right Messiah,
the high Priest for ever in the most holy, the noble King of Israel and Judah,
that possesses the seat of his Father, an everlasting peaceable Prince over the
house of Jacob according to the promises. But you will say this cannot be
understood of H. Nicolas, but of Christ, according as he has wrote Exhortat.
chap. 20.13.
elsewhere, that there is in his Communialty of the Love a true Judge, Jesus
Christ our Lord and King, which executes the right Judgment of his Father
according to the truth. But we are also to understand that This Christ, that
sits on the throne of his Father David, is the eldest Father of the Family of
Love, as appears out of his Evangelium Cap. 31. sect. 14. and 16. Which places
compared with what has been recited, it is clear that H. Nicolas is this Christ
on the seat of David for his lifetime; and, which is still worse, and the seed
of endless Madness and Blasphemy, that this wild Presumption of the eldest in
the Family being the very Christ from Heaven returned to judge the World with
equity, will be entailed upon their Successors for ever. And that the
appearance of this Christ may be the more glorious and more answerable to the
very Phrase of Scripture, he is accompanied with Angels as well as Saints, some
of his Elders being adorned with the glittering title of Seraphims, as is to be
seen in the Legend of his life, entitled Mirabilia Dei, as also in his Glass
of Righteousness.

CHAP. XIII. 1. An Examination of all possible Grounds of this fanatic
Boaster's magnifying himself thus highly. 2. That there are no Grounds thereof
from either the Matter he delivers, or from his Scriptural Eloquence, Raptures
and Allegories. 3. The unspeakable Power and Profit of the Letter above that of
the Allegory, instanced in the Crucifixion, Resurrection, Ascension of our
Savior, and his coming again to Judgment. 4. That Allegorizing the Scripture
is no special Divine gift, but the fruit of either our Natural Fancy or
Education. 5. That he had no grounds of magnifying himself from any Miracles he
did; 6. Nor from being any Special Preacher of Perfection or Practiser thereof.
7. Of that Imperfection that is seated in the impurity of the Astral Spirit and
ungovernable tumult of Phansy in Fanatic Persons.
1. BUT enough has been related to show that transcendent esteem this
Enthusiast had both of himself, and also would insinuate into others, of his
own Person and Doctrine. Let us now consider what Right or Ground he had to
assume so much to himself, or others may have to attribute so much unto him.
And to bring all the Inducements imaginable into view; This high conceit of his
of being so supereminent a Person, must arise either from the Matter he does
deliver, or his Eloquence, or the Raptures he was in when he penned down his
Revelations, (as he would have them thought) or from the Mysteriousness of his
Allegories, or from his Evangelizing the Perfection, or lastly for that he was
prophesied of in the Scriptures, as he in whom all things should be fulfilled.

2. Now for the main Matter he delivers plainly and above-bord, it is the
excellency of Love. Which is so Essential a Truth to Christianity, See Book 8.
chapter 2. ad 13.
and plainly inculcated in the Gospel, and so effectually recommended, that
there is no true Christian can miss of it. So that we need no new Instructor in
that divine Grace, much less any inspired Prophet to teach us what is so plain
to us already. And therefore if there be any thing new in this doctrine of
Love, it must be such a kind of Love that is new to Christians, I mean to true
Christians; but not to the Gnostics, nor the School of Simon Magus, who spoke
as magnificently of himself as this Impostor can do possibly. And for his
Scriptural Eloquence, his Raptures and Transportations in the penning down his
Writings, how that such things arise frequently from Nature and Complexion, is
abundantly declared in my Enthusiasmus Triumphatus: See Enthusias. Triumphat.
sect. 19, 20, 23, 24, 56, 59.
(to say nothing of worser Assistences then mere Complexion) as also the
dexterity of Allegorizing; which yet how distortedly he performs, I shall note
anon.

3. In the mean time I hold it well worth our observation, how giddy and
injudicious those persons are that are so mightily taken with the Mystical
sense of such parts of the History of Christ as are most profitable in the
belief of the mere Letter: such as his Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, his
Session at the right hand of God, and his coming again to Judgment, when he
will change these vile bodies of ours into the similitude of his Heavenly body.
For making this a mere Representation of something to be performed within us,
namely his Crucifixion, of our mortifying of the old man, his Resurrection, of
our rising to newness of life, his Ascension into Heaven and sitting at the
right hand of God, of our entrance into and rule and reign in the Heavenly
Being with Christ in the Spirit, and his Returning to Judgment, the judging
and governing our natural and earthly man with Righteousness and Equity (which
Allegories, or rather not so good, is the deepest Wisdom and divinest
Revelation that is to be found in this admired Prophet) such Allusions, I say,
and Similitudes as these have no more force nor efficacy to urge us, or help us
on to those Accomplishments they represent, then if the History of Christ were
a mere Fable. But if, in stead of making them Resemblances, we should use them
as Arguments from a true History, they have a power unspeakable for the making
us good. See Book 8. Chap. 16.
For thus any ingenuous Spirit would melt into remorse, when he considers how
the Son of God, out of mere love and compassion to him, was crucified for him;
and thereby will willingly submit to all the pain of Mortification in a kindly
Gratitude to his Savior: See Book 8. Chap. 17.
And from the belief of the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, will be the
further animated in his pursuance of the Resurrection to an holy life, being
assured of Eternal enjoyment of his labors by a blessed Immortality; of which
also His Ascension into Heaven is a further pledge, and his sitting at the
right hand of God the greater motive to take off his mind from earthly desires,
and to think of those things that are above. See Book 8. Chap. 18.
And lastly, his certain hope of obtaining that crown of glory which Christ the
righteous Judge shall give unto him at the last day (I mean that glorified and
Heavenly Body) will be the greatest engagement imaginable to spend the strength
of his natural body in his service, to expose it to all hardships, yea to death
it self, if need so require, for the honor of his Savior; and in the mean
time to possess it in all Sanctity possible, in a grateful observance of his
commands from whom we expect the Redemption of our Bodies.

4. Wherefore the Literal meaning of the History of Christ being so powerful
and effectual to the making of us good, it is a sign of a great deal of folly
and levity to dote upon mere Allegories and Allusions, that have no force at
all in them to move us to Godliness and Virtue; or to surmise that there is any
thing Spiritual or Divine in the mere allegorizing of the Scripture. For there
is nothing Divine, saving our full assurance of the holy Truths themselves that
are delivered in the Gospel, whether they be Life or History, for this is a
spiritual gift indeed. But that we conceive that one may represent the other,
that is only the natural Nimbleness of our Phansy, or a Dexterity accruing to
us from Use and Education; such as I question not but was in Saint Paul, who
was brought up a Pharisee, and therefore was well versed in their Midrash or
Mystical meaning of the History of the Old Testament, which made him so prone
to such applications in the New. But this was no such special Inspiration or
peculiar spiritual Attainment in him above the rest of the Apostles, but merely
a Cast of his Office, a Specimen of his former Education, which accustomed him
to Allusions and Allegories in the interpreting of the Law. So that I much pity
those poor See Book 10. chap. 13. sect. 5.
souls that are so transported and overcome with those Allusions and
Allegorical Reflections, as such high Seize, that they think themselves
illuminated above the capacities of all other Mortals, being more pleased with
the gaudy colors of the Rainbow then with the pure light which is reflected
thence: Which yet all true Christians plainly see and feel in the simplicity of
its own nature, without any such cloudy refractions; and know that the rest is
not the dictate of the Spirit, but the mere service of Phansy lending its aid
to the setting forth of divine Perceptions. And yet this slight sallad is the
chief food this pretended Prophet feeds his followers withal, and the greatest
demonstration of his being extraordinarily called and inspired.

5. For as for Miracles, he never did any, as you may see in that Book of his
Life entitled Mirabilia Dei, where nothing miraculous is recorded, unless a
certain Prophetical Dream, wherein he seemed to be frighted, together with some
devotional expressions after he awakened out of it; as also a lucky escape out
of the hands of his Persecutors, who happily being not so vigilant as they might
be, the phrase of the story makes them struck with blindness; and lastly his
witty questions and answers to the Priest or Confessor when he was a child:
wherein he does so fully utter the chief of his Doctrine, that he seems as wise
at eight years old as ever he was since, though he lived to a very considerable
Age. But any one that has any insight in things may easily discern that the
Discourse was never intended for a true History, but a spiritual Romance. So
that as petty businesses as these are, they have no assurance of their truth.

6. Now for his Pretensions of being the most eminent Preacher of Perfection,
it is a mere Boast. For whether he means by Perfection, Love, which is the
perfection of the Law, it cannot be more clearly and advantageously preached
then it is in the New Testament by Christ and his Apostles. See Book 8. chapter 2.
sect. 3.
And what Comparison is there betwixt such a Teacher of Love, who being the
declared Son of God by Signs and Miracles, gave his life out of dear
compassion to mankind, and a soft Fellow that only talks fine phrases to the
World? Or whether he pretend to a more general Perfection in the divine Graces
or holy Life, whose Root is true Faith in God and his Promises through Christ,
and the branches Charity, Humility and Purity; it shall appear anon, that as
for true Faith he is perfectly fallen from it, and that he is as a dead tree
pulled up from the root. And for the present it is evident also out of his own
writings (not to charge him with accusations out of others) that he is far from
being perfect either in Charity, Humility, or Purity. For what greater sign of
Uncharitableness, then to charge all men that are not of his Communialty to be
of the Synagogue of Satan and children of the Devil? and what greater Pride,
then to prefer himself before Abraham, Moses and Christ, and make as if he were
God himself come to judge the World with his thousands of Saints and Seraphims?
And lastly, what greater Symptoms of Lust and Impurity, then to be sunk down
from all sense and presage of a life to come? To say nothing of his complaints,
in his Glass of Righteousness, of such as came in to spy out their liberty,
See his Glass of Righteousness, Book 3. Chap. 26.
and his lusty animations against Shamefacedness and Modesty in men and women,
and their shiness to such acts as ordinary Bashfulness is loath to name. Which
in my apprehension are very foul spots in that Glass of his, as if it had been
breathed upon by the mouth of a menstruous Woman.

7. But there is also a more subtle Uncleanness, from which who is not free, if
he knew his own weakness, he would be ashamed to profess himself perfect; and
that is the Impurity of the Astral Spirit, in which is the Seat and Dominion of
unruly Imagination. Hence are our Sidereal or Planet-strucken Preachers and
Prophets, who being first blasted themselves, blast all others that labor with
the like impurity, by their Fanatic Contagion. Those in whom Mortification has
not had its full work, nor refined the Inmost of their natural Complexions, are
subject to be smitten and overcome by such Enthusiastic storms, till a more
perfect Purification commit them to the safe custody of the Intellectual
Powers. Wherefore let this pretended Prophet boast as much as he will of his
glorious Resurrection from the dead, it is manifest to the more perfect, that
he has not yet so much as passed through that Death that should have led him to
the unshaken Kingdom of Truth, and letten him in to the immovable Calmness and
serene stilness of the Intellectual World, where the Blasts and Blusters of the
Astral Spirit cease, and the Violence of Phansy perverts not the faithful
representations of Eternal Reason. For God is not in these fanatic
Herricanoes, no more then he was in the tempestuous Wind, 1 King. 19.12.
Earthquake, or Fire that passed before the Prophet Elias. But the Divine Truth
is to be found in that still small voice, which is the Echo of the Eternal
Word; not urged upon us by that furious Impulse of complexionall Imagination,
but descending from the Father of lights, with whom there is no shadow of
change. This was an Attainment out of this Boasters reach, of which he had not
the least sense or presage, and therefore was wholly given up to the hot
scalding Impressions of misguided Phansy in his Astral Spirit. Which being
strangely raised and exalted in this false light, has a power by words or
writings to fire others, and to intoxicate them with the same heat and noise in
their enravished Imagination, whereby that still and small voice of
Incomplexionate Reason cannot be heard.

CHAP. XIV. 1. That neither H. Nicolas nor his Doctrine was prophesied of in
Holy Scripture. That of the Angel preaching the Everlasting Gospel groundlesly
applied to him. 2. As also that place John 1.21. of being That Prophet. 3. His
own mad Application of Acts 17. v. 31. to himself. 4. Their Misapplication of 1
Cor. 13. v. 9, 10. and Hebr. 6. v. 1, 2. to the Doctrine of this new Prophet.
5. Their arguing for the authority of the Service of the Love from the Series
of Times and Dispensations, with the Answer thereunto. 6. That the Oeconomie of
the Family of Love is quite contrary to the Reign of the Spirit. 7. That the
Author is not against the Regnum Spiritus the Cabbalists also speak of, but
only affirms that this Dispensation takes not away the Personal Offices of
Christ nor the External comeliness of Divine Worship. 8. That if this Regnum
Spiritus is to be promoted by the Ministry of some one Person more especially,
it follows not that it is H. Nicolas, he being a mere mistaken Enthusiast, or
worse.
1. AND therefore being blinded with the wind and dust of this Fanatic
Tempest, they are carried on to so great a piece of Folly, as to fansy this
mistaken Wight so Sacred and Divine a person as to be prophesied of in the Holy
Scriptures. But the places that are alleged are so weakly and ineptly applied,
that it is a further confirmation of their being strangely hood-winked and held
down with an overbearing effascination and witchcraft. For how vain a thing is
it to make this Man that Angel that preached the Everlasting Gospel, Revel.
chap. 14. v. 6.
whenas that Angelical Preachment was at least seven or eight hundred years
before he lived, according to all those Interpreters that have endeavored to
give a solid and coherent account of S. John's Prophecy? But this is more then
I need attempt, (or it may be can be done) to confute this assertion by
Chronological demonstration. It is sufficient to note that it is groundless, a
mere phansy unbacked by Reason and Argument; whenas on the contrary there is
evident Reason against it; This person whom they so much adore being rather a
Decryer of the Everlasting Gospel then a Preacher of it, as shall appear in due
time.

2. The Second conceit of his being prophesied of in Scripture is fixed upon
that of S. John 1. verse 21. where they would have him to be That Prophet, viz.
an eminent Prophet distinct from Elias and Christ. But it is very discernable
how weak an Alledgement this is. For first, if there were such an eminent
Prophet expected distinct from Elias and Christ, it does not follow it is he.
And then again, this expectation of the Jews is no Divine Testimony. And
thirdly, as some Interpreters have noted, they expected him before the coming
of Elias, as Elias before the coming of Christ. See Grotius upon the place.
Others understood by That Prophet the Prophet Jeremy, who is styled (...),
That Prophet of God. And lastly, amongst the rest that excellent Critic and
pious Interpreter Castellio renders it simply, a prophet, the sense being, At
least art thou a Prophet? See Castellio upon the place. So many weaknings are
there of this groundless Fiction of his being prophesied of in this place of
Scripture.

3. But I shall produce a Third place, and that of his own choosing, Acts 17.
where God is said to have appointed a day in which he will judge the world in
righteousness by that man whom he has ordained; Acts 17. v. 31.
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead. This shameless Enthusiast does not stick to apply to himself this
place, as if he were the man prophesied of therein. Whenas it is manifest it is
meant of the Person of Christ, whom God had corporeally raised from the Grave,
as a palpable Pledge and Assurance that the World should be judged by him
according to the Scriptures, Math. 25.31. But supposing the meaning to be that
which this fanatic Boaster would have it, see what sense it will make with the
preceding verse, which would be this, That God now commands all men every where
to repent, namely, because 1500 years hence he will raise up H. Nicolas from
the dead, in a moral sense, who shall judge the world by his doctrine. What
Bedlam Madness is this to vent such Expositions of the Holy Writ upon pretense
of higher Inspiration then ever was yet in the World? The Apostle's exhortation
would be as wild sense as if one should earnestly cry unto the people walking
in Paul's to run out of the Church as fast as they can, because it is ready one
thousand five hundred years hence to fall down upon their heads.

4. That I may not omit any places that they allege, I will add also 1 Cor.
13. v. 9, 10. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part: But when that which
is perfect is come then that which is imperfect shall be done away. And Hebr.
6. v. 1, 2. Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us
go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead
works, and of Faith toward God, of the doctrine of Baptism, laying on of
hands, and of the Resurrection of the dead, and of the Eternal judgment. From
these two places they are wont to gather that the Doctrine of Christ is
imperfect, and a more perfect Doctrine was to come, which is, say they, the
Doctrine of Hen. Nicolas. Which argument is as weak and frivolous as
blasphemous. For it is plain that in the former place he compares not any
Doctrine to be set on foot on earth with the present Doctrine of Christ and
knowledge of the Apostles, but the condition of the knowledge of the Christian
Church in this life with that which she shall have in Heaven: and therefore he
says, Now I know in part, but then I shall know even as I am known. What, does
S. Paul mean that he shall know nothing clear till H. Nicolas his time? O the
madness and impudence of these giddy Interpreters! And to the latter Text;
What, would they have us to let go our Christian Creed under pretense of a new
Doctrine which is more perfect? Yea certainly they would so, as will appear
more plainly anon. But how shamefully they abuse this Scripture to that
execrable end, is evident from the following verse, And this will we do, if God
permit. That is, The Apostle himself will deliver that doctrine of Perfection
he mentions in the first verse; and therefore it is no Prophecy of the Doctrine
of H. Nicolas, but a more exquisite Declaration of the excellency of Christ's
Priesthood; which is too long and too accurate to fill a short Creed. But what
pitiful shifts are these deluded Fanatics put to, when they have no better
Alledgements then these for their rebellious Errors against Christ?

5. I shall conclude my examination of their grounds of believing this Fanatic
so great and eminent a Prophet, with something a more trim conceit of his
followers, whereby they would countenance their high opinion they have of him,
which is hinted also from himself; namely, That the Series of Times and
Providence seem to give witness to the mighty Professions he makes of his own
Ministry. For as there was for a time a Service of the Law under God the
Father, and then a Service of the Belief under Christ the Son; so likewise the
Holy Ghost must have his turn and have his Service: and what Service can that
be, but the Service of the Love? To which I answer, That if they speak this in
good earnest in reference to the three Hypostases of the ever-Blessed Trinity,
it is plain that that Mystery was not communicated to the World under the Law
of Moses, but concealed in the hidden Cabbala among the Wise men and Prophets,
not to be published till Christ; for the better clearing and fitter
recommending the Theory of his Union with the Eternal Word. With the appearance
therefore of Christ, with whom all the fullness of Divine Wisdom was to be
imparted to men, a distincter knowledge of the Deity and clearer assurance of
the Immortality of the Soul (the main Branches of the ancient Cabbala) was also
communicated. But it is no where said, nor can be conceived, That God the
Father distinctly from the Son and Holy Ghost gave the Law to Moses; but it was
an act, as all acts ad extra are, of the entire Godhead. Nor is the Father nor
the Holy Spirit excluded in the oeconomie of the Gospel, but their Glory is
acknowledged coequal and their Majesty coeternal. Nor again can the Church ever
cease to be under the Belief of Jesus Christ, so as that any other God-service
should justle that out by its succession. For the Belief of the Promises of
Christ's coming again visibly to Judgment and Crowning his true members with
Eternal Life and Glory, must of necessity continue till the Promises themselves
be fulfilled: Which are but phantastically conceived to be fulfilled in the
Service of the Love.

6. Moreover how can that Dispensation pretend to be the Ministry of the
Spirit, where men are kept off from believing the inward manifestations of
their own Mind (where alone they can be properly said to be taught of God) and
urged to give up all their Light and Consciences to be ruled at the pleasure of
the Elders of his Family? This is not to be inspired by God, but to be taught
merely by men, and to be carved and shaped out like a piece of dead Marble by
the hand of the Statuary. So wholly unlike the Dispensation of the Spirit is
this Oeconomie of the Service of the Love. Beside that it is a piece of Rapine
and Robbery to appropriate that to their Family which is the Peculiar of every
true Believer in Christ, who assuredly have the assistance of the Holy Spirit,
See Book 8. chapter 8. and 9.
as I have proved at large in the following parts of my Discourse.

7. But if any one will adventure to affirm, That after this dead Form of
Religion and external flattery of the Person of Christ, which has continued
too-many Ages, there will succeed a more general Reign of the Spirit of Life
and experimental knowledge of his Scepter and Power in us, subduing all his
enemies there under his feet, and renewing the World in true Righteousness and
Holiness; it is that which I in no wise oppose; nay I must confess I have a
fatal and unalterable propension to think it to be true, and that this may be
that Regnum Spiritus which the Cabbalists of old did presage, and does begin
with the Reviving of the Witnesses in the Apocalypse of S. John. Of which
things I have See Book 5. Chap. 17. sect. 8.
already spoke. But in the mean time this is not the special work of any one
man, but like the Vision of Chap. 3^. v. 9, 10.
Ezekiel, where Breath comes from the four Winds of Heaven upon the bones
already covered with sinews, flesh and skin; and behold they lived, and stood
upon their feet, an exceeding great Army: an orderly Company, such as the
Church of Christ ought to be. For this Internal power of the Spirit will not
annul or destroy the External Frame of Christian Religion, as it referrs to the
Offices of the Person of Christ, the Head of his Church, (as these Satanical
Impostors would pretend) but rectify and corroborate it, and make it more
irreprehensibly and enravishingly beautiful; as there was more luster in those
raised Bodies after the Spirit of life had entered into them, then when they
were mere dead carcasses.

8. Besides, if we did conceive that this Dispensation of Christ in the Spirit
was to be in a more special manner promoted by the Ministry of some one Person,
it does not at all follow that H. Nicolas is the man; and not only so, but I
am confident I shall make it manifest that it is impossible that it should be
he. Which I shall have sufficiently performed, when I have demonstrated that he
is nothing at all of that which he pretends to be, but only a mere mistaken
Enthusiast, if not worse; which was the last part of my Purpose. And this I
conceive is fully evinced by proving him to have laid aside all the Offices of
the Person of Christ, as he is Man, and intercepted all the hopes of his
Visible Return to Judgment in the clouds of Heaven, and of rewarding all true
Believers with that glorious Crown of Life in an Heavenly Body at the last day.
Which things are so clear in Scripture, that the Scripture it self must loose
its authority if these things once loose their belief, as is manifest by what
we have said Chap. 1.
already in this present Treatise. And therefore he that denies these things,
it is plain he is not inspired of God, but is a Minister and Factor for the
Devil.

CHAP. XV. 1. That the Personal Offices of Christ are not to be laid aside:
That he is a Priest for ever, demonstrated out of sundry places of Holy Writ.
2. That the Office of being a Judge is also affixed to his Humane Person,
proved from several Testimonies of Scripture. 3. Places alleged for the
excluding Christ's Humanity, with Answers thereto. 4. The last and most
plausible place they do allege, with an Answer to the same.
1. NOW that the Humane person of Christ, as I may so call it, is not to be
laid aside, is evident (not to repeat what I have elsewhere alleged) from the
whole Epistle of the Author to the Hebrews. For he that there is said to be an
high Priest for ever, is that very man who was crucified on the Cross at
Jerusalem, who was said to be like unto his brethren in all things; Hebr. 2. v.
17, 18.
that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest, in things appertaining
to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people: For in that he
himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that tempted.
And it is further clear that it is this very man we speak of, in that he is
said to be born not of the Tribe of Levi, but of the Tribe of Judah, chap. 7.14.
and yet he is there declared a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec.
Read the whole Chapter; nothing can be more clearly asserted then the
Everlasting High Priesthood of this man, who sanctifying the People with his
blood, suffered without the gate. Which are such particularities as must needs
affix the Eternal High Priesthood to the Humane person of Christ.

Again in that he is said to suffer but once, it is apparent that it is to be
literally understood of his Humane person; Hebr. chap. 10. v. 11.
And every priest stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same
Sacrifices which can never take away sins: But this man after he had offered
one Sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down at the right hand of God, etc. And
yet more fully in the foregoing Chapter: For Christ is not entered into the holy
places made with hands, Hebr. ^. v. ^4, 25, 26, 2^ 28
which are the figures of the true; but into Heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us. Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the
high priest enters into the holy place every year with blood of others. For
then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the World. But now
once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
judgment: So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them
that look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin unto salvation.
To which you may add that of Peter, 1 Pet. 3.18.
For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God. And 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is a propitiation for our sins.
And if he was so in S. John's time, why not always?

Furthermore, Romans 5.6. For when we were yet without strength, in due time
Christ died for the ungodly. He says not, by the ungodly, but, for the
ungodly: which therefore cannot be allegorized but into Nonsense. Like that,
verse 10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death
of his Son. Is any one reconciled by killing the Holy Life, the Mystical Christ
in him? Wherefore it is plain that in S. Paul's time the Humane Person of
Christ was the high Priest who was an Atonement with God by the sacrifice of
himself. And God has not declared any where that he has or ever will put him
out of his Office, till his coming again to Judgment, when he shall appear the
second time, without sin unto Salvation, as you heard out of the Author to the
Hebrews; that is, When he shall not bring his sin-offering with him, viz. an
earthly, mortal body, capable of Crucifixion, but shall appear as a glorious
Judge to complete Salvation to all them that truly believe in him, and expect
his joyful coming; at what time he shall finish the Redemption of our Bodies,
and translate us to his everlasting Kingdom in Heaven.

2. And that this Office of a Judge is assured to his Humane person, is plain
from what we recited out of the Acts: namely, That God has given assurance to
all men, Acts 17. v. 31.
that he will judge the world by the man Jesus, in that he has raised him so
miraculously from the dead. Which is that very Son of man that shall appear on
his throne accompanied with his Angels, Matthew. 25. And assuredly none will deny
but that he who sits at the right hand of God, will come thence to judge the
quick and the dead: But it is this crucified Jesus, that for the joy that was
set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of the throne of God, Hebr. 12.2. To which truth S. Peter also
witnesses in the Acts. Acts 3.13, 21.
Where that very Jesus whom the Jews delivered up and denied in the presence of
Pilate, is said to be received into Heaven, until the time of Restitution of
all things, which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets since the
World began. This implies that at the utmost fulfilling of the Periods of time
he will again appear and finish the Mystery of Righteousness, and perfect
Salvation to his people at the last, according as he has promised, John 6. No
man can come to me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw him; and I will
raise him up at the last day. Which certainly is to be understood of his Humane
person, forasmuch as for that very cause he has made him Judge of Life and
Death, as appears Chap. 5. ver. 26. For as the Father has life in himself, so
likewise he has given to the Son to have life in himself; and has given him
authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Now when he
says, No man can come to me, except the Father draw him, it is manifest, that
by the Father is meant the Eternal hidden Deity, whose workings and
preparations within every man's Soul fit him to join with Christ's humane
person, the visible Head of the Church of God: otherwise if by Christ were here
understood the Eternal Word, it would not be good sense. For that is that which
draws, not the thing drawn to, in this place. Again, whereas he says, He will
raise him up at the last day, it is evident that it is not morally or
mystically to be understood, but literally; otherwise it could not be deferred
till the last day, but should be done in this Life. Nor can it be understood of
the day of the service of the Love: For then the sense would be, That they that
believed on Christ some sixteen hundred years ago, should become Familists
now, or rather some others for them; which Promises are insipid and ridiculous.
Wherefore it is this Son of man, to whom God has also given power to execute
judgment. And the very same certainly is he that is represented on the great
white Throne, from whose face the Earth and Heaven fled away. Rev. 20. And I
saw the dead, small and great, stand before God: and the Books were opened,
and another Book was opened which is the Book of life: and the dead were judged
out of those things which were written in those Books, according to their
works. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in it; and Death and Hell
delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man
according to their works. And Death and Hell were cast into the lake of fire.
Hell, i. e. (...), is here the Region of the dead: and the whole frame and
phrase of the matter here contained does so plainly import that the Judgment is
concerning those that are dead, whether drowned in the Sea, or buried in their
Graves, or in whatever other circumstances quitted this mortal life; that this
truth of Christ's visible coming to Judgment cannot be concealed or eluded by
any Allegorical fetches whatsoever.

3. Nor have our inconsiderate Adversaries any thing to allege for their
rebellious despising of the Humane person of Christ, unless two or three
grosly-mistaken places of Scripture. Such as Hebr. 11. v. 26. where Moses is
said to esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in
Egypt; and Chap. 13. v. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and
for ever. Out of which passages they fancy to themselves such a Christ only
as was as well in Moses's time as now, and was ever the same from the beginning
of the World and ever will be. But they plainly in these Texts raise Mountains
of Molehills. For the simple and genuine sense of the former is nothing but
this, That Moses bare such reproaches as Christ and the firm professors of
Christ bear, which he uses as an argument of Patience to the Hebrews from the
example of Moses: See Book 1. chap. 8. sect. 4, 5, 6.
unless you will interpret the place upon the supposition of Christ being the
Prefect of Israel before his Incarnation. But the former sense is more plain
and passable. And for the other place, it is nothing but an exhortation to
Perseverance from the constancy of the Christian Rulers and Governors who
persisted in their Faith to the end: and the Apostle tells them hereupon that
the Faith is the same still, and Christ's assistance the same now that it was
then to them, and will be ever the same to all true Believers. Which surely is
all that is meant by Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.
For to make yesterday to signify from everlasting, is very rash and cross to
the phrase of Scripture, Psalm. 90. For a thousand years in thy sight are but as
yesterday; and Job 8. For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing. Which is
very true of these new upstart Interpreters.

4. But their last and most plausible allegation is that out of the
Corinthians, Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh; 2 Cor. 5.16.
yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet know we him so no more.
Here they think they have full commission to lay aside the Humane person of
Christ from the Example of S. Paul. But their mistake is in not knowing the
Hebrew Idiom of this place of Scripture. For as that excellent Interpreter Hugo
Grotius has noted, the words are to be rendered, yea though we might have known
Christ after the flesh, that is to say, Though I with others might have known
Christ after the flesh, and conversed with him here upon earth, nay have been
something akin to him, as certain boasted themselves it seems at Corinth, yet
henceforth, says he, we should know him after this manner no more, but as an
Heavenly Prince: in whom he has the most interest, that is the most nearly
renewed into the image of his life. Or without this Hebraisme, It may be an
oblique Monition to the aforesaid persons, and have rather the nature of an
Exhortation to them, then of a Declaration concerning himself; which they would
be more certainly enforced to take to themselves, by how much more plain it was
that Paul never knew Christ according to the Flesh. That it has some such
meaning as this, and not that of our Adversaries, is plain from the precedent
verse, where he expressly retains the Humane person of Christ in his Priestly
office: For that he says, that he is that one man that died for all, (not
killed by all, as I noted above) that they who live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him that died for them and rose again. Which is not
sense, if it be not understood of the Humane person of Christ. And verse 20 he
does plainly profess himself the Ambassador of the crucified Jesus, or Legate
of the great Angel of the Covenant; Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
if God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled
to God. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might
be made the Righteousness of God in him. Of which there can be no possible
meaning that excludes the Humane person of Christ from his Priestly office. We
have therefore abundantly demonstrated That the Person of our Savior is not to
be laid aside, but that he is a Priest for ever according to the Scriptures.

CHAP. XVI. 1. That Hen. Nicolas does plainly in his Writings lay aside the
Person of Christ, as where he affirms That whatever is taught by the
Scripture-learned is false, and That all the Matters of the Bible are but
Prefigurations of what concerns the Dispensation of his blessed Family. 2.
Other Citations to the same purpose, and his accursed Allegory of Christ's
celebrating his Passover with his disciples, whereby he would antiquate and
abolish the true Historical knowledge of him. 3. Several places where he
evidently takes away the Priestly Office of Christ. 4. Others that plainly take
away his glorious Return to Judgment and the Resurrection of the dead in the
true and Apostolical sense.
1. WE shall now make it as evident that this pretended Prophet we speak of
does lay him aside, whereby we shall clearly convince the World of his falsehood
and imposture. And this shall be chiefly out of his own Writings. Out of which
we shall first produce such passages as in a more general manner infer what we
aim at. As certainly such places do, as expressly declare That whatsoever is
taught of Christ out of his Communialty of the Love, is all false. Whence it
does plainly appear, That the Articles of the Apostles Creed understood
according to the Letter, are held false by this inspired Communialty: For these
Articles are taught by them that are not of Hen. Nicolas his Family. In his
First Exhortation Chap. 5. he plainly declares, That the true Belief in Jesus
Christ is not to be found in any people upon Earth that walk without the
Communialty of the Love. And Chap. 16. Sect. 15, 16. he tells us, That it is a
presumption against God and his Saints, that any one out of the Learnedness of
the Letter, or out of the Imagination of the Knowledge, takes upon him to be a
Teacher or Preacher, or to institute or intermeddle in any God-service or
Worship, unless he be an illuminated Elder of the house of the Love. And Sect.
17. He does affirm That it is all assuredly false and lies, seducing and
deceitful, whatever is taught by others out of the Learnedness of the
Scripture. Again, in his Evangely, Chap. 32. there also he asserts, That to
those that are without the Family of Love, all the matters of Christianity to
them are in Images, Figures and Shadows, in Similitudes, Parables and closed
Books. Where his meaning is easily understood out of Chap. 30. sect. 17. For
these Figures he makes Shadows of the true and spiritual things which were
heretofore, through Jesus Christ, come to pass, seen, heard and preached, and
have stood for a memorial of the true spiritual things which should, in the
time to come, come to pass, namely by this inspired Minister. Whereby the
History of Christ is made a mere Allegory and prophetic Prefiguration of what
is fulfilled in his Dispensation of the Communialty of the Love: wherein all
becomes fulfilled in Christ, whatsoever was written of him, as he plainly
asserts Chap. 1. sect. 10. And he more abundantly declares himself in his
Prophecy of the Spirit of Love, Chap. 13. That a man out of his natural and
Scripture-learned understanding has not any light or knowledge at all of the
Christian Mystery; yea he is so utterly void of the same, that he cannot
understand the smallest tittle thereof: he may indeed speak out of the written
Word, but understands nothing thereof according to the truth; but it is all
covered and sealed before him in Similitudes, Images, Figures and Parables.
Where again it is easy to infer, That this great Prophet holds nothing of the
Articles of the Christian Faith to be true in that sense the Scripture-learned
teach them: which is plainly to deny the History of Christ, and to profess our
selves mere Infidels. Out of which Spirit of Infidelity he has so distortedly
allegorized all the clauses of the Creed, that to such as are not bewitched and
besotted by his fanatic blasts to a better opinion of him then he deserves, he
must needs appear an Infidel. Lastly, in his Introduction, Chap. 9. sect. 35.
there again he does boldly affirm, That it is certainly mere lies what the
Letter-learned institute or set forth, how clear soever in understanding, if
they be yet unreformed by the Love and her Service. And in the following
Section he plainly declares, That the Scriptures are not to be taught nor held
forth Historically, but as Prefigurations of the Promises that are fulfilled in
his Service of the Love. Whence it is evident he had no belief in the Letter of
the Scripture, nor of the miraculous History of Christ, and of the Predictions
concerning him, whereby our Faith should be affixed to his Humane Person.
Against which he uses all diligence imaginable, as if not simple Care but an
inspired Envy or Satanical Spite against the honor of his Person did actuate
him in all his Writings.

2. To which purpose, Chap. 12. sect. 14.
I conceive, is that Caution in his Introduction, That no man bind his heart to
any outward thing, which he is served with to the Righteousness of life. For of
all outward things nothing can be more serviceable then the Humane Person of
Christ, who suffered for us and redeemed us from the wrath to come, if we stand
faithful in the Covenant. Introduct. chapter 13.27.
Those places also where he says, That the Godly life is the very Savior
himself; and that no man knows Christ nor can confess him, unless his shape be
in him, that is, his Life and Image be in him, seem intended as justling
against the External Person of Christ; as also what he says Chap. 22. namely,
That no other Foundation may be laid then that Jesus Christ who from
everlasting was, and is, and abides for ever: whereby I doubt not but he
intends the exclusion of his Humane Person, whose compute began but about 16
hundred years ago. But the most wonderful slight he puts him off by, is his
Mystical meaning of Christ's celebration of the Passover with his Disciples.
Which we shall easily understand, if we take notice what he means by Flesh in
his Writings, namely, by Flesh is meant the Letter or History. In his Prophecy
of the Spirit of Love, Chap. 13. ver. 4. Verily therefore they do all err very
much that judge according to their understanding (out of the earthly Being, or
out of the Flesh or Letter) God's truth, which is Heavenly and Spiritual. See
also Introduct. chapter 14. sect. 20. Now if you will but read his Evangely, chap.
21. sect. 3, 7, 8, 10. also chap. 22. sect. 5, 6. and chap. 25. sect. 1, 2. you
shall find in brief (for it were too tedious to write these allegorical
Ambages) that the right Celebration of the Pascha or Passover with Christ is,
That he (namely, Christ after the Flesh, they are his own words) should be
slain, that is, that Christ according to the Letter or History should be
abolished, that he may be entertained only according to the Spirit. Which is
the great Arcanum of this Sect of the Family. Behold, says he, this is the
right Passover with Christ, and the right Supper which the upright Believers
and Disciples of Christ keep with Christ, to wit, that they depart even so with
Christ out of the Flesh, (that is, that Christ according to the History or
Letter be crucified or slain in them, that is, nullified and rejected as a mere
Legend or Fable) and pass into the Spirit, (that is, the spiritual Mystery of
Christ, the (...) or Moral of the Fable) and out of the Death or Mortality,
(that is, out of the dead Letter) into the Eternal Life of everlasting
Immortality. In which sonorous language that you may not promise to your self
any such lasting purchase, there is nothing meant but the state of Perfection
which these Familists fancy to themselves here upon Earth, and is everlasting
in no other sense then in succession, they promising themselves that their Sect
will continue for ever; and therefore he adds, wherethrough sin and all
destruction becomes vanquished, namely by this state of Perfection, wherein sin
and every imperfect and destroyable state is swallowed up. For they having come
to the highest, there is no change of things, though their persons be mortal,
according to their own doctrine. This Allegory of the Passover is so odd a
conceit, that did I not suppose the Author deeply Fanatical, I should suspect
it accompanied with a sly jearing and scorn against the History of Christ, and
to be the product of a scoffing Atheistical Spirit. For no Atheist could
exercise his wit here with more villainous sliness against the truth of the
Scriptures then thus. Which makes me sometimes think that he was not simply
Fanatical, but either Atheistical, or possessed by the Devil, himself in the
mean time not knowing whose (...) he was.

3. And thus we have had a taste in general, how sedulously this Author
endeavors to out the Person of Christ. We shall now pursue the matter in two
main heads, the Office of his Priesthood, and his coming visibly to judgment in
his Humane person. To which is annexed the promise of a glorious Resurrection,
and Eternal Life, in a plain and true sense, without any shuffling or
equivocating. That he makes nothing of the atonement of Christ's personal
sufferings, he does in my judgment too plainly discover, chap. 13. sect. 8. of
his Documental Sentences, where rather then he will acknowledge the usefulness
of that Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is a
propitiation for our sins, he does pronounce him that sins by violence or
Temptation to be guiltless, as the ravished virgin Deuteronomie 22; that so
there may be no need of Christ's Sacrifice, whose personal death and Priestly
office he never takes notice of to this purpose: As you may observe further,
Exhortat. chap. 20. from sect. 19 to the end of the chapter. Where although he
supposes a man's stumblings and fallings daily very great and terrible before
him, and that for that cause he is very woeful of heart, feels the pricking of
sin, the darts of death, and condemnation of Hell, and so is in much anguish
and affliction of mind; yet is there no application at all of the Sacrifice of
Christ upon the Sea Book 8. chapter 15, and 16.
Cross, nor any help nor comfort at all held out by his sufferings, though it
was the most proper place that could be to mention them. And chap. 24. in the
prayers he puts up there, in stead of making use of the mediation of that
Christ that felt the pains of death on the Cross for us, he makes use only of
Gods supposed Promise or Covenant he has made with the House of the Love, sect.
3. and 7. See him also upon the Beatitudes sect. 6. And it is no wonder we hear
nothing of that Reconciliation made by the Cross of Christ, for he does plainly
aver, sect. 34. That the true being in the Love is that peace with God and man
(mentioned Ephesians. 2.14.) and the true Testament that stands fast for ever.
And Exhortation chap. 12.44. Remission of sins is gained only by submitting to
the House of the Love: The same that David George boasted of his doctrine.
Therefore my beloved children change ye not nor turn away your selves from the
House of Love. For there is in the same the stool of grace, to an everlasting
remission of sins over all such as cleave thereon, and to a peace and rest of
the life to all such as humble them there-under. By such slips and omissions as
these, those that are not very dull of perception may easily spel out his
meaning. Which yet is more clear by other places of his Evangely, chap. 13.
Where he setleth the Everlasting Priesthood not upon Christ's person, but makes
this Kingly Priest no person at all, but a thing, a state or condition of him
and his followers here upon earth. And therefore he calls there this mystical
Christ, The Lords Sabbath, The seventh day in the Paradise of God, The
perfection, etc. And chap. 22. he makes the entrance of Christ into heaven and
his visible ascending up thither, and sitting at the right hand of God, and
sending down the holy Ghost at the day of Pentecost, (which was a real effect
of his eternal Priesthood and Intercession with God for his Church) nothing but
the appearing of him according to the Spirit, out of the Heavenly Being in
their Minds or Souls, upon which he sent down his Spiritual or Heavenly Powers.

Wherefore this Mystical Christ is the only high Priest that he acknowledges,
and will allow him no otherwise then in this mystical and spiritual sense to be
an everlasting and true Christ of God. See the place; Evang. Regni, cap. 22.
of which you will assure your self I have given the right sense, if you
compare it with chap. 26. sect. 10, 11, 12. where he more plainly affirms, That
it is the upright being of the Love, Christ after the Spirit, (which he calls
the true light) which is that high Priest that abides for ever at the right
hand of God in the Heavenly Being. Which phrase Heavenly Being always
signifies morally or mystically with him, and means something within us. And
yet he has the impudence to allege Acts 1. v. 11. where Christ is said to
ascend into Heaven literally and naturally so called, his disciples gazing upon
him as he went up. Thus you see how industriously, nay how madly and rashly, he
shuffles out the Humane person of Christ from his Priestly Office every where.
And as he will have the Heaven or most Holy within us, so will he have his
Sacrifice and Passion within us too. Introduct. chap. 8.38. Where do any now,
says he, keep the Supper of Christ, where they break, distribute and eat the
bread (which is the true Body of Christ) to a remembrance of Christ, that he
has suffered in us for the sins cause the death of the Cross, and so his death
is published till he come in his glory? Where it is plain that the Crucifixion
of Christ is a mystery in us, and it is insinuated a duty too. For the Body and
the Flesh of Christ is Christ according to the History. Which Christ according
to the Flesh is to be slain in us, if we celebrate the Passover aright: and
thus we must publish his death till he come in glory, that is, in the Spirit.

4. And truly no other is his glorious coming to judgment, with this Sect,
then this Mystical and Spiritual coming; which was the second part I intended
to pursue; which I question not but I shall make as clear as noonday. Of this
there are so many Testimonies and so pregnant, that the only fear is of being
too copious in the proof of this matter. Revel. Dei cap. 7. There his
illuminate Elders together with his Family of Love are the Heavens in which
Christ the Son of God comes gloriously and triumphantly to judgment, to reign
with God and his righteousness everlasting upon earth. Which plainly excludes
the ending of the World and that coming of Christ that all Christians expect.
And chap. 15. sect. 6. he affirms that in this Eighth day, which is the day of
the Spirit of Love, all the dead that are deceased in the Lord Jesus Christ do
rise from the death, and all Generations of Heaven and Earth do become judged
in the judgment of God with equity.

Again in his Introduct. Chap. 1. he says, That now the true glorious God, who
is the Resurrection and the Life, reveals his Saints out of his bosom, where
(since the time they fell asleep) they have rested until this day of the Love;
because they should now in these last times, in the resurrection of the
righteous, be manifested with Christ in glory, to a righteous judgment of God
on the earth. And chap. 12. he there also affirms, That in this day of the Love
there appear and come to us livingly and gloriously all God's Saints which in
times past died and fell asleep in God. And chap. 22. there he also tells us,
how that in sure and firm hope of everlasting life the upright believers have
rested in the Lord Jesus Christ, till the appearing of his coming, which is now
in this day of the Love revealed out of the heavenly Being; with which Jesus
Christ the former Believers of Christ, who were fallen asleep, rested or died
in him, are now also manifested in glory, being raised from the dead to the
intent that they should reign alive with him over all his enemies. To which you
may add what he has wrote chap. 16. in his Prophecy of the Spirit of Love: Make
you to flight, make you to flight, yea, get you now all out of the way, ye
enemies of the Lord, and of his service of the Love, and give the Lord with his
holy ones the room; yet shall ye not escape the vengeance of God. For, he
says, the Lord comes to judge betwixt the Family of the Love and the rest of
the world: where-through the Earth is now moved, the Heavens troubled, the
Elements melt with heat, and the token of the coming of the Son of man appears
in Heaven: with which rumor or rushing noise of the power of God and his holy
ones, the last trumpet does also presently give forth her sound; through whose
blast of her vehement sound, and through the appearing of the coming of Christ,
the dead shall stand up and arise unto the judgment of God; who having
revenged the blood of his holy ones, that the sinners have spilt and shed upon
the earth, he puts this pure Family in peaceable Possession thereof; that they
may reign there-over, or judge the same with righteousness, from henceforth
world without end. So that the completion of all the Prophets ends in the
Triumph of Familism; the same which David George boasted of himself. See also
chap. 15. sect. 5.

Lastly in his Evangely, chap. 35.8. Behold in this same day, namely of the
Love, is the Resurrection of the Lords dead come to pass, through the appearing
of the coming of Christ in his Majesty according to the Scriptures. And a
little after, sect. 9. In which resurrection of the dead, God shows unto us
that the time is now fulfilled, that his dead (or the dead that are fallen
asleep in the Lord) rise up in this day of his judgment, and appear unto us in
Godly glory, which shall also henceforth live in us everlastingly with Christ,
and reign upon the Earth. Of which the plain sense is, That the Souls deceased
so many hundred years ago, are alive again in these of the Family of Love, and
shall reign everlastingly in them with the Mystical Christ on the Earth. Which
plainly excludes that other Judgment or Resurrection in the Literal sense, as
I said before. Again chap. 4. sect. 15. For this cause our hope stands now in
this day very little on many of the Inhabitants of the world; but we hope with
joy much more on the appearing of the dead that die in the Lord or are dead in
him, to wit, that they in their resurrection from the death shall livingly come
unto and meet with us. For all the dead of the Lord and members of Christ shall
now live and rise with their Bodies, and we shall assemble us with them, and
they with us to one body in Jesus Christ, into one lovely Being of the Love,
and be altogether concordable in the Love and peace of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XVII. 1. His perverse Interpretation of that Article of the Creed
concerning Life everlasting. 2. His misbelief of the Immortality of the Soul,
proved from his forcible wresting of the most pregnant Testimonies thereof to
his Dispensation and Ministry here on Earth. 3. Their interpreting of the
Heavenly Body mentioned 2 Cor. 4. and the unmarried state of Angels, to the
signification of a state of this present Life. 4. That H. Nicolas as well as
David George held there were no Angels, neither good nor bad. 5. Further
Demonstrative Arguments that he held the Soul of man mortal. 6. How suitable
his laying aside of the Person of Christ is to these other Tenets. 7. That H.
Nicolas, as highly as he magnifies himself, is much below the better sort of
Pagans. His irreverent apprehension of the Divine Majesty, if he held that
there was any thing more Divine then himself.
1. FInally as for that Article of the Creed concerning Life everlasting, his
exposition is this: We confess that the same everlasting life is the true Light
of men, and that God has made and chosen him the man thereto, that he should
live in the same light everlastingly. Where, by him the man, he means the
succession of mankind, as any one may know that is but a little acquainted with
his manner of writing: and by everlasting life and the true light of men, he
means the Light of the Love and the Service thereof; which he presages shall
abide for ever. Which therefore he calls the house of God's dwelling, Evang.
Regni, cap. 34. and 37.
the eternal rest of his holy ones, the everlasting fast-standing Jerusalem,
the true and indisturbable kingdom, full of all Godly Power, Joy, and of all
heavenly Beautifulness, wherein the land of the Lord, with fullness of Eternal
life, and lively sweetness is sung from everlasting to everlasting. With such
sweet Charms and pleasing enchantments does this grand Deceiver lull asleep his
little ones into an utter oblivion and perfect misbelief of those precious
Promises of Everlasting Happiness made to us by Christ, who has brought Life
and Immortality to light.

2. For that there is with no other Life but this, nor any Immortality of the
Soul or blessed Resurrection which consists in the Soul's being invested with
an Heavenly and Spiritual body according to the plain and literal sense of
Scripture; his gross abuse of those two main proofs thereof [1 Cor. 15.] [1
These. 4.] do plainly demonstrate; which he does wildly distort, as he does the
rest of the Scripture, to a mere prediction of his Service of the Love, in
which he will have every thing of the last Day and of the Resurrection
fulfilled, that we may be sure that there is nothing else to be expected but
this. For in this the last trump sounds; Christ appears in the Heavens, being
come to judgment; those very Saints that in time past died and fell asleep in
the Lord, are now raised up in glory, and that with their bodies, and livingly
come unto and meet with us, according to that in 1 These. 4. and lastly, these
raised Saints, that is, the Family of Love, shall thus reign with their
mystical Christ upon earth for ever world without end. What interpretation of
Scripture can more accurately and radically take away all expectation of
Christ's personal coming to Judgment, and the hope of a Blessed Immortality
included therein by the resurrection of the dead, then this of this bold
Author? Which we may be the better assured he intends, in that his applications
are so miserably forced, and yet he has no better proofs then these for the
ratifying of his Service of the Love. For if he thought they did signify that
which all Christians think they do, he could fancy no force at all in them for
the establishing of his Doctrine: but the orthodox meaning seeming to him
utterly incredible, makes him confident that he has found out the right sense;
if he deal bona fide, and takes not the Scripture for a mere Fable, which he
may abuse as he pleases.

3. For we may observe him using the same industry in eluding the force of such
places as are plain for an Immortal state after this life, even there where he
may seem unconcerned, if he held the Soul of man Immortal. As that 2 Cor. 5.
where the Promise of the Heavenly or Spiritual body is evidently set down, as
appears further out of the last verses of the precedent chapter: and yet these
Familists are not ashamed to expound it of the most holy of the true
Tabernacle, in their canting language; whereby they mean the perfection of the
Love, a state in this life, as you may see in their Mirabilia Dei. And in the
Spiritual Land of peace, That which is writ Luke 20.35. concerning the children
of the Resurrection, that they are neither married nor given in marriage, but
are as the Angels of God, he applies to the state of the Service of the Love,
and makes it fulfilled in his life. Which is an Allegory so cross and crooked,
that nothing but an unbelief of the literal sense could ever have put a man
upon the framing of it: besides that scurvy intimation it bears along with it
of community of wives, the very same doctrine that See Enthusiasm. Triumphat.
sect. 34. Artic. 9.
David George is said to have vented.

4. Who also held, That Angels and Devils are only Good men and Bad men, or
their Virtues and Vices: in whose footsteps this scholar of his Hen. Nicolas
treads very carefully, as appears from his Revel. Dei cap. 14. where he makes
the Righteousness, the true Spirits or holy Angels. As also See H. N upon the
seven deadly sins.
elsewhere he says, that he that has the seven deadly sins in him, is possessed
of the seven horriblest and destructionablest Devils: intimating that the rest
of the Vices are Devils also, but not so destructionable. And he insinuates
further in the same place, that the Seven Devils cast out of Mary Magdalen were
those seven deadly Sins. And I am certain that the most knowing of the Family
have freely professed that there are no Devils nor Witches nor Angels but those
in us. Which things being supposed, it is necessary either to cast away the
Scriptures, or else to allegorize them away into a mere moral or mystical
sense, as these Enthusiasts have done.

5. They believing therefore the Existence of neither Angel nor Spirit, of
necessity they must believe no Immortality of the Soul. And that they believe
no such thing there is still a further evidence, in that he never exhorts any
man to Holiness upon that account (which yet is he most powerful argument to
make men good that can be propounded) nor ever makes use of such places of
Scripture as imply a blessed Immortality to come after this life, in the
literal meaning of them. His encouraging his followers to comply with any
Superstition, be it never so uglily idolatrous, rather then to expose
themselves to danger, agrees also well with this Supposition. And some have
noted that they have alleged this reason for it, That the temple of God may
not be destroyed. Whereby they mean their humane persons, which they suppose
lost irrecoverably in the death of the body. And that there may be no doubt at
all that this is their opinion, I will conclude with a reference to Epist 6.
Chap. 1^.
one of his Epistles, where he speaks to this very question: which he does with
so many hacks and hesitations, with so much shuffling and doubling and
insinuations to the contrary, that no rational man can be unsatisfied but that
he held it mortal. For if he had held it immortal, it had been impossible he
should have concealed his opinion, or intimated any thing to the contrary; it
being so useful a doctrine for others, and so commendable for himself to
profess. Which obdurate conceit of his made him allegorize away all the
Articles of the Creed, and so deny the Resurrection of Christ as well as of all
others that believe on him; and being secure, as he thought, that he does not
now subsist, he could not dream of any Christ that could be Head of the Church
but that mystical one he insists so much upon, the Upright Being of the Love,
the Perfection of all. And verily if there be nothing to come after this life,
I dare allow him to be as great a Prophet as either himself or his followers
desire he should be esteemed.

6. He is therefore upon his own Hypothesis very consonant to himself, in
removing the Humane person of Christ as a thing that has perished one thousand
six hundred years ago, and in riveting the Godhead into his own person so
thwackingly and substantially, as that he may give the World to understand that
he was as much God as that Christ that died at Jerusalem, and that all those
that attained to the perfection of the Love were so too: that he might
abundantly compensate thereby the loss of that one that died upon the Cross,
having fallen into the hands of merciless sinners. This, I say, is a consistent
dream of his: and that it is no more but a dream, I partly have already, and
shall still more clearly demonstrate in this present Discourse.

7. In the mean time it is very plain, that though he sets out himself in such
Seraphical language, and adorns his own person with such gorgeous Titles as if
nothing ever yet appeared in the World so holy and divine; yet he is indeed
much inferior to the better sort of Pagans, as being nothing more then an
Enthusiastic Sadducee, or a Fanatic Deist, if so much. For I wonder what a
kind of God he imagins to himself, to whom he makes the Senate of Heaven so
unmannerly as to use such forms of speech to him as he does Revel. Dei cap.
21. Go to then, let it even be so, O God, it is vouchsafed thee that thou
should first bring forth a Declaration of thy right. But I have no mind to
dive any further into this depth of Satan, from which I pray God deliver every
good Christian.

CHAP. XVIII. 1. The great mischief and danger that accrues to the World from
this false Prophet. 2. The probable Ferocity of this Sect when time shall
serve, and eagerness of executing his Bloody Vision. 3. That Familisme is a
plot laid by Satan to overthrow Christianity. 4. What the face of things in
likelihood would be supposing it had overrun all. 5. The Motives that enforced
the Author to make so accurate a Discovery of this Imposture.
1. OUT of the Description we have given hitherto, we may easily compute the
great mischief that accrues to the World from this false Pretender to
Revelations, wherever his Witchcraft has power to seize the spirit of a man.
For first, That admirable Wisdom of God in the outward frame of Christian
Religion, as it respects the Person of Christ, his endearing Passion, his
glorious Resurrection and Ascension, his comfortable Intercession, and his
joyful Return to judgment, when our Immortality shall be completed in heavenly
Glory; all this is swept away, and therewith our assurance of Eternal Life. And
besides this, that there may be nothing wanting to the perfecting of that
monstrous Evil that is hatched in this Family, it may prove a Pandora's box to
Mankind even in this life, if a more benign Providence do not prevent it. For
they having, as I have told you, a full license from their infallible Prophet
to dissemble and aequivocate, to comply with any Religion whatever; they may
multiply hiddenly in great numbers to the hazard of a State or Commonwealth.
For being taught by their illuminate Elders, That there is nothing to be
expected after this life, it must needs make them hang their lips very
longingly after the greatest enjoyments they can of this present World. The
Possession and Rule whereof their Prophet has promised them with such
magnificent words and Enthusiastic Grandiloquence, that they cannot but be
inflamed into violent attempts upon the first occasion that they shall phansy
safe to make use of. And what full right do you think will they imagine
themselves to have to fly upon all, whenas they phansy the Head of their
faction to be no less then Christ himself come to judge the World in
righteousness?

2. Wherefore if some sullen fellow amongst them of a peremptory and imperious
Spirit, overcharged with Pride and Melancholy, and deeply baptized into the
doctrine of this Sect, shall by his fanatic heat, parts and language emerge to
that height of honor as to be approved the Eldest of that Family: the same is
presently become in his own conceit, and in theirs also, God himself returned
to Judgment, and all his host, Saints and Seraphims, if ever opportunity arm
them to execute their design. And then will they think that that is to be
fulfilled which is figured out in that Vision of a man clothed with an
Habergion, See Revelat. Dei, Cap. 27. sect. 8, 9, 10, 11.
and Harness, and girded with an iron chain, whose hands and legs to the very
girdle were wet with blood, with a sword in his left hand also red and bloody,
and another in his right which was altogether a glowing fire, glisning and
crackling very terribly with many fire-flames. Which direful Spectre gives out
his voice in the following Sections. Vengeance, Vengeance, Vengeance; Now
swiftly, now swiftly, yea now very swiftly, Woe, Woe, Woe, unto all the enemies of
the Lord and his holy ones, and to all the enemies of the Family of Love. So
great Darlings do they give out themselves to be of God and his Providence, and
so miserable an end, do they prefigure to themselves, shall befall those that
are not of their blessed Family. God of his mercy open the eyes of all men,
that they may see the fearful purposes of this Diabolical Impostor, and quit
themselves of these subtle delusions of Satan.

3. For if I have any sense or foresight at all in me, it is a plot to overrun
and subjugate, if it be possible, all Christendom, and perfectly to extirpate
the worship of Christ, and to extinguish the belief of all his Promises, under
pretense of a greater Holiness and Perfection then there is in Christian
Religion; though this Familisme be such as I have abundantly set out to you.
See his Prophecy of the Spirit of Love, Chap. 11. also Chap. 14. Sect. 8, 9.
and Chap. 16. Sect. 3, 4, 7, 8. and Chap. 19. Sect. 4.5.7, etc. In which places
he promises to his followers that they shall have the day at last, that is,
That Familisme shall thrust Christianity out of the World.

4. Which because they have so great mind should be fulfilled, let us suppose
a while that they have got the mastery over Christendom, and compute with our
selves the consequences thereof. Without all question, although every page of
this Divine Author (as they would have him) be so thick painted with the sweet
repetitions of Love and Lovely, the issue of such a victory would be the most
beastly Tyranny that ever appeared yet upon the stage of the earth, worse by
far then Mahometisme it self. For first, all hope of a Future life being
taken away, every man according to his power will be more free and eager to
satisfy his lust in the superfluous pleasures of this. From whence those that
are weak will be oppressed without pity, to satiate the desires of the proud
and injurious Oppressor. And then again, for peace in matters of Religion,
upon which score especially this flattering Deceiver would recommend himself to
the World, the interpretations of Scripture, whereby he would establish his
authority with men, are so wild and fanatic, and so dissonant to all sense
and reason, that he has sown therein the seeds of perpetual Contention; unless
it be prevented by a Remedy worse then the Disease, that is, a perfect slavery
of the Conscience, and an implicit faith That their Prophet is infallible,
without any examination and doubt. Which is the most base and villainous
Degeneracy that the Spirit of man can be forced into, and is ever there
attempted most where the Religion of a Nation is the most rotten and false. But
that this latter would be the way seems too-too probable, both from the
necessity of the case, and from such intimations out of his Writings as I have
already produced. To which you may add that in his Revelatio Dei, Revel. Dei,
cap. 18. sect. 10, 11, 12.
Where he plainly forbids to try the Spirits by Reason or Knowledge or
Scripture-learning, but by the true Being of the living Godhead. Which are high
words, but signify nothing but that we never attain to the living Godhead till
we think as he thinks: and therefore intercepting all information of Reason,
expects an immediate assent, that is, such an assent as we know not why we do
assent; then which nothing can be more mad and furious, or at least relish more
of Knavery and Deceit, and of a ready Reproach to all Dissenters, as if they
were utter strangers to the living Godhead. But that Religion certainly is
false at the bottom that will not suffer it self to be enquired into by
Reason; as Grotius de Religione Christiana, lib. 6.
he says very excellently of Mahometisme, Merito suspecta merx est quae hac
lege obtruditur, ne inspici possit.

5. You see what a wild and exorbitant thing this blind Enthusiasm is, the very
Vehicle of Hell that carries to Antheisme and Profaneness, and the Triumphal
Chariot of the Devil; in which questionless this begodded Mock-Prophet was
hurried away, though happily he might not know it, but gloried in his shame, and
prided himself in his own Captivity. The condition of whose Spirit, what it is,
and whitherto it tends, if I know mine own heart, I have thus carefully
discovered, out of no other Principle at all but that Love and Loialty I owe to
my crucified Savior and Sovereign, and out of that dear Compassion I bear to
my fellow members of his Body the Church. For verily I cannot but melt into
sorrow and pity, to consider how deceivable many well-meaning Souls are, and
how captivable by the witchery of a Fanatic Eloquence into a strange belief,
that there is a more then ordinary share of Divinity residing upon this Person,
whom I am so well assured is but Epicurus turned Enthusiast, and one sunk as
low beneath the light of the Gospel as any wretched Pagan that never heard
thereof. And therefore I hope all his Admirers that are not so far baptized
into his way as to have celebrated his Pascha and slain Christ according to the
flesh, that is, according to the Letter and History, and so become perfect
Infidels, will take it well at my hands that I have so faithfully discovered
the deceit, that they may no longer give countenance to so horrid an Imposture.
And for as many as have thus slain the Lord of Life, which yet I hope are not
very many, how they should take ill this my freeness of speech, I can in no
wise imagine. For I dare say for them, in that they have thus slain him, (as S.
Peter said in another case) they have done it out of ignorance, through the
prestigious enchantments of this grand Deceiver; and therefore they can no
sooner acknowledge their error, but find their pardon, through him who was
truly slain and sacrificed for the sins of the World, and rose again for an
assurance to us of a blessed Immortality after the death of the Body. Which
must needs be a message of great joy to all people that are of an upright and
sincere heart.

CHAP. XIX. 1. That Familism is a Monster bred out of the corruptions of
Christianity, and ill management of affairs by the Guides of the Church. 2. The
first Particular of ill Management intimated. 3. The second Particular. 4. The
third Particular. 5. The fourth. 6. The fifth Particular. 7. That this false
Prophet H. Nicolas was raised by God to exprobrate to Christendom their
universal Degeneracy, Profaneness and Infidelity. 8. That though the Evil be
discovered, it is not to be remedied but by returning to the ancient Apostolic
Life and Doctrine.
1. AND now after my freedom with your competitours for the rule of
Christendom, the Illuminated Elders of the lovely Communialty of the Love;
have the patience to hear me in a word or two, O ye conspicuous Lights and
Guides of the Communialty of Christ. What think you of this hideous Monster
that I have so lively set before your eyes? From whence came it? Whose brat is
this foul error of Familism? Methinks I hear you straight reply, H. Nicolas
his. But I demand further, how came H. Nicolas to be such a Monster? You will
immediately return answer out of Micronius, That he received his Metamorphosis
from David George. But I take leave to ask again, Who transformed David George
into such an Angel of light? To which you will quickly reply, The Devil. His back
I confess is broad enough to bear all, indeed too broad to satisfy the
curiosity of my Querie, who would gladly know the more particular causes of so
monstrous a production in the bowels of Christendom. Which if you be ignorant
of, give me leave a little to inform you: and be not displeased if you find
much of the fault laid at your own doors. For my own part, I humbly conceive
that you your selves have congested that putrid matter together, which neither
Sun nor Moon, nor any natural Influence of Heaven, but the fiery Wrath of God
and his enraged eye of Jealousy has given heat and life to. This dangerous
Monster therefore have you your selves, by Provocation of the Divine Vengeance,
raised up to your selves, and given increase to, and strength to subsist. Which
may appear to you from the due consideration of these Particulars following.

2. For first, You have so corrupted the Simplicity of Christian Religion by
your humane inventions and Opinions, (which are so incredible, so
unintelligible, so against all Sense and Reason, and obtruded on the people
with so much force and violence, and with an authority and necessity equally
indispensable to the very Oracles of God) that you are constrained thereby to
pronounce of that Religion then which nothing is more reasonable, That there is
no reasonable account to be given of it, but that we are to believe it without
examination or inquisition into it, and thereby debase it and set it as low as
Turcism or the most pitiful piece of Paganism that can be produced. You
inuring therefore the people to believe things upon no account, and obtruding
such things upon them as no account can be given of, prepare them for the
entertaining of every bold Impostor that pretends to an infallible Spirit, and
commends his adulterous ware upon the same title that you do yours, namely,
that they are so high and transcendent that they are above the reach of carnal
Reason, condemning every sober inquisition into the Truth as carnal. Wherefore
if there be but impudency enough, assisted with a fiery Enthusiastic style,
flowered over with Scriptural Phrases and Allusions, with deep and vehement
protestations of the irresistible power of the Spirit that transports them and
carries them on to that Prophetical Ministry, they may securely say what they
please, and never be tried nor distrusted, let them speak never so irrationally
and inconsistently. For the People are already sufficiently inured to things
irrational, contradictions and unintelligible, whereby the perfectest Nonsense
must appear to them the most pure Dialect of the Spirit. And therefore there
will be no stop but they must needs be carried on with such Torrents of
Ecstatick eloquence, and be washed away from the body of the Church into this
or that Fanatic Sect, according as the sutableness of their natural humor and
opportunity exposes them to their assaults.

3. Again, When I consider the ineptness of your Allegations out of Scripture
for such Opinions as you are so zealous for, and the solemn adorning of the
margins of your Theological Treatises with such insignificant citations out of
the undeniable Oracles of God, as that when one examines them he shall find his
understanding as much abused as a man's eyesight is by that mockery of drawing
ones hands one from the other, and twisting with his thumbs and forefingers as
if there were some subtle string betwixt; (For assuredly the connection betwixt
your Quotations and your Conclusions is utterly as invisible as that imaginary
line to the eyes of the sleepy) I cannot but look on the Writings of this
Enthusiast as an imitation of yours; wherein Providence does reproach to you
your unfaithfulness to the credulous people, in that you would bear them in
hand that all is true you obtrude upon them by your multitude of impertinent
references to the holy Writ. Which artifice this Mock-Prophet has taken up and
outdone you in, who stuffes his margins so thick with citations, as if every
Sentence in the Bible strove to put in their suffrage for him; according as he
boasts of himself, That all the Scriptures from the beginning to the end do
point at him and his Ministry if rightly understood: Whenas, if truly examined,
though his Margins perpetually point toward the Scriptures, they do not at all
point at him again in any place, nor give him the least nod of approbation, nor
take any notice at all of him.

4. Thirdly, Whereas the Mystery of Christianity, even as it refers to the
External person of Christ, is the chiefest obligation of mutual Love that the
Wisdom of God could set forth to the world; you that are not only Christians,
but the Guides of Christendom, have so entangled this Mystery with your rash
and perverse superadditions, with your forgeries, subtilties and vain comments,
that it is become nothing else but a shop of Controversies, a School of
Contention, out of which is heard nothing but brawlings and scoldings about
useless Opinions, nothing has sprung from thence but Hatred, Pride, Faction,
yea barbarous Persecutions and Bloodshed, your selves blowing the trumpet out
of those holy places which were erected for the preaching of the Gospel of
Peace, and in an Antichristian phrensy sounding an alarm of war against such
as are in Reconciliation with God through the blood of Jesus Christ, which
should be the common cement of Christendom, and hold all their hearts together
in firm Unity and Concord. Wherefore you having thus left empty the Tabernacle
of David, is it any wonder that a Stranger has thus stepped in, and taken
possession? And you having flung away that precious Legacy of your dying Lord,
namely, the Love of one another, what Injustice is it that an Alien take it up,
and flourish it in your sight to your utter Shame and Reproach? And truly he
writes as one that knows his advantage passing well in this regard, as you may
see if you read his Introduction, chap. 4. sect. 35. to the end of the chapter,
as also sect. 51 of the eleventh chapter to the end thereof.

5. Fourthly, Whereas you place all your Piety in an hypocritical Flattery of
Christ's Person, and have overwhelmed and smothered the Life of Religion with
an unsupportable load and luggage of needless and thankless Ceremonies, or else
have wounded it to death with the acuteness and spinosity of harsh and dry
Opinions, not heeding at all the renovation of your own minds, nor of theirs
that are committed to your charge into the lively Image of Christ, which
assuredly does mainly consist in Christian Love; how just is it with God to
permit such an Enthusiast to arise, who shall make it the great Arcanum of his
Religion to slay Christ according to the flesh, that is, according to the
History, you having slain him so cruelly and remorslessly according to the
Spirit, (that is, extinguished his Life that ought to be in us) by substituting
your own foolish Opinions and loathsome Ceremonies in the place thereof? Nay
indeed you have handled the matter so, that you have made Christ according to
the flesh be the Executioner of himself according to the Spirit, making every
Article concerning Christ an Engine for either Sensuality or Strife. In brief,
the exterior oeconomie of Christian Religion being intended for the inward
perfecting of our Minds in true Righteousness and Holiness, (which is Christ in
us according to the Spirit,) you by your Devices defeating this end, do
naturally take away the means thereto; and thus yourselves are the principal
Murderers of Christ, even according to the flesh too, and H. Nicolas is only
your appointed Executioner. And therefore it is, as I said, but just with God,
you having so long and so constantly abused all the Articles of the Creed to a
contrary purpose then was intended by his gracious counsel, that he permit such
a Mock-prophet to arise that should hazard the peoples misbelief of all, and
Allegorize away all that solid and useful Truth of the History of Christ, into
a mere moral or mystical sense, as if the Letter were but a Parable or Fable.

6. Fifthly, In that this Sect we speak of do rattle so about your ears with
the loud noise of Perfection, though for my own part I am well assured the best
of them are far enough from it; yet in the mean time I cannot but interpret it
an exprobration and reproach to the great abhorrency you have to so searching a
doctrine, that will touch and wound your Hypocritical hearts with the sense and
conscience of wilful sinfulness, which you would cloak under that color of
Impossibility of being as you should be; as also to your false dealing with
those under your charge, whom you do bedwarfe and becripple by your poisonous
medicines, would make them always sorry boys with bibs and aprons, or else
conceal their age and keep them always in minority for advantage sake, like
those unfortunate Orphans that are betrayed into the hands of treacherous
Guardians. What wonder is it therefore that those that truly hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, being starved at home with those dilute and corrupt
doctrines of the Needlesness of Sanctity, of invincible Infirmity, slight
Attrition, frivolous Penances, venal Indulgences, crawl out abroad to seek
better food, and so get into the lap and suck the nipples of this sweet
Enchantress, the lovely Family of the Love; whose breasts do promise such
strong nourishment, that they that drink thereof do not only pass from children
to men, but from being men do become Gods?

7. And Sixthly and lastly, While I contemplate the universal face of
Christendom, what a Den of Thieves and Murderers it is become, what a Region
of Robbers and Oppressors, what a Sty of Epicures, what a Wilderness of Atheism
and Profaneness, in a manner wholly inhabited by Satyrs and salvage Beasts;
when I consider within my self how generally men live as if there were nothing
to come after this life, and how many already have drunk down that doctrine,
That there is indeed nothing to come hereafter; of which notwithstanding the
History of Christ, his Death, Resurrection and Ascension, and his appearing out
of Heaven to Paul as he was a going to Damascus, are as palpable pledges as
Divine Providence could produce, as also of his visible Return to Judgment
according to the Scriptures: I say, when I consider how little effect all this
has had for the raising of men's minds to an heavenly Conversation, but that
they live as if they were utterly sunk from this belief, I cannot imagine any
thing more reasonable then to conclude, That out of very Wrath and Indignation
God has raised this false Prophet to them, that it might be with them according
to the Proverb, Like lips, like lettice; Like Prophet, like People. As if God
should thus expostulate with Christendom; Behold, I have given to you my
only-begotten Son out of my own bosom, whose authority I ratified unto you by
audible Voices from Heaven, by mighty Signs and Miracles done by him while he
was alive: I gave him a sacrifice for sin to reconcile you to my self, and to
endear your affections unto him and me, that ye might cordially follow his
Example and keep his Precepts: I raised him from the dead and exhibited him
visibly to his disciples, as an undoubted pledge of a blessed Immortality to
them that believe on him; which I further confirmed by his Ascension into
Heaven, and his appearing to that chosen Vessel of mine, who has so fully
prefigured unto you his glorious Return to Judgment, and the Resuscitation of
all his Saints into that Eternal Happiness which they had fallen from. And now
I demand of you, what could I have done more for the gaining you back to my
self, and for the resettling you again in my Heavenly Paradise? But because you
are so besotted with Earthliness and Sensuality as to make no use of the
inestimable advantages of the Gospel, but have set your Happiness upon things
here below; behold, I have raised up unto you a Prophet according to your own
hearts desire, who will help on the completion of your Infidelity, and in the
midst of a many fine words and sweet friendly phrases, close up your eyes in
Unbelief; and so having sealed unto you by his witchery and enchantments this
assurance, That the Mystery of Christ reaches no further then the things of
this life, you may use the present market, and enjoy your worldly lusts to the
full.

8. This surely, if I understand any thing, is the sense and meaning of God's
permission that such a Prodigy as Familisme should appear with so much success
in the Christian World: and though I have faithfully and industriously
discovered the matter unto you, yet I must profess that I conceive it not in my
power, nor any ones else, to prevent the sad effects thereof. That can only be
by a true and sincere Reformation of Heart and Mind into the ancient and
Apostolic Life and Doctrine. For there is nothing so recommendable to Mankind
as the Christian Faith in the native Plainness and Simplicity thereof; nor any
thing so horrible and detestable as that vizard that the Depravedness of
Christendom has put upon it. Which Face of things if it continue, Atheism
having seized on so great a Proportion, it is prone to conjecture, that what
remains may be easily swallowed up of Familism, or of some such parallel Plague
of the Church; and so the right Faith in Christ may quite be laid asleep, never
to awaken till there is no use thereof, I mean, till men be affrighted into a
belief by an universal Thunder and Lightning from Heaven, and the glorious
Appearance of the Son of man in the Clouds, to recompense the good, and to
adjudge the wicked to everlasting Fire. For the Counsels of God, as his
Prophecies, are two-handed, and both of them in some cases have a meaning
conditional. But, as I desire, so I hope the best: and it is a great ease to my
mind, that I have so freely declared what I conceive tends so much thereto.

BOOK VII
CHAP. I. 1. That the Subject of the Third part of his Discourse is The Reality
of the Christian Mystery. 2. That the Reasonableness of Christian Religion and
the constant Belief thereof by knowing and good men, from the time it is said
to have begun til now, is a plain Argument of the Truth thereof to them that
are not over-Sceptical. 3. The Averseness of slight and inconsiderate Wits
from all Arguments out of Prophecies, with their chiefest Objections against
the same. 4. That the Prophecies of the Messiah in the Old Testament were
neither forged nor corrupted by the Jews. 5. An Answer to their Objections
concerning the Obscurity of Prophecies. 6. As also to that from Free Will. 7.
That all Prophecies are not from the fortuitous heat of men's Phansies but by
divine Revelation, proved by undeniable Instances. 8. A particular reason of
true Prophets amongst the Jews, with some Examples of true Prophecies in other
places. 9. A notable Prophecy acknowledged by Vaninus concerning Julius
Caesar's being killed in the Senate.
1. WE are come now to the Third Part of our Discourse, wherein the doubtful
Dawnings of this great Mystery we are clearing up will break out into a fuller
Light, and the Progress of Truth will be like that of Righteousness, that
shines more and more till perfect Day.

The Possible, as also Reasonable Idea of Christianity, which I have hitherto
represented, is but as the Seminal Form of a Plant hid in the seed under
ground; but we shall now exhibit it as it were to sense, shot up into open
view, and demonstrate That this Possible Idea has already arrived to a Real and
actual Existence in the World.

Which being a matter of so great consequence, we will not huddle it up at
once, nor yet make any steps more for pomp then for use and the fuller
conviction of the Truth we are to prove.

2. And truly the very first step I shall make, or rather have partly made
already, I hope, to any indifferent man will seem not a little considerable. We
have very amply and intelligibly declared how highly- Reasonable the Frame of
our Religion is, how becoming and consistent all those things are that Christ
is recorded to have done or suffered. Add therefore to the Reasonableness of
the thing it self, the constant and perpetual Tradition thereof for true, and
that it has been so seriously believed in all Ages, that as well the Learned as
Unlearned, as well the Noble as Ignoble, have been ready, nay have actually
laid down their Lives for a witness thereof. And methinks no man that is not
over-Sceptical, but this Consideration should fetch off his assent. For the
Fame of those things that are seriously reported and constantly believed by
knowing and judicious men, cannot rationally be called into question, unless
the things themselves affirmed seem unreasonable, or else over-artificial and
in too trim and cunning a dress of Reason. That the things recorded are very
Reasonable, I have already demonstrated: And how little of the cunning Artifice
of either Logic or Rhetoric they partake of, I dare appeal to any that peruse
them. Wherefore if any man persist in his Unbelief, the impediment is not in
the Mystery offered to him, but in himself, that has no desire it should be
true, either out of Pride, as not being willing to find himself to have been
ignorant hitherto of the true Religion, or out of the love of either the
Pleasures or Profits of this present World, which the Belief of Christianity
does naturally curb.

But we proceed to what is still more close and cogent. That the Jews have for
this many hundred years expected and do still expect him whom they call their
Messiah, every one knows, as also that this name Messiah is the same with (...)
from whence our Religion is denominated. Wherefore if I can prove That this
Messiah is already come, and that Jesus whom we worship is that Christ, I have
then performed the Promise of the Third Part of my Discourse; which is to prove
That Christianity (the Idea whereof I have hitherto described,) is not a mere
Idea, but a real Truth.

Which first I shall attempt from Prophecies, after from History: the comparing
of both which together will be so strong an Argument, that to the unprejudiced
it cannot appear less then a perfect Demonstration.

3. I know some are of so impatient and superficial a Spirit that they vilify
the very name or mention of Prophecies, as arguments of no validity, because
they cannot find themselves at leisure to weigh the force of them. But if they
will rationally speak against them, they must allege some of these four
Objections, viz. That either they are often forged, or at least corrupted by
some wily Politicians to serve some State-design: Or are so obscure that there
is no certain sense or meaning of them: Or if there be, that it does not
infallibly import that things thus predicted will surely come to pass, there
being so great dependence of the affairs of the World upon the actings of men:
Or lastly, to strike home, that there never was nor ever will be any Prophecies
from any extraordinary Inspiration, but that some men have very hot Phansies,
and their minds running on future things vent what they think; and their
Predictions, like Dreams, sometimes prove true, sometimes false; and that the
report of those that have happened true has begot that false persuasion of there
being Prophets in the World.

4. Such slight Considerations as these do marvellously gratify the
Light-minded and Atheistical, but more severely looked into will prove of no
force.

For as for the first Objection, it is plain it can have no place here, if we
consider with what holiness and veneration the Jews look upon the very outward
Letter of those Divine Oracles committed to their custody. Besides that it is
ridiculous to suspect them either to have foisted in or any way altered such
Prophecies as we are here to make use of, they being such as will manifestly
make against themselves: Which is a mighty Privilege that Christianity has,
that in maintaining of her Cause she can so boldly appeal to those Records that
have been ever kept in the hands of her Enemies. Nor can the Christian, if he
would, corrupt these Prophecies, but he would be forthwith discovered by the
Jews. Whence neither Atheist nor Pagan can rationally suspect any foul play of
this kind.

5. As for the pretended Obscurity or Ambiguity of Prophecies, I deny that they
may all justly be termed Obscure. Besides that, the words of them that are so
in some measure, ever fit one sense better then another; and where there is any
such ambiguity, that sense is to be accounted true that has been judged so by
men unprejudiced, and, all things considered, appears most proper and easy.
The Satisfaction of which Answer will be better understood when we descend to
Examples, then by general Precept.

6. The third Objection cannot be urged by any but such as are overdoting
Idolizers of the Faculty of Free will, and forget that some Prophecies are not
conditional but absolute, as certainly all those are that are of so vast and
Moliminous Concernment to the World as the appearing of the Messiah is. Whose
coming, if it had been conditional, nothing could be thought to hinder but Sin.
Which in this case is as absurdly inferred, as if one should argue that the
sickness of the Patient keeps away the Physician, when it rather occasions his
coming. And one end of Christ's coming, as I have abundantly shown already, is
to be a Sacrifice for sin, and to renew the World in Righteousness.

7. The last Objection is the most perverse and lubricous, but yet such as is
easily mastered, if we consider how punctually and particularly many things
have been prefigured in Prophecy, and, that usually those that have
prophesied, have also done Miracles, or something miraculous and extraordinary
has happened unto them; that they have seen See Book 5. chapter 17. sect. 2.
Visions of Angels and have been assisted by supernatural Powers. An eminent
Example whereof is that Prophecy of the man of God out of Judah against the
Altar at Bethel, which was accompanied with the drying up and restoring of the
hand of Jeroboam, 1 Kings chapter 13. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and the rending of the Altar and pouring of the ashes for a sign that his
Prophecy was true. Which yet was so punctual and particular, that he names the
very name of him that was to do this vengeance against the Altar at Bethel,
viz. Josias; though it was a prediction of a thing that was not to come to pass
within three hundred years. So Isaiah prophesied of Cyrus by name, and what God
intended to do by him in reference to his people, some hundreds of years
before Cyrus was born. And Daniel so punctually foretold the Translation of the
Empire from the Assyrians to the Medes and Persians, and then to Alexander of
Macedon, whose successors in part the posterity of Lagus and Seleucus should
be, and what great evils the Jews should suffer from them, that Porphyrius
comparing the Greek History with Daniel's Prophecy, had no other way to evade,
but by pretending they were wrote after the event. Which is so frivolous a
subterfuge, that it is not worth answering.

8. For being there is a Deity, and that the Jews in a more then ordinary
manner lived under a kind of Theocracy, and were a people with whom it was
usual to have Prophets and inspired Messengers from God; why should it seem
strange to Porphyrius or any else, that God should by his holy Angels instruct
the Prophet Daniel so particularly and perfectly concerning things to come,
wherein his own Nation was so nearly concerned? For even there where Providence
seems to take less care, the greater mutations of States and Kingdoms have
been foretold by the Priests and Magicians of the Country. As it happened to
Moteczuma King of Mexico, before the invasion of the Spaniard, as you may see
in Acosta and other Writers. And Valens the Augur, in Varro, is said to have
prophesied at the first building of the City of Rome, that it should continue
twelve hundred years; which fell out accordingly.

9. And In his De admirandis Naturae Arcanis, Lib. 4. Dialog. 52.
Vaninus himself, that profane Wit, was not so far besotted with Epicurean
Incredulity, but that he does acknowledge, nay rather assert with a serious
appeal to all History as well ancient as of late days, if great changes in the
affairs of the World have not been predicted miraculously one way or other; and
himself instances in one notable Prophecy engraven in a table of brass found
in Capys his Sepulcher concerning the murdering of Julius Caesar in the Senate.
Which Capys notwithstanding, King of Italy, lived near a thousand years before
Julius Caesar. So that if a man be not very grossly stupid, he musts needs
confess that all Prophecies are not from the mere ravings and roamings of a
buisie Fancy, but from some higher and more infallible Principle; and that it
is far more rational, when Events answer to Prophecies of great concernment, to
impute it to Providence rather then to Chance. I know Vaninus referrs all to
the Celestial bodies or influence of the Stars: But how groundless and childish
his conceit is, I shall evince in its See Chap. 14. sect. 2, 3, 4, 5. etc. And
chap. 15, 16, 17.
due place.

CHAP. II. 1. The genuine sense of Jacob's Prophecy. 2. The Inference
therefrom, That the Messiah is come. 3. That there had been a considerable
force in this Prophecy, though the words had been capable of other tolerable
meanings: but they admitting no other interpretations tolerable, it is a
Demonstration the Messiah is come. 4. The chief Interpretations of the Jews
propounded. 5. That neither Moses nor Saul can be meant by Shiloh, 6. Nor
David, 7. Nor Jeroboam, nor Nebuchadonosor. 8. That in the Babylonian Captivity
the Scepter was rather sequestered then quite taken away; with a further urging
of the ineptness of the sense of the Prophecy, if applied to Nebuchadonosor.
9. Their subterfuge in (...) noted and refuted. 10. The various significations
of (...), and their expositions therefrom. 11. An Answer to them in general.
12, 13. An answer to their evasion by interpreting of (...) a Tribe. 14. An
Answer to their interpreting of (...) a staff of maintenance. 15. An Answer to
their interpreting it a rod of correction. 16. An Answer jointly to both these
last Interpretations. 17. That their Variety of Expositions is a demonstration
of their own dissatisfaction in them all.
1. BEing now well assured of the force of such Arguments as are drawn from
Prophecies, let us proceed and make use of them for the proving the matter in
hand, That Jesus, whom we worship, is the very Christ. Which we will do by
producing first Such as prefine and circumscribe the time of his coming, and
then Those that more perfectly characterize the properties of his Person.

Of the first sort is that most ancient and eminent Prophecy of Jacob on his
deathbed, Genes. chapter 49. ver. 10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
til Shiloh come, and unto him shall the gathering of the People be. That our
inference may be the more unexceptionable, let us briefly run over the words.

The Scepter. The Hebrew word is (...), which the Seventy interpret (...),
Aquila (...), Symmachus (...), Onkelos (...). All which denote the same thing,
the Sovereignty or Power Political.

From Judah. By Judah according to warrant of Scripture is to be understood,
not only the Tribe of Judah precisely, but what-ere accession or cooptation
there was into that Tribe, as appears from Malachy 3.4.

Nor a Lawgiver, (...). The Seventy render it (...). The word naturally
signifies a Commander or Decreer. I believe those that have translated it Dux,
have not missed of the mind of the Seventy's interpretation. Let (...)
therefore signify, one that gives laws or commands to the people. Which is an
unexceptionable meaning of the word, as all acknowledge, and is of nearest
affinity with the former, according to that usual way in Scripture of repeating
the same thing twice, in words little different in signification. Of which
instances are innumerable.

From between his feet, (...). The Seventy turn it (...), that is, ex semine
Iudae, in that sense that Judah has been interpreted. That is to say, that Judah
shall have a Prince, Governor, or Political power of their own, or shall be
governed or ruled by those of their own blood.

Till Shiloh come: that is, Till the Messiah come; as all the ancient
Interpreters of the Jews ever expounded it, their judgments being then
unprejudiced. Only they, as well as others, have varied about the Notation of
the name Shiloh, as you may see in Martinius. Some will have (...) put for
(...), which is as much as (...) signifying Filius, from whence is (...)
Secundina. Others will have Shiloh to be a noun of the same form with (...)
and (...), and expound it, Salvator, Pacificus, from (...). The Seventy seem to
have read (...), which they render (...), till he come for whom so great and
illustrious things are reserved. Others, as the Vulgar Translation, read (...)
missus. See Book 4. chap. 8. sect. 8, 9, 10.
Which reading always pleased me above any of them, and I have the suffrage
also of the incomparable Hugo Grotius upon that place.

And unto him shall the gathering of the people be. The word (...) may either
signify Congregatio, Expectatio, Obedientia or Confractio. None of the senses
but agree with the Prophecy; but the second and third are capable of a more
easy Critical Account.

2. It is plain from this brief and warrantable exposition of the words, that
the natural and genuine sense of Jacob's prophecy is this, That, whatsoever
become of the Tribes of Israel, Juda, and what ever part of the Tribes have any
coalition with it, and go under one name and title, shall not fail to have a
Political Power and Government of their own, till the Messiah come. This, I
say, is the most easy and natural sense of this Prophecy, and such as has
been ever given by their own Expositors, till that sad mistake of killing their
Messiah perverted their Judgments. Wherefore, before themselves became guilty,
and while they were fit to be judges, we appeal to them, if Jacob's Prophecy
does not plainly foretell, That the Political Power and Government of the Jews
shall not cease till the Messiah come. But it is evident it has ceased:
therefore of a certain the Messiah is come.

3. Which this Prophecy would sufficiently assure us of, though there were
other tolerable interpretations to be made besides this; it being reasonable to
conclude, that where there may be various senses made of words, that is the
truest that flows the most naturally, and seems to do so to such as are
unprejudiced. But to be still more certain of the truth of the sense of this
Prophecy which has been already given; though both Jews and others have set
their wits on tenter-hooks to find other meanings thereof, they have light upon
none but what are intolerably vain and foolish.

4. It will not be amiss to give you a taste of the chiefest of them. First
therefore, Those that would not have the Messiah understood by Shiloh, they
understand either Moses, Saul, David, Jeroboam or Nebuchadonosor. First, Moses,
because when he was sent to deliver the children of Israel out of Egypt, Judah
surrendered the Scepter to him, though he was of the Tribe of Levi. Secondly,
Saul, because he was crowned in Shiloh. Thirdly, David, viz. implying that the
Scepter was in Judah, and should there continue til David's time, in whose ^eign
there was an accession of some people brought under his Rule. Fourthly,
Jeroboam, as being he who was crowned in Shiloh, and took the Scepter from
Judah. Fifthly, Nebuchadonosor, because he took the Scepter from Judah, and
carried the people captive, and rased Jerusalem and the Temple to the ground.
But to these may be answered briefly:

5. To that concerning Moses, That he could not take the Scepter from Judah,
Judah having none. For all the Tribes together were not a Polity then, much less
any one of them, but were miserable underlings and bondslaves to that cruel
Tyrant Pharaoh. To that of Saul, That he was not created King in Shiloh, but in
Mizpeh; nor that Saul the Benjamite could take the Scepter from Judah, he having
none yet, as was said before; besides that ridiculous Syntax of Shiloh's
coming, which is a place, not a person, according to this interpretation: as
also it is very frigid to apply the last clause of the Prophecy to Saul.

6. To that of David may be answered much-what the same with that to the
former, That Judah before David's time, though it had a precedence and
Seniority, yet wielded no Scepter over the other Tribes, nor had any distinct
Jurisdiction more then the other had: And that it is very inept, if we read the
whole Prophecy, which immediately before speaks so magnificently of Iuda's
Courage and Prowess, to think it presently falls so flat, as only to predict
that Judah shall not lose his Seniority or Precedencie til David come. And
still, which makes it more harsh, the words naturally seem to import, that Judah
shall lose his Scepter when Shiloh or David is come, though it be the first
time then that he takes it up. I say the words do naturally implie so, though
not necessarily: but admit they do not, but the royal Scepter continue with
Judah for many hundreds of years afterward, as it did, and that even then when
almost all the Tribes were lost; how frivolous do they make this Prophecy of
Jacob, in setting off so petty things in such magnificent terms, and leaving
out the most notable matters that belong to that Tribe? And lastly, that that
addition to the Jurisdiction of David does not so well fit nor fill up the
sense of (...), as that of the Messiah the Jews expect.

7. To that of Jeroboam, That Jeroboam was not anointed King in Shiloh, but in
Sichem a city of Ephraim: And that this conspiracy did not take away the
Scepter from Judah, but rather gave occasion to Judah of being a kingdom of it
self, and such as was not dissolved for many hundred years after, whereas
before it was but a part of the kingdom of Israel.

And lastly to that of Nebuchadonosor, That this Interpretation puts a very
foolish and frivolous sense upon the Prophecy, as if it ran thus; That the
Scepter shall not be taken from Judah, till some one come and take it by force.
As if Jacob would venture to foretell that Judah would not be such a fool as to
give away his Scepter, though he might be so either cowardly or unfortunate to
have it wrested out of his hands. Wherefore he that is prophesied of here must
be to the Jews more then a mere Robber or Despoiler, and must have some special
relation to them of either being their King or Prophet in some more then
ordinary manner; or else the sense will be very flat and inept, as if he should
say, The Scepter will not be taken away before it be taken away.

8. Besides, the Scepter was not so much taken away by the Babylonish
captivity, as sequestered for a time, during which space they were ascertained
from God by the mouths of his Prophets, that they should return again within
the space of seventy years. So that it was rather an Interregnum then an
abolition of the Iudaical Polity. Which some would have to continue in some
small degree amongst themselves even in that interval of their Captivity, as
having their (...), their (...), who had a power over all the people of Judah.
But that is more then is worth the contending for. God's obligation by the
mouth of his Prophets to bring them back within seventy years, and the
smallness of the continuance of their Captivity in respect of the enjoiment of
their Liberty afterward, are sufficient of themselves to make that Captivity
only a suspension, not a taking away, of the Scepter from Judah. To all this
you may add the unsuitable Connection of this Prophecy with the foregoing
verses, where Judah is so magnificently spoke of for his stoutness and courage;
to which presently it is subjoined (according to this interpretation) that the
Scepter shall never be taken away, till some vanquish him and take it away, as
it seems Nebuchadonosor did: Which is as incoherent and insipid sense as can be
imagined, as I partly intimated before.

But to interpret it, as the ancient Jews have interpreted it, of the Messiah,
the coherence is very perfect, viz. That this stout warrior Judah shall not
finally lose his Scepter, till that special Messenger of God and expectation of
the Nations come, viz. the Messiah, who shall be of a more universal
concernment then to that little handful of the World, the Jews.

9. The next starting-hole they seek, they think they have found in (...),
phansying that (...) may there signify (as it does sometimes) in aeternum; but
the accent Athnack in (...), which is as much as a Colon in Latin, hinders
them from that evasion.

10. The last pretended Ambiguity is in (...), which, say they, may signify
either a Tribe or a Staff, viz. of support and aid, or a Rod of castigation
and affliction. Taking it for a Tribe, the Prophecy may run thus, That the
Tribe of Judah shall never be taken away, til the Messiah come; or thus, That
the Tribe of Benjamin, whatever become of the rest of the Tribes, shall not be
taken from Juda, etc. Taking it for a Staff, the sense is this, That Juda, be
he in what captivity or oppression soever, yet he will be supported and
succored by some or other, til the Messiah come. Taking it for a Rod; That the
Rod of castigation and affliction will never be taken away from Juda, til
Shiloh come.

11. To which I answer, and first in common to them all, That (...) and (...)
being thus put in the Prophecy, and so naturally answering one to another, if
(...) did as ordinarily signify a Scribe as one that had Political Power and
Rule, yet it were somewhat a forced thing to expound it so in this place, the
word (...) directing so naturally to the other sense; and still more forced if
you take notice of (...), ex semine ejus, a thing not stood upon in those
inferior offices of a Scribe or Expounder of the Law. To which you may add
that (...) is never so expounded in Scripture by the Seventy, but always
either (...), or (...). So that though they might shuffle off the right sense
of the Prophecy in the beginning thereof, yet the following part defends both
it self and the other from that violence and injury. For there must be (...),
that is, Political Power, in Judah, till Shiloh come, let (...) signify what it
will.

12. But to touch upon them also in several; where we must take notice that the
Tribe of Judah, not his Person, is the subject of this Prophecy. The sense
therefore of the first Interpretation will be this, That Judah will not be
taken from Judah, till Shiloh come. Which is very ridiculous. But so far as it
is possible Judah is taken from Judah, and therefore Shiloh is come. For Judah
is taken all apieces and scattered amongst the nations in all the quarters of
the World. Or if they will against reason phansy the person of Judah the
subject of this Prophecy, (of which the sense will then be, Judah his tribe
shall not be taken from him, till Shiloh come,) the Patriarch would have
expressed himself more determinately and said (...), not (...), otherwise (...)
naturally signifies, no Tribe at all should be taken from him, whereas Ten have
been carried away at a clap and never yet returned. Besides if (...) may
signify his own Tribe, that is properly taken from him too, and lost, they not
being under his Rule, that is, under the Government of Judah; but he is like a
Commander whose Army is quite routed, and all carried away from him Captive,
and under the command of strangers: and though they bear his name still, what
is that if they be not under his power? Surely the Patriarch's mind was taken
up with mean matters on his deathbed, if there be no more in the Prophecy
then so.

13. The Second Interpretation, understanding still (...) for a Tribe, is
liable to the like Exceptions with the first, and the foolery of it still more
palpably deprehendible. For here it is exceeding evident that (...), will
necessarily signify, Not a tribe shall be taken from Judah, etc. For it is as
if one should say, that a Sheep shall not be taken out of the fold, till
Dametas come. But if Dametas coming, there should be found only one left, the
other Shepherd would think himself deluded; if he that promised him should
pretend he has kept his word in keeping but one Sheep in the Fold. For it were
a foolish fallacy to plead, that he promised that a Sheep should not be taken
away, and that there is a Sheep that is not. So that it is plain that by (...),
one particular Tribe, Benjamin, cannot be understood, and therefore none at
all. For all the rest were carried away by Salmanassar into perpetual Captivity.

14. To the Third Interpretation we answer, That Jacob is distributing peculiar
Benedictions to every one of his Sons; but this is common to them all, and
therefore not to be affixed to Judah: And then, that it is a petty business
amongst such illustrious predictions and encomiums of Judah, that he shall not
be put to such utter streights but that he shall be able to live, though an
underling, and dependent on other People; so that this is a very wretched and
dilute sense of the Prophecy.

15. And the Fourth is as ill, if not worse. For First, as before, what is
common to all the Tribes, and yet belongs more to the other Tribes then to Judah
(the Ten I mean that were carried away by Salmanassar) is here appropriated to
Judah, and that in the midst of encomiums and blessings. Read the whole
Prophecy concerning Judah, and at the first sight you will discover the
unreasonableness of this patch, if this be the meaning of this part of the
Prophecy. Besides, the Prophecy according to this sense could not be true.
For Judah was a flourishing kingdom or commonwealth for many hundreds of years
together, as appears out of their own History.

16. And lastly, in answer to both these last Interpretations at once; The word
(...) simply set down as it is here without any other circumstances to
determine the sense of it, never signifies either the Staff of maintenance or
the Rod of chastisement. So that they might as well expound it a Crutch, as
either. For (...) will certainly signify a Crutch: and therefore taking that
liberty that they take, the sense of this Prophecy may run thus, A Crutch
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Scribe from betwixt his feet, till Shiloh
come: that is, That Judah never will want a Scribe with a Crutch, that is, an
halting Scribe, a Scribe that will make lame and crooked Expositions of the Law
in defense of that capital error of theirs, till the second Coming of the
Messiah.

17. I have given you a brief taste of the fond Evasions the Jews make use of,
to hide the plain sense of this Prophecy of Jacob: concerning which it is
worth the taking notice, That as their Expositions are very vain and seem so to
us, so it is manifest that they are unsatisfactory even to themselves, in that
they have produced so many. For what could put them upon excogitating a new one
but a dissatisfaction in the old? and though they have pumped out as many as
they can, they do not know which to adhere to.

CHAP. III. 1. The Prophecy of Haggai. 2. The natural sense of the Prophecy. 3.
That the Second Temple could not be more glorious then the First but by
receiving the Messiah into it. 4. That Herod's Temple could not be understood
hereby. 5. An Answer to their subterfuge concerning Ezekiel's Temple. 6. That
the Prophecy of Malachi adds further force to that of Haggai. 7. That the
Prophet could understand no other Temple then that which was then standing.
1. BUT if they could have found out any tolerable Evasion in this Prophecy,
yet their work is not done, there being other plain Predictions to the same
purpose: Haggai 2. v. 6, 7, 8, 9.
As in Haggai, For thus says the Lord of hosts, Yet once, it is a little
while, and I will shake the Heavens and the Earth and the Sea and the dry land:
And I will shake all Nations, and the Desire of all nations shall come, and I
will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts. The silver is mine,
and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts. The glory of this latter house
shall be greater then that of the former, says the Lord of hosts, and in this
place will I give peace.

2. The natural sense of which Prophecy is plainly this: The Prophet encourages
the people to work and build the Temple, because that though it should not be
so costly as the former in ornaments of Gold and Silver, which yet it were an
easy thing for God to bestow if he would, ( The silver is mine and the Gold is
mine;) yet the glory of this latter house shall be greater then the former, in
that it shall be honored with the presence of the Messiah in it, who is called
here The Desire of all Nations: and as he is elsewhere styled The Prince of
peace, so is his coming set out here by the Gift of Peace; And in this place
will I give peace, says the Lord of Hosts.

3. Now we demand of the Jews, in what respect this Second house was more
glorious then the former, if the Messiah came not into it while it was
standing. That it was a pitiful Structure in comparison of Solomon's Temple,
the weeping of the old men at the rearing of the edifice was a plain
Demonstration. Besides that the Rabbis themselves say it was destitute of five
Prerogatives the other had: viz. The Urim and Thummim, the Shechina, Fire from
Heaven, the Ark of the Covenant, and the Spirit of Prophecy. The evasions of
the Jews here are very poor and inconsiderable: viz.

4. That though the Temple at first was not so glorious, yet when Herod had
reformed it, it was more splendid and stately then Solomon's. Which is not only
false, but if it were admitted to be true, would not salve the meaning of the
Prophecy. For all those external Ornaments could not compensate the loss of
the five Preeminences abovenamed. Besides that it is ridiculous to make so
petty a design of building a fine Temple to be expressed with such exceeding
high language as if the greatest Miracle in the World were to be exhibited,
(which yet was done by Herod, the vilest of men) I will shake the Heavens and
the Earth and the Sea and the dry land, etc.

And the second Alledgement, That this latter Temple stood ten years longer
then the former, is still more frivolous. And therefore at last they are forced
to quit this Temple, and affix the Prophecy on a third, viz. Ezekiel's Temple.
Which is yet unbuilt, though it be above two thousand years since that
Prophecy; whenas the Prophet said, Yet a little while, and I will shake the
Heavens and the Earth, etc.

5. But the Jews will be still obstinate, and still urge that it is plain how
magnificent a Temple Ezekiel's is, and that it is clearly prophesied of, and
must be at last, and that therefore they will not expect their Messiah till
then. But to this I briefly answer, First, That it may be, that Vision of the
Temple was nothing else but an exhibition of the Temple of Solomon, such as it
was when Nebuchodonosar destroyed it. To which opinion Grotius is very
inclinable. Secondly, if it be a more magnificent structure, That the Prophecy
is not absolute, as that of the Messiah, but conditional; as seems to be
expressly intimated in the very Prophecy, Ezekiel 43. Verse. 10, 11.
Upon which, I conceive, it may be a representation of such a magnificent
Structure as the Jews would have raised even in their Messiah's time, if they
had not refused him, that they would have pulled down Herod's Temple as built
by the hands of so execrable a Wretch, and raised this structure of Ezekiel.
This had been the natural issue of their embracing the Messiah; but the counsel
of God must stand. Or lastly, That the whole Vision is of a mere Mystical or
Spiritual meaning, which the Vision of the holy waters and the strange virtue
of them, as also the Trees there mentioned ( See Ezekiel 47. v. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12.
Chap. 47.) seem shrewdly to insinuate. So that no argument drawn from the
Temple of Ezekiel can enervate the force of this Prophecy of Haggai, it being
so very clear in it self, and the other so many ways interpretable to a
compliance therewith.

6. The truth whereof will be still more evident if we add that of Malachi;
Malach. chapter 3. v. 1.
Behold, I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and
the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple; even the Messenger of
the Covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, says the Lord of
Hosts.

Which Prophecy is parallel to the foregoing Prophecy, and does more fully
describe the person of the Messiah, whereby we may be the better assured that
they are both meant of him: and the time here again seems plainly enough to be
predefined, viz. That he would come into that Temple that the Jews had then
standing, though it had not been long rebuilt, and grace it with his presence
before it should be utterly ruined and laid wast.

7. This certainly is the natural sense of this Prophecy, and it is a very
harsh thing to think that Malachi had any other Temple in his mind but this.
But this Temple has been laid level to the ground above one thousand six
hundred years ago, and therefore the Messiah either came into his Temple then,
or the Prophecy is false. For there never was any since for him to come into,
nor is now, nor will be again for ever, at least before his coming. For how
shall the Jews build them a Temple before they have found the Messiah? So that
the Messiah will be first, and the Temple after, if at all. But certainly this
Prophecy of Malachi supposes the Temple first and ready built, and that the
Messiah in due time will be born into the World, and come into it. Which
therefore was the Second Temple.

CHAP. IV. 1. The Prophecy of Daniel. 2. The Exposition of the Prophecy. 3.
That the said Exposition is as easy and natural as the meaning of any writing
whatsoever; and what an excellent performance it would be to demonstrate out of
Chronology, That the Passion of Christ fell two or three days after the
beginning or before the end of the Last week. 4. The sum of the sense of the
whole Prophecy. 5. That the Circumscription of the Prophetical Weeks is not
made by the vastation of the City, but by the accomplishment of those grand
Prophecies concerning the Messiah. And that no Epoch can be true that does not
terminate upon them.
1. THE last Prophecy which we shall allege is out of Daniel, Chap. 9. where
he meditating upon that Prediction of Jeremy, that seventy years should be
accomplished in the desolations of Jerusalem, and praying earnestly to God in
behalf of the people, the Angel Gabriel by express command was sent to him to
impart this Prophecy to him.

I. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy City, to
finish the transgression, and to make an end of Sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
seal up the Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.

II. Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the
commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince,
shall be Seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks, the street shall be built
again and the wall, even in troublesome times.

III. And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for
himself; and the people of the Prince that shall come shall destroy the City
and the Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and to the end of
the war desolations are determined.

IV. And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week, and in the midst
of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the
overspreading of abominations he shall make it desolate, even until the
consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.

2. This is so eminent a Prophecy, and so mainly to the purpose, that we are
concerned to annex some short notes upon every verse, that the sense may appear
more plain; and if there be any diversity of interpretations, that we may the
better show that none does prejudice the main scope we drive at.

I. Seventy weeks, that is, weeks of years. Of which sense there is no doubt
with either Jew or Christian. And seventy of such Weeks, not so precisely as
that what is foretold may not come to pass before the seventieth Week be quite
run out, or may not run out into some part of a following week; the reckoning
being by Weeks and not by Years, as Mr. Mede also has well observed, and is a
Supposition that no body can justly cavil at.

Are determined. (...), that is, cut out, as some would have it, implying that
immediately after the expiration of these, the Jews would into Captivity again.
But that curiosity is more then needs, and not so conformable to the sense of
the Prophecy: so that in my apprehension our English Translation has the odds
of it.

Upon thy people and upon holy City. i. e. Near upon the expiration of the
Seventieth week the people of the Jews shall be no longer the people of God,
nor their City holy, their Religion naturally ceasing upon some act of theirs,
whereby a better, according to the purpose of God, shall be brought in.

To finish transgression, or, to fill up, perfect, or complete transgression.
For so will the The Septuagint render it (...), ad consummandam
praevaricationem.
word (...) here signify, and seems to be the most natural sense in this
place: As if the Angel should say, Seventy weeks shall the scourge be taken
from thy people, wherein they will again follow their own evil ways and
increase their sins to the very height: Which they did the most notoriously by
killing their Messiah.

And to make an end of sin. Or, to put an end to the Judaical Sin Offerings.
For so will (...) signify; and (...), which is as much as to seal, denotes a
putting an end to a thing by fulfilling and completing it, as toward the
latter end of this verse, to seal up the Vision and Prophecy, the word (...)
is used.

And to make reconciliation for iniquity: or, to expiate iniquity. For so (...)
signifies: But the sense is much-what the same in both.

And to bring in everlasting righteousness. i. e. Such a Law or Religion which
shall endure for ever, and according to which if we live, that will be our
Justification, not the works of Moses's Law nor those Offerings nor Sacrifices.

And to seal up the Vision and Prophecy. i. e. To fulfill and accomplish the
Prophecies, viz. those great important Prophecies concerning the Messiah.

And to anoint the most Holy, viz. the most holy Person that ever lived. For
though (...) be the feminine gender, and may seem to signify rather Sanctity
in the abstract, or Res sancta, yet the Jews themselves understood it of a
Person; Moses Gerundensis of the very Messiah: and it is used of any thing
consecrate to God, whether Field, Man, or Cattle, Levit. 27.28. Besides that
(...) need not be a Noun of the feminine Gender, but be the same that (...)
sanctus, as appears from Levit. 21. 7. and Numb. 6.8. or the words there are to
be read (...), and therefore again confirm that (...) belongs to Persons
consecrated as well as Things. If it had been meant of the most holy place of
the Temple, it had in all likelihood been (...), and not (...). But if (...)
might go for the most holy Place, Christ was also See Revel. 21. v. 22.
(...) in the most eminent manner imaginable: For in him dwelt the ^ Coloss.
2.9.
Godhead bodily.

II. From the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build
Jerusalem. viz. From the Decree or Command of Artaxerxes in the seventh year of
his reign mentioned Ezra 7. whereby Ezra was enabled to constitute Magistrates
and Judges over the people, to have power of life and death amongst themselves
and to live after their own Political Laws. In which concession cannot possibly
but be included a license or decree to build up the houses of Jerusalem.
Besides that, as Funccius also pleads, their Liberty of living under their own
Magistrates is the truest and most substantial sense of building their City:
and verse. 18. there is express leave given to make what use they please of the
Remainder of those liberal Contributions which were given for Sacrifices and
religious Services. Whence it is plain the power of building the City was
included in this Commission; only Ezra cared not to beg that expressly that
would be involved in a greater Grant and such as might incline the King's
Spirit more powerfully, viz. matters of Religion, as you may see verse. 23.
Wherefore this is the proper Decree for rebuilding the City, or else none. For
the Titles of the other Decrees are either for building the Temple, or else
restrained to the rearing of the Walls of the City, the houses having been
built before, as you may see by reading the History of Ezra and Nehemiah.

Unto Messiah the Prince: That is, Unto the Manifestation of that Person that
is so well known and so much expected by the Jews under the name of their
Messiah, the word being never used absolutely but concerning him.

Shall be seven weeks, and sixty two weeks: that is, sixty nine weeks, there
being no mystery in the parting of these Numbers, saving an Hebrew Idiom to be
understood from Ezekiel 45.12. and Genes. 5. often in that chapter, as also 8.
verse. 3. as Grotius comments upon the place. Funccius offers at something more
considerable, That the State of the Jewish Commonwealth should be more
unsettled for the first seven weeks or thereabouts, as is to be understood out
of Ezra and Nehemiah.

The street shall be built again and the walls, even in troublesome times. That
is, not only the Area of Jerusalem shall again be replenished with houses, but
the wall shall also be built again, though in troublesome and unsettled times;
as appears in the abovementioned History: For the builders were fain to have
their Swords in readiness as well as their Trowels.

III. And after the sixty two weeks, which succeed immediately the seven weeks,
that is to say, after sixty nine weeks shall Messiah be cut off, viz. the
abovenamed Messiah the Prince. For that must needs be the most natural meaning
thereof; and, as I said before, Messiah is never put thus absolutely but here:
whence doubtlesly the Jews gave him whom they expected for their Redeemer the
name of Messiah.

Cut off. If it were (...), it might signify transfixus or affixus, as
Funccius, would have it: but it is (...), which signifies to cut off, not only
from life, but, as Mr. Mede observes, from reigning as a King. And in respect
of the Jews he was cut off in both these senses. For he was the Messiah their
Prince whom his own people cut off from life, and thereby from themselves, that
they should be no more his people nor he their King: And therefore it follows
(...), which is not, and not for himself; but the sense is, The Messiah shall
be cut off by the hands of the people of the Jews, and that people shall be
none of his. This exposition of (...) Manasseh Ben Israel likes so well, that
he applies it where it is not so natural and easy, or else is tautological.
For he interprets it of Agrippa the last king of the Jews, whom, he says,
Vespasian slew some three years before the destruction of the Temple, (...) and
so the Kingdom was no longer Agrippa's nor any of his Race. But in this sense
concerning the Messiah, it being presupposed that he is cut off by the Jewish
People, it is very easy to conceive that they are the Nominative Case to the
Verb understood in (...), and that the people that cut him off should be no
longer his people, by reason of this heinous Act of theirs. So that upon this
act the Jews ceased to be the people of God; and thus being given over, at last
comes that vengeance prophesied of in the following words, that their City and
Sanctuary should be destroyed by those that were designed to be the people of
the Prince the Messiah. For so Mr. Mede interprets the place excellently well
in my judgment, rendering (...), Populus Principis futurus; understanding
thereby the Romans, in which Empire Christ was to have chiefly his Church and
Kingdom. And it is most natural that as Messiah before was the same with
Messiah the Prince, so the Prince here should be the same with the Messiah, the
sense fitting so exceeding well. Whenas if the Messiah be not understood here
by (...), but only some Prince and people at large [ the People of the Prince
which shall come,] the sense thereof will be more lax and dilute, which would
be more knit together and made of a more even Contexture upon Mr. Mede's
Hypothesis.

And the end thereof shall be with a flood. That is, After the destruction of
the City, the Roman army will overflow Iudaea.

And to the end of the war desolations are determined. Grotius interprets (...)
for, and renders it, Pro fine belli erit definita a desolatio. Deus hunc exitum
bello isti praefinivit, terrae vastitatem, God has determined that issue of the
war, the devastation of the Land.

IV. And he shall. Mr Mede renders it, Nevertheless he shall. For indeed the
conjunction (...) has the force in a manner of any conjunction, and may be
rendered according as the sense directs. And the most genuine sense seems that
which Mr. Mede has given, That though Israel was cast off, yet a Remnant
according to the election of grace should be wone off to Christ by the
preaching of the Gospel of his Kingdom: which should be done before and after
his Passion, by himself and his Apostles. This is that (...), or new Covenant,
See Book 9. chap. 5. sect. 7, 8, 9.
which adorns the very Title Page of the Greek Testament. And the Seventy turn
it in this place (...).

Confirm the Covenant. That is, as I said, the Covenant of the Gospel: See
Funccius upon the place.

With many, i. e. with several; for so the word signifies frequently: though it
be true also that many of the Jews were converted and entered the Covenant
within the space of this one week, which is the seventieth or last week.

And in the midst of the week, or, of that week. (...) may either signify in
one half-part of the week, as Grotius interprets it, or else simply, in the
midst of the week. In which interpretation the midst need not signify
mathematically the middle part of the Week equidistant from the extremes, but
any part within the extremes: so that the second or sixth year of the week may
be said in this sense, and that truly, in the midst of the week. So that the
Angel may mean no more by this expression then that what he foretells shall be
done after the last week begins and before it ends.

He shall make the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease. viz. The Messiah then
suffering shall antiquate and put an end to the Jewish Sacrifices and
Oblations. For he that was prefigured by them being come, and having been
sacrificed and made an oblation, it is plain that those other ceased as to
right and efficacy, that is, were abrogated or abolished by the excellency of
his Person, who offered up himself once a Sacrifice and Atonement for the
sins of the whole World. If Chronology will but admit of it, the wit of man
cannot find out a more becoming interpretation then this concerning his making
the daily Sacrifice to cease. Which is as it were the Scope of the whole
Prophecy. For to intimate within what week the Messiah should suffer, upon
whose death the Antiquation of Moses's Law and the Introduction of the
everlasting Righteousness depended, is a thing more decorous, and more
befitting so precise an Accuracy, then the Destruction of the Temple, which
other Interpreters say is meant by making the Sacrifice to cease. Besides, it
had been more proper and compendious to have named the Temple then the
Oblations and Sacrifices, if there had not been something of an higher nature
meant by this Expression. The main drift therefore of the Prophecy is, more
curiously to define the time, as of his Manifestation, so likewise of the Death
of the Messiah, which I question not but may very well be hinted at here in
this Expression; and what was spoke more at large and indeterminately in the
foregoing verse touching his being cut off, may here, for time, be more
punctually defined: And as at the mention of his Death before, there was
annexed that Vengeance upon them that murdered him; so here, where it is
repeated again, the same Vengeance is repeated.

And for the overspreading of abomination he shall make it desolate. The Hebrew
is, (...). Which with Mr. Mede I would render thus, And commanding over a wing
of abominations he will be a destroyer, i. e. over an army of Idolatrous
Gentiles, namely the Roman Army. See also Grotius upon Matthew. 24. v. 15. Whose
Interpretation, though it differ something from Mr. Mede's, yet in my opinion
does confirm it very much: He proving by several citations out of Authors, that
the Romans bore upon their Standards the Images of their Gods, which in Hebrew
is (...). We shall only instance in that one of many out of Tacitus;
Fulgentibus aquilis, signisque and simulacris Deum in modum Templi. So fitly is
this Wing of Abominations interpreted of an Army of Idolaters.

Even until the consummation and that determined. Read, and even until the
consummation, i. e. the finishing of this destruction.

Shall be poured upon the desolate. Read, it shall continue upon the
distressed, viz. (...). The Roman army shall continue upon Jerusalem til they
have brought it to utter devastation: or, it shall be spread like water poured
out upon the desolate, in that sense that Inundation was interpreted in the
foregoing verse. For, as I intimated before, this is but a repeated Prediction
of the same Vengeance upon the same occasion, namely, the consideration of
their murdering their Messiah, which is implied in that expression, He shall
make the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, himself then becoming a Sacrifice
according to the eternal counsel of God.

3. The sense which we have given of this Prophecy is so coherent and of one
piece, though taken out of several Interpreters, that no sense can be applied
to any Writings more naturally. So that, as I said, if Chronology will but
favor the Interpretation, it is most certain that what we have given is the
meaning thereof. And Funccius, who has made the Seventy weeks expire exactly
with the breath of our Savior upon the Cross, if he could have found the
ending but a year sooner, had given a tolerable and commendable account of this
Prophecy according to the latitude of the sense of (...) above mentioned. And
it is not a thing hopeless, but that he and other Chronologers may be mistaken
a year in their Computations. But whoever out of his industry and skill in
History and Chronology shall demonstrate to the World, That the Passion of our
Savior fell out some two or three years before the ending or else after the
beginning of the last Week, his Invention will be more to Christian Religion
then either the Venae Lacteae or the Circulation of blood to Physic and
Philosophy. For the fulfilling of this Prophecy will appear so clear and
complete, that if Porphyrius were alive again, he would again be driven to say
it was writ post eventum, that is to say, That the Jews have contrived a
Prophecy to confute themselves withal.

4. The good news therefore that the Angel Gabriel imparts to Daniel in this
Prophecy is this, That they should return out of Captivity; and that from the
going out of certain Decree to rebuild Jerusalem and give it the form of a
City, that is, a power of being governed by their own Laws and Magistrates,
that from that time forward God had determined Seventy weeks for them, that he
would give them his special Protection so long, and they should be his People,
and their City should be holy, their Oblations and Sacrifices should not be
antiquated, nor their Law and Religion abrogated: But within that time a new
Law or Religion should begin, which should never have an end, which therefore
is called the Everlasting Righteousness; and that the Iudaical Sin Offerings
should then cease, that is, should be no longer warrantable or effectual. For
the Messiah should by that time be come, whom they will slay, and he shall by
his Death put an end to all other Sacrifices, his blood being sufficient to
reconcile the whole World to God. But though the design of Divine Providence
herein was holy and good, yet the Jews crucifying him out of malice and envy,
(enormous wickedness having blinded their eyes) the people of the Jews shall be
cast out of God's favor, nor shall they be the People of the Messiah, but a
People that shall be the Messiah's, viz. the Romans, shall come and destroy
their City and Sanctuary with an utter Destruction.

5. This is a short and easy account of the whole Prophecy, in which it
plainly appears, That the foretelling of the destruction of the City is but an
Appendix to the main Prophecy, and comes but in by the by, as an effect of
that foul act of the Jews in slaying their Prince: But that the circumscription
of the Prophetical Weeks is made by those main Designs they were allotted to
the Jews for, that is, they should not expire till the Everlasting
Righteousness was brought in, till the Prophecies were fulfilled, and the most
Holy was anointed, that is, till the Messiah was come, till he suffered, rose
again, ascended into Heaven, sent down the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and
set the Christian Religion on foot in the World. All which was done in the last
week. After which the City was to be destroyed by the Romans; but there was no
need of precisely setting down the time when.

But the noise and clatter of the devastation of it has so disturbed the
Judgments and Phancies of many learned Writers, that they have very crookedly
and unnaturally haled on the extent of the Weeks to reach the destruction of
the City, and so have caused a needless obscurity in so pregnant a Testimony
of the Truth of our Religion. For indeed there can be no genuine or
satisfactory Interpretation of Daniel's Weeks, unless they all of them, the
seven, the sixty two, with the single week, follow one another continuedly in
one line, and such an Epoch be pitched upon, as that at the expiring of the
sixty nine Weeks the Messiah may be manifested to the World, and in the
seventieth Week be cut off, and be made a Sacrifice for sin, and so abrogate
the Jewish Law, and bring in the Everlasting Righteousness, etc. To which the
Epoch from the seventh year of Artaxerxes Longimanus does fairly lead, nor is
there any other tolerable besides it; which is a further confirmation of the
truth thereof. To say nothing, how there is none of the three Decrees, but that
which went out in the seventh year of Artaxerxes, that can so fitly be called a
Decree for rebuilding the City, as I have intimated already.

CHAP. V. 1. The Application of the First verse of the Prophecy to prove That
the Messiah is come. 2. The Jews evasions propounded and answered. 3. An
Application of the Second verse of the Prophecy, with a Confutation of those
Rabbis opinions that make Cyrus, Jehoshua and Zerobabel, or Nehemiah their
Messiah. 4. An Application of the Third verse, with a Confutation of the Jews
fiction of Agrippa's being the Messiah to be cut off.
1. I Have completed the sense of the Prophecy of Daniel, and that with more
accuracy then this present occasion required, I speak in regard of pitching
upon that Epoch with Funccius, which is set down Ezra 7. For without being so
particular there is strength enough in the Prophecy to evince, That the
Messiah is already come.

For from the First verse thereof it is very clear, That within Seventy Weeks
the Most Holy was to be anointed, and an Everlasting Righteousness to be
brought in. Now I demand of the Jews or any else, take their Epoch where they
will, if they can find any Everlasting Righteousness, Law or Religion, that
was brought in before the Expiration of Daniel's Weeks, if it be not this of
Christianity: but by the Prophecy there must be some Law or everlasting
Righteousness brought in by that time. And what or who was that most Holy that
was anointed within these Weeks, if it was not the very Christ whom we
Christians worship? The Jews themselves acknowledge the Second Temple was not
anointed: therefore it must belong to some Person; which must be the Messiah
mentioned in the following verse. I may add also, how is Vision and Prophecy
fulfilled, (the most eminent whereof was concerning their Messiah) I say, how
are they completed within the space of these seventy Weeks, if the Messiah be
not yet come?

2. The Jews have no way in the World to evade here but by forcing the most
absurd interpretation upon this Verse of the Prophecy that can be imagined; as
if the sense were, That those things there foretold should come to pass after
the seventy Weeks. Whenas it is plain That the casting the Weeks so into parts,
and expressly foretelling that in this part this shall come to pass, and in
that, that; it is plain, I say, from hence, That the main scope of the
Prophecy is to tell what things will come to pass before their expiration.
Which we shall be the better assured of if we examine the fondness of the other
Supposition, and apply it to the words of the Text, which are these,

Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy City, or, cut
out for thy people and for thy holy City, (...), to finish transgression, etc.
If these things that follow in this verse be to be understood as foretold to
come to pass after the seventy Weeks, what is the sense of the preposition
(...)? Questionless there can be but these two senses of it; either so as the
Septuagint have translated it, (...), viz. that transgression may be finished,
as also our English Translatours have rendered it, which doubtless is the true
sense; or else it must signify the same that (...), and there is no sense
imaginable besides these two that can be pretended.

If the first, the gross Absurdity is this, That whereas there has been about
three hundred Weeks for the completing those things mentioned there in that
verse, and they not yet done, according to the Jews opinion; yet the Prophecy
mentions only Seventy, and those wherein they themselves confess nothing at all
was to be done of them; then which nothing can be imagined more wild and
ridiculous.

If the second, I answer that the Seventy and other unprejudiced Interpreters
always turn it according to the former sense. Nay, that Abarbanel and Manasseh,
who otherwise pervert the sense of this Prophecy, yet they translate it so
too, and yield that (...) never signifies (...) until. And lastly, if it did
so, yet the sense of the Prophecy would be pitifully lame and imperfect, if
we compare it with the Event. For the sense would be, Seventy weeks are
determined upon thy people, until or before that the everlasting righteousness
be brought in, the most Holy anointed, Vision and Prophecy perfected, etc.
Which certainly supposes that within a little time after, at least after less
then Seventy Weeks, these things should be fulfilled; and yet there has thrice
seventy Weeks gone over since the expiration of the first Seventy, and no
tidings of any such things. Wherefore it is more clear then the Meridian Sun,
that the things there understood were to come to pass within the Seventy weeks
expressly spoke of by the Prophet Daniel.

3. Again, from the Second verse of this Prophecy we demonstrate, That the
Messiah is come: Because from the going out of the Commandment or Decree to
rebuild the City to the Messiah is but sixty nine weeks. Wherefore imagine what
Decree you will, the time is run out, and many hundred years besides. And that
this Prophecy is to be understood of that great Messiah their Prince and
Redeemer, appears plainly enough because he is called here by Daniel (...) and
(...) absolutely, as being his Proper Name, whenas in all other places of
Scripture it is an Appellative. Whence it is more then conjectural that the
Jews had the name of their Messiah out of this place, and understood it of that
Messiah we speak of. But after that unhappy mistake of theirs in refusing their
Messiah when he came, they have forced other Interpretations, though utterly
unapplicable to the Text; some understanding by Messiah King Cyrus, others
Nehemias, others Iehoshua the Priest, others Zerobabel: none of which conceits
are so much as possible. For the Epoch from which they must reckon, must be
from some Command or Decree to rebuild the City. For so the words run, (...)
From the promulgation of the Decree to restore, etc. That that is the sense of
(...) is plain from Esther, chap. 1. ver. 19. (...), let there go forth a
royal Command or Decree. Whence it is plain that (...) is as much as a Decree,
and (...) the Promulgation of it; as may be understood also from Luke 1. (...).
And the particle (...) does put the business out of all controversy that this
(...) is, as the Seventy often translate it, (...), a Command, not a
Foretelling or Talking of things; because (...) does not signify concerning
the restoring, but to restore. So that none that have any either common sense
or but moderate skill in the Hebrew, but will confess that (...) signifies,
From the Decree to cause to return, etc.

From whence it is very manifest that none of those Persons which the Jews here
offer can be accepted for the Messiah mentioned in this Prophecy. Not Cyrus;
because if you will apply him to the first Decree, which was his own, the
account is absurd at first sight. For thus you must reckon from the Edict of
Cyrus to the same Cyrus. The other Decrees are after Cyrus, and therefore the
sense will be more absurd, if any thing can be more. The reason is much-what
the same concerning Iehoshua and Zerobabel, for they were the very persons that
immediately executed Cyrus his Decree. And for Nehemias, he is a great many
years too late from Cyrus his Decree, and as much too near to that Decree that
went out the seventh year of Artaxerxes. This I speak in reference to that
Evasion they seek in the parting of the number of this Prophecy into seven
Weeks, and sixty two Weeks, as if it should be but seven Weeks from the Decree
to the Messiah, that is, forty nine years. But besides that it is plain,
Chronology will not fit their turn for this subterfuge, it is further evident
that if it would, it will yet appear ut a Subterfuge. For unless you will join
the Seven Weeks and the fifty two Weeks together, it will not make good sense,
as any one that examines it will easily understand; and that the Messiah is not
to come within the first Seven Weeks, appears in that he is to be cut off after
the sixty two Weeks.

4. Which shall be a third argument (from the Third verse of the Prophecy)
That the Messiah is come. After sixty two weeks the Messiah shall be cut off,
that is, not until the last Week begin and before it expire. For there is no
question but the Seventy Weeks being thus divided into parts for the setting
out the time of the coming and appearing of the Messiah even to his death, that
what he did visibly or suffered in the World is circumscribed within those
Weeks; and therefore we may safely conclude that before the Seventy Weeks
expired the Messiah was cut off, that is, that he was cut off above sixteen
hundred years ago, to wit, before the destruction of the City, as plainly
appears in the Text, that makes the sacking of Jerusalem a consequent of his
death: and the number of the Weeks, pitch upon what Decree you please, must
needs expire many years before the taking of the City, and therefore the
Messiah was cut off, and consequently came into the World so many years ago.

Here the Jews, to evade so manifest a Demonstration, tell us a story of one
Agrippa their last King, and of Mumbas his son, whom they say Vespasian slew
at Rome three years and an half before the destruction of the Temple. This was
he that was cut off from the Kingdom of Iudaea, (...), and it was no longer
his nor his Posterities. This is the most specious Answer they have made yet,
but yet upon examination will be found excessively weak. For first it is plain
from Records of History and Antiquity, That Agrippa the last King of the Jews
lived nigh upon thirty years after the Destruction of Jerusalem. And then in
the second place, if we should suppose their fiction to be true, the last week
of the Seventy will either expire many years before, or run out beyond the
cutting off this Agrippa, if you make, as you ought, the Decree for building of
the City the Epoch of the account, and affix it to the seventh year of either
Funccius his Artaxerxes or Scaliger's. To all which you may add that (...)
being put here so absolutely, it cannot but be understood of the great Messiah
the Jews did and do still expect, their own Rabbis expounding it so while they
were unprejudiced; and that it is most natural to understand the same person
spoken of in the whole Prophecy; who is first prefigured in the expression of
(...) (which their own Doctors also interpret of their Messiah) by which if the
Temple had been meant, it had been rather (...). And therefore again an
anointed Person being understood in the first verse, (...) mentioned in the
second and third must be the same Person; and there being in the first joined
with the mention of him not only so sacred a Title as the Most Holy, but also
the bringing in of everlasting Righteousness, the expiating of sin, and
fulfilling of Prophecies, it is plain that so mean a person as Agrippa (or any
else they have or can name) is unapplicable to this Prophecy of Daniel; such
things being there foretold as are utterly incompetible to him: but such as
will anon appear from other Prophecies to be singularly competible to the great
Messiah the Jews expected, and are the Characteristicals of his Person, as we
shall fully make good in its due place.

CHAP. VI. 1. How convincing Evidences those three Prophecies of Jacob, Haggai
and Daniel are, That the Messiah is come. 2. That it was the General Opinion of
the Jews, That the Messiah was to come about that time we say he did. 3.
Josephus his misapplication of the Prophecy of Daniel to Vespasian. 4. A
further confirmation out of Tacitus, that the Jews about those times expected
their Messiah. 5. Another Testimony out of Suetonius.
1. IN the mean time it is so plain and apparent from these Prophecies of Jacob
and Haggai, That the Messiah is already come; that any one, though secluded
from all Commerce with these parts of Europe, and knowing nothing of the face
of things here, if he had but only certain information that the Jewish Polity
and Temple were destroyed, and could but read the abovenamed Prophecies, he
would be sure that the Messiah was come into the World: as also out of this
Prophecy of Daniel he might without any intelligence at all (provided only he
took notice of the Epoch of Decrees, and how that the Weeks from any one of
them would be expired many hundred years ago) infallibly infer That the
Messiah was certainly come. These things are so perfectly clear, that it is
needless to add any thing else to confirm the belief of them.

2. Which yet some do by appealing to the judgment of their own Rabbis, if
they themselves did not conclude that their Messiah was to come about that time
we say he did. Nehemias, a Jewish Rabbin, that lived some fifty years before
Christ, did openly declare out of the Prophecy of Daniel, that the coming of
their expected Messiah could not be prolonged above fifty years; as appears out
of Grotius, if he was not misinformed by Stoctoxus. But by what he answers to
Sarravius, one would think that he saw the place with his own eyes; See Sarrav.
Epist. page 52.
Ostendit istum mihi locum olim Hagae Stoctoxus. And that this was not one
Rabbin's opinion, but the apprehension of many of their wise men, is manifest
from what Josephus has written, De bello judaico lib. 7. cap. 31. To (...).
That which excited them most of all to the war, was a doubtful Prophecy
found in the holy Writings, as if about that time some one from their Country
should be Emperor of the World. This the Jews took as properly belonging to
them, and many of the wise men were deceived in their judgments about the
matter. Out of which words it plainly appears that the learned of the Jews, and
in a manner the whole Nation, was persuaded that their Messiah, whom they
thought would be the Prince of the known World, was hard at hand. In which
persuasion they were so serious that they ventured their Lives, Liberty, Temple
and City thereupon, that being the greatest thing that animated them to that
unfortunate War. Of their firmness in which opinion a further argument is,
that they were so ready to phansy this or the other their Messiah about those
times. For there were many looked upon for a while as such, as Herod, Judas
Gaulonites, Ionathas, Barchochab and others.

3. Neither does Josephus his note upon the Prophecy that gave the Jews this
confidence, he calling it (...), an ambiguous Prediction, derogate any thing
from the clearness thereof concerning the Time. But the character of his
Person, it seems, was not so perfectly set out, but that they missed the
knowing of him when he was come: and therefore it was necessary for Josephus to
say that the Oracle was ambiguous. But it were ambiguous indeed, if it were, as
he would make it, more applicable to Vespasian then to the true Messiah. For
that Messiah there prophesied of was to be cut off, which Vespasian was not;
and that before the last week, whenas Vespasian besieged Jerusalem about forty
years after. Besides that it is ridiculous to resolve the solemnity of the holy
Oracles of the Prophets into so petty a business, as in stead of their
foretelling that one of the Jewish Lineage should become a great Prince, and
sway the scepter over the Nations (which prediction was always looked upon as
some peculiar Honor and Privilege to the Jews) that only a forraigner coming
to Iudaea, and for no better end then to sack their City, destroy their Temple,
and make vassals of them and slaves, that this man after should be chosen
Emperor of Rome, as others had been before him. Whether awe and fear might
baffle the understanding of Josephus so as to think this a true Gloss, though
it be but servile flattery, I will not dispute: but whether he thought it false
or no, that it is so, I think I have put out of Controversy.

4. But what Josephus records concerning the opinion of his Nation, that they
thought the coming of their Messiah to be about that time, is got into the
History of the Pagan Writers also. (...) Histor. ab Exc^^^^ N^ronis lib. 5.
cap. 13. See Book 6. chap. 2. sect. 8.
Cornelius Tacitus writes so like to what Josephus has set down, that it seems
something like a translation of him, as in his speaking of the Prodigies that
did forerun the destruction of the City; Visae per coelum concurrere acies,
rutilantia arma, and subito nubium igne collucere templum. Expassae repent
delubri fores, and audita major humana vox, Excedere Deos, simul ingens motus
excedentium. That is, Armies were seen skirmishing in the Heavens, weapons
glittering, and the Temple filled with light from the sudden flashing of the
clouds. The door also of the Temple instantly flung open, and a voice was heard
bigger then the voice of any man, That the Gods go out, and withal a mighty
bustle of them as going out together. After this presently he adds, Quae pauci
in m^tum trahebant: pluribus persuasio inerat, antiquis sacerdotum literis
contineri, co ipso tempore ut valesceret Oriens, profectique Judaea rerum
potirentur: quae ambages Vespasianum and Ti^um praedixerunt. i. e. Which some
few interpreted as a dangerous Presage: most were persuaded that it was
contained in the ancient Books of their Priests, that at that very time the
East should grow potent, and that those come from Judaea should obtain the
Empire: which ambages presignified Vespasian and Titus. In which he plainly
intimates that the Opinion of the near approach of their Messiah was so strong,
that it bore against all the ill Prodigies, nay made them interpret them to a
good sense, as if this excedere deos was but their hastening out to take
possession of the Nations; which was true in no other sense then in that
Christ, who was the peculiar Guardian Angel, as I may so speak, of the Jews
before, became afterward the worship of the whole Empire. Or if you will, God,
who was in a manner Topical before, restrained to Iudaea, became the known and
acknowledged God of the whole Earth.

5. Suetonius in the life of Vespasian (cap. 4.) in express terms calls this
Expectation of the Jews, veterem and constantem opinionem. Percrebuerat, says
he, Orient toto vetus and constans opinio, esse in fatis ut eo tempore Judaea
profecti rerum potirentur. Id de Imperatore Romano, quantum eventu postea
praedictum patuit, Judaei ad se trahentes, rebellarunt, etc. An ancient and
constant opinion had grown very common over all the East, that the fates had so
destined, that at that time those that came from Judaea should become masters
of all. Which fate, as appeared by the event, foretold of the Roman Emperor,
the Jews interpreting in favor of themselves, rebelled, etc. By which
expressions of Suetonius we may understand how assured the Jews were, that that
was the time of the coming of their Messiah, and that the fame of it was not
contained within their own Precincts, but had spread over all the East, and that
the whole World was at a gaze in expectation of the Great Prince of the Jews.

CHAP. VII. 1. That it being evident the Messiah is come, it will also follow
that Jesus is he. 2. That the Prophets when they prophesied of any eminent
King, Priest or Prophet, were sometimes carried in their Prophetic Raptures to
such expressions as did more properly concern the Messiah then the Person they
began to describe. 3. That these References are of two sorts, either purely
Allegorical, or Mixed; and of the use of pure Allegories by the Evangelists and
Apostles. 4. Of mixed Allegories of this kind, and of their validity for
Argument. 5. That eminent Prophecy of Isaiah, that so fully characterizes the
Person of Christ. 6. That the ancient Jews understood this of their Messiah,
and that the modern are forced hence to fancy two Messiahs. The Soul of the
Messiah appointed to this office from the beginning of the World, as appears
out of their Pesikta. 7. The nine Characters of the Messiah's Person included
in the abovenamed Prophecy. 8. A brief Intimation in what verses of the
Prophecy they are couched. 9. That this Prophecy cannot be applied to the
People of the Jews, nor adequately to Jeremie's person. 10. Special Passages in
the Prophecy utterly unapplicable to Jeremie.
1. WE have, I think, sufficiently demonstrated That the time of the coming of
the Messiah is expired, and therefore (the Predictions of him and Promises
being not conditional, as I have above intimated, but absolute,) it undeniably
follows that he is come. Upon which we might immediately infer, especially
considering the Time of his coming, That Jesus Christ is he. For whom else can
they possibly pitch upon? But we shall proceed more punctually, and suspend
that Inference, until we have laid before you those Prophecies that
characterize his Person, What a one he should be, What he should do, and What
should betide him.

2. Of which there is none so full as that of Isaiah, Chap. 53. But before I
enter upon it or any other, it will be very convenient, for the preventing of
all Cavils and Tergiversations, to set down a Supposition which is both
rational in it self, and allowed of, nay highly magnified, in things where
their Interest does not lie at stake, by the most learned of the Jews. And it
is this, That that eminent Person whom they call their Messiah, being at last
to give them a visit in this World, and as the very sense of his Name imports,
which signifies Anointed, being to be the Top and Flower of those three
Functions in which this Anointing was used, viz. Prophet, Priest and King; it
is very rational to conceive, how in their Actuations by the Spirit of God,
when he fell upon the Prophets, that while they prophesied or spoke of some
more considerable Priest, Prophet or King (that Wisdom guiding them which is
omniscient and more moving then any motion, which reaches from one end to
another mightily, and sweetly orders all things) they were so actuated and
transported, that in that fatidical Rapture they were caught up into, the sense
of their Mind and Words was carried further then the particular Person they
began to describe. So that according to this Supposition we will of our own
accord acknowledge that several, and those of the most eminent Prophecies that
characterize the Person of Christ, did first touch upon some other Person,
which was but a fainter Resemblance of him. But that after this glance they are
carried to their main scope they drive at, where they pierce and are fixed, as
an arrow stuck in the mark.

3. Now this Reference is of two sorts, either a Perfect Allegory, or Mixed.
That I call a Perfect Allegory, when all the expressions concerning the Person
first spoke of do very well and naturally fit him, but may be interpreted (and
that more exquisitely it may be) of some more illustrious Person that comes
after. Such Allusions as these are used by the Apostles and Evangelists to the
great confirmation of our Faith, however the Jews are scandalized at it. For
there can be no other sense of it then this, viz. That either these
Interpretations which they put upon the Prophets were the known Interpretations
of the Jews, and therefore very accommodate to persuade the Jews by; and it was
a sign they were right Interpretations, they being made before prejudice had
blinded them. Or else, that these Expositions were their own, that is, that
they arose in their own minds first; which was impossible they should, they
being but Allusions, unless the certain knowledge of what happened to our Savior
Christ had put them upon it. So that those allusive Proofs are to us strong
Confirmations that the History of the Gospel in those things that seem most
incredible is certainly true. I will content my self with that one instance
(though I might allege many others) of Christ's being born of a Virgin.
Certainly unless they had known that de facto he was so, or that their wise men
had interpreted that of Isaiah Chap. 7. to that sense, it is incredible that
they should ever allege that place for it; and they making no use of any other
but this, which is only allusory, it is plain the certainty of the Event was
that which cast them upon the Interpretation.

4. I call a Mixed Allegory that which is partly allusoric, as being applicable
first to some more inferior Person, whether King, Prophet or Priest, and then
to the Messiah, and partly simple and express, not applicable to any but the
Messiah himself; the Prophet being so actuated by the Spirit of God, that in
the sublimity of that divine Heat he is in, his sense and expressions reach out
further then the Person that is the Type, and strike into such Circumstances
that are not at all true but in the Antitype. And these Predictions of this
nature concerning the Messiah are as Demonstrative to those that are not
intolerable Cavillers, as if the Prophecy had been wholly carried to the
Messiah, without glancing or touching upon any other Person.

5. These things being premised, let us return to Isaiah, and peruse his whole
Prophecy, that we may the more accurately judge thereof. Chap. 53.

1. Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
2. For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a
dry ground: he has no form nor comeliness: and when we shall see him, there is
no beauty that we should desire him. 3. He is despised and rejected of men, a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; and we hid as it were our faces from
him: he was despised, and we esteemed him not. 4. Surely he has born our
griefs, and carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of
God, and afflicted. 5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed. 6. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have
turned every one to his own way; and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all. 7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth:
he is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is
dumb, so he opened not his mouth. 8. He was taken from prison and from
judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the
land of the living; for the transgressions of my people was he stricken. 9. And
he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, because he
had done no violence, neither was deceit in his mouth. 10. Yet it pleased the
Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: when thou shall make his Soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. 11. He shall see of the travel
of his Soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities. 12. Therefore will I
divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the
strong; because he has poured out his Soul unto death; and he was numbered with
the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for
the transgressors.
6. The ancient and wisest of the Jews ever interpreted this Chapter of their
Messiah. And the later Rabbis being convinced of the clearness of the
Prophecy, and respecting the Authority of those wise Interpreters before them,
have been some of them forced to acknowledge two Messiahs, the one the Son of
Joseph, the other of David. The former a suffering Messiah, the other
victorious and triumphant, rather then to deny the evidence of this Prophecy.
Out of which there is also a special Tradition set down in an ancient Book
amongst the Jews, which is called Pesikta, which further confirms our assertion
of their interpreting of it concerning the Sufferings of the Messiah; How that
the Soul of the Messiah was ordained (and did gladly accept the condition) to
suffer, from the beginning of the World. The Tradition runs thus, See Hulsius
De Messia page 309. and Hornbeck l. 6. c. 1.
That when God created the World, he put forth his hand under his Throne of
Glory, and brought forth the Soul of the Messiah and all his Attendants, and
said unto him, Will thou heal and redeem my sons after six thousand years? He
answered he would. God said again unto him, Will thou undergo the
chastisements to purge away their iniquities, (according as it written (it is
the Rabbis own application) Certe morbos nostros tulit?) The Soul of the
Messiah answered, I will undergo them and that right gladly.

7. This is enough to confirm that it was the Opinion of the ancient and
unprejudiced Jews, That this Prophecy was meant of their Messiah: and, as I
said, there is not any one Prophecy so full of Characteristicals of his Person
as this, though not all of the like Clearness. But I dare say no less then
these nine are in some sort or other included in it. 1. His being rejected by
the Jews; 2. And being made a Sacrifice for sin. 3. His Resurrection. 4. His
Ascension. 5. His Apotheosis. 6. The excellency of his Doctrine. 7. His
Reception by the Gentiles. 8. The Destruction of their Superstition and of that
divine Honor done to unwarrantable Persons. 9. And the Eternity of His
Kingdom.

8. I shall briefly intimate in what verses of the Prophecy every of these are
hinted. His Rejection by his own is plainly intimated verse. 1, 2, 3. His
Suffering and being a sacrifice for sin, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 10. His Ascension
and Resurrection, verse. 8, 10. His (...), ver. 9. He made his grave with the
wicked and with the rich in his death, that is, with the wicked rich men, that
is, great Potentates of the Earth who were rich, powerful and injurious, those
many Nimrods in the World, whose Sepulchers and Monuments were after
magnificent Temples, and themselves deified as Gods. Because he had done no
violence. The reason is incomparably solid: For if the Princes and Emperors of
the World had divine honors done to them after their death who were but
Magnifici Latrones, as one calls them, much rather should the Messiah, who
did no violence, but was so faithful and good in all things, be exalted unto
this Honor, have Temples built to him, and be worshipped as a God. The 12
verse does further confirm this sense, Wherefore I will divide him a portion
with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he has
poured out his soul unto death. Which spoil cannot be so aptly understood of
any thing as this (...), it being mentioned so upon these terms, after his
pouring out his Soul unto death. One verse illustrates another so, that I think
there can be no doubt of the sense. The excellency of his Doctrine is
understood verse. 11. which sets out the success of the Gospel. His Reception by
the Gentiles verse. 10, 11. For if the Gentiles had not come in, there had been
small satisfaction; the Jews being excluded, or rather they excluding him. The
Destruction of their Superstition and unwarrantable Worship they did to
unworthy Persons, this is included in their Reception of Christ. The long
Duration of his Kingdom, v. 8. And who shall declare his generation? that is,
the permanency of his own royal Person, and the succession of his Church that
will adhere to him for ever.

9. This is a punctual and very reasonable account of this Prophecy: but be it
how it will, yet this is out of question, That the Suffering and Glorification
of the Messiah is here prefigured, and that if that in the general be not
understood, there is no good sense to be made of this Prophecy. For to distort
it to the affliction of the Jewish people, is very harsh, nay impossible, as
appears from verse. 8. For the transgression of my people was he stricken.
Wherefore it was not the People of God that are here stricken, but some person
struck by reason of them. The most tolerable application of the Prophecy is to
the afflictions of Jeremy, of whom Grotius has expounded it, (though not
excluding Christ) and has made sense of it in so many places, that I do not
deny but that it may be understood of Jeremy in the first and
less-considerable meaning; but that withal the application to Christ is not
merely allusory, but that such things are spoke in this Prophecy as cannot but
with an exceeding deal of lameness and ineptness be applied to Jeremy.

10. And truly the very beginning of the Prophecy is too magnificent by far
for the affairs of Jeremy; Who has believed our report, etc. for there is
nothing so incredible in all those transactions concerning him. Again verse. 5.
With his stripes we are healed. It is ridiculous to attempt an application of
these words to Jeremy. For he was no Sin-Offering to appease the wrath of God,
but what he suffered was rather for their mischief. And that is as foolishly
applied to him, verse. 8. And who shall declare his Generation? as if it were
understood of Ieremie's Longevity, then whom far less considerable men have
lived much longer. So frigid and frivolous is this Interpretation. Neither
without violence can that Phrase, For he was cut off out of the land of the
living, (especially considering the mention of the grave in the next verse) be
understood otherwise then of the inflicting of Death: Which was not Ieremie's
case. So verse 20. when thou shall make his Soul an offering for sin: To
interpret that of Jeremy is plainly to dote. For (...) signifies a
Sin-Offering or Sin it self; but God made Jeremy neither Sin nor Sin-Offering
for his People. And lastly, to say nothing of the unfitness of that expression,
I will divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with
the strong, to be applied to that petty business of Jeremy, chap. 40. v. 5.
where the Captain of the Guard is said to give him Victuals and a Reward,
(...), that is, he accommodated him for his Journey (the word (...) showing
what the whole gift was, only a Viaticum; and it had been the greatest reproach
imaginable for the Prophet to have received any thing more, to have made
himself rich with the spoils of his own countrymen) I say, to say nothing of
the unfitness of that expression to be applied to so small a matter; the words
following are so full and home, because he has poured out his soul unto death,
that they cannot signify less then an actual dying; nor is there any example
that they signify otherwise. And therefore the division of the spoil with the
strong must be after death, and denote his Apotheosis. It is plain therefore as
well out of the confession of the Rabbis themselves, as out of the words of
the Prophecy, that it is not merely an allusorie Prefiguration of the Messiah,
but a downright Description of him in such Circumstances as are incompetible
to any besides him, and therefore, as I said, is as valid as if it had all been
meant of him alone.

But because all the Characters of him here included are not so full and clear
as in other places, and those that are the clearest are of so much importance,
that it will not be any loss of labor to add other confirmations to them, I
shall evidence every one of them more fully from other Prophecies.

CHAP. VIII. 1. Further Proofs out of the Prophets, That the Messiah was to be
a Sacrifice for sin. 2. That he was to rise from the dead. 3. That he was to
ascend into Heaven. 4. That he was to be worshipped as God. 5. That he was to
be an eminent Light to the Nations; 6. And welcomely received by them. What is
meant by His Rest shall be glorious. 7. That he was to abolish the Superstition
of the Gentiles. 8. And that his Kingdom shall have no end. 9. That all these
Characters are competible to Jesus whom we worship, and to him only.
1. THE first mark of the Messiah was his Rejection, that he should be rejected
of the Jews; but those places that foretell his Killing, more strongly implying
his Rejection, we need add nothing particular thereof. That the Messiah was to
be slain, and be a Sacrifice for sin, besides that full and copious
prediction of Isaiah, is clear out of Daniel, who says that after sixty nine
weeks the Messiah was to be cut off; and then adding afterward that in the
half of the seventieth week he should make the sacrifice to cease, it is plain
that his Death and ceasing of the Jewish sacrifices and oblations were in one
Week, and that thereupon his Death was a Sacrifice, whereby those Iudaical
Oblations were antiquated. For it is well known that the Temple and their
Oblations continued about forty years after the Passion of Christ: so that it
cannot be understood of the outward destruction of the Temple, and Prohibition
of Sacrifices; and therefore it must be understood of the nulling of the
Validity and Authority of them, their Law of sacrificing being abrogated by
that transcendent Sacrifice of the body of our blessed Savior upon the Cross.
For there is nothing else that can be imagined to cease or take away the
Iudaical Sacrifices in the midst of the last Week but that. To these we might
add Psalm 22. and Zachar. 12.10. but what has been alleged already is more
then enough.

2. Let us now rather see what has been foretold of his Resurrection from the
dead. And in my mind that is a very clear Prediction thereof Psalm 16. v. 8.
where David being transported in his Spirit by a divine power writes higher
matters then are competible to any but the true David, the Messiah himself. I
have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall
not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices; my flesh also
shall rest in hope: For thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Thou will show me the path of life: in
thy presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy right hand there are Pleasures for
evermore.

This is so natural a description of one raised out of the Grave before he
corrupt there, and ascending into the presence of God in the Heavens to enjoy
Eternal Life, that nothing can be more express. But David was never raised out
of the grave himself, but his flesh saw corruption. Wherefore it appears that
it was a Prophecy of some other, viz. the Messiah, of whom David was a Type.

3. The Ascension of the Messiah is lively prefigured Psalm 68. The chariots of
God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: the Lord is amongst them as
in Sinai, in the holy place. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led See Book
1. chapter 9. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Captivity captive: thou have received gifts or men, for the rebellious also,
that the Lord God may dwell among them.

If this be applied unto Christ, the sense is easy, especially if you take
notice how the Lord was amongst them in Sinai, that is, there was one chief
Angel, whom some would have to be Christ, which sustained the person of God,
who might have the name of Adonai, as Christ also has, and is styled the Angel
of the Covenant, Malachi 3.1. In lieu of him is here the Messiah himself
attended with many Squadrons of Angels, and receiving gifts of his Father to
communicate to the World, that God might dwell amongst them, that they might be
brought in to be of his Church.

4. This Prophecy also plainly points at his (...) but there are also other
places that make it still more clear, as Psalm 110. The Lord said unto my Lord,
Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool: and then
verse. 4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchisedeck. The Jews themselves of old acknowledged this
Psalm to be a Prophecy of the Messiah; and the first and fourth verses are
such that they can bear no other sense, but that the Messiah was to be greater
then David, and to be a King, Priest and Intercessour at the right hand of God
for ever.

Also Psalm 45.6. Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the Scepter of thy
Kingdom is a right Scepter: Thou love righteousness and hate iniquity;
therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of Gladness above thy
fellows. Him that the Psalmist speaks of here he calls (...), and it cannot
signify an ordinary King or Magistrate, because he says, his throne is (...),
that is, for ever, absolutely, as R. Moses Aegyptius expounds that Phrase.
Wherefore most justly does the Chaldee Paraphrast make this Psalm a Prophecy
of the Messiah, whose (...) or Divinity is plainly expressed in these verses I
have recited.

I will add one place more out of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 9. v. 6. For unto
us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon
his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty
God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of peace: of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David and upon
his kingdom, to order and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from
henceforth and for ever: the zeal of the Lord of hosts will do this. I do not
doubt but that this Prophecy is in some sort referrable also to Hezekiah, and
hits upon him first, but the main scope of it is the Messiah; and that therein
his Divinity and the Eternity of his Kingdom is set out, both the Testimony of
the Chaldee Paraphrast, the Translation of the Septuagint, and the expressions
in the Prophecy according to the Hebrew Text is evidence enough. For they
translate (...), and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, The mighty
God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of peace, after this manner, (...) As
if they meant it of (...)
(...). Which exposition cannot possibly be sense, if referred to Hezekiah, but
agrees very well with the (...) of the Messiah. Besides the English
translation, Of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no end,
is so exactly according to the Hebrew, that it is plain all the expressions are
not competible to Hezekiah; and Grotius himself, who loves to stretch the sense
of every particular expression of these kind of Prophecies to the person they
first aim at, yet he acknowledges ingenuously that they are more fitly and more
plainly applicable to the Messiah. Which to any indifferent man is satisfaction
enough that they were meant of him; especially if he consider that the ancient
Jews, who may well be thought to understand the Genius of their own Prophets
the best, have long since, before this inveterate contest betwixt the Jew and
Christian, interpreted them so.

5. The sixth Character of his Person is the Excellency of his Doctrine. This
is intimated, as I said, Isaiah 53. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many; but is more fully expressed Malachi 3. The Lord whom ye seek
shall suddenly come into his Temple, (which might have been produced as another
Prophecy of the Divinity of the Messiah) even the messenger of the Covenant,
whom you delight in; behold, he shall come, says the Lord of hosts. But who
may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? For he
is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap: and he shall sit as a refiner
and purifier of Silver; and he shall purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them
as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
Righteousness. Whereby is plainly denoted the purity and sanctity of that Law
and Spirit that the Messiah was to communicate to his serious followers, that
he would thoroughly purify them and purge them from their Hypocrisy and
Sinfulness.

And again, Isaiah 42. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my
Soul delights: I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment
to the Gentiles. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard
in the street. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall
he not quench; he shall bring forth judgment unto truth. He shall not fail, nor
be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the Isles shall
wait for his law. Thus says God the Lord, he that created the Heavens and
stretched them out, he that spread forth the earth and that which comes out of
it, he that gives breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk
therein; I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand,
and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant unto the people, for a light
of the Gentiles: To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the
prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse.

And Isaiah 49. Listen, O Isles, unto me, and hearken ye people from far. The
Lord has called me from the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he made
mention of my name. And he has made my mouth like a sharp sword, in the shadow
of his hand has he hid me, and made me a polished shaft, in his quiver has he
hid me. And verse 5. And now says the Lord that formed me from the womb to be
his servant, to bring Jacob again unto him: Though Israel be not gathered, yet
shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength.
And he said, It is a light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up
the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the desolations of Israel; I will also give
thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the end
of the earth. My Salvation, (...), with an allusion to the very name of Isaiah
(...), which signifies, The Salvation of the Lord: Which seems to be alluded to
in the first verse also, from the bowels of my mother has he made mention of
my name. Which is so near a kin to the name of Jesus, that the Messiah may seem
to be prefigured in the very name of the Prophet Isaiah as well as in his
Person: As it must be confessed that both these two Prophecies do in some
measure belong to Isaiah himself first. But considering how the more excellent
Kings and Prophets were to be Types of the Messiah, and that the language is so
very high, it cannot be doubted but that in these Divine raptures and
exaltations of Spirit, the Mind and Tongue of Isaiah was carried above what
was competible to his own Person, and therefore must naturally be transferred
to the Messiah; it being plain from other places, that there was at last to
come some one transcendent Prince and Prophet anointed in an higher manner and
measure then any other. Which the Jews expected, and called their Messiah. And
therefore it is therewithal manifest, that their Messiah was to be an eximious
Teacher, Prophet or Lawgiver.

6. The seventh Character is that he should be very welcomely received of the
Nations; that which these last Prophecies also intimate. But I shall add others
also. To this sense the Jews themselves interpreted that ancient Prophecy of
Jacob (...), to him shall be the gathering together of the Nations; the
Seventy, (...), and he is the hope or expectation of the Nations. And there is
yet one, more ancient then that, which implies it; viz. the Promise to Abraham
that he should be a Father of many Nations, and that in his seed all Genes.
chap. 12. v. 3. and chap. 18. v. 18. also chap. 22.18.
Nations of the Earth should be blessed. Of which other Prophecies also
witness. Isay 2.2. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the
mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains,
and shall be exalted above the hills; and all Nations shall flow unto it. The
Jewish Doctors themselves acknowledge this to be understood of the times of
the Messiah. And chap. 11. And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse which
shall stand for an ensign of the people: to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his
rest shall be glorious; or, Him shall the Gentiles seek, viz. in a devotional
way, shall pray unto him, and sing praises unto him. For (...) is often used in
that sense, (...). And his rest shall be glorious, and sepulcrum ejus erit
gloriosum; so some turn it, and truly not rashly nor without cause. For (...)
in several places signifies the rest of the dead. Job 3. v. 17. (...); which
the Seventy render, (...): It is in Job's description of the state of the dead.
Also Proverbs 21.16. (...), He shall rest in the congregation of the dead,
(...) but (...) is better; for (...) and (...) are all one, as appears Psalm
88. v. 11. Lastly, Psalm 23. v. 2. (...) Aquae requietum, implies such a rest
as Sleep, the brother of death. For there is nothing more prone then to lie and
sleep on the shadie banks of a River. Wherefore (...) may very well signify
Dormitorium ejus, or Sepulcrum ejus, erit gloriosum; that is, That it shall at
last be exalted to the nature of a Temple, he shall have Divine Honor done
unto him, and the Gentiles shall pray unto him and adore him: as is intimated
in the words immediately going before. But this was more then we needed to
charge this Prophecy with, though it be probable enough it is contained in it.

There are sundry other places that serve for the proof of this seventh
Character: but because it is sufficiently enough demonstrated already, and
little or no controversy made of it, I pass to the eighth.

7. Which is the Messiah his abolishing the Superstition of the Gentiles, that
is, such worship as they had no divine warrant for, they being so grossly
mistaken in the Object. This is so plainly included in the two last Characters,
that I need add no other proof. But if there were need, that in the 2, and 110
Psalms might further confirm it. Where he is constituted a new King and
Priest; and therefore implies new Religion and Laws, and such as the heathen
were ignorant of before; but such as they must obey upon pain of high
displeasure.

8. The last Character is the long Duration of the Messiah's Kingdom. Psalm
89. v. 35. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David.
His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me. It shall
be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. Also
Psalm 45. v. 6. Thy throne, o God, is for ever and ever, the scepter of thy
Kingdom is a right scepter, etc. Which Prophecy makes good the former, and
shows how it is to be fulfilled in the (...) of the Messiah. See also Psalm 72.
which the Hebrew Rabbis do acknowledge to be understood of the Messiah. Also
Daniel 2.44. and 7.27. This Character is so clear, that I need not insist any
longer upon it.

9. These are the main Marks and Characters of the Person of the Messiah, by
which we may infallibly find out who he is. And who indeed can he be according
to these Characters, but Jesus whom we Christians worship? For what competitor
for the Messiahship but he, was, being a Jew, rejected by the Jews and
crucified? Who is it that arose from the dead and ascended into Heaven but he?
Who ever delivered so pure Doctrine to purge the World from wickedness and to
enlighten the Nations as he? It is he therefore whom the Nations waited for,
and have received: It is he for whose sake they parted with their old vain and
impure Superstitions, by whose Doctrine they are brought to the knowledge of
the Eternal God: And lastly it is he whom for his bitter sufferings God has
exalted above Angels and Archangels and all the host of Heaven, and has set him
at his own right hand to be a Priest and King over his Church for ever.

CHAP. IX. 1. The peculiar Use of Arguments drawn from the Prophecies of the
Old Testament for the convincing the Atheist and Melancholist. 2. An
Application of the Prophecies to the known Events for the conviction of the
Truth of our Religion. 3. That there is no likelihood at all but that the
Priesthood of Christ will last as long as the Generations of men upon Earth. 4.
The Conclusion of what has been urged hitherto. 5. That Christ was no
fictitious Person, proved out of the History of Heathen Writers, as out of
Pliny, 6. And Tacitus: 7. As also Lucian, 8. And Suetonius. 9. That the
Testimony out of Josephus is supposititious, and the reasons why he was silent
concerning Christ. 10. Julian's purpose of rebuilding the Temple at Jerusalem,
with the strange success thereof, out of Ammianus Marcellinus.
1. WE have now made a very considerable Progress in the proof of the Reality
of Christian Religion, That it is more then a mere Idea. Let us here make a
stand and breath a while, and contemplate with our selves the peculiar Use and
advantage of this present Argument, for the stopping the mouths as well of the
bold Atheist as the suspicious Melancholist. For indeed it is too true, and
every good man could wish it were not so, that the latter Ages of the Church
have not dealt faithfully with the World, but beyond the bounds of all modesty
and conscience obtruded upon the people fond Legends and forged Miracles, as if
they were given up into their hands only to be imposed upon and abused. Which
consideration does cast some men into an unchangeable misbelief of the whole
business of Christianity, and makes them look upon it all as a mere Fiction and
Fable. For they measure the Genius of the Primitive Church by what they see
practiced before their eyes now-adayes, and look upon the whole Tribe of the
Priests as Impostors. Which censure though it be most unjust, yet it will be
very hard to convince these Censurers but that it is very true, unless by some
such Argument as now lies before us, viz. That the ancient Prophecies in the
Old Testament could not be forged by the Christian Priests, and that the Jews
would not forge them against themselves. See chap. 1. sect. 4.
Nay they that know any thing of the Jews, will acknowledge them so religiously
addicted to the Letter of these holy Writings, that knowingly and wittingly
they durst not alter a tittle. Wherefore all those Prophecies we have alleged
are real, and we have made good they clearly foretell That the Messiah should
come many hundred years ago; therefore it is plain he is come.

2. I therefore demand of either the Profane or Melancholic, who is this
Messiah, if Jesus be not he. Nay I appeal to them if the very Characters of his
Person be not certainly to be known by their own Senses agreeably to the
Prediction of those infallible Oracles. The Prophecies have said, He should be
rejected of his own. Ask the Jews, they will acknowledge they have rejected
him. The Prophecies foretold he should be cut off, be killed by them. Ask the
Jews, they will not deny but that they did condemn him to death, but
deservedly, as they contend for their own excuse. The Prophecies foretold his
Doctrine should enlighten the Gentiles. Ask thine own eyes if the Gentiles be
not turned from their vain and unwarrantable Superstitions to the knowledge of
that one God that made heaven and earth, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent.
The Prophecies prefigured his rising from the dead and his ascending up into
Heaven: and ask thine own Conscience if thou do not believe that this was
always the belief of the Christians; and consult with thine own Reason, if it
had been possible that the Death of Christ could have drawn all the World after
him, if it had not been seconded with his Resurrection. Certainly those that
believed on him before, had deserted him after his death, if he had not risen
from the dead: but of that more fully hereafter. Lastly, the Prophecies
foretold that the Messiah should be worshipped as a divine Person, and receive
divine Honor, and that God would make him a King and Priest for ever. Ask
thine own senses, if thou do not find it so. How many thousand Temples are
there consecrated to his name? in how many Nations and Kingdoms of the earth
is he honored as the Son of God; Prayers offered unto him, and in his Name,
and Praises sung unto him with all solemnity and devotion imaginable?

3. And for the Duration of this his royal Priesthood, it has continued already
a fair time, about one thousand six hundred years, as may be infallibly
gathered out of History. And as appears from these ancient Prophecies of the
Jews, he is a Person so holy and sacred, and upon whom the eyes of Providence
have been in such a wonderful manner fixed, infinitely above any Person that
ever was yet in the World, that it is impossible that the Testimonies given of
him should ever be obliterated by succession of Time; nothing but an universal
Conflagration being able to make an end of all the copies of the Jewish Oracles
or of the Christian Gospel. And therefore it is a thing beyond all Likelihood,
nay I may say all Possibility, that this Honor and Kingdom of Christ upon
Earth should ever cease till the Earth cease to have Inhabitants. I do not deny
but the insupportable Wickedness of the Christians, their Faithlesness,
Ferocity and Uncleanness, their accursed Hypocrisy and open Profaneness, may
make this Kingdom of Christ very itinerant and to pass from one Nation to
another People; but it will ever be the Religion of some People and Nation or
other: Or if not, there will at least be sincere Professors of his Name in
several Nations and Kingdoms, as in the persecuted estate of the Primitive
Church; which will certainly leaven the World again with the Christian
Religion, with more glory and purity then ever, unless a fiery Vengeance from
heaven step betwixt, and Christ come again visibly so Judgment in the clouds.

4. The thing therefore that I say is this, That though a man should be so
cautious forsooth and so crafty, as that because these latter Ages have been
guilty of so much Falseness and Forgery, he will believe no Records of the
Church at all, no not so much as the Holy Gospels and the Epistles of the
Apostles; yet he may have sufficient assurance from the Prophecies of the Old
Testament (which, unless he will be egregiously foolish and unreasonable, he
cannot have any pretense to suspect as supposititious) That Christianity is no
Fiction, but a real Truth; if he will but compare the Prophecies with the
Events of things as they lie before his eyes, and with the free Confession of
those that are open Enemies to the Christian Religion, I mean the Nation of the
Jews.

5. For the firmer belief whereof, he may also help himself something from
those strinklings that are found in profane Writers. For if thou will be so
prodigiously melancholic and suspicious as to doubt whether there ever were
such a man as Christ, the very History of the Heathens may assure thee thereof;
they mentioning these things so timely, as that there could be no error about
the existence of the Person they speak of whether he ever were in the World or
no. For Pliny, Tacitus, Lucian and Suetonius, all of them flourished so near
the time of the taking of the City of Jerusalem, (viz. Pliny about twenty,
Tacitus thirty, Lucian and Suetonius about forty or fifty years) that they
could not but have certain information whether he was a fictitious Person or
real, from the captive Jews, who would not have failed to stifle a Religion
they hated so, if it had been but a Figment at the bottom. Pliny in his
Epistle to Trajan finds the Christian professors in good earnest, even to
death: Whose dangerous and mischievous error he might easily have confuted, if
the History of Christ had been but a Romance; but he found them immovable, nor
could he help it. Which constancy of theirs he calls pervicaciam and
inflexibilem obstinationem, a Pervicacity and inflexible Obstinacy. Which is
ridiculous to think can befall men in a mere Fiction within the time that
search may easily discover to be false, and that they should stand out to the
exposing of themselves to death and torture. He writes in the same Epistle that
he put two maidservants on the rack, Sed nihil aliud inveni quam
superstitionem pravam and immodicam, But I found nothing else (says he) but a
perverse and immoderate Superstition. And of those that fear made desist from
the profession of their Religion, Affirmabant hanc fuisse summam vel culpae
suae vel erroris, quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem convenire, carmenque
Christo quasi Deo dicere, etc. They affirmed that this was the sum of their
either fault or error, that they were wont on a set day to meet together early
in the morning before daybreak, and sing an hymn to Christ as to a God. Which
is a sign that betimes the Christians followed Christ, not as a mere eminent
Moralist, that gave excellent precepts of life, better then ever any did, but
that they held his Person truly Divine, and adorable for some wonderful
considerations or other.

6. But this Inquisition and bloody Persecution of the Christians began higher
then Trajan's time, to wit in Nero's, who, to smother that abominable act of
his in firing the City of Rome, did most salvagely punish the Christians, as if
they had been the Authors of it. Tacit. Annal. lib. 15. Ergo abolendo rumori
Nero subdidit reos, and quaesitissimis poenis affecit, quos per flagitia
invisos vulgus Christianos appellabat. Auctor nominis ejus Christus, qui
Tiberio imperitante, per Procuratorem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat.
Repressaque in praesens exitiabilis superstitio rursus erumpebat, non modo per
Judaeam originem ejus mali, sed per Urbem etiam, quo cuncta undique atrocia aut
pudenda confluunt celebranturque. Igitur primo correpti qui fatebantur; deinde
indicio eorum multitudo ingens, haud perinde in crimine incendii quam odio
humani generis, convicti sunt. Et pereuntibus addita ludibria, ut ferarum
tergis contecti laniatu canum interirent, aut crucibus affixi, aut flammandi;
atque, ubi defecisset dies, in usum nocturni luminis urerentur. Wherefore Nero
to suppress the rumor of his own vile act, by suborning false witnesses got
those to be accused who being hateful for their wickedness were commonly
called Christians, and punished them with exquisite tortures. The Author of
that Sect was one Christus, who in the reign of Tiberius was put to death by
Pontius Pilate the Deputy. Which damnable superstition, suppressed for a time,
broke out afresh, not only in Judaea the first source of that Mischief, but
also in the City of Rome, whither all villainous and shameful things flow from
all parts, and are held in great esteem. Wherefore they were first laid hold of
that confessed themselves Christians; afterward by their discovery a huge
multitude were condemned, not so much for being guilty of firing the City, as
that they were hated of all mankind. They added also reproaches to their death,
clothing some of them with the skins of beasts, to be worried by dogs; others
were crucified, and others were burnt after daylight, to serve in stead of
lynks or torches. This Persecution was not thirty years after the Passion of
Christ. I appeal now to any one, if he can think it possible that these that
lived so near to that time when Christ was said to be crucified, that they
might make exact inquiry into the matter; I appeal to him, if he can think it
possible they could expose their lives and fortunes to the hatred and cruelty
of the Heathen, if they were not most certain that there was such a man that
was crucified at Jerusalem: and demand further, he dying so ignominious a
death, whether it be again possible that there should not be some extraordinary
thing in the Person of Christ, to make them adhere to him so after his death,
with the common hatred of all men and hazard of their lives.

7. And therefore Lucian, in his Peregrinus, does rightly term Christ (...),
that great man crucified in Palaestine. For at least he spoke the opinion of
Christ's followers, if not his own. And the doctrine of the Christians he calls
(...), the mavelous wisdom of the Christians, whom he affirms to renounce
the Heathen Deities, (...), and to worship their crucified Sophist, or their
crucified Master and Teacher. And in his Philopatris, if it be his (and if it
be not, it is not much material, being it must be of some Writer coetaneous to
him) there are some inklings of very high matters in Christianity, as of the
Trinity, of Life Eternal, of the Galilean's Ascension into the third Heaven,
(...), walking up the Air into the third Heaven, where having learned most
excellent matters he renewed us by water. Which is likely to be some intimation
of the Ascension of Christ into Heaven, or else of Paul's being rapt up into
the third Heaven, though the Narration thereof be depraved. And Critias in that
Dialogue swears (...), By the son that is from the Father. And he and Triephon
jearing Divine Providence betwixt them, as being set out by the Religious, as
if things were written in Heaven, Critias asks Triephon if all things, even
the affairs of the Scythians, were written there also. To which Triephon
answers, (...), all things, if so be CHRESTUS be also amongst the Nations.
All which passages intimate what a venerable Opinion there was spread in the
World concerning Christ, and that therefore there was some extraordinary worth
and excellency in his Person. Which Conclusion I shall make use of in its due
place.

8. In the mean time I shall only add that mention made of him in Suetonius,
in Vita Claudii, cap. 25. where he is called Chrestus, as before in Lucian's
Philopatris he was called (...). Iudaeos, impulsore Chresto, assidue
tumultuantes Roma expulit, He expelled the Jews out of Rome, they making
perpetual tumults by the instigation of Chrestus. Which is the highest Record
of our Religion that is to be found in profane Writers; and no marvel, it
reaching so near the Passion of Christ from whence our Religion commenced. For
the reign of Claudius began about seven years after Christ's Passion, and ended
within thirteen years. And that Christ suffered under Pontius Pilate, Tacitus
himself gives witness in what we have above recited. But a more accurate
Chronology of these things cannot be expected but from them who are more
nearly concerned, viz. the Christians themselves.

9. Josephus his Testimony had reached higher in time, if we could be assured
that what he seemed to write of Christ was not foisted in, by some thankless
fraud of unconscionable Superstitionists, or short-sighted Politicians, that
could not see that the solidity of Christian Religion wanted not their lies and
forgeries to sustain it. But, for my own part, I think it very unlikely that
Josephus, being no Christian, should write at that rate concerning Christ as he
does, besides other reasons which might be alleged. And therefore for the
greater compendium, I shall be content to acknowledge that what is found in his
Antiquities concerning the crucified Jesus is supposititious, Antiquitat.
Judaic. l. 10. c. 4.
and none of his own. Which Omission I impute partly to his Prudence and partly
to his Integrity. For certainly he knowing the affairs of Jesus so well as he
did, could not in his own judgment and conscience say any thing ill of him,
more then that he was crucified; which was no fault in him, but in his unjust
and cruel Murderers: and simply to have nominated him in his History, without
saying any thing of him, had been a frigid, lame business; and to have spoke
well of him, had been ungrateful both to his own Countrymen the Jews and also
to the Pagans. Wherefore it being against his Conscience to vilify him and
revile him and his followers, so as the Heathen Historians have done; and
against his Prudence, being not convinced that he was the very Messiah, to
declare how excellent a person he was; it remains that in all likelihood he
would play the Politician so far as not to speak of him at all.

10. We shall produce but one Testimony more out of Pagan Historians, and that
is out of Ammianus Marcellinus, concerning Iulian's purpose to re-edifie the
Temple of Jerusalem, that the Jews might sacrifice there according to their
ancient manner. Which was looked upon to be done more out of envy to the
Christians, then in love to the Jews; and in an affront to that universal and
inestimable Sacrifice of the body of Christ once offered upon the Cross, which
was to cease the Jewish Sacrifices, and to put an end to the exercise of the
Mosaical ceremonies. Ruffinus and Sozomen declare the matter more at large; but
we shall contain our selves within the recital of what Ammianus has written,
(lib. 23. near the beginning) who being an Heathen, puts as fair a gloss upon
the Emperor's Action as he could; but the Event is plainly enough set down,
and such as does much confirm the Truth of Christian Religion. Julianus imperii
sui memoriam magnitudine operum gestiens propagare, ambitiosum quondam apud
Jerosolymam templum ( quod post multae and internecina certamina obsidente
Vespasiano, postea and Tito, agree est expugnatum,) instaurare sumptibus
cogitabat immodicis; negotiumque maturandum Alipio dederat Antiochiensi, qui
olim Britannias curaverat pro Praefectis. Cum itaque rei idem fortiter instaret
Alipius, juvaretque Provinciae Rector; metuendi globi flammarum prope
fundamenta crebris assultibus erumpentes fecere locum, exustis aliquoties
operantibus, inaccessum; hocque modo elemento destinatius repellente, cessavit
inceptum. Julian having a mind to propagate the memory of his Reign by the
greatness of his Acts, purposed to rebuild with immense charges that
once-stately Temple at Jerusalem ( which with much ado after many a bloody
battle was taken, after siege laid to it by Vespasian first, and then by
Titus.) This business was committed to the care of one Alipius of Antioch, who
had once been Deputy of Britain for the Governors. Wherefore when this same
Alipius did stoutly urge on the work, and the Governor of the Province gave him
his assistance; dreadful balls of fire breaking out near the foundation with
frequent sallies, burning up sundry times the workmen, made the place
inaccessible. And thus the Enterprise ceased, the Element directed by a
peremptory destiny beating them off from their work.

CHAP. X. 1. Further Proofs that both Jews and Pagans acknowledge the Reality
of the Person of Christ and his doing of Miracles. 2. The force of these
allegations added to the Prophecy of the Time of Christ's coming and the
Characters of his Person. 3. That the Characters of his Person are still more
exact, but not to be insisted upon till the proof of the Truth of the History
of the Gospel. 4, 5. That the transcendent Eminency of Christ's Person is
demonstrable from what has already been alleged and from his Resurrection,
without recourse to the Gospels. From whence it necessarily follows That his
Life was writ. 6. That the Life of Christ was writ timely, while Eyewitnesses
were alive, proved by a very forcible Demonstration. 7. That Eternal Happiness
through Christ was the hope of the First Christians, proved out of Lucian and
S. Paul; and of a peculiar Self-Evidence of Truth in his Epistles. 8. That the
first and most early meaning of Christianity is comprised in those Writings. 9.
That Eternal Salvation depending upon the Knowledge of Christ, it was
impossible but that the Apostles should take care betimes that the Miracles of
Christ should be recorded. 10. That the Apostles could not fail to have the
Life of Christ written, to prevent the erroneous attempts of the Pragmatical,
to satisfy the Importunity of Believers, or in obedience to divine
Instigation. 11. That it is as incredible that the Apostles neglected the
writing of the Life of Christ, as that a wise man in the affairs of the World
should neglect the writing of his Will when he had opportunity of doing it. 12.
That, it being so incredible but that the Life of Christ should be writ, and
there being found writings that comprize the same, it naturally follows, That
they are they.
1. THese Testimonies out of Heathen Writers may suffice to take off that fond
and groundless suspicion of the whole History of Christ being a mere Allegory
or Fiction. A thing that the greatest Enemies thereof had never the face to
object to the Christians, neither Jews nor Pagans, nor our modern Atheists,
especially the more nasute sort of them, such as Pomponatius and Vaninus, who
do not only acknowledge Christ's Person, but his Miracles; only forsooth they
refer them to the influence of the Stars and celestial Intelligences, of
which I shall speak in its proper place. The Jews also acknowledge his
Miracles, but add that he was a Magician: And Julian himself and Celsus, who
wrote against the Christians, never had the face to deny but that Jesus of
Nazareth did once live in Iudaea, and did strange things; though the one
revolted from him, and the other never believed in him. And Hierocles, that
highly-moral Pagan, does not deny the Miracles of Christ, nor the excellency
of his Person, but contends that Apollonius Tyaneus may at least come into
competition with him. And to say nothing of Tiberius his purpose of having him
entered into the catalogue of the Roman Deities by a decree of the Senate,
because the report thereof is from parties, viz. from Eusebius out of
Tertullian; we may more appositely adjoin that Adrianus Severus and
Heliogabalus, though in vain, attempted afterward the same thing. And
particularly of Severus, Lampridius an heathen Historian writes, that this
Emperor intending to erect a Temple to Christ, and to worship him amongst the
rest of the Gods, was hindered by the Priests, qui consulentes sacra, repererant
omnes Christianos futuros, si id optato evenisset, and templa reliqua
deserenda: who by some way of divination or other had found out, that if the
Emperor's mind was fulfilled all would turn Christians, and the other Temples
would be left desolate. So that there was a very high and venerable opinion of
Christ, even with those that were not Christians.

2. Which evidences out of profane Writers surely even alone, can have no
small force to beget the belief of that which I now contend for, viz. That
Christ did once live here on Earth, and that he was a Person very famous and
remarkable for some things in him, done by him or happening to him. To which
Testimonies if you add those clear Prophecies that foretold that the Jews
Messiah was to come about that time that Christ is said to have lived (in which
both the Heathen and Christian stories do agree) and those Characters that we
know for a See c. 9. sect. 2.
certain do belong to him, such as I have already largely enough insisted upon;
it is impossible, unless Skepticism be heightened unto a disease as perfect as
either Madness or downright Mopedness, but that any one should believe more of
Christ then I contend for at this present.

3. And yet the Characters of his Person set out in the Prophecies are still
more exact then what I have produced hitherto, to prove that he was indeed the
expected Messiah. As that he should be of the Family of David, of the Tribe of
Judah* born of a Virgin, and in Bethlehem; that he should open the eyes of the
blind, and make the lame walk, and other such like miracles; that he should be
put to such a death as that his hands and feet should be pierced, that they
should cast lots for his garment, and give him vinegar to drink, etc.

But these particularities having no force till we have proved that the History
of the Gospel is true, we must defer making any use of them till we have
cleared that point. In the pursuit whereof we must endeavor to prove these
three things. 1. That the Life and Death of Christ was writ in a serious manner
by some or other; not Romantically but Historically, as Plutarch, Tacitus and
Suetonius are conceived to have writ the Lives of Illustrious Persons and
Emperors. 2. That it was maturely writ, while there were living Eyewitnesses
of the things related. 3. And that those Gospels we receive now-adays, are the
true Copies of those that were so maturely written.

4. The first part seems to me fully demonstrable from what we have proved
already, without any recourse to the History of the Gospel, viz. That there was
a very transcendent Eminency in the Person of Christ, as to whom both the Time
and main Characters of the expected Messiah did so exactly agree: Whence he
could not but attract the eyes of the World after him, and gain very zealous
and faithful Followers, that would at least by word of mouth divulge the
things they saw and observed so strange and Miraculous in him. Whence he could
not escape having his Life and Death written by some Pen or other, especially
it being so certain he See further chapter 13. sec. 4, 5. and chapter 8. sect. 2.
rose from the dead, as it is.

5. For the Jews having crucified him, nothing could be more odious to them
then that report of his Followers, That God miraculously raised him from the
dead; whereby Christ was acquitted by a special hand of Providence of all their
wicked aspersions and false accusations, and themselves condemned of the
highest crime they could imagine themselves capable of, even the murdering of
their Messiah. Wherefore the attestation of that which would make them so
odious and execrable even in their own eyes, if it were true, must needs make
the Attestors thereof very hateful to them and unsupportable; and therefore
raise against them all the mischief they possibly could. Whence it is
impossible that the Disciples of Christ should maintain so heinous a falsehood,
no not if they had made no conscience of lying; and yet still more impossible,
if we consider their Simplicity and Innocence, a property in them of which I
think it never came into the mind of any one to doubt. I conclude therefore,
That a Person so plainly prefigured by ancient and sacred Prophecies, so
refulgent in miraculous Virtues and unheard of Providence, one who for the
Wonders he did, by the unbelieving Jews was accounted a Magician, by the
Heathen Philosophers and Atheists acknowledged a Worker of Miracles, and by his
own Followers proclaimed the expected Messiah, and the onely-begotten Son of
God, whom he had miraculously raised from the dead after the Jews had crucified
him; I say, That a Person thus wonderfully qualified above any that ever yet
came into the World, should fail of having his Life historically recorded, is a
thing far more incredible then the greatest Miracle that ever was yet upon
Record.

6. And now in the second place, That this History or Record of his Life and
Death was timely enough written, viz. while the Eyewitnesses of those things
which he did or happened to him were yet living, is also very clear, if we
consider the great importance of completing such an History in due time. For
certainly it could not but seem a matter of very weighty moment, Christ being
believed by his Disciples to be so holy and divine a Person as he was, and that
their faithful adherence to him was their only assurance of Everlasting Life.
Which great Truth of a blessed Immortality they were evidently taught by that
success their Messiah had upon earth, which was as ill as could be, he being so
spightfully abused and crucified in so ignominious a manner; whenas yet they
might with the rest of the Jews have expected that he should have broke the
Roman yoke, and been a glorious and victorious Prince to their great advantage
in this World. But they saw that Providence waved this, and by an high hand
exalted him into another Kingdom, raising him from the dead and taking him
visibly into Heaven. Which was so palpable a Demonstration of the Soul's
Immortality, and of a peculiar advantage to the followers of this great
Favorite of the Almighty, when they were to enter into that other state; that
the power of Conscience and the Sense of their own good in the other Life would
make them very careful and officious to preserve the memory of their Divine
Teacher, who both showed them the way to and the certainty of Immortal
Happiness. Which piece of Gratitude they were still more strictly bound to
perform, it being so obvious for them to look upon Christ as a public gift of
God to the World, not to be restrained to that Age then present, but to be
transmitted to all Posterity; nor confined within that little handful of
Followers he left behind him, but to be made known to all Israel: nor could
they long be ignorant but that the Gentiles also should have share in him,
especially upon his Rejection by the Jews, and so he was to become the Light
and Salvation of all Nations from Age to Age according to the Prophets.

7. That this was the early sense of the Church concerning the knowledge of
Christ for eternal Salvation, the nature of the thing it self, as I have
already intimated, does plainly demonstrate. For what meaning could they
possibly make of God's raising him from the dead, and visibly assuming him into
Heaven, but that he should be a palpable Pledge of that future Happiness which
was to accrue to them that would be his faithful Adherents and Followers? This
questionless was the belief of the Apostles and all succeeding Christians, as
the Sea Lucian his Philopatr.
Heathens themselves witness of them, though in a jearing manner. (...) (...),
But being catechized and instructed, be persuaded by me, if you desire to live
for ever. This Theme is much insisted upon by the Apostle Paul every where in
his Epistles. Which though I may seem too hasty in naming so soon, while I am
but driving on a method to demonstrate That there are very timely Records of
Christianity within the Ages of Eyewitnesses of the things that are recorded;
yet I think I have not done preposterously, if we consider that there is a
peculiar kind of Self-evidence in that Apostle's writings that they are not
supposititious or fictitious: It being, in my judgment, out of the power of
man to imitate that unaffected fervor, those natural and yet unexpected
Schemes of high and serious zeal, those parenthetical exundances of weighty
sense and matter, swelling out, I had almost said, beyond the bounds of Logical
coherence, that vigorous passion and elevation of spirit, and yet all so
unsuspectable of any humane artifice, that we cannot but be assured that he
that wrote these Epistles was thoroughly possessed and transported with the
belief of the things he wrote. I am sure I cannot but be assured, and find my
self in an utter incapacity of doubting thereof, who yet am naturally as
melancholy and suspiciou^ as other Mortals, as I could prove by early specimens
of this kind, if modesty would permit me to parallel the follies and errors of
my childhood with the mature conclusions of such as have affected the repute of
being the great Wits of the World.

8. Wherefore being so fully persuaded in my self, and never meeting with any
one that could have the face to deny but the Epistles of S. Paul were the
Writings of one that was in very good earnest, my appeal to them in this place
for the sense and meaning of the first and Apostolic faith I could not hold
unseasonable. But it is evident in these Epistles that the Writer of them lived
within the Age of the Eyewitnesses of the wonderful things that were either
done by, or happened to Christ. Whence it plainly appears also, That that sense
of the Gospel which Paul declares in these Epistles was the first and most
early meaning that the Apostles conceived concerning the Mystery of
Christianity, viz. That Christ's Passion was an expiation for sin, and that we
are purified by Faith in him, and that our Eternal Salvation depends on the
knowledge of him.

9. Now I appeal to the most Skeptical man living, if a matter of so vast
moment as this, that concerns the common Salvation of Mankind in that future
and Eternal state, can be sluggishly and carelessly prosecuted by those that
knew both the truth and importance of that affair, and had a more then ordinary
engagement to look after it, and whose consciences could not but threaten them
with the loss of Everlasting life, if they did not use all honest endeavors to
set on foot the most effectual way they could the certain knowledge of so
concerning a Mystery. And whether it be possible to conceive the First
Christians so sottish and devoid of sense, as not to see how necessary it was
to record the circumstances of the Birth, Life, and Death of our Savior, and
all the Miracles that he did, while the mouths of unbelievers and gainsaiers
might be stopped by recourse to Eyewitnesses of the things that were to be
related of him.

10. And if we could imagine any such supine carelessness or backwardness in the
Apostles themselves, who were the fittest to write these Records, or at least
those that were thoroughly informed by them; yet the Forwardness and
Pragmaticalness of others, who could not hold their hands from writing of such
strange matters as happened in Iudaea, though not sufficiently instructed in the
truth of them, would even force them to write down the truth of the History of
Christ so timely, for the prevention of error, and to set their own name to
the Record. To say nothing of the Importunity of the newly-converted
Christians, who could not but be extremely desirous very punctually to know all
things concerning that Divine Person whose name they now religiously professed,
and whom they acknowledged to be the onely-begotten Son of God. Wherefore the
Apostles themselves, or else some thoroughly instructed by them, could not choose
but draw up a Narration of the Birth, Life, and Death of Christ, and the many
considerables therein, for the Comfort and satisfaction of their Proselytes,
and that there might be a true Relation of these things to Posterity for ever.
To all which you may add, That if it were possible that all these should fail,
(which I think is incredible,) yet Providence would not fail, and supernatural
Inspiration, to drive them on to the seasonable Accomplishment of so important
a Work.

11. In my Judgment these are an undeniable Demonstration, that the History of
Christ has been so timely recorded as we contend for, by either the Apostles or
those that were intimately acquainted with them. And that it is infinitely more
improbable that this has not been done, then that one of a great estate and
many children, and wise in the affairs of the World, should, when it was in his
power to write, neglect the writing of his Will. A thing that none would
believe, unless this Will of his after his decease could not be found; nor then
happily neither, but rather suspect some body has burnt it. But if it be found,
and appear such as becomes a man of his wisdom and discretion to have made, it
will not be in the power of any man to doubt of it that is not interessed in
the matter: and if any do, he will be looked upon as a very fool or fraudulent
fellow, that sought some advantage by questioning the Will.

12. The case is very highly the same here, in these Records of Christianity we
speak of. For according to plain deduction of Reason we see it impossible but
that they should be writ so timely, and the outward Event answers punctually to
these Demonstrations of our own mind. For there are two Records of the Life and
Death of Christ written by two of his Apostles, viz. Matthew and John, a third
by Mark who was much conversant with the Apostle Peter, and a fourth by Luke
who was a great companion of S. Paul, whose Acts together with others of the
Apostles he also recorded, and ends the narration before Paul's departure from
Rome into Spain. Whence we may conclude that Luke wrote his Gospel while Paul
was yet alive, of whose transactions himself was an Eyewitness, as Matthew and
John of all the things they wrote, or at least most of them; and the rest they
had from other Apostles, who were by when they were not, or from the mouth of
our Savior himself. This Conclusion is so plain, that it is as ridiculous to
deny it, as for one to deny the abovementioned Will, which none can do without
being hooted at for a Fool. For when we see external Events such as plain and
undeniable Reason cannot but compute even necessary to come to pass, it must be
either Folly or Fraud that makes any doubt or deny they are really come to
pass, when they are exhibited thus manifestly to their outward senses.

CHAP. XI. 1. Other Proofs, That the Life of Christ was writ by his Apostles or
his Followers, out of Grotius. 2. An Answer to a foolish surmise that those
Records writ by the Apostles might be all burnt. 3. That the Copies have not
been corrupted by either carelessness or fraud.
1. THis it self was a sufficient Demonstration to prove that the History of
the Life of Christ was writ so timely as I affirm, and namely by some of his
own Apostles, and those that were coetaneous to them, particularly by Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, according as the Title of each Gospel does import. But we
will not neglect to mention what Grotius also makes use of in this place, viz.
That these Gospels are cited under these names by Justin, Irenaeus and Clemens,
the first Fathers of the Church: That Tertullian affirms that in his time the
original of some of them were extant, though betwixt an hundred and two hundred
years after they were written: That all the Churches acknowledged them as
Authentic, before there was any calling of Councils about that matter: That
neither Jew nor Pagan ever made any controversy thereof: That Julian, though
an enemy to Christianity, did expressly confess that these Writings that are
under the name of Peter, Paul, Matthew, Mark, Luke, were indeed their writings:
and lastly, That it is as fond a thing to doubt thereof, as to question whether
those Poems that go under Homer and Virgil's names be in very deed their Poems
or no. Which arguments certainly cannot but have their due weight with them
that are not over-pervicacious: but, as I think, I had sufficiently evinced the
Conclusion before.

2. Against which I do not see what the most perverse Wit can invent or object,
unless he will say That the first Records the Evangelists wrote, and the
faithful Copies taken from them, were burnt, and that these that we have
now-adays are an After-Forgery of the Church. Which is as bold and foolish an
allegation, as if a Son, who did not like his share appointed him in his
Father's Will, though the Will appear as authentic as any can do, should
pretend that they had burnt the true Will, and forged this to his damage:
whenas yet he cannot prove the least tittle of this Imputation. Nay I may say
it is far more foolish then this. For this may be feasible, to burn a single
Writing, and then make a new one in the stead. But it is altogether impossible
for the Enemies of the Church ever to have suppressed or made away with those
First true Copies of the Gospel; which doubtless were in the custody of many
thousand persons in several parts of the world. For the Writings being so very
little in bulk, and of so great concernment, what Christian would not have a
copy of them that was but able to read? Besides that there is not the least
hint in History of any such thing. Nor indeed can any Historian witness of
matters of this kind. For who could assure him, if there had been any attempt
of burning them, that they were all burnt? and if any were but left, they would
multiply again in a moment: and that but few would be delivered up, we may be
very well assured, when they bore such love to that Truth they contained, that
they preferred it before their own lives.

3. It is therefore undoubtedly true, that the Copies that we have this day of
the Evangelists are Transcripts from their first Originals, without any
Interruption. The only scruple that remains now is concerning our third and
last Conclusion, whether they may not be altered and depraved in some measure
in so long succession of time, either by chance, or the pious frauds of the
Church. To which I answer in the first place, That it is incredible but that
the Gospels should escape as well as the Writings of Plato, Aristotle, or
Tully, if we look at only such alterations as may proceed from the heedlesnesse
of the Transcribers; and yet no man doubts but that their Writings do now
fully communicate their minds to the World concerning those things they do
declare, as fully and perfectly as they themselves writ them. And as for any
pious frauds of the Church, I answer, That the Church was more simple and
honest in the Apostolical times and some Ages after, within which compass so
many Copies of the Gospel were extant, and so dispersed throughout the World,
that they could not adulterate those Writings if they would. For as I have said
already, those Writings being of so little a bulk, and consequently the
Transcription of them so easy, the Copies would be multiplied almost equally
to the number of Christians, I mean of those that could read; and being so
holy a Writ, the Transcription be made with all possible care and
circumspection. For certainly Christians were very serious in their Religion in
those days. Besides it is very reasonable to believe, that a special
Providence would keep off both chance and fraud from wronging so Sacred
Writings in any thing material; and if not material, what are they the worse?
Not to mention how Awe and Reverence to such holy Writings would naturally hold
them off from mingling any thing by way of fraud or intermedling with them: and
the Effect makes good this presage. For in perusing of them we plainly discover
that Harmony and agreement of one thing with another, that we may be well
assured that there is nothing spurious or adulterate foisted into the Text. The
multitude of various Lections also further confirms our Conclusion; which is an
argument of the multitudes of Copies I spoke of: and the collection of these
various readings a Testimony even of the faithfulness of these later Ages often
he Church, and of the high reverence they had to these Records, in that they
would not so much as embesell the various Readings of them, but keep them still
on foot for the prudent to judge of. And lastly, upon perusal of those various
Readings, the clear discovery that nothing at all is lost of the Truth of
Christian Religion by any of them (and consequently no detriment or prejudice
done to any but such as are more for factions and opinions then the real power
of Godliness) this also ratifies the Truth we drive at, namely, That those
Copies of the Gospel which we daily peruse are incorrupted, and that therefore
those things contained in them are certainly true, as being writ by the pens of
those who had sufficient knowledge of what they declare, being either
Eyewitnesses of the same, or conferring with them that were, and both of that
unsuspected Integrity, that the like is not to be found in any Witnesses else
in the World.

CHAP. XII. 1. More particular Characters of the Person of the Messiah in the
Prophecyes. 2. His being born at Bethlehem; 3. And that of a Virgin. 4. His
curing the lame and the blind. 5. The piercing of his hands and feet.
1. THus have we undeniably demonstrated the Truth of the Gospel and the things
therein contained, and consequently the Certainty and Reality of the Christian
Religion: which being done, we can now more seasonably add some few Characters
more of the Person of the Messiah so particular and express, that it may
justly ravish us with the admiration of so punctual a Providence as is
discoverable therefrom in Predictions and Prophecies. I will not instance in
many, because we have already finished our design; and those that love to
abound more in matters of this nature, may consult others that have handled
them more fully and copiously. We shall only resume what we above mentioned, of
his being born at Bethlehem, of the Family of David, and that of a Virgin; his
making the blind to see and the lame to walk; the piercing of his hands and
feet; and their casting lots for his vesture. That these things were true of
him, the Gospel plainly testifies: and that they were prophesied of him, is as
plain out of the Prophecies of the Old Testament, which we shall here recite.

2. And first that of Micah, Micah 5.2.
But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be Ruler in
Israel, whose goings forth are from old, from the days of Eternity. This is a
very particular description of the Person of the Messiah from the place of his
birth. And it was the confessed gloss of the chief Priests and Scribes upon
this Text, as appears Matt. 2.4, 5. To which Episcopius adds the suffrage of
the Chaldee Paraphrast and R. Solomon Iarchi. But that which makes this
prediction and the divine Providence more admirable are the Circumstances of
its completion. For Bethlehem was not the Town of abode of either Joseph or
Mary, nor went they thither at that time of their own accord, nor upon an
ordinary occasion: but Augustus, (surely not without some special incitation
from above,) made a Decree that all the World, that is, all under the Roman
Empire, should have their names enrolled in public Records. Wherefore all went
to be enrolled, every one into his own City. Whence it was that Joseph also
went up from Galilee out of the City of Nazareth into Iudaea, unto the City of
David which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lineage of
David, to be enrolled with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child.
Whence, as Grotius would infer, it is evident that Mary was of the house of
David as well as Joseph, else she would have resorted to the City of her own
stock or kindred, and not to Bethlehem. But the admirable hand of Providence
that all take notice of in this matter is this, That from this act it was so
manifest to all the World that Christ was of the lineage of David, and was,
according to the Prophecy, born at Bethlehem. A thing which if it had not been
true, the Jews could have easily confuted. But the Christians were able to make
good what they asserted, by appealing to these Records kept in the Roman
Archiva, and were to be seen, as Justin, Tertullian and Chrysostom do affirm,
in their Ages. Which blows away all the foolish and fabulous Parachronisms of
the Jews concerning the time of Jesus at one blast.

3. The next Character of his Person is that he was to be born of a Virgin.
Which the Evangelists affirm he was, and two Prophecies predict he should be.
The first Genesis 3. from God's own mouth, That the seed of the woman should
break the serpents head. Which seed certainly was Christ, who could not be
properly called the seed of the woman more then the seed of the man, but that
it was a prefiguration that Christ should be born of a Virgin without the help
of a man.

The other Prophecy is that of Isaiah chapter 7. v. 14. Therefore the Lord himself
shall give you a sign: Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and
shall call his name Immanuel.

This Prophecy I confess is applicable, and that with much ease and
perspicuity, to some certain Maid or Virgin, suppose one that the Prophet Esaias
was to take to wife, at the time he spoke this Prophecy to King Ahaz. The
first sense whereof is only this, That within such a compass of time that this
Maid should be married, bring forth, and educate her infant, that is to say,
within the time of his infancy, the Syrian and Israelitical forces should
unsuccessfully leave Iudaea, and in the interim there should be no such
scarcity as was feared by Ahaz, which is intimated in that Phrase, butter and
honey shall he eat, etc. The name also of the Child was therefore called
Immanuel, God with us, because he was used as a sign of God's special
assistance and Providence over Ahaz and his Kingdom.

Moreover I cannot affirm that any of the ancient or modern Jews ever
interpreted this Prophecy of the Messiah. Of which notwithstanding there can
be no worse consequence then this, That the first meaning thereof being so
easy and obvious, and made good by event, and none of the Jews ever venturing
to apply it to the Messiah, that nothing but the certain knowledge of the
Evangelist that Christ was indeed thus born, could move him to make this
application of it to the manner of his birth. But that being certainly known,
as also that Principle of the Jewish (...) of giving an higher and fuller sense
to the Historical or Prophetical passages in the Old Testament (all things
happening to them in types) it were impossible but that this Interpretation
should be made of this Prophecy; it belonging more perfectly and properly to
Christ then to Isaiah's son: whose mother was only a Virgin before she was his
mother, but Mary the mother of Christ was a Virgin both before and after; and
the Prophets son merely a nominal Immanuel, but Christ was truly God with us,
in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily: And lastly, the Prophet
bidding Ahaz ask a sign of God, either in the depth or in the height above, it
is plain that by a sign is meant some wonderful prodigious sign out of the
course of Nature. And therefore when the Prophet says, God himself will give a
sign, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, etc. it is manifest that
this sign is to be prodigious or preternatural; which was never fully nor
properly accomplished before the true Emmanuel was born of his ever-blessed
mother the Virgin Mary. For the deliverance of Iudaea from the two Kings within
the space of the Child's infancy was not a Sign, but the thing signified, and a
Type of the great deliverance to be wrought by Christ. What the Jews cavil
concerning the word (...), is very weak and frivolous. They that know any thing
in the Hebrew tongue, are well assured that (...) signifies properly a Virgin,
such as never knew a man. Which appears both from the derivation and the
constant use of its signification. To which you may add, That it is thus
translated in this very place by Onkelos, Jonathan and the Seventy. Insomuch
that this Prophecy seems to me more certainly to be applicable to Christ in
the most proper sense thereof then any Prophecy else (which has any other
reference then to him alone) that was ever applied to the Messiah by the Jews
themselves.

4. That of the lame, the deaf and blind, is in Isaiah chapter 35. v. 5. Then shall
the eyes of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.
Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb sing. Which
words though they may have a Metaphorical completion in the days of Hezekiah,
yet there is no question but the proper and real fulfilling of them was
intended for the Messiah, as is very suitable to what goes immediately before,
verse. 4. Behold your God will come, he will come and save you. And certainly
God could never be said to come so properly at any time, as in the person of
our blessed Savior, who is rightly styled God blessed for ever.

5. My last instance shall be Psalm 22. which the ancient Rabbis do freely and
apertly confess to be a Prophecy concerning the Messiah. In which some
particular passages, however express and precise, did never happen to any other
that they can entitle to the Psalm, but did punctually and literally happen to
him. As that verse. 18. They parted my garments among them, and cast lots upon
my vesture: which is verified exactly Matthew. 27. v. 35. And then again verf.
16. The assembly of the wicked have enclosed me, they pierced my hands and my
feet. I know not whether I should add also verse. 14. I am poured out like
water; and parallel it with John 19. v. 34. But the particular prediction of
that former circumstance seems admirable, that the manner of his death should
be so punctually set down by the Prophet. For this was very really and
literally fulfilled in his Crucifixion; wherein the hands and feet of
Malefactors were pierced with nails whereby they were fastened to the Cross. Nor
ought the various readings of (...) and (...) weaken the perfectness of this
prediction. For when they have made the best they can of it, yet are they,
whether they will or no, forced to acknowledge that there is some special
execution or mangling done on the hands and feet, by the sense of the Text. But
that it is just so as we ordinarily interpret it, the suffrage of the most
learned of the Jews themselves, See Grotius on Psalm. 22. v. 18.
as Jacob Ben Chaiim, Moses Hadarsan, and the Seventy do sufficiently confirm.
To which also the Exposition of the Chaldee Paraphrast, Aquila, and the Masora
contribute something. To which we may add, that (...) without another word is
not sense, and that there might by some neglect first be a change of (...) into
(...), which sound both alike, and then of (...) into (...), which are writ
almost like, (...) and (...) having no difference but of bigness, and that not
much, and therefore are very often confounded. This is more likely then the
leaving out a whole word, which they that read (...) do. That allegation also
of Grotius against this reading does not want its weight, namely, that the
similitude of the Lion is used but three verses before, and therefore not
likely to be used again so soon, especially it being mentioned also some four
verses after. Lastly, the Event ought to make an end of this Critical
controversy with those that are not prejudiced. And though it will not stop
the mouths of the contumacious, yet it will cheer the hearts of those that are
pious and rational with the pleasure of the contemplation of so punctual a
Providence over the affairs of men.

CHAP. XIII. 1. That if the Gospel of Christ had been false and fabulous, it
would not have had that success at Jerusalem by the preaching of the Apostles.
2. The severity also of the Precepts and other hardships to be undergone would
have kept them off from being Christians. 3. As also the incredibleness of the
Resurrection of Christ, and of our being rewarded at the Conflagration of the
World. 4, 5. The meanness also and contemptibleness of the first Authors would
have turned men off, nor would they have been listened to by any one, if the
Resurrection of Christ had not been fully ascertained by them. 6. Which the
Apostles might be sure of, being only matter of Fact; nor is it imaginable they
would declare it without being certain of it, by reason of the great hazards
they underwent thereby.
1. I Might note other remarkable Particulars out of this Psalm and other
places that do contribute to the more punctual characterizing the Person of
Christ; but I have already exceeded the limits of my own design, which was to
engage in these things only so far as might suffice to demonstrate the Reality
of the Mystery we treat of. Which when we have confirmed by one Argument more,
and answered an Objection or two, we shall then put an end to this Third part
of our Discourse.

The last Argument therefore is briefly this, A Religion so unassisted by men,
nay, so opposite to them, both their natural Belief and Interest, could never
have spread it self so in the World, if it had been false and fabulous, and not
really true at the bottom. How mightily it spread it self, appears out of the
History of the Gospel and the Acts of the Apostles, as also out of the Epistles
of S. Paul, even then when the greatest opposers of it, the Jews, were upon the
spot, to whom it was necessary for them first to preach it, and who had
opportunity to enquire diligently touching the matter of Fact, of every thing
that was alleged by the Apostles after the Passion of Christ, as done by him
or happening to him, or done by themselves, after they had received the Gift of
the Holy Ghost according to promise, and wrought such Miracles as he did. There
were many thousands of the Jews converted, whom it is impossible to imagine, at
least all of them, (and the more inquisitive and nasute might have undeceived
the rest) to have been so supine and careless, as not to enquire diligently
into things in a matter of so great importance as their Eternal Salvation, and
of so present damage and loss to them that they forfeited the favor of all
their countriemen, and unavoidably charged them and their Rulers with the most
impious Crime that ever Mortals could commit.

2. But the Success rested not here, but reached out of Iudaea into all parts
of the Roman Empire, there being gained innumerable companies of Believers
every where, till at last Nations and Kingdoms and Sceptres, and, in a word,
the whole Roman Empire became Christian. This is the Truth of the story, which
no man can deny; and that this story could not be true, unless the Christian
Religion be true also, I mean those miraculous things which are recorded of
Christ and his Apostles, is further demonstrable, as well from the harshness as
the incredibility of the Doctrine of this Religion, as also the weakness and
contemptibleness of the first Founders and Disseminators of it. For whether we
consider the Precepts of Christianity, they are very strict and severe, very
unkind and unwelcome to flesh and blood, such as the Animal life cannot at all
relish nor entertain, unless some extraordinary thing be adjoined, that forces
admittance. Self-denial, Mortification, the putting a man in a way of necessary
or very probable persecutions and afflictions from without, besides the
renouncing of those pleasures that no external power hinders him of, can be no
acceptable news to the natural man. Besides the Scoffs and Reproaches of the
world that would undoubtedly follow their change of Religion. Which change
could not but seem still more grievous and intolerable, in that it was to be
whole and entire from the present Superstition they were educated in, which
they were utterly to renounce. Whence their hazard and infamy could not but be
greater.

3. In the undergoing of which hardships they had nothing to sustain themselves
but the belief of such things which a man would think might startle them most
of all, that is, their Reward after this life, no other ways ascertained to
them, but by the rising of one from the dead after he had been three days
buried; which was exhibited to them as a pledge of that blessed Resurrection
which those that embraced the Christian doctrine should enjoy at the burning of
the World, and turning the Earth into ashes and cinders. A thing so incredible
to humane wit, that no man unless he was really convinced by some infallible
way that it was so indeed, could ever admit of, or abstain from denying with an
addition of scoffs and derision, as it fell out with the Epicureans and
Stoics, Acts 17.18. Wherefore without all controversy the first embracers of
Christianity entertained it upon no other terms but manifest proof of
Eyewitnesses, and the Evidence of such persons as they saw very faithful and
serious, and as had the effect of this great power of God, that raised Jesus
Christ from the dead, manifestly residing upon themselves, whereby they were
able to do Miracles; as is also recorded in the Acts of the Apostles.

4. Now for the First Authors and Founders of this Religion, how weak and
contemptible they were as to worldly concernments, appears plainly from hence,
that they were not recommended to the World either for their nobility of Birth,
or skill in humane Arts and Sciences, nor had they any secular power to assist
them, nor any force of arms to either overcome others, or defend themselves,
for all they were exposed to so great and imminent dangers perpetually. Our
Savior himself was but of mean Parentage, a Carpenters Son, crucified betwixt
two thieves as a heinous Malefactor. What therefore can there be imaginable
that should move his Apostles and Disciples to adhere to him so faithfully
after his death, and to expose themselves to all manner of jeopardies, all
manner of sufferings, whippings, imprisonments, long journies, tortures, and
death it self? What should cause them to disturb their own peace so, and the
peace of all men, if there were not some very miraculous thing at the bottom,
and such as was worthy to alarm all the World? What message could they have
brought to those several Nations they travailed to, that themselves would not
be ashamed of carrying, if it had been only so, That the Jews had crucified one
Jesus, the Son of Joseph a Carpenter, betwixt two thieves at Jerusalem, who yet
was a very good and Just man? It may be so, would the Gentiles say; More shame
for them; what is that to us? But this man was the promised Messiah, and did
very strange Miracles, cast out devils, healed all manner of diseases, and was
declared the Son of God by an audible voice from the Heavens. As for the
Miracles you mention, would the Gentile reply, we have heard strange things
done by those that are called Magicians; and we had no acquaintance with the
party you speak of, to discern whether he was so good as you pretend. For men's
Judgments are ordinarily partial out of affection and friendship: and it is
strange that if he were so good as you make him, and declared from the clouds
to be the Son of God, that God would suffer him so ignominiously to die betwixt
two Thieves on the Cross. Which is a sign that if he did any Miracles, they
were but from such powers as are subject to the Magistrate, and through that
faithful Providence that attends the affairs of men, can do nothing when the
Magician is apprehended, imprisoned and condemned. Truly if there had been no
more then this in the Story, it seems impossible that the Cause should have had
such Success as it has had.

5. Wherefore certainly the First Preachers of the Gospel added to all this, to
the admiration and astonishment of the hearers, That this Jesus, whom the Jews
had thus crucified, was by the miraculous hand of God raised out of the grave
the third day; That after his Resurrection he conversed with his disciples both
apart and together; That he was seen of above five hundred at once; That he
staid upon earth for Acts 1. v. 3.
forty days, and was seen visibly afterward to ascend into Heaven. Which
things as they were above all expectation marvailous, and did, if they were
true, fully argue not only the Innocence but transcendent Divinity of the
Person of Jesus; so were they so incredible, that none could believe them,
especially to their present peril, unless from such as were Eyewitnesses of
the same, and could send them to many more that were Eyewitnesses, and of
unsuspected integrity of life; or for the better compendium, showed that they
were true messengers sent from God, by some Signs or Miracles they did upon the
spot.

6. This therefore was the main of their message, which was nothing but matter
of Fact, which themselves knew certainly to be true, and seriously and
earnestly declared it to the World, not by any Art or Eloquence. For the
Apostles were but poor illiterate persons, Fishermen, Publicans, and the like,
had no other weapons to win men to the Faith, but by a simple, though earnest
and serious, narration of those things they knew for certain, and did avouch
with that confidence, that they gave up their ease, livelihood and lives, for a
pledge of the truth thereof. Which Testimony could not possibly be false, it
being (as I said before) concerning matter of Fact, namely, the Resurrection of
Christ, wherein so many could not be deceived: Nor is it imaginable how they
should go about to deceive others against their own Consciences, or without
sufficient knowledge in a thing that gained them nothing but perpetual Hatred
and ill will, Imprisonments, Tortures and Death. In the mean time, by these
poor contemptible Instruments, that had neither Political power on their side
(but were oppressed by it) nor had any Art nor Eloquence (excepting only Paul,
who yet made use of neither) and by succession of such as they had converted,
within a few Ages all the World in a manner swarmed with Christians of all
qualities and degrees, noble and ignoble, learned and unlearned, though invited
thereto by no secular advantage, but rather being perpetually exposed to misery
and persecution. All which things seriously considered together with the
exactness and perspicuity of Prophecies concerning the Messiah, cannot but seem
to any indifferent judge a Demonstration for the Truth of Christian Religion no
less certain then Mathematical.

CHAP. XIV. 1. Objections of the Jews against their Messiah's being come,
answered. 2. A pompous Evasion of the Aristotelean Atheists supposing all
Miracles and Apparitions to be the Effects of the Intelligences and Heavenly
bodies. 3. Vaninus his restraint of the Hypothesis to one Anima Coeli. 4. His
intolerable pride and conceitedness. 5. A Confutation of him and the
Aristotelean Atheism from the Motion of the Earth. 6. That Vaninus his
subterfuge is but a Sel-contradiction. 7. That Christianitie's succeeding
Judaisme is by the special counsel of God, not by the Influence of the Stars.
8. Cardanus his high folly in calculating the Nativity of our Savior, with a
demonstration of the groundlesness of Vaninus his exaltation in his impious
boldness of making Mahomet, Moses and Christ sidereal Lawgivers of like
Authority. 9. That the impudence and impiety of these two vain glorious
Pretenders constrains the Author more fully to lay open the frivolousness of
the Principles of Astrology.
1. THE Chap. 13. sect. 1.
Objections we were a mentioning are from two hands; from the Jew, or from the
Atheist. That from Jew is chiefly this, That the condition of the times under
Christ is not conformable to what is prophesied concerning the times of the
Messiah. There is not that Peace and Concord, no not in Christendom it self,
neither in the Church nor State; nor is Idolatry extirpated, nor the Israelites
replanted and settled in their own land: all which things notwithstanding are
foretold to come to pass in the days of the Messiah. Whence, say they, it is
plain he is not yet come. But I briefly answer, 1. That the Prophetical
Promises of the coming of the Messiah were absolute, as I have See Book 7.
(...) 6.
already noted, the Extent of the Effect of his coming conditional; men being
free Agents, and not fatal Actors, in all things, as the Jews themselves cannot
deny. 2. That the nature of the Gospel tends altogether to the accomplishing of
those Promises of universal Peace and Righteousness, and did begin fair in the
first times of the Church as much as respects the Church it self. 3. That
whatever Relapse or Stop there has been, things are not so hopeless but in time
they may be amended; and that they, in those days when they are true Converts
to Christ, may, if they will then desire it, return to their own Land. But
after this serious conversion and real renovation of their Spirits into a true
Christian state, I cannot believe they will continue so childish as to value
such things; but will find themselves in the Spiritual Canaan already, and on
their march to that Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of us all, and that it
will not be in the power of any but themselves to turn them out of the way.

2. The other Objection, or rather Evasion of that wholesome use that may be
made of the Truth of the History of Christ, is from that sort of Atheists that
love to be thought Aristoteleans: For there are two chief kinds of Atheism,
Epicurean and Aristotelean. The former denies all Incorporeal substance
whatsoever, and all Apparitions, Miracles and Prophecies that imply the same.
Who are sufficiently confuted already by this undeniable declaration we have
made. The other are not against all Substances Incorporeal, nor against
Prophecies, Apparitions and Miracles, though of the highest nature; insomuch
that they will allow the History of Christ, his Resurrection, and Appearance
after death, the Prophecies concerning him, and what not? But they have
forsooth this witty Subterfuge to save themselves from receiving any good
therefrom, in imagining that there is no such Particular Providence as we would
infer from hence, because all this may be done by the Influence of the
Celestial Bodies, actuated by the Intelligences appertaining to each Sphere,
and deriving in a natural way from him that sits on the highest of the Orbs
such influences as according to certain Periodical courses of Nature will
produce new Lawgivers, induing them with a power of working Miracles,
assisting them by Apparitions and Visions of Angels, making them seem to be
where they are not, and appear after they cease to be, namely after their
death: when in the mean-time there be neither Angels, nor Souls separate, but
all these things are the transient Effects of the power of the Heavens and
Configuration of the Celestial bodies, which slacks by degrees, and so the
Influence of the Stars failing, one Religion decaies and another gets up.
Thus Iudaisme has given place to Christianity, and Christianity in a great part
of the World to Mahometisme, being Establishments resulting from the mutable
course of Nature, not by the immediate finger of God, who keeps his throne in
the Eighth sphere, and intermeddles not with humane Affairs in any particular
way, but only aloof off hands down, by the help and mediation of the Celestial
Intelligences and power of the Stars, some general casts of Providence upon
the Generations of the Earth.

3. A goodly speculation indeed, and well befitting such two witty Fools in
Philosophy as Pomponatius and Vaninus: the latter of which seems not to give
himself up to this fine figment altogether fully and conformably to the ancient
doctrine of Aristotle, but having a great pique against Incorporeal Beings, is
desirous to lessen their number as much as he can, and seems pleased that he
has found out, That one only Soul of the Heavens will serve as effectually to
do all these things as the Aristotelean Intelligences; and therefore ever and
anon doubts of those, and establishes this as the only Intellectual or
Immaterial Principle and highest Deity; but such as acts no otherwise then in a
natural way by Periodical Influences of the Heavenly Bodies. Where you may
observe the craft and subtility of the man, what a care he has of his own
safety, and how he has imprisoned the Divinity in those upper rooms for fear of
the worst, that he may be as far out of his reach as the Earth is from the
Moon. So cautious a counselor in these matters is an evil and degenerate
Conscience.

4. This is the chiefest Arcanum that the Amphitheatrum and famed Dialogues of
this stupendous Wit will afford; who was so tickled and transported with a
conceit of his own parts, that in that latter Book he cannot refrain from
writing down himself a very Good for wisdom and knowledge. Whenas, assuredly,
there was never any man's Pride and Conceitedness exceeded the proportion of his
wit and parts so much as his. For there is nothing considerable in him but what
that odd and crooked Writer Hieronymus Cardanus had, though more modestly,
vented to the world before: only Vaninus added thereto a more express tail of
bold Impiety and Profaneness.

5. I have elsewhere intimated how the attributing such noble Events to the
Power of the Stars is nothing but a rotten relick of the ancient Pagan
Superstition; and have in my Book Of the (...) book 2. chap. 11.
Immortality of the Soul plainly enough demonstrated that there is no such
inherent Divinity in the Celestial Bodies as that ancient Superstition has
avouched or modern Philosophasters would imagine. And I shall here evidently
prove against this great Pretender, That his removal of the Deity at that
distance from the Earth is impossible. For there are scarce any now that have
the face to profess themselves Philosophers, but do as readily acknowledge the
Motion of the Earth, as they do the reality of the Antipodes, or the
Circulation of the Blood. I would ask then Vaninus but this one question,
Whether he will not admit that the Sun is in that Heaven where he imagins his
Anima coeli^ and whether this Heaven be not spread far beyond the Sun, and be
not also the Residence of this celestial Goddess of his. There is none will
stick to answer for him, that it is doubtlesly so. Wherefore I shall forthwith
infer, that let his unskilful phansy conceit us at this moment in as low a
part of the Universe as he will, within the space of six months we shall be as
far above or beyond the Sun as we are beneath him now, and yet then phansy our
selves as much beneath him as before. Which plainly implies that our Earth and
Moon swim in the liquid Heavens, which being every where, this Deity of Vaninus
must be every where, though his degenerate Spirit was afraid of so holy a
Neighborhood, nor could abide the belief of so present a Numen. Thus has the
Annual Course of the Earth dashed off all that Superstitious power and sanctity
that ancient Paganism has given and the Aristotelean Atheist would now give to
the Sun, Planets and Stars; and we are forced even by the light of Nature and
humane Reason to acknowledge the true Principle from whence all miraculous
things come, that is, a God, every where present, in whom we live and move and
have our being.

6. Besides this, suppose that all Prodigies, Apparitions and Prophecies were
from the intermediate Influence of the celestial Bodies, these Intelligences or
that Anima Coeli working thereby upon the persons of men, to inspire them, and
turning the Air into representations and visions to converse with them; This
covering is too scant to hide the folly of this sorry Sophist, his Supposition
plainly ruining it self. For he does acknowledge that those Inspirations and
Prophecies are true that are thus derived from those ^idereal Powers. But it is
evident that those that have been the most illustrious Prophets, have had
converse with Angels, and talked with them, and have so recorded the matter to
the World. As for example, the Prophet Daniel who discoursed with the Angel
Gabriel; Christ also discoursed with Moses and Elias on Mount Tabor, and Moses
with the Angel of God on Mount Sinai. Besides Christ, who was so highly
inspired and assisted from Heaven, has over and over again pronounced a future
Happiness after this life. All which, allowing them for a while to be the
dictates or representations of the Astral Influences, I demand of Vaninus, how
he comes to be wiser then those that were so miraculously assisted, That these
Visions of Angels should not be so as they that saw them have related, That
Moses and Elias should not be the Spirits of Moses and Elias, but only
transient Figurations of the Air raised by the Influence of the Heavens.
Moreover I would ask of him if he think that that Heavenly assistance that can
according to his own acknowledgement inform men of things to come at a thousand
years distance, (for such was the prediction of the death of Julius Caesar in
the Senate, though a matter very contingent,) cannot certainly inform them whom
it pleases so wonderfully to assist, whether the Souls of men be mortal or
immortal, which is far more cognoscible to those ethereal Powers then the
other. Wherefore this wretched Figment of his to excuse himself from the
acknowledgement of the Existence of Angels or Demons, and the Subsistence of
the Soul after death, from which he so much abhors, will stand him in no stead,
but argues him more intoxicated, whifling and giddy, in admitting the truth of
such Narrations, and yet denying the genuine consequences of them, then they
that give no credence to the Narrations themselves.

7. That which was objected of Christianity justling out Iudaisme, and of
Mahometisme in a great part of the World justling out Christianity, is partly
false and partly nothing to the purpose. That Christianity has properly justled
out Iudaisme, is very false. For Iudaisme has rather been ripened into the
perfection of Christianity, then been stifled and sufflaminated by any
Counter-blast of those sidereal Influences he dreams of. For we see how things
have gone on in one continued design from See Book 5. chap. 17. sect. 2.
Abraham to Christ, as the Prophecies and the Predictions in Scripture plainly
testify. God promised to Abraham that in his seed all the Nations of the Earth
should be blessed. Jacob foretells on his deathbed, that the Jewish Polity and
Religion should not fail till the Messiah, a Jew and Son of Abraham, was come,
to whom the gathering of the Gentiles should be: and so in other Book 7. chapter 5,
7, 8.
Prophecies which we have already recited and applied. From whence it is
manifest, that it is the hand and counsel of God who is constant to himself,
and whose Wisdom and Providence reaches from end to end, that has begun and
carried on this matter according to his own will and purpose, and not any
Bustles or Counter-blasts of various Aspects of the Heavenly bodies, that do
and undo according to the diversities and contrarieties of their Schematisms
and Configurations.

8. Nor could any thing but Levity of mind and Vainglory induce Cardan to
pretend the calculating of our Saviors Nativity, whenas the year of his Birth
is so uncertain amongst the most accurate Chronologers, and Astrology it self a
thing wholly groundless and frivolous, as I shall demonstrate anon. Nor is it
any specimen of his Wit, but of his gross Impiety, so boldly to equalize the
rise of Mahometisme to that of Iudaisme and Christianity, as if Moses, Christ
and Mahomet were all Astrall Lawgivers, alike assisted and inspired from the
influence of the Stars. A conceit that Vaninus is so transported with, that he
cannot tell what ground to stand upon when he cites the passage out of Cardan,
he is so tickled with Joy. But that this exultation of his is very childish and
groundless, appears, both in that he falsely attributes Prophecies, Divine Laws
and Miracles, to the influence of the Stars (a superstitious error that arises
only out of the ignorance of the right Systeme of the World;) and then again
(if it were true) that he imagines Mahomet (who was a mere crafty Politician,
and did neither Miracles, nor could prophecy) to be a Lawgiver set up by the
miraculous Power of the Heavens, such as enables Divine Lawgivers and Prophets
to do real Miracles. To which you may add the ridiculous obstinacy of this
perverse Sophist, who the more we give him of what he contends for, ( viz. that
Mahomet also is a Star-inspired Prophet, that is to say, illuminated from the
Anima coeli, which according to his opinion is the highest and most infallible
principle of miracles and divine wisdom,) the more ample testimony we have
against his own folly, that so peremptorily denies the existence of Demons,
and Subsistence of the Soul after Death. Which are openly avouched by this
third Witness of his own introducing: and therefore he abhorring so from such
Truths as are certainly dictated from the Celestial Bodies, did not excess of
Pride and Conceitednesse blind his judgment and make him senseless, he could
not but have found himself stung with that lash of the Satyrist, O curvae in
terris animae, and coelestium inanes!


But I have even tired my self with running the Wilde-goose chase after these
fickle and fugitive Wits, whose careless flirts and subsultorious fancies are
as numerous, as slight and weak, against the firm and immovable foundations of
solid Reason and Religion.

9. I should now pass to the Fourth Part of my Discourse, did not the reflection
upon the insufferable impudence of Cardan, in pretending to cast our Saviors
Nativity, and that villainous insulting of Vaninus thereupon, (as if all
Religion was but an Influence of Nature and transent blast of the Stars)
invite me, nay indeed provoke me, to lay open the Vanity of their accursed Art,
wherein they have combined together to blaspheme God, and to make Religion
contemptible and useless to the world.

CHAP. XV. 1. The general Plausibilities for the Art of Astrology propounded.
2. The first Rudiments of the said Art. The Qualities of the Planets, and their
Penetrancy through the Earth. 3. That the Earth is as pervious to them as the
Air, and of their division of the Zodiac into Trigons, etc. 4. The essential
Dignities of the Planets. 5. Their accidental Dignities. 6. Of the twelve
Celestial Houses, and the five ways of erecting a Scheme. 7. The
Requisitenesse of the exact Knowledge of the moment of Time, and of the true
Longitude and Latitude of the place. 8. Direction what it is, and which the
chiefest Directours or Significatours. 9. Of the (...) and (...) or Apheta and
Anaereta, and the time when the Anaereta gives the fatal stroke.
1. I Shall therefore make this short Digression to expose to your view the
extreme folly and frivolousness of the pretended Art of Astrology, whose main
general Reasons and particular Principles are in brief as follows.

First, They allege, that it is a thing beyond all belief, that such an
innumerable company of Stars, whose light is not considerable, nor their
position so exact for ornament, should be made for nothing else but to look
upon. Therefore, say they, there is some other Mystery in it, and that they are
endued with certain hidden Influences, and have their several peculiar
Virtues, as distinct as the Herbs and Flowers of the field, and it is their Art
of Astrology that professes the Knowledge thereof.

Again, the Earth and Water being such simple bodies as they are, the various
productions in Nature could not be, were it not for that infinite Variety of
those Celestial bodies, the Stars, and their several influences upon the
Earth. This their great Champion Sir Christopher Heydon urges as a principal
Argument for them.

Thirdly, That it is plain that the Moon has a moist influence, and that at
her full the Brains of Beasts generally, the Eyes of Cats, and the meat of
Shell-fishes are swelled to a greater bigness; and that they are lessened in
the change.

Fourthly, That the Moon also, to our wonderment, guides the Ebbing and Flowing
of the Sea, whose influence is equally seen when she is under the Horizon as
when above, when near our Nadir as when near our Zenith. Whence, say they, it
is plain that the Heavenly bodies have not only a power or influence, besides
Light, but more searching and penetrating then Light it self, as being able to
make its way through the thickness of the Earth, and to reach its effect on the
further side thereof. Both which wonders they further confirm from the
Magneticall Needle, hat looks toward the Pole-starre, though on the other side
of the Tropic of Capricorn; where the Northpole will be hidden twenty or
thirty degrees below the Horizon. Whence it is manifest, say they, that the
influence of the Pole-starre pierces through the bowels of the Earth, and is a
notorious argument of that secret and irresistible virtue of the rest of the
Heavenly bodies.

Fifthly, The Station, Direction and Repedation of the Planets is a thing so
strange and mysterious, that it is not likely they should make those odd
motions, unless those waglings this way and that way, those goings backward and
forward were a certain reeling or spinning the Fates and Fortunes of Things or
Persons here below.

Sixthly and lastly, Yearly experience teaches us that the approach of the Sun
renewes the World, and makes an annual Resurrection of Plants and Insects, and
such living creatures as are born of Putrefaction, and have no other Father
then the fiery-bearded Sun. If then this one Planet does such rare feats,
certainly the rest of the Planets and fixed Stars do not stand for ciphers,
but have their virtues and operations as well as he, whose efficacy and
influence, say these Starre-gazers, our Art does punctually and particularly
define. You may add if you will out of Origanus, the heat of the Dog-Starre,
and the moist influence of Arcturus and the Hyades. These are the general
Plausibilities that these Deceivers endeavor to countenance their Profession
by. But we shall now set down the main particular Principle and fundamental
Rudiments of their so-much-admired Science, as they would have it esteemed, and
then shall orderly answer to them both.

2. According therefore to Origanus, whom I shall chiefly follow in setting
down these Astrologicall Principles, I do not say all, but what is sufficient;
nor will I set down any but what they acknowledge for Principles, nor omit any
that are so considerable as these I set down;

First, It is taught by them, That the Planets have the most influence upon
Terrestrial bodies, but that the fixed Stars also as well as they have virtues
so potent as to pierce the very penetrals of the Earth: That of the Planets the
Sun is hot and moist rather then drying: That Mars is hot and parchingly
drying: That Saturn hinders the warm influence of the other Stars, and is in
an high degree frigefactive, as also exsiccative. From these two Qualities
contrary to the Principles of life, Saturn is termed Infortuna major, Mars,
Infortuna minor; because heat is not contrary to life, though dryness be.
Jupiter is also deemed Fortuna major, because he has sufficient moisture well
tempered with heat. But Venus, Fortuna minor, because her moisture exceeds her
warmth. From this distinction of hot, cold, dry and moist, the Planets are also
divided into Masculine and Feminine, Diurnall and Nocturnall, etc. So that if
these conceits of dryness, moistness, coldness, and heat fail, all the rest
fail.

3. But I think that Principle more observable which is touched upon already,
That the influence of the Stars and Planets do pass freely through the Earth:
which is implied in that Aphorism of Ptolemy cited by Origanus, Masculescere
and efficaciores dici Planetas, qui ab Horizonte ortivo vel occiduo deducuntur
ad Meridianum supra vel infra terram. Effoeminari vero qui contra. Which
plainly implies, that their influences pass as easily through the Earth as
through the Air: otherwise surely those Planets that tended from the Western
Horizon toward the Meridian under the Earth, would have the disadvantage of it.
That also goes upon the same Hypothesis that the Earth is no impediment,
namely, That Jupiter being Consignificatour in the second House, denotes
Riches; and that by how many more Planets there be in the sixth House, by so
much more subject to diseases the Child will be. That the sixth Stars and
Planets do most potently act in the Cardines of the Celestial Theme, of which
Imum Coeli is one. Which supposes the Earth as pervious as the very Air to the
Celestial influences.

To omit other divisions of the Signs into Mobilia, Fixa, and Bicorporea, into
Masculine and Feminine, etc. I shall only set down that more noised division of
them into Trigons, viz. The Fiery Trigon, Aries, Leo, Sagittarius; the Earthly,
Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn; Aereall, Gemini, Libra, Aquarius; Watery, Cancer,
Scorpius, Pisces.

4. They teach us also fine things of the Dignities of the Planets: which are
either essential or accidental. An essential Dignity is nothing else but the
increase of the innate virtue of the Planet by being in such or such a sign of
the Zodiac, as Origanus has defined.

The first essential Dignity is the House of the Planet. As for example, Leo is
the House of the Sun, Cancer of the Moon. And because there are more Signs
then Planets, it falls to the share of the rest to have two Houses apiece, so
aspected to the Houses of the Luminaries as becomes the goodness or malignity
of their Natures. As for example, Capricorn and Aquarius must be the Houses of
unfortunate Saturn, because their aspect is opposite to the Houses of the
Luminaries. Sagittarius and Pisces the Houses of Jupiter, because the aspect to
the foresaid Houses of the Sun and Moon is a benign aspect, namely, Trine. But
now Mars has Aries and Scorpius for his Houses, because he forsooth himself
being a malignant Planet may have his Houses in a malignant posture to the
Houses of the Sun and Moon, namely, in a quartile aspect, etc. And as to be in
their own Houses is a Dignity, so to be in the Sign opposite they call
Exilium, and account it a great detriment to the Planet.

To second essential Dignity is Exaltation: as Aries is the exaltation of the
Sun, because his efficacy is so apparent in Spring, and therefore his Casus
must be in Libra: which must on the contrary be the exaltation of Saturn, that
Planet being of a cold temper contrary to the Sun. The Dragon's head also is
exalted in Gemini, as Albumasar out of Hermes has given us to understand, and
depressed in Sagittarius.

The third essential Dignity is Triangularity or Triplicity, whereby certain
Planets are constituted the (...) of their respective Trigons. Sol and Jupiter
of the Fiery Trigon; the Moon and Venus of the Earthly Trigon; Saturn and
Mercury of the Aereal: and because there are not eight Planets, but seven only.
Mars is the sole Trigonocrator of the Watery Triplicity. I omit to say any
thing of the (...) or dignity of Terms, in which the two Luminaries are not
concerned.

Carpentum, which is the fifth Dignity, is but a coacervation of the four
precedent. Persona or Almugea is when there is the same configuration betwixt
the Sun and Moon and another Planet as there is betwixt their Houses. Decanat
is the Prefecture of the Planets over every ten degrees of the Signs in the
Zodiac. Mars over the first ten degrees of Aries, Sol over the second, Venus
over the third; Mercury over the first ten of Taurus, the Moon over the second,
Saturn over the third; and so on, according to the order of the Planets, till
all the ten degrees of the Zodiac be gone through.

The last essential Dignity is Gaudium, which is competible only to those
Planets that have two Houses, and is when a Planet is placed in that House
which is most agreeable to his Nature.

The chief of these Dignities are House, Exaltation, and Triplicity. For the
first has five Powers, the second four, and the third three. But (...) has but
two, and Almugea and Gaudium but one apiece.

5. The accidental Dignities arise either from their posture to the Sun, or
from their motion in their Orbs, or from their mutual Configuration.

In regard of their Position to the Sun they are either in Cazimi, or Combust
or (...), or free from Combustion, or Oriental or Occidental. To be in Cazimi
is to be corporeally joined with the Sun, and gives the Planet five Fortitudes.
To be Combust or (...) is to be distant some ten or fifteen degrees from the
Sun, etc. This position puts four or five Detriments on the Planet. To be free
from Combustion adds five fortitudes. Saturn, Jupiter and Mars from their
conjunction to their opposition with the Sun are Oriental, and gain two
fortitudes; but from their Opposition to their Conjunction are Occidental, and
incur two detriments.

In regard of their Motion the Planets are either Direct, Retrograde, Swift,
Slow or Stationary. Direction has four Fortitudes, Retrogradation five
Debilities, Station two Debilities.

Configuration or Aspect is either Sextile, Quartile, Trine, Opposition or
Conjunction. The Conjunction of benign Planets adds five fortitudes, of malign
five debilities. Sextile and Trine are benign Aspects, Quartile and Opposition
malign, etc.

6. But to climb nearer to the top of their Artifice, let us now set down
their witty contrivance of the Heavens into twelve Houses in their Erection of
their Astrological Scheme. The first House begins at the East Horizon, and is
to be numbered according to the Series of the Signs Eastward, and is called
Horoscopus and Domus Vitae. The second (...) and Domus Lucri. The third (...)
and Domus Fortunae. The fourth (...), Imum Coeli and Domus Patrimonii. The
fifth (...) and Domus Liberorum. The sixth (...) and Domus Aegritudinum. The
seventh (...) and Domus Nuptiarum. The eighth (...) and Domus Mortis. The ninth
(...) and Domus Religionis. The tenth (...), Cor Coeli and Domus Honorum. The
eleventh (...) or Domus Amicorum. The twelfth (...) or Domus Carceris. Every
one of these Houses has its Consignificatour. The first house Saturn, the
second Jupiter, the third Mars, the fourth Sol, and so on, according to the
Ptolemaical order of the Planets. According to which also they constitute their
(...) or Afridarii, giving the Planets a Septennial dominion in succession from
the Nativity. The first Septennium to the Moon, the second to Mercury, the
third to Venus, etc.

Now this Erection of a Scheme and distribution of the Heavens into twelve
Houses is no less then five manner of ways, as De Motibus part. 2. cap. 11.
Origanus has set down. The first of Julius Firmicus, who draws his Circles
through the Poles of the Zodiac. The second of Aben Ezra, who divides the
Equator into twelve equal parts, as the other did the Zodiac, by the drawing
of six great Circles through the mutual sections of the Horizon and Meridian
and through each thirtieth degree of the Equator. The third is that of
Campanus, who divides the principal Vertical into twelve equal parts by archs
drawn through the common intersections of the Meridian and Horizon. Fourthly
Alcabitius draws the circles through the Poles of the World and certain
equidistant points in the semidiurnal and seminocturnal archs of the Ascension
of the Ecliptic. And lastly, Porphyrius divides the two Oriental parts of the
Zodiac intercepted betwixt the Horizon and Meridian above and below into three
equal parts apiece. So many ways are there of building Houses or Castles in
the Air.

7. That the Erection of a Scheme may foretell right the Fate of the Infant,
the time of the Birth is to be known exactly. For if you miss a degree in the
time of the Birth, it will breed a years error in the prognostication; if but
five minutes, a month, etc. For which purpose also it is a necessary to know
the Longitude and Latitude of the place.

8. After the Erection of so accurate a Scheme, they pretend to be able to
foretell the time of the main accidents of man's life, and that either by
Profection annual and Transition, or by Direction. The last is the chief: and
therefore not to fill your ears overmuch with the wretched gibberish of
Gypsies, when I have intimated that the first of the two former run all upon
Aspects, and that Transition is nothing else but the Passing of a Planet
through the places of the Nativity, whether its own or of other Planets or of
the Horoscope, etc. I shall force my self a little more fully to define to you,
out of De Motibus part. 2. cap. 15.
Origanus, the Nature of Direction. Which is the invention of the Arch the
Equator which is intercepted betwixt two circles of Position, drawn through
two places of the Zodiac, the one whereof the Significator possesses, the
other the Promissor, and ascends or descends with the Arch of the Ecliptic in
the posture of the Sphere given. The term from whence the computation is made
is the Significator; the term to which, the Promissor. As if Sol be directed to
Mars, Sol signifies Dignities, and Mars the nature of those dignities; and the
distance of the time is computed by Direction. I shall omit to tell you that
all the Planets and all the Houses are capable of Direction, if we would
accurately examine a Scheme. But the chiefest Directors or Significators are,
1. The (...), which the Arabians call Hylech from (...), the Latins Emissor or
Prorogator vitae. 2. The Moon for the Affections of the Mind. 3. The Sun, even
then also when he is the (...), for the condition of Life and Dignities. 4. The
Horoscope for Health and Peregrinations. 5. The Medium Coeli for Marriage and
procreation of Children. 6. The (...) or the Part of Fortune for increase or
decrease of Riches.

9. But the chiefest of all is (...), as respecting Life it self, which is
directed to the (...), or Interfectour, or Slayer. Which is, suppose, either
some Planet which is present in the eighth house, as Saturn or Mars, or the
Almuten of the eighth house, or the Planet joined to the Almuten, or the
Almuten of the Planet, or the Almuten of the Lord of the eighth house. But the
huge mystery is, and that a sad one, that when the (...) comes to the place of
the (...), that is, the Emissor unto the place of the Interfector, then woe be
to the brat that ever he was born under so unlucky Stars; for there is no
remedy but he must die the death. Nor will his Alcochodon est stella virtutis,
ex qua de annis quibus natus secundum Naturae cursum victurus est judicium
sumitur, nisi ratione directionis vel alterius violenti and subiti casus vita
nati citius abrumpatur. See Origan. de effect. part. 13.
Alcochodon, or Almuten Hylegii avail him any thing, when his Hyleck or Emissor
is once come into the hands of the (...), or that Celestial Butcher.

These are the most fundamental and most solemn Fooleries (for so I must call
them) of their whole Art: and I shall now set my self to demonstrate them to be
so, after I have answered those more general Plausibilities they would
countenance themselves by.

CHAP. XVI. 1. That the Stars and Planets are not useless though there be no
truth in Astrology. 2. That the Stars are not the Causes of the Variety of
Productions here below. 3. That the sensible moistening power of the Moon is no
argument for the Influence of other Planets and Stars. 4. Nor yet the Flux and
Reflux of the Sea, and direction of the Needle to the North Pole. 5. That the
Station and Repedation of the Planets is an argument against the Astrologers.
6. That the Influence attributed to the Dog Star, the Hyades and Orion, is not
theirs but the Sun's, and that the Sun's Influence is only Heat. 7. The slight
occasions of their inventing of those Dignities of the Planets they call
Exaltations and Houses, as also that of Aspects. 8. Their folly in preferring
the Planets before the fixed Stars of the same appearing magnitude, and of
their fiction of the first qualities of the Planets, with those that rise
therefrom. 9. Their rashness in allowing to the influence of the Heavenly
Bodies so free passage through the Earth. 10. Their groundless Division of the
Signs into Moveable and Fixed, and the ridiculous Effects they attribute to the
Trigons, together with a demonstration of the Falseness of the Figment. 11. A
Confutation of their Essential Dignities. 12. As also of their Accidental. 13.
A subversion of their Erection of Themes and distributing of the Heavens into
twelve Celestial Houses. 14. Their fond Pretenses to the knowledge of the exact
moment of the Infants birth. 15. A Confutation of their Animodar and Trutina
Hermetis. 16. As also of their Method of rectifying a Nativity per Accidentia
Nati. 17. His appeal to the skillful, if he has not fundamentally confuted the
whole pretended Art of Astrology.
1. WHerefore to their First general Pretense, That the very Being of the
Stars and Planets would be useless, if there be nothing in the Art of
Astrology, I answer, That though there were certain virtues and influences in
every one of them, yet it does not follow that they are discovered in their
Art: and then again, That though there were none saving that of Light and Heat
in the Fixed Stars, it will not follow that they are useless. Because the later
and wiser Philosophers have made them as so many See Book 3. chapter 1. sect. 6.
Also Immortal. Book 3. chapter 19. sect. 4, 5, 6.
Suns: which Hypothesis our Astrologers must confute before they can make good
the force of their first Argument. And for the Planets, they have also
suggested that they may have some such like use as our Earth has, i. e. to be
the mother of living Creatures, though they have defined nothing concerning the
natures of them; whereby their opinion becomes more harmless and
unexceptionable, as it is in it self highly probable: Forasmuch as the Earth,
as well as Saturn, Jupiter and the rest, moves about the Sun, and is as much a
Planet as any of them; as the best Astronomers do not at all stick now-adaies
to affirm. Which does utterly enervate the force of this first general Pretense
of the Astrologians.

2. To the Second I answer, That the Stars are but Lights of much the same
nature as our Sun is, only they are further removed, so that their contribution
is much-what the same. And again, Nothing turns off their more subtle
Influence, according to their own concession; and therefore though there were
this Variety in them, yet because all this Variety reaches every point of the
Earth, the Product would be the same, unless the particles of the Earth were
diversified by some other cause, which assuredly they are. And thirdly, That
neither their own Variety, nor the influences of the Heavens, if they be merely
material, are sufficient causes of Productions here below. Fourthly, That the
celestial Matter is every where, and that the Earth swims in it, as Wood does
in Water, so that we need not have recourse to so remote unknown activities.
And lastly, That that general (...), or Spirit of Nature, is also every where
ready to contrive the Matter into such shapes and virtues as its disposition
makes toward. And this is enough and more then enough to take off the edge of
the Knights argument.

3. I do acknowledge that the Moon in her full swells certain things with
moisture; which Effect is both sensible and palpable, and also reasonable, by
reason of her proximity and of the reflection of the Sun's beams from her body,
which being but of a moderate power, melt the Air and Vapors into an
insinuating liquidness, but do not dissipate them, as his direct beams do by
day. Which feat I do not doubt but that any other of the Planets would perform,
if they were so placed that their discus would seem of equal bigness with the
Moon's, and she were removed into their place. But it is an insufferable folly
to argue from such both reasonable and palpable effects of the Moon, that the
other Planets also and Fixed Stars have as powerful effects upon us; which yet
we can deprehend by neither Reason nor Experience.

4. The like may be answered concerning the Flux and Reflux of the Sea; the
ground whereof is rational from what Descartes has set down in his Princip.
Philos. part. 4. namely, That the Ellipsis of the celestial Matter is
straightened by the Moons body, which makes the Ether flow more swift: which is
a plain and mechanical solution of the Phenomenon. And then we find by
certain experience that this Flux and Reflux depends on the course of the Moon,
so that there can be no deceit in the business. But when there is no Reason nor
sufficient Experience that this is the Cause of that, to attribute the one to
the other is no good Logic. And to that of the Loadstone and Polar-Starre I
say again, as I have said already, That it does not follow, because there are
some sensible effects from the Heavens, certain and constant, that therefore we
may imagine what effects we please to proceed from this or that particular
Star without due Experience or Reason for the same. And then in the next
place, That it is not so much the influence of the Heaven, as the Magnetisme of
the Earth, in which this direction of the Needle toward the North consists. For
the Needle varies in certain Meridians, and some three miles from Rosseburg, a
Town near upon the very corner where the Finnick Seas and Sinus Finnicus are
joined, the Needle amidst a many Sea-Rocks turns about, nor ceases so to do for
the space of a whole mile. Which is a further demonstration that the Direction
of the Needle depends upon the Magnetisme of the Earth. But truly if the Events
that Astrologers take upon them to predict did as steadily point to the Causes
they allege, this Planet or that Configuration of Planets, Signs or Stars,
as the Needle and Axis of the Earth to the North; though they could give no
reasons thereof, I could easily allow their Art. But there being such
demonstrative Reasons against their Grounds, and no certain Experience for
them, these particular Allegations concerning the Moon and Pole-Starre will
stand them in no stead.

5. The Station and Retrogradation of the Planets is a very considerable
Argument against them, and shows how foolish and imaginary their Art is that is
upheld by such gross mistakes. For they that understand the right Systeme of
the World, know very well that those Phenomenon are not real but seeming:
which is a scurvy slur to these Astrologers. But this I shall meet with again
hereafter.

6. To the last I answer, That neither the Dog-Starre, Arcturus, the Hyades nor
Orion are conceived to have any such Effects as are attributed to them, but
then when the Sun is in such places of the Zodiac as himself without them
would bring forth. And therefore they do fallaciously attribute to those
Stars what is really the virtue of the heat of the Sun approaching nearer us,
or abiding longer upon us. And as for the wrath of the Dog, which is abated
already in some considerable measure, how tame a creature think you will he be,
when the Anticipation of the Aequinoxes shall appoint him his Kennell as low as
Capricorn, if the World should so long continue? These may serve for Poetical
Expressions (such as that of Virgil, who attributes that to the Signs which
belongs to the Sun; Candidus auratis aperit cum Cornibus annum
Taurus --
When the white Bull opens with golden horns
The early year:)
but they will not endure the severity of the Laws of an Art, which is, to
speak properly, not to entitle things circumstantiall and concomitant to real
Causality. But as for the Sun's efficacy it self, I will not deny it, nor yet
acknowledge it any more then in the general influence of heat, which cherishes
and excites the seminal Principles of things into act and perfection. Which is
no more mysterious then the Egyptians and Livia's Maids of Honor hatching of
Eggs without the help of the Hen; the same which the Sun does to the Ostriches
left upon the sand. And I will also acknowledge that the rest of the Stars do
not stand for ciphers, but that at a competent distance they will have their
effect: which the Sun it self has not when removed from us but to the other
side of the Equator, whereby his rays become more oblique. How inconsiderable
then think you would he be, if he were removed as far as the fixed Stars,
all whose influence put together cannot supply his absence in the depth of
Winter? Whence it is plain, that it is a very fond inference to argue that
those remote bodies of the fixed Stars and Planets have an influence upon us,
because the Sun and Moon that are so near us have; whenas if they were as far
removed, their influence would assuredly be as insensible as that of the five
Planets and fixed Stars.

7. And yet notwithstanding such is the intolerable Impudence of the Inventours
of Astrology, that they have at random attributed such things to the other
Planets and Stars as they have only ground for, if any at all, in the two
Luminaries. As for example, because they might observe some more sensible
mutation in the Air and Earth at the Sun's entering Aries, it would be the more
tolerable to fancy that Sign his Exaltation. But now to appoint places of
exaltation to other Planets, as Taurus to the Moon, Libra to Saturn, is a mere
running the Wildgoose chase from one single hint to matters where there is
nothing of like reason or experience. So likewise because they had some
intimation to make Leo the House of the Sun, his heat being then most sensible,
and Cancer the House of the Moon, because then she would be most vertical to
us; they have without either fear or wit bestowed Houses two apiece upon the
rest of the Planets, though there be neither reason nor effect answerable.

And lastly, for Aspects, in all likelihood the sensible varieties of the
Phases of the Moon in Opposition, Trine and Quartil, gave them first occasion
to take notice of Aspects: and then another thing happening, though independent
on the course of the Moon, namely, that every seventh day, in an acute Disease,
is Critical, and that there are usually at those returns the greatest stirrs
and alterations in the Patient, and the Quartil Aspect of the Moon happening
also about seven days from the Conjunction, and then about seven days more
she being in Opposition; this natural circuit of Fermentations in acute
Diseases, has given them occasion to slander the Moon in those cases, and for
her sake to reproach the aspects of Opposition and Quadrature in all the rest
of the Planets. Such small hints as these are the solidest foundations of the
fantastic structure of Astrology. Which we shall now something more nearly
lay battery to, and so shatter it, that it shall not so much as find room in
the Imaginations of men.

8. To begin therefore with the First of their Principles I have set down, That
they prefer the Planets before the Fixed Stars (I mean those so remote ones,
that they seem but about the bigness of the greater Stars) is without all
reason; the Planets being but heaps of dead matter much like that of the Earth,
and having no light but what they reflect from the Sun. For that which seems to
be the innate light of the Moon, is but the reflection of the Sun's beams from
the Earth. Wherefore their activity and influence may justly seem less then
that of the Fixed Stars which shine not with borrowed but innate light. And for
their powerful penetrating into the Bowels of the Earth, that is a mistake
arising from the supposed influence of the Moon on the Flux and Reflux of the
Sea, even when she is on the other side of the Earth; to which with the like
fallacious inference I have See sect. 4.
answered already. But then, for the Qualities of the Planets, where they
define the Sun to be hot and moist rather then drying, but Mars hot and
parching dry, and Saturn dry and cold; what will not these impudent Impostours
dare to obtrude upon us, when they will vent such stuff as is liable to
confutation by our very Senses? For does not our very Sense tell us that the
Sun is the most hot and drying Planet that is? His heat it is, and not that of
Mars, that withers the grass and flowers, and parches the tops of Mountains,
and even rosts the Inhabitants of the Earth when they expose their bodies to
his more direct rays. But what Faculty could ever inform us that Mars was such
a parching and heating Planet, and Saturn so cold? Assuredly he that will
expose his head to their Acronychal rays, which are most potent, and shall
profess he feels more cold from one and heat from the other, then he does from
the other parts of Heaven, will approve himself as mad as that old Dotard that
pretended that he could as often as he listened plainly hear the Harmony of the
Celestial Spears. All the Planets are opake Bodies, and whatever their color
is, are as cold as Earth. For neither yellow nor red clay cast any more heat
then white, nor has any soil any sensible influence but what is drawn in by the
nose, which sometimes proves wholesome and savory and sometimes of^ensive. But
how our Star-gazers Proboscides should be drawn out to that length as to smell
out the different virtues of the Planets, I can no way understand. Wherefore
the pronouncing of Mars hot and dry, and Saturn cold and dry, etc. is a
shameless foolery, and a demonstration of the vanity of the rest of their
allotments of the first qualities to the Planets. And since from these they are
reputed Benign or Malign, Masculine or Feminine, and the like, all this part of
their pretended Science is but a Rhapsody of Fooleries also.

9. To the Second, of the Earth's being so pervious to the influence of the
Stars and Planets, I say, First, That it is a Principle without proof, as I
have already evinced: and then Secondly, If I give them it, they will be fain
to vomit it up again, it being destructive to their whole Art. For if the rays
and influence of the Stars and Planets have free passage through the body of
the Earth, the whole Ceremony of erecting a Scheme for such a Longitude and
Latitude is needless; nay, as to the Heavens, the fates of all men would be
alike. For that hidden influence which governs all would reach to all points
from all parts of Heaven at once.

10. Thirdly, Concerning the division of their Signs into mobilia and fixa and
hicorporea. The mobilia are the Equinoctial and Solstitial Signs. The latter
whereof might deserve better the name of fixa then mobilia. And in my
apprehension the Tempers of the Year might as well be said to be begun, suppose
the cold in Sagittarius and fixed in Capricorn, and the heat in Gemini and
fixed in Cancer, as begun in Capricorn and fixed in Aquarius, etc. But we will
wink at small matters. That of the fiery, earthy, watery and aerie Trigons is
more notorious, and I cannot but smile when I read the Effects of them. As for
example, in Physic, as Dariot has set down, the Moon and Ascendent in the
Fiery Signs comfort the virtue attractive, in the Earthy Signs the retentive,
the Aerie the digestive, and the Watery the expulsive. Would any man dare to
administer Physic then without consulting the precepts of Astrology? Also in
Husbandry that is a notable one of Sir Christopher's, See Sir Christopher Heydon
his Defense of Judicial Astrology, c. 7. p. 186.
who tells us how we may cause a Plant to shoot deep into the Earth or higher
into the Air, by setting of it at such an aspect of the Moon. Namely, if the
Moon be in the Earthy Triplicity, the root will shoot more downward into the
Earth; if in the Aerie, more upward into the Air. Which is a rare Secret. Now
to omit the groundless and arbitrarious division of the Zodiac into these four
Trigons, of which there is only this one hint, that I can imagine, namely, the
fitness of Leo for one part of the fiery Trigon, the Sun being most hot in that
Sign; (From which little inlet all the four Elements flew up into Heaven, and
took their places in their respective Triplicities in the Zodiac with great
nimbleness and agility, playing at leap-frog and skipping over one another
backs in such sort, that dividing themselves into three equal parts, every
Triental of an Element found it self a fellow-member of a trine Aspect:) The
best jest of all is, that there is no such Zodiac in Heaven, or, if you will,
no Heaven for such a Zodiac as these Artists attribute these Triplicities to.
For this Heaven and this Zodiac we speak of is only an old error of
Ptolemie's and his followers, who not understanding the true System of the
world, and the motion of the Earth, in which is salv'd the anticipation of the
Aequinoxes, have phansied a Heaven above the Coelum stellatum, and a Zodiac
that did not recede from West to East as the starry Zodiac does. And this
Figment, which later Ages have laughed off of the Stage, is the only Subject of
these renounced Trigons and Triplicities, which therefore are justly laughed
off of the Stage with it. Which discovery is a demonstration that the whole Art
of Astrology is but upon frivolous and mere imaginary Principles, as we shall
further make manifest. And therefore those Physicians proclaim themselves
either Cheats or Fools, that would recommend their skill from such vain
observations.

11. Fourthly, Now for the essential Dignities of the Planets, since it is
nothing but the increase of their innate virtue by being in such or such a
Sign, and these being the Signs of that Zodiac which has no Heaven, nor is any
thing; it is manifest that the whole doctrine of essential Dignities falls to
the ground. But we will also cast our eye upon the distinct parts of this vain
Figment. And therefore as to the first essential Dignity, the House of the
Planet; There is no sagacious Person but can easily smell out the meaning of
making Leo the House of the Sun; namely, not that that Sign has any virtue to
increase heat, but that the Sun then has been long near the Tropic of Cancer,
and so has more then ordinarily heated the Earth by so long a stay in so
advantageous a posture. And this is it, not the being in his House then, that
makes the heat so great; for those beyond the other Tropic sure are cold
enough. The same may be said of Cancer, the Moons House, that it is posture,
not the nature of the place, that makes her virtue more then to us, but less to
our Antoeci. From this small hint from Sense and mistakes of Reason, have they
without all Reason and Sense bestowed Houses on the rest of the Planets,
guiding themselves by the conceit of the Malignity and Benignity of Aspects.
Which to be a mere Figment I have See sect. 7.
noted already, it having no ground but that rash joining together of Critical
days with the Aspects of the Moon.

What a small preferment Astrological Exaltation is, you may understand from
Albumazar's liberality, who amongst the Planets has advanced the head and tail
of the Dragon to the same Dignity, which yet are nothing but Intersections of
the imaginary Circles of the course of the Moon and the Ecliptic. But of this
Dignity I have See sect. 7.
spoke enough already, and therefore I pass to the next.

As for the (...) or Lords of the Trigons, what great pity it was there were
not just eight Planets, that each Trigon might have had its two Consuls, and
Mars not rule solitarily in his watery one? But the foolery of the Trigons being
already confuted, I need add nothing further concerning this Dignity. The
Prerogative of the (...) is destroyed by that first general Argument, the parts
of the Signs being as fictitious as the whole. And as for the Carpentum or
royal Seat or Throne, it being a compound Dignity compacted of the former, the
parts being but imaginary, it is evident that the whole is a mere Nothing.

And that Persona Planetae or Almugea is as little, appears from hence, in that
Aspect is an empty conceit, raised upon no solid ground, as I have more then
once already intimated.

And that the Lords of the Decanats have but imaginary Provinces, is again
plain, for that their whole Zodiac wherein all those fripperies are lodged is
but imaginary, and their order also of assignation upon a false Hypothesis,
viz. according to that ranging of the Planets that is in Ptolemie's System.

And lastly, Gaudium, the last of the Essential Dignities, supposes two
falsities; that there are Houses in this fictitious Zodiac, and that Planets
are Masculine and Feminine: which Supposition has been confuted already. So
that all these essential Dignities are devoid of all substance and reality, and
the numbering of their particular Fortitudes is the telling out so many
nullities to no purpose.

12. Nor can you hope for a better account of their Accidental Dignities.
Cazimi, Combustion, and Freeness from combustion, how fond and inconsistent
conceits are they? For first it is unreasonable, if they know the nature of the
Planets, of the Sun, and of the celestial Vortex, to make a Planet in Cazimi to
gain five Fortitudes. For beyond the Sun the Planet is at the furthest distance
it can be from us: and Saturn, Jupiter and Mars a whole diameter of the Suns
orbit more distant then when they are in opposition to the Sun: and Venus and
Mercury half of their own. Besides, how can their virtue pass the body of the
Sun, or the bearing of the Vortex against the Planet and against us, and all
the attemps of influence from the Planet not be eluded? Again, if Cazimi on
this side the Sun be good, why should not beyond the Sun be bad? And if Venus
or Mercury in the body of the Sun be so considerable, how much more are the
spots of the Sun that are far greater? which their ignorance could never reckon
in the compute of their Dignities. Besides, what wild and disproportionable
jumps are these, That Cazimi should be five fortitudes, and yet Combustion,
which is to be but a little distance from the Sun, should be five debilities;
and yet to be free from combustion, that is further removed from the body of
the Sun, should be again five fortitudes? Things so arbitrarious groundless,
that none but sick-brain'd Persons can ever believe them.

That also is notoriously foolish, That Saturn, Jupiter and Mars from their See
chap. 15. sect. 5.
conjunction with the Sun to their opposition should have two fortitudes, and
from their opposition to their conjunction should have two debilities. For in a
great part of that Semicircle that carries from opposition to conjunction, they
are far nearer, and therefore much stronger then in the beginning of that
Semicircle that leads from their conjunction to opposition.

Moreover those Dignities and Debilities that are cast upon Planets from
Direction, Station and Retrogradation, the thing is mainly grounded upon a
mistake of the Systeme of the World, and ignorance of the Earths annual
motion, and from an Idiotick application of accidents or phrases amongst men.
And therefore because when things succeed ill they are said to go backwards,
and when we are weary we go more slow or stand still to breath us, or when we
are most vigorous we run swiftest; therefore must Station be two debilities,
Retrogradation no less then five, but Direction must be five fortitudes.
Whereas in reason Station should rather seal on the effect of the Planet more
sure. But the truth is, a Planet is neither stationary nor retrograde truly,
but in appearance, and therefore these Debilities no true ones but imaginary.

The last Accidental Dignity is Configuration or Aspect, the vain grounds
whereof have been See Sect. ^.
already taxed. To which I add, That it is utterly unreasonable to conceive
that Sextil and Trine should be good, and yet Quartil that is betwixt both be
stark naught. Nay it were far more reasonable to conceive that if Conjunction
and Sextil were good, that Quartil should be better then Trine, as being
further from Opposition, and because the Planets thus aspected are in better
capacity both of them to strike with more direct rays on the Earth, then if
they were in a Trine Aspect. And therefore I know no reason imaginable that
could move them to have so ill a conceit of Quartil aspect, but because of the
great unquietness of acute diseases that happens about every seventh day, which
is the time also of the Quartil aspect of the Moon: and therefore the whole
mystery of Aspects is to be resolved into this rash Misapplication.

You have seen now how little worth all the Astrological Dignities are; and yet
out of these huge Nothings of their fictitious Art is the whole fabric built
of whatever Predictions they pretend to: So that we may be assured that all is
vain and ridiculous.

13. Concerning their twelve Houses of the Nativity, the division is
arbitrarious, and their erecting of a Scheme so many ways and that with like
success, an evidence that the success is not upon Art but fortuitous. The
Configuration also of the Houses and those See chap. 15. sect. 6.
Septennial (...) or Alfridarii do intimate that the whole business is but a
Figment, going upon that false Hypothesis of Ptolemie, That the Planets and the
Earth have not the Sun to their Center. But this is not all we have to say
against these Celestial Tenements. For either the Earth is pervious to all the
rays of the Planets and Stars, as well beneath as above the Horizon, or only
they above the Horizon shed their Virtue on the Child. If the former be true,
all Nativities are alike. If the latter, why have they any more then six
Houses, and why any at all under the Horizon? And in good sadness what is the
meaning that their Horoscope and the sixth House, being Houses of so great
concernment, should be under the Horizon; especially when they are pleased at
other times to pronounce that a Star or Planet that is Vertical is most
efficacious? And can it be thought any thing but a mere phancie that led them
to make the Horoscope the House of Life, namely, because the Stars arise from
thence, and are as it were born into the World? whence (as I have showed their
custom to be in other things) they have feigned the rest of the Houses at
random. And that you may still be more sure that there is nothing in these
Houses, (or rather that the Houses themselves are nothing) they are but the
Distribution of that imaginary Zodiac and Heaven, which (I told you See sect.
10.
before) the error of Ptolemy brought into the World, into twelve imaginary
Sections, beginning at the East point of this Zodiac: So that their Art is
perpetually built upon Nothing.

14. Now for the exact time of the Nativity, That one should know the very
moment when the Child is born, I say it is a Curiosity nothing to the purpose.
For first, if the hard and thick Earth be pervious to the rays of Heaven, how
easily may those thin coverings of the Womb be penetrated continually by the
power of the Stars? and therefore even then is the Child as much exposed to
them, as when it is newly born. Or if it be not; why may not it some moments
after its being born, be still as liable to their influence as in the moment
when it was born? For cannot these Influences that penetrate the very metalline
bowels of the Earth pierce a Child's tender skin without any resistance? But
supposing this Curiosity to be to the purpose; how hard and lubricous a matter
is it to come to that exactness that they pretend to be requisite? For first
they must know the exact Longitude of the Place, (a thing of extreme
uncertainty) or else the exactness of Time will do them no good. And yet
again, their affectation of exactness seems ridiculous, when we cannot well
determine the proper Time of his Birth. For he is born by degrees, and few or
none come out, after first they appear, in a shorter space then half a quarter
of an hour. Wherefore their Head being exposed to the starry influence, why
should not that celestial infection pervade their whole body? But suppose that
to be the moment of their birth, wherein the whole body is first out, how shall
this moment be known? By an exact minute watch, such as Tycho had, and Sir
Christopher Heydon professes himself to have had, which would exactly give him
the minute and second Scruple of Time. But how few Nativity-casters can boast
of the same privilege? Or if they could, to what purpose is it, when it
seldom happens that they are in the same house, much less in the same room
where the party is delivered? Wherefore the report of the Midwife is the best
certainty they have: and how many Nativities have been cast without so much as
that? And yet they will confidently predict Fates and Destinies upon an
uncertain time given them. For they can, say they, correct it, and reduce it to
the right moment of the Nativity, and that by no less then three several ways;
by Trutina Hermetis, Animodar, and Accidentia Nati: which how bold and
groundless a boast it is, let us now see.

15. Trutina Hermetis goes upon this ground, That that degree of the Zodiac
the Moon is in at the time of Conception, the same is the Horoscope of the
Nativity. But what a foolish subterfuge is this, whenas the exact time of
Conception is as hard to be known as that of the Nativity? And if it were
known, there is yet no certainty, some coming sooner, some later, as every
Mother, Nurse or Midwife knows full well; nor will any of them presume to tell
to a day when a woman shall be brought to bed.

In Animodar the Nativity is either Conjunctional or Preventional, that is,
either after or before the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon. If the Interlunium
precede the time of the birth, the degree is to be noted in which it happens;
if the Plenilunium, that degree in which that Luminary is that is above the
Horizon in the time of Opposition, the Sun by day, the Moon by night. The
degrees thus given, the Almuten Almusteli is to be found out, which is the
Planet that has most dignities in that place of opposition or conjunction;
which are Trigon, House, Altitude, See Origin. par. 2. cap. 113.
(...) and Aspect. Then the degree of the Sign is to be noted in which the
Almuten was at the time of the estimated birth, etc. For I need not hold on;
enough has already been said to demonstrate the whole process a ceremonious
Foolery. For the computation being to be made from the place of the Almuten
Almusteli, and his election by Dignities, and Dignities being nothing but empty
phansies and vanities, as I have already proved, the Correction of the Nativity
by Animodar must needs be idle and vain. Besides that, the Almuten being one
and the same, as belonging to one and the same Conjunction or Opposition of the
Luminaries, how can it be a rule to Children born at the same times in diverse
Climates? For it is evident the Horoscope alters with the Clime And lastly, not
only Picus, a foe to Astrology, professes how false both this method of
Animodar as also that rule of Hermes is, and clashing one with another; but
Origanus himself, a friend to the Art, advises us rather to listen to the
relations of Mother Midnight then to give any credit to either of these ways.

The most certain way of correcting a Scheme of Nativity in Origanus his
judgment, is per Accidentia Nati, whether good or bad, as Honors, Preferments,
Gifts, Sickness, Imprisonment, Falls, Conflicts, etc. which way
notwithstanding at the first sight is very lubricous. For it is at least
disputable and uncertain, whether there be Liberty of Will in man or no. But I
will venture further, that for my own part, I think it demonstrable from inward
Sense, Reason and Holy Writ, that there is Free Will in men; whence it will
necessarily follow, Quod multa accidunt hominibus praeter naturam praeterque
fatum. Diseases therefore, Imprisonments, Disgraces and Preferments may be
brought upon us by the free Agency of our selves or others, and that sooner or
later according as men's Virtues or Vices act. Which takes away all certainty of
computation per Accidentia Nati.

16. Besides that the manner of it is very frivolous and ridiculous. For it
being threefold, as Origanus has set down, Profection annual, Transition, and
Direction; there is none of them that are any thing more then mere phansies and
figments. For what can be more vain and imaginary then their annual Profection,
which makes the Horoscope and the rest of the Houses move thirty degrees a year
till the whole period be finished in twelve? Is this circuit of the
Nativity-Scheme any where but in their own brain? And then their Predictions or
Corrections are by Aspects of the Cuspe of the Root with the Cuspes of the
present Scheme calculated for this or that year. And how Aspects themselves are
nothing, I have again and again taken notice.

And for Transition, what is more monstrous then to think that a Planet by
passing the same place in which it self or other Planets were at the Nativity,
should cause some notable change in the party born? As if the Planets walked
their rounds with perfumed socks, or that they smelt stronger at the Nativity
then other times, and that another Planet come into the trace thereof should
exult in the scent, or the same increase the smell: or what is it that can
adhere in these points of Heaven that the Planets were found in at the
Nativity? or why is not the Whole tract of the same scent? or why not expunged
by the passage of other Planets? But what will not madness and effascination
make a man fancy to uphold his own Prejudices? And truly these two Origanus
himself is willing to quit his hands of, as less sound and allowable: but
Direction is a principal business with him.

Which yet in good truth will be found as frivolous as the rest. For as in
Transition, so also in Direction, the great change must happen when a Planet,
or Cuspe, or Aspect come to the place where such a Planet or Cuspe were at the
Nativity. When the Significator comes to the place of the Promissor, then the
feat does not fail to be done. For the Promissor is conceived as immovable, and
such as stands still and expects the arrival of the Significator: which is a
demonstration that this Promissor is either Imaginary space or Nothing: and
which of these two think you will keep promise best? Nay the Significator also,
if it be the Horoscope or any other House, is imaginary too, as I have
demonstrated. And if it be a Planet, seeing yet the Planets move not as a Bird
in the Air, or Fishes in the Waters, but as Cork carried down the stream; it
is plain how this Planet never gets to that part of the celestial Matter in
which the Promissor was at the Nativity, the Promissor ever sliding away with
his own Matter in which he swims: and therefore if he has left any virtue
behind him, it must again be deposited in an Imaginary Space. Which is an
undeniable argument that the whole mystery of Direction is imaginary.

Wherefore if Profection annual, Transition and Direction are so vain that
they signify nothing forward, how can we from Events (though they should be
judged and reasoned from exactly according to these fantastic Laws) argue
backward an exact indication of the time of the Nativity? If they could have
pretended to some Rules of Nature or Astronomy to have rectified a Geniture by,
they had said something; but this recourse to their own fantastic and
fictitious Principles proves nothing at all.

17. And thus have I run through the eighth and ninth Sections of the foregoing
Chapter before I was aware. And he that has but moderate skill in the solid
Principles of Natural Philosophy and Astronomy, and but a competent patience
to listen to my close reasonings therefrom, cannot but acknowledge that I have
fundamentally confuted the whole Art of Astrology, and that he has heard all
their fine terms of Horoscope, and Celestial Houses, Exaltation, Triplicity,
Trigons, Aspects Benign and Malign, Station, Retrogradation, Combustion,
Cazimi, Significator, Promissor, Apheta, Anaereta, Trigonocrator, Horecrator,
Almugea, Almuten, Alcochodon, together with the rest of their sonorous
Nothings, to have fallen down with a clatter like a pyle of dry bones by the
battery I have laid against them. And truly here I would not stick to pronounce
that I have perfectly vanquished the enemy, did I not espy a little blind Fort
to which these Fugitives usually make their escape. And surely by the Title it
should be a very strong one; they call it Experience or Observation of Events,
which they boast to be accurately agreeable to their Predictions.

CHAP. XVII. 1. Their fallacious Allegation of Events answering to Predictions.
2. An Answer to that Evasion of theirs, That the Error is in the Artist, not
in the Art. 3. Further Confutations of their bold presumption, that their Art
always predicts true. 4. That the punctual Correspondence of the Event to the
Prediction of the Astrologer does not prove the certainty of the Art of
Astrology. 5. The great Affinity of Astrology with Daemonolatry, and of the
secret Agency of Demons in bringing about Predictions. 6. That by reason of
the secret Agency or familiar Converse of Demons with pretended Astrologers,
no argument can be raised from Events for the truth of this Art. 7. A
Recapitulation of the whole matter argued. 8. The just occasions of this
Astrologicall excursion, and of his showing the ridiculous condition of those
three high-flown Sticklers against Christianity, Apollonius, Cardan and Vaninus.
1. BUt here their Hold is not so strong as their Impudence great, that they
will so boldly bear us in hand, that by virtue of the Principles of their Art
they have foretold any thing to come. There are many ludicrous ways of
Divination wherein no man is in good earnest, and yet the Predictions and
present personal Descriptions of men sometimes fall right: but no sober man
will impute this to Art but to Chance. It was but a fallacy of Neptune's
Priest, when he would have carried the Spectator into admiration of that Deity
from the many Donaries hung up in his Temple by Votaries. But he whom he would
have thus imposed upon was too cunning for him. For he demanded straightway a
Catalogue of those Votaries that had suffered Shipwreck. And so do I of those
Predictions that have proved false. Cardan, a reputed Prince in this faculty,
complains that scarce ten in forty prove true: And Picus, a narrow searcher
into the Art, professes that he has found of his own experience nineteen in
twenty false; and that in the Prognostication of Weather, where no free Agents
intermeddle to interrupt or turn off the natural influence of the Stars.

2. But all the Aberrations that either themselves or others may have observed
will not bring off the more devoted Admirers of Astrology to acknowledge the
vanity thereof. For their excuse is, first, That by History, private
information, and by their own experience they are assured that the Predictions
do sometimes fall punctually true to a year, nay, to a day, and sometimes to an
hour, and that the circumstances of things are so particularly set out, that it
cannot be Chance but Art that arrives at that accuracy. And then secondly, That
the profession of others, and also their own observation, does witness to them,
that when there is any mistake, the Error is in the Artist, not in the Art.
For when they have examined their Astrologicall Scheme, they find the Event
was there signified, and that it was their own oversight to miss it. But to
answer to the latter first, I say, they cannot pretend their Observation
universal; and they that understand Astrology best, will acknowledge there is
that intanglement usually and complication of things, that it requires a very
long time to give due judgment according to Art concerning a Nativity. And
therefore, I say, the Representation of the Event being so doubtful, if they
chance to predict right at first, they easily persuade themselves that was the
meaning of the Celestial Theme. If they miss, they will force on their way
further, till they find out what is answerable to the Events; which then must
needs be the meaning of the Art, though the Artist oversaw it: nor will they
urge themselves to any further accuracy of inquisition, for fear they should
find it disagree again; or rather out of a strong credulity that if it hit
right, it is surely from the true meaning and principles of their beloved
Science: whenas in truth their Themes have no certainty in their
representation, but are as a piece of changeable Stuff or creased Pictures,
look this way it is this color, that way that, this way a Virgin, that way an
Ape; or like the Oracles of Apollo, who was deservedly called Loxias, whose
crooked Answers winded so this way and that way, that nothing but the Event
could tell whither they pointed.

3. I might add further, that the pretense of the Schemes themselves (be they
never so exact) I say the pretense of their always representing the Events
aright, is a most impudent and rash Presumption; because (as I have intimated
already) the Objects of their Predictions are so alterable by the interposall
of free Agents, which interrupt ever and anon the series of Causality in
natural inclinations. Whence in reason a man can expect no certain Predictions
at all from the significations of the Stars, nor that any trial can be made
whether there be any thing in the Art or no. And it cannot but seem to every
one a very bold surmise, to imagine that all that fall in one fight by the edge
of the Sword, or suffer shipwreck in one Storm, or are swept away in one
Pestilence, had their Emissors and Interfectors in their Nativity answerable to
the times of their Death. The Artists themselves dare not avouch it, and
therefore bring in an unobserved caution of having recourse to Eclipses,
Comets, and blazing-Stars, to calculate the general fortune of the place, nay,
of their Parents and Ancestors, and of their familiar Friends, of which there
is no news in the most famous Predictions of Astrologers: and therefore these
and the like considerations being left out, it is a sign their divinations
fell true by chance. Wherefore it is a shameless piece of Imposture to impute
the truth of Predictions to Art, where the Rules of Art are not observed; I may
add where they are so palpably by Experience confuted. For so it is in Twins,
whose natures should be utterly the same according to their Art; and if they
could be born at one moment, the moment of their death should be the same also.
And yet those undissevered Twins born in Scotland, who lived till twenty eight
years of their age, See his Defense of Judicial Astrology, cap. 11.
proved very often dissenting brethren, would wrangle and jangle; and one also
died before the other. In answering to which instance, in my judgment, that
ingenious Knight Sir Christopher is very shrewdly baffled.

4. And now to the Sect. 2.
former, I say, The reasoning is not right, to conclude the certainty of the
Art from the punctual correspondence of the Event to the Prediction. For it is
also true that the Event has been punctually contrary thereto. And therefore
this is as good a demonstration that it is no Art, as the other that it is: But
it is easy to conceive that both may happen by Chance. Again, as for that
exact Punctuality of time, it is most likely to be by Chance, because (as I
have proved above) there is no way of rectifying a Nativity to that accuracy
they pretend. And for particular Circumstances in Horary Questions, why may
they not be by underhand information, or some tricks and juglings that are
usual amongst Cheats? But if the Predictions of Astrologers be free from this,
and yet be punctual in time and other circumstances, and so many that it may
seem improbable to be imputed to Chance, (though Chance has such a latitude,
that it is difficult to say any thing is not by Chance that happens, suppose
but four times seldomer then the contrary) it will not yet follow that they are
free from other things which are assuredly worse, more horrid, and more
execrable; such as the consulting of Ghosts and Familiar Spirits: a wickedness
that that zealous Patron of Astrology, Sir Christopher Heydon, acknowledges to
be too frequently palliated under the Pretense of this Art.

5. And truly for my own part I do not much doubt but that Astrology it self is
an Appendix of the old Pagans Superstition, who were Worshippers of the Host of
Heaven, and whose Priests were Confederates of the Devil; and therefore it is
no wonder if Daemonolatry creep in upon Astrology, and renew their old
acquaintance with one another. And assuredly it is a pleasant Spectacle to
those aerie Goblins, those Haters and Scorners of Mankind, to see the noble
Faculties of men debased and entangled in so vile and wretched a mystery, which
will avail nothing to Divination unless these (...) these malicious Deceivers
act their parts in the Scene. For it is not unconceivable how these invisible
Insidiators may so apply themselves to a man's curiosity that will be tampering
and practicing in this Superstition, that (suppose) in Horary Questions, they
may excite such persons and at such a time to make their demands, that
according to the foreknown Rules of Astrology the Theme of Heaven will decypher
very circumstantially the Person, his Relations, or his Condition, and give a
true solution of the demand, whether about Decumbitures, Stolen goods, or any
such questions as are set down in Dariot's Introduction. Which needs must
enravish the young Astrologer, and inflame him with the love and admiration of
so strange an Art. And as for Nativities and punctual Predictions of the time
of ones death, and it may be of the manner of it, (which either only, or most
ordinarily happens in such as are addicted to, or devoted admirers of this Art)
it is very suspicable that the same invisible Powers put to their helping hand
to bring about the Effect; and so those whose misfortunes and deaths are
predicted, must to the pot, to credit the Art, and be made Sacrifices to the
lust and ambition of those rebellious Fiends, to whose secret lash and dominion
men expose themselves when they intermeddle with such superstitious Curiosities
as are Appendages to ancient Paganism, and were in all likelihood invented or
suggested by those proud and ludicrous Spirits, to entangle man in by way of
sport and scorn, and to subjugate him to the befoolments of their tricks and
delusions. For it is not unreasonable to think that by certain Laws of the
great Polity of the Invisible World they gain a right against a man without
explicit contract, if he be but once so rash as to tamper with the Mysteries of
the Dark Kingdom, or to practice in them, or any way to make use of them. For
why not here as well as in the Ceremonies of Witchcraft? (But I must not make
too large excursions.) And therefore I think it the safest way for every one
that has given his name to God and Christ, not to meddle nor make with these
Superstitious curiosities of Astrology, either by practicing them himself, or
consulting them that do, that no ill trick be put upon him by being made
obnoxious to the invisible scourge, or by making others so in whose behalf he
consults.

6. I say then, these vagrant Demons of the Air either secretly insinuating
themselves into the actions of Astrologers, or after more apparently offering
themselves to familiarity and converse, for to grace their profession by oral
revelation of things past, present, or to come in such a way as is above humane
power; I demand how it shall appear that Cardan's, for example, and Sueton, in
vita Domitiani sect. 15.
Ascletarion's deaths, and others more punctually, that I could name, predicted
by themselves or others, was not by the familiarity of Demons, but the pure
principles of Astrology. And so of whatsoever Honor or other Events that have
been found to fall out just according to Astrological predictions, I demand how
it can be proved that Astrology was not here only for a vizard, and that a
Magician or Wizzard was not underneath. By how much accurater their Predictions
are, by so much the more cause of suspicion.

7. Now therefore to conclude, seeing that the Principles of Astrology are so
groundless, frivolous, nay contradictious one with another, and built upon
false Hypotheses and gross mistakes concerning the Nature and System of the
World; seeing it has no due object by reason of the interposing of the free
Agency of both men and Angels to interrupt perpetually the imagined natural
series of both Causality and Events; seeing there is not sufficient Experience
to make good the truth of the Art, they that have practiced therein having not
observed the pretended Laws thereof with due accuracy, and therefore if any
thing has hitherto hit true, it must be Chance, which quite takes away their
plea from Events; so that their Art is utterly to seek, not only for
Principles, which I have demonstrated to be false, but for Experience and
Effects, which hitherto have been none; (And assuredly they make nothing of
pronouncing loudly that such or such a Configuration will have such an Event,
though they never experienced it at all, or very seldom: as it must needs be in
the conjunction of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, which returns not in seven
hundred years;) seeing also that those Predictions that are pretended to have
fallen right are so few, that they may justly be deemed to have fallen right by
Chance, and that if any thing has been foretold very punctually and
circumstantially, it may as well, nay better, be supposed to proceed from the
secret insinuations or visible converse with the aerie Wanderers, then from the
indication of the Stars; and lastly, seeing there is that affinity and frequent
association of Astrology with Daemonolatry and ancient Pagan Superstition; that
person certainly must have a strangely-impure and effascinable passivity of
Phancie, that can be bound over to a belief or liking of a Foolery so utterly
groundless as Astrology is, and so nearly verging toward the brinks of
Apostasy and Impiety.

8. I have now finished my Astrological Excursion, to which I was strongly
tempted, in a just zeal and resentment of that unparalled presumption and
wicked sauciness of the vainglorious Cardan, who either in a rampant fit of
pride and thirst after admiration, or out of a malicious design to all true
Piety, would make the world believe that the Divinity and Sacrosanctity of
Christian Religion was subjected to his imaginary laws of the Stars, and that
the fate of Christ the Son of God, miraculously born of the Holy Ghost, was
writ in his Nativity, which forsooth he pretended to have calculated: As if all
that Justice, Meekness and power of working of Miracles were derived upon our
Savior from the Natural influence of the Configuration of the Heavens at his
Birth; and as if he did not willingly lay down his life for the World, John
10.18.
as he himself professes, but were surprised by Fate, and lay subject to the
stroke of an Astrological (...) or Sidereal Interfector. As also to meet with
that enormous Boaster and self-conceited Wit, the profane and giddy-headed
Vaninus, a transported applauder and admirer of that wild and vain supposition
of Cardan, upon which he so much dotes, that it is the very prop and
masterpiece of his impious Writings, the both Basis and Finishing of all his
villainous distorted doctrines against the Truth and Sacredness of Christian
Religion. To which two you may add also Apollonius, though long before them, a
high pretender to divine Revelations, and hot Instaurator of decaying Paganism;
but withal a very silly affected of See Book 4. chapter 4. sect. 2.
Astrological predictions, by which it is easily discoverable at what a pitch
he did either divine or philosophize. And methinks it is a trim sight to see
these three busy sticklers against Christianity, like three fine Fools so
goodly gay in their Astromantick Disguises, exposed to the just scorn and
derision of the World for their so high pretensions against what is so holy and
solid as the Christian Faith is, and that upon so fond and frivolous grounds as
this of Astrology.

BOOK VIII.
CHAP. I. 1. The End and Usefulness of Christian Religion in general. 2. That
Christ came into the World to destroy Sin out of it. 3. His earnest
recommendation of Humility. 4. The same urged by the Apostle Paul.
1. WE have no finished the Third part of our Discourse, and have sufficiently
proved, That Christianity is not only a Reasonable and Intelligible Idea of
something that may be worth Providence's setting on foot some time or other, or
as a seminal Form lurking unactive in the seed under ground; but that it has
shot it self into Real existence, and is as a grown Tree that spreads its arms
far and wide. It remains now that we consider the Branches and Fruit thereof.
And I dare boldly pronounce that this is the Tree whose leaves were intended
for the Healing of the Nations, not for a Pretense and Palliation for Sin; and
that the Fruit thereof to the true Believer is Life and Immortality. This is a
brief comprehension of the glorious End and great Usefulness of the Gospel. But
we shall be something more explicate in a matter of so mighty importance. You
may understand out of what has been said in the First part concerning the
Nature of the Mystery of Godliness, that the Gospel is a kind of Engine to
raise the Divine life into those Triumphs that are due to it, and are designed
for it from everlasting by the all-seeing Providence of God. Let us now
consider how fit the Dispensation of the Gospel is for this purpose, that is to
say, Those things that are testified in it, or prophesied of it, or intimated
by it, how all these things aim and conspire to this End; partly by affording
the most effectual means imaginable for the re-installing the Soul into an
higher state of Righteousness here, then any other Dispensation that has yet
appeared in the World, and thereby more certainly transplanting her hereafter
into a blessed state of immortal Life; and partly by exhibiting such
warrantable grounds of doing Divine Homage to the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
this Life we speak of resideth so plentifully, he being anointed therewith far
above the measure of his fellows. So that in this respect, though the other
design has taken so little effect in the World, yet we cannot but acknowledge
that the Divine life has not been disappointed of all her exterior Pomps and
Triumphs. We shall begin with the former kinds of the Powers of this Engine.

2. The First whereof consists in this, In that it is so plainly and clearly
declared in the New Testament, That the great End of Christ's coming into the
World was to remove Sin out of it, and to purify men's Souls from all
uncleanness and wickedness; as is apparent from sundry places. As 1 John chap.
3. He that commits sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from the
beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin;
for his seed remains in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.
Again, Tit. chap. 2. For the grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared
to all men; teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world; Looking for that
blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar people, Zealous of good works. Also Ephesians. chapter 5.
v. 25. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church, and
gave himself for it; that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
water, by the word: That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be holy and
without blemish.

I might add several other places, but I shall content my self with but one
ratification more of this truth from the mouth of our blessed Savior, who
professes he came not to destroy the Law, Matthew. 5.17.
but to fulfill it, that is, to set it at an higher pitch, as appears by the
whole scope of his Sermon upon the Mount. The observance of which Precepts he
does seriously require of his disciples and followers; as appears from that
Similitude he closes his discourse withal, where he pronounces that they that
kept and practiced his sayings, should be safe as one that builds his house
upon a Rock; Matthew. 7.24.
but those that heard and practiced not should be as he that built on the Sand,
that is, upon a false and deceitful foundation. And a little above he does
plainly protest even against such that may have prophesied, cast out Devils and
done Miracles in his name, (which yet are greater matters then either the
making or hearing of long Prayers or long Sermons,) because they kept not this
Law of Righteousness he there propounds, he does protest that in the day of
Judgment he will not know them, but bid them depart from him, as Workers of
Iniquity.

This is sufficient to demonstrate That the End of the Gospel is to renovate
the Spirits of men into true and real inherent Righteousness and Holiness,
which in counter-distinction to the Animal life (which had domineered in the
World so long, not only in the profane Actions but also in the very See Book
3. chap. 6, and 7.
Religious Rites of the Heathens, as I have already shown at large) I have
denominated the Life Divine, and numbered out those Three parts it most consists
of, namely, Humility, Charity and Purity; and therefore it will not be
unseasonable to show how expressly and particularly urgent the Gospel is for the
promoting these three Graces.

3. Our Savior Christ Matthew. 11. makes a solemn invitation to the first of
these Virtues, propounding himself an Example; Come unto me all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest unto your
souls. And Matthew. 5. v. 5. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the
earth. It is a promise from the same mouth. The meaning of both which places
is, That Humility and Meekness beget a great deal of Peace and Tranquillity and
enjoyment of a man's self even in this life, whenas Pride exposes a man to
perpetual Discontent and Impatiency. Besides that the Proud man is as it were
the Butt that the Almighty shoots his Arrows against to gall, wound and vex;
the very hackstock of Divine vengeance, and the sport and pastime of
Misfortune. James 4.6.
God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. But my purpose is not
to interpret such easy places as I allege, but merely to bring them into the
Readers view.

And there are many more yet that testify of the Excellency of this Grace of
Humility. For our Savior again ( Matthew. 11.) entitles those Virtues especially
to the knowledge of the Mystery of the kingdom of God. I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because, thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seems
good in thy sight. And Matthew. 18. Christ being asked who is the greatest in the
kingdom of Heaven, called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of
them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted and become as
little children, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of Heaven.
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is
greatest in the kingdom of Heaven. And Chap. 20.25. Ye know that the Princes of
the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise
authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your servant. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. In which
passage is insinuated, that useless and pompous honor is to have no place in
the Church of Christ; but that if any man's office be more honorable then
another, it must be also more serviceable, especially in matters appertaining
to Religion.

For to the like purpose is that Matthew. 23. where the Pride and Hypocrisy of
the Scribes and Pharisees is taxed. For they bind heavy burdens, says our
Savior, and grievous to be born, and lay them upon men's shoulders; but they
themselves will not move them with one of their fingers. But all their works
they do to be seen of men: they make broad their Phylacteries, and enlarge the
borders of their garments, and love the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and the
chief seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the marketplaces, and to be
called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi. But ^^ not you called, Infallible Doctor,
impetious Father or Master, obtruding upon his own authority other doctrines
then Christ has taught us.
Rabbi, says our Savior: for one is your Master, even Christ, and all you are
brethren. And call no man your Infallible Doctor, impetious Father or Master,
obtruding upon his own authority other doctrines then Christ has taught us.
Father upon Earth; for one is your Father which is in Heaven. Neither be you
called Infallible Doctor, impetious Father or Master, obtruding upon his own
authority other doctrines then Christ has taught us.
Masters; for one is your Master, even Christ. But he that is greatest among
you, shall be your Quo quis inter vos majorem in Ecclesia dignitatem obtinebit,
cosciat sibi non plus imperit concessum, sed plus oneris injunction. Grot.
Servant. And whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that
humbles himself, shall be exalted.

4. Hitherto our Savior, and that very fully. In whose footsteps the Apostles
also insist, Romans 12.16. Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not
high things, but condescend to men of low degree. Be not wise in your own
conceits. And Ephesians. 4. I therefore the prisoner of the Lord beseech you that ye
walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called, in all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love. And Titus 3.
Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work, To speak evil of no man, to be no
brawlers, showing all meekness to all men. So that we see the Christian
Religion meets as well with the sauciness of the Inferiors, as with the
affected domination of Superiors. Thus expressly does the Gospel recommend
Humility to the World.

CHAP. II. 1. Christ's enforcement of Love and Charity upon his Church by
Precept and his own Example. 2. The wretched imposture and false pretensions of
the Family of Love to this divine Grace. 3. The unreasonableness of the
Familists in laying aside the person of Christ, to adhere to such a carnal and
inconsiderable Guide as Hen. Nicolas. 4. That this Whifler never gave any true
Specimens of real love to Mankind, as Christ did and his Apostles. 5. His
unjust usurpation of the Title of Love. 6. The unparalled endearments of
Christ's sufferings in the behalf of Mankind.
1. THe next Branch of the Divine Life is Christian Love or Charity, then which
nothing is more inculcated in the New Testament. Christ has left it as his
Motto, and the Motto of his Church, the Symbolum or Word whereby it may be
known to whom they belong. John 13.34. A new commandment I give unto you, That
ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye love one another. By this
shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another. As if he
should have said, You may have heard something indeed out of Moses of loving
ones neighbor as himself; which Precept as it did not reach so far as I intend
this of mine, and that which it reached at is utterly laid aside and neglected,
I now afresh set it on foot, and upon such terms and in such a degree and
manner as never was yet. For I would have you love one another even as I have
loved you, that is, so heartily and sincerely, that you will be ready to lay
your lives down one for another, if need require. Which is more express, Chap.
15.12. This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.
Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends. Which Christ doing for his Church, especially in those circumstances
he did, is an unparalled specimen of true love indeed, and the highest
obligation that can be of our loving both him and one another.

2. Which things while I consider, I cannot with patience think upon the gross
imposture of that bold Enthusiast of Amsterdam, who giving no sound evidence of
any such Love as may be deemed rightly either Moral or Divine, only tumbling
out a Rhapsody of swelling words, distorted Allegories, and slight allusions to
the History of Scripture, intermingling them or strinkling them ever and anon
with the specious name of Love, (though there be no motive nor reason that
urges the thing it self all the while,) would give out himself such a Master of
this Mystery, as that Christianity must be super-annuated, and all the
devotionall Homage due to our Savior laid aside, all his Offices silenced, his
Passion slighted, nay derided, his visible Return to Judgment anticipated and
eluded, his Resurrection and Ascension misbelieved, and the promise of Eternal
Life swallowed up in the present glorious enjoyments and enrichments of them
that will give up their soundness of judgment and reason to be led about with
the May-games and Morrice-dances of that sweet Sect that have usurped to
themselves the Title of the Family of Love. Whenas the Author of this Faction,
as I am well enough informed, was more likely to prove a Pimp or second
Sardanapalus, then a true Instructor of the World in so holy a Mystery; being
infamous for having suspected Females in his House, and living splendidly and
deliciously above his rank; noted for his crimson-Satten doublet and other
correspondent habiliments, as also for his large Looking-glass, wherein he
often contemplated his whole begodded Humanity; and composing his long beard,
and stroaking down his Satin sides, might strut in admiration of himself, that
he found the World so favorable to his false Impostures; and lastly,
ridiculous for his women-Scribes, and other such like soft doings, not to say
impure and obscene. All which to any man that has but a moderate nasuteness
cannot but import, that in the title of this Sect that call themselves the
Family of Love, there must be signified no other love then that which is merely
Natural or Animal; though the Preacher of this Love-mystery bears himself so
aloft, and is so high upon the wing, that he cannot fancy himself any thing
less then that Apocalypticall Angel flying in the midst of Heaven, and
preaching the everlasting Gospel to the Inhabitants of the World. And truly
this Gospel of Henry of Amsterdam is likely to be as lasting as the generations
of men, and, I may add, as universal as both Men and Brutes.

3. Hear, O Heavens, and hearken, O Earth, while I plead the cause of the just
one and despised against the rebellious Hypocrites. Isa. 28.16.
Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Sion for a foundation a stone, a
tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation; and he that believes
thereon, shall not be ashamed. Judgment also will I lay to the line, and
righteousness to the plummet, and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies,
and the waters shall overflow their hiding-places. That this cornerstone and
sure foundation is 1 Pet. 2.6. Romans 9.32, 33.
Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, we are infallibly informed by those that
were truly inspired, the blessed Apostles. That the refuge of lies and
hiding place is most naturally applicable to this skulking Family, is apparent,
in that the sum of their Religion is nothing but a bundle of lying Allegories
and Canting Terms, whereby they deal falsely with men; and under the pretense of
fine Mystical speeches, would thrust out of the World the choicest and most
beneficial Truth that ever was imparted to the Sons of men; I mean the Truth
of the Gospel in the plain simplicity thereof, whereby we are so clearly taught
what we are to be, to do, and to expect. And the Storm that shall overtake
them, and the Deluge that shall fall in upon them in their hidden dwellings,
shall be those Torrents of Reason and that irresistible conviction from the
sincere and true-hearted followers of Christ.

Tell me therefore, O ye conceitedly-inspired, whose phancies have blown you
above Gospel-dispensations, why do you run into the error of the Jews, and
refuse this precious cornerstone, this sure foundation, and build upon
disunited Sand and rotten Quagmires, that will bear no weight? Why do you lay
aside Christ in the truth of his History, the most palpable pledge of Divine
Providence, of God's Reconciliation to men and of future Happiness, that ever
was exhibited to the World, and choose for your Guide a mere Allegorical
Whisler, an Idol-Puppet dressed up in words and phrases filched out of the
Scripture, but perverting and eluding the main scope and most useful meaning
thereof?

Why have ye forsaken the only-begotten Son of God, and given your selves up
to the deceivable conduct of a mere carnal man, and wholly destitute not only
of true faith in God and Christ, but of all substantial Knowledge and Reason?
Why are you so rash and giddy as to believe one that only testifies of himself,
and is so impudent a Plagiary as to offer you no wares but such as he has
stolen from you, if you pretend to be of the Christian Church; and those so
poisoned and adulterated, that you cannot receive them without the danger of
being struck into a misbelief of the truth of Christ's Gospel, and of revolting
from him to whom so many illustrious Prophecies of old, so many Miracles done
by himself, to whom his wonderful Resurrection from the dead, and audible
voices from Heaven while he was living, gave ample testimony that he was indeed
the true Son of God?

4. What indearing evidence or argument has this Mercer of Amsterdam given you
of true compassion and love to mankind, that you should vaunt him so
transcendent a Mystagogus in so divine a Mystery, that you equalize him to,
nay, exalt him above Christ and his Apostles? Did he not live a lazy, easy,
soft life, as other rich Shopkeepers do; whenas not only our Savior himself
but also his Apostles lived an hard Asketick life, full of dangers and
afflictions also from without? Let S. Paul speak for the rest, for they were in
a manner all of them in the same case, and might justly expostulate with these
high fanatic Pretenders in the same words: 2 Cor. 11.23, 24, etc.
Are they Ministers of Christ? (I speak like a fool) I am more; in labors more
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often.
Of the Jews received I forty stripes save one, thrice was I beaten with rods,
once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have I been
in the Deep; in Iourneyings often, in perils of water, in perils of Robbers, in
perils by mine own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the
City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils at the sea, in perils among false
brethren; in weariness and painfulnesse, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness, etc. To all which you may
add very despightfull and torturous deaths which most of them underwent at
last: and all this out of a faithful love to their Lord and Master Jesus
Christ, and a dear regard to the good and Salvation of mankind. But what was
it wherewith this H. N. obliged the world so that all due homage and divine
reverence to the Person of Christ must be laid aside, and this bold Impostor
silence the constant faith of Christians, by his high pretensions of being the
Head and Father of such a Family whose Inscription must be Love, who with this
Family of his, is God and Christ, and Cherubims and Seraphims, Angels and
Archangels already busy in their office of judging the quick and the dead,
and gathering the elect from all the corners of the Earth?

5. But in my apprehension at the very first sight he shows himself very
injudicious, if not malicious, in making a difference betwixt the true Household
of Faith and Family of Love; besides his gross and impudent injustice in
usurping that badge of honor to himself that was won by another in a field of
blood. For, as I was going to say, what has this H. N. done to merit this title
more then in scribbling many fanatical Rhapsodies of unsound language, abusively
borrowed from the sacred Scriptures, and in perverting the sense and
supplanting the end by his wicked elusions and vain Allegorical evasions, and
so under pretense of beginning an higher dispensation of Righteousness and
Religion in the world then ever was yet, treacherously introducing in stead of
true Religion nothing but Sadducisme, Epicurisme and Atheism? This voluminous
Enthusiasme of his, together with the gracing of the Family with the splendor
of his crimson habiliments, is all I find that can pretend to any contestation
or competition with the true Master of Divine Love, or to any obligation of his
Followers.

6. I must confess our Savior compiled no Books, it being a piece of Pedantry
below so noble and Divine a person. But that short Sentence which he writ with
his own most precious blood, As I have loved you, so love you one another, is
worth millions of Volumes, though written with the truest and sincerest
Eloquence that ever fell from the pen of an Orator. Nor did he wear any gay
Clothes, but when by force the abusive soldiers put a scarlet robe upon him
indespight and mockery. Nor was he resplendent in any colors but what was the
die of his own blood in his solemn and dreadful Passion, when he was so cruelly
scourged, when out of agony of mind he sweat drops of blood, when he was
nailed to the Cross, and the lance let blood and water out of his side. All
which ineffable and unsupportable torments this innocent Lamb of God suffered
for no demerit of his, (for what thank is it to suffer for a factious Impostor
or open evil doer?) but out of mere compassion and hearty love to mankind, that
he might by this bitter Passion of his, and the glorious consequences of it,
his Resurrection and Ascension, gain us to God. And now let all men judge if
there can be possibly any Author or pretended Instructor of the World, in that
holy and divine Love indeed, comparable to the Lord Jesus, who has given this
unparalled demonstration of his love unto us.

CHAP. III. 1. The occasion of the Familists usurpation of the Title of Love.
2. Earnest precepts out of the Apostles to follow Love, and what kind of Love
that is. 3. That we cannot love God, unless we love our neighbor also. 4. An
Exposition of the 5 and 6 verses of the 1 chapter of the 2 Epist. of S. Peter.
5. Saint Paul's rapturous commendation of Charity. 6. His accurate description
thereof. 7. That Love is the highest participation of the Divinity, and that
whereby we become the Sons of God. And how injurious these Fanatics are that
rob the Church of Christ of this title to appropriate it to themselves.
1. HEarken therefore to me, yet that would follow after righteousness, ye that
seek the Lord: Isa. 51.1.
Look unto the rock whence you were hewn, and to the hole of the pit from
whence you were dug. Look upon him whom ye have pierced, and whose blood is
the seed of the Church, whose Spouse was taken out of his side as Eve out of
the side of Adam. Acknowledge your original, and recount with your selves the
price of your Redemption, even the inestimable blood of that immaculate Lamb
Christ Jesus. The sense whereof is the strongest cement imaginable to unite us
to our Savior and one unto another.

But the Church having been given up so long a time to bitter factions and
persecutions, to war and bloodshed, and all manner of enmity and hostility
one against another, it is no wonder if a stranger has invaded that Title,
which she may justly be thought to have either refused or forfeited. For my own
part, I know not how to apologize for either the fond opinions or foul
miscarriages of the Wilderness of Christendom. But sure I am That the Banner
over the true Spouse of Christ is Love: That Love is the badge and cognoscence
of all his faithful members, by which they are known to be His living members
indeed: That Love and Peace is the last Legacy which was left to the disciples
by their dying Lord and Master; an inheritance entailed upon all the true sons
of God for ever: That Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and has filled almost
every page of the Gospel and all the Writings of the Apostles; and when they
speak of Faith, it is none other Faith then that which works by Love.

2. Out of the many repetitions and inculcations of this holy and heavenly
Virtue I was a gleaning out some to present you withal, for an evidence how
serious the Gospel of Christ is and how sufficient in the urging of his
indispensable duty. We go on therefore, and add to what we have already cited
these following places. Galat. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love. And if
Circumcision be nothing without Faith working by Love, what can Baptizing or
Rebaptizing or any external ceremony be without this true Faith whose life and
spirit is Love, which the Apostle directs us to? And after v. 13, 14. For,
brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not your liberty for an
occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. For all the Law is
fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
Where this Law of Love is so carefully described, that the abuse of this Title
to Lust and Libertinisme is plainly excluded, against such as talk so much of
Love, and are but Libertines at the bottom. Which caution also is very soberly
and prudently put in by S. John, Ep. 1. chap. 5. v. 2. By this we know that we
love the children of God, when we love God and keep his Commandments. Which is
a plain demonstration that that Love which Saint John exhorts to so copiously
in his Epistle, is a Love purely divine, and such as no man can be assured he
does practice, unless he keep all the Commandments of God. For even a carnal
man may love the Children of God, because he finds them harmless, peaceable
and beneficial, or because himself is of a good sanguine benign complexion:
But this Love, in a man that makes not conscience of the Commandments of God,
is merely animal and natural; not proceeding from that community of the Divine
Spirit which all the Regenerate participate of, but out of complexion and
self-love, which will adhere to any thing that it feels a natural comfort
from. But if this Child of God prove something spinose and harsh in opposing,
rebuking, or it may be not complying with some dearly-beloved humors of this
good-natured sanguine; his corrupt blood will then begin to boil against the
Son of God, and return him hatred for his good will.

3. And as this blessed Apostle and peculiarly-beloved of our Savior has made
so careful a caution, that the Love he recommends to the world should not
slack so low as to draggle in the dirt; so has he wisely provided against the
Hypocrisy of high-flown Religionists, who pretend to be so transported with
love to God and his service, that they quite forget their neighbor: and
therefore at the end of the foregoing Chapter he does plainly pronounce, 1 John
4.20.
that If a man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar: For he
that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has
not seen? And this commandment have we from him, that he that loves God, love
his brother also. Which duty of the Second Table being most hard, and the most
l^able to be cast off through the Hypocrisy of men's hearts, the inculcation
thereof is most frequent with the Apostles. Paul to the Ephesians, chap. 4.
ver. 31. Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, and clamor, and evil
speaking be put away from you, with all malice: And be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you. Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear Children; and walk in
love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us an Offering
and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. And Colos. 3.12. Put on
therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering; Forbearing one
another, and forgiving one another, even as Christ forgave you. And above all
things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness: and let the peace of
God rule in your hearts, etc. Peter also, in his first general Epistle, 1.
Pet. 1.22.
Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit,
unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye love one another with a pure
heart fervently. ver. 5.
And in his second Epistle, chapter 1. And besides this, giving all diligence, add
to your faith virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance;
and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness,
brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity.

4. The coherence of this golden chain of Divine Graces is so admirable that I
cannot pass it by, though it be beside my present purpose to speak any thing
of the places I cite. But we shall not so well understand the fit connection of
these Virtues with themselves, nor of the whole link of them with the precedent
Text, without rectifying the Translation in a word or two. The Apostle in the
foregoing verses intimates to them how God has provided for them according to
his divine power all things appertaining to life and Godliness, through the
knowledge of his Son Jesus Christ, who has called us in glory and Or, power.
virtue, and given us exceeding great and precious promises, that having
escaped the corruption that is in the World through lust, we should be
partakers of the divine nature: and then comes in what has been recited, (...),
which they have rendered, And besides this. Which Translation makes no connection
of sense with the former words, but is very abrupt, nor will the phrase I think
bear that meaning. It is better sense and more laudable Criticisme to render it
thus, And therefore forthwith, or without any more ado, add to your faith
virtue, etc. Which latter words are not well rendered neither. The Greek is,
(...). Grotius would have (...) to be redundant there; so that his suffrage is
for the English Translation. But for my own part I think that (...) is so far
from being redundant, that it is essential to the sentence, and interposed
that we might understand a greater Mystery then the mere adding of so many
Virtues one to another, which would be all that could be expressly signified if
(...) were left out. But the preposition here signifying causality, there is
more then a mere enumeration of those Divine Graces. For there is also implied
how naturally they rise one out of another, and that they have a causall
dependence one of another.

Therefore the sense is, That God having on his part fitted all things for
their Salvation, and they having obtained like precious Faith with the Apostle
himself, that through the efficacy of their Faith they should also acquire
Virtue, that is, Strength and Fortitude. For high and noble Promises excite
courage and resolution to set upon the difficulties through which they must
pass that would obtain the Promises. And this encountering with the
difficulties that are in a Christian man's way, while he is not a talker of
Christianity but a real actour and cordial endeavourer to follow the Precepts
and Example of Christ, will beget not verbal but true Knowledge in him, that
is, holy Experience in the ways of God. And in this Experience he is taught
how those fleshly and worldly lusts and desires have often deceived him, and
led him out of the way, blinding his judgment by their importunate
suggestions, and extinguishing, or at least dulling, those more religious and
divine senses of the Soul, when their importunities are listened to and their
cravings satisfied. And therefore this Knowledge and Experience begets
Temperance, that is, a more rigid resolution of curbing and keeping under of
all worldly and carnal desires, and a peremptory refraining from giving any
answer to their impudent beggings and cravings.

Which things if a man seriously attempt in its due extent and latitude,
questionless he will put himself upon a very intolerable task, and there will
be no remedy but Patience; which he will find so mightily out of his power,
that he will be forced upon his knees to the God of heaven to comfort, assist
and strengthen him in his agony and conflict against his domestic enemies, and
to support his spirit in so great anguish and pain. Whence it is plain that we
cannot keep close to the laws of Temperance, but that Patience will necessarily
emerge therefrom; nor be kept in this Spirit of Patience without the invocation
and acknowledgment of Divine assistance, which is an unquestionable fruit of
Godliness properly so called.

Nor can we apply our hearts seriously and sincerely to this kind of Godliness
long, but we shall find answers to our prayers and breathings after God, beyond
both our own expectation and the belief of others: and therefore enjoying the
victory through the Divine grace that is sufficient for us, and getting so
glorious a triumph over our lusts, we finding our Souls transported with an
high sense of thankfulness to our Redeemer and Benefactour, who wants nothing
of our retributions himself, the stream of our affections is naturally driven
downwards to his Church, Psalm 16.2, 3.
to the Saints that dwell upon earth, and those that excel in virtue, or at
least pretend unfeigned endeavors after it. And this is properly brotherly
Kindness, which carries our affections to those that profess the same Religion
with our selves. Which brotherly Kindness arises not only out of this
consideration of thankfulness toward God, but out of the very temper and
condition of the Soul thus purified: according to what S. Peter intimates, that
having purified our Souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, the end and
result thereof is the loving our brethren. Or else what serves this
Purification for?

Shall Envy, shall Hatred, shall Lust, shall Ambition, shall Luxury, shall
those enormous desires and affections be cast out of the Soul by Sanctity and
Purity, that she may be but a transparent piece of ice or a spotless fleece of
snow? Shall she become so pure, so pellucid, so crystalline, so devoid of all
stains and tinctures, of all soil and duller colors, that nothing but still
shadows and Night may possess that inward diaphanous Purity? Then would she be
no better then the nocturnall Air, no happier then a statue of Alabaster. All
would be but a more cleanly sepulcher of a dead starved Soul. But there is no
fear of so poor an event upon so great preparations. For Love and Desire are so
essential to the Soul, that she cannot put them off but change them. She is
(...), as Psellus calls her, an immaterial and incorporeal fire, an
unextinguishable activity, and will catch at some Object or other. And
therefore if she has ceased to love the world and the Lusts of her own body,
she will certainly love the body of Christ, the Church, and study how to help
them and advantage them. Nor can she stop here, but this pure and quick flame
mounts upwards and is reflected again downwards, and vibrates every way,
reaching at all Objects in Heaven and in Earth, as natural fire enters all
combustible matter. And therefore in her pure and ardent speculations of the
Godhead and his unlimited Goodness, and also her observations of the capacity
of the whole Creation of receiving good both from him and one another, she
overflowes those narrow bounds of brotherly Love, and spreads out into that
ineffably-ample and transcendently-divine grace and virtue, universal Charity,
which is the highest accomplishment the Soul of man is capable of either in
this life or that which is to come: and thus at last she becomes perfect, as
her Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

5. This is that most excellent way which S. Paul speaks so transportedly and
triumphantly of, 1 Cor. chapter 13. Where having first numbered out the manifold
Gifts that God bestowed upon his Church, as Preaching, Prophesying, working of
miracles, gifts of healing, and diversity of tongues, he immediately breaks out
in the rapturous commendations of Charity above all. Though I speak with the
tongues of men and of Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as a sounding
brass and a tinckling cymball. And though I have the gift of Prophecy, and
understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so
that I could remove mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing. And though I
bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned,
and have not Charity, it profits me nothing.

And after he has raised our expectation and estimation of this Heavenly grace
with these high words of his, he does not, as the vain Enthusiast does, heat
our phancies and leave our judgment in the dark; but he does very distinctly
and copiously describe to us the nature of this Divine virtue; so that we may
plainly know where to be, and what to seek after, and how to be satisfied
whether we have attained to it or no.

6. Charity suffers long, and is kind; Charity envies not; Charity vaunteth
not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave her self unseemly, seeks not
her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, complies not with iniquity,
but rejoiceth with the truth; Bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, endures all things. This is a very full and lively description of
Love and Charity, and the character of the sweetest and Heavenliest perfection
that is communicable to the nature of man; and so warmly poured out from the
sincere heart of this rich possessour of it, the holy Apostle, that it is to me
more moving then all the canting language of the highest fanatical Pretenders
to the profession of this Mystery.

7. This is the highest participation of Divinity that humane nature is capable
of on this side that Mysterious conjunction of the Humanity of Christ with the
Godhead; and therefore this is that whereby we become the Sons of God, as S.
John has evidently declared in his 1. Epistle general, chapter 4. Beloved, let us
love one another: for Love is of God; and every one that loves, is born of
God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not God; for God is Love. And
verse. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent
his Son to be a propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we
ought also to love one another. No man has seen God at any time: If we love
one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us. And again
verse. 16. God is Love; and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God
in him. Several other Testimonies there are of the high estimate the true
Church of Christ has of this holy Virtue of Love: but what I have already cited
is sufficient to show how urgent the Precepts of the Gospel are for this
excellent branch of the Divine life, which we call Charity; as also how
inexcusably injurious, impious and blasphemous to Christ those fanatical
Impostors are that revolt from the Church, superannuate Christ's offices, and
antiquate the Christian Religion, under a pretense of an higher dispensation
and Revelation upon which they have set the Title or Superscription of Love,
adorning themselves with the Churches colors, that by this evil stratagem they
may the more safely fall upon her and destroy her, at least seduce the most
simple and, many times, the best-meaning members of the Church from their true
Head, Christ Jesus, who ransomed them with his own most precious blood. Whose
Sovereignty over his Church cannot cease, himself not ceasing to be; but he is
a Priest and King for ever according to the Prophecies.

CHAP. IV. 1. Our Savior's strict injunction of Purity; from whence it is also
plain that the Love he commends is not in any sort fleshly, but Divine. 2.
Several places out of the Apostles urging the same duty. 3. Two more places to
the same purpose. 4. The groundless presumption of those that abuse
Christianity to a liberty of sinning. 5. That this Error attempted the Church
betimes, and is too taking at this very day. 6. Whence appears the necessity of
opposing it, which he promises to do, taking the rise of his Discourse from 1
John 3.7.
1. THE third Branch of the Divine Life is Purity. In the urging whereof both
Christ and his Apostles being so earnest, it is plain, that that Love which
they recommend to the World can be no suspected affection, like that which the
canting language of the Enthusiasts may justly be thought to favor; but that
it is that pure and holy Love indeed, which deservedly we have styled Divine.
And how severely this Purity we speak of is required, I shall give you some few
but very sufficient instances. Matthew. 5.27. Ye have heard that it was said by
them of old time, Thou shall not commit adultery: But I say unto you, that
whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery already
with her in his heart. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast
it from thee: for it is better for thee that one of thy members should perish,
then that thy whole body should be cast into Hell. And if thy right hand offend
thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee, etc. What more serious and earnest
monition can there be made to Continence and Abstinence from sensual pleasures
then this of our Savior, who upon no less penalty then the torments of Hell
interdicts us all looseness and uncleanness; forbidding us all preludious
preparations to the foul acts of Lust, and not permitting so much as an
imaginary scene of illicit transactions, to which our will could really assent
if opportunity were offered?

2. And we shall find the Apostles insisting in the footsteps of their Master
in this matter. 2. Corinthians. 6. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye
separated, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive
you: And I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. And 1 Thessalon. 5. The God of peace sanctify you
wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in the former chapter,
ver. 3. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should
abstain from fornication: That every one of you should know how to possess his
vessel in sanctification and honor; not in the lust of concupiscence, as the
Gentiles that know not God. And 1 Corinthians. 6. ver. 13. Now the body is not for
fornication, but the Lord; and the Lord for the body: And God has both raised
up the Lord, and will also quicken us by his own power. Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and
make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. And a little after, Flee
fornication. Every sin that a man does, is without the body; but he that
commits fornication sins against his own body. What? know ye not that
your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost in you, which ye have of God, and ye
are not your own? For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in
your body and in your Spirit, which are God's. Also Coloss. 3.5. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon the earth, Fornication, Uncleanness,
immoderate affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness, which is Idolatry.
For which things sake the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience. Parallel to which is that Ephesians. 5.3. Walk in love, as Christ
also has loved us: but fornication and all uncleanness and covetousness, let
it not be so much as once named amongst you, as becomes saints. Neither
filthiness, nor foolish talking, which are not convenient; but rather giving of
thanks. For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous
man, who is an Idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of
God. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things comes
the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be not you therefore
partakers with them. And 1 Corinthians. 6.9. Know ye not the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicatours, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

3. I have made a more ample collection of the enforcements of this duty of
Purity and Sanctity then I intended; and yet I cannot abstain from adding of
two more: the one out of S. Peter, 1 Epist. chapter 2. Dearly beloved, I beseech
you as strangers and pilgrims to abstain from fleshly lusts which war against
the soul. The other out of him which I have already so often cited, Romans 13.12.
The night is far spent, and the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and put on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly as in
the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambring and wantonness, not
in strife and envying: But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

4. I have now abundantly shown how plainly and explicitly Christ and his
Apostles urge all men that are hearers of the Gospel to be careful and
conscionable doers of the same, that they should be holy even as Christ was
holy in all manner of conversation; that they are bound to endeavor and aspire
after the participation of the Divine life and all the Branches thereof,
Humility, Love and Purity, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh, as the
Apostle Jude speaks. And how this Holiness and Righteousness is required of
them with no less seriousness and earnestness then upon the forfeiture of their
eternal Salvation if they do not act according to those Precepts. Insomuch that
I stand amazed while I consider with my self that hellish and abominable gloss
that some have put upon the Gospel, as if it were a mere school of looseness,
and that the end of Christ's coming into the world was but to bring down a
commission to the sons of men whereby they might be enabled to sin with
authority, I am sure with all desirable security and impunity; nothing being
required on their part but to believe that Christ died for them, and upon no
other condition then that bare belief: as if Christ did not give himself to
redeem us from sin, but to assert our liberty of sinning; which is the most
perverse and mischievous misconstruction of the grace of God revealed in Christ
that possibly could be invented, and point blank against the end and design of
his coming into the world. For he gave himself for us, Tit. 2.14.
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works.

5. Yet as repugnant and irrational as this Error is, it had attempted the
Church betimes; as appears by sundry monitions of the Apostles, when exhorting
their charge to holiness of life and real righteousness, they often intimate
their proneness of being deceived in thinking they had leave to be remiss in
these matters. Some instances you may have observed already: to which you may
add that of S. James, Jam. 1.22.
Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own souls. But
that of S. John is most express and emphaticall, 1 John 3.7.
Little Children, let no man deceive you; he that does righteousness, is
righteous even as he is righteous, that is, even as Christ was righteous, who
was not putatitiously and imaginarily righteous, but really so indeed: though
it seems by this caution there were that went about in those times to persuade
it might be otherwise. And I could wish that this error were not so taking in
the Church as it is at this day: then which notwithstanding no greater I think
can be committed nor more dangerous, it rendering this admirable Engine (as I
have termed it) which God has set up in the world for the advancement of Life
and Godliness, altogether invalid and useless.

6. Wherefore all the following Powers of this Instrument depending on this
first, unless we can make good this, the rest will have no force nor motion.
Therefore that I may make all thoroughly glib and expedite, I find an obligation
upon me not to rest in these, though never-so-evident testimonies, That we are
strictly bound to inherent sanctity and holiness; but to clear also to the
judicious the unwarrantableness and weakness of the grounds of this Error,
which they would obtrude upon the world as the chief Mystery of the Gospel,
namely, That if one do but believe, though devoid of all sanctification, yet he
is approved as holy and righteous by the imputation of Christ's righteousness,
and so consequently shall inherit everlasting life, let him live here as he
will. I shall take the rise of my discourse from that grave and affectionate
counsel the holy Apostle has given to young and weak Christians, and which I
even now mentioned, Little children, let no man deceive you, etc.

CHAP. V. 1. The Apostle's care for young Christians against that Error of
thinking they may be righteous without doing righteously. 2. Their
obnoxiousness to this contagion, with the Causes thereof to be searched into.
3. The first sort of Scriptures perverted to his ill end. 4. The second sort.
5. That the very state of Christian Childhood makes them prone to this Error.
6. What is the nature of that Faith Abraham is so much commended for, and what
the meaning of (...). 7. A search after the meaning of the term Justification.
8. Justification by faith without the deeds of the Law what may be the meaning
of it. 9. Scriptures answered that seem to disjoin Real righteousness from
Faith; 10. And to make us only righteous by imputation. 11. Undeniable
Testimonies of Scripture that prove the necessity of real Righteousness in us.
1. THAT which Plato commends in Lawgivers and Institutors or Governors of
Commonwealths, that they have a special and prime care of Childhood and youth;
as the diligent in Husbandry make peculiar fences for their young plants to
save them from the dangers their tenderness exposes them to; that also is
observable in the blessed Apostle, who amongst many other provisions he has
made in the behalf of all younglings in Christianity, has also armed them and
fenced them with this caution against being mistaken so dangerously in
Christianity as to conceit they may by a bare professing themselves Christians
be righteous, though there were neither any real Righteousness in their hearts
nor any fruits of it in their hands. A wicked Error which several Seducers
tempted men to, such as were Nicolaus, Marcio and Carpocrates, as Historians
have taken notice of.

2. And because there can be no better Antidote then the being convinced that
there is an obnoxiousness in younger Christians to this contagion, I shall
diligently search out and set forth the causes whereby they become obnoxious;
that finding themselves so, they may have the greater care to keep themselves
from being smitten with this pestilentiall infection.

Where we shall find that come to pass in Spiritual things that often happens
in Natural. For as weak bodies contract diseases from meats and drinks, nay,
from that which is so perpetual and palpable a principle of life that we can
scarce live one moment without it, I mean, the refreshing Air, which casts
many tender bodies into Agues and Fevers and other distempers: so tender and
weak Souls often by ill concoction turn the very bread of Eternal life, the
Word of God, into morbifick matter; and in stead of getting growth and strength
by feeding thereon, weaken the Divine life in them, and sink themselves into
most dangerous and desperate maladies.

3. The first cause then of the proneness of young Christians to this present
Error, is certain places of Scripture, the meaning whereof they not rightly
understanding, make bold to interpret them in favor to their own carnality and
fleshly desires. It would be too voluminous a business to cull out all the
places that are perverted to this ill purpose. We shall content our selves in
producing the chiefest, in answering to which we shall naturally satisfy all
the rest.

And these I may cast into two sorts. For they are such as either seem to
import, That a bare Faith will justify us, and so we may become righteous by
an empty belief; or else such as seem to say, That the righteousness of Christ
becomes ours, or, That we are righteous by that righteousness that is in him.

And of the first kind is that Romans 4. Abraham believed God, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness. Now to him that works, is the Reward not
reckoned of Grace, but of debt; but to him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

And Romans 5. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And Romans 10. For Christ is the end of the Law
for righteousness to every one that believes. And at the ninth verse of the
same Chapter, If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. Which places seem to imply, that a mere belief that Christ has done or
suffered this or that is our Justification and Salvation. I might add Galat.
2. ver. 16. But I shall defer it till its proper place.

4. We come now to the second sort of Testimonies of Scripture which seem to
impute the righteousness of Christ to us, and to teach us that it is that by
which we become righteous. 1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who
of God is made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness and Sanctification and
Redemption. And Romans 5. Therefore as by the offense of one judgment came upon
all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came
upon all men to justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
From these and such like places young and unskilful Christians are prone to
infer, that they may be righteous by the obedience or righteousness of Christ
applied or imputed to them, though they have no real righteousness in their own
Souls, nor care to act righteously. And this is the first cause of their
proclivity to this unwholesome Error. But there is another behind, without the
concurrence of which this former would be ineffectuall. For all the passages in
holy Scripture are certainly both sound and true; but it is the unsoundness and
corruptness of our own minds that draws poison out of these Herbs and Flowers
of Paradise.

5. I say therefore in the second place, That the main cause of the propension
of Christian Childehood to this gross Error is in the very condition it self
of those that are but Children in Christianity. For this childish state I
conceive to be this; When a man makes indeed a free open Profession of
Christianity, and with all possible expressions of thanks to God for his rich
mercy in the blood of Christ for the remission of sins, lays fast hold (as he
thinks) on this grace by faith; having also some more weak inchoations of the
life of Righteousness: But the old man is still very strong, the body of Sin
very little subdued or impaired, so that whenever they are encountered, the
toil is very heavy, and a world of work still behind, and such ungrateful work
and painful, that it is no Metaphor nor Hyperbole to say, it is a perpetual
death, a continued crucifixion. This being then the condition of one that is
but a little young child in Christianity, I appeal to any one if there can
choose but be a very considerable proneness in such persons to be delivered from
this toil and torture of Mortification, whereby they are to enter into higher
degrees of Righteousness and life. And now we being very easily drawn to
believe those things which make for our own interest and the accomplishment of
our desires, it must needs be that if any thing sound toward that sense, we
shall easily make it up with a lusty belief that it is so indeed, and (it may
be) thank God to boot for this amabilis insania, for these dear mistakes and
dreams of ours. Wherefore at length to assume, The Scripture therefore seeming
at first sight something to favor this opinion of being righteous without any
real Righteousness in our selves, but by that which is at a wide distance
removed from us and placed in another; to save the pains of the great anguish
and agony that the aspiring to inward real Righteousness will cost in this weak
estate of Christian childehood, it cannot be but that he that has arrived to no
higher condition, should very easily close with this so welcome a notion, and
having once embraced it, be angry at the very heart at any one that would rouse
him from this so pleasing repose, or dissettle him from this false ease and
joy: The weak and fainting heart of this tender age choosing rather (for present
avoiding of smart) an hasty palliation then a sound cure.

But that I may not rather confirm then bring off these Younglings from this
dangerous Error, by noting their most pregnant places and saying nothing to
them; I shall endeavor to make it plain that, if they please, they may
understand those places otherwise then they do: and then, because that their
gloss is not so consonant to Reason, nor the rest of the Scripture, that they
ought to relinquish this unwarrantable sense which they have harbored in
favor to their own vices and wickednesses.

6. And for our better preparation for this design, we will first settle the
notion of the terms that so frequently occur in the Epistles of S. Paul, and
which so nearly concern our present matter. Such as are Faith, Righteousness,
Justification, Imputation, and the like.

And first of Faith, which is so highly commended by the Apostle, I say, it
signifies nothing else but this in general, viz. An high sense of and
confidence in the Power, Justice and Goodness of God, and a firm belief that he
will assuredly bring to pass whatsoever he has promised, seem it never so
unlikely and difficult to flesh and blood. And this is that which was so
commended in Abraham, as it is plain in the fourth to the Romans, Romans 4.18.
who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the Father of many
Nations: And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead,
when he was about an hundred years old, nor yet the deadness of Sara's womb;
being fully persuaded that what God had promised he was able to perform. And
therefore (says the Apostle) it was imputed to him for righteousness. That is
to say, God approved of him for a good and pious man, who not consulting with
the natural improbability of the thing, but giving firm credence to the Promise
of God, did that which was due to the Goodness and Power of God, and becoming a
good and righteous man. So that (...), is nothing else but to be approved as a
good man, or a doer of what is righteous and good, and that because he does
that which is good and righteous. As this act of the Soul exerting her self
above the low and sluggish tenor of Nature, and winging her self by lively
sense of divine Power and Goodness, to the assenting to and resting in such
things as the present state of Nature can never bring about, certainly is, and
is esteemed and approved of God as a very righteous and good Act, and to
proceed from a good and holy temper, which is called (...), which signifies any
virtue or goodness in a man whatsoever: So that act of Phinehas, when he so
zealously did vengeance on Zimri and Cosbi, it is said in the 106 Psalm, (...),
it was looked upon by all succeeding generations as a very noble and eminent
act of Righteousness, i. e. it was reputed according to its own nature. But the
meaning is not, that this was in stead of all other Righteousness to him, and
that he was reputed as righteous all over now, although he were not so at all
in any other things.

7. Now for Justification, we shall best understand the meaning of the word
from the Greek (...) and (...). First therefore, besides the forensal
acception, (...) signifies to be just, Genesis 38.26. (...), Thamar is more
righteous then I. So Eccles. 31.5. (...), He that loves gold, will not be just
See also Apocal. 22.11.
. Secondly, it signifies to appear just, Psa. 51.4. (...), that is, that thou
may plainly appear or approve thy self to be just. And Psalm. 143.^. For in
thy sight no man living (...) shall appear just. Thirdly and lastly, (...)
signifies to make just and pure, to free from vice and sinfulness. Psalm 73. v.
13. (...), Therefore have I cleansed my heart in vain. And Eccles. 18.22.
(...). Nec tuam probitatem usque ad mortem differas, says the Translation. And
Romans 6.7. (...), He that is dead, is freed from sin. Also Act. 13.39. And by
him all they that believe are justified from all things from which ye could not
be justified by the Law of Moses: i. e. Ye are more thoroughly cleansed and
purged from sin and wickedness then you could be ever under the Law of Moses.
Which is consonant to other passages in Scripture, Hebr. 7.19. Gal. 3.21.
as, That the Law makes nothing perfect; and again, If there had been a Law
that could have given life, then verily righteousness might have been of the
Law. And now we have found out a warrantable sense of these words, we shall be
able more expeditely to discover the sense of the foregoing places of Scripture
alleged for this pernicious conceit of a Christians being righteous without
any real Righteousness in him.

Sect. 3.
8. Wherefore, to that in the 4. to the Romans: whose force will be the greater
if we add that also which is written a little before in the 3 chap. v. 28.
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the Law; and what he inferrs also verse. 9. That Jews and Gentiles and all are
under sin. Wherein the meaning of the Apostle is to magnify, as was most fit,
the ministration of the Gospel; and so he signifies to the world that
whatsoever is discovered hitherto, is imperfect, lapsed and ruinous, all but
weak and sinful before the coming in of Christ, even the works of the Law
themselves, and that smooth external Righteousness of mere Morality and
Ceremony. So that all the world are found guilty before God, and by the deeds
of the Law there shall be no flesh justified in his sight. For by the Law is
but the knowledge of sin, verse. 20. it gives no strength to perform.

Wherefore now reckoning nothing upon all these things, we are as it were to
begin the world again, and to endeavor after such a Righteousness as is by
Faith in Christ Jesus; and not to rest in any thing that may be done by the
ordinary power of the flesh, but to aspire after that Righteousness which is
communicable to us by that Spirit which raised Jesus Christ from the dead. But
neither Abraham nor any one else can be justified by any carnal righteousness
of their own; but that highly-spiritual act of Abraham reaching beyond the
common rode of Nature, who against hope believed in hope, that was that which
commended Abraham so much to God. And thus from the Example of Abraham would
the Apostle commend the Christian faith to the world, and in particular to the
Jews the Offspring of Abraham. For at the end of the fourth chapter he makes
this use of Abraham's faith being imputed to him for Righteousness (that is,
reputed by God as a very excellent good act, Romans 4.24, 25.
as it indeed was) that we might also be brought off to believe on him that
raised up jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our offenses, and
raised again for our justification. In which verse are contained the two grand
privileges of the Gospel, that is, the forgiveness of sins upon the
satisfaction of Christ's death, and the justifying of us, that is the making of
us just and holy through a sound faith in him that raised Jesus from the dead.
Which interpretation the 11 verse of the 8 Chapter does sufficiently
countenance, But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you, viz. to Righteousness: as is plain
out of the foregoing verse, And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because
of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness; that is, The body of
death which we desire to be delivered from, as the Apostle speaks, appears by
the presence of Christ in us to be thus deadly a body by reason of sin, we
feeling for the present nothing but an heavy indisposition to all holiness and
goodness in the body and its affections, and all sinfulness and unclean
Atheistical suggestions from the flesh, which is death to the Soul. For to be
carnally-minded is death. So that by reason of the sinfulness of our body and
the sad heaviness thereof, it appears as deadly and ghastly a thing to us as
Mezentius his tying the living and the dead together, when once Christ is in
us: but our Life is then that Righteousness which is of the Spirit, we finding
a comfortable warmth and pleasure in the grateful arrivals of that holy and
Divine sensation. But he that raised Christ from the dead, will in due time
even quicken these our mortal bodies, or these dead bodies of ours, and make
them conspire and come along with ease and cheerfulness, and be ready and
active complying Instruments in all things with the Spirit of Righteousness.

Which belief is a chief Point in the Christian Faith, and most of all parallel
to that of Abraham's, who believing in the Goodness and Power and Faithfulness
of God, had, when both himself and his wife Sara were dry and dead as to
natural generation, and so hopeless of ever seeing any fruit of her womb, who
had, I say, (...). Philo in his Allegories. And in his (...). See also in his
(...) to the same purpose. And in his De Nominum mutatione, (...).
Isaac born to him, who bears Joy and Laughter in the very Name of him, and was
undoubtedly a Type of (...). Philo in his Allegories. And in his (...). See
also in his (...) to the same purpose. And in his De Nominum mutatione, (...).
Christ according to the Spirit. For Isaac is the Wisdom, Power and
Righteousness of God flowing out and effectually branching it self so through
all the Faculties both of man's Soul and Body, that the whole man is carried
away with joy and triumph to the acting all whatsoever is really and
substantially good, even with as much satisfaction and pleasure as he eats when
he is hungry, and drinks when he is dry. And thus by our entrance and progress
in so holy a Dispensation, are we well approved of by God, and being justified
thus by faith, we have peace with him through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1.

So that this Justification is not a mere belief that Christ died for us in
particular, or that he was raised from the dead, whereby another Righteousness
is imputed to us: but a believing in God, that he has accepted the blood of
Christ as a Sacrifice for sin, and that he is able through the power of the
Spirit to raise us up to newness of life, whereby we are encouraged to breath
and aspire after this more inward and perfect righteousness. Which advantages
God propounds to all the hearers of the Gospel, without any respect of works or
former demureness of life, if so be they will but now come in and close with
this high and rich dispensation, and be carried on with courageous resolutions
to fight against and pull down the man of sin within themselves, that this
living and new way of real Divine righteousness may be set up and rule in
their hearts. I say, if they be encouraged to this holy enterprise by Faith in
Christ for the remission of sins, and for the power of his Spirit to utterly
eradicate and extirpate all inward corruption and wickedness, this Faith is
presently imputed to them for Righteousness; that is, they are, and are
approved by God as dear children of his, and as good men, and are of the seed
of the Promise. For they are born now not of the will of man, nor of the will
of the flesh, but of the will of God; and their will is wholly set upon
righteousness and true holiness, which they hunger and thirst after as
sincerely and eagerly as ever they did after their natural meat and drink: and
God who feeds the young Ravens is not so cruel as to deny them this celestial
food; which food they reach at and as it were wrest out of his hands by Faith
in the power of his Spirit, whereby they account themselves able to do Phil.
4.13.
all things.

9. And this is the only warrantable notion that I can find, of being
justified by faith. Nor do those places above recited prove any other then
this. For that which seems to make most of all for another [viz. Romans 4.5. But
to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly,
Sect. ^.
his faith is counted for righteousness,] may very well be interpreted
according to that tenor of sense I have already declared. For that is the
great and comfortable privilege of the Gospel, that without any respect of
former works, if so be we do but now believe remission of sins in Christ, and
believe in his power that justifies the ungodly, (i. e. that makes just the
ungodly, and purifies and purges them from all sin and iniquity, from which by
their own natural power they could not purged, and restores them to inward
real righteousness by the working of his Spirit) this Faith is imputed for
Righteousness. For they that do thus believe, are good and righteous men for
matter of sincerity, so that they have peace with God through the blood of
Christ, and by the power of that Spirit that is now working in them, are
renewed daily more and more into that glorious image and desirable liberty
which arises in the further conquest of the Divine life in them, and makes them
righteous even as Christ was righteous.

And now the hardest is satisfied, the other places alleged will easily fall
of themselves by the application of what has been said concerning this nature
of Faith and Justification.

10. As for those places of Scripture that seem to attribute the Righteousness
of Christ to us, as where he is said to be made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption, the sense is only this, that he works in us
wisdom, righteousness, etc. Otherwise it might be inferred that we shall have
only an imputative Redemption, and that we shall not be really saved and
redeemed. As for that other, As by the disobedience of one man many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one man many shall be made righteous, I say it
is a place against themselves: For by Adam we became really sinners and sinful,
contracting original corruption from his loins; therefore by Christ we are to
be made really righteous. And this was the end of his obedience that was
obedient even to the death of the cross, that we being buried with him by
baptism into death, like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of
the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life, Romans 6.

Wherefore there really being no ground in Scripture for this childish mistake,
and it being as unreasonable that one Soul should be righteous for another, as
that one Body should be in health for another; if I show that the Scripture it
self does expressly require of us that we be righteous and holy in our own
persons, there is then nothing wanting to the full discovery of this childish
and ungrounded conceit of being righteous without any Righteousness residing in
us.

11. And in my apprehension this very Text of S. John is a clear eviction of
this Truth, 1 John 3.7.
it plainly declaring that they are mistaken who ever conceit themselves
righteous without doing righteousness, or without being righteous in such a
sense as Christ himself was righteous. There are also several other Testimonies
of the Apostles to the same purpose, some whereof I have noted already; as
where he says, That Christ was manifested to take away our sins, and that he
came to destroy the works of the Devil; and that he that is born of God,
sins not, because the seed of God abides in him, that is, a permanent
Principle of Divine life and sense, whereby he sees and abhors whatsoever
is wicked and unholy. And again, 1 Ioh. ^. Hereby we know that we know him, if
we keep his commandments. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him: but whose keeps his
word, in him verily is the love of God perfected. Hereby know we that we are in
him: He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk even as he
walked. Like that 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that names the name of Christ
depart from iniquity.

CHAP. VI. 1. Their alledgement of Gal. 2.16. as also of the whole drift of
that Epistle. 2. What the Righteousness of faith is according to the Apostle.
3. In what sense those that are in Christ are said not to be under the Law. 4.
That the Righteousness of faith is no figment but a reality in us. 5. That this
Righteousness is the New Creature, and what this new Creature is according to
Scripture. 6. That the new Creature consists in Wisdom, Righteousness and true
Holiness. 7. The Righteousness of the new Creature. 8. His Wisdom and
Holiness. 9. That the Righteousness of faith excludes not good Works. The
wicked treachery of those that teach the contrary.
1. AS for that Text which we deferred to speak to, we shall now take it into
consideration. It was Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the
works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the Law: For by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. From
this place of Scripture also there are some that would infer a superannuating
and annulling of all moral honesty and real Righteousness whatever, pretending
that nothing but mere Faith is required to make us approvable before God. And
indeed they fansy that this whole Epistle administers invincible arguments to
maintain this mischievous Conclusion, though there be not to any indifferent
Judge any solid reason of so full a confidence. Which we shall easily
understand, if we take notice that the design of this Epistle is only to
reduce those Galatians again to the truth of Christianity, that were almost
apostatizing to Iudaisme and the Ceremonial Law of Moses. Ye observe days and
months and times and years; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed labor on
you in vain, Chap. 4.10, 11.

But the main scope of the Apostle is against Circumcision, as is plain upon
the very first perusal of the Epistle; which he beating down together with the
Law of Moses, and extolling the Faith in Christ, seems sometimes to excuse a
man from walking according to the moral Law under the pretense of Faith in
Christ. But as S. Peter has well observed, there be many things in S. Paul's
Epistles hard to be understood, 2. Pet. 3 16.
which foolish men pervert to their own destruction. But that we be not led
into the same error and mischief, it will be of no small concernment to trace
the footsteps of S. Paul, that so we may wind our selves out of this dangerous
Maze or Labyrinth.

2. Whereas then he seems to nullify or vilify at least the Law in the
advancing of that Righteousness that is by faith; let us see what this
Righteousness that is by faith, and what that of the Law, is. Chap. 2.19. For
I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God: I am
crucified with Christ. Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
I through the Law am dead unto the Law, what a riddle is this! that the Law
should deprive it self of its disciples. And yet it does so: For it is a
Schoolmaster to Christ, or rather an Usher, which when it has well tutour'd us
and castigated us, removes us up higher, to be made in Christ perfect, who is
the perfection of the Law. But the Law it self makes nothing perfect; and this
is the reason that Righteousness is not of the Law.

And to this purpose speaks the Apostle in this very Epistle at the 21 verse of
the 3. Chapter, Is the Law then against the promises of God? God forbid. For if
there had been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness
should have been by the Law; (...), A law that could enliven and enquicken us.
But that is beyond the power of the Law: That Is the title and prerogative of
Christ, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life. I am the Resurrection and the
Life: he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and
whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never die, Joh. 11. This therefore
is the Righteousness of Faith or belief, far above the Righteousness of the Law
or killing letter.

3. Wherefore when this Faith is come that works us up to a living frame of
Righteousness within us, we are no longer under the servility of the Law of
Moses, but are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Now none are
the children of God but those that are led by the Spirit of God, as the Apostle
elsewhere witnesses in his Epistle to the Romans. And those that have the
Spirit of God, what fruits they bring forth is amply set out by the Apostle in
this to the Galatians, chap. 5. v. 22. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance:
against such there is no law. For indeed there is no need of it, they being a
law unto themselves. So we see how those that are in Christ are not under the
Law, because that inward fountain of obedience or living law in their hearts is
above it: They do really and truly fulfill it through the Spirit that is by
faith. For that Spirit is the begetter of Love, and Love is the fulfilling of
the Law. For all the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5.14.

This I say then, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the
flesh. For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh; and these are contrary one to another, that ye may not do the things ye
would. Which certainly is the true and genuine sense of (...), as Grotius also
has noted. And these are contrary, that is to say, oppose one the other,
namely, the Spirit the flesh, (...), to the end you may not do those things
that your own corrupt will or carnal mind inclines you to: which naturally
coheres with what follows, But if you be led by the Spirit, you are not under
the Law. For against such there is no law, as was said before. Which implies,
if they be not led by the Spirit, they are liable to the curse of the Law, to
death, hell and damnation. For so also speaks the Apostle, when he has
reckoned up the works of the flesh, That they that do such things, shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, ver. 21. And v. 25. he openly declares, That they
that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with its passions and lusts.

4. So we see plainly that the Righteousness that is of faith is not a mere
Chimaera or fancy, but a more excellent Righteousness then that of the Law.
For the Law is no quickening spirit, but a dead letter: But Christ is the
Resurrection and the Life. And he is God our righteousness, mighty to save, and
can with ease destroy the powers of death, darkness and the Devil out of the
Soul of man; but we must have the patience to endure the work wrought in us by
him. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And if we will still cloak and
cover our foul corrupt hearts with forged conceits of Hypocrisie's own making,
and excuse our selves from being good to one another or to our selves, because
God in Christ is so good to us; hear what the Apostle speaks in the sixth and
last Chapter of this Epistle at the seventh verse. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked: For whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he that
sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

5. The aim therefore of the Apostle is not to extenuate or discountenance real
Virtue and Righteousness, but to point us to it, and show us where it may be
had: Not in days or years, not in New Moons or Festivals, not in Circumcision
nor in the dead letter of the Law; but in Christ and the Spirit of God, in the
renewed Image of God, in the new birth, in the new life, in the second Adam
from Heaven, in the new Creature. But God forbid that I should glory save in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14.
by whom the world is crucified unto me and I unto the world. For in Christ
Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature. Ephesians. 4.22.
Which the Apostle elsewhere calls the new man; That ye put off concerning the
former conversation the old man, that is corrupt according to the deceitful
lusts; and be renewed in the Spirit of your mind: And that you put on the new
man which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, that is,
not in external Ceremonial holiness or outward sanctimonious show, but in the
regeneration of the inward Spirit to a new life from the very heart. And again,
Colos. 3. verse. 9. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old
man with his deeds, and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge,
after the image of him that created him; where there is neither Greek nor Jew,
circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ
is all and in all.

6. This new Creature then is nothing else but the Image of God in the Soul of
man. So witness both these Texts: The new man which after God is created in
Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness. The very same that Plato speaks at
once in his Theaetetus, (...), To be like God is to become Holy, Just and Wise.
But because most men, even the old Adam in us, take themselves to be holy,
just, and wise; it will be seasonable here to see what Justice, Holiness and
Wisdom this is that is in the new Creature.

7. And who can tell it so well as he that is it? Matthew. 5. Ye have heard that
it has been said by them of old, Thou shall not kill; and whosoever shall
kill, shall be in danger of the judgment: But I say unto you, that whosoever ^
angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment;
and whosoever shall say unto his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the
Council; but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hellfire.
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old, Thou shall not commit adultery:
But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her already in his heart. Again it was said of old,
Forswear not thy self: But I say unto you, Swear not at all, but let your
communication be Yea, yea, and Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more then these,
comes of evil. Ye have heard it also said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for
a tooth: But I say unto you, Resist not evil. Ye have heard also, Thou shall
love thy neighbor, but hate thine enemy: But I say unto you, Love your
enemies, Bless them that curse you, Do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them that despightfully use you and persecute you. Behold the exact and
unblameable Righteousness that is in the regenerate Soul far above the
doctrine or thoughts of either the Legal Pharisee or mere Moralist. External
Righteousness in the outward man, or to be internally just as far as corrupt
Reason suggests, is but filthy rags in respect of this Righteousness Christ
requires of us, and the new Creature does bring into us, once grown up to its
due stature in us. Let every man examine himself by this Rule.

8. And as this Justice is far above, yea, sometimes contrary to, the Justice
of the Natural man (for with him to hate his enemies, to recompense evil with
evil, is just;) so the Holiness is far transcending the Holiness of either the
ancient or modern Scribes and Pharisees and Zelotical Ceremonialists. For all
outward Ceremonies of Time or Place, of Gesture or Vestments, Rites or Orders,
they are all but Signs and Shows; but the Body is Christ. Lastly, that the
natural man fancy not himself Wise, (as who is not of all precious things the
most forward to appropriate that to himself?) that he fancy not himself Wise
before he be Holy and Just, let him examine his Wisdom by that square in the
third Chapter of S. James's Epistle. Who is a wise man and endowed with
knowledge amongst you? Let him show out of a good conversation his works with
meekness of Wisdom. But if you have bitter envying and strife in your hearts,
glory not and lie not against the truth. This wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish. For where envying and strife is,
there is confusion and every evil work. But the Wisdom that is from above is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy
and good fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy. The Righteousness
then of the new Creature is a Righteousness far above the letter of Moses's
Law, though exactly performed; it is Holiness more resplendent then the Robe of
Aaron and all his Priestly attire, or whatsoever Ceremonies else God has
instituted or man invented; it is Wisdom far above all the thin-beaten
subtilties of either the wrangling Sects or disputacious Schools, without
contention or bitter contradiction.

9. So that it is plain from the constant scope of the Apostle both in this
Epistle and every where else, That he does not vilify true Virtue and
Morality, but drives at an higher pitch and perfection thereof; and that the
Righteousness of Faith, which he prefers before the Righteousness of Works, is
not by way of exclusion of Good Works out of the Righteousness of Faith, but of
urging us to exacter and more perfect works of Righteousness then could be
performed under the dispensation of the Law. How wicked a treachery therefore
is it against the Church of Christ, and how impudent a piece of boldness in
those false Teachers that would bear men in hand, That this doctrine of the
being approved in the eyes of God by a dry and dead Faith, devoid and destitute
of all real sanctity and holiness, is not only a Christian truth, but the most
choice and principal doctrine in all Christianity; when there is not any
footstep of any such thing in all the Instructions and Informations of either
Christ or his Apostles?

CHAP. VII. 1. That no small measure of Sanctity serves the turn in
Christianity: 2. As appears out of Scriptures already alleged. 3. Further
proofs thereof out of the Prophets; 4. As also out of the Gospel, 5. And other
places of the New Testament. 6. The strong Armature of a Christian Soldier. 7.
His earnest endeavor after Perfection.
1. WHerefore having sufficiently cleansed and oyled the first Wheel of this
mighty Engine we are showing the Usefulness of; we proceed now to the second,
where if we do not use our diligence also, this Machina will not prove
effectual for the purpose it was designed, viz. for the destroying of the works
of the devil. Of whose stratagems and devices we being not ignorant, we will
declare unto you what is most seasonable in this place; namely, That where he
cannot corrupt our minds with this dangerous Error of the sufficiency of an
unsanctified and an unsanctifying Faith, he will in the second place endeavor
to persuade us that a small measure of Holiness will serve our turn;
considering the Passion of Christ is of so great price in the eyes of his
Father, who accepts of his death for an atonement for our sins, and that by his
blood we are reconciled to God, and therefore any remiss desire, any lazy
inclination to obedience will be enough; the Passion of Christ and the
Imputation of his Righteousness will make out the rest.

2. But that this is really the suggestion of the Devil, not the meaning of the
Gospel, I shall make evident from many Testimonies of Scripture. I might say,
that many of those we have already alleged do clearly demonstrate the same.
For what means that of John, where he declares That he that is born of God
cannot sin, 1 John 3.9.
because the seed of God remains in him? What that of Paul, Tit. 2.
where he says That Christ came to redeem us from all iniquity, Ephesians. 5.
and purchase to himself a Church without spot and wrinkle, a Church holy and
without blemish? What means our Savior Christ's setting the Rule of
Righteousness at that exquisite pitch of perfection, accounting tacit assents
to lust no less then adultery, rash and causlesse anger a degree of murder,
who has not only condemned retaliation, but has commanded us to do good for
evil? I say, what is the sense of all this, but that we Christians are called
to a higher degree of perfection in life and sanctity then ever any Masters of
Morality and Religion in the world hitherto put men upon? And therefore the
dispensation of Christianity is so far from allowing men in any immoral vices
or defects, that it does not only cleanse from these, but lifts us up a degree
higher, and never leaves till it has restored our Souls into a condition
plainly Divine.

3. That this is the state that every Christian is called to, and ought to be
unsatisfied unless his conscience tell him he is aiming at, and growing in
some measure toward it, both the Prophetical descriptions of the Kingdom of
the Messiah upon earth, and several other Testimonies in the Gospel and
Writings of the Apostles do still more fully witness. For besides those places
that describe the Reign of the Messiah from the abundance of Peace and
Righteousness which should overspread the Nations, as the waters cover the
Sea; there are other particular passages that do prefigure a very great measure
of Holiness that the Church of Christ should be conspicuous by, with clearer
knowledge and greater activity to walk in the ways of God. And I do not doubt
but that which was fulfilled in a corporeal sense in Christ's time, had also a
more spiritual and more permanent meaning; namely, that of Esaias, chap. 35.5,
6. where the eyes of the blind are said to be opened, and the ears of the deaf
unstopped, the lame to leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb to sing.
Which lively does set out the condition of the true Christian believer while he
makes his faithful progress in Christianity, going on from strength to
strength till he appear before God in Sion. Add to this Zech. 12. For that it
is mystically applicable to our present purpose, appears from v. 10. They shall
look upon me whom they have pierced: but what we were going to recite was v. 8.
In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is
feeble among them shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as
the Angel of the Lord before them. Matthew. 11.11.
As our Savior says of John the Baptist, That the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven is greater then he. I shall close the Prophetic predictions with that
of Malachi, chap. 3. speaking of the Angel of the Covenant, viz. Christ, and
that dispensation he was to set afoot in the world, Behold he shall come, says
the Lord of hoasts: But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall
stand when he appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap.
And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the
sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the
Lord an offering in righteousness.

4. The very same thing which John the Baptist witnesses of Christ, Matthew. 3.
v. 11. I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but he that comes
after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall
baptize you with the Holy ghost and with fire. Whose fan is in his hand, and he
will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner; but he
will burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire. To which you may add v. 10. And
now is the axe laid to the root of the trees: Therefore every tree that
brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. Like that
Matthew. 15. v. 13. Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall
be rooted up. Which Scriptures do plainly declare to us, That the design of
Christ's coming was to consume utterly and to tear up by the very roots all
error and wickedness out of the hearts of them that would receive him.

5. And this were sufficient to discover what a high degree of Holiness is
expected of him that will be in good earnest a Christian. But I will not omit
other places that sound to the same purpose. 1 Peter 1.13. Wherefore gird up
the loins of your mind, be sober and of a perfect hope in the grace that is
brought to you through the revelation of Jesus Christ; as obedient children,
not fashioning your selves according to former lusts in your ignorance: But as
he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation;
((...), in your whole conversation, in every thing you do) Because it is
written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. The same which our Savior exhorts to in
his Sermon on the Mount, Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect. Paul also to the Ephesians, chapter 6. v. 10. Finally, my brethren, be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put you on the whole armor
of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. For we
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, even against the
wicked Spirits of the air. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God,
that ye may be able to stand in the evil day, and having vanquished all, to
stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on
the breast plate of righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of peace. Above all, taking the shield of faith, whereby you shall
be able to quench the fiery darts of the wicked: and take the helmet of
Salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. We shall add
only a short speech to the Christian soldier thus harnessed from the Captain
of our Salvation, Jesus Christ, Revel. 3. To him that overcomes will I give to
sit with me in my throne; even as I also overcame, and am set down with my
Father in his throne. Which things thus put together and carefully considered,
cannot but awaken us out of that drouzy and lazy dream of unoperative Faith and
sluggish sordid slavery to sin under pretense of invincible infirmity, into a
full belief of the mighty power of Christ and of his Armature and Ammunition,
whereby we are able to overcome all our domestic lusts, though abetted and
incensed by the fiery Stratagems of the Devil.

6. To him that overcomes. When, I beseech you, is this overcoming? Is not
Victory wone in the same field the battle is fought? and is not our warfare
here upon this earth? wherefore it is plain our Victory must be here also. It
is in this life we are commanded to kill and slay the old man in us with all
his deceiveable lusts, who, while he is alive, will be always plotting and
inventing some evil device or other to undermine and root the Kingdom of
Christ out of our hearts. And therefore we must be wholly the one or wholly the
other. We cannot serve Christ and Belial, ^ Cor. 5.16.
Light and Darkness cannot abide together. And verily the Apostle has furnished
us with so complete an armature, that we cannot but confess our selves stronger
then the strong man that has hitherto kept the house; so that if he be not
dispossessed, it is long of us. For the faithful Christian Soldier is so well
appointed (being girt with Truth, and his Heart fortified with Uprightness and
Sincerity, his Mind with representations of Eternal life, his feet with
readiness and unwearied resolution of walking as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
his Memory with the choicest and most useful and encouraging Precepts of the
Scripture, and his whole Soul bearing it self strong in the Faith of the power
of God against all assaults and temptations of the enemies of our Salvation)
that he cannot but get the day and stand Conqueror in the field, though his
own domestic lusts be assisted by the powers of the Prince of the Air that
rules in the Children of disobedience. For this shield of Faith is able to
quench all the fiery darts of the Devil. This is that Faith whereby the
ancients have subdued kingdoms and wrought righteousness. Hebrews 11.
And this is that whereby every Christian shall advance his conquests against
the Kingdom of Darkness and Unrighteousness as much as he pleases. For
according to a man's Faith, so shall it be unto him.

7. Wherefore those that plead for a lazy Slackness and Remisness in these
attempts, are not faithful Christians but false brethren got amongst us. Luke
9.62.
He that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back, is not fit for the
kingdom of God. Matthew. 10.37.
Again, He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me; and
he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. Nay, he that
loves his own life more then Christ, is not worthy of him, nor can he be his
disciple, as our Savior himself has declared. How can then any be Christ's
disciple that loves any lust whatsoever, though never so pleasant, though never
so profitable, more then the Son of God that redeemed him with his own blood?
Wherefore all true Christians have been in this point in good earnest in both
practice, profession and prayers, in breathing and contending after all
exquisiteness of purity and integrity both of flesh and Spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, as the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians. According
to which also S. James in his Epistle general, chap. 1. v. 4. Let patience have
her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, being defective in
nothing. Like that prayer of Epaphras for the Colossians, chap. 4.12. who is
said there to labor fervently for them in prayer, that they may stand perfect
and complete in the whole will of God. Which is the same with S. Peter's, 1
Epist. the last chapter, The God of all grace, who has called us to his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that you have suffered a while, make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To which we will add that of the
Author to the Hebrews, Hebr. 13.20.
and so conclude. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the
everlasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do his will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

CHAP. VIII. 1. That the Christians assistance is at least equal to his task.
2. The two Gospel-powers that comprehend his duty. 3. The first Gospel-aid, The
Promise of the Spirit, with Prophecies thereof out of Ezekiel and Esaias. 4. Some
hints of the mystical meaning of the last. 5. Another excellent prediction
thereof.
1. WE have made it very evident That that degree of Righteousness that the
Christian is called unto is no lazy, sluggish inclination to holiness, no
maimed, halting, Hypocritical following after Christ; but a sound and cheerful
endeavor, and at last a joifull acquisition of such a degree of Sanctity and
Righteousness as far surmounts the pretensions of all other Religions
whatsoever; and is indeed so exquisite and perfect, that nothing better can be
desired or imagined. So holy and Heavenly a calling is the calling of a
Christian. And indeed the expectation is so great, that if our aids and
assistances were not proportionable, we could never arrive to the End of our
calling. But our helps are in my apprehension far greater then our task, if we
were not wanting to our selves.

2. We have hitherto seen how necessary inward Sanctification is to a
Christian, as also to how ample a measure he is called. Both these he is
indispensably obliged to endeavor and breath after perpetually; as is
manifestly declared by Christ, his Apostles, and the Prophets before them.
Wherefore these two, I mean The evidence that we are to be inwardly and really
righteous, and not only so, but in an extraordinary manner, are the two Powers
of the Gospel that comprehend our great and ultimate duty of being holy as he
that has called us is holy, of becoming perfect as our Father which is in
Heaven is perfect. The following Gospel-Powers all of them are aids and helps
to this design. The first whereof is The Promise of the Spirit, through
Christ's Intercession; the second, The Example of Christ; the third, The
Meditation on his Passion; the fourth, on his Resurrection and Ascension; and
the last, on the last Judgment. These Powers are of such admirable efficacy,
if rightly applied, that they are able to pull down every strong hold, and to
cast out all evil imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and to bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, as the Apostle speaks. No strength of habituated sin, no
violence of any lust shall be able to stand before them.

3. The first of these Powers is The Promise of the Spirit; I do not mean for
the doing Miracles, (for that was but a transient business, and accommodate
only to the first Ages of the Church,) but for through-sanctification and
cleansing us from all our sins, and for our perfect growth in Righteousness and
Holiness. That this Power is a concomitant to the Dispensation of the Gospel in
all true Believers, is apparent both from the predictions of the Prophets, and
from the mouth of our Savior and his blessed Apostles.

Esaias 44. Hear now, O Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen. Thus
says the Lord that made thee, and framed thee from the womb, and will help
thee. Fear not, O Jacob my servant, and thou Iesurun whom I have chosen: For I
will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I
will pour my Spirit upon thy seed and my blessing upon thy offspring. And they
shall spring up as among the grass, and the willows by the watercourse. Which
Prophecy is most properly applicable to the Church of Christ who is the true
seed of Jacob: those wrastlers with God, and strivers to get in at the Luke
13.24.
narrow gate that leads to life, they are the true Iesurun, the From (...),
rectus*
upright of heart and sincere seekers after God, those that truly hunger and
thirst after righteousness; and therefore God will satisfy them by the
supernatural assistance of his blessed Spirit.

Again, Ezekiel 36. ver. 25. prefiguring the blessed dispensations of the
Kingdom of Christ; Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean: from all your filthiness and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A
new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you; and I
will take the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of
flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them.

Also Esaias 41. v. 10. where certainly according to analogy of interpretations
of Prophecy, ( the seed of Abraham being a Type of the Spiritual Church of
Christ, and their warfare not carnal but spiritual, nor the waters promised by
Christ such liquors as run in Brooks and Rivers, but emanations of the
purifying and refreshing powers of the Spirit of God) we may see with what
close and faithful assistance God is pleased to adhere to his true Israel in
whom there is no guile, but they are sincerely waging war and to the utmost
resisting all the Temptations of the World, the Flesh and the Devil.

But thou, Israel, my servant, Jacob, whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham
my friend; fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed for I am thy God:
I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the
right hand of my righteousness. Behold, all they that were incensed against
thee, shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as nothing; and they that
strive with thee shall perish. Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them,
even them that contended with thee; they that war against thee shall be as
nothing and as a thing of naught. For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right
hand, saying unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee. Fear not thou worm Jacob,
and ye men of Israel; behold I will make thee a new sharp threshing-instrument,
having teeth; thou shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shall
make the hills as chafe. Thou shall fan them, and the wind shall carry them
away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them; and thou shall rejoice in the Lord,
and shall glory in the holy One of Israel. When the poor and needy seek water,
and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst; I the Lord will hear
them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them: I will open rivers in high
places, and fountains in the midst of the valleys. I will make the wilderness a
pool of water, and the dry land springs of water. This Prophecy is an
exquisite description of those full and complete Victories the Church gets
against Sin and Satan by the supernatural assistance of the Spirit of God.

Which Promise is again repeated in the following chapter, which though it be
larger then the former, and part cited already to another purpose, yet I cannot
refrain from transcribing the whole, it being so plain a Prophecy of Christ
(as appears from the forepart thereof) and of the power of his Kingdom
through the Spirit for the vanquishing of all sin and wickedness in them that
do truly believe. Behold my servant whom I uphold, Isai. 42.
mine elect in whom my soul delights. I have put my spirit upon him, he shall
bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause
his voice to be heard in the street. A bruised reed shall he not break, and
smoking flax shall he not quench; he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.
He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he has set judgment in the earth:
and the Isles shall wait for his Law. Thus says God the Lord, he that created
the Heavens and stretched them out, he that spread forth the earth and that
which comes out of it, he that gives breath to the people upon it, and spirit
to those that dwell therein: I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and
will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the
people, for a light of the Gentiles; To open the blind eyes, to bring out the
prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
prisonhouse. I am the Lord, that is my name; and my glory will I not give to
another, neither my praise to graven images. Behold, the former things are come
to pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth, I tell you of
them. Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth;
ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the Isles and the
inhabitants thereof. Let the Wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their
voice, the villages that Kedar does inhabit. Let the inhabitants of the rock
sing: let them shout from the top of the mountains: let them give glory unto
the Lord, and declare his praise in the islands. The Lord shall go forth as a
mighty man, he shall stir up jealousy like a man of war; he shall cry, yea,
roar; he shall prevail against his enemies. I have long time holden my peace, I
have been still and refrained my self; now will I cry like a travailing woman,
I will destroy and devour at once. I will make wast mountains and hills, and
dry up all their herbs; I will make the rivers Islands, and I will dry up the
pools. And I will bring the blind by a way that they know not, I will lead them
in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness light before them, and
crooked things straight. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake
them.

4. It is a very high representation of that mighty power of God from above
that assists his Church, and how Christ by the dispensation of the Gospel does
set us free from the bondage of sin; how he opens the understandings of the
ignorant, and procures liberty for those that were shut up in the dungeon of a
dark conscience, and held in captivity under sin; how those that are dry and
barren like the wilderness and the tops of rocks shall be watered with springs
of living water, and how the villages that From (...) Obtenebratus, atratus
fuit.
Kedar possesses, that is, those that are overshadowed with sorrow and
darkness, a light shall spring up unto them, and how they shall give glory unto
the Lord: for that he himself will be their champion, he shall fight their
battles, and by the power of his Spirit and by that fire wherewith he will
plead with all flesh, wither the top and flower of their pride, and dry up
their restagnant lusts, and lighten their paths before them, and lead them
forth into the land of Righteousness. These are the true Warfares and Victories
of the Church of Christ, as those that have the veil taken off from their eyes
and hearts can easily discover. And surely with any other useful sense then
this cannot we ordinarily read the like descriptions of the Churches triumphs
by Christ over her enemies, or by those that have been Types of him, as David
was an eminent one. And therefore if I would read the 18 Psalm ( I will love
thee, O Lord my strength, etc.) I should hope for very small edifying thereby
but in such a Mystical sense as this is, that is, by supposing that in me which
partakes of Christ, that is, my inward Mind or Spirit, raising war against
(...) Infernus, a (...) petiit.
Saul, which is the power of the Flesh, the craving pit of Hell, that sin that
lodges in this mortal body whose vain desires have no bottom nor end.

5. I might abound with these allegations out of the Prophets and Psalms; but I
have given a Key into the hand of the judicious, and he may unlock those
treasures himself, if he desires to have his Faith enriched and strengthened by
those plentiful Promises of this assistance we speak of, made to them that are
serious professors of the Gospel. I shall only add one testimony more, which
in my apprehension is very express, and that is Isa. 35. Strengthen the weak
hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Say to them that are of a fearful heart,
Be strong, fear not; behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a
recompense, he will come and save you. Then shall the eyes of the blind be
opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped; Then shall the lame man
leap as an Heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing: For in the wilderness
shall waters break out, and streams in the desert. And the parched ground shall
become a pool, and the thirsty land Springs of water: In the habitations of
dragons, in the places where they lay shall be grass, with reeds and rushes.
And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called a way of
holiness: the unclean shall not pass over it, but he shall walk in the way
with them, and the simple shall not err. No Lion shall be there, nor any
ravenous beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the
redeemed shall walk there. And the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come
to Sion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy
and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

CHAP. IX. 1. The great use of the belief of The Promise of the Spirit. 2. The
eating the flesh of Christ and drinking his blood, what it is. 3. Further proof
of the Promise of the Spirit. 4. That we cannot oblige God by way of Merit. 5.
Other Testimonies of Scripture tending to the former purpose.
1. THese places which we have recited out of the Old Testament cannot but warm
and encourage him that reads them, by reason of the loftiness of their
Prophetical style, provided that he have in himself a facility of mystically
applying of things to the great purpose they drive at. But what we shall add
out of the New, though they will not strike the phansy with so high language,
yet they will, it may be, reach ones Reason more surely, and extort assent more
powerfully even from them that are loath to find it true, That there is such a
mighty supernatural assistance afforded from God, viz. the Cooperation of his
holy Spirit in our conflicts against sin. Which persuasion is of great
consequence to make us resolute in resisting all Temptations, and to gain the
victory in every assault; and therefore we will produce sufficient evidences of
the truth thereof.

2. And the first that occurs to my mind, is that of our blessed Savior, Luke
11.13. If ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your Children, how
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?
And that this Dispensation of the Spirit of Sanctification is a common gift to
all Christians, appears out of what we have already recited out of S. Matthew,
where John professes himself only able to baptize with water unto repentance,
but that the Baptism of Christ should be with the holy Ghost and with fire,
that is, with the power of the Spirit that will melt and purify us as silver
is purified in the fire. Ver. 35, 51, 54.
Also from Ioh. 6. where Christ styleth himself the Manna that came down from
Heaven, and declares, that he that eats his flesh and drinks his blood,
has eternal life; with other expressions of the like nature. Wherefore his
Disciples began to be scandalized at it: but Jesus answered and said, Ver. 62.
Does this offend you? What if you shall see the Son of man ascend up where he
was before? That will be a very strange and stupendous spectacle to you, and
such as will assure you of my Divinity; but withal remove my body so far from
you, that you cannot then, if you would, mistake so grossly as to think I speak
of this body and blood I carry now about with me. Ver. 63.
It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. The words that I
speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are life; that is to say, They are
touching the spiritual body, which is the inmost Temple of the holy Ghost, and
which you are in some measure to partake of here, and which shall have its
complete refinement when I shall crown you with the perfection of Life Eternal
at the last day. Or, They are simply concerning the Spirit, and that Life which
I my self am according to my Divinity, viz. The Eternal Word in whom is the
Life, and that Life is the light of men. This is that which you are to feed on,
and to drink into your Souls, when you have not my particular bodily presence
with you. For this Word and Spirit is every where to be taken in by them that
breath and thirst after this Heavenly sustenance of their Souls; and so is that
fulfilled which he declares v. 56. He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, dwells in me and I in him. For the eating of the flesh is in some
measure partaking of the spiritual body, and the drinking of the blood the
imbibing that life therewith that rays out from the Eternal Word into all
purged and purified hearts, whereby Christ dwells in them and they in him,
and God in all.

3. Again, John 7.37. In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood
and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. He that
believes on me, as the Sea Chap. 8. sect. 3, 4, 5.
Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters.
Which he spoke of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive; as
the Text it self expounds it. And therefore is a good ratification of the
Mystical sense of those Prophecies we rehearsed out of Esaias.

But these things are spoken more plainly and without a Metaphor, Ioh. 14.15.
If ye love me, keep my Commandments. And I will pray the Father, and he shall
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; Even the
Spirit of truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in
you. Which Precept and Promise is like that of Esaias, chap. 58. which is, that
(if we seriously compose our minds to do due acts of obedience to God) he will
pour out his Spirit upon us. Ver. 8.
Then shall thy light break forth like the morning, and thy health shall spring
forth speedily; and thy righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the
Lord shall be thy rereward. Ver. 11.
He shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make
fat thy bones: and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of
water, whose waters fail not. That is, (as any spiritual Christian would be apt
to interpret the place) If thou thirst after Righteousness, and in the mean
time to thy utmost power do the outward functions thereof in thy duties to God
and man, at length this Spirit of truth will break forth like the morning light
within thee, and the emanations of the holy Ghost will so thoroughly refresh
thee and strengthen thee, that with ease and pleasure thou shall walk in all
the ways of God, which shall be like the flowery Alleys of a Paradise to thee,
both to thine inward and outward man.

4. Not that our endeavors or desires are any obligation to God by way of
merit on our part, but it is his mercy to the Soul that does in good earnest
pant after him. For till he has completed his work in us, all our works are
worth nothing; and whenever they are worth any thing, they are not ours but
his. And to this sense speaks Paul to Titus, chap. 3. But after that the
kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on
us (or poured out upon us, as the Original has it) abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior. Like that of the Prophet, Thou shall be like a watered
garden.

5. Add to these Ioh. 3.5. Jesus answered, Verily verily I say unto thee,
Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he can in no wise enter into
the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which
is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. And Romans 8.9. But ye are not in the flesh,
but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man
have not the Spirit of God, he is none of his. And verse. 26. Likewise the
Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as
we ought; but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings that
cannot be uttered. And also 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of
God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? And lastly, Ephesians. 3.14. (For
it were infinite to reckon up all places of Scripture that tend to this
purpose) For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
of whom the whole Family of Heaven and Earth is named, That he would grant you
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
spirit in the inward man; That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that
ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the
love of Christ which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the
fullness of God, who is able to do abundantly above all that we ask or think,
according to the power that works in us. To him therefore be glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

CHAP. X. 1. A Recapitulation of what has been set down hitherto concerning the
Usefulness of the Gospel, and the Necessity of undeceiving the world in those
points that so nearly concern Christian Life. 2. The ill condition of those
that content themselves with Imaginary Righteousness, figured out in the
Fighters against Ariel and Mount Sion. 3. A further demonstration of their fond
conceit. 4. That a true Christian cannot sin without pain and torture to
himself.
1. WE have now abundantly proved out of places of Scripture, The necessity of
inward Sanctification and real in-dwelling Righteousness, and the high pitch
thereof, together with the mighty assi^^ance hereunto, The Promise of the
Spirit of God moving and cooperating in the inward man to the finishing and
completing all his works in us, that we may be holy and blameless without spot
or wrinkle or any such thing.

We have also prevented all perverse glosses of false Teachers, whereby they
would slacken and enervate the strength and efficacy of these three Powers of
the Gospel we have hitherto spoken of, by introducing a bare, fruitless and
steril Faith, or the Imputation of an external Righteousness, that, according
to their compute, is further removed from us then the highest Star. Which
error, were it as harmless as groundless, any peaceable good Christian could
be content to connive at it: but it being an old mischievous Stratagem against
the Church, and so noted by the wisdom of the Apostles, an evil Machination
found out by the Prince of darkness to undermine the Kingdom of Christ, no
faithful Adherent to the interest of the Lord Jesus, and the advancement of his
Rule and Power in the World, can with a good conscience slightly pass it over,
but will use his best endeavor to undeceive the world in so dangerous a
mistake.

2. And though I be now hasting apace to the next joint of the Evangelical
Engine I am describing, yet I cannot pass on with satisfaction to my self,
before I have also added to the suffrages of the Apostles (who unanimously have
voted this opinion, of being righteous without doing righteousness, a very
dangerous Imposture and Deceit) some rational Considerations that may make us
still more sensible of the ill consequences thereof. For my own part, I must
confess that it is to me a thing utterly inconceivable how a man can be
righteous here without Righteousness, or happy hereafter without
Righteousness here; or how any true Christian can please himself in a
Palliation more then a Cure, or can be satisfied with any thing but that Manna
that came down from heaven, the very Flesh and Blood of Christ in that sense I
have interpreted it, or without feeding his Soul with that real Spirit of
Righteousness, or the Divine Nature, which is meat indeed and drink indeed. For
I do not understand how the condition of these Opposers of so Essential and
Fundamental a Truth can be any other then what the Prophet Esaias 28.
Esaias has prefigured in those that fight against Ariel, the Altar of
Holocausts, (where the whole beastly nature is to be burned by the consuming
From (...) ignis and (...) Deus.
Fire of God) and that lay siege against Mount (...) from (...) Siccitas.
Sion, the Hill of that Dryness and Thirst which God has promised to irrigate
with living Springs of water. It shall be as when an hungry man dreameth, and
behold he eats; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty
man dreameth, and behold he drinks; but he awaketh, and behold he is faint.
So shall the multitude of the Nations be that fight against Mount Sion. This is
the condition of all Sects whatsoever that are contrary to them that thirst and
hunger after righteousness: For these shall be really satisfied, the dew of
Divine grace shall plentifully shower down upon this Sion, and they shall be
filled with Spiritual Manna from Heaven; whereas the other, their hunger and
thirst (that is, their wants and defects) being real, but not after real
Righteousness, are fed only by imaginations and dreams, and whenever they awake
out of them, will find themselves destitute.

3. Nay, what is yet worse, a man may almost conclude that they are not so much
as in a capacity of dreaming of celestial food. For that is a function of life,
to dream of such things as are agreeable to such a species of living creatures;
and those that dream of such things as are congruous to their nature, it is
because they have had an enjoyment of them, and do sometimes enjoy them
according to the order of Nature. And certainly he that is a true Christian, is
not a mere natural man, but is that New Creature that is framed in
righteousness and true holiness: and therefore he must be fed out of such
Principles as he was generated from, not of the will of man but the Spirit of
God; and therefore he does not only dream of, but really feed of that Manna
that is from Heaven, that inward essential Righteousness that is from God. And
as it is impossible for one man to eat, to drink and to breath for another in a
natural way; so also is it alike impossible for any one person to eat and drink
and breath in a spiritual way for another. And if we were wholly alive to that
life that is most certainly in every Christian rightly so called, we should
think it as inconvenient that any one should be righteous for us, as that he
should be in health for us. For what comfort would it be, while we are in a
tedious fever, a sharp fit of the stone or gout, that some other person should
be sound and at ease for us?

4. And therefore it is too shrewd an indication that men in this imaginary
persuasion are in a manner past feeling, as the Apostle speaks, as being devoid
of all divine life and sense; otherwise Sin and Immorality would be as harsh to
their Souls as these Diseases are painful to their bodies. And hence it is that
S. John says, That he that is born of God sins not, because the seed of God
remains in him; as I have noted above. For what Principle of life sins
against it self? what Beast wilfully wounds it self? what Tree blasts it self?
what life will so much as hurt it self any way? Will the Eagle swim in the Sea,
or the Dolphin fly in the Air? Will not all Creatures keep them to their own
Element and Original, and fly their contrary Element as that which brings
destruction, or at least a great deal of diseasement to them? What regenerate
man then can endure to come near the Region of Sin? It can be no more pleasant
to him then the Smoke to his eyes, or the Saw to his hearing. How can I do this
wickedness, and sin against God? Nay how can I cut and lance and scorch my
self, my better self, even Christ which lives in me, with whom I suffer as
often as his image suffers?

And this may serve for a more general taste of the unreasonablenesse of this
wicked and mischievous Imposture that has ever more or less attempted the
Church of Christ. But I shall bring you in a more punctual Bill of the losses
and damages done thereby.

CHAP. XI. 1. That the want of real Righteousness deprives us of the Divine
Wisdom, proved out of Scripture: 2. As also from the nature of the thing it
self. 3. That it disadvantages the Soul also in Natural speculations. 4. That
it stifles all Noble and laudable Actions; 5. And exposes the imaginary
Religionist to open reproach. 6. That mere imaginary Righteousness robs the
Soul of her peace of Conscience, 7. And of all divine Joy; 8. Of Health and
Safety, 9. And of eternal Salvation. 10. That God also hereby is deprived of
his Glory, and the Church frustrated of public Peace and Happiness.
1. THis sad reckoning may be comprised under these two general heads, The Good
of man and The Glory of God. Those particulars in which the Good of man chiefly
does consist, be these: 1. True Wisdom and a sound Judgment in things. 2.
Noble and profitable Actions. 3. Honorable Repute. 4. Peace and Tranquillity
of Mind. 5. Divine Joy and Triumph of Spirit. 6. Health and Safety here in
this life. 7. Eternal Happiness hereafter.


And now first that we are deceived and cheated of true Wisdom and a sound
Mind by this fond supposal, That we may be righteous, though we be not
righteous as Christ was righteous, that is, in doing of righteousness, will
sufficiently appear from this, That Righteousness and Holiness is the only true
way to Divine Wisdom and a sound judgment in things. Which may be made good
both by manifold testimonies of Scripture, and from the nature of the thing it
self. If any one will do the will of God, he shall know of my doctrine, says
Christ whether it be from God, or whether I speak of my self, John 7. And in
the Psalms, The fear of the Lord (by which is understood Righteousness, the
eschewing evil and doing good, as the Psalmist himself explains it) is the
beginning of wisdom; a sound Judgment have they that do thereafter, etc. And
elsewhere, Psalm 25.14.
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he is mindful of his
Covenant to make them know it, as the Hebrew will be well rendered. And Job 32.
I said Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom: But
there is a spirit in a man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. But how this Inspiration and Spirit of Wisdom has for its abode
an heart really righteous, the Wisdom of Solomon will tell us; insomuch that
he that is contented to forgo Righteousness, must also of necessity fall short
of Wisdom. Wisdom cannot enter into a wicked heart, says he, nor dwell in a
body that is subject unto sin. For the holy Spirit of discipline flees from
deceit, and withdraws her self from thoughts that are without understanding,
and is rebuked when wickedness comes in. Wisdom therefore and Unrighteousness
cannot abide under the same roof. Our bodies cannot be both the Temples of the
living God and of a deceitful Idol.

And if it were needful to add any thing Allegorical and Mysterious to these
plain Testimonies of Scripture, we might also urge that this precious truth,
That Wisdom rises out of Righteousness, was also shadowed out in the fourth
days Creation, wherein the lights of Heaven were made. For that mysterious Jew
on the place records this observable privilege of the number Four, (...), That
the Quaternarie Number is the first Quadrate, pariter par, or equally equal,
the measure of Justice and Equity. Wherefore the number here of the Day being a
Symbol of Righteousness, that which was created in that day, viz. the Lights of
Heaven, may very well be the Symbols of divine Knowledge or Wisdom, viz. the
Sun of Righteousness, as Christ is called; intimating that the Divine Wisdom
is conceived and brought forth, or, if you will, created in Righteousness. So
that this Intellectual Sun does not arise and shine upon our Minds til this
fourth day, the day of Righteousness. But then that in the Proverbs is made
good, Proverb. 4.18.
That the path of the just is as the shining light (...) that goes on and
shines (...) til the firmitude or stability of the day; and that is at Noon,
which is the Solstice of the day, where his altitude does not so sensibly vary.
So that the sense is, That the path of the righteous is like the course of the
Sun, who still climbs up, til he fully reach his Meridian: But the way of the
wicked is as darkness, (as it is in the following verse,) they know not at what
they stumble.

2. And thus it is plain from Testimonies of Scripture, That divine Wisdom and
a sound Mind is not to be attained unto but through Righteousness: And that
consequently he that forgoes real Righteousness, must of necessity lose true
Wisdom.

But beside this there are also innate arguments taken from the things
themselves, whereby the same Truth may be proved. For it is apparent that
Corruption of the Will, like rust, eats away the strength, defaces the beauty,
and obscures the brightness of the Understanding, and dulls the edge of the
natural wit. But to point out more at large some Reasons why the unrighteous
must be also unwise. The first is, From the falseness of the wicked heart; the
second, From the asymmetry or incongruity the vicious Mind has with divine
Truth. And for the former, it is a manifest reason why God does not commit the
treasures of Wisdom to the unrighteous. For he will not put it into the
custody of false men. How careful the divine Wisdom is in this point,
Siracides has very fitly described, chap. 4. For first she will walk with a man
by crooked ways, and bring him unto fear and dread, and torment him with her
discipline, until she have tried his soul, and proved him with her judgments:
Then will she return the straight way unto him, and comfort him, and show him
her secrets, and heap upon him the treasures of knowledge. But why she will not
commit this great and precious treasure to polluted and unholy minds, is, as I
have said, because of their faithlesness, they being so likely to abuse it:
that is, they will either contemn it, as a swine does a pearl, preferring
either the sensual pleasures or the riches or the honors of the world before
it, and so quenching the good grace of God by their base lusts and evil
desires, are cast off by God in a deserved scorn; (For the divine Wisdom is
not so vile and cheap a thing as to intrude her self like an impudent woman
into the familiarities of men, but is rebuked and checked and goes her way at
the entrance and appearance of her bold corrivals, if they be entertained, viz.
The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: and many
such affronts will quite chase her away, so that whereas she sought after us
before, she now sought after by us will be hard to be found:) or else if we do
not seem to contemn her and slight her, yet we may show our selves faithless
and treacherous in betraying her to other uses then God intended her. As if so
be we should thence endeavor to exalt our own name, and please our selves in
our own arrogance, setting our selves above others; or use the quickness and
sagacity of our Understandings to deceit, or the patronizing of evil in our
selves or others; I say, because the unrighteous man would be subject to abuse
thus treacherously the great gift of God, therefore the divine Wisdom may not
lodge in his false heart: but in stead of that any fortuitous Opinions which
his own natural inclinations, practices, education, or confusion of his own
mind and conscience shall heap together in him hand over head; which he taking
for Truth shall notwithstanding abuse, and show the divine Wisdom how he would
also use her if he could come at her, it is likely worse, or rather he would
abuse himself worse with her then with those; that meat being worst for the
sick which is best for them that are well.

But beside that the counsel of God is such that he will not give the gift of
Wisdom to the wicked heart, there is also an incongruity, if not an
incompossibility, in the thing it self. The wicked man is incapable of it. The
natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are
foolishness to him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. (...), The Sun cannot be seen by the Eye, unless the Eye receive the
likeness of the Sun, as Plotinus speaks. Wherefore we do very foolishly in
that we bestow so much time in the exercise of our (...), and so little in the
preparing and fitting of it, that afterward the use of it may be with good
effect. If the Eyes be weak, muddy and dim, even almost to blindness, we are
not so foolish as to think to perfect our sight by looking long, or often, or
on many Objects; it makes our sight rather worse: but the disease of the Eye is
first to be taken away, and then with ease and in a moment we may see more then
before we could in many years by wearisome poaring with our short sight; or
rather (which is more to the purpose) we should be able to discern such things
as in our former condition we should never have been able at all to discern.

So the Soul of man, in its unrighteous and polluted condition, does very
unadvisedly with so much curiosity and anxious labor to endeavor the
discoveries of divine Truths; for there is as yet Laesum organum, and she ought
to commit her self first to the skill of a faithful Physician, to Christ, who
is the healer of the Souls of men as well as he was of their Bodies, and so to
be re-estated again into that state of health and soundness, (and Righteousness
is this soundness of the Soul,) and then to use her Faculty when it is able to
receive that whereby the Object is discovered. In lumine tuo videbimus lucem,
In thy light we shall see light. But if the Eye receive no light, it discovers
no Object: So if the Soul receive no impresse from God, it discovers nothing of
God. For it is most certainly true, That like is known by like; and therefore
unless the Image of God be in us, which is Righteousness and true Holiness, we
know nothing of the Nature of God, and so consequently can conclude nothing
concerning him to any purpose. For we have no measure to apply to him, because
we are not possessed of any thing homogeneal or of a like nature with him, and
this only can be a measure; for (...), as the Philosopher speaks. But when we
are arrived to that Righteousness or rectitude of Spirit or uprightness of
Mind, by this, as by the Geometrical Quadrate, we also comprehend with all
Saints what is that spiritual breadth and length and depth and height, as the
Apostle speaks. What the Rectitude of an Angle does in Mathematical measurings,
the same will this Uprightness of Spirit do in Theological Conclusions.

3. And not to make this loss of Wisdom a jot less then it is, I further add,
That Unrighteousness is encumbred with many distempers and impediments whereby
even Natural knowledge, as well as Divine Wisdom, is much hindered in a man.
Such are Anger, Impatience, Self-admiration or Self-conceitedness, Admiration
of persons, or a pusillanimous Over-estimation of them; Desire of Victory more
then of Truth; Too close attention to the things of the world, as Riches, Power
and Dignities; Immersion of the Mind into the Body, and the slaking of that
noble and divine fire of the Soul by Intemperance and Luxury, with such like.
All which certainly are very great enemies to all manner of Knowledge, as well
Natural as Divine. And as for Anger, which appears in disputes, that it blinds
the Judgment, is an acknowledged truth, as those Proverbial sayings witness,
Impedit ira animum, etc. and Ira furor brevis; and Madness and Wisdom do not
consist together. This Passion placed upon Religious objects is called Zeal,
and the Apostle, that there may be no mistake, calls it (...), bitter Zeal. But
this inordinate Anger, be it in things Humane or Religious, it is really a
Whirlwinde in our Soul, and carries up with it dirt and straws and dust and all
in to the Understanding, and does always more or less blind the Judgment. And
how great an enemy Impatience is to that choice piece of Natural knowledge
which lies in Mathematics, is evident from hence, That those Sciences either
find or make the studiers of them of calm and quiet Spirits, as Petiscus truly
observes. But whether the Admiration of our selves, or of other Persons, be
more mischievous to the Truth, is not easy to define. For though we be more
prone to admire our selves, yet we may with less checking admire another; it
looking something like Friendship or Modesty: though commonly, if not always,
we have some lurking interest involved in the same, and so admire our selves in
another with less Envy and Suspectedness. Wherefore the next way not basely to
admire another is not conceitedly to admire ones self, or more favorably to
look on a man's own conceits then on a strangers. For it will be very hard for
one whom Self-love does not impose upon, to be imposed upon by any other
person, whom he cannot love better then himself.

And as for Desire of Victory, the sense of that folly is, That a man had
rather seem wise, then be so, or have the glory and fame then the possession of
Wisdom. And he that is thus affected, must of necessity follow such things as
are most obvious, plausible and popular; and so become a fool amongst wise men
as well as seem a wise man amongst fools.

And as for close Attention to the world, that man ought to hold there be more
Souls then One in a man's body, that will hold that ambitious and covetous men
have any leisure to be much seen either in Divine or Natural things. For their
plottings after Wealth and Honor, and the putting of their plots in execution,
will take up the Animadversion of the Soul so much, that one Animadversive will
not suffice for both these Provinces. So that it is possible that men that have
not addicted themselves to any such projects, but have been ever employed in
the single search after Wisdom, may understand more in Divinity and Nature
then they who by long diligence and industry have at last scrambled up to the
top of Honor and Riches; a Position never allowed of either by the Jewish
Prelates of old or the present Cardinals. Which has made the one bold
persecutors of Christ, the other of the chief Christian Philosophers. As is
manifest in the story of Galileo.

Lastly, Immersion of the Mind into the Body, Sensuality and Intemperance, that
these be main impediments to Knowledge, is most plain. For seeing that the Soul
in this state does depend on the Brain for Phansy and Memory (without which
there can be no Understanding) as well as on the Eye and Ear for seeing and
hearing; it will follow that the Brain being altered and distempered by
frequent excess, the Faculty of Understanding will also go to wrack. For if
the very clime or temper of the Air wherein men are bred and born does avail so
much for wit or dullness, as has been always acknowledged that it does, whence
is that byword of a Boeotian wit; certainly distemper in Diet will as much, if
not much more. And it is known by too frequent and woeful experience, how many
men of good natural parts have either buried them in Gluttony, or drowned them
in Drunkenness, or consumed them by Lust. This Truth indeed is more easy to be
understood then worthily to be deplored.

4. I have now sufficiently proved, That we are assuredly cheated of true
Wisdom and a sound Mind by that mischievous conceit, That a man may be
righteous, though he be not righteous as Christ was righteous, that is, really
righteous.

And that we are also cheated of all noble and profitable Actions is as plain.
For from whence should they arise but from these two fountains, Righteousness
and Wisdom? And the former is here supposed to be wanting, from whence has
been clearly proved the want also of the other. Wherefore the good and
happiness of Mankind does here most miserably go to wrack.

5. And therefore thirdly, There is no ground of deserved Reputation amongst
men. But their mouths will be closed in silence, if not opened in reproach. For
the unrighteous Nature will work in those that be really unrighteous; and the
actions of unrighteousness, in those that will however be reckoned in the
number of the righteous for some other cause then for being so indeed, will be
more lavishly spoken against for their numbering of themselves amongst those
that are godly. For the miscarriages of those that make no show of Religion nor
pretend to Holiness, are noted only by them that are holy, and they only take
offense at it; but when they that are reckoned amongst the Religious do
transgress, even the Wicked themselves, that are willing to wink at one
another, will take great offense at these, and talk very loud against them. For
their wicked Acts breaking through that external covering and outside of
Religion, they are deservedly laughed at; as the Ass by the beasts of the
Forest, when his unsuitable ears appeared through the Lions skin, and his rude
braying betrayed his nature.

6. This imaginary Righteousness does rob us also of Tranquillity and Peace of
Mind. For he that acts unrighteously, is in actual rebellion against right
Reason and the Spirit of God; and he that is only imaginarily righteous, will
not fail to act unrighteously; for real Unrighteousness will have its real
effects, as well as poisonous Plants their fruit, and Serpents their spawn.
Wherefore he that has no more then imaginary righteousness, carries a Kingdom
of Rebellion in himself; and unless he be given up to a reprobate sense, the
peace and tranquillity of his mind cannot but be shaken. For verily the
Rational Soul of man is not so utterly estranged from all Virtue and Goodness,
nay indeed there is that congruity and connaturality betwixt them, that it will
be a hard task utterly to break off that ancient league. For Virtue is natural
to the Soul, Vice and Immorality extraneous and adventitious; else why do they
call the cleansing of the Soul from Vice, the Purging of her? For Purgation is
(...), as the Platonists well define it, the taking away of what is unnatural
and improper. Wherefore seeing that Virtue is natural to the Soul, it is
reasonable to conceive it is better rooted then to be expunged quite or a
sudden by any one Phansy or Opinion, and that the sense thereof will not so
easily be washed out. And therefore it remaining there, and yet a man acting
according to some unnatural or irrational conceit that he has taken up he knows
not how unawares, he acting, I say, against this noble and innate sense of the
Soul, he must needs be wounded and disquieted.

7. Divine Joy and Triumph of the Soul is taken away. For what is Joy and
Triumph but the more fully and easy of any Nature according to its own
principle? As the Flame when it has broke through the smoke and raw smotherings
of the fuel into more free activity and more uncurb'd vibrations of its own
splendor and light. And verily the Soul has found its own freedom and force
and easy activity and natural complacency in the Spirit of Righteousness, when
once it has from many encumbrances of the flesh and of the world broke out into
that Divine flame, and so felt what is most perfective of her self and of her
own happiness, and what suits her better then any thing that ever she had a
sense of before. Which is a sign again that this is most natural to the Soul,
her sense being most satisfied therewith. And in the high enjoiment of so
enravishing a good, what can she do less then breath out her pleasure in such
like ejaculations as these, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say,
rejoice; and with the Psalmist, Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous, for it
becomes the just to be thankful?

8. That Health and Safety is taken away by this substituting of Imagination
for real Righteousness, is plain. For if the keeping of the Law is health to
the navel and marrow to the bones, Prove. 3.8.
as the wise man speaks, what must Unrighteousness be, but a canker in the
flesh and rottenness to the bones? And if that of the Apostle be true, Who is
he that will harm you, 1 Pet. 3.13.
if you be followers of that which is good? then what harm may you not fall
into if you adhere to what is evil?

9. As we are deprived of Health and Safety here, so also shall we be defrauded
of our Eternal Happiness hereafter by this imposture wherewith we are imposed
upon by our own selves. For to say nothing by way of argument from the Reason
of the thing, how incompetible and incongruous Heaven is to an unrighteous
Soul, the Testimony of Scripture is plain in this matter; For no unclean thing
may enter into the holy City. And 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither Fornicatours,
nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. And Hebr. 12.14. Follow peace
with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. And thus
we see that all the Happiness of man and his real good is utterly subverted and
destroyed by this mischievous imagination of being righteous otherwise then by
true and living Righteousness.

10. And it is as plain that this imposture will rob God of his Glory, as well
as defeat man of his Happiness. For whether we understand by the Glory of God
the Image of God communicable to men; as the Image, that is, the light of the
Sun, is the glory of the Sun: or whether we understand the acknowledgment of
that Excellency and Perfection that is in God, first deeply conceived in our
hearts, and then fully and freely professed by our mouths: both these are
assuredly taken away by this false conceit. And of the former there is no
doubt, being that the Spirit of Righteousness is that very Glory of God or
Image of Christ. Wherefore whatever does intercept this, does really eclipse
the Glory of God. And it is as true also of the other. For seeing that the most
rich and precious Excellencies of the Divine Nature cannot be discovered by the
Soul as they ought to be, but by becoming Divine, (...), If thou be it, thou
see it, as Plotinus speaks; it must needs be that they cannot be worthily
admired and extolled by any Soul but such as is Divine, that is, such a Soul as
God has poured the Spirit of Righteousness and true Holiness on, without which
it is impossible to see God.

To all which Particulars that concern every private man you may add that great
sum of an incomputable damage that respects the Public* For what Peace or
Faithfulness can there be amongst men where the professed Mystery of their
Religion is the Explosion of real Righteousness? Or what can possibly take
place in stead thereof but Fraud and Falsehood, foul Lusts, phrantick Factions,
rude Tumults and bloody Rebellions? To which you may cast in the loss of our
very hopes that the World should ever grow better, or that the holy Promises of
God should take effect. For there is not a more cruel or butcherly weapon for
the slaying of the Witnesses, nor a more impregnable Fort against the
approaching Kingdom of Christ, and that millennial Happiness which many good
and faithful Christians expect, then this hell-hatch'd doctrine of
Antinomianisme.

CHAP. XII. 1. Of the attending to the Light within us, of which some
Spiritualists so much boast. 2. That they must mean the Light of Reason and
Conscience thereby, if they be not Fanatics, Madmen or Cheats. And that this
Conscience necessarily takes information from without; 3. And particularly from
the Holy Scriptures. 4. That these Spiritualists acknowledge the fondness of
their opinion by their contrary practice. 5. An appeal to the Light within
them, if the Christian Religion according to the literal sense be not true. 6.
That the Operation of the Divine Spirit is not absolute, but restrained to
certain laws and conditions, as it is in the Spirit of Nature. 7. The fourth
Gospel-Power, The Example of Christ. 8. His purpose of vindicating the Example
of Christ from aspersions, with the reasons thereof.
1. WE have now gone through the Three first Powers of the Gospel; of which
Three the last, namely, The Promise of the Spirit, may seem so sufficient of it
self to some, without any thing further, and I am sure does so to others, that
professedly they take up here, and exclude, or at least neglect, all that
advantage that accrues from the History of Christ, and hereby do antiquate the
Christian Religion. These are those great Spiritualists that talk so much of
The Light within them, and the Power within them; and boast that they want
nothing without to be their Guide and Support, but that they can go of
themselves without any external help. For keeping to the Light within them, the
Power of God and the Spirit of God will assist them, and will lead them into
all truth. And truly I cannot but say Amen to what they declare. For I know
assuredly that it is most true, if they would leave off their canting language,
and say in downright terms, That keeping sincerely to the dictates of Reason
and Conscience, and the perpetually denying themselves in such things as they
know or suspect to be evil, with devout addresses to the Throne of Grace for
the assistance and illumination of the Holy Spirit, to discover and overcome
all Error, Falseness, Pride and Hypocrisy that may lurk in their hearts; I
say, I am well assured that this Dispensation, faithfully kept to, will in due
time lead unto all Saving Truth; and that such a one at the last cannot fail to
become a Christian in the soundest and the fullest sense, such as firmly
adhered to Christ in the first and most unspotted Ages of the Church. But if
they will call any hot, wild Imagination or forcible and unaccountable
Suggestion, the Light within them, and follow that; this is not to keep to
Reason and Conscience, but to be delivered up to a reprobate sense, and to
expose a man's self to all the temptations that either the Devil or a man's own
Lust or a sordid Melancholy can entangle him in.

2. Wherefore by the Light within them they must understand an accountable and
rational Conscience within them, unless they be perfect Fanatics or Madmen,
or, what is worse, mere Impostors and Cheats, who would pretend to a
Conscience, but yet irrational and unaccountable to any one, and hereby have
the liberty of doing what they please, being given up at length to nothing but
Fury and Lust.

And then lastly, This Conscience within them is not a thing so absolutely
within them, that it can take no information from what is without. For it is
manifest that this Lamp of God that burns in us, is fed and nourished from
external Objects. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the
World are clearly seen, Romans 1.19, 20.
being understood by things that are made; for by these from without are we
advertised of his Eternal power and Godhead. And as we are thus taught by the
outward Book of Nature concerning the Existence of God and his general
Providence in the world as to the necessities of life both of Men and Beasts;
so may we also by external VVritings or Records be more fully informed of a
more special Providence of his to the Sons of men, concerning the State in the
other world, and of that Eternal life manifested by Christ. But I grant that it
is still this Light within us, that judges and concludes after the perusal of
either the Volumes of Nature or of Divine Revelation.

3. But as he that gives his Mind to Mathematics, Architecture, Husbandry,
Gardening, and the like, if he out of a foolish conceit of Light and Reason
being only ^^^hin one, and not without, (as certainly neither Ink nor Paper,
nor both put together, are any more partakers of the Light of Reason then of
Sense and Life) would make no use of the Writings of Euclid, suppose for
Mathematics, nor any other Author that has writ of such matters, and so of
the rest of the Faculties I named, nor converse with any man by word of mouth,
nor cast his eyes upon what they have done, but only think with himself and sit
still by the light of his own lamp within doors; will be a very sorry
Mathematician, Architect, Husbandman or Gardener: So certainly for Moral and
Divine Truth, he that will be so taught by himself, that he will not use
outward advantages, such as the Holy Scriptures especially afford, will be
found at last to have been the Scholar of a very foolish and imperfect Master.

4. Besides that, these men contradict themselves in their own practices. For
they vilify that by which they have been taught, and retain the very phrases
of what they have learned out of Scripture, and know not how to speak without
Scripture-terms, nor can make any show without Scriptural allusions; and that
grand Document of keeping to the Light within us they borrow out of S. John's
Gospel: and yet they are so phrantick and peevish that they would fling away
the staff without which they are not able to make one step in Religion.
Moreover if this Light within us is so precisely within us, that it wants no
information from without us, why do they themselves scribble such abundance of
Pamphlets, make Catechisms, set out Prophecies? why do they exhort, rebuke, nay
reproach and rail against men to convert them, if what is without cannot reach
that which is within? or why do they meet together to hear some one of their
Assembly (after he has fallen down as in a trance, and got up again) dictate
Oracles out of his disturbed breast? For his words which they hear are without,
and beat upon the Ear; they are not the Light within. Wherefore it is plain,
that the Light within may be informed by something which is without, whether by
voice or writings: And if so, there is an obligation upon this Light within to
be so considerate, as to seek the most punctual information it can from what is
most likely to inform it from without.

5. And therefore they are with all diligence to examine the most venerable
Records of Religion, and especially of that Religion under which they were not
only born, but which is absolutely of it self the most renowned Religion that
ever was in the World. Which therefore none but such as are utterly averse from
all Religion, as being wholly given up to lust and profaneness, can without
examination dare to relinquish; and if they will examine it, I mean the
Christian Religion, (as it referrs to the Person of Christ, that died betwixt
two thieves at Jerusalem, but rose again the third day, that ascended visibly
into Heaven, and shall again return in a visible manner to judge the quick and
the dead,) I appeal to this Light within them, to their Reason and Conscience,
and that of the most cunning Impostors amongst them all, or of whoever will
join with them, if the evidence for this Religion from Prophecy, History, and
from the Nature of the Religion it self, is not such, as that nothing but
Ignorance of the true meaning thereof and of its right design can hinder it
from being acknowledged as a most certain Truth by any, but those that are
afraid that any Religion that leads to Holiness, or promises any thing after
this Life, should be found true.

6. As for that Objection taken from the mighty Power of the Spirit of God, as
if that were so sufficient of it self, that belief therein and assistance
therefrom would anticipate the mention and use of any other power whatsoever
that may seem to confer to the End of the Gospel, the Sanctification of our
Souls; I answer to this, That they that do after this manner argue, do err not
knowing the Scriptures. For this Power of the Spirit communicable to Believers
is not an absolute and omnipotent Power, not to be resisted, not to be
frustrated, if there be not due means and wise accommodations concurring with
its workings or attempts to work. But I may in some manner illustrate the
condition thereof from what is observable in the Spirit of Nature, the
Principle of all natural Generations, Growths and Perfections; in which there
is a kind of Hypothetical Omnipotency as to the work of Nature; that is, That
this Spirit will not fail to assist and complete, provided that such and such
circumstances in Corporeal Agents be not wanting. So is it also in this Divine
Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, as it is communicable to us; it will certainly
assist and finish its work, if there be no impediment on our side, which it
behooves us to remove out of the way, nor any thing wanting which we can apply
our selves to for the advance of our Faith and perfecting of the holy life;
such as Meditating on the Scriptures, Conferring with Holy men, experienced
Christians, and Using with devotion and reverence all the Ordinances of Christ.
For though this assistance of the Holy Spirit be unspeakably powerful to the
sincere and diligent; yet in the negligent and perverse, as I said, his
attempts are frustrated. And therefore Steven expostulates with the Jews in
this sense, Acts 7.51.
Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost: and elsewhere we are exhorted not to Ephesians. 4.30.
grieve the Spirit, nor 1 These. 5.19.
quench the Spirit. Which expressions do plainly demonstrate that the
Communication of the Spirit is not absolute and omnipotent, but received
according to certain laws and ways of God's own appointing; who of his
infinite wisdom has traced out such a method in Christian Religion as is most
accommodate to gain Souls to himself: of which we have heard part already, and
shall now proceed to the Four last Powers of the Gospel, which are mainly
instrumental to the work of the Spirit upon the Hearts of all true Believers.

7. And the first of these is the Example of our ever-blessed Savior, who has
given us no other Precepts then what himself was the exactest Pattern of; and
himself such a Pattern of Life, that is, of Faith in God, of Humility, Love and
Purity; that we cannot doubt in following his footsteps that we are in a wrong
way, he being by voices from heaven and by his miracles upon earth proved and
declared to be the only-begotten Son of God. Wherefore the nearer we keep to
his path, the surer we are that we walk upon sound ground. Besides that he is
our Lord and Sovereign, and therefore natural Ingenuity will urge us forward to
compose our lives so as is most agreeable to his fashion. And he does expressly
require this as a Testimony of our love and loyalty to him; If you love me,
John 14.15.
keep my commandments: Of which a principal one is, That as I have loved you,
John 13.34.
ye love also one another. So he gives his disciples an Example of being humble
one to another, in that he washed their feet. If I then, your Lord and Master,
have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another feet. For I have
given you an Example, that you should do as I have done to you, John 13. And
Matthew. 11. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in
heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

8. But I need not insist much upon this subject; I having amply enough shown
in the Second part of my Discourse, how the whole History of Christ, all his
actions and deportments of himself, tend to the most effectual recommending of
the Divine Life unto us. We shall only take the opportunity here to wipe off
such stains as the foul and unsound breath of some blasphemous mouths have of
old or of late endeavored to stain this bright Mirror of Divine perfection
withal. Which will be not only a piece of indispensable duty and loyalty to
the Person of our Savior, but also the better encouragement to his sincere
followers; especially when I have added the Parallel of such accusations and
imputations as bear very close analogy with those of our Saviors himself.
Matt. 10.25.
For he has foretold of old what would come of it, That the disciple should not
be above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord. And if they have called
the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of the
household? But how just the calumnies are against the one and the other, we
shall now see.

CHAP. XIII. 1. That Christ was no Blasphemer in declaring himself to be the
Son of God; 2. Nor Conjurer in casting out Devils. 3. That he was unjustly
accused of Profaneness. 4. That there was nothing detestable in his Neutrality
toward Political Factions: 5. Nor any Injustice nor Partiality found in him. 6.
Nor could his sharp Rebukes of the Pharisees be rightly termed Railing; 7. Nor
his whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple tumultuary Zeal; 8. Nor
his crying out so dreadfully in his Passion be imputed to Impatience or
Despair. 9. The suspicion of Distractedness and Madness cleared. 10. His
vindication from their aspersions of Looseness and Prodigality. 11. The crooked
and perverse nature of the Pharisees noted; with our Saviors own Apology for
his frequenting all companies. 12. That Christ was no Self-seeker in undergoing
the Death of the Cross for that joy that was set before him.
1. THE former part of which Task though it may seem needless, if not
ridiculous, amongst Christians, who cannot entertain any evil thoughts of that
Person whom they deservedly worship; yet because all that live in Christian
Commonwealths are not cordially such in no manner at all; for the convincing of
them, if it were possible, of the Excellency of Christ, or at least for the
better stopping of vain mouths from rash and unskilful censures, I hold it not
improper to recite to you a Charge or Bill of Indictment exhibited against that
innocent and immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus by malicious and ignorant men; to the
intent that he, whom they have so unworthily charged, may be as honorably
dismissed and acquitted, That his righteousness may be brought forth as the
morning, Psalm. 37.6.
and his judgment as the noon day.

And here that they may fly high enough at first, and strike deep enough even
to a deserved taking away of life, Blasphemy must stand in the front, to give
countenance and strength to the rest of their following accusations.

2. Then Conjuring and dealing with the Devil. 3. Profanation of the Sabbath.
4. Neutrality, or cold indifferency in public Controversies. 5. Injustice. 6.
Railings. 7. Tumultuary and injurious Zeal. 7. Impatience and Despair. 9.
Phrensy or Madness. 10. Debauchery and Looseness of Life. 11. Lavishment and
Prodigality. 12. And lastly, Ambition and Self-interest.
These are the several dunghills from whence wicked and perverse men would
industriously dig out dirt to cast in the face of him who was the perfect
Pattern of divine Purity and Righteousness. But let them ply themselves as fast
as they can in these several foul pits, it will not be hard to find wherewith
to wipe it off as fast as their impious diligence shall be able to cast it on.

And first let us consider what work they make in the first place as concerning
Blasphemy. John 10. For declaring God his Father, and that He and his Father
was one, he is there furiously accused of Blasphemy, and ready to be stoned.
And John 8. They are also there ready to stone him for saying He was before
Abraham. And Matthew. 9.3. He is there also accused of Blasphemy for saying, Son,
be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.

And here in this first accusation de facto constat; Christ confesses, That he
is one with God, That he is the Son of God, and that he has power to forgive
sins, That he was before Abraham: but it is utterly denied, that in any of all
this Christ did blaspheme.

For first, consider the very words of Christ, I and my Father are one. How
unreasonably and inconsequently did these dull and peevish Perverters of the
words of him whom they so entirely hated for his good life and doctrine, deduce
from that saying, I and my Father are one, that he, being a man, made himself
God? For it is as childishly and ineptly inferred from thence by them, That he
made himself God; as if they should conclude, That the Body is the very Soul,
because the Body and the Soul are one, that is, one man. And it is no more
Falsehood, much less Blasphemy, for the Humanity of Christ (who was so really
and lively actuated, informed, and united with God, as the Body is with the
Soul) to pronounce of himself as if he were very God, then it is for the Tongue
to say, I understand, I believe, I perceive, when neither the Body nor it
believes, perceives, or understands any thing, but only the Soul with which it
is so intimately united, and of which that which the Tongue speaks in such
cases is to be understood.

And if this be duly considered and taken in, Christ's saying also, That he was
before Abraham, will not prove any Blasphemy. For Christ by reason of his so
near union and essential conjunction with God, which Athanasius well resembles
to that of the Body and Soul, may as properly and naturally profess himself to
be before Abraham, yea, to have been before the world was made, as the Tongue
of man may utter, I shall survive after the death of this my body; in which
there is no ill sense nor incongruity in the judgment of most sober men. But
besides this, that which the blind Jews understood not, being hoodwinked with
the thickness of their own particular Religion and unregenerate Nature,
sometimes Christ speaks of himself under the notion of a Divine Life and
Unction communicable to the Sons of men in all Ages and Places. Wherefore the
sense is this, That whereas the Jews Religion and Topical and Temporary
Holiness began but as high as from Abraham; that of Christ's, which he exhibited
in that fullness to the World, was truly Universal both for Time as well as
Place; a Light that enlightneth every man that comes into the world; the
Eternal Wisdom of God, that in all Ages makes those that receive it friends of
God and Prophets, Wisd. 7.27.
as the Wise man speaks.

And it is no wonder that Divine men according to their higher or more intimate
union with the Divinity lose their sense and remembrance of their
Particularities, and pronounce of themselves rather according to the things
they are so livingly united with, then according to their own vanishing
circumscribed corporeal persons.

And now it being no Blasphemy, as is plain, to admit that one may be thus
lively actuated by and united to God, in whom, if any where, the mind of God
must dwell; who can more reasonably remit sins then such an one and so manifest
a Prophet as our Savior declared himself by his signs and miracles done among
the people? But our Savior has so excellently answered for himself, and so
appositely, as to the condition of his Opposers, that when I have rehearsed it,
this first accusation will be more then satisfied. Joh. 10.34, 35.
Is it not written in your Law, I said, Ye are Gods? If he called them Gods
unto whom the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken; Say you of
him whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest;
because I said, I am the Son of God? If I do not the works of my Father,
believe me not. But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works; that
ye may know and believe that the Father is in me and I in him. And surely at
the very first sight this is a right sober plea to any unprejudiced Judge, that
our Savior was so far from a Blasphemer, that for his Life he was a Saint, or
rather the Pattern and Original of all Saintship, for his Miracles the Power of
God, and for his Nature and relation Filius Dei, the Son of God, in a very safe
Scriptural and Judaical sense; to trouble their low apprehensions with no
higher nor harder conceptions. Which Conceptions are notwithstanding not so
hard as true: and the Writings of the Apostles and the Evangelists being judge
(to whom every Christian is bound to appeal) I conceive it will easily appear
to indifferent men, That the Godhead belongs to Christ really and essentially,
not titularly, being as necessarily included in the formalis ratio of his
nature, as three Angles in the notion of a Triangle. And in my own judgment, I
cannot acquit those men who are so busy against the Divinity of Christ (whenas
yet they would be called and esteemed Christians) from being guilty not only of
high indiscretion, but of a very grand error in Christianity.

But the Jews, to whom this great Mystery of the Coalition of God and Man into
one person was not then revealed, did very perversely to interpret Christ's words
into such a sense as they might with confidence call Blasphemy; whenas they
might have interpreted them according to what was more compliable with the
tenor of their own Faith. In this, I say, was their malice very remarkable,
that they would not afford his saying an ordinary benign interpretation, whose
works and actions were so miraculous and divine, and his life so full of
Goodness and Innocence.

2. But such was the perverseness of this stupid Nation, that even those
things that should have wrought an acknowledgement of their Messiah, made them
more obstinate; and they must be less his friend, because he was a foe to the
Devil, and deem him a Conspiratour against God, when it was his business to
dislodge Satan wherever he found him.

Christ in the second accusation must by all means be represented to the world
as a Conjurer, and a dealer with the Devil, Matt. 12.22. Where the people being
much amazed at that great Miracle that Jesus did in healing the possessed that
was blind and dumb, insomuch that they began to bethink themselves that this
man might very well be the Messiah; the wicked and envious Pharisees most
impudently calumniate him, saying, This man does not cast out Devils, but by
Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils. But Christ's Reply to this so heinous
Calumny is as solid as mild.

Every kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation; and every city
or house divided against it self cannot stand. And if Satan cast out Satan, he
is divided against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand? And if I by
Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore
they shall be your judges. But if I cast our Devils by the Spirit of God, etc.
And here he clears himself by two excellent Arguments. The first supposes the
Devils to be so wise and to love themselves so well, that they knew how to
conserve, and would endeavor to conserve their own Commonwealth and Power; but
if they should enable Christ to cast out their fellow-devils, it were a plain
beginning of sedition and dissension, and a portending of ruin to their State.
Nor could it be reasonably suspected that Christ was so deep a Complotter with
the Rulers of Darkness, and that he was of so much intimacy or interest with
them, that this was done by way of Collusion betwixt the Devils and him, that
in something else he might subvert the kingdom of God with greater ease and
effect. For there can be nothing conceived more contrary to the Devils nature
and interest, then that Life which Christ both taught and practiced; besides
his recommending of Joh. 4.23, 24.
spiritual worship, which destroys Paganism and the worship of Demons.
Wherefore it was the more perversely done of the Pharisees to impute this
Miracle to the Power of the Devil rather then the Spirit of God; whenas also
their own Sons and Disciples were conceived by them to cast out devils by no
evil Art, but merely by the Power of God; as diverse Writers testify, that both
Jews and Egyptians were known to cast out unclean spirits by conjuring them in
the name of the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and sometimes in the Nomen
(...), that is, In the Name of IEHOVA, as ad Autolycum, lib. 2.
Theophilus writes.

3. The third charge is Profaneness and Sabbath-breaking, Luke 6. where Jesus
with his disciples going through the cornfieldsd, they pluck the ears of corn,
rubbing them with their hands, and eating them, and that on the Sabbath Day.
But here Christ apologizes for them by the example of David who ate the
Shewbread. And at the 11. verse, the Scribes and Pharisees are filled with
madness, because he healed a man on the Sabbath Day; insomuch that they
consult to do the utmost of despite unto him: for all one might have thought
that Apologetical reason for the business might have prevented their choler, or
assuaged it, Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath Day or to do evil, to save
life or to destroy it? But methinks there cannot be imagined any answer so
smart, and hit more home then that in the second of Mark, v. 27. The Sabbath
was made for man, not man for the Sabbath; therefore the Son of man is Lord
also of the Sabbath. Where the well-prepared Christian is taught in a short
sentence worthy to be writ in letters of Gold, or rather in the Heart of every
holy and understanding man, not only what concerns the Sabbath, but even the
whole business of Religion, That it is rather Hominis gratia quam Dei; and
that though God's Honor be mainly pretended in it, yet it is man's Happiness
that is really intended by it, even of God himself. Which wretched men of
ignorant and dark minds, and deeply levened with the sour Pharisaical leven,
understanding not, create much trouble to themselves and all the world besides
in their peevish and inept prosecution of matters of Religion; they being no
meet Judges of their either Apprehensions or Actions, whom the Divine Freedom
and Benignity has transformed into a contrary nature to themselves.

4. Now for Neutrality, that seems so intolerable and detestable to those whose
uncurbed desire of worldly advantage or humorous projects makes them even hate
all that may be and yet are not instrumental to their precipitate designs; it
is so far from being a Fault in our Savior, that in my opinion it was a very
graceful Ornament in the demeanor of so Divine and Pious a Personage as he
was, who was set apart for better purposes then to attend Political Squabbles
and Dissensions, which seldom fail of being begun and continued from any better
Principles then Envy, Ambition and Covetousness.

Our Savior being very craftily tempted to declare himself to be of judgment
either for or against Caesar ( Matthew. 22.) by this Question, Is it lawful to
pay tribute to Caesar, or no? he as warily avoids giving his sentence, for the
justness of this or that cause, as may be; returning only this well-attemper'd
Answer, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things
that are God's. Ita Christus sapientissimo responso and seditionis motae and
violatae Religionis calumniam in quaestione insidiosissima effugit, as that
excellent Interpreter observes: and so he quits himself from appearing either
Herodian, Gaulonite or Caesarean.

5. What semblances they can feign of Injustice or Partiality, will be picked
out of such passages as these; His unseasonable cursing the Fig Tree for not
bearing fruit, whenas the time of year was not for fruit; His blaming the
Pharisees for long Prayers, when himself is recorded to have prayed a night
together; and lastly, His quitting the woman that was taken in the very act of
Adultery.

But as for the first; As the Fig Tree felt no hurt, so no hurt was done in
withering it: but this was merely a Symbolical passage, whereby the judgment
of God was prefigured against the unfruitful Religion of the Jews, See Book 4.
c. 8. sect. 5, 6, 7.
as I have above noted.

For long Prayers; Whereas our Savior is said ( Luke 6.) to have gone out into
a mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God; the Greek has it
(...), not (...) which is more likely to signify in proseucha Dei, or Divine
Oratory, or Place of Prayer to God; as is plain from that of the Satyrist, Ede
ubi consistas, in qua te quaero proseucha.
However it is to be conceived our Savior condemned rather the Hypocrisy and
effectedness of long Prayers then the mere length of them; it being impossible
for any of so accomplished a Spirit as our Savior to blame either the
shortness or length of men's devotions arising out of a soberly-guided
affection, not a vain affectation.

For the acquitting the Adulteress, it cannot be interpreted as a
countenancing of any such foul miscarriage, but as an exprobration to the Jews
of their own wickednesses, which whenas they ought to have been conscious to
themselves of, they should not have been over-forward to do execution upon
those that were but sinners as themselves, especially that power of condemning
and punishing being then in a manner taken out of their hands by the Romans.
And here Christ did also worthily of that divine and benign nature which dwelt
in him, of which this fruit was but as an handful to that full Harvest the Sons
of Adam afterward reaped from his Doings and Sufferings.

6. As for the Imputation of railing; One of the worst speeches that ever fell
from his lips was when he called the Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites; which,
according to the propriety of the word, is as much as Histriones or
Stage-plaiers: and indeed the Scribes and Pharisees of old and their posterity
ever since have so dressed up themselves and their Religion too, that that
Title might deservedly have been entailed on them and their seed for ever. But
Christ elsewhere seems more bitter, where he speaks out in plain English, Joh.
8.
Ye are of your Father the Devil. But it was a Title that fell out so fittingly
for them upon their vain boast of their Father Abraham, whose Sonship they had
forfeited by being quite of a contrary nature to him, that it had been a piece
of inexcusable Forgetfulness not to have reminded them of their true Descent
and Pedigree, he having so full authority thereto.

7. That seeming injurious and tumultuary Zeal, where he whips the Tradesmen
out of the Temple, and overthrows the Tables of the Money Changers, the very
manner of the doing of it does justify the act; it being plainly miraculous,
that a private man, destitute both of arms and authority from men, should drive
so many both from their station and gain. Nor would this zeal, seem it never so
tumultuous, look misbecomingly, if we did consider from whence it sprung. Our
Savior certainly conceived high indignation and sorrow in his heart, while he
observed that scorn and contempt those blind Superstitionists, the Jews, bore
against the poor despised Gentiles, in thus profaning their Place of worship.
But I may not stay here, especially having touched upon this Book 4. c. 8.
sect. 3.
Objection already. I will only cursorily note this, That there was nothing
could more effectually attempt to move that mild Spirit of our Savior to Ire
and Impatiency, then the scornful Pride and smooth Hypocrisy of great
Pretenders to Religion.

8. What is alleged against him of Despair and Distrust in God, is from those
last dreadful and Tragical words, Eli, Eli, lama sabacthani: which being
uttered in the very pangs of death and insufferable torture, if they had been
more harsh and unreasonable then they seem, there had been little reason to
accuse Christ for them; Christ then, according to his humane nature, being at
the same disadvantage that those that lie in the highest Paroxysms of sickness,
the actions of whom are rather to be deemed Actiones Hominis then Humanae, and
so they to be acquitted of them. But those words are so sober, that they want
no such Apology: especially if it be free to interpret them according to the
latitude of the Hebrew Text, from whence they are taken. For lama will signify
how as well as why; and then it is nothing but a speech of one bemoaning
himself in the present sense of his insupportable desertion.

9. What others gather of Distractedness in our Savior and broken
Forgetfulness, that he should pronounce himself forsaken of him who himself
was, (for he was God,) and so complain of an impossibility; that Allegation
argues more shortness of Understanding in themselves. For the Humanity of
Christ was not God; for so he had not been (...), God and man, but (...), twice
God: but he being only God by Union, even that union holding, there may be this
desertion of the Humanity. As the Sun, at Christ's Passion, not disjoined from
the World, yet for the time deserted the World by withdrawing its light from
it. But if this will not do, there is another way to make good this Imputation
of Madness against Him who was deservedly styled the Wisdom of God. And this
they will confirm even by the verdict of his own friends, Mark 3.21. And when
his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hands on him; for they said, He
is beside himself. But indeed this is the fate of all almost that are more then
ordinarily wise, to be accounted little better then mad. For they having either
higher or contrary apprehensions to the vulgar, and consequently acting many
times contrary to them, they can hardly escape the suspicion of Madness; the
multitude of their judges, even the meanest of them, having not so mean a
conceit of himself, but that he is even infallible in those things which he has
for so long a time together held as true, without any control in himself or of
others. And I remember a passage somewhere in Trismegist, where the Instructor
in high mysteries, when he had enlightened his Son Tatius, forewarns him of the
reproach he would undergo from the Vulgar, that he would certainly seem to
them as a man distracted. And this also was the condition of Democritus, whom
the people out of overmuch pity and officiousness desired Hippocrates to use
his best skill to cure, as troubled with the Phrensy: which he intending to set
to the next day, was over night advertized by a divine vision or dream, that it
was not Democritus that was mad, but the People. And to return again to the
Text alleged, if we follow the not-unprobable conjectures of some, the people
will also be here found to be the madmen, and not Christ, For (...) will agree
as well with (...) as with Christ, and the actions of the Multitude are more
suitable with madness then any thing recorded there of him. For the people did
tumultuously flock together, and was so troublesome, it seems, that men could
not eat their meat quietly for them: wherefore there being that fervor and
heat in the multitude, Christ's friends went out (...), to take Christ by the
hand, and lead him out of the Crowd or (...), the Multitude; (...), For it was
said, the Multitude or People are mad or beside themselves. Which is a thing
too often credible, whether this Text prove it or no.

10. As for the Tenth and Eleventh accusations of Debaucherie and Looseness of
life, Prodigality and needless Lavishments, which are a near strain to the
height of the worst kind of Madness; they are expressly set down in Scripture.
And our Savior himself knew what a fame went of him. Luke 7.33, 34. John the
Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine; and ye say, He has a
Devil. The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold, a
gluttonous man and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners. For in the
following verses that woman in the city, which is said to be a sinner, which
bestowed so much cost and affection upon our Savior, was such an one,
prostitutae pudicitiae mulier, as Beza interprets it: But what her demeanor
was toward our Savior Christ is there set down, She stood behind him weeping,
and began to wash his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her
head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. Which ointment
in the other Gospel is said to be a box of Spikenard very precious. Which
familiar and affectionate officiousness and sumptuous cost, together with that
sinister fame that woman was noted with, could not but give much scandal to the
Pharisees there present. For that dispensation of the Law under which they
lived making nothing perfect, but only curbing the outward actions of men; it
might very well be, that they being conscious to themselves of no better
motions within then of either Bitterness or Lust, how fair soever they carried
without, could not deem Christ's acceptance of so familiar and affectionate
service from a woman of that fame to proceed from any thing better then some
loose and vain principle; and that therefore the Prophet was grown idly-minded,
or that he was no Prophet at all. But he was both a Prophet, and constantly
sober-minded, and unblamable even in this matter. For he knew that she had been
sometime a Convert, as well as heretofore a Sinner, whose Conversion our
Savior, he having several times conversed with her, either begun or confirmed
by that his conversation. For he balk'd no company, as a good Physician
declines no patient nor disease. And certainly that great miracle which Jesus
wrought upon her brother (for this was Mary the sister of Martha and Lazarus
whom Christ raised from the dead) could not but fully settle her in a firm
faith and love of God and Jesus Christ whom he had sent. Whereby her heart at
that time being full of the joiful remembrances of the mercy and goodness of
God every way exhibited to her by this man Christ, (as Remission of sins, true
Instructions in Righteousness, Newness of life, and the regaining of her dear
brother Lazarus from the grave;) out of a deep sense of the love of God, and
thankful regard to him through whom all that was manifested and made good to
her, she did overflow with kindness and thankfulness: the expressions whereof
moving no sense of evil to our Savior, (his sanctified body being as pure and
immovable as consecrated marble, the golden wings of the Cherubims in the
Temple, or that very alabaster that bore in it the precious ointment,) it had
been not only Incivility but even Impiety to have given any check or
discountenance to this devout Convert in this her full carier of sincere love
and thankful affection. Which certainly, whatever it seemed to those pitiful
Spectators, those strait-laced Pharisees, was an odor of sweet savor unto
God, and as holy Incense filled the court of Heaven, as well as the opening of
the box of ointment filled the house with an acceptable sent to all but Judas
(whose Covetousness made him with a handsome pretense to the poor, exclaim of
the act as profuse and prodigal;) and to the abovesaid Pharisees, who doubtless
thought all the perfume lost, saving that fee thereof they felt in their own
Nostrils.

11. But it is observable that such was the perverse and wicked ingenie of
those crooked Superstitionists, that true Goodness in no kind of dress would
please them. In John the Baptist there was that eminent Severity and Austerity
of Life, accompanying and unreprovable Integrity and Purity of heart, that he
might, one would think, have commanded them to that which was good; but he must
have a melancholy Devil in him. Our Savior came in a more pleasant and
careless garb, laying aside that awful and rough severity that was in the
other, intermingling himself with all companies, taking not at all upon him,
being as other men are in every thing, sin only excepted; (which manner of life
as it is of more perfection then the other, as supposing more Benignity of
nature, and more firm radication in Goodness, so fewer men are capable of it,
much less unsteddy and unresolved youth, who are to fly from suspected company
as from the devouring plague;) yet, I say, these wretched Pharisees, as true
Detesters of real Holiness and Godliness, whatever they pretend in the shadow
thereof, cannot give our Savior a good word, but interpret his good nature
good-fellowship, or debauched company-keeping, and his serviceable
intermingling himself with all sorts of men (Publicans and Sinners not
excepted) for their good, friendship and countenance to what is evil. But our
Savior Christ has sufficiently apologized for himself in this matter in these
few words; The whole have no need of the Physician, but those that are sick.
And in another Similitude he fitly represents their cross nature by what is
said of those in the song the little children sung in the marketplace; We have
piped to you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not
lamented: that is, These inept and unwieldy-spirited fellows, the Pharisees,
could not be moved to what was truly good, neither by the sad and austere
deportment of John, nor by the more free and unaffected carriage of our Savior.

12. And therefore let us leave them at last as remediless, and examine the last
allegation, which is taken out of one of his own followers and friends, Hebr.
12. v. 2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith; who for the
joy set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the throne of God. Here cavillers will insinuate to the
derogation of that perfect Righteousness in Christ, that he was a Self-seeker
in all that toil and sorrow he underwent for the Sons of men, nay an ambitious
Kingdome-seeker, (For That Joy which sustained him was This Throne mentioned in
this Text; as I confess cannot be denied by any:) and that therefore all these
Acts and Sufferings of our Savior, that seemed so Heroical, do proceed but
from a Mercenary Principle. But this Allegation is very easily answered. For
whether we understand by This Throne or Kingdom a more undisturbed enjoiment
of the Divinity and fuller possession of God, which speaks a more powerful and
high exaltation of the Humane nature of Christ, and his more free fruition of
the Divine; and this respects our Savior Christ's own good; or whether we
understand That Power he should be endued with, whereby he led Captivity
captive and procured gifts for men, trampling down the powers of Hell and
Darkness for the rescue of the Sons of Adam from their long bondage; This
Throne, This Kingdom, This Power aimed at, implied in our Savior neither
Ambition nor Mercenariness. For the desire of a fuller Fruition of God was not
Ambition, but Divine Love; which he not affecting in that Luciferian way,
Similis ero Altissimo, but through an humble enravishment of Spirit in the
remembrance of that Divine Beauty, was so far from committing any sin, that he
did that which is Weakness or Sin not to commit. And as Jacob could not
properly be said to be either a Self-seeker or Mercenary in respect of Rachel
for whom he served so many years, and whom he so entirely loved, but in respect
of Laban and his sheep-keeping he might be said to be Mercenary, and a
Self-seeker; (for he served him only for Rachel's sake:) so Christ being
enamoured of the Divine Nature, for love whereof he went through so much
drudgery and misery upon Earth, could not in respect of that glorious and
soul-ravishing Beauty which he sought to enjoy, be said to be either
Self-seeking or Mercenary; when it was the very Presence of God that he was so
taken with, as a Friend is with the lovely person of his Friend.

But now for That Power he foresaw he should be invested withal, of leading
Captivity captive and procuring gifts for men; being that it was for the
Universal good of others, why might he not please and solace himself in it in
the midst of his many tedious encumbrances, without the least suspicion of
Ambition or Blame?

Wherefore maugre all that has been hitherto objected or can be devised against
that accomplished Pattern of all Righteousness, that immaculate Lamb Christ
Jesus, we will conclude with that Song of praise sung in the Apocalypse by the
Elders before the throne of the Lamb.

Worthy is the Lamb, Revel. 5.12, 13.
that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and
honor, and glory, and blessing. And let every Creature which is in Heaven, and
on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that are
in them, help to fill up the heavenly Quire and say, Blessing, and honor, and
glory, and power be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for
ever and ever.

CHAP. XIV. 1. The reason of his having insisted so long on the vindicating of
the Life of Christ from the aspersions of the Malevolent. 2. The true Character
of a real Christian. 3. The true Character of a false or Pharisaical Christian.
4. How easily the true members of Christ are accused of Blasphemy by the
Pharisaical Christians. 5. And the working of their Graces imputed to some
vicious Principle. 6. Their censuring them profane that are not superstitious.
7. The Pharisees great dislike of coldness in fruitless Controversies of
Religion. 8. Their Ignorance of the law of Equity and Love. 9. How prone it is
for the sincere Christian to be accounted a Railer, for speaking the truth. 10.
That the least Opposition against Pharisaical Rottenness will easily be
interpreted bitter and tumultuous Zeal. 11. How the solid Knowledge of the
perfectest Christians may be accounted Madness by the formal Pharisee. 12. His
Proneness to judge the true Christian according to the motions of his own
untamed corruptions. 13. His prudent choice of the vice of Covetousness. 14.
The Unreasonableness of his censure of those that endeavor after Perfection.
15. His ignorant surmise that no man lives virtuously for the love of Virtue
it self. 16. The Usefulness of this Parallelisme betwixt the Reproach of Christ
and his true Members.
1. AND thus you have seen Christ vindicated from all those several Suspicions
and Aspersions laid upon him by malicious and ignorant men, whereby they would
represent him as not possessed of, nor acting from so Noble and Divine a
Principle of Righteousness as he himself professed, and his Followers have ever
witnessed of him. In which I confess I have been something more large then
might have been expected in pleading the cause of a Person so perfectly pure
and innocent. But I considering our Savior Christ not so much in himself, as
in his members, I mean, his true members, who have one common Spirit with him;
and how they are liable to the same accusations and misconstructions of
spightfull and inconsiderate men that himself was in the flesh: I thought it
fit more fully to insist upon the clearing and well and rightly interpreting of
all the Carriages of Christ; that thereby those that call themselves his
members, may know better how to interpret one another; or if they be not so
themselves, that they may however learn not to judge rashly and inconsiderately
of them that are, and walk indeed as he walked.

And that my foregoing pains may be the more effectual to this purpose, I shall
not stick to second them, so far as to show how men ordinarily cast the same or
the like soil and dirt upon the truest members of Christ, that they did upon
Christ himself.

2. And that you may take in this with the more evidence, give me leave to
prefix in your mind the right Image of a true Christian, or living member of
Christ. And such an one is he, who is a branch of the same Vine, has derived
into him the same sap and Life, partakes of one and the same Divine spirit with
Christ; Mark 12.33.
the fruit whereof is to love God with all a man's heart and with all his Soul,
and his neighbor as himself; and to do so to others as he himself would be
done to. Matthew. 7.1^.
And that I may not name that only which seems nothing in too many men's eyes, I
add also, John 17.3.
To know and acknowledge the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.
And surely whosoever has this in its due measure and vigor of life, is
conscious to himself and finds the sweet of so great and glorious an
accomplishment of Mind, that whatever the Wit or Humor of man can add to it,
will seem of little more value then dust and straws we tread under our feet.

3. And now I have told you what a true and living Member of Christ is, let me
also tell you what a false or titular or Pharisaical Christian is. And he is
this, One that has not the Divine Sap or Spirit derived to him, as being and
growing in, and becoming one with the true Vine Christ Jesus; and is not
possessed nor is sensible of that Sufficiency, Joy and Satisfaction that is in
the inward Life of Christ, and the Spirit of Righteousness and eternal and
undispensable Truth of God: But being dead to what is most necessary, precious
and saving in Christianity, and only alive, or mainly, to the Spirit of the
world, loves himself with all his heart and all his soul, and God and his
Neighbor only for his own sake: or rather uses and rides his Neighbor, having
haltered him or obliged him with some prudentially and judiciously-bestowed
courtesies; and worships God rather then loves him, ne noceat, beseeching him
that upon a special Dispensation, though he be no better then others, nor ever
intends nor hopes to be better, yet that it may be better with him in the end
then with other folk. Number. 23.10.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my latter end be like his. Or
it may be, what is little better then that, in stead of the living
Righteousness of Christ, he will magnify himself in some humorous pieces of
Holiness of his own. For he imagines there is a God, and that it is safe to
make a friend of him one way or other; and therefore, that his conscience may
be the better excused from those things that are more weighty and substantial,
he will take up things according to his own humor and fancy, as fasting
twice in the week, making long prayers, hearing long sermons, sticking
curiously to some unnecessary, uncertain and fruitless opinions concerning God
and Religion, such as are warrantable neither out of Scripture nor Reason, and
growing very hot and zealous in the agitation of these things (though to the
Disturbance of the Church of God and Injury of his Neighbor) yet these
trinkets and trumperies of his own humor and complexion, this Heat, this
Noise, this Zeal, these are the Altar, Fire and Holocaust wherewith he
sacrifices to God, and presents himself an Oblationer before the Almighty. And
all this to be excused from that which is the very End of all Religion and
Worship, that is, the sacrificing of our own corrupt life, and acquiring that
prize that is set before us, the holy Spirit of Righteousness, Equity and
Purity* whose moderation and guidance is the Light of the world and the Life of
man.

4. And having thus, though but loosely and rudely, scattered the delineaments
of these two opposite professors of Christianity (the true Christian and
Pharisaical Humorist,) I shall from hence, as from the Cause and Original,
derive evidence and light to what I shall now propose to you by way of
Parallelisme betwixt what our Savior in his own person suffered of false
Accusations and Aspersions, and what his true and living Members are obnoxious
to from that Spirit of Pharisaisme that has ever and does to this very day rule
still in the world.

And first of the first Accusation that was laid to our Saviors charge, viz.
Blasphemy, He has spoken Blasphemy, Matthew. 26. It is apparent, the Pharisaical
nature being desirous to be excused from destroying and bringing to nothing in
ones self all haughty and ambitious Designs, Self-seeking, Covetousness and
Intemperance, does easily endeavor to make amends for this, and to pacify the
conscience and approve ones self to God, by laying out all our parts in
spinning excellent high Subtilties and amazing Mysteries from any hints taken
in Scripture, and in adorning the nature of God and Religion according to the
garishness of a man's own natural Fancy and Nicety of Wit. Whence it may come
to pass that these Traditionary Pharisees having made it their business to rack
their natural unregenerate minds to find some magnificent conceptions (as they
imagine them) to bestow upon the Deity; that one freed by Christ (who is the
Truth that makes one* free indeed) by not admitting or gainsaying these high
and divine inventions of theirs concerning God and Christ, wherewith they have
wrapped him and clothed him (though they do but what Dionysius did to the
golden vestments of Jupiter, take them off and put on a linsy-wolsy one,) may
well be suspected and accused of Blasphemy and injury to God, when it is
nothing but a refusal of the groundless Conclusions of rash and inconsiderate
men, or else worse, that of purpose cloth God and Christ and represent him to
the people in such a dress as will make most for the countenancing their own
Hypocrisy, Profit and Interest. I will only name one instance of many. How has
the Roman Clergy forced and racked their wits to make good the grand mystery of
Transubstantiation, whose ordinary Priests must have greater power of working
miracles then the Devil could invent to puzzle our Savior withal? For what is
the turning a stone into bread in comparison of turning bread into God
incarnate? And yet a Mass-priest after the uttering of a few formal words of
Consecration, has brought about the prodigy. And he that will be so bold as to
call bread but bread, and not Christ or God, how can he choose but be thought to
blaspheme? But yet this Blasphemy is not against the Nature of God or Christ,
but against the forgery and fictions of men, and so indeed is no more Blasphemy
then Bread is Christ or man's Phansy the Deity. The Rule therefore that
Christians are to take notice of here is this; There being so much Humor and
Interest and Stupour of Education that may begin or continue false conceptions
of God; if any one profess himself that he cannot conceive such things as some
so peremptorily and imperiously obtrude upon his belief, that he is not
straightway to be accounted a Blasphemer of God, it happily being but a dissent
only from the conceits of men.

5. The second Aspersion cast on our Savior was, That that miraculous good
that he did, was from the power of Satan, not of God. And methinks it is not
hard to find something parallel to this in some Aspersions cast upon his true
members by rash Pharisaical censure. Which is this; The eximious and exemplary
life of good and holy men is many times (by those that are more addicted to
such a dress or outward platform of Religion consisting of certain Ceremonies
and Opinions, then to the truth and essence of Religion it self) imputed to
corrupt natural principles, such as Vainglory and the esteem of the World,
Political advantage, and the like; which answers to the Pharisees giving out
that Christ cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils. So say our
modern Pharisees of such as are not of their Sect; if those men live never so
holily and unblamably in this present evil World, exercising Virtue and
avoiding Vice, that it is not from any Divine Principle in them, but from the
instigation of Pride the Prince of Vices.

6. So in the third place, They that affect even more then a Iudaical
strictness in the observation of the Sabbath, (though God knows it is too many
times that their consciences may be the more free to work unrighteousness all
the week after,) yet they will take upon them to censure them of no less crime
then Profaneness that observe neither the same measure of Superstition nor
Hypocrisy with themselves.

7. Fourthly, Neutrality and cold Indifferency in public controversies, how
can it possibly choose but seem very abominable to the Pharisee or formal
Professor? For they knowing no other Religion then what consists in certain
dispensable and unnecessary Opinions and Performances; when they are shaken and
hazarded, he that will not engage to the utmost then, as if God and true
Religion it self were at stake, cannot but be deemed very unworthy and
detestable. Whenas to be but coldly and indifferently affected in things
indifferent, is in all reason to be esteemed just and good.

8. Nor is it a whit strange to hear the Pharisaical Tribe complain of the true
regenerate Christian as Unjust; whenas the one acts according to an outward
Rule or Tradition which was made for the meeting with their own wicked and
untamed corruptions, (malo nodo malus cuneus) and which notwithstanding they
craftily and perversely make use of by leguleious cavills to the injuring of one
another or them that are better then themselves; but the true Christian acts
and judges according to the living Law of Equity and the Eternal Love of God
springing up in his heart.

9. Sixthly, As for the accusation of Railings and Revilings, even a sober and
wel-carriaged Christian may well be subject to that calumny. For the Pharisee
bearing himself very high in the opinion of his own either Formal or
Fantastical righteousness, making a shift rather any way to persuade himself
he is righteous and religious then by partaking of true Religion and
Righteousness indeed; he acting therefore according to the nature he really
has, not according to what he phansies himself to be; it cannot but happen that
the true Christian, endued with the Divine nature and spirit of Righteousness,
not intending at all to rail or revile, but using the most easy and
unaffected propriety of words, calling a Spade a Spade, as the Proverb is,
doing but so as Adam did in innocence, giving the creatures names according to
their natures, it cannot but happen, I say, that the Actions and Persons being
foully bad of such as notwithstanding be in their own conceit as good as any,
when they be called by what names express the truth of their natures and no
more, that yet they will presently judge the (...) a Railer and Reviler.

10. Now for tumultuary Zeal, I must confess that Pharisaical Hypocrisy is
such an abominable provoking thing in the sight of all the Sons of God, that it
can scarce fail scorching and heating their tender and lively spirits, no more
then a natural flame can fail to swinge and pain our natural flesh; which none
of us can suffer with such patience, but we are ready to testify our
sensibleness both by gestures, actions and words. Besides that in a moderate
and well-guided zeal against the Pharisaical Interest, all being so rotten
there, so sore and patched over with pitiful plasters; the least Action or
Opposition will make them cry out, even before they be hurt, being conscious to
themselves how unsound and unable they are to abide the least measure of rough
handling. So that the least vigor of Opposition in good earnest against their
hypocritical and unwarrantable ways will by them be deemed but bitter and
tumultuous Zeal.

Eighthly, The just and seasonable bemoanings of the dear servants of God and
fellow members of Christ, when Nature is very much oppressed with adversity or
torment, are not to be judged rashly the Symptoms of Impatience or Despair.
For the expressing of the sense of ones Misery is no Vice, since the
suppressing thereof may be no Virtue, but rather a Symptom of Pride, or
affectation of Spartanisme.

11. And now in the ninth place, as for that Aspersion of Madness and Phrensy
the true Christian has often cast upon him by the Pharisaical Religionist, the
Cause of it is plain from either of their natures, or from the nature of
Madness it self. For as Sottishness and Dotage is the extinguishing of Reason
in Phlegm or Cold; so Madness is the disordering, discomposing and dissipating
the Phansy and Reason in the distemper of Heat. Wherefore, wherever the Heat
exceeds the Sense and Reason of him that speaks or acts, there comes in so much
of Madness as there is of that Excess. But as concerning Sense and Reason,
since it is all one to be absent as not to appear, therefore it must needs
follow, that those that speak with much zeal and vigor things very true in
themselves, yet to others very incredible or unintelligible, must be by them
reputed no better then madmen. And hence it was that the Governor told Paul,
that too much learning had made him mad. And hence probably may be the ground
of that ordinary saying, Nullum magnum ingenium sine admixtura insaniae. Partly
because no great Wit can well be but with some good measure of natural Heat and
Activity of Spirit; and partly, or rather mainly, because the improvement of
these parts and wit by subtle search into things have produced such
Conclusions, so Paradoxical and opposite to the vulgar conceits of men, and yet
of such evidence of Reason to the Inventors of them, that they asserting with
heat and confidence the Conclusions to be true, to such men as were not capable
of the subtilty of the reasons which infer them, could not choose but get to
themselves for their pains the reputation of men whose brains were seasoned
with some strinklings at least of Madness and Phrensy. And according to this
analogy may it very well be said, Nullus insignis Christianus, etc. That there
is no notable Christian that will not seem to have some spice of madness in
him, especially if he be judged by the formal stiff Pharisee, whose Postures
and Actions are always kept as it were in an outward wooden frame, as a child
in a standing stool; his Traditions and accustomary Opinions being as deeply
scored and carved in his Memory, as the outward and obvious shows of things at
the first sight in the world are scralled out in the rude furrows of an Idiots
brain. And as the unskilful Rustic would suspect him scarce sound in his
senses, that should confidently speak any thing that should palpably cross or
cancel those gross scrallings the sensible show of this world has writ in his
Imagination: so certainly the formal Pharisee would not stick to judge him mad,
that with zeal and boldness pronounced such things that were not parallel nor
agreeable to the Preconceptions and Prefigurations of his prejudiced Mind; but
most of all if such things as he could get no conception at all of, they being
not upon the same level opposite, but so high removed, that they would be out
of his reach of apprehension. Surely the more earnest a true member of Christ
should be in such points, the more mad he would appear in the eyes of the cool
prudential Pharisee.

12. As for the three last Aspersions that were cast on our Savior, and his
true Members are accordingly liable unto, the mere formal Christian being
judge, viz. Debauchery and Looseness of life, Lavishments and Prodigality,
Ambition and Self-Interest; I shall briefly dispatch them all. And to the first
this general consideration appertains, By how much every one is weak himself
and obnoxious to temptations, by so much more suspicious he is that others
transgress, when there is any thing that may tempt out the corruptions of a
man; or where there are any Signs or Effects of that which in some persons is
naught, though those Signs or Effects in themselves are neither good nor bad.
Here the formal Christian consulting with what is alive and operative in
himself, viz. his inward corruption, judges the best of men after his measure;
and concludes that how he should be affected, what he should do or suffer in
such or such cases, that any one placed in the same cases and conditions does
suffer or act the like. And the more scandalous and offensive must the
conversation of the most perfect and purified be, for as much as their
Invulnerableness and Insensibleness in the midst of such vanities as others are
moved with that are alive unto sin, cannot but make them more innocently free
and careless in things that of themselves are not really evil.

13. As for the matter of Prodigality, it is obvious to conceive that
Covetousness sitting judge, even Frugality it self shall be branded with that
name; and that Covetousness being so clean and dry and creditable a sin, (as
being so perfectly opposite to the mad roaring garb of the Spend-thrift) there
will scarce be found a Pharisee that will be so imprudent as not to retain so
profitable a Vice. Wherefore the Pharisee being covetous, the true Christian,
whom that Noble and Divine nature according to which he is regenerate has made
more liberal, must needs by him be sentenced as Improvident and Prodigal.

14. Lastly, for the imputation of Ambition and Self-interest. It is no
Ambition or Pride earnestly to endeavor as much as in us lies to be renewed
into that glorious and divine Image of Christ, and to contend to the utmost for
the accomplishment of the same. For in this Image is very eminently contained
that most healthful and comely disposition of the Mind, unaffected Humility.
For whereas the Image of Christ grows not up but from the destruction and (if
it were possible) perfect annihilation of our own stubborn and stout Will, that
eagerly and peremptorily ever seeks its own satisfaction, and whenever it finds
it glories and arrogates to it self the success; it must needs be, by how much
more perfectly the true Image of Christ is recovered in us, that by so much the
more fully we are freed from all Pride and Arrogance. So that as it cannot be
the puff of Pride that should drive us on to endeavor after so high a pitch of
Perfection, but the Divine breath of God in the Soul; no more can that pitch of
Perfection once attained to be any cause of Pride, since that Humility is of the
very Essence thereof. For it is as contradictious and unreasonable, as if we
should say that we become proud by becoming humble.

15. As for Self-interest, the accusation is of that nature of the Devil's
against Job, Does Job serve God for naught? Men devoid of the Spirit of
Righteousness and unacquainted with the Power and Pleasure of Divine Worth and
Grace, can phansy nothing there desirable but the external fruits thereof, such
as Honor and Esteem among men, or a future Reward from God. Wherefore it must
needs be that the Pharisee or outward Formalist, perceiving nothing of pleasure
and sweetness in Holiness and Virtue in himself, if he observe others much
devoted thereunto, that he must judge them to make use of those things for some
other more pleasant enjoiment, as Praise and Applause, or a future Reward; and
that they are not delighted with the things themselves. Whenas certainly a true
member of Christ and one really regenerate into his Image, could no more cease
from pleasing himself and enjoying himself in the sense and conscience of this
Divine Life, and the results thereof, all holy and becoming actions, then the
Natural man can cease from the enjoiments of the Body, though he knows ere long
his Body shall afford him no more enjoiments. And yet I must also add, That it
is the next door to an Impossibility, that one that is become thus Divine,
should not have his Heart fully fraught with the most precious hopes of future
Immortality and Glory: He asked life of thee, and thou gave him even a long
life for ever and ever.

16. I have now finished my Parallelisme betwixt the Revilements cast upon our
Savior and those that his truest Members may be obnoxious to. Which pains I
think I have not at all misplaced, they tending only to the stopping of the
mouths of carnal Censurers, and the animating sincere Christians, that they may
not be discouraged from following so excellent an Example by the affronts and
reproaches of the World, but that they may know their own Innocence, Safety and
Freedom, while they keep in the true way, that is, in Christ the Son of God,
who making us free, we become free indeed; that is, free from the deceits of
our own lusts, and free from the awe and terror of imperious and superstitious
men, that would obtrude their own Errors upon us with as much earnestness and
make them as indispensable as the infallible Oracles of God. We having
therefore spoken what things we thought most requisite concerning The Example
of Christ, we proceed now to his Passion, which is the fifth Power of the
Gospel.

CHAP. XV. 1. The Passion of Christ the fifth Gospel-Power, the Virtue whereof
is in a special manner noted by our Savior himself. 2. That the Brazen Serpent
in the Wilderness was a prophetic Type of Christ, and cured not by Art but by
Divine Power. 3. That Telesmatical Preparations are superstitious, manifest out
of their Collections that write of them; 4. Particularly out of Gaffarel and
Gregory. 5. That the Effects of Telesmes are beyond the laws of Nature. 6. That
if there be any natural power in Telesmes, it is from Similitude; with a
confutation of this ground also. 7. A further confutation of that ground. 8. In
what sense the Brazen Serpent was a Telesme, and that it must needs be a
Typical Prophecy of Christ. 9. The accurate and punctual Prefiguration
therein. 10. The wicked Pride and Conceitedness of those that are not touched
with this admirable contrivance of Divine Providence. 11. The insufferable
blasphemy of them that reproach the Son of God for crying out in his dreadful
Agony on the Cross; wherein is discovered the Unloveliness of the Family of
Love.
1. AND truly this fifth Gospel-Power, the Passion of Christ, is of so great
efficacy and concernment, that our Savior seems with more then ordinary
delight to have ruminated on the wonderful effects that it would have in the
world. John 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men
unto me; signifying thereby what death he should die, as the Text witnesses.
This shows what a powerful Engine our Savior himself thought his Death would
prove to draw all the World after him. Which is a demonstration that the Mind
of a Christian ought to dwell very much in the meditation of the Death and
Passion of Christ. The use whereof appears in another intimation of our
Savior's, though more Typical, yet the Analogy is so plain, that no man can
miss it. John 3. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so shall
the Son of man be lifted up; That whosoever believes on him should not perish,
but have eternal life. This is so perfect a Representation of our Saviors
Passion, that I cannot but blame my self for not entering it amongst other
Prophecies that I alleged for the Messiah's suffering.

2. And it will still appear more plainly that it was intended a Prefiguration
or Typical Prophecy of Christ, if we consider that Moses was not put upon it
by any natural skill, as if the Effigies of this Brazen Serpent did by any
power of Art or Nature heal the Israelites of their bitings of the fiery flying
Serpent. But it was an immediate direction of God, by whose supernatural power
the cure was wrought: As the Author of the Book of Chap. 16.6.
Wisdom expressly has noted, namely, That he that turned toward that (...), as
he styles it, the sign of Salvation, was not saved by the thing that he saw,
but by him that is the Savior of all. For beside that the whole mystery of
Telesmes is but a superstitious foolery, much-a-kin to and dependent of that
groundless Pretense of such wonderful influences as the ancient Pagan
Ignorance attributed to the Stars; the very matter of this Serpent was
inconvenient and improper for this Effect, as Interpreters on the place have
observed. To which I might add that there is not any example of any Telesmes
that were ever known to cure the diseasement after this sort, that is, by only
looking thereunto. And that those that have been made against Scorpions or
other hurtful Creatures, they have chaced them out of the place or killed them
upon the Spot; but if any one were stung by these venomous Serpents, there was
a tactual application of the Remedy to him that was hurt.

3. And yet I will not so much stand upon this, as that the whole business of
Telesmatical Preparations is superstitious, and that they have no Effect by any
natural Virtue or Influence. This methinks I plainly discover out of their
Collections that seem most pleased in the representing of these Curiosities to
the eye of the world in their Writings; Gaffarel especially, who does with
plenty of words, but no reason at all, endeavor to make us believe that the
power of Telesmes is natural: but I never knew any cause managed with more
slight, more loose and more frivolous arguments in my days. But out of his own
mouth I shall be able to condemn him, and upon these two accounts. First, in
that according to his own Conjectures and Relations, the erecting and preparing
of these Telesmes is, as we contend, superstitious or paganically Religious:
and then secondly, That the effects of them, where they have any, are plainly
beyond the power of any natural cause.

4. As for the first, himself does profess that he is of opinion that the first
Gods of the Latins, which they called Averrunci or Dii Tutelares, were no
other then these Telesmatical Images. And his reason is, that they made some of
these Tutelar Gods under certain Constellations: which is no wonder say I, the
Host of heaven being the Deities of the Pagans, and Telesmes and Astrology both
rags of that ancient Superstition. And Apollonius Tyaneus, who trotted and
trudged about the world so much to restore the Heathen Religion, had an
excellent gift (if Historians do not belie him) of consecrating Telesmes
against Storks, Gnats, Inundations of Rivers, Winds and Storms and other
noxious Things: Which notwithstanding that nasute Sophist Philostratus was
willing to omit in his Legend of him, as being very solicitous to save him
harmless from the imputation of being a Magician, as a man may observe by
several passages in him. So that either way the natural efficacy of Telesmes is
discovered to be but a figment.

But that their Formation is but a Paganical Superstition, those more exact
Collections and Transcriptions of Gregory will further clear, if a man do but
peruse them. For there he may see how in the building of Cities they did not
only consult the Rules of Astrology for a fit Configuration of the Heavens,
but also sacrificed, and that sometime with man's blood, to the Genius of the
place, erecting a figure of Brass whereinto, as they thought, they
Telesmatically conveyed the Tutelar Deity of the City. Which Statue was
therefore placed in some safe Recess, or else in some eminent place: but
wherever it was, there they conceived was contained the Fate or Fortune of
all. Of this sort doubtless was the Trojane Palladium, and the Lame and the
Blind that the soul of David so hated, 2. Sam. 5. as Gregory has with very
good reason, I think, concluded.

5. This is enough to intimate from what Principle these Telesmatical Fooleries
sprung, let them be of what kind they will. And the Effects of them, such as
are recorded, are plainly such as cannot be imputed to the power of the
Heavens, if we carefully consider the circumstances of things. As for example,
what influence from Heaven can be derived upon a City for having the first
stone of it, or any one stone of it, laid under such an Aspect? What is this to
the whole City that shall be so many months, it may be years, in building
afterward? Besides that I have already demonstrated the whole Artifice of Book
7. chap. 15, 16, 17.
Astrology to be but a Foppery. So that certainly it is nothing but the
Consecration of the City and the Recommendation of it to the Tutelage of a
Demon. And though we should admit that the Telesmatical Figure of a Stork
(suppose) or a Scorpion may drive away Storks or Scorpions, how should the
Telesmatical Statue of a Man drive away Men, and keep a Fort or Country
impregnable from the incursions of the enemy? as the silver Statues did buried
in the confines of Thracia and Illyria, that Valerius commanded to be dug up
and taken away: upon which those countries within a few days after were
overrun with the Goths and Hunns. Besides, it is much that the humane Statues
should make such a difference as to take part with some men and be against
others, when the Telesmatical Figures of other Creatures drive away Creatures
only of the same Species. Which are things utterly inexplicable from the Laws
of Nature.

6. If there by any Natural Power in these things, it must be from Similitude:
but it is most ridiculous to think that this Similitude has any thing to do
with the Stars. For though there be the name there suppose of a Scorpion, yet
there is no Scorpion there nor the Image of one. But if there were any
Antiscorpionical Power in that Constellation; that Matter or Metal that will
receive it at all, will receive it in any other figure as well as in the figure
of a Scorpion, and in some, it is likely, better. But this Influence, being
nothing but some thin particles that must pervade the pores of this Brazen
Serpent, can as easily go out as come in, and will give place to the next
influence, and so never be the same. It is simply therefore the Similitude of a
brazen Scorpion that must drive away the Scorpions: which no man can imagine
any reason for, if the experience be true, but the community of the Spirit of
Nature, and that Instance of one Chord trembling while that which is unisone to
it is struck, and of Sympathy in Persons by reason of Similitude and
Cognation; as in those two young children, brothers, and extremely like one
another, born at Riez in France, who if one were sick, sad, sleepy, the other
would be so also. Which are the most plausible reasons that Gaffarel alleges
for his so-dearly-beloved Conclusion. If therefore Scorpions and Gnats fled
from the place upon the making of such a Figure of a Gnat or Scorpion (suppose)
in brass or in any other metal, I should think the reason was, because the
Spirit of Nature being harshly affected in the body of that which has so
complete a similitude with such a creature, may in some measure raise an harsh
sense in those creatures, and therefore finding themselves in such a place in
an unpleasing temper, they will be sure to keep far enough from it. But if this
be a right cause, such a Telesme may be made without any regard to the
Configuration of the Heavens. Whence again all these Astrological Ceremonies
will be demonstrated to be but Fooleries.

But I shall demonstrate further that this also is a Foolery, and that there is
no Natural efficacy at all in Telesmes, and that from their own History. For
either Gregory or Gaffarel tells us, that if part of a Telesme be broken off,
the Effect ceases. (Which we might have alleged as an argument that the virtue
is in the Figure merely.) And they instance in a Telesmatical Crocodile whose
chap was broken off; For then the Crocodiles returned. Which to me is an
Indication that the Effect is not from the Spirit of Nature, but from some
ludicrous and deceitful Demons that love to befool Mankind. For if
Telesmatical Emerods and the Phallus work upon those parts, why should not the
abovenamed Crocodile that wanted but a chap work upon all the parts of the
Crocodiles but their chaps; which would be diseasement enough to keep them
away? And the Phallus Gregory mentions, (which he rightly, I think, reckons
amongst these Telesmes) cured or diseased the privy parts of the Athenians,
according as they received the Deity to which they were consecrated. From
whence a man may conjecture concerning the rest of these Trumperies.

7. Again, these Telesmes are made against such things as have no life nor
sense in them, as against Fire and Water. Of which the engravements can have no
such similitudes, one would think, as to engage the Spirit of Nature to act any
way; and yet Gaffarel tells us a very reverend story of a Telesme against Fire
found under a bridge at Paris. Which certainly if it had any natural power to
preserve the City from great Fires, such as would destroy the Houses, it would
also have h^ndred them from lighting their candles at a tinder-box, and warming
their fingers in a frosty morning. And yet this curious Philosopher seems to
lament the loss of that Telesme, they having thereby, as he says, exposed the
City to frequent Scale-Fires ever since. But let the Telesmatical Sculpture of
Fire and Water be never so like, insomuch that we may hope that it may affect
the Spirit of Nature something; there being no sagacity nor sense in the River
Lycus (suppose) which Apollonius curbed with such a device, nor in Fire now
existent, (much less that which is to come) how can they withdraw themselves
from such places where Telesmes are laid up, they having not, as Animals have,
the power of spontaneous motion?

Lastly, There are Telesmes that have no similitude at all with the things they
are to keep off; as that Man on Horseback in brass set up at Constantinople
against Pestilential Infection, which (say they) being once demolished, the
City has been extraordinarily subject to Plagues and fearful Mortalities. That
Ship also of brass there Telesmatically consecrated against the dangers of
that tempestuous Sea, it had no similitude at all of either the Water or
VVinde: but yet of such force it was, that a piece of it being broke off and
lost, the Sea returned to its former Unrulinesse; but being found and put
together, the Sea became quiet again. They took it therefore apieces again, for
experience sake, and the Winds and Sea were suddenly rough and boistrous, so
that a Ship could not come up into harbor; but the brazen Ship being again
handsomely compacted, the Winds and Sea were again peaceful and calm.

Wherefore if a man do but cast an indifferent eye upon the whole matter, it
will be very difficult for him not to pronounce, That he that can believe that
the power of Telesmes is natural, is more irrationally credulous then the most
simple Superstitionist in the world.

8. Out of what has been said it is evident that the Brazen Serpent erected by
Moses in the Wilderness was not a Telesme in that sense Gaffarel would
understand the word, that is, a Sculpture, Statue or Similitude of something
made so by Astrological Art, that what Effects it has for the keeping off evil
or remedying what has already befallen, is merely from the concurrence of
natural causes, though the Application of them was Artificial; the chief
whereof is the Influence of the Heavens and the Figure of the Telesme. For it
is apparent there can be no such. But if they mean by a Telesme, such a Figure
of some creature consecrated in a way of Religion for the services abovenamed,
nothing hinders but that the Brazen Serpent may be a Telesme, whether from the
Hebrew (...) which signifies an Image, or from (...) which denotes
Consecration. And this of Moses was both a warrantable and effectual Telesme.
For it was by the prescription of God himself, and thoroughly did the effect it
was set up for. But the cures that it did being supernatural, and neither the
Figure nor the Matter of the Serpent contributing any thing to the healing of
them that were bitten by those fiery flying Serpents, it is plain that Moses
had been left free from making any such Telesme of the Figure of a Serpent,
(there being nothing in the thing it self to invite him to it) had not God
moved him thereto. Nor can we imagine any other cause why divine Revelation
should suggest such a thing unto him, unless there were some mystery in it.
Something therefore that did notably concern the Church of God was denoted
thereby; and what I was a going to say at first, having removed all obstacles I
now again resume and dare pronounce, That it was a plain, though Typical,
Prophecy of the Messiah his Passion, and of the use of it, and so clear, that
no words could have more punctually prefigured it to us. For the Analogy and
Resemblance is most exquisite, if we cast our eye upon the whole Scene of
things.

9. For how naturally do the Israelites in the Wilderness represent the
Church of Christ in the World; and their being bitten with fiery flying
Serpents, our being poisoned and pained with vexatious lusts, and remorse of
conscience when sin has entered into our Souls? What could more lively represent
our Savior upon the Cross, who knowing no sin, yet was made 2 Cor. 5.21.
sin for us, then this Brazen Serpent set upon a pole in the Camp of Israel?
Which indeed had the outward shape of a fiery flying Serpent, but was so far
from being a Serpent, that it had nothing of a Serpent but external form
thereof, and healed all them that were bit with those poisonous and deadly
Serpents. So our blessed Savior devoid of Sin himself, yet being in the most
ugly outward appearance of Sinfulness that could be put upon him (he suffering
betwixt two criminal Malefactors, Isa. 53.12.
as it was prophesied of him, that he should be numbered amongst the
transgressors) he is in this posture (where he looks so like Sinfulness it
self) unto the whole Church of God, when they are smitten with the fiery
excitements of Sin, or the deadly pangs or remorse of Conscience, those
rancorous wounds that Sin leaves in the Soul when she has been once bitten
therewith, he is, I say, thus hanging upon the Cross, if they look upon him
with the eye of Faith, the most sovereign Remedy and the most presentaneous
asswagement of their Pain and Malady that can be offered to the thoughts of
men, I am sure, of any humble and well-meaning man.

10. But for those that are self-conceited, of a perverse Reason, and of an
high-flown Luciferian Temper, that prefer the subtilty of their own opinionated
Wit and curious search into all secrets, and magnify their own natural Worth
before the Friendship of him that loved us even to the death; these men are not
fit Relishers of the Sweetness of that abundant Goodness and kind
Condescension of Divine Providence in his manifestation of Jesus Christ to the
world: as neither the fiery Enthusiast, filled with the sense of his own
foolish Revelations and Divine Visitations (as he phansies them,) so stout, so
stiff, and so perfect (as the flatteries of his own Imagination would bear him
in hand) that he finds nothing but God and himself worth thinking of, and will
be an immediate Reteiner to the Almighty, without any Interposal whatsoever. To
that height and hardness is he swollen in his own conceit. But the true
Character of him is that which the Apostle Jude has given him, that he is but a
mouth filled with great swelling words, puffed up, sensual, knowing not the
Spirit. Such as these are those in too great a measure that wholly neglect the
meditation on Christ's Passion, though it be of so great efficacy for the
quenching and suppressing of all the restless and fiery motions of Sin in
them. But execrable Blasphemers are they, whose Pride and Conceitednesse has
made them reproach the person of Christ in his highest Agonies on the Cross,
and impute that to a sinful weakness and imperfection, that was but the due
effect of the weight of his Sufferings, who bore the Sins of the whole world,
and made an atonement with God for them. Yet because he cried out in the words
of that Psalm, Psalm. 22.
which is a lively Prophecy of his Sufferings, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? therefore must that Fanatic Fool of Amsterdam, and his illuminate
Elders, that boast so much of Perfection, be more perfect then the Son of God
himself, whose certain appearance in the World is so clearly demonstrated out
of the ancient Prophecies of the Old Testament, and so manifestly ratified by
the Miracles recorded in the New.

11. I appeal to all men if Satan himself could vent any thing more despightful
and scornful against the endearing sufferings of our ever-blessed Savior, who
out of tender love to Mankind underwent those dreadful agonies of Death, and
waded through the heavy wrath of God for sinners, then these Wretches have,
that would recommend themselves to the World under the false Flourish and
Hypocritical Title of the Family of Love; whereas by antiquating the use of the
Passion of Christ, and thus villainously reproaching Christ upon the Cross,
they demonstrate to all the world, that they have not the least sense or skill
in so Divine a Mystery, but are wicked Apostates from God, who is that pure and
Divine Love, and Underminers of the Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ: In which
neither such high-flown Enthusiasts nor any dry churlish Reasoners and
Disputers shall have either part or portion, till they lay down those Gigantick
humors, and become (as our Savior Christ, who is the unerring Truth, has
prescribed) like little Children; for of such as these only is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 19.14.
as the Prince of that Kingdom has declared. These therefore he embraced and
blessed when he was alive; these he dying on the Cross stretched out his arms
to receive; to these he wept drops of blood, that they might shed tears; for
these he was scourged, that they might chastise the exorbitancy of their own
lusts and evil concupiscences; for these he shed his most precious blood, that
they might die to Sin, and live to Righteousness, by that power which raised
Jesus Christ from the dead. This is the Foolishness of the Cross, a Scandal
not only for such as are Unbelievers, but even to many of them also that would
be accounted zealous and knowing Christians.

CHAP. XVI. 1. The End of Christ's Sufferings not only to pacify Conscience,
but to root out Sin; witnessed out of the Scripture. 2. Further Testimonies to
the same purpose. 3. The Faintness and Uselesnesse of the Allegory of Christ's
Passion in comparison of the Application of the History thereof. 4. The
Application of Christ's Sufferings against Pride and Covetousness. 5. As also
against Envy, Hatred, Revenge, vain Mirth, the Pangs of Death, and
unwarrantable Love. 6. A General Application of the Death of Christ to the
mortifying of all Sin whatsoever. 7. The celebrating the Lords Supper, the use
and meaning thereof.
1. BUT that this is the meaning of Christ's Sufferings, that is, That we should
also suffer in the Flesh, and mortify our sinful members, besides what our
Savior himself has intimated in comparing himself to the Brazen Serpent in the
Wilderness, the sight whereof did not only assuage the pain of them that
were bitten, but take away the poison, (whence we may reasonably conclude, that
the looking on Christ on the Cross is not only to heal the Stings of
Conscience upon sin committed, but to destroy the Poison and corruption of Sin
out of us, that we may not sin any more) is plain, in that the Apostles
themselves also do urge the Use of Christ Crucified to both those ends and
purposes. Saint John 1 Epist. chap. 2. My little Children, these things write I
unto you that you sin not. But if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.
But this use of the Cross, namely, Propitiation and the Peace of Conscience,
all men catch at. There is more need of producing such places as show the other
use thereof, for the Mortification of our sins. That of Saint Peter, 1 Epist.
chap. 4. is very express. For as much therefore as Christ has suffered for us
in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind: for he that has
suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin; That he no longer should live the
rest of his time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. For
the time past of our lives may suffice to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lust, excess of wine, revelling,
banquettings and abominable Idolatries. To which sense he speaks at least as
fully, Chap. 2. ver. 19. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience
toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For even hereunto were ye
called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we
should follow his steps; Who did no sin neither was guile found in his mouth;
who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously; who his own self bare
our sins in his own Body on the tree, that we being dead to Sin, should live
unto Righteousness; by whose stripes we are healed. For ye were as Sheep going
astray, but are now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls. What can
warrant the use of the Cross for the cure of sins more plainly then this?

2. But we will hear also what Saint Paul says, 2 Timothy chap. 2. ver. 11. This
is a faithful saying, If we be dead with Christ, then shall we also live with
him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he will also
deny us. This is most certainly true as well of inward Mortification as of
outward trouble; and the mention of the death of Christ is to support our
Spirits in the enduring of both. And Philip. 3. ver. 10. That I may know
Christ, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable to his death; viz. That as Christ died upon
the Cross, so he might be crucified to the world and all the vain Lusts
thereof: and those that walk otherwise, he cannot but proclaim them enemies to
the Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame,
who mind earthly things, ver. 18. And Galat. 6.14. But God forbid that I
should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world is
crucified to me, and I unto the world; that is, The world is but a dead
spectacle to me, my affections being dead to it. I will close all with that
excellent place, Romans 6.3. Know ye not that as many of us as were baptized into
the Lord Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried
with him by Baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the
dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we
shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection. Knowing this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we might not serve sin. For he that is dead, is freed from sin.

3. You see how the most urgent Exhortations of the Apostles to kill and
overcome our Lusts are backed and edged, if you will, with a reflection upon the
Crucifixion of our Savior. Which allusion, if it were no more then that odd
perverse Sect (which I have so often named) would make it, (who desire to
allegorize away the whole History of Christ to a mere Fable, as if it were
nothing but a mere fictitious Representation of things to be morally transacted
in us) truly the Argument were nothing. For the death of a Ram or a Goat would
serve to represent the sacrificing of our sensual Lusts, rather better then the
death of Christ, who was so innocent a person. But the stress of the Argument
lies in this, That a person not only so immaculate and innocent, but so holy
and sacred, so honorable and Divine; that the Son of the living God, declared
so from Heaven, foretold evidently by the mouths of the most infallible
Prophets, and that at the distance of so many Ages, and undeniably demonstrated
to be such by his own Miracles, and by that Miracle of Miracles, his
Resurrection from the dead, and his visible Ascension into Heaven in the eyes
of his Disciples; that this so noble and Divine a Person, that this Son of God
should in dear Compassion and Love to Mankind give himself up, not only to a
poor despicable beggarly life, but be contented to be whipped and scourged, and
put to a death both painful and shameful with Thieves and Malefactors, and this
merely to atone the wrath of God, and open the gates of Heaven to bewildred
mankind that were wandering further and further from their primeval Happiness;
This is such an Argument as would melt the hardest Heart; and awake the dullest
Understanding into a quick and cheerful apprehension of that duty that so
nearly concerns him, viz. to be, if it were possible, more resolvedly willing
to die to all his sins and worldly vanities, then Christ was to lay down his
life to redeem him from them.

4. This mighty Power of the Death of Christ is of such invincible efficacy to
them that will but seriously dwell upon the Meditation thereof, that no strong
hold of Sin will be able to resist it; no evil and inordinate affection, but
the consideration of this Passion will calm, keep under, and utterly subdue.
The very counting the circumstances of his Sufferings will put us out of
conceit even with those Vices that we have most familiarly entertained, and
still all those Perturbations and Disquietnesses of Mind that the crossest
accidents of the World and our own Weakness can expose us to. Art thou a lover
of money? how can thou abstain from blushing, whilst thou remembrest that
Covetousness betrayed and sold thy Savior for thirty pieces of Silver? or
refrain from communicating thy goods to the poor, when Christ has been so
prodigal of his blood for thee? Art thou proud? how can thou but be ashamed
to exalt thy self, when the onely-begotten Son of God took upon him the form of
a Man, yea of the lowest sort of men, and humbled himself, and became obedient
to death, even the reproachful death of the Cross, Philip. 2.5. 1 Pet. 4.1.
that he might teach us Humility, that the same mind might be in us that was
in him, as the Apostle speaks? Art thou neglected, scorned, or reviled? Thy
Savior was buffetted, mocked and spit upon. Are thy Inferiors preferred
before thee? Barabbas was held a more worthy person then Jesus. Are thy friends
false to thee? Christ was betrayed by Judas with a kiss. Do thou fall from,
or fall short of thy expected honors? Jesus wore no earthly Crown but that of
Thorns, nor Scepter but a Reed, nor any Robe but such as the abusive Soldiers
put on him to make legs to him and mock him. Art thou traduced for one as not
sound in thy Religion? Thy Savior was accused as a Blasphemer. What motion
therefore or disturbance of Pride shall be able to disquiet thy mind, if thou
do but reflect on thy Saviors Sufferings?

5. And for Envy, Hatred and Revenge, how can thou harbor the least touch or
sense of them, while thou look upon him who out of love laid down his life
for us, even then when we were Enemies to him, yea, for those very persons that
crucified him, praying unto God for them, Luke 23.34.
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do? And if thou be
transportable into vain Mirth, what can better calm that giddy temper then the
remembrance of his Sadness, whose Soul was sorrowful even unto death? And if
the highest and most searching Afflictions attempt thee, what can more strongly
arm thy Patience, then if thou ruminate on that bitter cup, the consideration
whereof put thy Savior into such an Agony, that he sweat drops of blood that
fell down to the ground? And lastly, if Lust and Wantonness do assault thy
Soul, the most present Remedy is the contemplation of thy dying Lord and
Master, who with his outstretched arms on the Cross to embrace thee, presents
himself a Corrival in thy strongest Affections. Look upon his inclined Head,
not crowned with roses but wounded with thorns; view his half-closed Eyes,
heretofore filled and beautified with lucid Spirits, whose mild motions were
the perpetual Interpreters of his Kindness and Compassion to the Sons of men,
but now overcast with the heavy cloud of Death. Kiss his cold and pale Lips,
and receive his last breath, and tell me if thou did not hear this whisper in
it, Can thou love any thing better then me, who out of love do undergo this
painful and reproachful death for thee?

6. But what I have appropriated to this foolish Passion of Wantonness, may
equally take place in any inordinate affection; and our Savior may justly
expostulate how unkindly, how ungrateful he is dealt with, when his pretended
Disciples refuse to mortify any lust whatsoever for him, who gave up himself
to death for them. This consideration is so urgent and convictive, that none
that have the least spark of Ingenuity can be able to resist it. And therefore
whatever conceited high-flown Fools may imagine of the Cross of Christ and the
meditation of his Crucifixion, as a thing that may rather fit Children in
Christianity then grown men; I say, it is the great Power of God to Salvation:
and so long as a man finds any sin in him, he is to have recourse to it for
his cure, as the Israelites in the Wilderness, as often as they were bit with
the fiery flying Serpents, were to look up unto the Brazen Serpent which Moses
had erected in their Camp. And those that make no use of the benefit thereof, I
should suspect them to be no Israelites, but a gen^ration of Vipers or Serpents
themselves, to whom the poison of Sin is so congenerous, that it is their
nature and pleasure, no pain at all to them; so that they desire no cure, but
flee from the Cross, as Scorpions do quit the place where a Telesme is erected
against them.

7. But our Savior Christ knew the power and efficacy of his Passion so well,
that he made a special provision for the Commemoration of that often which it
was fit he should suffer but once. This we usually call the Eucharist or the
holy Communion. A Solemnity never to be antiquated, till our Savior return
again to judgment visibly in the clouds of Heaven, as S. Paul intimates, 1
Cor. 11.26. For as often as you eat this bread or drink this cup, you do show
the Lords death till he come. For the solid use of it cannot cease till then
when all is accomplished. For so long as men are to have any growth in
Godliness, or are to animate themselves to any holy designs, or sin is to be
encountered with, or thanks to be given for the victories of the Cross, the holy
Eucharist cannot possibly cease.

For the most proper Preparation for the receiving of the Sacrament is a
serious Meditation on the Passion of Christ, which is commemorated therein. The
consideration whereof, what mighty power and efficacy it has for the
vanquishing and subduing of all manner of sins and corruptions, I have given
sufficient intimation. So that every Celebration of the Communion should be as
it were a repeated Resolution and corroborated Conspiracy in the blood of the
New Covenant, to do our utmost against all the Powers of Sin, of Darkness, and
of the Devil; and this upon the sense of that great Love and Loialty we owe to
our dear Savior and Sovereign Jesus Christ, who died for us, and poured out
his own blood to glue and cement us to himself and to one another. So that the
Mystery of Christian Religion is a Mystery of the deepest and dearest
Friendship, and of the most indissoluble Union of Affection that can possibly
be excogitated. Wherein neither Distance of Place nor Time can make any
division, but it holds together Heaven and Earth, and binds what is past to
what is present, and actuates and invigorates what is present, to a prosperous
and successful bringing on that which is to come. Thus it is with all those
that are true Christians, and do really communicate in the blood of Christ;
They have one Mind and one Heart, they have one Vote and one Interest, which
is the Advancement of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ in the world in
Truth and Holiness, and that Christian Peace, Faith and Love may flourish even
to the ends of the Earth.

CHAP. XVII. 1. The sixth Gospel-Power is the Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ. The privilege of this Demonstration of the Soul's Immortality above
that from the Subtilty of Reason and Philosophy. 2. The great power this
consideration of the Soul's Immortality has to urge men to a Godly life: 3. To
wean themselves from worldly pleasures, and learn to delight in those that are
everlasting: 4. To have our Conversation in Heaven. 5. The Conditions of the
Everlasting Inheritance, 6. Further enforcements of duty from the Soul's
Immortality.
1. THe sixth Gospel-Power is the Contemplation of the Resurrection and
Ascension of Christ; in respect of which stupendous event the Apostle has
declared how it is Christ Jesus that has abolished death, ^ Tim. 1.10.
and brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel. For truly
whatsoever Traditions there were amongst the Jewish Rabbis, whatever
Disquisitions or Conclusions amongst the Philosophers, whether Platonists or
Aristoteleans, concerning the Soul's Immortality, they were either so uncertain
and fallacious in themselves, or so subtle and unintelligible to the People,
that they could not satisfy the World concerning this so important a matter.
And if a man should write never so accurately and Apodictically of this point,
the use thereof would reach but to a few, namely such as are of a very patient
and comprehensive Spirit, that have leisure and take delight in perusing of
subtle and close-wrought contextures of Reason; which to most men is a toilsome
and tedious thing. And when a man has writ and read all he can of this Subject,
and has met with the very best and most Demonstrative arguments for the
Conclusion; yet for use and service, the Recollection of them is voluminous and
cumbersome, as well as the Collections from them doubtful and fallible, at
least to them that are not fully masters of their Reason. But as the
Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior is certain, as known to be de facto
by abundance of Witnesses; so is the Remembrance and Representation of it to
our minds at once, and strikes strong upon our Fancy, and reaches our Reason
with that powerful conviction, that believing this, we cannot any longer doubt
of either the Existence of God, or our own Immortality. And if we once be but
well assured of the Existence of God and of our own Immortal state after this
Life, methinks this alone should be able to lift us above all the Snares that
Satan has laid in this World to entangle us.

2. Mortality, one would think, if well considered, might give us some check
from too eager pursuit of Honors and Riches, from worldly Plots and Designs,
as also (for fear of diseases that accelerate death) from over-lavish
Indulgence to Sensuality and Intemperance. But the Certainty of a Life to come,
the condition whereof shall be such as our Demeanor here lays the seeds of,
whether for Happiness or Misery, and that in a measure unspeakably above what
happens, or can happen in this life; this consideration must have such virtue
in it, if we duly meditate upon it, that it should win us with all willingness
to forsake all the unlawful Pleasures and Projects of this transient World, to
get some sure Interest in that which is to come, and not to trust all in one
bottom, if any thing at all, I mean in the leaking vessel of this mortal Body,
which is ever and anon ready to sink or topple over, and so to drown all the
hopes we placed in it. Wherefore, as ye heard out of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.1^.
we are, like Strangers and Pilgrims in this life, to abstain from fleshly
lusts which war against the Soul; that our Minds going out impolluted of the
Foulness and Contagion of this defiled Earth they sojourn in, may be received
into the happy Society of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.
as the Author to the Hebrews speaks. Whenas if they go out foul and impure,
their Reception must be accordingly, they being given up into the power of
those deformed Fiends of Hell, the very thoughts of whose sight and company
might be enough to affright any man that is not Atheistically sortish from
assimilating himself to those nasty Gaol-birds by repeated acts of Vice and
Wickedness. Besides what smart of punishment shall reach both their outward
Senses and guilty Consciences by the inevitable rod of God's Justice upon them.

3. Wherefore it is most indispensably rational, to use this World as if we
used it not, and to addict our selves to such Pleasures as are most proper to
the other State; such as are those most delicious touches and senses of the
Divine Love, or that pure and intellectual Affection which S. Paul calls
Charity: Whereby we delight in the good of another, as if it were our own;
whereby we rejoice in the wisdom and goodness of God displaied his Creatures;
whereby we ardently desire the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ infinitely
before any private advantage whatsoever, and do faithfully assist and earnestly
expect the joyful accomplishment and finishing of the great Mystery of
Godliness in the fullest period thereof, to a final Triumph over Sin and Satan,
and a perfect Redemption of the Church of Christ into the glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God.

4. These are the warrantable Pleasures of the Soul that has a design upon the
Life to come, Colos. 3.1.
of a Soul that is risen with Christ, and therefore seeks those things that are
above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God. And upon this very
consideration the Apostle enforces his Exhortation, Colos. 3. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon earth, Fornication, Uncleanness,
inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness which is Idolatry.
And our Savior in his Sermon on the Mount, Lay not up for your selves
treasures upon Earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal: But lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven, where
neither moth nor rust does corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal. For
where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. And therefore Saint Paul
professes of himself (and exhorts others to imitate him) that his mind is
wholly taken up with those things which are above, Philip. 3.17. Brethren, be
followers of me, and mark them that walk so as ye have us for an example. For
our conversation, (...), our municipal affairs, our negotiations of greatest
concernment are in Heaven, of which City we are, and from whence we look for
our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, that they
may be fashioned like to his glorious body, according to the working whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

5. And verily he that through Faith is once possessed of these things, it is a
wonder to me how he can think of any thing else: As the Prisoner could not
abstain from the pleasure of thinking of the known day of his Liberty, or a
poor man of an Inheritance that would certainly fall to him within the term of
few years. And if it were Conditional, as this of the Kingdom of Heaven is, we
may easily conceive how much he were concerned to have a care punctually to
observe the Conditions propounded, or earnestly to endeavor to get such
Qualifications as that he may not forfeit the enjoiment of that Fortune which
otherwise would naturally fall to his share. And how they are to be qualified
that are to be Heirs of that everlasting Inheritance, the Scripture does
plainly set out; Revel. 21.27.
there must no unclean thing enter into the Holy City. None can be Heirs of
this Kingdom but the sons of God, nor any be the sons of God but those that
are led by the Spirit of God, Romans 8. And what are the Fruits and Effects of
that domestic Guide, the Apostle has plainly told us already, Galat. 5. That
the fruits of the Spirit are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. And they that are Christ's (in whose
Title alone it is that we can lay claim to Heaven) have crucified the flesh
with the affections and lusts. And again Romans 8. If ye live after the flesh, ye
shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live: that is to say, ye shall live the life of Peace and Joy and
Righteousness here, and of Eternal Glory hereafter.

6. Wherefore we see what an urgent Power the Meditation of future Happiness is
to the Believer, to make him endeavor to the utmost to be Partaker of the
Divine Nature, and to aspire to a due measure of Holiness, without which we
shall necessarily be frustrate of our expected Happiness. The consideration
whereof cannot but wean him from all the exorbitant desires of the Pleasures,
Profits or Honors of this World. Which though they had not intermingled with
them many vexations and distasts, much care and solicitude, but were certain
for this life and entire; yet Life being uncertain, and the longest term
thereof but like a Dream, or a Post that goes by, in comparison of our future
abode elsewhere, I dare leave it to the worldly man's own computation, what a
pitiful bargain he has made in forgoing what is to come for these temporary
Enjoyments: worse far then he that sold his Birthright for a mess of Pottage.
But I shall not dilate any further on so plain a matter. All the Wit and
Rhetoric of Man cannot move him whom those known, but weighty, Mark 8.36.
Words of our Savior will not; What will it profit a man to gain the whole
World, and to lose his own Soul?

CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Day of Judgment, the seventh and last Gospel-power, fit
as well for the regenerate as the unregenerate to think upon. 2. The
Uncertainty of that Day, and that it will surprise the wicked unawares. 3. That
those that wilfully reject the offers of Grace h^re, shall be in better
condition after Death then the Devils themselves are. 4. A Description of the
sad Evening-close of that terrible Day of the Lord. 5. The Affrightment of the
Morning-appearance thereof to the wicked. 6. A further Description thereof. 7.
The Translation of the Church of Christ to their Ethereal Mansions, with a
brief Description of their Heavenly Happiness.
1. WE come now to the Seventh and last Power of the Gospel, which is The
consideration of the dreadful Solemnity of the Day of Judgment; the very
mention whereof from the mouth of Paul made Felix the Governor to tremble. And
I must confess it is so hard an Engine, that it is more fit to beat upon the
obdurate hearts of the Unbeliever and Unregenerate, that are crusted over with
Iron and Flint, then for battery against the truly Regenerate and sincere
Believers; for those other Powers of the Gospel are more proper and abundantly
sufficient for carrying them on with courage and constancy in the ways of God.
But there is in the Day of Judgment an Object not misbeseeming their most
serious thoughts; which is the perfecting and finishing of the Redemption of
the Godly. 1 Cor. 15.51.
We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, and that for the better.
For whatever is mortal, then shall put on Immortality; and none of the Saints
shall be worse clothed then in a Body of an Heavenly and Ethereal consistence.
This is that incorruptible crown of Glory, of Life and of Righteousness, which
the Apostles mention, and S. Paul expressly declares to be laid up for him
against that day, namely, the Day of Judgment; Which the Lord the righteous
Judge shall give him at that day, 2 Timothy 4.8.
and not to him alone, but to all those that love his appearing: that is to
say, Whose affections and consciences are so sincere, that they longingly
expect when he will consummate and finish the happiness of his Church; and
should be so far from fear, that their hearts would exult for joy, to hear the
sound of the Trump, and see the Sky grow bright by the overspreading of his
Heavenly Camp in the Air.

2. This Meditation therefore reaching as well the unconverted as the
converted, it had been ill omitted of us. And that it may take the better
effect, we are to suggest what will be able to break down or prevent such false
and foolish Fortifications as the Mind of man may rear up against it, to bear
off the powerful Assaults it makes upon his Soul and Conscience. These are
chiefly two. The one, the long Intervall of time from hence to that Day, which
makes the terror thereof little, as things seem less the farther they are
removed from our eyes. The second is, the hope that within so long a space they
may have time to repent and be converted, though they live as they lift in this
life: For they may prepare themselves for that Day in the other life which is
to come. But to the first I answer, That the approach of this Day is very
uncertain, (by reason of the obscurity of Prophecies and of the very
Completions of them) and is left so, for the present exercise of the good, and
the perpetual vexation of the wicked both in this state of things and that
which is to come. His appearance therefore will be sudden like a Comet or
blazing-Star, which no man could tell when it would first appear; but more
terrible and minacious by far, not threatening the death of this or that
Prince, or the change of this or that State, but the overturning of all States
and Kingdoms, and the burning up the Earth with all the Works and Inhabitants
thereof with unquenchable Fire. And that evil which a man does not know but may
begin to morrow, if duly thought upon, cannot seem at a great distance, but
near at hand, and ready to surprise him.

3. To the other I answer, That he that wilfully rejects the offers of Grace
and Opportunities of becoming holy and good in This life, he shall have no more
privilege in the other then the Devils themselves have, who, as S Jude
expressly tells us, are reserved in everlasting chains of Darkness unto the
Judgment of the great Day; who shall then inevitably undergo the Fate of Sodom
and Gomorrha, who are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal Fire. And what manner of Persons these are, Jude and Peter have both
very graphically described: such as had totally evaded all obligation to true
Holiness and Righteousness, and were of an impure and foul conversation,
Filthy dreamers, defiling the Flesh, despising Dominion, and speaking evil of
Dignities; Followers of Balaam, perverting the truth for a reward; Spots in the
Christian Societies, feeding themselves without fear; Clouds without water,
blown about with every wind of false doctrine; Fruitless Trees; Raging waves
of the Sea foaming out their own shame; Wandering Stars to whom is reserved
the blackness of darkness for ever. No more hope of them therefore then of
Lucifer and his accursed Accomplices. And S. Peter pronounces the same sentence
of them, 2 Pet. 2.10, 14, 17.
for they are plainly the same persons, namely, bold and daring spirits,
arrogant and self-conceited, despising government and reproaching authority;
such as speaking great swelling words of vanity, allure through the lusts of
the flesh, in much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them that
live in error; Day-rioters, having their eyes full of adultery, that cannot
cease from sin, or forbear the recommending of the liberty thereof to others,
but beguile unstable souls; Having their hearts exercised with crafty and
covetous practices; Wells without water; Clouds carried about with Tempests,
adjudged to utter darkness for ever. For with the Devils they are cast down
into Hell, and delivered up even as they to chains of darkness, to be reserved
to the day of Judgment, 2 Pet. 2. So that there is no more hope of such
impenitent Sinners that have laid waste their Consciences, and wilfully
neglected or resisted the manifold convictions, clear illuminations, and
frequent offers of Grace and Assistance from the dispensations of the Gospel,
after this life, then there is of those old Apostates, the wicked spirits that
are kept as Prisoners in Hell, till that fearful and terrible Day of the Lord.

4. That Day of the Lord wherein all unbelieving Flesh shall tremble, and every
Face gather blackness. For this will prove a day of Wrath indeed, a day of
Anguish and Distress, Zeph. 1.15.
a day of Devastation and Desolatenesse, a day of Darkness and of Gloominesse,
a day of Clouds and of thick Darkness; a day of the Trumpet and Alarm against
the fenced Cities and the high Towers, not of Judah only, but against all the
Nations of the Earth. For the Lord himself will descend from Heaven to revenge
him of his Enemies. Wisd. 5.17.
He shall take to him his Jealousy for complete Armor, and turn the whole
Creation into weapons of his displeasure. His severe wrath shall be sharpened
for a sword, and the World shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall
the right-aiming Thunderbolts go abroad, and from the Clouds as from a
well-drawn Bow shall they fly to the mark. And hailstones of wrath shall be
cast as out of a Stone-bow, and the waters of the Sea shall boil and rage
against them, and hot scalding Floods shall overflow them and drown them: and
they shall be blown about with fiery Winds, and wearied out with the
whirlwinde, and they shall have no Peace nor Solace for ever. The Moon and
Stars shall withdraw their shining, and the Sun shall be turned into blood. For
nothing but Mists and Fogs and Stench, nothing but sulphurous Vapors, smoring
Heat, dark Clouds charged with horrid Thunder and Lightning, immense
Earthquakes and innumerable Eruptions of subterraneous Flames, crackling
Volcanoes, smoking Mountains, high flakes and tortuous streams of Fire from
burning Forests and Woods, loud Shreeks and howlings of affrighted Men and
Beasts, grim and grisly Apparitions, deep and dreadful Groans of tormented
Ghosts; nothing but such uncomfortable Objects as these shall fill up the Scene
of the Earth and Air, when once that Final Vengeance has seized upon the Wicked.

5. This is the sad Evening-close of that terrible Day of the Lord; and the
Morning-Appearance thereof will not be much more cheerful to either the
Hypocrite or Profane person. For the hopes of the Hypocrite cannot but fail,
and his heart sink like a stone, while he sees the righteous Judge that tries
the heart and reins coming in the clouds of Heaven to execute vengeance on the
wicked, and to deliver the godly from that imminent fate that attends the
Earth. And the proud scoffing Epicurean that laughed at Religion as a piece of
weakness and foolery, and impudently denied there was either God or Providence
in the world, he will then to his utter shame and confusion acknowledge his own
Philosophy, which he thought such an high piece of wit before, the most unhappy
Folly and Madness he could have light upon. For he shall be confuted to his
very outward Senses, when he shall see Christ himself appear with all his
Heavenly Host attending him; when he shall hear the sound of the Trump, and see
forthwith the whole Air filled with his glittering Legions consisting of Saints
and Angels. For the Trump shall sound, says the Apostle, and then those that
have already departed this life shall immediately appear in their celestial
Harness, in their glorified bodies. For those that are alive shall not prevent
those that are dead, but rather the contrary. For those that sleep in Jesus
will God bring with him, and harness them with the bright Armor of Life and
Immortality, whereby they become part of that glorious Angelical Host wherewith
our dread Sovereign and blessed Savior Jesus Christ will face the Earth a
while, to the exceeding great astonishment and terror os the wicked World.

6. Out of which by the Ministry of his Angelical Troops will he gather his
Saints that are found alive in the flesh from all the corners of the Earth, as
the Angels plucked Lot out of Sodom, when the City was to be destroyed with
Fire and Brimstone from Heaven; a Type questionless of this Final Judgment.
And whether it be by the quick descent of fiery Chariots, like that of Elias,
who was safely thereby conveyed to Heaven, and about a thousand years after
conversed with our Savior on the Mount; or bright shining clouds, glistering
with the glory and luster of their celestial guides, be made foot-stools for
them to get up on (for there is no fear that the weight of their Bodies should
break through, their Earth and Flesh being of a sudden changed into pure
Ether;) or whatever other pomp and solemnity there may be in their
transportation from the rest of the World unto that glorious Company that
strikes all men's eyes with amazement, while they look up into the sky; This
visible Selection of the Good from the Bad must needs fill the hearts of the
Wicked with unspeakable Dread and Horror.

And that partly by reason of the present wonders of this unexpected
supernatural Visitation, which thus suddenly has surprised them through
unbelief; and partly from the sad presage of what will follow, even that horrid
and dismal Tempest which we have already described, that endless Night of
Thunders and Lightnings and Earthquakes, of roarings and howlings and utter
confusion and destruction for ever.

7. Which direful vengeance having once entered upon that execrable crew,
forsaken of God and given up to the merciless Rage of the incensed Elements,
the victorious Church of Christ retreats with the rest of the Angelical Hosts,
marching up the Ethereal Regions in goodly Order and lovely Equipage, filling
as they go along the re-echoing sky with Songs of Joy and Triumph. For this is
the greatest day of Solemnity, the highest Festival that can be celebrated in
the Heavens; whose Inhabitants if they rejoice at the conversion of one sinner,
what Joy and Rejoicing must they express at the complete Redemption of the
whole Church? when Jesus Christ the Prince of our Salvation, who is able to
save to the Heb. 7.25.
utmost, has perfectly redeemed us body and soul, and leading Captivity
captive, rescuing us from the power of Hell, Death and the Devil, does resettle
us again in our own Land, and reestablish us into the ancient Liberties of the
Sons of God, making us fellow-citizens with the pure and unpolluted Angels, and
free Partakers of all the Rights and Immunities of the celestial Kingdom; even
of that Kingdom where there is Order and Government without Envy and
Oppression, Devotion without Superstition, Beauty without Blemish, Love without
Lust, Sweetness without Satiety; where there is outward Splendidness without
Pride, Music without Harshness, Friendship without Design, Wisdom without
Wrinkles, and Wit without Vainglory; where there is Kindness without Craft,
Activity without Weariness, Health without Sickness, and Pleasure without Pain;
and lastly, where there is the Vision of God, the Society of Christ, the
Familiarity of Angels, and Communion of Saints; where there is Love and Joy and
Peace and Life for evermore.

Upon the consideration of which ineffable Happiness, what inference can be
more genuine then what S. Paul has made already on the same Subject? Wherefore,
1 Cor. 15.58.
my beloved Brethren, be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord; forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

CHAP. XIX. 1. That there can be no Religion more powerful for the promoting of
the Divine Life then Christianity is. 2. The external Triumph of the Divine
Life in the person of Christ how thoroughly warranted and how fully performed.
3. The Religious Splendor of Christendom. 4. The Spirit of Religion stifled
with the load of Formalities. 5. The satisfaction that the faithfully-devoted
Servants of Christ have from that Divine homage done to his Person, though by
the wicked.
1. I Have now sufficiently exposed to your view the Nature and Use of this
sevenfold Engine, these Seven Powers of the Gospel, how potent they are to
beat down every strong hold of sin, and to raise up the Divine Life and Spirit
of Righteousness in us. That they have done so little execution in Christendom
hitherto, that disquisition I shall defer till its due place. In the mean
time I appeal to all the World if there can be invented a Religion more
powerful for this purpose then the Christian Religion is.

2. But for the external Triumphs of the Divine Life in reference to the Person
of Christ, the Usefulness of our Religion in that point is demonstrable not
only from the Frame thereof in it self, but from the long and constant Effects
it has had in the Christian World. For as for the Frame of our Religion, we
have therein a full warrant to do the highest Divine homage to Christ that we
can express; He being so clearly therein declared The true Son of God, not only
by several Testimonies from Heaven, but also by that supernatural manner of his
generation in the womb of the Virgin by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, by
his mysterious union with the Eternal Word, by his miraculous Resurrection from
the dead, and by his visible Ascension into Heaven, and Session now at the
right hand of his Father. This is warrant enough to do all Divine homage to our
blessed Savior, as to the only-begotten Son of God. And truly the Church, to
give them their due, has not been sparing; the very constitution of our
Religion being so effectual for this purpose. For so Divine a Person as Christ
was, namely, The very Son of God, and yet condescending to undergo so horrid a
death for the World; how could engaged Mankind stint themselves from showing of
all manner of expressions of Love and Devotion toward him?

3. Wherefore they erected innumerable magnificent Structures of Temples,
Chapels, and other Religious Edifices, and consecrated them to his Name: They
endowed the Christian Priesthood with ample Riches and Dignities; set up
Church-musick, sung divine Anthems in honor of our Savior, adorned their
Churches, celebrated his Passion with unexpressible reverence, instituted
Festivals, and filled both Time and Place with such variety of Ornaments, that
a man might observe that the greatest part of the Splendor and Pomp of
Christendom was in reference to their Religion. Which certainly would have been
a very goodly and lovely spectacle, if Superstition, Hypocrisy, and
Ecclesiastic Tyranny could have been kept out.

4. But this External Worship and the Ceremonies thereof, things equally
performable by the evil and the good, by the regenerate and mere natural man,
these took growth enormously, and like rank Weeds choked the Corn: or, what
happens in full and over-fed bodies, in which natural heat and activity is very
much lost, the huge load and bulk of visible Formalities extinguished the Life
and Spirit of Religion.

5. But however this outward Homage to our Savior continued and does continue
in a great measure over the face of Christendom to this very day, though their
expressions are not alike courtly every where. Which continuation of Divine
Honor done unto him cannot but gratify his faithfully-devoted Servants, they
having a deep resentment of the shameful Sufferings their Lord and Master
underwent out of his dear love to them; and therefore do naturally rejoice at
this Tribute of Divine Adoration the World gives to so holy and sacred a
Person, it being so suitable a part of compensation of his Humiliation and
Reproach. Besides that they receive some satisfaction, that Divine Providence
has so brought it about touching the true Members of Christ, whose Principles
are so opposite to the Guise of the world, and their Persons so contemptible,
that yet the World are fain with the lowest prostrations to adore that in
Christ, which they kick about and trample upon so in his despised Members.

But I will insist no longer on this Theme, having spoke enough of it
elsewhere. We have now shown the Usefulness of the Mystery of Godliness in all
holy and religious respects: I shall add only a word or two in reference to
things of this Life, and so conclude the fourth part of my Discourse.

CHAP. XX. 1. The Usefulness of Christianity for the good of this life,
witnessed by our Savior and S. Paul. 2. The proof thereof from the Nature of
the thing it self. 3. Objections against Christianity, as if it were an unfit
Religion for States Politic. 4. A Concession that the primary intention of the
Gospel was not Government Political, with the advantage of that Concession. 5.
That there is nothing in Christianity but what is highly advantageous to a
State-Politick. 6. That those very things they object against it are such as do
most effectually reach the chief end of Political Government, as does Charity
for example, 7. Humility, Patience, and Mortification of inordinate desires. 8.
The invincible Valor that the love of Christ and their fellow members inspires
the Christian Soldiery withal.
1. THat Christianity contributes also to the Happiness of this present World,
is evident both from the Testimony of Christ and his Apostles, and also from
the nature of the thing it self. Matthew. 6. Where our Savior having exhorted us
not to be over-sollicitous for the things of this Life, food and raiment;
setting before our eyes the care of Divine Providence in Creatures of far less
price then our selves; how the Fowls of the Air are provided for, that neither
sow nor reap, nor gather into barns; how gloriously the Lilies of the Field are
arraied, that neither weave nor spin: he concludes, That we should not so
eagerly and carefully seek after those things as worldly-minded men do; But
seek ye first the kingdom of God (says he) and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you. For your Heavenly Father knows that ye
have need of all these things. 1 Timothy 4.3*
And Paul to Timothy, Godliness is profitable for all things, having the
promise of this life and that which is to come.

2. And if we consider the nature of the thing it self, there is an accruement
of present Happiness from true Christianity, not only by virtue of Promise,
but even by natural dependence of Causes and Events; especially when that
Christian frame of Spirit has arrived to any considerable degree of perfection
and maturity. For there is no such obliging person in the world as a mature and
ripe Christian, nor any truer Policy then to be obliging. Which Temper the more
sincere it is, the more taking it is, and the more sure Fortress against
adverse Fortune. Wherefore what advantage Humanity has, he has it in the
greatest measure. Besides that his calm and castigate spirit makes him sensible
and discreet above all expression, and of a sagacity beyond all conceit of the
unregenerate man. His Faithfulness also and honest and cheerful Industry have
their proper blessing attending them. And his moderate desires of Riches and
Honors and his laudable use of them, unblemished with any blot of either
sordid Covetousness or vain Ostentation, prevents or beats back the ill-aimed
darts of secret Malice and Envy. And if but a meaner share of the things of
this world be allotted to him, yet his contentments are not the less, he
finding that true which both David and Solomon have pronounced, That better is
a little that the righteous has then great possessions of the ungodly. ^sa.
37.16. ^^ov. 16.8.
And when more unsupportable pressures and afflictions fall upon him, such as
great Fits of Sickness, Imprisonment, and the Approaches of Death, his
Advantages in this Condition are unspeakably above what any other mortal is
capable of. For the more these urge his outward man, the more his inward is
inflamed and excited to the exercise of those powers that are most holy and
precious; and needing no admonition, (though so fit and apposite as that of
Epictetus, (...)) the Circumstances of things themselves will assuredly awaken
this Christian Champion to the exertion of all the strength of his Soul, and to
the successful use of his spiritual weapons wherewith he is armed against the
day of battle. For Faith and Devotion and invigorated Meditations of the other
State will so fortify his spirits and strengthen his mind, that in all this
affliction he will become more then Conqueror through the power of Christ that
enables him to all things. And by how much the enjoyments of this present life
are diminished, the more his thoughts are cast upon those that are to come.

3. This brief Intimation shall suffice to show how serviceable Christianity is
for comfort and solace in this present life to every true Christian in his
private Capacities. But I must not omit to discover also that advantage which a
Communialty has by becoming truly Christian. Which I am forced to the rather,
because some have not stuck to pronounce of Christianity as of a Religion never
intended for bodies Politic, and very disadvantageous for public Concerns: As
if Christian Humility, Mortification of the Flesh, and Patience of Injuries,
would so cow and soften a Nation, that it would make them as helpless as
innocent, and thus betray them to the victorious Fierceness of their invading
Neighbors; and the Precepts of Charity so indispensably urged but slacken the
hands of those that are able to work, and fill the whole Land with lazy
beggars. Such like Cavils as these have some ill-willers not only to Christian
Religion, but (as I suspect) to any Religion that would curb their inordinate
affections, invented and cast abroad; but more to the detection of their own
ignorance and shame, then of any Imperfection or Unfitness in Christianity,
whereby it may not be the Religion of the most flourishing States and Kingdoms
that can be constituted.

4. In answer therefore to the proposed Objections, I will in the first place
acknowledge with them, That the Gospel was not intended primarily for the
advantages of this Life, nor bore in it any Politic design for the
administration of Public affairs of State; but for making men in their private
capacities good and happy, and for working their spirits into such a frame of
Life and Holiness as would most certainly assure them of that Joy and Glory
that is laid up for Believers in the other World. But withal I cannot but take
notice, By how much it is plain that there is no Political or Worldly Design in
the Gospel, by so much the more evident it is that there is no deceit nor
falsehood therein; and that it is not the cunning contrivance of some crafty
Lawgiver, but an holy, sincere and infallible Testimony of the Will of God
concerning the True way of Salvation, and of the everlasting Happiness of the
Souls of men.

5. But though I have been so liberal as to allow them thus much, yet I deny
That there is any thing in Christian Religion but what is not only not
inconsistent with, but highly advantageous to a State or Kingdom that becomes
truly Christian. For empty noises and names of things do nothing. Wherefore I
shall affirm, That whatever advantages other Religions may be thought to have
for conscientious obedience to the supreme Powers and faithful dealing betwixt
man and man, (which is the universal scope of all Religions as they are made
serviceable to bodies Politic) Christianity has these, and upon more evident
and unquestionable grounds then any Religion else whatsoever. For what Religion
is there in the World that can give that demonstration of a Life to come, that
Christianity does in the Resurrection of our blessed Savior, that infallible
pledge of immortal Happiness to all his followers? The truth therefore of
Christian Religion rightly represented being so irrefutably convincing to both
the learned and the unlearned, the Heart and Conscience not only of the People
but also of the Magistrate will be the more irresistably bound to the
performance of their mutual duties one to another. The Result whereof is an
unviolable Peace, and with that, all such comforts of Life as the best Laws and
Governments pretend to aim at for making a Nation happy.

6. Nay I add further, that those things that they object against Christianity
are such as, if a Nation become truly Christian, do most effectually reach the
chiefest Ends of Political Government. Of which one main one is mutual succor
in time of need. And what is more proper for this then Charity? Nor is there
any fear that this proneness to help one another shall relaxate the endeavors
of the generality of the body Politic, but it only sweetens their care and
industry, and takes off that torturous solicitude that must naturally attend
those that know too well, that if they cannot hold up themselves, they must
certainly perish. Which desperate consideration forces them to all possible
tricks and frauds for Self-Preservation. Which uncomfortableness of life and
the evil temptations thereof are prevented in a Commonwealth that is truly
Christian, and consequently sincerely Charitable. Neither will Laziness thereby
be nourished; this same Christian frame of Spirit making them all more
ambitious of doing then receiving good; according to that noble saying of our
Savior, Act. 20.35.
It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive.

7. And as it is without controversy that Humility, the patient Suffering of
injuries, and the Mortifying the exorbitant desires of the flesh, do tend most
certainly, in a Polity that is become thus Christian, to a constant
Peaceableness and a faithful and impartial Administration of Justice in all
things, (For from whence is War and Dissension, Violence and Injustice, but
from the inordinate lusts of the Flesh, from Pride and Desire of
disproportionable Revenge?) so is it as true also that they make us not a whit
more liable to the invasion of our Enemies, as becoming thereby more cowed or
soft in Spirit. For a due castigation of the lusts of the Flesh renders the
Body more healthful and hardy; whenas Luxury will certainly make it rotten and
effeminate, and expose it to all manner of diseases. And it is a very unskilful
conceit to think that Humility will make them such tame things, that the enemy
may take them up and carry them away at his pleasure: For Christian Humility
does not consist in being content to be brought under bondage by men, but in
not despising others, and not arrogating any thing to our selves, nor seeking
unjust dominion over others for our own pleasure and satisfaction.

8. Nor does Patience toward particular injuries inure the Christian at all to
be remiss in making resistance against an unjust Invader of his Country and
Liberties. For the very same Principle, namely the Divine Love, that prompted
him to bear private wrong, the damages whereof he could better reckon up, will
as forcibly urge him to resist such public Violence done against the body of
Christ, who are more dear unto him then the apple of his eye, and their
Concerns as much beyond his private Interest as their Number exceeds his single
Person. His Love therefore to Christ who died for him, and whose Cause then
shall really lie at the stake; His sincere affection to his fellow members, to
whom their dying Lord left that sacred legacy of mutual love, sealing it on
their minds with his own stupendous example, who being so high above them,
yet stooped to the shameful and bitter death of the Cross, that they might love
one another so ardently and entirely, that if need required they would not
stick to lay down their lives one for another; His firm belief in the
Providence of God and his special assistance to them that fight his battles;
His moderate love of this present World, and certain expectation of the
immediate enjoyments of the Happiness of the other life upon the quitting of
this; The consideration, I say, of all these things will arm our Christian
soldiery (let them be in their private demeanor as mild and humble, as tame
and lamb-like as you please) with such miraculous valor and courage, that I
cannot but presage that that Benediction of Moses will not fail to attend their
enterprises, Levit. 26.8.
Five of them shall chase an hundred, Isai. 52.12.
and an hundred of them shall put ten thousand to flight: For the Lord will go
before them, and the God of Israel will be their Rereward. What Nation
therefore can grapple with such a people as this? For there is neither Strength
nor Counsel against the Almighty.

BOOK IX.
CHAP. I. 1. The four Derivative Properties of the Mystery of Godliness. 2.
That a measure of Obscurity begets Veneration, suggested from our very senses.
3. Confirmed also by the common suffrage of all Religions, and the nature of
Reservednesse amongst men. 4. The rudeness and ignorance of those that expect
that every Divine Truth of Scripture should be a comprehensible Object of their
understanding, even in the very modes and circumstances thereof. 5. That
Contradictions notwithstanding are to be excluded out of Religion. 6. And that
the Divinity of Christ and the Triunity of the Godhead have nothing
contradictious in them.
1. WE have now finished the four Primary Properties of the Mystery of
Godliness, having treated of the Obscurity, Intelligiblenesse, of the Truth,
and Usefulness thereof: and have already intimated that there arise from these
four other properties (which if you please you may call Derivative;) as from
the Obscurity of this Mystery arises Venerability; from the Intelligiblenesse,
Communicability; from Truth, a Power of gaining Assent; and lastly, from
Usefulness, an affectionate prizing of it, and a Zeal or desire of promoting
the knowledge and virtue of it in the World as much as we can. It remains
therefore that we speak something of these, but with all brevity possible.

2. That a due measure of Obscurity makes a Mystery the more venerable, is a
Truth suggested to us by several observations. How Shades and Silence affect
our very Senses, every one can witness who is not of so course a contexture of
Body that only gross and fierce Objects can move him. But he whose Senses are
more passive and delicate, can with pleasure relate how he is affected when he
enters into some shady and invious VVood or Grove, the thickness of whose Trees
and redoubled Shadows stops his sight and hopes of ever passing through all
that grows on that Sacred ground; but what he sees, he approves of as
delightful, and conceives a peculiar pleasure in that confused divination or
obscure representation of things there, where his Eyes cannot reach, nor his
Feet approach. The Silence also of the place increases the solemness thereof,
in which (as Plutarch says well) there is something profound and mysterious.
And for this very reason the shadiness and stilness of the Night ordinarily
seems a very venerable object to those whose Senses are so quick and fine, that
they can feel and relish all manner of mutations in Nature: which impress
enriched the Poets Fancy with that expression, Noxque tenebrarum specie
reverenda tuarum.


3. The common Suffrage also of all Religions gives with us, who have always
affected something not easily Intelligible at first sight: And their Temples
were so built as to have their Adyta, some more Sacred and inaccessible places
in them. And we may further observe, that Sparingness of speech and
Reservedness in men does naturally conciliate reverence to them. For there is
still something behind in them impervious and inaccessible, which if they would
impart, they might lessen their respect and become more contemptible. For it is
very obvious to humane Nature to brood some strange overweening conceit of
those things they know not, and to neglect and slight that which they know.
These are Thieves that willingly leave the house when they have carried away
all the treasure. But perpetual expectation continues respect. And what makes
matter if the bottom of the Well be fathomless, if the Water we reach be but
pure and useful? Wherefore those that contend for such an absolute plainness
and clearness in all points of Religion, show more of clownishness and
indiscretion then of wit and judgment; and their zeal is not so much for
Truth, as out of Pride and Vainglory; they taking it very ill that any thing
in the Mystery of Godliness should be so mysterious, as that their conceited
Reason should not be able to comprehend it.

4. But I demand of those great Pretenders to Reason, who would usurp or
monopolize that Title to themselves in matters of Religion, By what Faculty can
they demonstrate, that the Divine Oracles should mention nothing to us but what
is the adequate Object of our Understandings, and that we shall not be puzzled
in our endeavoring to comprehend the modes and circumstances of that General
Truth which they propose to us? For the General proposal may be useful to us,
whenas the curiosity of Circumstances may serve for nothing but the feeding of
our foolish desire of devouring all Truth we can meet with and priding our
selves in the booty. I speak this in reference to the most obscure Articles of
our Religion, touching the Triunity of the Godhead and the Divinity of Christ.
For that the Holy Scripture does affirm both, Book 1. c. 4. sect. 8, 9, 10. and
c. 5. sect. 1, 2, 3, etc.
I have already sufficiently shown. And being that they come to us with the
same authority that the whole new Testament does, we cannot with any face deny
the assertions and yet profess our selves Christians. For the adverse party
have no plea but the Incomprehensibleness of the manner of the thing: which
allegation is most unjust and ridiculous.

For that which comes to us by Divine Revelation is as certain as our Senses.
But our Senses do assure us of such things as no faculty can conceive how they
are such as our Senses warrant them to be. As for example, The immediate Union
of Matter with Matter, and The power we have by Will and Thought to move any
member of our Body; These things we know to be, but are as incomprehensible as
any thing that the Scripture has declared of the Triunity of the Godhead or
Christ's Divinity. And therefore all their Arguments against those two Articles
are weak and vain. For it is sufficient that for those useful purposes I have
often mentioned they be proposed in the Scripture; but in a more shady, obscure
and general way; that being enough to serve the End they are proposed for. And
if any one be at a loss how to conceive the Mystery, let him make it up with
devout admiration and humble veneration: Affections better becoming every holy
man, then a fierce and peremptory pursuit of his own conceited Reason, and bold
attempt to pry into those things that God has thought fit to hide from him.
Which is a saucy and clownish as forcibly to unveil or unmask some noble Matron
or modest Virgin whether they will or no.

5. But that no fraud be done to Truth, nor mankind left liable to all the
incredible forgeries and fables of covetous Priests and Impostors, we shall
more carefully limit this our exaction of Reverence only to such Articles of
Religion as are recommended to us not only upon account of Divine Revelation
and Serviceableness to some laudable end, but are also clear from contradiction
and incompossibility. For for my own part I am well assured That God, who made
our Faculties, will never offer any thing to us to believe, that upon close
debate does plainly contradict them. Else all Religions were alike credible,
and the Moons coming out of Mahomet's sleeve as passable as the History of
Jonas his being three days and three nights in the Whales belly, and
afterward coming out alive. Which, though it be miraculous, is not at all
impossible.

6. And therefore I do with all confidence imaginable assert, That the Divinity
of Christ, and the Triunity, so far forth as the Scripture has dedeclared it
self in these points, have nothing of contradiction nor impossibility in them.
Nay, I will go one step further. Athanasius his Creed, which one would think is
express enough concerning this Mystery, if certain words in it be but varied
in that latitude of sense which they are capable of, and not only so, but must
of necessity have in the Creed, there may be such an interpretation made of it
as the most captious Reason can find no cavil against.

CHAP. II. 1. That there is a latitude of Sense in the words of Athanasius his
Creed, and that One and Unity has not the same signification every where. 2.
The like in the terms God and Omnipotent. 3. Of the word Equal, and to what
purpose so distinct a knowledge of the Deity was communicated to the Church. 4.
In what sense the Son and Holy Ghost are God. That Divine adoration is their
unquestionable right. And that there is an intelligible sense of Athanasius his
Creed, and such as supposes neither Polytheisme, Idolatry nor Impossibility. 5.
That there is no intricacy in the Divinity of Christ but what the Schools have
brought in by their false notions of Suppositum and Union Hypostatical. 6. That
the Union of Christ with the Eternal Word implies no Contradiction, and how
warrantable an Object he is of Divine worship. 7. The Application thereof to
the Jews. 8. The Union of Christ with God compared with that of the Angels that
bore the Name Jehovah in the Old Testament. 9. The reasonableness of our
Saviors being united with the Eternal Word, and how with that Hypostasis
distinct from the others.
1. NOw that there is necessarily understood this latitude of variety in the
sense of several of the words of the Creed, is apparent from the consent of
those that do subtilize this Mystery to the utmost curiosity. For it is
impossible for them or any else to think that the Godhead of the whole Trinity
is One in the same sense that the Father considered alone is One, or the Son or
Holy Ghost so considered. For then there being no more Unity in the single
Hypostases then in the whole Trinity, every Hypostasis will be Triune; which no
man will assert. Wherefore there is a latitude of sense in the word One or
Unity allowable in the Creed.

2. So when the Father is said to be Omnipotent, the Son Omnipotent, and the
Holy Ghost Omnipotent, it is evident that Omnipotent has not the same sense in
all. For the Father has the power of Eternal Generation of the Son, and both
Son and Father of an Eternal Emission of the Spirit; but the Son does not
proceed from the Spirit, neither is the Father generated of the Son. Yet the
Spirit and the Son which are both from the Father, how infinitely do they
exceed the Creation of the World? And the like may be said of the term God; by
which if you understand That which is first of all in such a sense as that all
else is from him, and he from none, the Son and the Spirit cannot be said to be
God in this signification, because the Father is not from them, but they from
the Father.

3. And therefore it is further manifest that the word Equal is not to be
understood mathematically and absolutely, but in an useful reference to us.
Which is a Key that will easily open the whole Mystery of the Creed, which God
did not communicate to the world to spin and weave unprofitable cobwebs out of;
but did thus explicitly impart the knowledge of his Divine glory, that
understanding the Distinctness of his Godhead in the Triunity thereof, the
Divinity of Christ might the better be conceived, and how warrantable an Object
he is of our worship and Divine Adoration. For it passing through the Titles of
the Humanity to the Eternal Son of God, there cannot be the least scruple or
show of Idolatry in such Divine worship.

4. For the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, as well as the Father, that
is to say, they are all Eternal, Omnipresent, Omniscient, Omnicreant; and
therefore Divine Adoration is due without question to the whole Trinity from
the Creatures. And not upon this account only, but because they are so
perfectly One, and have the same indivisible Omnipresency, and therefore are
One entire Godhead, One coequal Glory and Majesty coeternal. I say then that
this latitude of sense being once admitted, which is necessarily implied, the
meaning of Athanasius his Creed may prove such as no imputation of either
Polytheisme, Idolatry, or unconceivable Impossibility can be alleged against
it; and the end of this Mystery fully served in such an intelligible
Interpretation. But I shall not undertake any such Paraphrase in this place.
And what I have already ventured at is rather by way of Essay or invitation to
others to make trial, then peremptory assertion in so profound a point, that
deserves rather our humble admiration then curious disquisition. It is
sufficient that so far as Scripture has determined of this Article, it is
without exception or Contradiction.

5. The Divinity of Christ in my apprehension is a more easy Object of belief,
being as intelligible as the Union of our Soul and Body. For as they two make
up one man, so God and Man make one Christ, as Athanasius himself has expressed
it. This the Schools call Hypostatical Union, which has no intricacy in it but
what they themselves have bestowed upon it. For every Substance is of it self
an Individual Substance, and Universals but a Logical notion arising from our
comparing of Substances of like nature together. Neither is there any Substance
but by due preparatory modifications may be capable of being united with some
other Individual Substance, and these Two Individual Substances become One
whole Substance. Which yet are not so One as that they cease to be Two
Numerical Substances; because they ar^ ^o otherwise said to be One, I am sure
are no otherwise One, then by the apt Union of one with another. Which yet
hinders not but that they are still; and if they are, they are Two: namely, my
Soul and Body are still this Individual Soul and this Individual Body, though
they be, as they term it, Hypostatically united. For it only implies
conjunction, not confusion of Substances, nor any loss of the Individuality of
the Substances thus conjoined. For there is no Substance conjoinable with
another, but remains this Individual Substance, even for that very reason
because it is a Substance, every Substance being of it self Individual, as I
have already said, and yet conjoinable with another Substance: whence it is
plain that the Scholastic notion of Suppositum is a mere foolery.

6. Out of which we may easily understand how that the Humanity of Christ and
the Eternal Word may be Hypostatically united without any contradiction to
humane Reason unsophisticated with the fopperies of the Schools, and both their
Hypostases remain still entire. Of which I will exhibit this as a more
sensible representation. Suppose a vast Globe made all of solid Gold, saving
one very small section which we will suppose of Silver. This individual Gold
and this individual Silver, remaining still this individual Gold and Silver,
make up one entire Globe, which is not an entire Globe without either. So in
Christ, made up (as I may so speak) of the Second Hypostasis of the Trinity and
of that humane Person that conversed at Jerusalem; He is that individual
Silver, and the other that individual Gold, and both these together One Christ,
the sphere of whose Divinity filling all things, and being every where at hand,
cannot but be a warrantable Object of our Prayers and Invocations, as the
passive Humanity of Christ the prop of our Faith and confidence by his bitter
Passion and Intercession.

7. What Superstition therefore can there be, or least suspicion of Idolatry,
when we pray unto Christ, if we do but think of him to whom we pray? For the
Eternal Godhead does so outshine every thing in this Object of Devotion, that
our mind is in a manner wholly transported into God, though with a due
reflection of honor upon the Person of our Savior, in virtue of whose Death
and Intercession we make our addresses. Which Truth might also pass with the
Jew, without any scruple at all, if he do but call to mind with what devout
Humility their forefathers have Exodus 34.8.
adored the presence of Angels. To whom in their Law Genesis c. 18, and 19. Exodus
c. 3, 14, 32, and 34.
Jehovah, the most holy name of God, is also attributed. And if an Angel, that
sustains the Person of God only by way of Embassy, has this divine honor; how
much more then is due to Christ, who is Jehovah not only by Title and external
Function, but by real Union with the Eternal Son of God? Which the Platonists
in their Triad also call (...), the same in Greek that Jehovah is in Hebrew.

8. Or if they could imagine that there was so extraordinary a kind of Union of
these Angels with God, where so high a name is attributed to them, as being in
such an universalizing Rapture that they had lost the sense of their own
Personalities, and were wholly actuated by God, who used them as fully and
commandingly as our Soul does our Bodies; yet this may fall short in a twofold
respect of that Union which is betwixt the Humanity of Christ and the Eternal
Word. For first, it may not be of the same kind, but differs as much, it may
be, as the union of a Spirit with a dead Corpse does from the union of the Soul
of Man in an healthful body. Or if it could be admitted that there was some
Principle excited and awaked, or some way inserted into the Essence of an
Angel, whereby he might have real and vital union with God, yet it being but
temporary, it is not to be compared with this lasting and durable union in the
Messiah. Nor does the visible presence of the Angel warrant Divine worship more
to him then to Christ. For Christ according to his higher and more adorable
nature is every where present.

9. I conclude therefore that the Divinity of Christ is not at all repugnant to
Reason, I mean his Real and Physical union, as I may so call it, with the
Eternal Word. For being that it was this Word or Eternal VVisdome whereby God
made all things, it is very decorous and congruous that that great Instrument
of the restoring so choice a piece of his Creation as Man is, should be united
particularly to the (...) or Eternal Word. Nor is it unconceivable how he may
be united particularly and immediately to this Hypostasis, and not the other
two, from what we observe in Nature. For even the Faculties of the Soul
residing in the same part of the Soul, according as the part of the Body is
tempered or modified, one Faculty may exert it self in the part, and another be
silent and take no hold thereon. And further it is evident, that though the
Holy Spirit of God and the Spirit of Nature be every where present in the
World, and lie in the very same points of space; yet their actions,
applications or engagings with things are very distinct. For the Spirit of
Nature takes hold only of Matter, remanding gross bodies toward the center of
the Earth, shaping Vegetables into all that various beauty we find in them;
but does not act at all on our Souls or Spirits with divine illumination, no
more then the Holy Spirit meddles with remanding of Stones downwards, or
tumbling broken tiles off from an house. Which things rightly considered and
improved make this Mystery intelligible enough for those that are fit for such
Speculations. So that I need add nothing more, having already proceeded
further then I intended, in zeal against the fraud of some, and indiscretion of
others, who so confidently maintain, That some main Points in Christian
Religion are not only obscure (which I willingly acknowledge, and that thereby
our Religion is the more Venerable;) but also repugnant to Reason, which I
utterly deny, and shall in its due place show the sad inconvenience of so rash
an Assertion.

CHAP. III. 1. That the Communicableness of Christian Religion implies its
Reasonableness. 2. The right Method of communicating the Christian Mystery. 3,
4. A brief example of that Method. 5. A further continuation thereof. 6. How
the Mystagogus is to behave himself toward the more dull or illiterate. 7. The
danger of debasing the Gospel to the dullness or shallowness of every weak
apprehension.
1. THE Second Derivative Property of the Mystery of Godliness is
Communicability. For in that it is Intelligible, it becomes hereby
Communicable. Whence it appears what Communication I mean: not such as is
competible also to Magpies and Parots, that is, a sound of words or phrases,
which those Birds are able to repeat after us; but a Rational impartment of the
matter, whereby a man's Understanding is satisfied of the real grounds of our
belief. This duty the ancient Christians were charged with, as appears 1 Pet.
chap. 3. v. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks a
reason of that hope that is in you, with meekness and reverence, (...). And if
we be asked a reason of our belief, and the Apostle requires us to answer,
assuredly he was not conscious of any Unreasonableness of the Christian Faith
in his time. That of that witty Father of the Church, Credo quia impossible,
however it might please the Answerer, it could never satisfy the Opposer.
Philip. 1.7^
This would not prove (...), as S. Paul speaks, a defense and confirmation of
the Gospel, but rather an exposing it to derision and contempt. For he that
will acknowledge Impossibilities in his Religion, gives up the Cause without
blows, and yields at once all that his adversary desired, namely that his
Religion is nothing but a Forgery or Foolery.

2. Intelligibleness therefore must precede Communication in him that
communicates the Mystery to another, so far as he does venture to communicate
it. Otherwise if he once give his Tongue leave to outrun his Understanding,
what hopes has he of seeming intelligible to another when himself understands
not what he says? Whence unless he meet with a fool, he himself will be sure
to be found one, or accounted an Impostor or Madman. So little edification can
there be in such Discourses.

But if a man would be a prudent Imparter of Christian Religion indeed, he is
not only to take care that what he pronounces of the Mystery is intelligible
to himself; but also to be very circumspect how he speaks any thing to any one
before they be capable of receiving it. And therefore if he would use a right
Method, he must begin with such things as are the most easy to conceive and the
most capable of Demonstration, and also are the most certain pledges of the
Happiness which they may expect who desire to be real and cordial Embracers of
Christianity.

3. As for example, They are to declare how Christ is the Messiah expected of
old of the Jews, though rejected by them when he came: That he is the Son of
God, miraculously born of a Virgin: That he was a Sacrifice for sin, and
underwent the shameful death of the Cross out of love to us: That he was raised
from the dead the third day, and ascended visibly into Heaven, and thence is to
be expected as Judge of the quick and of the dead; and that then those that
believe on him shall be crowned with the highest glory and immortality, their
vile bodies being changed into the similitude of his Heavenly body: And that
the Resurrection of Christ is a palpable earnest of the purpose of God to
reward us thus with everlasting life. Such like things as these are to be
communicated first by way of proposal, they neither vexing nor wearying the
apprehension or imagination of man by any difficulty of conception, but are so
strange that they may well call out the closest attention, and put a man upon
the most eager inquisition to be satisfied whether they be true.

4. The terms of the question therefore being thus easily intelligible, in the
next place it will be expected that they evidence the Truth of the Narration:
which is to be done from those clear Prophecies of the coming of the Messiah,
in the Old Testament, and of what he was to do and to suffer; any by a rational
eviction of the incorruptedness and authentickness of the History of Christ in
the Gospels and the rest of the Writings in the New. And after this, orderly
and by degrees, they are to be led on to those things that are more obscure and
mysterious, and yet to the patient and well-prepared mind both true and
intelligible. For though some few points in Christianity may be obscure; yet so
far forth as the Scripture defines any thing of them, they are both
intelligible and true. So that Truth and Intelligibility is in every
warrantable part of Christianity, at least to those that have their
understandings exercised in rational Speculations. But for others whose parts
and imploiments have rendered them less fit for any meditation that is subtle
and obscure, they may content themselves with the safe adhesion to the form of
Sound words delivered in the Scriptures.

5. Out of which they are very intelligibly instructed of the Divinity of
Christ's Person, in that they read there how he was declared the Son of God by
voices from Heaven: That he was begotten not by man, but by the overshadowing
of the Holy Ghost: That he did such Miracles also as became the Son of God to
do, being utterly above the power of nature: That in him dwells the fullness of
the Godhead bodily, whenas it dwelt in the Temple of the Jews only Typically.
And therefore there is far greater reason that the devotions of Christians
should be directed Revel. 21.22.
toward Christ, then those of the Jews toward the Holy Temple; toward which
they always worshipped, when they put up their supplications to God, though
they were far distant from it. That the Word also is said to be made flesh,
John 1.14.
to wit the Word that was in the beginning with God, when all things were made;
and that this Word also was God; 1 Timothy 3.16.
and that God was manifested in the flesh by the appearing of Christ in the
World.

6. That these things are thus really and in truth, the Authentickness of the
Scriptures makes good. But for such as are unexercised in Metaphysical
speculations, that have not so much as considered the Union of their own Soul
with their Body, nor once heard of distinction real and formal, and other
settled notions requisite for the more express apprehension of such high points
as the Conjunction of the Divinity and Humanity in Christ and the Triunity of
the Godhead; the best instruction can be given to them by the Mystagogus is,
that they would make that up in humble Adoration that they want in Knowledge:
and that God of his mercy imparted these Mysteries to the World for use, and
not for curious and vexatious speculation: and that they should be so modest as
not to think that utterly unintelligible that themselves for the present cannot
apprehend.

7. That the Truth of the Gospel is a standing and immutable thing, not to be
altered and changed according to the capacities of men; and that if nothing
should be exhibited to their belief but what they will all affirm they have a
satisfactory conception of, they will at last tread down Religion to nothing.
For they will not stint themselves there, I mean in the rejection of the
Divinity of Christ, and of a Triune Deity; but the notion of Angels and
Spirits, and of an Immateriall Soul, and lastly of any Being whatsoever that is
truly spiritual, will appear so inconceivable to some, that at last Religion
will be tumbled down as low as mere Body and Matter, and will find no Object
but the visible World, and the Sun and Stars must be the greatest Deities. And
so either the ancient Pagan Superstition or else downright Atheism must take
place.

CHAP. IV. 1. The due demeanor of a Christian Mystagogus in communicating the
Truth of the Gospel. 2. That the chiefest care of all is that he speak nothing
but what is profitable for life and godliness. 3. A just reprehension of the
scopeless zeal of certain vain Boanerges of these times. 4. That the abuse of
the Ministry to the undermining the main Ends of the Gospel may hazard the
continuance thereof. 5. That any heat and zeal does not constitute a living
Ministry.
1. SOme such account as this will the prudent Communicatour of the Mystery of
Christianity give to him that asks a reason of his Faith, declaring his sense
of things with meekness and fear, as S. Peter speaks, 1 Pet. ^.1^.
that is to say, with patience and mildness toward him whom he informs, and
with holy respect and reverence toward God whose Messenger in some sort he is;
and therefore ought to be careful that he mistake not his errand in any thing,
nor mingle of his own what he has no commission to speak, nor distort the truth
out of fear or favor, nor make himself suspected by any levity or affected
vanity in style or words, that are misbecoming a matter of so great importance.
For quaintness of wit and studied eloquence may tickle the Ear for a time, like
a Musical air the while it is playing: but a faithful and serious declaration
of the most weighty parts of our Religion will wound the very Heart, and
captivate the Soul to the Obedience of Christ.

2. And above all things, he that either of himself adventures, or has any
better call to this office, let him ever have in his eye the Usefulness of the
Mystery he endeavors to communicate, remembering that that is an Universal
property thereof; and that, if either his inadvertency or curiosity has carried
him into any Useless speculations or Theories, he is most certainly led out of
his way, and that he is now imparting humane inventions which are nothing at
all appertaining to the Gospel of Christ; that he is now feeding his charge not
with the sincere milk of the Word, but the brackish sweat of some overheated
Brain. This is the most common and the most dangerous mistake that is to be
observed in this Function; as if their very Art and Faculty were to let fly
words for whole hours together, whereof not one is directed or intended toward
the mark and scope of the Gospel, which is the rooting out of Sin and
destroying the Kingdom of the Devil.

3. And yet it is a wonder to see the zeal and heat, and hear the noise of
these Boanerges, these Sons of thunder, as if every sentence were fire and
lightning from Heaven against the strong holds of Sin and Satan, and that they
would humble every thought to the obedience of Christ, who came into the World
to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purchase to himself a Church pure, holy
and undefiled, without either spot or blemish. Which End notwithstanding is for
the most part not only not aimed at, but too often crossed and supplanted by
Hypocritical insinuations of either the Needlesness or Impossibility of these
things. To be short, For the most part the discourse is so off and on, that a
man knows not what they would have: but it is as if one should bring
Greyhounds into the field, and let them slip and cry allooe, when yet there is
no game before them. Which noise though it may make them skip up and look about
a while, yet they will presently find themselves unconcerned, there being
nothing in sight for them to pursue.

4. But if they would exhort to follow peace and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord, this were worth our pursuance indeed, as being the known
and certain end of the preaching of the Gospel. But if we see no such design
therein, and therefore act opposite to it, and vilify the dawnings of that Day
of righteousness that is to arise upon the World and to make that Habitations
of Christendom a Land of joy and peace, and discourage the people of God by
telling them dreadful stories of the Sons of Anak, those invincible Giants,
whenas there is nothing too hard nor invincible to the true Joshua, our Lord
Jesus, the wisdom and power of God; verily it is to be feared that this
Function, which was intended by God a Fortress against Sin, if it prove by
unskilful zeal such a Bulwark of unrighteousness, that He may dig it down and
remove it as a ruinous wall of a garden, whose dead rubbish and stones ever
falling on the innocent herbs and flowers do smother and stifle them, or as an
old decayed hedge which is to be pulled up and carried away, the quick-set
being grown.

5. But if we will work the works of the Lord in faithfulness and according to
the design of the Gospel, we our selves shall become part of that Quick-set,
and be made living stones to hold up one another in the Temple of God. And that
those that are not thus enlivened may not take themselves to be so, by reason
of their extraordinary promptitude and vivacity; I must not forbear to declare
that this life we speak of is no natural heat, nor the external effects of it.
Nor is that a living Ministry according to this sense, that makes show of the
greatest zeal. For verily it is well known that cooling Physic may be
administered in very hot broth. And it is too-too possible that such things may
be delivered with the greatest heat and fervency imaginable, which once
received into the Minds of the hearers are so far from warming them afterward
and spiriting them to true holiness and righteousness, that they even slake and
extinguish the desire thereof: which yet is no less a crime then stifling the
life of God in the World as much as in us lies, and undermining the Kingdom of
Christ upon Earth. These things I could not but take notice of concerning the
Communication of the Gospel, as being of very great use as well to the Hearer
as the Teacher, that neither the one might mistake himself, nor the other be
deceived by him.

CHAP. V. 1. The nature of Historical Faith. 2. That true Saving Faith is
properly Covenant, and of the various significations of (...). 3. In what Law
and Covenant agree. 4. In what Law and Testament. 5. I^ what Covenant and
Testament agree. 6. That the Church might have called the Doctrine of Christ
either the New Law or the New Covenant. 7. Why they have styled it rather (...)
then (...). The first Reason. 8. Other Reasons thereof. 9. The occasion of
translating (...), The New Testament.
1. THE Third Derivative property of this Mystery is a power of winning assent,
which arises from the convincing clearness of the Truth of the Gospel. This
Assent, which is general to all convincing Truths of what nature soever,
appropriated thus to this Divine Mystery, is called Faith: And this Faith in
persons unconcerned, suppose Angels or Devils (whom the Gospel may not be meant
for, and yet believe the truth of it, at least the good Angels) or else in such
persons as may be concerned in the Gospel, and yet will not close therewith,
though they believe it, (if there be any such that can do so) is vulgarly
called an Historical Faith. As if a man should thoroughly understand how such a
one has purchased a Lordship upon such and such terms, this is an Historical
Knowledge in him; and he can tell the whole transaction of the business, and
does believe it; but in the mean time has no share there, he professing himself
either unable or unwilling to meddle upon these terms. Such is Historical
Faith, which alone stands us in no stead to Salvation, and gives no share or
portion in the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. But if out of this Belief and Knowledge we seriously close with the terms
of the Gospel, this will prove a Saving Faith, and is not mere Historical
knowledge and belief, but Covenant. The Conditions and Promises whereof are
clearly comprehended in the New Testament, as we ord^narily call it from the
Latin translation. But the Greek Inscription is, (...), which might be better
rendered the New Covenant; but is capable also of being interpreted the New Law.
For of so large an extent is the signification of (...), it denoting both Law,
Covenant and Testament, as Hugo Grotius has observed out of Plato, Aristophanes
and Isocrates.

3. And well may these See Grotius upon the Inscription of the New Testament.
three kinds of Rights pass under one common notion and name of (...), if we
consider what agreement and affinity they have one with another. For first, Law
and Covenant agree in Sanction; especially public Leagues and Covenants, which
of old were made by the mactation of some beast, from whence Sanction is a
Sanguine, from the blood of the Sacrifice. For which cause also the Hebrew
Doctors willingly deduce (...) from (...) succidere, as the Latins foedus a
feriendo. Whence the phrase of striking a covenant is so obvious both in
Hebrew, Greek and Latin Authors. And that there is Sanction in Laws as well as
in public Contracts and Covenants is plain, for that the blood of him that
transgresses is to satisfy the Law. In legibus Sanctio dicitur ea pars (says
Grotius) quae Sanguinem delinquentis legi consecrat; In laws that part is
called Sanction which consecrates the blood of the Delinquent to the law.

4. Again, Law and Testament have this common to them both, that neither are
without covenanting or contracting. Nam and haeres, eo ipso quod haeres est,
praestare debet factum defuncti; and subjectus alterius impeperio, eo ipso quod
subjectus est, ejusdem legibus parere debet: For an heir or executor, as such,
is hereby bound to perform the deed of the deceased; and he that is a Subject,
is, as such, bound thereby to obey the laws of him whose subject he is, as the
same Author tells us.

5. Lastly, Covenant and Testament agree in this, that at first it is free to a
man whether he will contract or no, and so whether he will take administration
or no, or be such a man's heir. But it is not always free whether a man will be
such an ones Subject or no, whenas Subjection may unavoidably descend on one as
born of such parents and in such an ones Jurisdiction.

6. Out of this distinct apprehension of these several significations of (...),
we may the more easily judge which is the most competible to the nature of the
Gospel; and observe the wisdom of the Ancients in making this Inscription
rather then any other. For they might have entitled it (...), having a double
invitation thereto. For first, the Jews called their Pentateuch, as also the
rest of their Books of Holy Writ, (...), that is (...) and the Christian
Doctrine is so termed also both by Paul and James, Galat. 6. Bear ye one
another burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ: and Iam. 2. If you fulfill
the royal law, according as it is written, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, ye do well. They might also have inscribed it (...), whose determinate
sense had been then, The new Covenant. But then it would have hid that special
sense of (...) which the Author to the Hebrews alludes to, chap. 9.17.

7. But they have made choice of (...) rather then (...), first because they
seem to have an intimation from Christ himself thus to style the Gospel, Matthew.
26.28. (...), This is my blood of the new Covenant. The same also you may read
in Mark and Luke. So that here being mention of Blood, Sanction properly so
called, and which is most conspicuous in the nature of a Covenant, is herein
manifested. The Author to the Hebrews does more accurately and fully prosecute
this Matter, chap. 7, 8, and 9. where ver. 19. he plainly parallels the blood
of Christ to the blood of the Covenant made by God with the Jews. For when
Moses had spoken every precept to all the people according to the Law, he took
the blood of Calves and Goats, and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both
the book and all the people, See Exodus 24.8.
saying, This is the blood of the Covenant which God has enjoined unto you. To
which blood of the Jewish Covenant all along to the end of the chapter he
compares the Sacrifice of Christ and the shedding his most precious blood, when
he did Foedus ferire, make a Covenant of peace with God for remission of sins
to all Mankind.

8. The other reason why they have styled it (...), Covenant, rather then
(...), is because this Inscription more plainly insinuates unto us the sweet
condescension of God Almighty and his singular goodness in the Gospel, who in
sending of Christ has not dealt with us summo jure, nor imperiously and
minaciously, as severe Lawgivers use to do; but mildely and kindly, as those
that contract and covenant in a familiar and kind way one with another. And the
holy Writers are so far from giving any considerable occasion to title the
Gospel by the name of (...), that they frequently set it in opposition
thereunto. And if at any time they attribute that term to it, it is ordinarily
not without some softning or mitigating qualification; as the Law of Faith, not
of Works, and the Law of liberty Jam. 1.25. So that we see that there is a very
sufficient ground why, notwithstanding the Jews called their Pentateuch and
other holy writings (...), the Law, that the primitive Christians should call
the Evangelical writings (...), Covenant; it usually also signifying Testament,
to which the Author to the Hebrews alludes, chap. 9.17. which comes exceeding
near to the nature of a Covenant, where one is constituted Heir upon Condition.

9. The very Title therefore of that Authentical Volume of our Religion gives
some general knowledge of the nature of it, if it had been fitly translated out
of the Greek. But the Latin Christians as well in the old as in the new
Testament ever translating (...), Testamentum, ( etiam ubi (...) nominatur, as
Grotius takes notice, whenas God yet cannot die, and therefore will never have
occasion to make his last Will and Testament) have given occasion to our
English Translatours to follow them in the Title of this Book, and to render it
Testament, rather then Covenant: by which notwithstanding is to be understood
Covenant. Otherwise if you understand a last Will and Testament, what sense
will the Old Testament bear?

CHAP. VI. 1. That there were more Old Covenants then one. 2. What Old Covenant
that was to which this New one is especially counterdistinguished: with a brief
intimation of the difference of them. 3, 4. An Objection against the difference
delivered; with the Answer thereto. 5. The Reason why the Second Covenant is
not easily broken. 6. That the importance of the Mystery of the Second Covenant
engages him to make a larger deduction of the whole matter out of S. Paul.
1. IN general therefore our Christian Religion is a Covenant, the Terms and
Conditions whereof are comprehended in those Books which we ordinarily call The
New Testament, which were better and more significantly rendered The New
Covenant. The nature whereof we cannot so well understand, unless we reflect
back upon the Old Covenants mentioned in the Scripture, which preceded this;
and there being more then one, take notice which of them especially this New
one is set opposite to. That there is mention of more Covenants then one, is
manifest from Ephesians. 2.12. And particularly Circumcision in the book of Moses
and the Prophets is called (...), and (...) in the New Testament, Acts 7.8.
(...), And God gave unto Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision.

2. But questionless that One most eminent, most solemn and most formal
Covenant which God made with the Children of Israel, beginning it at their
going out of Egypt, but perfecting it on Mount Sinai in Arabia, this is that
Old Covenant chiefly glanced at by them that styled our Religion The New
Covenant: and they had a very good warrant for it out of the Prophet Jeremy,
chapter 31. v. 31, 32. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a
New Covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah: Not
according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day that I took
them by the hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt (which my Covenant
they brake, although I was an husband unto them, says the Lord.) But this
shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: After those
days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

Which promise also is recorded in the 54. of Esaias, And all thy children shall
be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children.

So that there is found an Old and a New Covenant set opposite the one against
the other by the Prophets own ordering. The difference of whose natures
consists mainly in this, That the Old Covenant is an external Covenant,
something without a man, the other an inwardly-ingrafted principle of Life.
This is that word which is in our heart as well as in our mouth, of which Paul
professes himself a preacher, and therefore must be the gospel of Jesus Christ.

3. But you will say, The Evangelists and the Apostles Writings are without too as
well as the letter of Moses. I, but yet for all that it is very manifest and
plain that they have not reached the Dispensation of the Gospel, that have not
attained to an inward principle of life. Which being the great distinguishing
design of the Gospel, we are to look upon it in this design and end, and that
it has not done its work, and is in a manner nothing to us till this be done.
He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water. John 7.38.
And John 6. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me,
and I in him. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father; so he
that eats me, even he shall live by me. Which passages plainly enough import
the most intimate principles of life that may be; the divine nature being
turned as it were in succum and sanguinem within us, being converted into the
juice and nourishment of our Souls.

4. But our conversation under the Mosaical Covenant, and our frame of Spirit
there is but an ordinary accustomary temper or habit of doing or not doing such
and such things; and consequently all that righteousness but a fleshly rational
fabric of mind, which Fear and Custom have carved out in the surface as it
were of our Souls; which characters by the same instruments are so preserved
legible. But under the Covenant of Christ, nor Fear nor Custom, but an inward
spirit of life works us into everlasting holiness and a permanent Renovation of
nature and Regeneration of the hidden man.

5. From whence the reason is to be understood of that difference the Prophet
Jeremy intimates betwixt the Old Covenant and the New. That the old Covenant
was broken by his people, but the new one should not be broken. For the one
being an external yoke, and the other the inward pleasure of life and radicate
desire of the Soul; it is no wonder that what is forced lasts not long, but
that upon the first opportunity and provoking occasion, like unmanaged horses,
we cast off the burden that so pinches us and galls us, in lying so heavy upon
us, and being no part of us. But the perfect Law of liberty becoming as it were
our own life and nature, our greatest burden would be not to act according to
it, and to act contrary thereto intolerable. For it were the wounding and
tormenting a principle of life in us, or the Spirit of Christ in us, whereby we
are not only aided and assisted to every good work, but take a natural delight
therein: whereas under the Mosaical law we have no conformity of Spirit to
either the purer Moral precepts, or any complacency in the luggage of a company
of insipid and burdensome Ceremonies; and yet the Mosaical Dispensation, though
it give no strength to perform what it requires, yet like Pharaoh's hard
taskmasters requires the same tale of brick, though they withhold the straw.

6. And this gives us some light into the nature of the Two Covenants in
reference to the Prophecy of Jeremy. But it being an argument of very great
consideration, I will not content my self with so scant an account thereof, but
make a more copious deduction of the whole matter out of Paul, Gal. 4. that we
may the more fully understand so important a Mystery: and when I have from
thence discovered the excellency of the state of the Second Covenant, I shall
add such things as tend to the more useful knowledge of the entrance into it
and advance in it.

CHAP. VII. 1. The different states of the Two Covenants set out Galat. 4. by a
double similitude. 2. The nature of the Old Covenant adumbrated in Agar: 3. As
also further in her Son Ismael. 4. The nature of the New Covenant adumbrated in
Sarah: 5. As also in Isaac her Son and in Israel his offspring. 6. The
necessity of imitating Abraham's faith, that the Spiritual Isaac or Christ may
be born in us. 7. The grand difference betwixt the First and Second Covenant,
wherein it does consist. With a direction, by the by, to the most eminent
Object of our Faith. 8. The Second main point wherein this difference consists,
namely Liberty, and that, First from Ceremonies and Opinions; 9. Secondly from
all kind of Sins and disallowable Passions; 10. Lastly, to all manner of
Righteousness and Holiness.
Gal. 4.21, 22, 23, etc.
1. TEll me, ye that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law? For it
is written that Abraham had two Sons; the one by a bondmaid, and the other by a
freewoman. But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of
the freewoman was by promise. Which things are an Allegory; for these are the
Two Covenants, the one from the Mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which
is Agar. For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem
which now is, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem which is above
is free, which is the Mother of us all.

Here the story of Agar and Sarah, Ismael and Isaac is made to set out, and
that very appositely and lively, the two different conditions of those that are
under the Law and those that are under the Gospel: that thereby the advantage
and excellency of one above the other being laid open before the eyes of the
Galatians, they might not hereafter be any more in a tottering and fluctuating
condition, or sophisticate and adulterate the precious purity of the Gospel
with Iudaical superfluities and useless, if not now hurtful, Ceremonies; but
stick fast to Christ alone, not going back from him to Moses, nor yet mingling
Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies with the plainness and sincerity of Christ.

In the words we have recited there is a double Similitude. We will in each
first lay out the particulars of the Protases, and then pass on to the
Apodoses. The particulars of the First are Agar Abraham's bondwoman, Ismael the
Son of the bondwoman, and the manner of the birth of this Son of the
bondwoman, he was born after the flesh, that is, according to the ordinary
course of Nature. Now in the Apodosis, Jerusalem that now is, that is, the
Church of the Jews, answers to Agar Abraham's bondwoman, and those of that
Church to Ismael the Son of the bondwoman, and to the being born after the
flesh, the being born out of the outward letter of the Law.

The particulars in the Second Protasis are Sarah the freewoman, and Isaac the
Son of Abraham which he had of this freewoman, and lastly, the manner of his
birth, it was not (...), but (...), it was not after the ordinary course of
Nature, but the extraordinary power of God signified in his promise. And now in
the Apodosis, Jerusalem that is from above, that is, the Church of true
Christians, answers to Sarah the Freewoman, and those of that Church to Isaac
the Son of the Freewoman, and their being born of the Spirit, not of the
letter, to the being born by promise, not according to the flesh.

And now if we compare the particulars of these two Protases one with another
in their due order, we shall find a main difference or rather contrariety. For
Agar and Sarah differ as Bondage and Freedom, and Ismael and Isaac as bond and
free, and the condition of their births as Nature and God. And consequently
there must arise a real difference or contrariety in the particulars of the
Apodoses, viz. betwixt the Old terrestrial Jerusalem and the New one from
above, betwixt the Jew, Pharisee or outward Legalist and the true and real
Christian, and lastly, betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit. And so to speak
compendiously, this Text of the Apostle is nothing else but a description of
the different conditions of the Two Covenants, set out in an historical
Allegory, taken from Agar and Sarah and their two Sons, etc. I shall therefore
now fall upon them in that order as I have laid them out.

2. And First therefore of Agar, the bondwoman, which signifies the Covenant
of the Law given upon Mount Sinai. For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia.
Which is spoken Synecdochically from a Town there called Agra by Pliny, and by
Dion, Agara, and the people (...) and (...) in Greek Geographers, as Grotius
has pertinently observed. This allusion therefore to Agar on Mount Sinai where
the Law was given, does commend to us more handsomely and facilitate the
Allegory taken from the story of Agar and Sarah. But if there were not this
Geographical advantage, the Application will be found very suitable and apposite
even without it. And much of the nature of the Old and New Covenant is hinted
at even in the names themselves: as in this of Agar, which they ordinarily
interpret Peregrina. What the relation of habitude is betwixt the Soul of man
and the things of the Old Covenant, is very fitly set down in the meaning of
this Name Agar. For verily as for those things that were Positive and
Ceremonial in the Law of Moses, they are but (...), things strange and of no
affinity with the Soul; and as for those things that are most precious and most
indispensably good in the Law of Moses, the Soul in no better a dispensation
then under the Law is plainly a Stranger to them. For the Law conveies no life;
but all congruity, sympathy and vital affinity must arise out of a Principle of
life. And hence it is that the Law makes nothing perfect, and that
Righteousness cannot be of the Law, Book. 8. c. 6. sect. 2.
as I have above intimated out of the Apostle. The Law therefore giving no
life, a mere Legalist is even a stranger to those things he practices and
imitates under the Law, and acts so as the Parot speaks, by external imitation,
not from a due inward Faculty.

Secondly, This Agar her condition was a bondwoman: and what I pray you is it
to be in bondage or not sui juris but to be constrained to act ad nutum
alterius? And in this condition are all those that are under the Law. For they
do not act according to a free inward and living Principle in them, but are
fain to be curbed and fettered by an outward imposition, which is perfect and
proper bondage. And there is no bondage but to do or suffer otherwise then a
man would himself.

3. Thirdly, Of this Agar is begot Ismael. What Is that? Ismael may signify
these two things: viz. either one that has only a knowledge of God by Philo
(...).
hearsay, from (...) audire and (...) Deus, or so far as some external letter
conveies it to him, resolving all his faith in things concerning God into an
outward Scripture only; and happily is so earthly and carnal that he would scarce
believe there were a God, unless it were for the Scripture. Or else from (...)
obedire, from obeying God in a servile and external forced way. For Obedience
implies some kind of reluctance, or that that which we obey in goes something
against the hair with us; but yet in obedience to the Commander we do it
nevertheless, as being bound to obey. And this is most of all proper to them
under the first Covenant. For that Law not giving life, there is no Principle
of life and natural and genuine compliance of the Soul of man with the
spirituality of the Law under the First Covenant; and therefore that of the Law
which he endeavors to perform must needs go cross to him, and it will be
merely the obedience to the Precept, not the love of the thing, that will make
him endeavor the performance. And this is the true condition of Agar's Son
Ismael. And it would not be unseasonable to add also that he is a great and
fierce Philo (...)
Disputer upon the letter, a notable Polemical Divine, and his ignorance and
untamedness of his carnal heart makes him very bold and troublesome: Philo (...)
his hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him, as the
Scripture witnesses of him. But I will not insist upon these things.

Fourthly and lastly, This Ismael the Son of Agar (...), he was begotten and
born after the flesh, or according to the ordinary and accustomary power of
Nature. And such an one is he that is merely under the First Covenant: He is
not born of the Spirit, or regenerated (...)nary power and assistance of God,
which he that is un(...) Covenant takes hold of by Faith in the Promise; but
toiles and tugs with that Understanding and ordinary Natural power is in him
of externally conforming himself to the proposed Rule: and under this poor
dispensation, when he is come to the best of this his either birth or growth,
he is but (...), he is but Flesh, and not Spirit. For that which is born of the
Flesh, that is, of our own natural abilities, is but Flesh; but that which is
born of the Spirit, that is, of God and his Divine seed in us, that is Spirit,
the true Spiritual man, the Lord from Heaven, Heavenly, in a Mystical sense.
But this under the Law is but the Son of the Flesh or the Earth; is not a Son
of that Jerusalem that is from above, the Heavenly Jerusalem, which is the
Mother of as many as are real and true Christians.

For this is Sarah the Freewoman; but the old Jerusalem is in bondage with her
Children, as the Apostle plainly tells us.

4. And thus far have I described the condition or nature of the Old Mosaical
Covenant, so far forth as is intimated in the Text. I proceed now to the Second
or New Covenant under Christ. And the first Particular in the Protasis here is
Sarah, Domina, a Freewoman, libera a vitiis ac ritibus, as the Interpreter
speaks very well, one that is not commanded into obedience by others, but is
sui juris, does what she pleases; and so she may very well, for nothing pleases
her but what is good, and therefore fit to be done. For Sarah, or the New
Jerusalem from above, is of one Spirit and one mind with Christ. And this is
the true Church of Christians, in whom the body of sin being dead, they are
free from it, as the Apostle speaks to the Romans; and being quit thereof, they
walk freely and safely, etiam custode remoto, that surly Paedagogue, the Law,
no longer dogging them at the heels. For whatever it can suggest from without,
the Spirit of God whispers to them from within, or indeed that living Form of
all holiness and righteousness, the Image of Christ recovered in them, guides
them as easily and as naturally to, as our external Senses guide our Natural
man in this outward and visible world. This therefore is the condition of the
Church of Christ and every true member of it, at least arrived to its due
maturity and perfection, that every Soul there is as Sarah, Domina, as a Queen
Regent in her little world, her self acting nothing forcedly but freely, as
from a living principle, and keeping those under her in due order and
subjection. Which condition undoubtedly the Scripture does point at in such
phrases as these, He has made us Kings and Priests; and elsewhere, You are a
Kingly Priesthood; and the like.

5. Secondly, Of this Sarah was born Isaac, which signifies See Book 8. chap.
5. sect. 8.
Laughter, and is a sign of Cheerfulness and Joy. Because he that is a true
Christian acts and walks with joy and cheerfulness in the ways of holiness
and righteousness. And herein is he mainly distinguished from Ismael, who acts
merely out of obedience to an external form, and so forces himself against the
hair to do or omit that which, were it not that he was bound in obedience to do
or omit, he would take the boldness to neglect; his inward principle being
contrary to it. As for example, he would revenge, did not the Law forbid him;
he would immerse himself into all manner of Sensual pleasures, were he not awed
as an hungry dog by the lash and penalty of the Law; and so in other things.
But the Soul of a true Christian, in whom Isaac is born, does not act what is
good or omit what is evil out of any force or fear of any external
inconvenience, but naturally, as I may so speak, that is, from a Divine nature
and power in him, and therefore with as much cheerfulness and willingness as
the natural man does eat and drink. And of this Isaac was born Jacob, who was
called Israel, which Philo the Jew interprets, one that Philo (...). As if
Israel were also to be deduced from (...) signifying videre, and (...) Deus.
sees God, (...) but you may be remembered that Ismael in the first
signification of his name noted one that did only know God by hearsay, which
is quite contrary to the seeing of God. For that privilege is proper to the
true Christian to whom Isaac is born, and from him Israel: but he is quite out
of the line of Ismael; having now nothing to do with hear-saies and
conjectures, and fruitless disputacity upon the mistaken letter, and Polemical
Divinity, and vain and ridiculous altercations and janglings; for he is now a
Citizen of that New Jerusalem from above, and the only true Jerusalem,
according to the notation of the name, which they will have to signify The
vision of Peace. He is a living stone of the Temple of Him that is greater then
Solomon, where there is not heard the noise of any axe or hammer.

Thirdly and lastly, This Isaac was not born according to the flesh, but (...),
i. e. Per eam vim extraordinariam quam Deus promiserat: for it is a Metonymy,
as the Interpreter rightly has noted Isaac was not born according to the power
of Nature (for that Natural power of begetting and bearing Children was then
extinct in Abraham and Sarah, by reason of old age, as the Text tells us;) but
he was born by the power of God working extraordinarily in Nature: which power
Abraham having a faith in, and believing the promise, he at the appointed time
saw and enjoied the effect of it. And this is the precious Christian Faith so
mainly necessary, and yet so little spoken of by them that spoke much in
matters of Divinity. For without this Faith in the power of God, Isaac will not
be born in us; and if he be not born in us, I know no warrant we have to
conclude our selves Christians or men under the Second Covenant. Wherefore it
is a point mainly necessary to be insisted upon, that we may at length be
really that which we pretend to be, that is, Sons of the Freewoman, and not of
the Bondwoman; that the true Isaac may be in us, which is Christ according to
the Spirit, the Wisdom and Power of God, a Divine vigor and life whereby we
are enabled with joy and cheerfulness to walk in the ways of God.

6. And verily it was this so necessary and useful Faith that was so commended
in Abraham, that it was imputed to him for righteousness, as I have above
noted, viz. his believing the Promise of God in things above the ordinary power
of Nature. For it is the nature of men that make large professions of God and
Divine Providence, yet never to believe him further then in Natural Causes and
humane probabilities. But this is not so much to believe God as Nature, nor to
depend on him, but on our own cold and ineffectual Reason concluding from
accustomary probabilities. Which if Abraham had done, it might well have
forfeited the birth of his Son Isaac. And it will be very reasonable to examine
our selves, if we do not now hinder the birth of the spiritual Isaac, by reason
of our unbelief. For we finding the generality of men so evil as they are, and
being conscious to our selves of abundance of corruption and all manner of
weakness and proclivity to what is bad, and finding it so common a thing for
men to continue in their evil ways, and not to put off their wonted habits,
and that in our own attempts and resolutions we have been often baffled and
cast back again; we are likely, through a spirit of Infidelity, to conclude
that that which is so hard to flesh and blood, and is so seldom seen in the
course of the World, will not be at all effected in us, and therefore either
live as it happens, or at least make very small progress in matters of true
Religion and Piety, I am sure fall short of that high calling whereunto we are
called, viz. that glorious liberty of the Sons of God, from the slavish
inveiglements of all useless Ceremonies and real sins. And this is for want of
Abraham's Faith, who believed contrary to all probability of Nature, that for
all his decayed body, and Sarah's barren womb, yet God would raise up seed to
him, and that they should have a Son in their old age. We are therefore to
imitate Abraham the Father of the faithful; and what we find our selves weak
in, not to distrust but that God in his good time can make it out to us; and
therefore with patience and perseverance to press forward, and by Faith in the
power of God, who raised Christ from the dead, to expect that after we have
been made conformable to his death, we shall also partake of the Resurrection
from the dead. For Christ in our Souls wading through the death with us, that
is, supporting and strengthening us in our greatest Agonies, brings up himself
and us into a glorious Resurrection from the dead: which you may call a Birth,
if you please, as well as a Resurrection, using but the same liberty that is
already in the Scripture; where speaking of his Resurrection, the Apostle cites
that in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And
this is the Son who, as he professes of himself, if he make us free, we are
then free indeed. For he is the Son of Sarah the Freewoman, and we being of
one Spirit with him do ipso facto become free.

7. And if we would compendiously declare the grand difference betwixt the
First and Second Covenant, it does consist mainly in these two points we are
upon. First, That a true Christian, or one attained to the End and Scope of the
Second Covenant, is what he is by Faith in a supernatural power working him to
it. Secondly, That that condition he has attained to is a condition of true and
perfect Freedom properly so called. But he that is under the First Covenant,
is what he is by the power of Nature only, and by applying himself as well as
he can to the external Rule he has set before him. And verily he that does no
more then thus in Christianity it self, that is, outwardly apply himself to the
Letter of the Gospel, has not arrived to the End of the Gospel, nor is Isaac
yet born in him, but is under an outward legal Form, in stead of the Law of the
Spirit of Life. And he cannot be born of the Freewoman, forasmuch as the Law
of the Spirit of Life is wanting in him, which does really free us from the Law
of Sin and Death.

But now by reason that a true Christian arrives to that happy condition he is
in by a Supernatural power, (which condition is to be freely and naturally
righteous and good, that is, (...) by a Divine nature; which when we have
attained to, we may be properly said naturally and without straining to do that
which is good and righteous) we discover here a very eminent Object of our
Faith, viz. this Divine power, by the help whereof we are to be wrought up into
this happy condition of a living inward Righteousness, that is as near to us
as our own Souls, and is the life and spirit of our Soul, as our Soul is of our
Body. And thus are we made just by Faith, as I have elsewhere intimated, viz.
by Faith in the power of God, whereby he is able to raise Jesus Christ from the
dead in us, or what is all one, whereby he is able to make the Spiritual Isaac
grow in our withered and barren wombs, and to bring to pass in us that by his
assisting Grace which would never have come to pass by the mere strength of
Nature. This I say is a very eminent and highly-considerable Object of our
Christian Faith. And the want of this Faith the Prophet may seem to complain of
in a mystical sense, Psa. 53.1.
when he says, Who has believed our report? or to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? that is, Men are very slow to believe that the power of God in Christ
is so efficacious as it is to cast down every strong hold of Satan, and to kill
and slay the body of Sin in us, that the spirit of Righteousness may be
revived and restored in us. And thus much briefly of the First point wherein
the Second Covenant differs from the First. The Second point is this, That the
state of the Second Covenant is a state of Liberty, as that under the First of
Bondage.

8. And this Liberty consists in these three things especially. First In that
we are freed from the tedious and voluminous luggage of Ceremonies, nor are any
longer superstitiously hoppled in the toiles and nets of superfluous Opinions,
which tend not at all of their own nature to the advancement of the Divine life
and the Kingdom of Christ in the world. And verily it cannot sink into my
mind how Zeal about unnecessary knowledge can be any better then the boiling
of the natural heat in the behalf of that which is alike dear, nay more dear to
Devils and Natural men then to the true Children of God, in whom the curious
desire of Speculative knowledge is very much extinguished through their ardent
thirst after Divine life and sense: which will most vividly possess them upon
a due measure of Regeneration, or the Resurrection from the dead, when we have
risen with Christ as well as died with him. In the mean time while we are
passing through the painful Agony of Mortification, all fine Opinions and
Curiosities of Religion will lie scattered and neglected about us, as toies and
gew-gawes by a child that is deadly sick.

9. Secondly, the Second part of our Liberty consists in this, that we are free
from Sin. They are the very words of the Apostle, For if we have been planted
together in the likeness of his death, Romans 6.5, 6, 7.
we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection: Knowing this, that our
old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin. For he that is dead, is freed from sin. And
hence I think it is very plain that a man that has had his due progress under
the Second Covenant, I mean the Gospel of Christ, is freed from the rebellion
and tumult of the body of sin. And that we may not shuffle off so general a
notion and elude the force thereof, I will particularize; He is freed from
Pride, from Envy, from Hatred, from Wrath, from Grief, from Covetousness and
from sensual Lust. And some of these are so incompetible with the nature of a
Christian, as Pride and Envy, that they are like the rankest poison, not in the
least degree consistent with the condition we speak of. And though something in
reason may be said for Hatred, yet I believe it will lie very crosly and
unevenly in the heart of a good Christian; and I see no need of it, whenas
Anger and Sorrow, that is Pity, will supply the place of it. And we may observe
our Savior Christ surprised with Anger, and melted in Grief and Pity; but
there is not the least intimation of Hatred in any passage of our Saviors
life. So that it is the safest and most warrantable to be angry at, or pity
wicked men, not to hate them; lest we become in some measure hateful our selves
by putting on that so deformed vizard. As for sensual Lust and all
Voluptuousness, it is so conspicuous an Object of mortification, that he that
does not hit the mark there, and strike dead, kills nothing at all. For it is
the most crass and gross enormity of them all, and the most scandalous, and the
most importunate disturber of men that make toward God, and the greatest
extinguisher of true Faith and Sense in Divine things; and so besmears the
wings of the Soul, as it were with bird-lime, that she cannot move upward, nor
at all release her self from the impediments of the Body, nor have any phansy
nor conceit of what is Heavenly and Divine.

But now Pride and Voluptuousness being exterminated, it is plain that
Covetousness will be set packing; for it is ordinarily only a purveior for
those two Vices. And those that are the most sordidly covetous, are well aware
that Money being able to do all things, (let men talk what they will) they
really are not, nor can be despicable.

10. The Third and last is his Freedom to Righteousness. And that this is
true, is very plain from what has been said before. For he being free from that
load of unnecessary Ceremonies, and from the intanglements of fruitless and
superstitious Opinions, and from the body of Sin; what can now hinder that
Divine principle of Regeneration from acting cheerfully, freely and
comfortably? For every mountain is cast down, and every valley is exalted, and
all is made plain and even before him, that with pleasure, ease and joy he may
walk in the ways of that Everlasting Righteousness that Christ brings into the
world. For the Eternal seed of the Word that is engrafted in him, or that
living law of Righteousness planted in his heart, does as naturally guide and
actuate him as the Soul does move an unshackled Body; and it is no more
constraint or bondage in him to do what is truly good and holy, then it is to
the unregenerate to do that which is natural or vicious.

And thus have I plainly and truly set before you the Idea of a well-grown
Christian, that has made his due proficiency under the mighty advantages of the
New Covenant, the Gospel of Christ; that we may know what to aspire to and
breath after, and that we may never be quiet till we be possessed of this
blessed and happy condition. Which design is of so high consequence, that I
shall hold my self very defective in my treating thereof, unless I add also
what would be serviceable for direction touching the entrance into this New
Covenant we have described, and for our advance and progress in the same. Which
we shall do by showing the adequate Object thereof, the true Principle that
moves us to covenant, and the most effectual means to make us faithful
pursuers of what we first purposed and agreed to.

CHAP. VIII. 1. The adequate Object of saving Faith or Christian Covenant. 2.
That there is an Obligation on our parts, plain from the very Inscription of
the New Testament. 3. What the meaning of Blood in Covenants is. 4. And
answerably what of the Blood of Christ in the Christian Covenant. 5. The
dangerous Error and damnable Hypocrisy of those that would persuade
themselves and others that no performance is required on their side in this
Covenant. 6. That the Heavenly Inheritance is promised to us only upon
Condition, evinced out of several places of Scripture.
1. THE adequate Object of saving Faith or Christian Covenant (For I mean by
Covenant our faithful and sincere closing with the terms of the Gospel) is
that which we ordinarily call The New Testament; that is to say, those
concerning Truths that are there upon record, as well Precepts as Promises: all
these are to be believed and assented to. Or, to speak yet more
comprehensively, All that Christ is said there to have done or suffered, to
have acted or procured for us, whatever good he has done for us already or
promised for the future on his part, this is to be believed without any evil
suspicion or wavering: And what on our part is required to be done, is also
with a free and plenary purpose of mind to be accepted and promised, and with
all stedfastness and sincerity to the utmost of our power to be endeavored
after, without any fraud or tergiversation, without any elusive tricks or
perverse misconstructions of the holy Precepts of the Gospel.

2. For the very Inscription of this Record we call the New Testament, (...),
bears before it the Notion of a Covenant, that is, of mutual obligation: though
it may also signify a New Law; Which title would more roughly confute those
Hypocritical Flatterers both of themselves and their Followers, who by their
deceitful Interpretations would make them believe that nothing is expected on
our hand in this Gospel Dispensation. And besides, a Law is not for nothing
defined in Aristotle by (...), Covenant, it being (...), as Lycophron has
defined it, The Law being our common sponsour or undertaker that there shall be
just dealing betwixt party and party. Nor can they decline the truth we aim by
pretending that (...) is only the New Testament in such a sense as relates to
dying men, and therefore may signify a right conveied to another without any
mutual obligation. For in this sense it cannot be called a New Testament,
because there was no Old one answering to it. For the Law of God, or Covenant
by Moses, could not be called a Testament in this sense: For God the Father did
not die, nor is Moses his Law any Legacy or last Will and Testament in
reference to Moses his death.

3. It remains therefore that Christianity is an obligatory Covenant, whereby
party is tied to party, that is, God to man, and man to God; and that the
Mediator of this Covenant is Jesus Christ, whose blood shed upon the Cross is
the blood of this Covenant; as your most sacred and solemn Covenants amongst
the Nations, and with the Jews too, were (as I have above intimated) with the
sprinkling of blood. Which Ceremony of sacrificing and effusion of blood was
nothing but an insinuation of a mutual imprecation or commination of the
highest evil to one another, if they dealt treacherously in the Covenant.
Grotius produces an ancient form of the Pagan Religion, which is express to
this purpose; Qui prior defexit, tu illum, Jupiter, sic ferito, ut ego hunc
porcum hodie feriam, tantoque magis quanto magis potes pollesque. And so the
Trojans and Graecians making a solemn Covenant, and religiously obliging one
another to stand to the terms thereof, upon the sacrificing of lambs and
pouring out a drink offering to the Gods, one uttered this Imprecation or
Commination indifferently to either party that should prove false.

(...), Hom. Iliad 3.

(...),
(...).
Thrice great and glorious Jove, and ye the Gods
His Heavenly Senators, which of these twain
First break this solemn League and fall at odds;
As does this Wine, so may their scattered Brain
Pash'd from their cursed sculls the pavement stain.
4. From this general notion and meaning of the Blood in the sanction of
Covenants, we may the better understand what is the meaning thereof in that
Covenant which God has made with us through the blood of Christ. For at his
last Passion he called the Wine his blood of the New Covenant to be shed for
many for the remission of Sins, that is, for peace and reconciliation betwixt
God and man. But in these solemn Leagues, Pacifications and Covenants, which
were made with blood, though it were a Ceremony of agreement, yet the effusion
of blood did not cease to be of a comminatory signification for those that were
faithless in their Covenant. So it is also much more with the blood of the Son
of God. As the peace is of higher concernment, so is the breach of Covenant of
the greater danger. This the Author to the Hebrews does expressly take notice
of, and shows that upon wilful misdemeanors and perverse revoltings from God,
the expiatory and pacificatory virtue of the blood of Christ then ceases, and
the comminatory part takes place; Hebr. 10.26. For if we sin wilfully after we
have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sins: but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation
which shall devour the adversaries. He that despised Moses law died without
mercy, under two or three witnesses. Of how much severer punishment, think ye,
shall he be thought worthy who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has
counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of grace? And therefore, as S.
Peter speaks 2 Epist. 2. It had been better for them not to have known the way
of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered to them. Which persons he decyphers in he foregoing
verse, That they were such as had escaped the pollutions of the World through
the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but were again entangled
therein and overcome, being brought into the bondage of sin by giving place to
the deceitful doctrines of Libertinism; as you may see more at large in that
Chapter.

5. Wherefore it appears out of what already has been said, That there are
Terms to be performed on out part in this New Covenant as well as there are
Promises on God's part, and that Christianity is no such loose, remiss and
inert Religion as some Deceivers would make it: which we shall make still more
plain from several other testimonies of Scripture. Matthew. 11. The Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Whence is plainly
intimated that no lazy or careless endeavors will carry us on to the enjoiment
of the Promises of the Covenant. As elsewhere, He that lays his hand to the
plough and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of God. And Luke 13.24.
Strive to enter in at the straight gate: For I say unto you, many shall seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. Because straight is the gate and narrow is the
way that leads unto life; but wide is the gate and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat. As it is in the
parallel place of S. Matthew. Which plain places of Scripture one would think
should awake those filthy dreamers out of their mischievous conceits and
opinions, whereby they would make us believe the Evangelical dispensation is so
soft and delicate a thing, that there is no laying of the hand to the plough,
no crouding or striving, but that we shall be carried to heaven on that easy
featherbed of unactive Faith or fanatic Libertinism. Whenas the Evangelical
Oracles tell us that we are to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling;
Phil. 2.12. Ephesians. 6.12. Hebr. 12.4.
that we are to run and to wrestle, to fight and to resist even unto blood. 1
Cor. 9.24. Know ye not that they that run in a race, run all, but one receives
the prize? So run that ye may obtain. And every one that strives for the
victory, is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible
crown, but we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so
fight I, not as one that beats the air. But I keep under my body, and bring
it into subjection: lest by any means when I have preached to others, I my self
should become a castaway. And yet S. Paul was as chosen a vessel as the
choicest of these pieces that befool themselves so with self-flattery, that
they think they have found an easier way to Salvation then Paul himself knew,
that think they shall get the victory and the crown by not fighting against
their own corruptions, but by beating the Air with knackish forms of gracious
speeches and vain grandiloquence that tends to nothing but the masking of their
own Hypocrisy and unfaithfulness in the Covenant, and to the seduction and
ruin of others.

6. But S. Paul, however they would abuse some passages in him to the favoring
of their ill cause, is an utter disclaimer of such false doctrine, and does yet
more expressly tell us That the promises of the Gospel are conditional. This is
a faithful saying (says he to Timothy, 2 Epist. chap. 2.) If we be dead with
him, we shall also live with him: if we suffer, we shall also reign with him:
if we deny him, he will also deny us. If we deal unfaithfully in the Covenant,
yet he is faithful and cannot deny himself: He will stand to his Covenant in
all the intents and purposes thereof, whether to punishment or reward. And Romans
8. There is therefore now no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus;
but their qualification presently follows, that walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit: and ver. 8. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God.
But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be the Spirit of God
dwell in you: and if this Spirit be in you, the body is dead unto sin. And
again, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if through the Spirit ye
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. And ver. 16. The Spirit it self
bears witness with our spirits, that we are the Children of God. And if
Children, then Heirs, heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ; if so be we
suffer with him, that we may also glorified with him. Which plainly implies
that the Inheritance of Heaven, or Kingdom of glory, is a conditional Kingdom
or Inheritance. And not to speak of Kingdoms, we shall not so much as have
remission of sins but upon condition. Matthew. 6.14, 15. For if ye forgive men
their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if you
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive you your
trespasses. What can be more evident then this?

CHAP. IX. 1. What it is really to enter into this New Covenant. 2. That the
entering into this Covenant supposes actual Repentance. 3. That this New
Covenanter is born of water and the Spirit. 4. The necessity of the skillful
usage of these newborn Babes in Christ. 5. That some Teachers are mere Witches
and Childe-Suckers.
1. WE have therefore undeniably demonstrated That this New Gospel Covenant is
a conditional Covenant: and but that Hypocrisy and Impiety has made men's
souls so degenerate, that Sense and Nonsense is alike to them, they would from
the very sound and signification of the word perceive that there are mutual
Terms and Conditions implied, or else it could be no Covenant. This therefore
being premised, we shall the better understand what is that due affection and
qualification of mind that is required of him that would enter into this
Covenant, or what it is whereby he has really entered into it. For it is not a
mere Historical Faith or Belief of those things that are in the New Testament,
and an acknowledgment that they all tend to the peace and salvation of man, and
that he is obliged to live up to the utmost of his power to those holy Precepts
that are there contained; but further, there is a love and liking of the said
Precepts as well as a desire of the enjoiment of the promise of Eternal life,
and a sincere resolution of endeavoring to live as near as he can according to
those Evangelical Rules, and a cheerful expectation of Divine assistance, that
God will enable him by the cooperation of his Holy Spirit to make such due
progresses in life and Godliness as shall become an unfeigned professor of
Faith in Christ Jesus.

2. He that upon the perusal of the Records of the Gospel, as they are found in
the New Testament, or by what other way soever the substance thereof is
communicated to him, and so upon information of his errors and mistakes,
whether in opinion or practice, is thus affected as we have declared; it is
manifest that he has already repented him of his sins and errors, and is in a
real mislike of his former Conversation, so far forth as it was unconformable
to the mind of Christ. So that the state above described does plainly implie
Repentance, which comprehends in it a rejection of such apprehensions as we now
have discovered to be false, and an abhorrence from and sorrow for all our
misdeeds, with a willingness to make satisfaction where we have done wrong, if
it lie in our power, and a proneness to take revenge of our selves in curbing
our selves and cutting our selves short of the ordinary enjoiment of such
things as are in themselves lawful, they being for the present not so
expedient for us, but rather hurtful and dangerous.

3. He that is thus affected as we have described, and can thus willingly and
sincerely close with Christ, and receive him as King as well as Priest and
Prophet, and holds himself bound in duty to live in the World as he lived,
following his Example in all things, and has (as I have already said) a love
and liking of those Graces he has recommended to the World, is a fit
New-Covenanter. For flesh and blood has not revealed these things unto him, but
the Spirit of God that remains in him; he being born again not of corruptible
seed, but incorruptible, the word of God that lives and abides for ever. Of
this state may be understood that of S. John, Whosoever confesses that Jesus is
the Son of God, God dwells in him and he in God: 1 John 4.15.
and chap. 5. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, 1 John 5.1.
is born of God. And this is that new birth without which there is no entrance
into the Kingdom of Heaven, namely, unless a man be born of water and of the
Spirit; that is to say, born of the Spirit which is figured out in Baptismal
water; which is the outward sign of this inward Regeneration, whereby a man is
a capacity of thus Covenanting with God, obteins remission of sins in Christ,
and becomes a real and visible member of his Church.

4. And when he is thus born into the Church, he is not then taken into the
arms of absolute Omnipotency to support him, defend him, and nourish him: but
there is much-what the same reason that there is of a young plant newly sprung
out of the earth, or a young child newly born into the world; unless they meet,
the one with a careful and skillful Gardener, the other with good Nurses, they
are both in hazard of being spoiled with one sad accident or other; their
growth may be hindered, if not life extinguished, by neglect or untoward
handling. For the influence of Grace is not always irresistible, nor the
purpose of it undefeatable, but is much-what as the power of Nature and her
offerings and attempts toward the perfection of those Species of things she
produces, Book 8. chapter 11. sect. 6.
as I have also above noted. She works always toward the best, but may be
checked or stopped; and the Spirit (the Apostle says) may be quenched as well
as natural Fire. And though Nature freely offers that comfortable principle of
life, the fresh Air, yet the Lungs of the child may be so stuffed by the
unwholesome milk of a wretched and unfaithful Nurse, that he cannot receive it,
to continue life and health, but the poor Infant must be forced to yield to the
importunity of the disease, and to die by their hands who professed to
administer life and nourishment to him.

5. There is the same reason in those that are as yet Infants in Christianity,
that have really a life and sense and desire to what is truly good, but are not
yet come to that growth but that they are to suck from others. If they that
pretend to nurse them up impart poison in stead of the sincere milk of the
Word, there is no question but they are in very great danger of losing that
life they are newly begotten into, and of falling from this New Covenant. That
there were of old such Nurses or rather Witches that, in stead of feeding these
Infants, sucked the very blood and life of Religion out of them, several
passages in the Epistles of the Apostles do intimate, Book 8. chapter 5.
as I have already taken notice, namely, That they were little Children whom
those Impostours would make believe that they might be righteous, though they
were not righteous as Christ was righteous. Which is to squeeze cold poison
into their mouths, not to suckle them with the saving milk of the Word. St.
Paul was a more faithful Nurse, and taught Titus to be so too, Chap. 3. where
after the mention of the entrance into this new Covenant by the washing of
Regeneration and the renewing of the holy Ghost, he presently adds, This is a
faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that
they which have believed in God should be careful to maintain good works.

CHAP. X. 1. The First Principle the new-Covenanter is closely to keep to. 2.
The Second Principle to be kept to. 3. The Third and last Principle.
1. WHerefore that there be no Recidivation nor standing still, but that there
may be a due advance and growth in the Christian life, the First Principle that
the new-Covenanter is to adhere to steadfast and unshaken, is this, That there
is an indispensable obligation in this new Covenant of living up so near as we
possibly can to those Precepts of the Gospel that are delivered either by the
mouth of our Savior himself or the holy Apostles; and that we are not to allow
our selves in any thing that our own consciences tell us is a Sin; nor be
discouraged as men out of hope, if we find our selves, against our own meaning
and purpose, at any time mistaken; but with cheerfulness and confidence in the
mediation of our Savior to add more resolute endeavors and the greater
circumspection for the future, making even an advantage of our lapses, that
sudden surprisal or any error or frailty brought us into, for an higher and
more speedy advance in the Divine life. These two considerations of our
indispensable obligation to duty, and Christ's Intercession and propitiation for
us, S. John has prudently bound up together, 1. Epist. 2. My little children,
these things I write unto you, that you sin not. But if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is a propitiation
for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world.
Hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments. He that says I
know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar and the truth is not in
him. But whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected. As
this point is exceeding clear, Book 8. chapter 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11.
as I have more largely proved elsewhere: so is is most necessary to be believed
and to be remembered perpetually, that we may keep our selves safe from tasting,
touching, or coming any thing near the sight or sent of that lushious poison of
Libertinisme (let it be colored, sugared over or perfumed with the most
gracious terms or glorious expressions that the deceivable Eloquence of man
can put upon it;) and that we may shun the breath of such a Seducer, as of one
that is infected with the pestilence, and whose converse is death and the
eternal ruin of our very Souls.

2. The Second Principle that he is closely to keep to is, That (I had almost
said) Omnipotent Faith in God through Christ: I mean the belief of the
assistance of his holy Spirit to overcome all manner of sin in us. For if we
keep up duly to this, nothing will be able to withstand us, but by patience
and perseverance we shall be able to beat out Satan out of his strongest holds.
According to thy faith so be it unto thee, is true as well in Christ's healing
our Souls as in his curing the bodies of the sick when he was upon earth. This
is a prime branch of that saving Faith, and the greatest strength and
sustentation we have to keep us from sinking back into sin, and from being
drowned and carried away with the floods of ungodliness. If we let this hold
go, all is gone: For they that do not believe that they have power to resist
sin, must of necessity give up themselves captives to it. And this is that
which makes S. Paul so affectionately devout in the behalf of the Ephesians,
that God would be pleased to give them this special gift of Faith for their
strength and corroboration of the inward man; chap. 3. For this cause I bow my
knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, That he would grant you
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the inner man; That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith; that ye
being rooted and grounded in love, Book 8. c. 9.
etc. according as I have elsewhere rehearsed. And in the Doxologie immediately
following this prayer, of what unconceivable efficacy the operations of the
Spirit are in us, the Apostle again does intimate in a very high strain, Now
unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above what we ask or think,
according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in the Church by
Christ Jesus throughout all ages world without end. Which words plainly imply
that such is the inexhaustible richness of Grace and Assistance from the Spirit
of God, that the effect of its inward workings in us is for the present not
imaginable, much less expressible. Wherefore our Faith cannot be too great in
this supernatural Principle; and the greater it is, the greater courage and the
more speedy and more absolute victory.

3. And yet there is still another Principle that will further actuate our
Faith, and make us still more lively, resolute and invincible; and that is The
Love of Christ which every young Christian is to warm himself with, and
inflame his courage more and more: which he will best do by frequent
Meditations upon Christ's Passion, what shame, what sorrow and pain he underwent
to gain the love of Souls, and so to try them to himself in those sweet and
inviolable bands of sincere love and friendship, that by this golden chain he
may pull them up after him from Earth to Heaven. Let therefore our
new-Covenanter as often as he reflects upon the exceeding great love of his
Savior, and finds his heart begin to grow hot, being touched with a ray from
that celestial Flame, that bright Sun of righteousness that now shines at the
right hand of God, let him be sure to remember what compensation he requires
for all that dear affection he has shown to us. The lesson is but short, and
therefore must not be forgotten, If you love me, keep my Commandments.

CHAP. XI. 1. The diligent search this new-Covenanter ought to make to find
out whatsoever is corrupt and sinful. 2. That the truly regenerate cannot be
quiet till all corruption be wrought out. 3. The most importunate devotions of
a living Christian. 4. The difference betwixt a Son of the Second Covenant and
a Slave under the First. 5. The Mystical completion of a Prophecy of Esaias
touching this state.
1. THE young Christian being thus armed with Faith and Love and an unwavering
sense of his duty in becoming holy even as he that called him is holy, he will
be then both willing and ready to look his enemies in the face, and to seek
them out if he cannot at first sight find them, and to pull them out of every
hiding place of Hypocrisy, and bring them into the open light and slay them.
And if after diligent search he can find none, yet he will be so modest as to
distrust the measure of his skill, and will be earnest in Prayer to God to
discover what inward hidden wickedness there may lurk yet in him, to the end
that the old Leven may be utterly cast out, and that there may be nothing left
that is contrary to the Scepter of Christ and the Kingdom of God in his heart.

2. For indeed it is impossible that one is truly regenerate and has the seed
of God and the life of his Spirit actually in him, should be quiet till all
that which is unholy and corrupt be wrought out. But the case is much-what as
in the natural body that is sick, either death or health will in a competent
time possess the body. If the morbifick matter be not carried away by sweating,
purging or some evacuation or other, Life it self will be carried away: but if
that which is contrary to life be removed, Health must certainly take place.

3. And so it is in the Divine life it self, when it has taken root and growth,
whatever is contrary to it, is burdensome to it, like that Book 8. chapter 5. sect.
8.
tyrannick project of tying the living and the dead together. Wherefore the
true Christian can never be at ease and rest till he has cast off that heavy
load, the body of sin, the old man that stinks earthily and unsavourly, if he
be perceived at all, and indeed so unsufferably, that the divine life and sense
in a man cannot endure it. Nor can endure to be in a condition so senseless that
there should be any of that ^our Leven left, and yet there be no perception of
it. And therefore the most importunate address to the throne of Grace in a
living Christian is, that God would be pleased to discover whatever ugliness or
deformity there is in him in either practice or principle. Which God of his
mercy does by degrees, not all at once, that there may not arise overmuch
distraction and confusion. But if we be not wanting to our selves, the work
will be accomplished in due time, and the Kingdom of heaven, as well within as
without, Matt. 13.31.
will be as a grain of Mustard Seed. The Crisis of the disease will be in a
competent time, as I said before, and our whole man re-enlivened with the
Spirit of God, and restored to the state of righteousness, peace and joy in the
Holy Ghost.

4. For verily to be quiet upon any other terms but these, is not to be a Son
of the Second Covenant, but a careless Slave under the First, that acts not out
of a principle of Love and inward Life and liking, but out of some external
respect, and cares not how little he does or what is the frame of his mind, so
he may but escape being well cudgelled for the present, and receive at last the
promised wages of his Master. But under the Second Covenant the case is quite
otherwise. For the true Christian there is impatient of Sin, merely because it
is Sin, and bears the same analogy to the sense of his Soul that a wearisome
or torturous disease does to the sense of his Body; and therefore it is
intolerable till he be freed from it; and that the more, by how much the more
assured he is that it is contrary to the will and mind of Christ, Book 8. c.
6, 7.
who came into the world to heal us of our iniquities and to free us from all
sin.

5. And therefore lastly, we are never to rest contended till we find our
selves through the power of God arrived to this state and frame of spirit, (and
that in such an height as is competible to humane nature,) that there may be
nothing undestroied that is contrary and opposite to the Life of God in us.
That that may be fulfilled which is prophesied in Isaiah, Isai. 41.11, 12.
That they that fight against Israel shall be as nothing; and they that strive
with him shall perish. Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them, even
them that contended with thee; they that war against thee shall be as nothing
and as a thing of naught.

CHAP. XII. 1. That the destroying of Sin is not without some time of conflict.
The most infallible method for that dispatch. 2. The constant ordering of our
external actions. 3. The Hypocritical complaint of those for want of power that
will not do those good things that are already in their power. 4. The danger
of making this new Covenant a Covenant of Works, and our Love to Christ a
mercenarie friendship. 5. Earnest prayers to God for the perfecting of the
Image of Christ in us. 6. Continual circumspection and watchfulness. 7. That
the vilifying of outward Ordinances is no sign of a new-Covenanter, but of a
proud and carnal mind. 8. Caution to the new-Covenanter concerning his converse
with men. 9. That the branches of the Divine life without Faith in God and
Christ, degenerate into mere Morality. The examining all the motions and
excursions of our Spirit how agreeable they are with Humility, Charity and
Purity. 10. Cautions concerning the exercise of our Humility; 11. As also of
our Purity, 12. And of our Love or Charity. The safe conduct of the faithful
by their inward Guide.
1. AND this may serve for a more general direction and encouragement; but we
shall annex also what is of more particular consideration. For we have
expressed our selves hitherto, as if so soon as a man were under the Second
Covenant, there needed nothing but the finding out of his Sins: for then armed
with Faith and Love, he could suddenly destroy them. But that I may be rightly
understood, it cannot be without some time of conflict. But the stronger he is
in these Divine Virtues, the Victory will be the easier and the speedier. But
in the mean time the Flesh will be working against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the Flesh; and Patience and Faithfulness is required on our side that
we do what God already has put into our power. And assuredly it is in the
power of the new-Covenanter to mortify all manner of corruptions and
immoderate desires in due time by this short and infallible method, viz. By a
constant denial of their cravings. Give a Beggar nothing at thy door, and he
will never visit thee. Desire is starved by being unfulfilled. A man you know
often loses his appetite by staying overlong for his dinner.

2. Inordinate Desire will haunt a man like an Ague, if we pamper and satisfy
it. The Devil and the Sop will both down into our bellies at once. But thou
may pine out both Desire and the Devil that lurks in it by a pertinacious
Temperance or stopping thy self in thy outward Actions. Affect not Vainglory
and applause in thy outward actions or speeches, but modestly decline it, and
Pride will fall in thy Soul. In good time thou shall find Humility rise in thy
heart, and sweetly shine in thee with her mild light. Give not thine Anger
vent, and it will be extinct like smothered fire. Answer not thy Lust or
Lasciviousness, and it will cease to call unto thee, but die as a weed trod
down into the ground. Dare to do good, though thy base heart gainsay it; and
pleasure thy very enemies, those that hate thee or envy thee. For Covetousness
and Hatred being thus often crossed, will out of discontent at last quite leave
thee.

3. But if thou be false to God and thine own Soul in those things which he
has put in thy power, (and he has put the outward man plainly in thy power,)
and neglectest the performance of them, and yet do complain of want of
strength; thou art in plain English an Hypocrite, and dealest treacherously
with Christ in the Covenant, and the Devil and thine own false heart have
deceived thee. Thou colloguest and flatterest with thy lips, and tellest fair
stories of the Loving Kindness and free Grace of God in Christ; but thy heart
is far from him: For whosoever names the name of Christ, is to depart from
iniquity, as has been already noted out of the Apostle.

4. But now in the second place, as we are faithfully to persist in a constant
abstinence from outward evil actions, and in a perpetual exercise of such as
are good; so we must by all means have a special care that we take not up our
rest in these, and so make this new Covenant a mere Covenant of works, as if by
these external performances we did so oblige Christ as that he were bound to
give us Heaven by way of gratitude or of bargain and purchase: we dealing
craftily herein, as poor men do sometimes with great Persons, presenting them
with something of small value, to get from them a reward of far greater worth;
they having in the mean time no cordial affection to those they present with
their gifts, but only baiting the hook to catch a fish. Nay, I add further,
That personal Love and Affection merely upon this account of being externally
beneficial to us in dying for us and delivering us from eternal destruction,
even this does not fill up the End and purpose of the Second Covenant. For this
were little better then a kind of mercenary Friendship, and such as is
competible to the mere Natural man: for he can love him that does him such a
good as his very Animal frame or temper is sensible of. But our Love and
Friendship with Christ must be still more inward and more intimate, we being
tied to him not only by the sense of external Benefits, but by Unity of Spirit;
there being the same Life and Spirit in us that was in him here on Earth. And
therefore there will be in our very Souls an high Sympathy and ineffable
pleasure and liking of that Nature and Spirit that breaths in all the actions
and speeches recorded of our Savior, and a transporting delight in all the
Precepts of the Gospel, whether delivered by himself or his holy Apostles; they
will be sweeter then the honey and the honey-combe, and more desirable then
thousands of gold and silver, as the Prophet David speaks.

5. Wherefore we are never to be quiet till we find our selves fully enamoured
on the very Character and Genius, as I may so speak, of our blessed Savior,
and find our selves so affected as he was affected in the world. And therefore
we are to add to our external profession fervent Prayer to God, not only to
resist temptations, or to do outward good works; but that he would also wholly
renew our nature in us, that our Regeneration may be perfected, and that we may
be entirely transformed into the lively Image of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. And this not only at set times, but continually as we have opportunity
and vacancy from the throng and urgency of worldly affairs. For then should we
commune with our hearts, and meditate on that divine Image and Character, The
Life of Christ, and observe wherein we are most wanting, and to what part
thereof our affections are the most cool; and so with serious and earnest
ejaculations to God implore the help and assistance of his Spirit to complete
the good work that he has begun in us: and so we shall fulfill that Precept of
the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.27.
Pray continually, that is, whether upon the emergency of some temptation, or
upon self-examinations and devout Meditations.

6. And as we are to pray continually, so we are to watch continually, that is,
to pass from one transaction to another with circumspection; making our very
converse with men and affairs in the world an advantage to our main design of
improvement in the Divine Life. For coming thus out into company and
emploiment, we have thereby a present exercise of that Grace that is in us, and
can find thereby the better our own inabilities and defects, as also what
strength we are of, and what proficiency we have made in the way we have
chosen. And so what we have, will be thereby corroborated; and what we want,
being discovered to our selves, we know the better to ask it at the hands of
God.

7. Thus will the work assuredly go on by perpetual Meditations, Prayer and
Watchfulness. And while thou art thus taken up with thy self, take heed how
thou meddlest with other men. And particularly beware of despising the public
Ordinances of thy Church. For thou may hear the same advice given thee in the
open congregations that thou have assented to as true in thine own Conscience,
from a faithful and knowing Ministry. Which, if thou be what thou pretendest
to, will delight thy heart, both in that it is a Testimony of the Truth, and
that it may take effect in others by God's blessing as well as in thee.
Wherefore it is no sign of a New-Covenanter, but of a proud and carnal mind and
of a wicked designer, to vilify these things.

8. Moreover thou art to take this Advertisement along with thee concerning thy
converse with men, That first thou censure not any man for external matters of
an indifferent Interpretation, in Diet, Apparel, or Civil behavior, whether he
be more courtly or plain in carriage, whether more cheerful or more sad,
whether he drink wine or refrain from drinking, whether he wear good clothes or
go in a meaner dress; and so of other things of like nature. Thou ought I
say to pass no censure, no not so much as in thy tacit thoughts, about these
things, but esteem every man from what is truly Christian or Unchristian in
him. And then secondly, Thou art carefully to take heed that the just liberty
of another lead thee not into any inconvenience, by tempting thee to imitate
him. But thou art strictly to keep to what thou know in thine own Conscience
to be most for thine own safety; that the good work may go on in thee, and
that Righteousness may have its firm rooting and full growth. But in the mean
time thou art to look after thy self as a tender child or sick person, who are
rightly forbidden such things as grown men and in health take their liberty to
make use of. These two Cautions will prevent all Scandal whereby thou may
either harm thy self or be injurious to others.

9. Lastly, I shall more particularly and expressly recommend to thee the
frequent Meditation of these three branches of the Divine Life, Humility,
Charity and Purity, together with their deepest Root Faith in God through Jesus
Christ. For if this be not taken in, thy progress in the Second Covenant may
degenerate into a mere accustomary or complexional frame of Morality, and have
nothing in it that is really Divine. I am sure it will not be of that nature as
to fit thee for that Eternal salvation that is promised to those that are true
Believers. And as concerning those Three branches of the Divine Root, I would
have thee to place them ever in thine eye, and examine all the motions and
excursions of thy Spirit into outward actions, how suitable they are to these,
and closely observe when thou think thy self so zealously carried out by the
moving of one of these Principles, if thou do not run counter to another.
Nay, it may be thy Enthusiastic Heat may carry thee so far as to sin against
that very Principle that thou think thy self to be moved by.

10. Thus whilst thou affectest too extravagant expressions of thy Humility,
the discreet and knowing in Religion will thereby find out thy Pride. As if
thou should not be content to entertain the poor at thy table, but thou will
also wait upon them with a trencher in thy hand, bare-headed, and do all the
offices of a Servitour to them; as if thou were celebrating the old Saturnalia.
Look to thy self that there be no touch of Vainglory in it, and that thou do
not desire to be talked of. Consider also if it be not an offense against
Charity, and a scandalizing those that are without; who, if they can fancy
thee sincere, will be forcibly invited to deem thee very fanatical and
melancholic, and that all Religion is nothing else. But true Charity does
nothing unseemly.

11. When the desire of Purity also puts thee upon the chastisement of thy
body, do it so hiddenly that thou may not offend against Humility by thy
Pharisaical ostentation. Wherefore if thou do give thy mind to the
mortification of the flesh, show it not to men in thy sordid clothes, nor in
thy sour face and hard looks; but keep it to thy self as secret as thou can,
that he that sees in secret may reward thee openly.

12. Art thou warmed with the sense of Charity, which thou had rather call
Love? take heed that thou transgress not against Purity by declining into
unclean fanatic Lust, that foul ditch that many of our high-talking
Enthusiasts have tumbled into, and have been so blinded with the mire thereof,
that they have made it a principal fruit of their Illumination, to do those
acts without shame or measure that both the Light of Nature and the Gospel of
Christ has taught us to blush at. Such circumspections as these thou art to
use, if thou would stear thy course safely; and if thou will be faithful to
thine inward Guide, and deal uprightly in the holy Covenant, thou will want no
Monitor; thy way shall be made so plain before thee, that thou shall not err
nor stumble, but arrive at last to the desired scope of all thy travails and
endeavors, to a firm Peace and unfailing Righteousness, and shall be filled
with all the fullness of God.

BOOK X.
CHAP. I. 1. That the Affection and esteem we ought to have for our Religion
does not consist in damning all to the pit of Hell that are not of it. 2. The
unseasonable inculcation of this Principle to Christians. 3. That it is better
becoming the Spirit of a Christian to allow what is good and commendable in
other Religions, then so foully to reproach them. 4. What are the due
demonstrations of our Affection to the Gospel of Christ. 5. How small a part of
the World is styled Christians, and how few real Christians in that part that
is so styled. 6. That there has been some unskilful or treacherous tampering
with the powerful Engine of the Gospel, that it has done so little execution
hitherto against the Kingdom of the Devil. 7. The Author's purpose of bringing
into view the main Impediments of the due Effects thereof.
1. THE Fourth and last Derivative Property of the Mystery of Godliness, which
arises from the Usefullness thereof, and that great concernment it is of in
relation not only to this present and transitory, but that future and
everlasting Happiness of mankind, is that Appretiation and high Value it
deservedly wins or should win (...) us. Which is not to be expressed, as
usually is done, by vilifying and reproaching all other Religions, in damning
the very best and most conscientious Turks, Jews and Pagans to the pit of Hell,
and then to double lock the door upon them, or to stand there to watch with
long poles to beat them down again, if any of them should offer to emerge and
endeavor to crawl out. This Fervor is but a false zeal and of no service to
the Gospel, To make it impossible to all men to escape Hell, that are not born
under or visibly converted to Christianity, when they never had the opportunity
to hear the true sound thereof. For if Providence be represented so severe and
arbitrarious, it will rather beget a misbelief of all Religions then advance
our own, especially with all free and intelligent Spirits.

2. And what need they tell such sad stories to them that hear the Gospel
concerning them that hear it not, nor ever were in a capacity of hearing it? it
touches not them, but disturbs these that hear it, and makes Divine Providence
more unintelligible then before. Were it not sufficient for their Auditors to
understand, That they that do hear the Gospel and yet refuse it, that they are
indeed in a damnable condition, the belief thereof being the very Touchstone of
Salvation to them that it is offered to? But if they will be curious, (which is
no commendable quality,) they can only add, That none shall be saved but by
virtue of that Truth which is comprehended in the Gospel, that is, before they
come under that one Head of the Church, which is Christ Jesus; there being no
other Name under the Heavens whereby we can be saved, as the Apostle has
declared. But how the conscientious Jews, Pagans and Turks, that seemed not to
die Christians, may be gathered to this Head, it will be a becoming piece of
Modesty in us to profess our Ignorance.

3. Certainly it were far better and more becoming the Spirit of the Gospel, to
admit and commend what is laudable and praiseworthy in either Iudaisme,
Turcisme or Paganism, and with kindness and compassion to tell them wherein
they are mistaken, and wherein they fall short; then to fly in their faces and
to exprobrate to them the most consummate wickedness that humane nature is
lapsable into in matters of Religion, and thus from an immoderate depression of
all other Religions to magnify a man's own. Which is as ridiculous a Scheme of
Rhetoric, in my apprehension, as if one should compare Solomon with all the
natural fools in the world, and then vaunt how exceeding much he out-stripped
them all in Wisdom; or Helena with all the ugly deformed Females that ever
were, and so argue the excellency of her Beauty, because she so far surpassed
these misshapen wretches: which in my judgment is a very small commendation.

4. But such demonstrations of our affections as these are very sorry and
injudicious. He that professes he believes the Truth of the Gospel, and has
entered into this New Covenant, if he will give a solid testimony of his sincere
affection to it indeed, he must do it by his life and conversation. For if he
like it and believe it, he must needs follow the counsel contained in it; which
if he do closely and faithfully, he will find it of that unspeakable
excellency and important concernment, that he cannot rest quiet in reaping the
fruit thereof himself, but will be truly desirous that the same good may be
communicated, if it were possible, to all the world.

5. And truly for my own part, when I seriously consider with my self and
undeniable clearness and evidence of Truth in the Gospel of Christ above all
the Religions in the world, and the mighty and almost irresistible power and
efficacy that lies in it for the making of men holy and virtuous; I cannot but
with much fervencie of desire wish it were further spread in the World, and am
much amazed that it has made no further progress then it has. For as Brerewood
has probably collected in his Enquiries, Pagan Idolatry still possesses two
thirds of the known world, Mahometisme one fifth part, and Christianisme but a
sixth. And (what is a thing more deplorable) a very great part of the Christian
Church has been overrun with the Turk, and does lie at this very day in
miserable bondage under him. And that there may be nothing wanting to increase
wonderment, even those parts of the world that are purely Christian, as to
Title, so great share of them, whether they go under the name of Reformed or
Catholics, are tainted with so gross Hypocrisy, such open Profaneness and
professed Atheism amongst their own Crews and loose Conventicles, that it is
something hard to find a cordial Christian in the most pretending Churches of
Christendom, that does not deny his profession either in heart or practice or
in both.

6. Which sad Scene of things cannot but move any thoughtful Christian, that
does in good earnest wish well to his Religion, to sift out, if it be possible,
the true Causes of his lamentable condition of Christendom, and what are the
Impediments that hinder the Gospel (which of it self is so powerful an
Instrument as it is of Salvation) from taking effect with out selves, or from
having freer passage into other Countries that are yet Pagan. That it is our
Sins, every well-meaning man will be ready to reply. But the question still
remains, there being amongst us the most effectual Engine that the Wisdom of
God could contrive for the destroying of Sin out of the world, why there is no
more execution done thereby against the power of Sin and the Kingdom of
Darkness then there is. The enquiry therefore must be what tampering there has
been with this Engine, what adding or taking from it, to spoil its efficacy,
what mistakes of the use thereof; and the like. For that there is something
most wretchedly amiss in the use of the Gospel throughout all Christendom, is
very plain, in that the Purpose of it is almost totally frustrated every where;
and Profaneness, Infidelity and Atheism have in a manner seized the hearts of
all. Which most men are ready to confess, some with a true Christian sorrow or
hearty indignation, others with a tacit joy or exterior flearing, as being
glad their corrupt thoughts and practices have the countenance of so many
suffrages.

7. To omit therefore such Principles as are unintelligible and are for ever
sealed up out of our sight; let us look upon what is intelligible and visible.
Let us produce such Causes into view, which no man can deny but that they are
as general as these horrid diseases, and are extremely inclining, if not
absolutely effectual and necessitating the Christian world into this abominable
condition it is found in at this day, and many Ages before.

CHAP. II. 1. The most fundamental Mistake and Root of all the Corruptions in
the Church of Christ. 2. That there maybe a Superstition also in opposing of
Ceremonies, and in long Prayers and Preachments. 3. That self-chosen Religion
extinguishes true Godliness every where. 4. The unwholesome and windy food of
affected Orthodoxality; with the mischievous consequences thereof. 5. That
Hypocrisy of Professors fills the World with Atheists. 6. That the
Authoritative Obtrusion of gross falsities upon men begets a misbelief of the
whole Mystery of Piety. 7. That all the Churches of Christendom stand guilty
of this mischievous miscarriage 8. The infinite inconvenience of the
Superlapsarian doctrine.
1. WHerefore freely to profess what I think in my own conscience to be true;
The most universal and most fundamental Mistake in Christendom, and that from
whence all the Corruption of the Church began and is still continued and
increased, is that conceited estimation of Orthodox opinions and external
Ceremony, before the indispensable practice of the Precepts of Christ, and a
faithful endeavor to attain to the due degrees of the real Renovation of our
inward man into true and living Holiness and Righteousness: in stead whereof
there is generally substituted Curiosity of Opinion in points imperscrutable
and unprofitable, Obtrusion of Ceremonies, numerous, cumbersome, and not only
needless, but much unbeseeming the unsuspected modesty of the Spouse of Christ,
who should take heed of symbolizing any way with Idolatry, which is spiritual
Adultery or Fornication. For while the Heart goes a whoring after those outward
shows, and an overvalue be put upon them, the inward life of Godliness will
easily be extinguished, and Love to the indispensable Law of Christ grow cold
and dead. Nay they that have the greatest zeal and fierceness, as I may so
speak, toward Religion, there is invented such an heap and cumbersome load of
external performances, that such a Zelot as this may spend all his strength
upon the mere Outworks of Piety, before he can come near to take the Fort
Royal, or enter the Law of perfect Liberty, the Divine Life, which consists in
true Humility, perfect Purity and sincere Charity. For all such Ceremonies make
but a show in the flesh, nor can reach to the Regeneration of our Minds into
the unfeigned Love of our brethren. Whence the most seemingly religious this
way may be the most accursedly cruel and unjust, the most implacable and
uncharitable that can be. And yet according to that false model of Religion
that humane invention has set out to the world, he may both take himself, and
others also may take him to be Seraphically pious; though in the judgment of
Christ and of his true Church he lie in the gall of Bitterness and bond of
Iniquity.

2. And in other parts of Christendom where the pomp of Ceremonies and
exterior Superstition is not so much urged, though a man at first sight might
hope that things would be much better, yet experience will teach him that there
is little amendment, and that the Causes of Degeneracy, of gross Hypocrisy and
Wickedness, are even as operative and as well appointed to work their effect
there as in other places. For this also is Superstition, to place our Religion
in opposing external Ceremonies, and to think every man the more pious by how
much the more zealous he is against them. Wherefore our affections being drawn
out in this hot Antipathy, our hearts grow cold to the indispensable duties of
the Gospel; which are Love, Patience, Meekness and brotherly-Kindness, with the
rest of those fruits that demonstrate that the Tree of life, that the Life of
Christ is planted in us, and that the Spirit of God abides in us. Besides that
we are to remember that we may idolize long Prayers and frequent Preachments,
and that they may make up an external Religion to us in stead of that Godliness
that is indispensable and internal, and an ever-flowing fountain of all comely
and profitable Actions and deportments toward God and toward men.

3. I say therefore that this Self-chosen Religion in all the parts of
Christendom (though it be but such as a wicked man may perform as dexterously
and plausibly as the most truly righteous and regenerate) being so highly
extolled and recommended to the people, is almost an irresistible temptation to
make them really and morally wicked. For that natural inclination and appetite
in mankind to Religion being satisfied or eluded by this unwholesome food, they
can have no desire to that which is true Religion indeed; and will be very glad
to be excused from it, it being more hard at first to embrace or practice,
whence it is in a manner necessary for them to let it alone.

4. And they will the more easily abstain from it, there being another
poisonous V^and that swells them so that they are ready to burst again, which
is that highly-esteemed Knowledge called Orthodoxness or Rightness of Opinion.
1 Cor. 8.1.
Of which the Apostle, Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth. This seems
so glorious in their eyes, that they phansy themselves Angels of light, and fit
to enter into the presence of God, if they be but neatly and elegantly trimmed
up in these fine ornaments of Orthodoxality. ^esotted fools! blind and carnal!
that think to recommend themselves to the Majesty of Heaven by being arrayed in
these motly coats, this stripped stuff of their own spinning. While they thus
affect the favor o^ God by opinionative Knowledge, how do they betray their
gross Ignorance! For how can that which is more pleasing to the natural man,
nay, I may say, to the Devil himself, then to a regenerate Soul, how can that
render any one acceptable to God? And yet in all the Divisions of the Churches
they lay the greatest stress upon this, bear the greatest zeal toward it,
recommend it the most vehemently to the people, who following the example of
their Pastors, if they be but busy and hot in these rending points, they
think themselves fully possessed of the life of Christ, and that they are very
choicely religious, though in the mean time Charity to their neighbor be cold,
and they have attained to no measure of true Righteousness and Holiness. Herein
chiefly lies the mystery of Hypocrisy in all the Churches of Christendom,
counting all pious that are but zealous for the ways and opinions of their
Sect; and those that are not for it, be they never so unblameable and cordial
Christians, they are either hated as Heretics, or at best pitied for poor
Moralists, mere Natural Men.

5. These are the most general and very potent Impediments for the hindering the
Gospel of taking that effect which it would otherwise have in the Christian
World, and for making most of the professors of Christianity Hypocrites, that
is, such as make a great show of Godliness, but deny the power thereof, which
should mainly appear in our duty to our Neighbor and in a sober and just
conversation, doing all things as in the sight of God. Now this Hypocrisy in
Professors begets Profaneness, Atheism, and Unbelief in such persons as
naturally have not so strong propension to matters of Religion, that is to say,
that have not so superstitious a Complexion as to be tied to Religion upon any
terms in any dress and from any kind of Recommenders of it. For their natural
Nasuteness suggests, that if there be any Religion at all, most certainly it is
not to be divided from sound Morality, to which truly both the Prophets,
Apostles, and Precepts of Christ do plentifully witness. But they observing
that they that make the greatest noise about Religion, and are the most zealous
therein, do neglect the Laws of Honesty and common Humanity, that they can
easily invade other men's rights, that they can juggle, dissemble and lie for
advantage, that they are proud and conceited and love the applause of the
People, that they are envious, fierce and implacable, that they are unclean and
sensual, that they are merciless and cruel, and care not to have Kingdoms to
flow in blood for the maintaining of their Tyranny over the consciences of poor
deluded Souls; (when yet the contest is nothing but about hay and stubble, the
combustible superstructures of Humane Invention: of which every vainglorious
Superstitionist, that would make a show in the flesh, has cast on his handful,
if not his arm-full, for the hiding and smothering of the indispensable Truths
of the Gospel, and to put men into perplexities and labors for that which is
not bread, to rack their heads with Nonsense, Contradictions and
Impossibilities, to weary out their bodies with the thankless toil of endless
and needless Ceremonies, and to carry out their heart to toys and trifles, and
so make them neglect the holy and weighty commands of our Savior, which are
intelligible to all men, and in some measure approved by all; such as are, To
deal as we would be dealt with, To love our neighbors as our selves, and the
like) I say, those that are not of so religious a Complexion naturally, but
have wit and sagacity enough to smell out the Corruptions and discern the
Incoherences of the Actions of Professors, making observation of these things,
are by this Scandal exceedingly tempted (and very hardly escape the being quite
overcome by so perverse a Scene of pretended Piety) to think that the whole
Business of Religion is nothing but Humor and Madness, or, at the best, but a
Plot to enrich the Priest and keep the People in awe.

6. This is one great Scandal and effectual counterplot against the power of
the Gospel, the Vilifying and despising of Moral honesty by those that are
great Zelots and high Pretenders to Religion. This does advance Atheism and
Profaneness very much. But there is another Miscarriage which I have hinted at
already as Epidemical and Universal, and at least as effectual to this evil
purpose as the former. There is scarce any Church in Christendom at this day
that does not obtrude not only Falsehoods, but such Falsehoods that will appear
to any free spirit pure Contradictions and Impossibilities, and that with the
same Gravity, Authority and Importunity that they do the holy Oracles of God.
Now the consequence of this must needs be fad. For what knowing and
conscientious man but will be driven off, if he cannot profess the truth
without open asserting of a gross lie? If he sees good wine poured out of one
bottle, but rank poison out of another into the same cup, who can persuade him
to drink thereof? This is a heavy sight to the truly-Religious, but the joy and
triumph of the Profane, who willingly take this advantage against the whole
Mystery of Piety, as if there were no truth at all in it, because that so gross
Falsehoods are urged upon them with the same Indispensableness, with the same
Solemness and Devoutness, as those things that (were it not for the serious
Impudence of the Priest in other open falsities) might pass with them for true.
But they being not at leisure to perpend things to the bottom, but it may be
not altogether indisposed to believe a faithful report from an honest man,
they finding the Relater foully tripping in some things that he so earnestly
urges, discredit the whole Narration, and so become perfect Atheists and
Unbelievers; though, for their own security, they juggle with the Juglers, that
is, comply and do outward reverence and devotion, though they cannot but laugh
in their sleeves at either the Ignorance or cunning Deceitfulness of their
Ghostly Leaders.

7. And that I may not seem to slander the state of Christendom, I mean of the
whole visible Church in what Nation soever under Heaven; if we may believe
Historians, there is none, neither Greek nor Roman, neither Lutheran nor
Calvinist, but will be found guilty of this fault. I shall particularize in
some one thing in all. The Greek as well as the Roman hold Transsubstantiation,
the Lutheran Consubstantiation; things that have no ground in Scripture, and
are a palpable contradiction to Reason. And yet not more contradictious then
Absolute Reprobation according as our rigid Reprobationers have defined it:
namely, That God has irresistibly decreed from all Eternity to bring into Being
innumerable Myriads of Souls of men exceeding far the number of them that shall
be saved; who as without their own consent they were thus thrust into the
World, so let them do what they will, are certainly determined to unspeakable
torment so soon as they go out of it, and at the last day shall be adjudged to
an higher degree of misery, so great and so exceeding, that all the racks and
tortures that the Wit or Cruelty of the most enraged Tyrants could ever invent
or execute, would be ease and pleasure in Comparison of it, and that these
Pangs and Torments shall remain fresh upon them for ever and ever.

8. This is the Representation of that sour Dogma. Which to Reason is as
contradictious as if one should name a square Circle or black Light; and as
harsh and horrid to the ears of the truly-Regenerate into the nature of God,
who is Love it self, as the highest blasphemy that can be uttered. Nor is the
nature of those that are irreligious enough so much estranged from the
Knowledge of God, but that they think, if there be any at all, he cannot be
such a one that laid such dark plots from all eternity for the everlasting
misery of his poor impotent and unresisting Creature, that never did any thing
but what the Divine Decrees determined he should do, and therefore was always
the Almighties obedient servant: For which at last he must be condemned to
eternal punishment by him whom he did ever obey. The serious and imperious
obtrusion of such a dismal Conceit as this for one of the greatest Arcanums of
Religion, will make the free Spirit and over-inclinable to Profaneness
confidently to conclude, That the whole frame of Religion is nothing but a mere
Scar-crow to affright Fools, and that there is no Hell at all, since such
Innocent Persons and constant Obeyers of the Divine Decrees must be the
Inhabiters ot it.

CHAP. III. 1. The true Measure of Opinions to be taken from the design of the
Gospel, which in general is, The setting out the exceeding great Mercy and
Goodness of God toward mankind. 2. And then Secondly, The Triumph of the
Divine Life in the Person of Christ, in the warrantableness of doing Divine
Honor to him. 3. Thirdly, The advancement of the Divine Life in his members
upon Earth. 4. The Fourth and last Rule to try Opinions by, The
Recommendableness of our Religion to Strangers or those those that are without.
1. I Might add several other Opinions in several parts of Christendom, that
tend very much to the defeating and eluding the serious End and purpose of
Religion: but before I go any further, I shall set down the main designs of
the Gospel of Christ, that we may have a more plain and sure Rule and Measure
to try all Opinions by. The design therefore of the Gospel in general is the
magnifying of the Goodness and Loving Kindness of God, that he has afforded
mankind so glorious a light to walk by, so effectual means to redeem them from
the love of the perishing vanities of this present world, and to recall them
back again to himself and to the participation of the ineffable joys and
pleasures of his celestial Kingdom. For God so loved the World, that he gave
his only-begotten Son, John 3.16, 17*
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that the
World through him should be saved. And Titus 3. For we our selves also were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. But after that the
Kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, Not by works of
Righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the
washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. To which sense also the Apostle
speaks, Ephesians. chap. 2. And you who were dead in trespasses and sins, Wherein
in times past ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the
Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience; Among whom also we all had our conversation in times past, in the
lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of our fleshly mind, and were by
nature the children of wrath even as others. But God who is rich in mercy, for
his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has
quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved) and has raised us
up together, and made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus; That
in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace, in his
kindness toward us, through Jesus Christ. To which lastly you may add Tit.
2.11. For the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men;
Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, etc. These Scriptures
give plain testimony of this more general design of the Gospel.

2. The next design is an external exaltation of the Divine Life that did so
mightily and conspicuously appear in the Person of our Savior Christ; as I
have already abundantly declared, How the mystery of Christianity comprehends
in it chiefly this design of exalting into Triumph the Divine Life above the
Animal and Natural: and that either externally, in the religious worship we do
our Savior, and is done even by Hypocrites and wicked Persons; or else
internally, in the advancing of true Faith and Holiness in his living members
and sincere followers of his doctrine. Philip. 2. Let the same mind be in you
which was in Christ Jesus, Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery
to be equal with God; But emptied himself and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in likeness of men; And being found in fashion as a man,
he humbled himself and became obedient to the death, even the death of the
Cross. Wherefore has God also exalted him, and given him a name above every
name; That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven and
things in Earth and things under the Earth, and that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. And Hebr. 1.
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; the Scepter of righteousness is the
Scepter of thy Kingdom. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity;
therefore God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows, that is to say, has exalted thee to this due honor and rule,
having put all things under his feet, Angels themselves not excepted, as S.
Peter tells us, 1 Epist. 3.22. Who is g^ne into Heaven, and is on the right
hand of God, Angels and Authorities and Powers being made subject unto him.
There is a further enumeration of the Angelical classes, Colos. 1. where the
Apostle speaking of this high exaltation of the Person of Christ, he intimates
not only the Subjection of the Orders of Angels to him, but their
Reconciliation to God by him, and, as some would have it, a fuller Confirmation
of them in his favor, verse. 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the
Firstborn of every Creature. For by him were all things created that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones,
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: all things were created by him and
for him; and he is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is
the Head of the body the Church. He is the Beginning, the Firstborn from the
dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence. For it pleased the
Father that in him should all fullness dwell: And making peace through the blood
of his Cross, to reconcile all things by him unto himself, whether they be
things in Earth or things in Heaven. So mighty and wonderful was the result of
the Humiliation of our Savior; and so clear and warrantable an Object is he of
Divine Adoration.

3. Thus is the Divine Life Triumphant in the Person of Christ the Head of his
Church. But another main design of the Gospel is, That the Divine Life may be
advanced in us, that is, that Faith in God through Christ, that Humility, Love
and Purity may have their due growth in us here; that thereby we may be fitted
to receive that immortal Crown of Glory which he will bestow upon all true
believers at the last day, when he shall carry his whole Church with songs of
Joy and Triumph into his celestial Kingdom. That this is the main purpose of
the Gospel I have already sufficiently proved, and therefore need add nothing
in this place.

4. The fourth and last Rule or Measure of Opinions is, The Recommendableness
of our Religion to those which are without; that is to say, We must have a
special care of affixing thereto any of our own Inventions or Interpretations
of Scripture for Christian Truths, which may seem uncouth and irrational to
strangers and such as are as yet disengaged. For though those that by reason of
their education have had full acquaintance with Christianity will adhere to
their Religion, though it may be corrupted with many false glosses and fond
opinions of men as indispensably obtruded as the undoubted Scripture it self:
yet strangers that are free and unaccustomed to them, will not fail to boggle
at them; and being offered to them also with equal Authority with the very Word
of God, they will be necessitated to fly back, and to relinquish the Holy Truth
by reason of the indissoluble intertexture of the gross falsehoods they find
interwoven with it. A thing that is seriously to be considered by all those
that bear any love to the Gospel, and desire that it may be propagated and
promoted in the World. For certainly it was intended for a more general good
and larger diffusion then has been hitherto by reason of its having fallen into
faithless and treacherous hands, who make it only an instrument of gaining
wealth and power to themselves and of riding the people, and not of gaining
souls to God.

CHAP. IV. 1. The general use of the foregoing Rules. 2. A special use of them
in favor of one another persons in matters of opinion. 3. The examination of
Election and Reprobation according to these Rules. And how well they agree with
that Branch of the Divine Life which we call Humility. 4. The disagreement of
absolute Reprobation with the first Rule; 5. As also with the third, 6 And with
the second and fourth.
1. THese are the four main Rules which I conceive very useful to examine
either other men's Opinions or our own. And if the heat of our spirits or the
confidence of others would urge upon us pretended Truths (for to admit of open
falsities or forgeries for what advantage soever is intolerable,) that are not
subservient to these designs above named, we may well look upon them as idle
curiosities; and if they pretend also to Revelation or Inspiration, that it is
nothing but Madness and fanatic Delusion. But if they do not only not promote
but countermine those designs above mentioned, they are to be looked upon then
not as frivolous, but dangerous and impious, and so to be declined by all means
possible. And lastly, though they appear such as may contribute something to
those designs if followed and embraced, yet I must add also this caution, that
they are not to be forced so as that unless a man will profess them, he must be
accounted no good Christian. For they coming from a fallible and doubtful
hand, they ought not in reason to infringe that undoubted right of Christian
liberty; the Scripture alone being full enough to perfect a Christian both in
life and doctrine.

2. There is also a further use to be made of these Rules in favor of one
another persons though of different Opinions, that is, by taking notice what
good they drive at, as well as what evil they tend to: which makes much for
peace and brotherly kindness, and may blunt the edge of eager and bitter zeal,
that makes the over-fervid Zelot think that he that is of a contrary opinion to
him intends nothing but mischief by his opposite doctrine. In examining
therefore every Opinion, we are to observe what design of the Gospel it agrees
with, as well as what it crosses. And that the Use of our Rules may the better
appear, I shall now show the practice of them by trying some few Opinions of no
small note by this Touchstone: For it were an endless business to examine all,
and needless, because by these examples he that lists may examine the rest,
indeed any that either has been or ever will offer it self to the World in
matters of Religion.

3. The first that occurrs is such an Election and Reprobation that wholly
excludes Free will. The Controversy is so well known that I need not state it.
Applying this doctrine to the four Rules I have set down, I find in the Third
that it has some compliance with that choice branch of the Divine Life, namely
Humility, and a submission of a man's self and all the World to the will of God.
1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what he pleases. And that therefore a serious and
humble Soul being much taken up and transported with this consideration, may
think of nothing else, but take this Doctrine to be very Truth, nay live and
die in it, and go to heaven when he has done. Whence it were a piece of
Satanical Fury to persecute any such Opinionist; and want of Charity, these
living as well as other Christians, not to bear as good affection to them as to
others; nay to advance our affection with the superaddition of pity, they
living in something a more dark mansion then others; which will plainly appear
if we apply their Opinion to the rest of the Rules and the Particulars of
them, which we have set down.

4. For if we make application to the First, that tells us that the design of
the Gospel is the Manifestation of the exceeding superabundant Loving Kindness
of God to the World, 2 Pet. 3.9.
who would not any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, as S.
Peter speaks. This sad Opinion of the Predestinatours does confront this design
at the very first sight, making the Goodness of God such an half-faced thing,
nay I may say of a more thin and sparing aspect then the sharpest new Moon, nay
an infinitely less proportion, if their doleful stories be true. For to speak
summarily of the business; Some very exceeding small number shall necessarily,
by the free grace of God, be eternally saved, but the rest necessarily damned
to ineffable, eternal and unsupportable torture. This is that glorious
redundant Grace of the Gospel according to them. Which free Spirits will think
the worst news and most mischievous that ever was communicated to the World.
The worst, because so extreme few shall be saved. The most mischievous, because
it will hazard all men to be damned according to the ordinary course of
Reason. For, whenas things are determined already, who need stir a foot unless
to please himself and reap the present joies of this life?

5. For it is very irrational for us to be sollicitous and trouble our selves
to bring that to pass which will every jot as soon come to pass without our
trouble. So that unless a man be, beyond all conceit, foolish and sottish, and
cannot reason concerning things, he will be necessitated almost, I am sure,
very strongly invited, to be as loose and wicked as his own heart or the
temptations of the World can suggest to him. Whence it is plain that this
doctrine in it self, though it may impose upon some by the show of Humility, is
a Supplanter and Destroier of the whole Divine Life Root and Branch, that is,
It weakens men's Faith also in the Gospel, if this be peremptorily obtruded upon
them to be all the Design of it; it slakes all endeavor of good practice,
takes them off from the aspiring to that blessed Regeneration and Renovation of
their minds into Purity, Love, and Humility it self, which they most pretend
to. And therefore most generally, though they seem to crouch to God, yet are
they very prone to be too-too rigid, sour, and even cruel to men, full of
Pride, Dissension and Confusion. So that the Unworthiness of this Opinion is
discernible also by the Third Rule.

6. And does entrench something also upon the Second. For whereas, according to
their own concession, the value of the blood of the Son of God was such that it
might have been a Ransom for ten thousand Worlds; what a check would this be
to a man's more affectionate Veneration of him upon the Cross, when he thinks he
has restrained the purpose of his suffering to so exceeding few? Nothing but
Self-Love and Self-Flattery can well bear up a man's devotion. What an adorable
thing have they made the tender Compassion of God in Jesus Christ, whenas he is
represented to us, according to their explication of the Mystery, at the same
time to have found out a full satisfaction to his Justice for the sins of the
whole World, and yet at that very moment to have decreed in a manner all the
World to eternal damnation; and this forsooth to make manifest his Justice,
which is sufficiently manifested by the death of his Son? Is not that freer
grace that is intended for all, and they put in a capacity of receiving it, if
they be not wanting to themselves, then that which is only necessitated on some
very few, and for want of which the rest must necessarily perish? Wherefore
upon these terms a man cannot conciliate that venerable affection which is due
to our Savior, nor indeed beget a belief of the Narration in more nasute and
sagacious men. Which is an entrenchment against the Fourth Rule also, which
should awe us from peremptorily affixing any thing to our Religion that will
make it less recommendable to them that are without, as certainly this Opinion
does to all indifferent men. Which makes me amazed at the sedulous obtrusion of
it by some men, whom I can charitably conclude to be, as well as hey are
accounted, in their way religious and godly. For it is a piece of unsufferable
Pride and Conceitedness to think themselves infallible in a point where free
men, at least as pious and religious, if not more, have seriously and
industriously concluded the contrary; especially when such gross inconveniences
are discernible therein.

CHAP. V. 1. That Election and Reprobation conferrs something to Humility. 2.
That some men are saved irresistibly by virtue of Discriminative Grace. 3. That
the rest of Mankind have Grace sufficient, and that several of them are saved.
4. The excellent use of this middle way betwixt Calvinisme and Arminianisme. 5,
6. The exceeding great danger and mischief of the former Extremes.
1. THere is nothing makes this Opinion pardonable, but that show, as I said,
that it bears of Humility; and happily it is in some regard really serviceable
thereto. And I should take it to be very instrumental to take away all Pride
and Arrogance, or attributing any thing to our selves, or contemning our
neighbors, if the Professors of it were generally of so meek, so humble and
so lowly a Spirit; whenas they are too often over-harsh, fierce, and
contemptuous of others. But this may not be the fault of the Opinion, but of
the Opinionist, though that sad severity of God tied up in this same pretended
Mystery is no enforcing example of Kindness and Humanity.

2. But to the end that choice and lovely virtue of Christian Humility may want
no motives nor encouragement, and that that pleasure that some Souls may justly
take in the free acknowledgment of God's irresistible Grace and over-powering
Operations upon their Spirits may not be suffocated nor extinguished; we shall
make such an accommodation betwixt both parties, that unless Envy and Repining
at the Goodness of God toward mankind make them still dissatisfied, I question
not but that they will rest contented. I profess therefore and do verily think,
That there is such a thing as Discriminative Grace, as they call it, in the
World, and that to such a difference for good, that some few of Mankind by
virtue thereof will be irresistibly saved, but that the rest of the world are
Probationers, that is, have free will and are in a capacity of being saved,
some greater, some less; and that whosoever is damned, Eccles. 15.12.
it is long of himself. For (as Siracides says) God has no need of the wicked
man.

3. And that this may not seem to be a mere Subterfuge, like that of some
others, I further add, touching all this rest of Mankind which I speak of, That
there is Grace sufficient offered to them some way or other, some time or
other, and that several of them, according to their faithfulness to that light
and power which God has given them, shall be actually saved. At which sentence
neither the Arminian ought to repine nor the Calvinist. For whatever good
Arminianism pretends concerning all mankind, is exhibited to this part not
absolutely elected, and to the other part the Goodness of God is greater then
is allotted by Arminius. And whatever good there is pretended in Calvinism to
that part that is absolutely elected, the same Goodness is here exhibited, and
besides that direful vizard pulled off that Ignorance and Melancholy had put
upon Divine Providence and on the lovely Face of the Gospel.

4. I may add to this, That he that finds himself in an extraordinary
powerful manner carried to that which is good, may as fully ascribe it to
God's free grace, as in the Calvinistical Hypothesis; and he that has no mind
to Goodness cannot lay the fault on God but himself. Nor can Satan tempt by
that forcible stratagem to either despair or dissoluteness, suggesting that if
a man shall be saved, he shall be saved, or if damned, he shall be damned, and
that he can neither help on the one nor hinder the other. For unless a man be
very deeply radicated in Faith and sincere Obedience, I should hold it a piece
of fond Self-Flattery to take himself for one of the Elect, whenas he may hold
of a more seasonable Tenure, and act accordingly as a Probationer: and when he
has got to that irrelapsable condition of those whose Souls are after a manner
perfected in Faith and Holiness, it will better become him then to entitle God
alone to all those Transactions wrought in him, and to take up that saying of
Jacob, Genesis 28.19.
Verily God was in this place, and I knew it not, and name the place he slept
in Bethel, The Temple of God: For such is the body of every Regenerate
Christian, and especially of the Elect.

5. This Concession of ours thus far, as it is most true, and certainly not
unserviceable for the promoting that thankful and humble frame of Spirit that
would attribute all to the Irresistibleness of free Grace and to the force of
their particular and irrevocable Predestination and Election; so is it also a
mighty safeguard from those dangerous miscarriages that too often happen the
other way. Wherein there being no mean, but one must be either Elect or
Reprobate, how prone is it out of Self-love to take up a stout and peremptory
conceit that a man is the Child of God destinated thereto before the
foundation of the World, and that he can no more miss to be saved then he did
to be born? But as for others, poor Offalls and Outcasts of the Creation, that
they can never find out the way to Heaven and Salvation, do what they can, let
them importune God and vex and weary Nature never so much; but are like
Sampson, with his eyes put out, brought upon the stage of this World only to
make the Philistims merry, or at best to be mere foils and blacks to set off
the beauty and luster of the secure Saints: who being unavoidably caught as it
were in a nooze or fast snare of Salvation laid for them from all eternity, so
soon as they once phansy themselves taken by the leg, do so bounce and dance in
the string with that enormity and violence, as if they tried by their wild tugs
and jerks, whether the force of their Corruption or the Decretall thread be the
stronger.

6. Nay do grow up to such a pitch of Fool-hardiness, as to think themselves
not possibly able to run themselves out of breath by the most wild and
dissolute courses imaginable, nor remove themselves one hairs breadth out of
God's favor for all this. In fine, do proceed so far as to acknowledge no Law
but their own Lust and the fulfilling their own masterless will, and
consequently do conclude that they cannot sin. Thus imitating a false Pattern,
and making themselves compendious Puppets or Pocket-medals of that great Idol
of theirs (for it is no God) that wills, as they say, merely because he wills.
And so they dance and sport about the imagination of their own heart, as the
children of Israel, in the Lawgivers absence did about the molten Calf. Thus
has this dark Conceit, which some rash spirits have endeavored to make
essential to Christianity, led many one into secure Libertinism first, and
after into most desperate Atheism.

CHAP. VI. 1. The Scholastic Opinions concerning the Divinity of Christ
applied to the foregoing Rules. 2. As also concerning the Trinity. 3. The
Application of the Antitrinitarian Doctrine to the said Rules. Its disagreement
with the third, 4. As also with the second. 5. The Antitrinitarians plea. 6. An
answer to their plea. 7. How grossly the denying the Divinity of Christ
disagrees with the third Rule.
1. THE next Opinions that occur are those concerning the Divinity of Christ
and the holy Trinity. And first, those of the Schools, of which I shall only
say in general, That though their industry and sincerity of their design may be
commendable, which was to unite the Humanity of Christ of Hypostatically to the
Divinity, that there should be no suspicion of Idolatry in doing the highest
divine Honor to Him we call the Son of God, and that therefore what they drive
at is very agreeable to the second Rule we have set down; yet for my own part I
think they have made so little proficiency to the main End, that that one plain
expression in Athanasius, As the Body and Soul is one man, so God and Man is
one Christ, is better then all their curious definitions of things, which reach
to no greater Hypostatical union then that of the Body and Soul; whenas I dare
say, if it were searched to the bottom, the Union betwixt the Divinity and
Humanity in Christ is more one and more exact then that of Soul and Body, which
they call Hypostatical. But they have defined things so unskilfully and
perplexedly, that though their design be agreeable to our second Rule, yet
their performance does clash much with the third and fourth: Such
contradictions or unintelligible spinofities weakening Faith, and hindering the
passage of the Gospel to them that are without.

2. Which may be rightly said also concerning their subtle and inconsistent
disquisitions and conclusions touching the Trinity. Wherein though their design
be in the same respect commendable as before, yet they have made the mystery so
intricate and contradictious, that they weaken the Christian Faith to those
that are within, and make it less passable and recommendable to strangers; and
have given occasion thereby to some bold Spirits, it being so disadvantageously
represented to them, to deny the whole Mystery, whereby they have purchased to
themselves the Title of Antitrinitarians.

3. Whose Opinion I look upon as fundamentally repugnant to Christianity it
self, if the New Testament be the foundation of Christianity. For I know
nothing more express then that in those Writings. And therefore the denying of
the Trinity is the denying of the Authority of the New Testament. Or if they
will pretend they can interpret things there so as to evade this doctrine, by
the same reason I think they may evade any, and so still the sacred Writ shall
stand for a cipher, and signify nothing; which tends mainly to the enervating
of our Faith, and is a gross entrenchment upon the third Rule.

4. And truly I think it may be made to appear that it is also particularly
against the second. For the Divinity of Christ does not fall in so handsomely
and kindly without the supposition of a Trinity, Book 1. c. 4, 5.
as I have elsewhere intimated; and therefore I look upon it as a special piece
of Providence, that so explicit a knowledge of the Godhead in the Triunity
thereof was so generally made known to the world together with Christianity,
that the Eternal Son of God might be worshipped through Christ, and the whole
Deity, as I may so say, distinctly honored and adored.

5. But they will reply, that though they deny the Trinity and Divinity of
Christ, namely that the Eternal Word was made Flesh, yet they assert that
Divine Honor is due unto him, and therefore do not transgress against the
second Rule. For they acknowledge that though Christ be but man, yet God has
given him all power in Heaven and in Earth, and that he shall return visibly to
judge the quick and the dead, and that as the Father has life in himself, John
5.26.
so has he given him to have life in himself, that is, the power of enlivening
us and quickening us at the last, and of changing these vile bodies of ours
into the similitude of his glorious body. And therefore that their Opinion
serves the End of Christianity as well as the other in reference to Divine
Worship due to Christ, and is more suitable to the fourth Rule; these
perplexities of Christ's Divinity and the Triunity of the Godhead making our
Religion less passable and recommendable to those that are without.

6. But to this I answer, First, as before, That to take away the Trinity and
Divinity of Christ is to take away the Authority of the New Testament, or to
take such a liberty of forcing and distorting the sense of things, as will make
it contemptible and useless; then which what can be of more dangerous
consequence? It will be a Trespass not only against one, but against all the
Rules I have set down, and make the Gospel pass very ill not only with
strangers, but our selves too, and turn Christendom back to Infidelity and
Paganism.

But Secondly, I deny that the Scripture declares any thing concerning the
Divinity of Christ, or the holy Trinity, that is impossible, contradictious, or
more unintelligible then things that men do ordinarily assent to, that are free
Philosophers, and admit nothing upon force or Superstition, but upon Reason;
and That the Union of the Eternal Word with the humane Nature of Christ is as
conceivable for the Modus as the Union of the Soul and Body: That the
Intricacies of the Schools are fooleries, and not to be taken into our
Religion: That the Scripture only sets forth a Triunity in the Godhead in
general, not obscured by any term that can entangle any one of a tolerable wit
and understanding, unless he will be so blockish as to think, because the
second Hypostasis in this Trinity is called Son, that the Father was married
and had a wife, as the Turks fondly object; whenas nothing else is signified
but that the Son is from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from both.

Thirdly, That the first Author and Beginner, or at least the most eminent
Renewer of this Sect that so boldly and stoutly denies the Trinity, was one,
though of a leguleious Wit, yet so inept and averse from Divine matters, that
he flatly denies that the Existence of God is discoverable by the light of
Nature and Reason. And after he has found him by help of Scripture, as he
thinks, yet he has missed him. For that which is not Infinite in Essence,
cannot be God. And therefore it is no wonder if he hangs off so heavily from
the admission of that more distinct and full knowledge of him manifested in the
holy Oracles, and that those that symbolize so much with his Genius in other
things follow him also in this.

Fourthly, The noblest Spirits and best Philosophers that ever appeared in the
world for the Knowledge of Nature and of God, and that some Ages before Christ,
of their own choice without force or obtrusion held the Triunity of the
Godhead; which though I will not avouch to be perfectly right in all things,
(they being even over-accurate in the describing of it, and therefore well may
trip) yet for the main is such that there is reason for it, but none at all
against it, and it is very suitable in the general to those general intimations
in the Scripture. Nor do I believe any Christian bound to hold the Theory in
the set forms of humane Invention, though he may peruse them and believe as
much as he thinks good, and do think it a decent thing, that his Reason cannot
perfectly reach nor exhaust so profound a Mystery, and that therefore he is to
make up the rest in humble Adoration.

Fifthly and lastly, By denying the Triunity of the Godhead and Divinity of
Christ, other Articles of our Faith are made incredible, and that Divine
Adoration we give to Christ suspected of Idolatry. For it will not seem
credible to strangers, especially that abhor such superstitions, that God ever
exalted any mere man to such a pitch as the Socinians themselves acknowledge
Christ is exalted; but that it is some cunning plot to lapse the World or
retain it in Idolatrous Worship. It will also seem to them incredible, if
Christ be mere man, that he should John 5.26.
by a power in himself, as he professes, be able to perform his promise at the
last day, that is, to raise us all to a glorious and immortal life, changing
these bodies of flesh into a pure celestial substance; which is an act for none
but the Deity to do. And therefore if it be done by any thing in himself, it
is by the Deity residing in him, by the Eternal Word by whom all things were
created: Who was said to be the Son of God before the Incarnation; and after
the Incarnation both he that was born in time and this Eternal Word is looked
upon as one Son of God by real and Physical union. From whence that is easily
understood which we alluded to before, As the Father has life in himself, so
has he given to the Son to have life in himself. But our Adversaries way is
very unconceivable and unintelligible, and therefore does plainly transgress
against the Rule he pretends it most agrees with, the making Christian Religion
recommendable to them that are without.

7. As also he does herein against the third Rule in no small measure. For by
spoiling Christ of his Divinity and of being acknowledged in very truth the Son
of God, all those condescensions of his which he stooped to for our good, the
esteem of them is much slackned and relaxed, and will not stick the mark so
strongly as upon this ancient and universal Hypothesis of the Church of Christ,
who did acknowledge that he was really the Son of God; which must needs enhance
the esteem of his Sufferings exceedingly, and therefore more effectually melt
our affections into the greater remorse for Sin, and stouter resolutions to
mortify and kill all inordinate motions and desires, all perverse and corrupt
suggestions of our Natures, be it never so harsh to us, and bring them under
the scepter of the crucified Jesus. Which this Sect so little considers, that
they very hardly are drawn to acknowledge Christ's death a Sacrifice for sin;
and so by their dry, harsh and rash reasonings expunge one of the chiefest
Powers and choicest Artifices of the Gospel for the making men good.

CHAP. VII. 1. Imputative Righteousness, Invincible Infirmity and
Solifidianism, in what sense they seem to complie with the second and last
Rule, and how disagreeing with the third. 2. The groundlesness of men's Zeal for
Imputative Righteousness, 3. And for Solifidianisme. 4. The conspiracy of
Imputative Righteousness, Solifidianism and Invincible Infirmity to exclude all
Holiness out of the Conversation of Christians. 5. That large confessions of
Sins and Infirmities without any purpose of amending our lives is a mere
mocking of God to his very face. With the great danger of that Affront.
1. THE last Examples of applying and examining of Opinions according to the
Rules we have set down shall be in Imputative Righteousness, in Perfection and
Infirmity, in Justification by Faith alone, and in the Reign of Christ upon
Earth. And as for Imputative Righteousness, Infirmity and the Opinion of the
Solifidians, I must confess, they seem to pretend much to the exaltation of the
Person of Christ, and to make men sensible of their great need of him; and
seeming to promise ease and security to careless sinners, may also make the
Gospel more passable to those that are without, that have a mind to enjoy this
world as well as that which is to come, and is as plausible to such kind of
people as Roman Indulgences and Pardons, Absolution upon slight Penances, and
the like. To which kind of errors and miscarriages I cannot but impute a
great part of the degeneracy of Christendom at this day. Nor can I imagine how
the more perfectly Reformed Churches could have failed of proving generally
excellent Christians indeed, if these Opinions of Imaginary Righteousness,
Empty Faith, and the Invinciblenesse of Sin, had not stepped into the room of
those Follies and Errors they had fled from. Whence it is apparent how highly
they transgress against the third Rule, and consequently how cautious men
should be of either receiving them or communicating them to others.

2. For as for Imputative Righteousness it is very suspicious, seeing the
Scripture is silent therein, that it is the suggestion of Hypocrisy and Deceit
to undermine that due measure of Sanctification whereunto we are called. For
otherwise this invention is utterly needless, the Sacrifice of Christ's Passion
being sufficient to expiate whatever sins we fall into from any pardonable
Principle. Which Sacrifice were utterly needless, if the perfect Righteousness
of Christ were so imputed to us as that we might reckon it our own. For then
were we as righteous as Christ, for he has no greater Righteousness then his
own whereby he is righteous. And this Righteousness consisting as well of
abstaining from sins as doing acts of Righteousness, it is plain that all this
is imputed to us, and that therefore hereby we are to be accounted of God as
never to have sinned, and therefore there wanted no Expiation for sin; and so
Christ died in vain. For the imputation of his Righteousness will serve for
all. Wherefore an opinion so absurd one cannot imagine why any should be so
well pleased with, unless they intended it a shelter for sin, and to excuse
themselves from real Holiness and Righteousness.

3. Neither do I know to what end but this men should so zealously press the
Opinion of being saved by Faith alone, in such a perverse sense as some do, not
meaning thereby a living Faith working by Love, but we must be justified by
Faith prescinding from Charity, Obedience, and whatever is accounted Holy and
Just. But it is plain, that unless a man will say he is justified by a dead
Faith, which is no more true Faith then a dead corpse is a man, that real
Sanctity will as surely accompany Faith as Light does the Sun; and that the
controversy is as ridiculously raised of Faith, whether it alone justify, as
if one should move a question whether the Sun alone makes it day. For if they
mean the Sun without the rays, it is evidently false; but if they mean the Sun
alone without the Moon or Stars, it is as evidently true. But by prescinding
life from Faith, and contending that it justifies, is as incongruous as to
assert that the Sun without Light makes day, and as mischievous as to insinuate
that inward Sanctity is not necessary to Salvation. And therefore when they
talk of Faith alone, they ought to explain themselves so as that they may not
be understood to exclude Christian Holiness, but Judicial, and what other
needless, imperfect and superstitious Principles of Justification men have
stood upon in the world, and withal to urge an operative Christian Love, which
is the fulfilling of the Law.

4. To this Imputative Righteousness and Justifying Faith, from which they
would fain disjoyn real Sanctity, they add Christian Infirmity, whereby they
would insinuate the Invinciblenesse of Sin. So that two of these Opinions
suggesting That that due degree of Righteousness we have spoken of (nay indeed
any degree thereof) is needless, and this other, That it is impossible, what
can this tend to but an utter neglect of all Holiness in Christian
Conversation? The profession of which frame of Religion, though some take it to
be a great piece of service of God, yet that Apostle whose expressions they too
often abuse, declares that it is a mere mocking of him, as if they did naso
suspendere adunco; Gal. 6.7.
(...), Be not deceived, God is not mocked; as a man sows, so shall he also
reap. For this abuse and perverse application of the Mystery of Christianity to
lewdness and secure wickedness is a mere deluding and mocking of the benign
counsel of God in Christ. It is to flear in the face of Heaven, and under
pretense of extolling Christ, really to subvert his Kingdom upon earth.

5. Is not this a mere mocking and confronting of the Divine Majesty, whenas he
has sent Christ into the World on purpose to redeem the world from their vain
Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18.
and to abolish or destroy the works of the flesh and the devil, to tell God in
our devotions a long story of our own Fleshliness and Devilishness, and to
intimate to him to his face, that however his Free-Graciousness is content it
should be so, and that in the application of Christ's Righteousness God cannot
nor will not see any Unrighteousness of ours; and therefore, which is worst of
all, after many long and tedious narrations, of which the greatest part is a
very foul and black Catalogue of our faults, to depart out of his presence
without either Hope, Resolution or Endeavor of being any thing better then we
are: Is not this, I say, to pervert and make ridiculous the good counsel of God
even in his own hearing, and to jeer him to his face? But however he may
connive for a while at these follies or affronts, yet he will not always keep
silence and hold his hands: Non semper stolidam praebebit vellere barbam
Jupiter.
He will not always be put off with solemn whimperings, Hypocritical
Confessions, ruful faces, sore arms and legs tied up and set on wooden stumps,
with doleful acknowledgements of but wilful Misery and Poverty, of feigned and
counterfeited Maimedness and Inability. If his Indignation be kindled, yea but
a little, it will burn off our wood, and force us to find our legs, yea, and
use our arms too, to fly or fend off, if it were possible, the strokes of
Divine Vengeance that will justly find us out.

CHAP. VIII. 1. The flaunting Hypocrisy of the Perfectionists, and from whence
it comes. 2. The easy Laws whereby they measure their Perfection. And the sad
result of their Apostasy from the Person of Christ. 3. That there is far more
Perfection in many thousands of those that abhor the name of Perfection then
in these great Boasters of it. 4. In what consists that sound and comely frame
of a true Christian Spirit.
1. ANd thus much of that creeping Hypocrisy that walks with a still and
demure pace in these Opinions of Imputative Righteousness, Empty Faith and
Invincible Infirmity: Contrary to which is that flaunting Hypocrisy of the
high-flown Perfectionists, whose Constitutions yet are ordinarily as unsound as
the former, and far more opposite and repugnant to the very frame and spirit of
the Gospel; nay, I dare add that it is an Opinion cunningly urged by the envy
of the Devil himself upon hot, fierce, eager and melancholy Spirits, that fly
high and are exceeding subject to Self-Pride and Arrogance, to obliterate in
them the remembrance of the Passion of Christ, and to elude the use of that
precious Sacrifice, to slake the affections of men to him, and to draw them off
from dependence any way on his Person. Which we may be the better assured of,
if we consider what easy Laws they measure their Perfection by and their
Freedom from Sin.

2. For any ill Motions, though never so strong, if not assented to, they have
no shame nor conscience of; and if they be carried by the strength of
Temptation to commit the act, then they lay the blame on the impetuosity of the
assault, conceit themselves to be only as ravished Virgins (according to the
softness of their fancy and favorable opinion of their own sincerity)
deflowred against their own will, and still stand upon Self-Justification. And
what is yet more execrable, when they are come to the height of their begodded
Condition, and arrived to the state of full Perfection, then like the Indian
Abduti or Spanish Illuminati, they cannot sin, do what they will; let them
commit what Foulness they will, what Injustice or Cruelty soever is suggested
to them, these unclean and proud Fanatics take it all to be Inspiration; or
else are emboldened at last (by the upshot of their Luciferian Apostasy from
the simplicity of the Truth of the Gospel) to hold that there is no Difference
of Good and Evil, and that Sin is but a Conceit, no real Miscarriage, but to
those that know not their own Liberty. Which final Result of things does
plainly indigitate, who moved at the bottom of the business in their first
alienation from the Person of our Savior. And the Justice of God is very
observable in such Apostates, how they are stricken with Blindeness, how silly
and weak they are in their Reason and Imagination, and their Lives and Actions
odious and abominable.

3. But that the Religion of these Perfectionists is not merely a surprisal by
the sleights of Satan, but a studied and premeditated Revolt from their
allegiance to our blessed Savior, though first suggested by the envy of
Lucifer against the Son of God, is too-too plain in this; That when they seem
most tolerable and to have some conscience of their ways, yet what Christians
are troubled at and ashamed of, they will not acknowledge to be Sin, lest they
should seem to want the Sacrifice of Christ or be beholden to him for his
Sufferings. Which is a sign, as I have already said, that Familisme was
invented by the malice of the Devil to lay aside the Office and Person of
Christ: let them talk as highly and gloriously of their begodded Estate as they
will; which their Infernal Teacher has taught them to boast of so much, that
Christ may seem less God then he is. But I dare pronounce, that thousands of
poor modest Christians that abhor the name of Perfection, and speak much of
Justification by Faith alone, of the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and
complain of their own Infirmity very sadly and seriously, have yet arrived to a
far greater degree of Perfection then these Self-Magnifiers and rude Insulters
over these humble and contrite Spirits: who having no ill meaning by those
frames of speech that are taught them, are affectionate Adherers to their
Savior, and out of their due reverence to God, and hearty abhorrence from all
show of or least approach toward sin and wickedness, take Sanctuary in Christ,
and ease their Souls by their reliance on his Atonement and Intercession for
such Infirmities as these bold and fanatical Boasters would bear men in hand
and persuade themselves not to be at all sinful.

And now whether these rampant Enthusiasts or the humble and orthodox Christian
be of the sounder complexion, let any man that is not wilfully blind give
sentence, and how allowable the Doctrine of these Perfectionists is, whenas it
traitorously strikes at the Person of our Savior and at the antiquating the
office of his Royal Priesthood, and is cross to that lovely and decorous frame
of spirit which is required of all men, and most of all of Christians, that
they be humble and lowly of mind, which the Death of Christ, and our reliance
upon his Intercession and Sufferings for favor at the hands of God, does
naturally nourish, and keep off that swollen unwholesome distemper of Arrogance
and Self-weening.

4. In which, that no man may mistake me to his own prejudice, I say that the
sound and comely frame of a Christian spirit is this; Unfeignedly to endeavor
the perfecting of all Holiness both in Heart and Actions, and not to allow a
man's self in any thing that he thinks is a sin; and when he is arrived at that
height of Sanctity, that he is not conscious to himself that he does any thing
that is unlawful, to give the whole praise to God, and to His Merits and
Intercession that has procured him the assistance of his holy Spirit, and by
virtue of his Death has so powerfully engaged him to war against his lusts
and to mortify all his immoderate Passions; 1 Cor. 4.4
and withal to remember, that though he know nothing by himself, yet he is not
thereby justified, and that a man cannot be sure but that he may mistake
himself in some thing or other, though he never sin against his own light; and
to impute it rather to the mercy of God, that he has not led him into such
violent Temptations as some have been, that he finds himself not to have
submitted to evil motions, then to ostentate his own strength, and contemn the
Protection of so kind a Savior, who being acquainted with humane infirmity,
may justly be thought to have kept off those tempestuous Assaults that
otherwise might have invaded us. Besides that, let us be never so perfect now,
yet it cannot pay the old score, because we ought to have been always without
sin; and therefore our recourse to so compassionate a Savior is never out of
date. Which is a Truth indispensable both for the maintaining of the honor of
Christ, and keeping our selves in a submiss and humble frame of Spirit toward
God and toward men. So that the Opinion of these Enthusiastic Perfectionists
does plainly transgress against both the second and third Rule we have set down.

CHAP. IX. 1 Sincerity the middle way betwixt pretended Infirmity and the boast
of Perfection: with the description thereof. 2. A more full character of the
Sincere Christian. 3. That they that endeavor not after that state are
Hypocrites, and they that pretend to be above it, Conspiratours against the
everlasting Priesthood of Christ. 4. The Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth,
and the Millenium in the more sober meaning thereof applied to the above-named
Rules.
1. TO stear our course right therefore betwixt those Hypocritical Pretenders
of Invincible Infirmity and these High-flown Boasters of absolute Perfection,
we must keep in that safe middle path of Unfeigned Sincerity. Which therefore
will neither charge the condition of Nature, as being utterly uncorrigible, that
cannot be reduced to Obedience, no not by the power of the Spirit of God; nor
cast it upon God himself, as being unwilling or not caring that Nature should
be thus reduced and brought under to the obedience of Christ: But a man will
charge himself in all his miscarriages, and hold it his duty (and such as by
Gods assistance he may perform, if he be not wanting on his part) to yield his
Members as Instruments of Righteousness to God, Romans 6.13.
as well as he did before yield them as Instruments of Unrighteousness to Sin.
For Sincerity implying a faithful purpose and will of doing what is right,
Christ has hereby wone the Castle or Fort of his enemy; and all the Ammunition
and Engines therein will certainly then be used for right designs.

The Eyes that before sucked in rotten corruptive thoughts from false alluring
Objects, and so set the Heart on fire with filthy lusts, are now made Inlets of
the light and brightness of the unspotted Wisdom of God, fairly pourtraied out
in the visible Creature. Those Ears that could before drink in with delight the
smooth tales of Detraction and Calumny, stand now open only to the sighs of
the poor or honest reports of our Neighbor. Those Feet that before were swift
to shed blood, are now much more ready to rescue the innocent. Those Hands that
before were only exercised in griping and pulling from others, are now ever
open for Alms-deeds and bountiful distribution to the needy. That Tongue that
in secret would not spare to strike his Friend, will now in a just cause defend
his Enemy.

In brief, there is no external Action of true Sanctity and Righteousness but
the sincere Christian both believes and finds he has a power to perform it,
and therefore does constantly the good and refuses the evil, that his
conscience tells him is so indeed, and is in his power to do and refrain: that
is to say, He will be sure to refrain from whatsoever is unjust, he will never
deal with another otherwise then himself would be dealt with, he will most
certainly abstein from Extortion, Adultery, Fornication, he will never do any
envious or revengeful Actions. And not only so, but he does believe that
through the grace of God he may be quite devoid of all Envy and Malice, and not
so much as bear any ill will against any man, no not against his Enemies; and
the same of all other inordinate affections, which though they move strongly
and rebelliously, yet he never assents so far to them as to be willing to do
them, though he had a secure opportunity thereof.

2. And yet he does not think himself perfect, though he thus assents to no Sin
while he thinks it so; nor at all doubts of his Salvation, though he be
imperfect. And if by the boisterousness and importunity of a Temptation or some
unavoidable Inadvertency he falls into any evil action, the pleasure he finds
from it will be like that which a child gets by falling with his forehead
against sharp stones or with his hands into the fire. Wherefore his sincere
Love to Righteousness and hearty abhorrence from Sin will make him always
circumspect. For he holds himself bound not only not to commit sin when it
appears to be so, which he thinks then impossible for him to do; but charges
himself with a perpetual watchfulness, that he may not commit it when it would
insinuate it self under some more specious shape.

And though by Divine Assistance and faithful Adhesion thereto, he find
himself arrived to that pitch that he has conquered all corruptions, so that he
cannot charge himself with either Pride, or Lust, or Envy, or Covetousness, or
any such like Vice, or that he does misbelieve the Promises of God, or does not
depend upon his Providence, or is not willing to submit to his will in all
things to whatever condition he shall call him: yet he knowing himself withal
not infallible, nor unconquerable, especially without the assistance of Christ,
as also actually beset with many inconveniences of humane Nature (such as are
Straying of thoughts, Unevenness in Devotion, Indisposedness of mind by reason
of this Tabernacle of Earth we live in) and reflecting on the old reckoning of
the Follies of our Life past, which nothing but ignorance can conceit to have
been without Sin, and how all these things (though ordinary Philosophy
pronounces them to be no Faults, but mere Infirmities of Nature) they having
been contracted by our Lapse, may justly by Religion be set on our score; This
Sincere Christian, whose Character I have given, will be so far from setting
the Person of Christ at defiance, and vilifying his Passion, Intercession and
holy Priesthood, that he will with the greatest reverence of Devotion that can
be imagined love him and adore him, and will not quit that sweet Repose of
mind he finds in the recounting with himself what an inestimable Friend he
has with God, for all the Pleasures and greatest Interests of this present
life; nor presume to be justified by his own Life or Works, but by Faith in
Christ, whom he rejoices to think that he shall see his Judge at the last Day.

3. This is the true and sound complexion of a Sincere Christian; and he that
does not faithfully endeavor to arrive at this state, discovers himself to be
an halting Hypocrite, and one that is no Lover of the Divine Life, nor has
tasted the sweetness of Sanctity, and of the holy Spirit of God, nor known the
power of his operations. He that pretends to be above it, he is self-condemned,
and betraies himself of what Kingdom he is, that he is inacted by the envy of
Satan against the Kingdom of Christ, to antiquate his Offices and to lay aside
his Person: which he persuades sundry fanatical Souls to do, puffing them up
with the conceit of Self-perfection, on purpose to exclude our Savior. The
danger of which error is no less then the utter forfeiture of their Eternal
Salvation. For no man shall inherit eternal life but by the donation of the
crucified Jesus, whom God has appointed Judge at the last day. Besides that the
very life and moral temper in these Revolters from the Son of God, if we
compare it with that of the Sincere Christian, there is as much difference, to
them that can taste, as betwixt the wild grape and the sweet. So hard a thing
is it for either Nature or the Devil to imitate the true tincture of the Spirit
of Christ. Their vine is the vine of Sodom, and their fruit as the clusters of
Gomorrah, and their Churches as a field whom the Lord has blasted, there is
the smell of the Sulphurous Lake and of the pit of Hell amongst them.

4. The last thing I propounded was the Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth. Of
which Opinion as the reasons are slender or none at all, so the Usefulness
thereof to me invisible, not knowing that it promotes any End of the Gospel
which I can take notice of.

But that there may be a Millennium, as they usually call it, or a Long Period
of time wherein a more excellent Reign of Christ then has manifested it self
yet to the World may take place, truly it seems so reasonable in it self, and
there are such shrewd places of Scripture seem to speak that way, that it is
hard for an indifferent man to gainsay it. But I conceive then that the
Renovation of the state of things will be, as S. Peter speaks, into new Heavens
and new Earth wherein Righteousness shall dwell; wherein real Sanctity and
universal Peacefulness shall bear sway; wherein the crucified Jesus shall not
be only complemented aloof off, and saluted in Statues and Pictures, both
himself and his Mother and all his Apostles and most eminent Adherents (whenas
in the mean time Mars, Venus and Pluto and other Idols of the Heathen are
cordially loved and served, all Christendom giving themselves enormously to
War and Bloodshed, to Lust and Luxury, to Wealth and Covetousness, worshipping
these Deities in Spirit and in truth:) but as the Divine honor done to our
Saviors person shall not then cease, so the power of His spirit shall be more
potently felt for the unpaganizing of the World, and for the destroying of this
spiritual Idolatry, which is the Inordinate Affections and fierce endeavors of
the Animal Life; and shall implant such a love and liking of the life of
Christ, that Peace and Righteousness shall overflow all.

Contentions about Opinions shall then cease, they being prized only by the
Pride and Curiosity of the Natural man, and all the goodly Inventions of nice
Theologers shall then cease, and all the foolish and perplexing Arguments of
the disputacious Schools shall be laid aside, and the Gospel alone shall be
exalted in that day. And truly the Millennium being in such a sense as this
stated, it is both probable and very desirable, and an opinion that agrees
with, nay such as may very well further, all the designs of the Gospel; as any
one may discern by making application to the Rules I have set down.

Of which Rules these few Examples may serve to show the use, and to teach a
man how to extricate himself from that mighty cumbersomeness of the numerosity
of Opinions, whether they be suggested from his own thoughts or offered by
other men. For if he applies them to these Rules, he will find most of them
either so little to the designs of the Gospel, or so much against them, that
he will account some not worth the sifting, others not worthy the naming, much
less the entertaining by a sober Christian.

Which practices and considerations cannot but tend much to the advancement of
the Gospel of Christ, if diligently observed though but by private Christians.
I shall only give some brief touch what is proper for the Magistrate to
contribute for the Advancement of Christianity, and then we shall conclude.

CHAP. X. 1 That in those that believe There is a God, and a Life to come,
there is an antecedent Right of Liberty of Conscience not to be invaded by the
Civil Magistrate. 2. Object. That no false Religion is the command of God; with
the Answer thereto. 3. That there is no incongruity to admit That God may
command contrary Religions in the world. 4, 5. The utmost Difficulty in that
Position, with the Answer thereto. 6. That God may introduce a false persuasion
into the mind of man as well for probation as punishment. 7. That simple
falsities in Religion are no forfeiture of Liberty of Conscience. 8. That
though no falsities in Religion were the command of God, yet upon other
considerations it is demonstrated that the Religionist ought to be free. 9. A
further demonstration of this Truth from the gross absurdities that follow the
contrary Position.
1. BEfore we can well understand the Power of the Magistrate in matters of
Religion, we must first consider the Common Right of Mankind in this point,
provided they be not degenerated into Atheism and Profaneness. For he that
believes there is no God, nor Reward, nor Punishment after this life, what plea
can he have to Liberty of Conscience? or how unproper is it to talk of his
Right in matters of Religion, who professedly has no Religion at all, nor any
tie of Conscience upon him to make that wicked profession? For Atheism as it
is very coursely false in it self to any man that has the clear exercise of his
Reason, so is it intolerably mischievous and destructive even to the present
Happiness of States and Kingdoms, and therefore to be shunned and repressed as
the very plague and pest of humane Polities. But for those that seriously make
profession of the Existence of God Creator of all things, and of his
Providence, and acknowledge that there is a life to come wherein the wicked
shall be punished and the virtuous rewarded; it seems to me that there does
naturally accrue such a Right to these men of freedom in their Religion as is
inviolable, and such as the power of the Magistrate ought not to invade, unless
there be some perverse mixture in it that forfeits their Right.

In the mean time supposing there be nothing but simple mistake, which they of
the contrary Religion will call Superstition, yet the Conscience of the other
party being bound up to this, it is his natural Right to have his Freedom
therein; because his Conscience is necessarily subjected thereby to a greater
power then any is on earth: and therefore not to give him the Liberty of his
Religion is both a piece of Inhumanity and Injustice toward him, and a kind of
Rebellion against God whose liege subject he is.

2. Nor can any thing that I know weaken the solidity of this Truth, unless you
will say that no False Religion is the command of God, or at least that it is
countermanded by the Promulgation of the True. To which I answer, That there is
so much Truth in those Religions I speak of, that they contain a belief of the
Existence of God and that there is a Life to come; which is a demonstration
that the rest of their Religion, in the belief and exercise whereof they
seriously and sincerely seek the favor of God and Eternal happiness, does bind
their Conscience most severely and indispensably to obedience. Which immediate
Dictate of Conscience in a soul that is Which qualification is all along
supposed in this question, otherwise the falsities of a Religion cannot so
rightly be conceived any commands of God, but a blindness and darkness the
Religionist has brought upon or continues to himself through his own Hypocrisy
and wickedness.
sincere, what is it but the Command of God? and before his voice be heard
here, his will is not promulgated to that person. For nothing but Conviction of
Conscience that this or that is the Will of God is properly the promulgation of
his Will to every particular soul: Otherwise it is but as a recital of the Law
in a So it is to them that are sincere, but in those that are not it is like
the stopping of the ears against the reading of the Law in a Known Language.
language the People understand not, and therefore can take no hold upon them.

Again, how can an Erroneous Conscience oblige to obedience, if its Dictate be
but as from it self, and not the command of God? For it is improper to say a
man is obliged to obey himself, especially in matters of Religion. Wherefore it
is plain that the Obligation is to God, and from God, who has proclaimed in the
heart of every man that is conscienciously and sincerely religious how he will
be served and worshipped, and by inevitable trains of Providence has for a time
fixed him to this or that persuasion. Which being the most express, the most
complete and articulate way that God can promulgate his Law by, namely, the
Conviction of men's Reason and Conscience (for I speak of such as are in their
wits, not madmen and Fanatics, nor yet such as embrace for Religion Precepts
contrary to the Light and Law of Nature, which is the highest and most
uncontrovertible Law of God, as being not Topical but Universal, and therefore
there can be no persuasion against that, but it is to be imputed to the villainy
of man, not to the command of God, who in all Nations by the inward Light of
Nature commands to the contrary, be their Topical Religion what it will;) In
these things, I say, whose falseness is not easily discoverable by the Light of
Nature (such as are sundry matters of fact done many Ages ago, and Religious
Precepts and Ceremonies thereupon depending) if there be this Conviction of
Conscience concerning them, there is necessarily implied the command of God to
that people so convicted. For when can God be said to command a person, if not
then when he conveys a practical persuasion so unto him (be it by the
intervention of what Providence it will) that there is no place left to doubt
but that it is his Command? For if he spoke to him face to face (which he does
not do to one of infinite thousands, nor it may be properly to any) there
could be no greater assurance of receiving a command from him. Wherefore a man
being as fully assured that he has received a command from God as he can be
assured, and this assurance being contrived into him by the Providence of God
himself; it is evident that the command is truly from God. To which a man is
still obliged till he does in as express a manner receive a Countermand from
the same Sovereign Power.

3. Which Countermand, according to what I have already laid down, is not
received nor promulgated till the Conscience be convinced, but is still as a
Law repeated in a strange language; and therefore being not understood, is not
obligatory. Nor does the great Lawgiver of the Universe contradict himself in
this variety, nay contrariety, if you will, of Religions. For he does not
command them all to the same people at the same time; but every one according
as his Conscience is convicted receives a new command, and where they are
inconsistent, relinquishes the old. And truly there seems no harshnesse nor
incongruity at all in admitting variety and contrariety of Religions in the
world, and all commanded by God, if this Diversity and Opposition were
discoverable only in several degrees of Perfection, or in the manner of Worship
and Ceremony: but they being contradictory one to another in the very Articles
of their Creeds, this seems an insuperable difficulty, how God should command
them to believe Contradictions, of which one part must of necessity be false.
As for example, It is impossible, That Christ died on the Cross, and, That he
died not on the Cross, or, That he rose again from the dead, and, That he did
not rise again from the dead, should both parts be true. In the former of which
examples the Turks, in the latter the Jews Belief is opposite to ours.

4. This truly at first sight seems a very hard knot. But the difficulty will
not prove so formidable, after we have considered wherein it lies and how it
may be answered. And surely it lies mainly in this, Whether it be consistent
with the Nature of God to conveigh a false Persuasion into the mind of man or
no. This is the utmost of the intricacy. To which methinks the Answer is not
difficult. I freely therefore do affirm, That it is not inconsistent with Gods
nature so to do. For he is thereby neither the Author of any sin committed by
us, nor does he commit any thing himself herein unworthy of his Divinity. He is
not the Author of Sin in us, in that invincible ignorance is no sin, nor any
act that proceeds therefrom. There is indeed less perfection in these actions,
but every imperfection is not sin; for they may be such imperfections as are
utterly involuntary and unavoidable, as we suppose this false persuasion is and
all the effects of it.

5. Nor does God do any thing unworthy of himself in introducing such an
invincible or unavoidable persuasion, though it be false. For to cause another
to think that which is not true, is not simply evil in it self. Otherwise it
were unlawful to fence, and to use ordinary stratagems of war, wherein the
Enemy endeavors to deceive each other; which is not done but by bringing them
into a false belief. And we are the worst kind of Enemies against God, being
Rebels and Apostates from him: And therefore though he needs insinuate no
mistakes into us by way of stratagem, yet he may fix upon us the belief of such
things as are false by way of punishment; and though he command homage from us
as his Subjects, yet he may do it with several badges of disgrace, as some
offended Prince might command a Rebel for a time to wear some sordid token of
his Rebellion upon his outward garments whenever he went abroad, or an incensed
High Priest for Penance adjudge some offender to do his devotions always in
some dark pit or dungeon, in stead of a convenient closet or well-adorned
Church. Which things though they be but ugly in themselves, yet they being part
of that duty they are tied up to by them that ought to command, they are free
from the molestations of others that are inferior to that Power that commanded
them; nor are these Offenders the one to be dragged into the Church to do his
devotions there, nor is any one to pull off by violence from the other the
badge of dishonor that he is commanded to wear.

Now the dishonorable badges of the Soul are those gross Errors and
Ignorances with which God may justly be deemed, by way of reproach and
punishment, to command those to worship him that are convinced so to do, nor
know yet any thing better. And the dark pit may be any blind dispensation
which Divine Providence has adjudged men to, till their conviction to the
contrary. For Conviction is the immediate Command of God in the Conscience; as
I have often repeated.

6. And as God by way of Punishment may introduce a false persuasion into the
Mind of man, so also by way of Probation. For if to introduce a false
persuasion in it self be not simply evil, how can it be evil when used for a
good End, and by an unerring Wisdom, and from an infinite Goodness? Which
powers if we were invested with, none could make any controversy of it, but
that we might also take the liberty to do so too. And people hold it ordinarily
very pardonable, if not allowable, to impose upon children and sick persons by
false stories for their health, and to save the spilling of innocent blood by
concealing the pursued from the knowledge of him that would murder him. Nay,
in smaller exigencies, as in the trial of a servants trust, no man would be
much offended if one made his servant believe he trusted him further then he
did, either to encourage his faithfulness or to detect his fraud: as if he
should in his presence put up into a box some false Jewels that made a great
show, but of small value, and should commit them unto his servants custody
carefully sealed up as a most precious Treasure, thereby to try if he will run
away with them; adding thereunto a sealed bag of Counters with an old
inscription of so much in Gold. Such a Trial as this, which implies an
introducing of a false opinion into the mind of the servant, few or none would
hold culpable in his cautious Master. What injustice therefore can it be in
God, if he try the Souls of men first in a false Religion, persuading them that
it is true, and thereby commanding the practice thereof; since by this means
their faithfulness is discovered, whether they will be sincere when that is
committed to them which is wholly true indeed?

7. It is plain therefore that some falsehoods in a Religion which has so much
Truth in it as to engage a man in the exercise thereof in hope of Eternal life,
do not hinder but that this whole Religion that obliges the Conscience is the
command of God to them whose Conscience it does oblige; and therefore that they
are free from the commands of any external power, if some other things of
another nature do not make them forfeit their liberty. For the simple falsities
in Religion are not enough, that is, are not sufficient to detect that such a
Religion is not commanded to such and such persons by God himself; who thought
good to try Abraham's Faith by that false persuasion, that he was actually to
sacrifice his son to him, whenas God intended no such matter. Which Example
does prove that God has not only a power, but has put also into act this right
that he has of causing men to think otherwise then what is really true. But
what is that to thee? they must stand or fall to their own Master, nor have
thou any power to countermand them till they have a countermand from God by
clear conviction that the way they are in is false: For then only ceases it to
be the Command of God to them.

8. But if thou will be so humor some for all this as to deny that such a
Conviction of Conscience, so stated as I have stated it, is the real command of
God in every particular, namely, in the apprehensions which are false; yet,
though this were admitted, it will notwithstanding be evident that it is a
piece of Rudeness and Barbarity to incommodate a person thus persuaded for the
profession of his Religion. For first, his speaking and acting according to the
unavoidable persuasions of his mind is not a sin, it arising according to our
hypothesis out of invincible Ignorance; nor is he supposed to act any thing
against the known laws of Nature; and therefore no just right of any one is
endamaged: but in the mean time the Sovereignty of the Godhead is fully
acknowledged, and the Loyalty and Sincerity of the Religionist exercised
therein.

Wherefore what reason can there be that any one for so good an action, that is
not exceptionable for any thing that is properly sinful, should be rudely
treated, punished, or any way disturbed or hindered? For whosoever endeavors
his forcible hindrance, does not only suppress an innocent and laudable action,
but he does necessarily perpetrate a foul and sinful one. For such is the
solicitation of others to the omission of that duty of Loyalty our own
Conscience tells us we owe to God. Wherefore he that hinders the sincere
Religionist from the Profession of his Religion, tempts him to a sin against
God: which no Powers in the World have a right to do, but are ipso facto guilty
of rebellion against their Maker, by corrupting his liege Subjects, and urging
them to faithlesness and neglect of their duty. How culpable are they then in
forcing them and haling them to such actions as they are persuaded God has
severely forbid them? Verily if this be not unjustly to command him who is
under the power of another, I cannot imagine what is; nor what can be deemed a
sin against God, if urging others to sin against him be not. So that again,
even upon our Adversaries own terms, it is plain that the Sovereign power of
God sets the sincere Religionist free in matters of Religion from any external
force or power whatsoever.

9. Now as this Position recommends it self sufficiently from its own native
concinnity and solidity; so will it also appear still more solid and more
consonous to Reason, if we consider the absurdity of the contrary Position,
namely, That liberty of Conscience is by no means to be granted in Religion.
For from hence it follows that every Religion may, nay ought to keep out all
other Religions with all care possible. For every man's Conscience tells him His
is the best, or else he would not be of it; nay, that there is none true and
saving but his own. For if they will say they may be saved in others, then is
our former argument a perfect demonstration against them, that they are not
only injurious to men but absolute rebels against God indeed, in treating those
ill that are his liege people, and whom he loves so well that he intends to
save them, and in persecuting them even for those very actions wherein they do
most seriously express their obedience to him.

But if there be but one true and saving Religion at once in the world, this is
the greatest disinterest to it that can be imagined. For upon this Position it
will be as carefully kept out and as forcibly as any of the rest; which in my
apprehension is very foul play, and therefore this is another evidence of the
truth of our Thesis, viz. That the contrary is the greatest injury and
disinterest to the True Religion that can be supposed, which nothing but
external force hinders from spreading over all. For Magna est veritas, and
praevalebit, I mean in the Minds and Consciences of those men where she may
have free audience, not in the noise and terror of tyrannical impositions and
obtrusions. Besides the frequent misery and calamity this Position brings upon
Nations and Kingdoms, viz. Wars, bloodshed, subversion of Families, deposing,
stabbing or poisoning of Princes, perpetual enmity and hatred, and all the
works and actions of the kingdom of Darkness. Of so mischievous consequence is
this Opinion we do oppose. Whenas if it were acknowledged universally, That
Liberty of Religion is the natural right of mankind, all these mischiefs would
be prevented; The Prince could not pretend any quarrel against the People, nor
the People against the Prince or against one another, but in Civil Rights that
are more plain and intelligible.

CHAP. XI. 1. That there is a Right in every Nation and Person to examine their
Religion, to hear the Religion of Strangers, and to change their own, if they
be convinced. 2. That those Nations that acknowledge this Right and act
accordingly, have naturally a Right to send out Agents into other Nations.
Their demeanor there, and the right of revenging their injuries. And how this
Method had justified the Spaniards Invasion of the Indians. 3. The
unpracticablenesse of the present Theory by reason of the general perverseness
of the World. The advantageousnesse of it to Christendom, and suitableness of
it to the Spirit of a Christian. 4. That Religion corruptive of manners is
coercible by the Magistrate. 5. And that which would plainly destroy the
defense of the Country. 6. As also whatever Religion is inseparably interwoven
with Principles of Persecution. 7. An Answer to that Objection, That all Sects
are persecutive, and that therefore there can be no Liberty of Conscience given.
1. IT is manifest therefore That Liberty of Religion is the common and natural
Right of all Nations and Persons, that is to say, That they have a power, as
they are Rational men, and believe that there is a God, and a Life to come, to
examine what is the best way to serve him for their future advantage; and not
to be tied up so to that Religion is first proposed to them, but that they have
a Right to suspect, especially if they do not like it, that there is some
better, and therefore that they may confer with those of other Religions, send
for them out of one Nation into another, and entertain them when they are
arrived, hear them diligently, and, if they be convinced, openly profess it. Or
if they come of their own accord, they are to be entertained with the same
security that an Agent of State is, and may freely converse with them of the
Nation that have a mind to hear them. For this is a piece of their Right of
Liberty, to speak as well as the others to hear. Which Transactions would breed
no disturbance at all, if this Right of Liberty of Religion was universally
understood and acknowledged by all the Nations of the World: as certainly it is
their Right.

2. And it being so, it seems plainly to follow, That any Nation or People that
do heartily ackowledge the Reasonableness of this Right, and their practice is
accordingly, that there accrues to them this part of the Right also, that they
may send of those of the Religion themselves are into their neighboring
Nations to communicate their Religion to them, and to try if they can convince
them of that which they are persuaded is true, and to show them the errors of
their own; but at seasonable times, and without reproach or tumult, or any way
confronting them in the exercise of their Religion; a thing very barbarous and
insufferable at home, much more abroad in Countries where they are Strangers.

For the avoiding of which wild enormities it seems reasonable in it self, and
a thing to be agreed upon, that there shall be no security to any stranger that
takes upon him to gather the people together under pretense of instructing them
in a more perfect Religion, unless he be an Agent from his own Nation for that
purpose. Nor is he to begin with the rude people, but to act above-board, and
to make his applications to the Governors of the places where he arrives; and
not to pretend to the Juglings of Inspirations, and the irresistible blusters
and impetuosities of an unaccountable Conscience: but first with a discreet
candor to allow and commend what is good and praiseworthy in the Religion of
the place; and then, after an unaffected profession of the love and kindeness
of them that sent him, toward the Nation, with all prudent insinuations
possible to lay before them the groundlesness or gross falsities which are in
their Religion; and after that to show the most demonstrative Reasons he has
for the recommending of his own, namely, such as are agreed upon by the mature
deliberation and counsel of them that sent him upon this errand, to which it
should be criminal to add, upon their authority, any foolish inventions of
his own.

And if these Agents for Religion neither injuring nor defrauding any one of
their Civil rights, shall be evilly entreated by those they offer to instruct,
if they abuse them by imprisonment or any other hard dealing, or finally put
them to death; that State or Kingdom to which they belong may require their
blood at their hands, as having grossly and barbarously transgressed against the
Law of Nations, and the common Right of all mankind that have not forfeited it
some way or other: As these have not, they allowing this Liberty among
themselves, and to all others that have a sense and conscience of the same
Right, and being firmly resolved, if it should come to a war, and they be
Conquerours of their ill Neighbors, to use no other means to turn their new
Subjects from their old Religion, but by peaceably and patiently showing them
the vanity thereof, and the excellency and solidity of their own. Which cannot
by any means be called the Propagation of Religion by the Sword, when there
shall not be so much force put upon them to change their former Religion, if
they be found conscientious, as to compel them to be present at the
Solemnities of the New. Only they shall swear fealty to their Conquerours, and
be well indoctrinated in that common Right of Mankind, That no man is to be
persecuted for Religion, if he have not forfeited that Right by taking upon him
the liberty of persecuting others. And therefore they may enjoy their Religion
if they can still like it, upon equal terms with the conquerours, as to their
private capacities. If the Spaniard had made himself master of the Indies upon
these conditions, and had abstained from his execrable cruelties, he might have
justified himself to all the World. For this had not been to propagate Religion
by the sword, but to maintain a man's natural right.

3. This Theory I think is very sound at the bottom, and that it is very clear
what ought to be; but hugely unpracticable by reason of that general
perverseness and corruption of men. Yet I thought it worth the while to expose
it to view, the acknowledgement thereof being the greatest advantage to
Chritian Religion that can possibly be conceived, there being nothing so
effectual for the easy fall of Turcisme and Paganism into the profession of
Christ as this Prin^iple we have explained; our Religion being not only solid
in it self, but incomparably more demonstrable to all Rational spirits then any
Religion ever extant in the World. Besides, though its use will not extend so
far at the first, yet it may be something serviceable to these parts of the
world whose eyes are more open to Truth then others are. And verily in my
judgment, this Principle I do thus recommend, as it seems to me to deserve the
reception of all men as true, so of all Christians especially, not only upon
point of Policy, but as more suitable to that spirit they are of, abhorring from
force and cruelty; who are therefore to permit full Liberty of Conscience to
all those that do not forfeit it by mixing with their Religion such Principles
as are contrary to good manners and civil Right, or repugnant to this very
Principle of Liberty we speak of.

4. Wherefore those that under pretense of Religion would corrupt the people
with such doctrines as plainly countenance Vice and tend to the rooting out of
the sense of true Honor and Virtue out of a Nation, have lost this Common
Right we contend for, as being infecters and poisoners of the people amongst
whom they live; and therefore the therefore the public Magistrate of what
Nation or Religion soever has a power to restrain them, their doctrine being so
dangerous to the welfare of a State, and contrary to the light of Nature and
suffrage of the wisest men in all places of the World and in all Ages. No
Religion fraught with such rotten ware as this, is to be received in any coast
where they would put in, but to be kept out by Strangers and suppressed at home.

5. Again, those also would forfeit this Right of Liberty, whose Religion
should contain any thing in it that would weaken the State which received it.
As if there were some such absurd Superstition, as upon pretense of an high
esteem fo Virginity and extreme abhorrence from war should urge the
emasculation of every third male-child, or the luxation or cutting off their
forefinger or thumb, whereby the Country would be depopulated, and the
Inhabitants made unserviceable for the defense thereof: there is no question
but the Magistrate might inhibit such a Religion as this.

6. As he might in the last place all such as have intermixed with them that
wolvish and ferine humor of persecuting others for their Religion, that would
live quietly by them, and would not force any one to their own Faith, nor
disturb the public exercise of Religion in others. For these have no right to
be suffered further then at the discretion of the Magistrate; nor can more
reasonably plead for Liberty then the Wolf and Fox crave leave to have their
kennels or holes in the midst of a Sheepfold, or the Owl or Night-Raven to put
in their note amidst a Quire of Nightingales.

7. But you will say, all Religions and Sects are such Foxes and Wolves, and
therefore there is no Liberty of Religion at all to be given. Those that are
so, I confess, are at the mercy of the Magistrate, as having forfeited their
Right. Which forfeiture he may exact more or less severely accordingly as he
has more or less security that these crafty and wild Creatures may do no
mischief. But I do not believe that all men that do profess Religion are of
this partial nature; nay on the contrary, I do verily believe That they that
are the most truly religious, are the most abhorrent from persecution of
conscience sake. Wherefore as many as are ready to profess, and that upon Oath,
if it be required, That it is their judgment (and their Practice does not
contradict it) that no man is to be incommodated in his Civil rights, in his
Libety, Estate or Life, for the cause of such a Religion as whose principles
teach not to incommodate others, and do avow that theirs is such, and that they
will be as faithful to the Prince or State in which they live as those of his
own Religion; these having in no wise forfeited their Right of liberty, neither
this way nor any other, by intermingling Practices or Principles against the
light of Nature and laudable Morality; it were the highest piece of Injustice
that can be committed to abridge them of the safe profession thereof.

CHAP. XII. 1. To what Persons and with what Circumstances the Christian
Magistrate is to give Liberty of Conscience. And the great advantage thereof to
the Truth of Christianity. 2. That those that are not Christians, are not to be
admitted into places of trust by the Christian Magistrate, if he can supply
himself with those that are. 3. That the Christian Magistrate is to lay aside
the fallible opinions of men, and promote every one in Church and State,
according to his merit in the Christian life, and his ability promoting the
interest of the Church of Christ and the Nation he serves. 4. That he is to
continue or provide an honorable and competent allowance for them that labor
in the word and doctrine. 5. That the vigilance of the Christian Magistrate is
to keep under such Sects as pretend to Immediate Inspiration unaccountable and
unintelligible to sober Reason, and why? 6* That the endeavor of impoverishing
the Clergy smells rank of Profaneness, Atheism and Infidelity. 7. That the
Christian Magistrate is either to erect or keep up Schools of Humane Learning,
with the weighty grounds thereof. 8. A further enforcement of those grounds
upon the fanatic Perfectionists. 9. The hideous danger of casting away the
History of the Gospel upon pretense of keeping to the Light within us.
1. TO come to a Conclusion therefore, and to touch the Point we have aimed at
all this time, What a Christian Prince or the Supreme Magistracy may contribute
to the advancement of the Gospel of Christ: From these general Principles we
may infer, First, that he is to give Liberty of Conscience to all such as
have not forfeited it, namely such as I have last of all described, especially
if they be Natives of the place, were it possible for them to be of any
Religion then Christian. But withal to require a public and solemn account of
their change of Religion; wherein it may appear whether it be Conscience or
Design or humor that makes them Apostatize. Which either fraud or giddiness
shall make the party obnoxious to such rebuke and penalty as may probably
deter the people from the like causeless revolts. But if the person be of a
serious life, and shall be found to have changed his opinion upon such grounds
of Reason as, though false, yet may possibly mislead a wel-meaning man; yet for
sureness he shall be put upon his Oath: Which test though it be abused to
over-petty matters, yet certainly must not loose its due use in causes of so
solemn importance.

In which kind of cases if any refuse upon a pretended scrupulosity of swearing
at all, and in an affectation of seeming more precisely holy then others,
without question it is not Religion but some fathomless depth of knavery that
lies at the bottom; and they may justly be suspected of some treasonable and
treacherous design against the Religion and Government under which they live.
Wherefore before they should have liberty to profess themselves of another
Religion, they should be required to take a solemn Oath, with a deep
Imprecation of Divine vengeance upon Soul and Body, that nothing moves them
thereto but mere conviction of Conscience, and that they have no secular design
at all in their change, nor desire any more liberty then what they think
themselves bound in conscience to allow to others. Which public Examination
and Oath is very useful also and justifiable upon men's relinquishing of the
public worship of God in the Churches, though they do not professedly declare
themselves to be no Christians. For not to join with them in public worship,
is the next door to that Apostasy.

This practice would be of infinite advantage for the Truth of Christianity.
For hereby the Priesthood will be more cautious how they clogge the Gospel with
unwarrantable trumperies; and those that would revolt, by this calling them to
an account first, shall be forced to feel the strength and solidity of that
Religion they would bid adieu to, and their secret designs prevented by the
solemnity of an Oath. And lastly the Christian Magistrate by giving this
liberty after these due circumstances (which assuredly he will have very
seldom occasion for by reason of the Evidence of our Religion) will avoid the
justifying the iniquity of other Religions who not by power of Reason and
Conscience, but by outward Force, hinder their Natives from turning Christians.

2. But Secondly, Though these serious people shall not be deprived of their
Liberty, Lives or Estates, nor any way impaired in their private fortunes; yet
they shall be disabled from bearing any Office of trust in the Commonwealth,
especially if there be of the Christian Religion that will manage them with
equal skill and fidelity. For it is plainly unnatural, if not impossible, that
a man that is serious in his Religion should not prefer one of his own Faith
before a Stranger, if in other things they be equal. Besides that the Laws of
Caution and Prudence cannot fail to suggest so reasonable a choice; which are
very much to be listened to in things of this nature. For present possession of
power is better assurance then the Oath of well-meaning but withal of
temptable and lapsable Mortals.

3. Thirdly, The Christian Magistrate is to give no assistance of his power nor
countenance any further then Christianity it self is concerned: that is to say,
He is to give that assistance which is due from a Magistrate for the defending
and promoting of our Religion, so far forth as it is plainly discoverable in
the written Word of God in the Literal and Historical meaning thereof: For to
cant only in Allegories, is to deny the Faith of Christ. And as for Opinions,
though some may be better then othersome, yet none should exclude from the
fullest enjoyment of either private or public Rights, suppose there be no
venom of the Persecutive spirit mingled with them. But every one that
professes the Faith of Christ and believes the Scripture in the Historical
sense thereof, let his Opinions be otherwise what they will, he is according to
his life, worth and ability every where to be preferred in either Church or
State. Which is absolutely the most advantageous way for the advancing of the
Gospel and making the World good that the Wit of man can find out.

And External Force being so unfitting in it self, and most of all unbecoming
the Christian Magistrate, in matters of Religion, what one might fancy lost in
laying aside Persecution, would in as great a measure be regained by
countenancing this free and naked Representation of the Beauty and Perfection
of the Gospel quite rid of all pretended Traditions and whatever obfuscations
and entanglements of humane Invention. For then the Truth of God would be like
an unsheathed sword, bright and glittering, sharp and cutting, and irresistibly
convincing the rational Spirit of a man. Whenas now our Religion is wrapped up in
so many wreathes of hay and straw, that mo man can see nor feel the edge of it.

4. Fourthly, Being Compulsion is not to be used nor Prudence excluded, (For it
is the same fanatical madness to exile Prudence out of affairs of Church and
State as to exclude Reason and Mathematics out of Philosophy) it is very plain
that the Christian Magistrate is engaged to add to Liberty of Conscience the
advantage of an honorable and comfortable subsistence for those that labor in
the word and doctrine; that is to say, he is obliged in all reason and
conscience to continue it where it is, and to raise it wherever it is wanting.
And I am very confident it is either gross Fanatical ignorance, or the hidden
malice of Satan against the kingdom of Christ, acting either in profane and
Atheistical persons or such as are not cordially Christians, that suggests any
thing to the contrary. For the less any Religion is underpropped by External
force, the more able ought their Heads and Tongues to be that are only by their
learning, eloquence and innocence of life to support it: And the present Ages
having so much wit and so little sense of Piety, he that will undertake to give
a good account of his Religion and to answer all Opposers, though the Scruples
and Controversies be but concerning that which is plainly in the Scripture, he
ought to have leisure and vacancy from the affairs of the World to prepare
himself, and continue his dexterity in this kind.

For that tedious buzz and noise of the Spirit has now, I think, made it self
so ridiculous, that no prudent man will listen to such lazy Impostures. Every
one is to give a reason of his faith; but Priests or Ministers more punctually
then any; their Province being to make good every sentence of the Bible to a
rational Enquirer into the Truth of those Oracles. Who therefore can
sufficiently attend these things, and be to seek for bread for himself and his
Family? How unjust and sordid a temper therefore are those persons of, that
could be content to leave the Clergy to work for their living? Any inferior
fellow may talk and prate phrases and make faces, but when a sober man would be
satisfied of the grounds from whence they speak, we shall hear no news of any
thing but the Spirit, and railing against carnal Reason, though it be no soft
flesh but hard and penetrant steel, and such as pierces them to the very heart,
for all their contempt and slighting of it.

5. And verily while I consider the unreasonableness and ill consequence of
this kind of Enthusiasme, I cannot but think the Vigilance of the Christian
Magistrate should extend to this also amongst other things, to suppress and
keep under all Sects and Religions that hold of so Fanatic a tenor, that is
to say, that profess they believe against the Christian Faith from the
illumination of such a Spirit as they can give no account of, viz. such as does
not illuminate their Reason, whereby their doctrine may be accountable and
intelligible to others, but only heat them and make them furious against the
Christian Church. For besides the hazarding of making a whole Nation mad (for
seriously it is an infectious disease, if not the very possession of the Devil)
there may some damnable plot lie under it against Christianity and the State.
For it is a more easy thing to heat the Phansies of the vulgar, then to inform
their Judgments; though this tends to sober edification, that to confusion and
destruction. In brief, there are these two very bad things in this resolving of
matters into the immediate suggestion of the Spirit not acting upon our
Understandings. First, it defaces and makes useless that part of the Image of
God in us which we call Reason; and secondly, it takes away that special
advantage that Christianity has above all other Religions, that she dare appeal
to so solid a Faculty. And therefore he that takes away the use of Reason in
Religion, undermines Christianity, and lays it as low as the basest
Superstition that ever appeared in the World.

6. Now therefore to return, I say, To talk at the rate of these blind
Illuminati, that do not so much as pretend to any solid satisfaction in what
they say, requires no study, nothing but heat and impudency, and a careless
insensibility of what they said last, or whether one thing will hold with
another: But he that so speaks as ready to give a reason of what he delivers,
and indeed of all things that are already delivered in the Scriptures so
plainly as that it appears what the meaning is, (for it is no prejudice that
there be some depths beyond the present reach of men) this man certainly ought
not to be tied up to the cares of the world by being put to labor for his
bread; but ought to have a liberal, certain and honorable allowance. But to
contemn the Christian Clergy, or to endeavor to make them contemptible by
impoverishing them and forcing them to base terms of living, smells exceeding
rank of Profaneness, Atheism, and Infidelity: and the railing at them and
calling them Mercenary because they have a just maintenance allowed them, is
assuredly the voice of that envious Accuser of the brethren, who by those
villainous reproaches and calumnies would undermine and pull down the Kingdom
of Christ in the world, by striking at the necessary props and supporters of
it, the Ministry of the Gospel; whose subsistence ought to be independent of
the People, that may reprove the more freely, and that there may be no
temptation to either unworthy connivances, or to the sophisticating the
doctrine of Christ by sweet poison, to inveigle the rich, and to untie their
purse-strings; what they thus pay, being the price of their own Souls, betrayed
into the hands of such canting Mountebanks.

7. Fifthly, The Christian Magistrate ought also to continue, and erect where
there wants, public Schools of Learning. For the more knowing his Subjects
are, the more certainly will they keep to Christianity, and the more easily
will others come off to the same Faith. Nothing comparable to this for the
preventing all delusions and impostures in Religion. Mahometisme could never
have been set on foot but in a rude and illiterate Nation. But Christianity got
its first foot-hold in the most civilized parts of the world, though persecuted
and opposed. Besides that it is a piece of unspeakable madness to think that
any man can be a fit Interpreter of Scripture without that which some in
contempt call Humane Learning, as Logic or the known Principles of Reasoning;
I will add Mathematics and Philosophy, and skill in Tongues and History: no
man without the knowledge of these can make good the Truth of those holy
Oracles to knowing and understanding men. And therefore they that decry these
helps, are either very ignorant, or out of their wits, or have a treacherous
plot against the flourishing of Christianity, and would bring in some Fanatic
Religion, or else are enemies to all Religion whatsoever.

8. For tell me, O ye high-flown Perfectionists, and ye great boasters of the
Light within you, could the highest Perfection of your inward Light ever show
to you the Histories of past Ages, the universal state of the World at present,
the knowledge of Arts and Tongues, without some external helps of either Books
or Teachers? How then can you understand the Providence of God, the purpose of
Prophecies and the Authority of that Religion which God has peculiarly
appointed us to walk in, without external assistances? How can you make a due
judgment of the Truth of Christianity, without a rational explication of the
Prophecies that foretold the coming of Christ, without weighing what may be
said concerning the authentickness and uncorruptedness of his History in the
Gospels, and without considering the Reasonableness of all those Miraculous
matters there recorded concerning him, and of what is behind for him to
perform at his visible return to judge the quick and the dead? No light within
you, unassisted of helps without, and of the knowledge of History, Tongues and
Sciences, and careful exercise of Reason, that excellent gift of God to
mankind, can ever make you competent Judges of this matter.

9. And as you do thus forfeit the knowledge of the Truth by this sullen
Self-sufficiency of yours within, so do you also endanger your eternal
Salvation. For you cannot justly excuse your selves by the close following the
light within you, if you do it in such a contemptuous manner that you will
listen to nothing offered you from without, though never so accommodate and
agreeable to those rational Faculties God has given you. Wherefore it being no
necessitated ignorance, but your own wilfulness, that has made you Apostates
from the Law of Christ, your unbelief is no abrogation of that Law to you; but,
stop your ears as hard against it as you can, yet you shall be judged by it at
the last day; when, you having not served God as he would be served, he will
assuredly reward you as you would not be rewarded. For there is no other Name
under Heaven whereby we must be saved but that of Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
Act. 4.12.
whom the Jews crucified and God raised from the dead. Wherefore you who make
it the chiefest point of your Religion to crucify him again by celebrating
that execrable Pascha or Phase, which is your detestable killing of Christ
according to the flesh, that it to say, according to the Letter or History,
which is to put Christ out of all his Offices assigned to him by his Father,
and to turn mere Pagans and Infidels, think as smoothly and favorably of your
selves as you will, that doom must pass upon you at last (not according to your
self-flattering Mysteries, but according to the truth of the Letter) which
shall adjudge all the wicked to that everlasting fire which is prepared for the
Devil and his Angles.

CHAP. XIII. 1. The Authors application to the better-minded Quakers. 2. He
desires them of that Sect to search the grounds and compute the gains of their
Revolt from Christ. 3. That there are no peculiar Effects of the Spirit of God
in the Sect of the Quakers, but rather of Pythonisme. 4. That their
Inspirations are not divine, but diabolical. 5. The vanity of their boasting
of the knowledge of their mysterious Allegories. 6. The grounds of their
insufferable bitterness against the Ministers of Christ. 7. That he was urged
by the light within him to give witness to the Truth of the History of the
Gospel, and to admonish the Quakers. His caution to the simple-minded among
them how they turn in to Familisme. 8. His ease and satisfaction of mind from
disburdening himself of this duty. 9. The compassionablenesse of their
condition, 10. And hope of their return to Christ.
1. KNowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we were earnestly moved in mind
to forewarn you and exhort you, I mean, as many of you are curable and
reducible to the Truth. For some have celebrated that accursed Pascha so fully
and obdurately, that they are become past feeling, having not any sense nor
hope left of the concerns of another life, God having justly given them up to a
reprobate sense for the denying of the Lord that bought them. But for you whose
defection is not completed, nor your eyes sealed up to perfect infidelity, let
me desire you to make a stand awhile, to lay your hands upon your own hearts,
and impartially examine your selves, what you would have, where you would be,
and what good thing you would seek, that is not plainly exposed to your view in
the Gospel of Christ. You had begun well: Who has hindered you? What has tempted
you out of the way? Do you now sincerely seek the kingdom of Heaven, or gape
after a booty upon Earth? Examine your own Consciences, and answer to your
selves. I desire not to broach your shame. But I hope you will not account me
injurious, if I take notice of such things as you conceal from none.

2. Search therefore your own hearts, and try your selves, what manner of
Spirit has taken hold upon you, since you have been so imbittered against the
School of Christ. There is no Virtue you can pretend to that is not
comprehended in his Life and Doctrine in the highest perfection and clearness.
How can you then take a new guide, unless it be to be led into some pleasing
error? And truly it is no small pleasure to the proud to have something
separate and peculiar of their own, to seem wiser and holier then other men.
And I desire you to appeal to your own Conscience, how great a stroke this Vice
has had in furthering on your Apostasy; and beseech you to compute, if you be
still serious in Religion, what you have gained by your revolt. Is your Reason
any thing more improved? nay certainly, that ye have cut off and cast from you
as carnal and unholy. Are you more humble and more charitable? If you be, you
do ill to conceal your Virtues, who would have the World believe so highly of
you. You affect indeed to be very homely and sordid in your habits; but you do
not perceive how sour your affected sordidness smells of the leven of the
Pharisees, who loved to be seen of men; and how you have but licked up what
Diogenes that Pagan Sophist left in his Tub, and have chosen rather to be proud
Cynicks then civil Christians.

And if your Humility have so strong a sent of Pride, how noisomely does your
Pride it self stink in the nostrils of all men, your disrespect to your
betters, your sawciness, your censoriousness, quite contrary to the precepts
and practice of all holy men in all Ages? Your Humility therefore being so
little, your Charity certainly cannot be great. For indeed you count all
besides your selves a rude unsanctified mass, the Weeds of the World, fit for
nothing but the fire of your Fanatic wrath to burn up.

I but you will say, though you have forgone your Reason and good manners, yet
you have the Spirit of God amongst you, which is worth all. If you have, show
me the fruit thereof. For Pharisaical sowrnesse, Contest with the Magistrate,
affronting the Minister in his public Function, these are no fruits of the
Spirit of God; but these alone with certain clownish forms of calling Thou for
You, and keeping on the Hat when others in civil respect put it off, are the
main Effects of that Spirit that distinguishes you from others of the Nation.

3. Is this therefore the great purchase you have obtained by turning your back
on Christ and contemning of his Person, to grow rude and clownish to all the
World beside? But methinks I hear you answer again, As for this man, we know
not what is become of him; but behold the Spirit is sensibly present amongst us
even at this day. But I demand by what Signs. O, we shiver and quake every
joint of us. But that is no certain sign of the Spirit of God. Was not the
wind suddenly turned into the North, or had you not an Ephemera, or was not
your over-excited Choler entangled or turned out of the way by Phlegm or
Melancholy? What miraculous power is there in all this? O, but there are also
amongst us that have fallen down into a trance, that have foamed and swelled
till their buttons break off. Wherefore of a truth these men could not but be
full of the Spirit, and this be a Miracle indeed. If your Religion owes not
its growth to the tricks of Juglers and Tumblers, or to artificial Epilepsies I
do confess, it is a Miracle from these Symptoms, if Satan himself drives not
on the design. For these are plainly the passions of Pythonicks, such a kind
of possession as seized the Pagan-Prophets and Priests of old, who were no
better then the worshippers of Devils, whose Oracles Christ has silenced long
since. Wherefore examine your selves if you glory not in your shame: See how
you tread: look behind you, or rather search within you, who is the Prompter
or first Mover in this new Scene of things.

4. For tell me (I beseech you) what did your foaming Prophets, when they
vented themselves, discharge into your ears, whereby they may be deemed more
Divine then those Fanatic Pagans? Was not their continual song, so soon as
they got upon their feet, the burning up of all Ordinances? From whence
therefore could this voice come but out of the flames of hell? or what could
swell the bodies of your Inspired, but the venom and poison of the Devil,
which at last working up to their mouths he spit out enviously against the
worship of Christ's Person and all his holy Offices? Which is another evidence
against you that your pretended Inspirations are not divine but diabolical, and
that the mystery of Satan works amongst you, who would fain pull down Him
whom of a truth God has set up to be a King and Priest to the Nations for ever.

5. But the sweetest satisfaction of all is, that you are so extraordinarily
illuminated, that you understand all the Mysteries of Christ's kingdom better
then any one else, and can in a supercilious pity bemoan the ignorance of the
World, or with an imperious bitterness fly in their faces and reproach them for
it, especially the Teachers of the people, that they have not taken up your
Allegorical knacks, nor know how to give a mystical meaning of the Gospel from
the preaching of John the Baptist to the coming of Christ to Judgment.

But you are indeed so unilluminated as not to understand that such devices as
these are merely Allusions of humane Wit, and help very little to the enforcing
of that they are made to signify, namely, Repentance and Mortification of
every evil lust and concupiscence, and a renovation of our minds into the
perfect image of Christ, that his spirit may rule in us, and that the works of
death and darkness may be utterly destroyed. For this Truth is plainly and
literally contained in the Scripture; so that if your minds were not more set
upon fancies then savoury instruction, you need not run a gadding after any new
Guide for the attainment of this light. And, God be thanked, many honest
plain-hearted Christians, that do not swagger and make such a noise with
Mystical phrases as you, both hear and live according to these Gospel-Precepts,
using a secret and silent severity upon themselves, not acting the rough and
hairy Baptist upon others as you do, who love to o^tentate your self-chosen
austerities to the eyes of the world, like the Pharisees, who made sour faces
for fear the people should not take notice that they afflicted their bodies
with fasting.

What purchase therefore have you got by your Allegorical Mysteries? unless
you have been emboldned thereby to let go the Historical truth of the Gospel,
and have found your selves much at ease, that your belief is not charged with
such miraculous things as are written of Christ, partly done already and partly
to be done at the end of the World. For hereby you do proclaim your selves
Infidels, and that for all your boasting, your spirits are so foul and impure,
that they are no fit receptacles of the holy Christian Faith, but that you have
levelled your selves as low as Epicures and Atheists, who are no more capable
of the belief of these things then the Beasts of the Field.

6. If it be thus with you, I dare appeal unto you whether you keep so
precisely to the light within you, but that you have consulted with that blind
Guide H. Nicolas, and tasted of the treacherous sops of his abhorred Passover,
whose Fanatic boldness has led the dance to this mad Apostasy. Have you not
celebrated his detestable Phase, who has gone about to persuade the World that
the greatest and truest Arcanum of the Lords Supper is Iudas-like to betray
their Master, to kill Christ according to the flesh, that is, to lay aside and
misbelieve the Truth of his History? Ask your own hearts, if the warmth of this
sop has not so encouraged you, nay inflamed you with insufferable bitterness
against the Ministers of Christ as teaching nothing but lies, because they have
not ceased to believe the Truth. Has not this with him that entered in with it
so intoxicated you with rage, that you have trampled the holy Bible under your
feet? Is it not this that has made you so often roar against and revile the
Preacher in the Pulpit, and disturb the public Assemblies by your rude and
frantic interpellations? Which Extravagancies demonstrate by what Spirit you
are led, and that you are plainly Rebels against Christ, and are revolted to
the Powers of the dark Kingdom.

7. These things I could not forbear to write, as being very much pressed in
Spirit thereunto. For the Light within me, that is, my Reason and Conscience,
does assure me that the ancient and Apostolic Faith according to the
Historical meaning thereof is very solid and true; and that the Offices of
Christ are never to be antiquated till his visible return to Judgment
according to the literal sense of the Creed; and that Familisme is a mere Flam
of the Devil, a smooth tale to seduce the simple from their Allegiance to
Christ.

And therefore I beseech every man in these days of Liberty to take heed how
they turn in thither, especially those that are of an Enthusiastic temper,
such as are most of the honester and better-meaning Quakers. For if in their
bewildred wanderings they take up their Inn here, let them look to it that they
be not robbed of all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and be stripped into
naked Infidelity and Paganism, and (which is worst of all) be so intoxicated
with the cup of this Inchantress, as to think this injury their gain, and to
prefer false Liberty before their Christian Simplicity, and those gaudy and
fantastic Titles of being Deified and begodded before the real possession of
Christian Truth and Godliness.

8. These things both here and elsewhere I have been forced to utter to the
world; for it was as fire within me, and the discharging of my burden as it is
mine own ease and satisfaction, so I do not despair but if there be that
sincere Zeal to Truth and Holiness that is pretended, that it will redound to
the safety of these melancholy Wanderers that look up and down for Truth with
that candle of the Lord, the Spirit that he has lighted in them. But however
where it shall not take effect, I shall nevertheless be excused, and their
blood will be upon themselves and their accursed Seducers.

9. I know the haughty and covetous, that relish nothing but the tearing to
themselves undeserved respect from men, and clawing of money to them any way
with their crooked talons, will hardly abstain even from open derision of my
zeal and solicitude for so contemned a people, and look upon me as a man of
very mean designs, that would any way intermeddle with these poor despised
Pilgrims. But these worldly Sophists consider not that the gaining of the
meanest Soul to Eternal Salvation is really a greater prize then purchasing
whole Kingdoms upon Earth, and infinitely above all the pains of any man's
applications thereto.

And besides, for mine own part, I have ever had so right a sense and touch
upon my spirit of their condition, that I think none more worthy of a man's best
direction then they; the most imperious Sects having put such unhandsome
vizards upon Christianity, that they have frighted away these babes that seem
to me very desirous of the sincere milk of the Word. Which having been every
where so sophisticated by the humors and inventions of men, it has driven
these anxious Melancholists to seek for a Teacher within, and to cast
themselves upon him who they know will not deceive them, the voice of the
Eternal Word within them; to which if they be faithful, they assure
themselves he will be faithful to them again. Which is no groundless
presumption of theirs, it supposing nothing but what is very closely consistent
with the Nature of God and his Providence. And truly as many of them as do
persist in that serious and impartial desire of such knowledge as tends to Life
and Godliness, I do not question but that God will in his due time lead them
into the Truth, and that they will be more confirmed Christians then ever.

10. Which success of theirs will be more speedy and sure, if (as they set
themselves against other vices, so) they mainly bend their force against
Spiritual Pride and affectation of peculiarity in Religion, and of finding
themselves wiser in the mysteries thereof then the best of Christians have
pretended to. And above all things if they beware of Enthusiasme either in
themselves or others, or of thinking that the gift of the Spirit can be any
Revelation that is contrary to Reason or the acknowledged History of Christ,
the truth thereof being so rationally evincible to all such as apply themselves
without prejudice to examine it to the bottom. If in pursuance of their sincere
intentions they keep off from these rocks, I doubt not but they will return
safe again to Jesus Christ the great Pastor and Bishop of their Souls.

CHAP. XIV. 1. That Public Worship is essential to Religion, and inseparable
when free from Persecution. The right measure of the Circumstances thereof. 2.
Of the Fabric and Beauty of Churches according to that measure. 3. The main
things he intends to touch upon concerning Public Worship. 4. That the
Churches of Christians are not Temples, the excellency of our Religion being
incompliable with that Notion. 5. The vanity of the Sectarians exception
against the word Church applied to the appointed places of Public Worship. 6.
That though the Church be no Temple, yet it is in some sense holy, and what
respect there is to be had of it, and what reverence to be used there. 7. Of
Catechizing, Expounding and Preaching. 8. Of Prayer, and what is the true
praying by the Spirit. 9. The Excellency of public Liturgies. 10. What is the
right End of the Ministry. 11. Certain special uses of Sermons, and of the
excellency of our Savior Christ's Sermon on the Mount. 12. The best way for one
to magnify his Ministry. 13. Of the Holy Communion, who are to be excluded,
and of the posture of receiving it. 14. Of the time of Baptism, and the Sign
of the Cross. 15. Of Songs and Hymns to be composed by the Church, and of
Holy Days. 16. Of the celebrating the Passion-day and the Holy Communion. 17.
Of Images and Pictures in places of Public Worship. 18. A summary
advertisement concerning Ceremonies and Opinions.
1. AFter this charitable Digression to meet with the Quakers, let us resume
our business in hand, and make an end. See Chap. 12. sect. 7.
The sixth and last thing that concerns the Care of the Christian Magistrate is
Public Worship. Which seems to me so natural and essential to Religion, that
it cannot fail to appear, unless some force hinder it; in which case they will
venture to meet in private Conventicles; that is, they will exercise their Acts
of Religion as publicly as they dare, and will not be content to be confined
to their Closets at home. Ioint-exercise therefore of Religion is confessed of
all sides, which therefore must necessarily be external and visible. Now no
visible actions can be done without visible Circumstances, and amongst these
Circumstances some are more fit and decorous, some less; as is manifest at the
first sight. Nor will it be hard to judge of the fitness or decorum of these
Circumstances, if we can find out a measure of them; which certainly is the
End and meaning of them: Which is, the expression of our Honor and Reverence
to God and to his Son Jesus Christ, and the Edification of our Neighbor.

2. By which Rule we shall discover concerning the Meeting House, as some had
rather call it then the Church, that it ought to be of a comely structure,
proportionably magnificent to the number of the People that are to have
recourse to it in the common exercise of their Devotions. For though men of
equal condition may make bold with themselves and meet in what place they
please, yet it would be thought a piece of gross unmannerliness to expect a
Prince to give an inferior Peasant the meeting in a Barn or Cow-stable. Would
it not look then like a piece of irreligious rudeness, which is truly a kind
of Profaneness, to expect that Almighty God and his Son Jesus Christ should
give us the meeting in squalid and sordid places, even then when we pretend
most to show our Reverence and Devotion to him? For though we may make bold one
with another to meet where we please, yet we making our approaches to God in
those places, and he thereby making his special approaches to us (for in a
Philosophical sense he is every where alike) questionless it cannot but be an
expression of our Reverence unto him to have the Structure of the place
proportionably capacious, well and fairly built, and handsomely adorned, and as
properly and significantly of our Religion and devotional homages we owe to our
crucified Savior, as can be without suspicion of Idolatry or any scandalous
Superstition. For it is true from the very light of Nature, which the knowledge
of Christ does not extinguish, but direct and perfect, That Houses of Public
worship ought to have some Stateliness and Splendor in them expressive of the
Reverence we bear to the Godhead we do adore. And therefore the Christian
Magistrate, for the honor of his Savior who suffered so much shame for him,
as also for making Christian Religion more recommendable to them that are
without, (for Religion will not seem Religion to any without Public worship,
nor a desirable Religion unless this Public worship be performed with
inoffensive Splendor and Decency) ought to assist and abett such good
practices as these.

3. It is beyond the limits of my present Discourse to make any curious
inquisition or determination concerning the particularities of this Public
Worship; though I cannot abstain from giving some general hints concerning the
due managements of the chief matters thereof, such as are most obvious to think
of and most useful to consider. And such are the Enquiries into the nature of
the Place of this Public worship, and the Holiness thereof, and our Demeanor
therein, and especially of those chief performances of Preaching, Praying,
Receiving the Sacrament, of Baptism also and of Holy Days: To which we may
add those accessory helps of Devotion, as some account them, Music and
Pictures. Concerning which I shall rather simply declare my sense of things,
then solicitously endeavor to demonstrate my Conclusions by over-operose
Reasonings; which will but raise a dust and provoke the Polemical Rabble.

4. Concerning therefore this House of Public Worship the Christians meet in,
I conceive there is no need to fancy it a Temple; nay rather it seems fit to
look upon it as no Temple, the use of that Ceremony being antiquated by the
excellency and supereminency of our Religion. For the famed Jehovah is not now
a Topical Deity, nor Christ confined to this or that City or People, but is the
declared Worship of the whole Earth, and is not contained within the walls of
any Temple, but has his personal Residence in Heaven, whither our Devotions are
to be directed, and our Minds suspended and lifted up thitherward, not debased
nor defixed to the corners of any earthly Edifice, into which when a man looks
he finds nothing worthy of adoration. To which Truth both Stephen and Paul
give their suffrage, the one declaring to the Jews, the other to the
Areopagites, Act. 7.48. Act. 17.24.
That the most High, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples
made with hands. And our Savior himself to the Samaritan woman who was
solicitous which of those Temples, that of Samaria or that of Jerusalem, was
the right place of Worship, he tells her plainly that such Topical or Figurative
worshipping of God was shortly to cease; Joh. 4.23, 24.
That the hour was coming, and then was, when the true Worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and in truth. For the Father seeks such to
worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
Spirit and in truth, that is, by the inward Sanctity of their Souls, and with
the true service of Prayers and Praises and Alms-deeds, of which Incense and
Sacrifices were but the figures and shadows. Psa. 141.2.
Let my prayer be set forth before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of my
hands as the Evening Sacrifice. Heb. 13.6.
To do good and to communicate, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is
well pleased. And lastly, S. John in his Apocalypse describing the condition of
the New Jerusalem, which is the Church of Christ in her best state, Rev. 21.22.
I saw, says he, no Temple there, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are
the Temple of it: That is, their worship is directed immediately toward God and
Christ, not to any place, as the Jews ever worshipped toward the Temple of
Jerusalem.

5. But though the nature and name of a Temple does not belong to this House of
Public worship according to the sense of Scripture (which made also the
Primitive Christians carefully abstain from that nomination) yet I do not see
any ground at all why some of our phanciful Sects should take offense at the
name of Church applied thereto. For the Church being an house wherein we meet
to serve the Lord, whether God the Father or Christ his Son, both which are
called (...), this house is naturally there from denominated (...) in Greek,
whence is our English word Church, as every trivial Grammarian can tell them.

6. But now it being thus plain, that it is an house for Divine worship, and
therefore has a special relation to God, though it be not dedicated in such a
solemn manner as Solomon's Temple, yet it does necessarily contract a kind of
Holiness hereby, and by this Holiness some measure of respect, namely, that it
should be kept in handsome repair, and be carefully defended from all foulness
and nastiness both within and without. And because Custom has appropriated it
to the service of God, unless very great necessity urge, it is not to be made
use of to any other purposes. Those that are otherwise affected in this matter,
may justly seem guilty of a kind of Incivility against God, as I may so call
it, and hazard the being accounted Clowns in the sight of the Court of Heaven
and all the holy Angels: As that also might be reputed a piece of unskilfulness
and obsolete Courtship, to complement any one part of this House, as if there
were the (...) there, and the Ark of the Covenant. For this would be to turn
the Church of Christ into a Temple. Wherefore those that at their entrance into
the Congregation either kneel down, or standing do their private devotion, and
continue bare-headed before Divine Service begin, they mean not this Devotion
to the Edifice, but testify only with what fear and reverence they make their
approaches to God; and their Hearts being in preparation to a nearer approach,
show their sense of his coming nearer to them by this reverential observance.
For Veneration is done at the coming of great persons at great distances off;
nor does cease till a due distance after the congress.

7. Concerning Preaching, that which is most remarkable is this, That whereas
there are three chief kinds thereof, namely, Catechizing, Expounding a
Chapter, and Preaching usually so called, whereof the first is the best, and
the last the least considerable of them all; this worst and last is the very
Idol of some men, and the other rejected as things of little worth, But
assuredly they are of most virtue for the effectual implanting the Gospel of
Christ in the minds of men, and of the two* as I said, Catechizing the better;
because it enforces the catechized to take notice of what is taught him, and
what is thus taught him is not so voluminous but that he can carry it away and
remember it for ever: and withal the most Useful, as being the very
Fundamentals comprised in the Christian Creed, or the first and most natural
results from them tending to indispensable duties of life; and therefore will
alone, if sincerely believed and faithfully practiced, carry a man to Heaven.

But the next profitable way of Preaching is Expounding of a Chapter, provided
that he that does so, makes it his only business (without any vain excursions
to show his reading) to render those places of the Chapter that are obscure,
easy and intelligible to the capacity of the Auditors, with some brief, but
earnest, urging of their duties from such passages as most necessarily tend
thereto. This will make the private Reading of Scripture pleasant to his
charge: And it will prove the more effectual for their good, if he contain
himself within the New Testament, and fetch only so much out of the Old as will
be subservient for the full understanding of the New. There is nothing so
likely to convince the Conscience as this, when men are able to read and
understand the Text of Scripture it self, and are sensibly beat upon by the
power of that Spirit that is found in those Writings, far beyond all the fine
Speeches and Phrases of humane Eloquence. Which yet is the greatest matter in
this Third way of Preaching, and the truest use that can be made of it, namely,
not to fill the peoples head with unprofitable or hurtful Opinions, but by the
artifice of a more florid and flowing style, to raise the affections of the
Auditors to the love and pursuit of such things as are commanded us by the
Precepts of the Gospel.

I confess therefore, This exercise may be of laudable use in such a
Congregation where all the people are thoroughly grounded in the Fundamentals of
Christianity, and are well skilled in the knowledge of the Bible: otherwise if
the other Two necessary ways of Preaching be silenced by this more overly and
plausible way, it is to the unspeakable detriment of the flock of Christ. Which
will happen even then when it is performed after the very best manner. How
great then is the evil, think you, when the exercise of their popular Eloquence
is nothing but a Stage of ostentation and vainglory to the Speaker, and begets
nothing but an unsound blotedness and ventosity of Spirit in his hearers and
admirers, they being intoxicated with lushious and poisonous Opinions, which
tend to nothing but the extinguishing of the love and endeavor after true
Righteousness and Holiness, and the begetting in them a false security of mind
and abhorred Libertinisme? Had it not been far better that they had rested in
the Fundamentals of their Faith comprised in the Apostles Creed, with an
obligation on their Conscience to live according to the Laws of Christ and his
holy Precepts, then to be led about and infatuated by the heat and noise of
such false Guides?

8. Concerning Praying, it is an Epidemical mistake, That men think extemporary
Prayers are by the Spirit, and that the Spirit is not in a Set Form: Whenas in
truth the Spirit may be absent in the highest extemporary heats, and present in
the use of set Forms, where there may appear greater calmness and coolness. For
the Spirit of Prayer does not consist in the invention of words and phrases
(which is rather a Gift of Nature, as the Faculty of extemporary speaking in
other cases is, proceeding from heat and phansy and copiousness of the Sea Book
2. Chap. 11. sect. 5.
Animal Spirits) but in a firm belief in God through Christ, and in an hearty
liking and sincere desire of having those holy things communicated to us that
we pray for. And therefore he that reads, or hears a public Liturgy read, in
such a frame of mind as I have described, does as truly pray by the Spirit as
he that invents words and phrases of his own. For there is nothing Divine but
this holy Faith and Desire, the rest is mere Nature. And it is a demonstration
how ignorant these men are that talk so loud of the Spirit, whenas they cannot
so much as discern what is truly Spiritual from what is but Animal and Natural.
To which you may add, That if none pray by the Spirit but those that invent
their own words, the whole Congregation are very Spiritless Prayers, they all
hanging upon the lips of the Minister, who alone will be acknowledged to pray
by the Spirit: Whose pretended assistance is not yet always so powerful as to
protect him from the incurring of the danger of Nonsense, and of making the
Public Worship of God insipid or else distasteful and loathsome, or, which is
even as ill, contemptible and ridiculous.

9. Wherefore it is far more safe, as it is undoubtedly more solemn, to use a
public Liturgy that bears the authority of the whole Church, then to venture
so holy and devotional a performance upon the uncertainty of any man's private
spirit, who will be but tempted to ostentate his own conceited Eloquence, or
forced to discover his own weakness and folly. Whenas a set Form will prevent
all Pride and knackishness, and preserve the public worship in its due
reverence and honor, especially where it is contrived with that cautiousness,
that nothing is expressed therein that engages the Mind in controverted
Opinions, but speaks according to the known tenor of Scripture undepraved by
humane glosses.

10. But you will say, if a Minister be cut so short in these performances of
extemporary Prayer and expatiating Preachments, how shall he be able to give
any eximious Testimony of his abilities in his calling? how shall he have the
opportunity of showing his Gifts? To which I answer, That the end of the
Ministry is not the Ostentation of any man's particular Gifts, but the
Edification of the People; which are better edified by diligent catechizing and
faithful and judicious expounding of the Scripture, then by loose and ranging
Discourses out of the Pulpit, where he that speaks having taken leave of his
short Text, may fill the ears of his Auditors with nothing but the noise of his
own conceits and inventions: whenas in the Exposition of a whole Chapter
(suppose) at a time, the peoples minds will be kept closer to those infallible
Oracles, and will more easily discern the prevarications of their Teacher. But
for the greater assurance against any foul play of this kind, his
misinterpretations of these Holy Writings to Loosnesse and Libertinism should
be the forfeiture of the exercise of his Function.

11. Besides, I do not speak so much to exclude Preaching, as to bring
Catechizing and Expounding into more request, which are abundantly more useful
and edifying. Nay, I think that some well-tuned strains of unaffected Eloquence
at the chief Festivals of the Year, and in occasional Exhortations to the
people upon observation of what is most amiss amongst them, done with a great
deal of seriousness and gravity, as also at public Fasts and Thanksgivings,
were a thing of excellent use, and of the more efficacy, it being the more
seldom. But for other days, If our Savior Christ's Sermon on the Mount were
read with much reverence and emphatick distinctness; it being the advice of so
sacred and infallible a person, in whose mouth there was neither Error nor
Guile, who was the Son of God clothed with the formalities of our flesh, on
purpose to take the chair awhile amongst us, and to read us sound and
warrantable Lectures of Divinity; in whose behalf God the Father condescended
to do the Office of a Praeco, and commanded silence out of the Clouds, saying,
This is my beloved Son, hear him; who was so faithful and compassionate a
Pastor to his Flock, that he laid down his life for his Sheep, and so beloved
of his Father, that he was miraculously raised from the dead, and taken up into
heaven; and lastly, who shall visibly descend thence, and judge every man
according to his works; If this Sermon, I say, of wholesome advice and holy
Precepts, were read distinctly and reverently to the people, how can it but be
more edifying and work more upon their spirits for their good, then the
sophisticated and affected Rhetoric of a fallible Mortal? Besides the keeping
out the danger of being either choked with the crooked and spinose
Controversies of Polemical Divinity, or of being poisoned or intoxicated with
the unwholesome sugar-sops of Antinomianism and Libertinism.

12. And lastly, to answer still more home to the point, If thou have a desire
to magnify thy Ministry in an eximious manner, in stead of ostentating thy
Gifts, exercise and improve thy Graces to the highest thou can. Endeavor to
the utmost to be an unblemished Example to thy flock of Humility, of Brotherly
kindeness, of Obedience to the Magistrate, of Temperance, of exact Iustness in
thy dealing, of Compassion to the poor and needy. Use thy best Prudence to keep
Peace and Love amongst thy charge, as it becomes Christians, and to invite the
more able to a charitable relief and help of those that are in want and
necessity, that no unsupportable distress may make the lives of our
fellow members comfortless: as also privately to reprove those that are guilty
of any scandalous miscarriages, but with the wisest and discreetest
applications that may be; that thy Reprehensions, as they ought, so they may
appear to proceed from nothing but from love, and from care and conscience of
thy duty. In which if thou would not lose thine authority and confidence,
thou must live exactly in the indispensable Laws of Christ thy self, nor make
these solemn Reproofs but for the breach of such. But if thou be really vicious
thy self in these, or, to make thy self seem more holy, rebuke for the neglect
of some petty mock-vertues of thine own choosing, thou shall not fail to be
either odious or ridiculous.

But here the great Hypocrisy is this, That to compensate their neglect in
these indispensable and highly-concerning Duties of the Ministry, they abound
in empty Lip-labor, and endeavor to conciliate authority to themselves by
their pretended spiritual Gifts of extemporary Praying and Preaching, in stead
of that unblemished Sanctity of life, of useful Prudence in behalf of their
Charge, and of Christian Goodness and Charity. And that they may keep up their
credit more certainly with the people, they lay their foundation wisely,
namely, by giving them to understand that there is no hope of living as we
should do, or any need thereof; and so making their whole flock as rotten as
themselves both in Principles and Practice, there being none left to reprove
the false Prophet by either example of life or contrariety of doctrine, he thus
secures to himself his authority entire by his admired clack of the Tongue,
which some call The knack of preaching and praying. Which yet, where better
intended, is of as little efficacy as a Tar-bottle hung out on a Thorn-bush, if
compared with personal application and private information and reproof. For
that is like the Adfriction of the pastoral medicine to a diseased Sheep,
without which the formality of the Bottle on the Bush will do no cure, let the
flock be gathered about it never so solemnly.

13. Touching the Communion; None are to be excluded therefrom that profess
their belief of the Holy Scriptures and of the Apostles Creed in the plain
literal and Historical sense thereof; unless they stand guilty of some gross
and scandalous sins (which are to be nominated in some known Law concerning
this matter, and not to be left to the uncertainty of any private Ministers
Judgment) and do persist therein impenitent and unreclaimed. For it were the
greatest treachery to the party that could be, by admitting him to this Holy
Communion, to make him more secure in such sins as will be sure, while they are
unrepented of, to exclude him from that Heavenly Communion of Saints for ever.
Besides the Scandal and Offense to the rest of the serious and sincere-hearted
Communicants, to whom the sight will appear as ugly as if one having fallen
over head and ears into the dirt, should in that black miry hue, droppingly
dirty, place himself at table amongst persons of quality, whom the Master of
the Feast had invited upon some special entertainment.

And as for the Posture of the Communicant, as there are none that are so
curious as to reduce it to that in which Christ and his Disciples celebrated
his last Supper, so none ought to be so captious as to take offense if one
receive the Communion kneeling, in devotion to God and humble thankfulness for
that great Benefit that is signified thereby, namely, the Death of Christ with
the Results thereof, and the participation of his body and blood in that sense
I have spoken of Book 8. c. 9. sect. 2. also c. 10. sect. 2, 3.
elsewhere; nor if another take it sitting, as it is a celebration of a Supper,
or that he may clear himself of the suspicion of Idolizing the outward Elements
of Bread and Wine. For it is as well unjust as uncharitable to be at all
scandalized at actions that have such innocent and allowable grounds, and the
most unsufferable at the celebrating of such a Mystery as is wholly made up of
love and affection to Christ and to one another. I confess an Uniformity would
look better in outward show, but is not worth the least stir or violence in
diversities of actions or rather circumstances interpretable to so good a
meaning. And the real exercise of our Charity in leaving every one free, is
every whit as suitable to this solemn performance as the most exquisite
Uniformity, if devoid of the spirit of Meekness and mutual Forbearance.

14. Concerning Baptism; The more seriously a man looks into it, the more
certain he will find it, That the Scripture has defined nothing concerning the
time of baptising those that are born of believing Parents. Some adventure
further, and affirm there is no Precept for baptizing them at all, and that
they are Members already of the Church by being born of them that are. To the
latter of which I answer, That if they be capable of Membership, how can they
be incapable of the Sign thereof? But to those that acknowledge that they must
be baptized, it being plain that no time is set down in Scripture, I say, it is
naturally left to the power of the Church to appoint that time which she thinks
to be most convenient. For though it may seem more excusable to call the
Churches authority into question, of appointing new Ceremonies or such
circumstances of the old as are not necessary; yet it cannot but be judged an
unsufferable piece of temerity to question it here concerning such a
circumstance as the substance cannot be performed without it. For if any one be
baptized, he must be baptized some time or other. And in my judgment, though
the Arguments of our adversaries make a bold show, she has pitched upon the
safest. For I am very inclinable to believe, though I think I am as little
superstitious as another, that there does some real good accrue to an Infant
from thus early being dedicated to Christ by the sincere devotion of his
Parents. Which dedication he himself is more fully to ratify and complete
publicly in the Church, when he comes to years of discretion, when he will be
able to make distinct Answers to such Questions as it is over-obvious to
imagine were unseasonably asked him when he could not speak.

But for the Cross in Baptism, it was so seasonable at the first Institution
thereof, while professed Pagans were mingled among the Christians, and so
significant always, that if the Church cannot make such an additional as this,
she cannot make any at all. But Unity of hearts being better then Uniformity in
actions indifferent, there ought to be no breach nor quarrel about these
things. But if the Parents conscientiously defer the Child's Baptism till
years of discretion, or desire it should be baptized in its infancy, if they
like the signing of it with the sign of the Cross or the omission of it, the
Minister will conciliate more authority to himself by professing his
indifferency in these things, and his high value of the Indispensables of
Christianity and of his tender regard to the Consciences of men, (which is a
thing more sacred then any Ceremony that is not of Gods own institution,) then
if he drew too hard to an Uniforme compliance in things where Christ has left
us free. For the visible exercise of professed Charity and kind forbearance is
a more comely ornament of the Church then constrained Uniformity. Nay I will
add, That a constant profession of an Indifferency may sooner make the Church
Uniforme, then the placing Religion in these things. For contestation cease
when the Object is judged of little value.

15. Touching Music, it is evident that Hymns and Songs were the timeliest
piece of Public worship that was offered to Christ. And truly I think the
Church having Authority to frame a public Liturgy in prose, they should do
well not to confine their singing to David's Psalms, but also to compose Songs
of their own, in an easy and unaffected Style, but in warrantable both
language and meeter; and get Tunes set to them, not over-operose and
artificial, nor over-plain and languid; which need not be many in number, and
might be taught children betimes, so that there might be no need of the
unsanctified throats of mere Mercenaries to fill up the Quire, but that all
Musical devotions might be performed by the whole congregation, every Christian
making it a piece of the Education of his children to learn the Tunes of the
Church, who therefore would be near-upon as soon fit to sing as to pray with
the rest of the Assembly.

These Hymns composed by the Church should be chiefly for the main Holy Days
thereof, appointed for the celebrating (suppose) of the Nativity, of the
Passion, of the Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior, and of the Mission
of the Holy Ghost. For it seems to me a thing almost beyond belief, That a
Nation should believe the History of Christ, that he was God incarnate at such
a time, and that the same incarnate Deity suffered, etc. and yet not be so much
transported with the consideration, as to celebrate such stupendous passages
by Anniversary Solemnities; since that to adorn the year with Festivals and
Holy Days is according to the very dictate of Nature and practice of all
Nations. Wherefore those that pretend to so much Spirituality as to cast out
all observation of days, I wish it be not a symptom of Infidelity in them,
and of a secret quarrel they have to the truth of Christianity it self. For
those that are most perfect in Divine accomplishments, cannot enjoy the actual
enravishments that may arise from this perfection without vacancy from secular
emploiments, for which these Holy Days therefore are most fit: and those that
are less perfect, by their vacation from worldly drudgery have the opportunity
of searching more closely into the state and condition of their Souls, and of
more serious Meditations and resolutions of composing their life to the most
perfect patterns of Truth and Sanctity.

And for this very purpose The observation of every Seventh day should be
inviolable, not to be profaned by either secular imploiments or foolish
pastimes; but spent in Religious exercises either public or private; not as
placing any Sanctity in days, but in laying hold of so good an opportunity for
the completing of the work of Godliness in us, and meditating upon the infinite
Goodness of God in the Mystery of the Creation and Redemption of mankind.

16. The knowledge of the latter of which being so appropriate to us
Christians, that we are acquainted with the main strokes of the process
thereof, it is more worthy and becoming us not to huddle up all in one day, but
distinctly to celebrate the main Particularities of so concerning a Mystery,
such as are, the Nativity of Christ, his Passion, Resurrection, and the rest;
amongst which the celebration of his Passion being most useful and edifying,
the solemnity thereof ought to be at least as sacred and as frequented and as
religiously celebrated with preaching, praying and singing, as any other day,
and that in a way appropriate to that solemnity with Hymns and Songs also
proper for the Passion of Christ, and mournful and melting Tunes proper to
these Songs composed by the Church.

Which Passion-songs would be also useful upon Communion-dayes, they
containing in them Devotional desires and resolutions of crucifying our
affections and lusts, and of faithful love to Christ and to one another; which
are the Great things that the Passion of Christ points us to and would enforce
upon us. Wherefore the Morning-singings on a Communion-day may very well be
supplied by these Passion-songs. But at the Receiving of the Communion, while
the Bread and the Cup pass about, some Psalms of David that appear most
proper, and that declare the great Goodness and Mercies of God, or some Songs
of the Church's composing appropriate to the purpose, full of thankful
acknowledgments and holy resolutions, may be sung all the time in more cheerful
Tunes, such as the Ascension-songs and Resurrection-songs are sung in. All
which Songs of the Church are to urge duty upon men and press on holiness, upon
considerations naturally flowing from the belief of the things we do solemnize.

If to the singing of these skilfully-composed Songs and choice Psalms, there
were added also the help of an Organ, for the more certain regulating of this
singing part of Devotion and the more affectionate performance thereof; it will
not be easy to imagine what is wanting to a due and unexceptionable filling up
of all comely circumstances of that Public worship that is fit to be practiced
by professed Christians, unless you would bring in also Images and Pictures.

17. But to speak my sense and judgment of things freely; The mere placing of
Images or Statues in a Church is a very bold and daring Spectacle: but the
bowing toward them, or praying with bended knees and eyes devoutly lift up to
them, is intolerable, if Pagan Idolatry be so; nay in some regard worse, that
is, more irrational and ridiculous, forasmuch as these Statues are not
supposed to be the Receptacle of the Spirit of him they pray to: So that their
way of Devotion is utterly groundless, senseless and sottish, as well as
impious and Idolatrous.

Pictures I must con^ess are a more modest Representation; and the
consideration of the vile reproaches some foul mouths have heretofore, and do
sometimes still cast upon the crucified Jesus, may tempt the devotional Lovers
of his Person to a conceit that if there were a Representation of his
Crucifixion in picture, and that they bowed to it at their coming into the
Church, it were but an innocent satisfaction to themselves so publicly to do
their homage to their Savior in that Representation that he is most scorned
and reproached in, and but a just compensation to him for the reproaches that
vile and wicked persons cast out against him.

But to this I answer, first, That the determining our Worship to any part of
the Church would look like the turning of our Christian Meeting Houses into
Temples, Rev. 21 22.
contrary to what is written, I saw no Temple there. And then in the second
place, Though the fetches of man's Wit are very fine and subtle in these cases,
yet it is expressly said that God is a jealous God, and there are many
scrupulous and jealous men, as well in Christendom as out of Christendom; and
therefore a practice that is not right in it self, and so exceeding scandalous
to others, ought by no means to obtain in the public Worship of Christians.

If there be any permission of Pictures therefore in the Church, it must not be
for worship but for ornament, which they will scarce be without considerable
cost; nor that cost again well placed, unless there be some Edification by
them. And therefore I do not conceive how they will be tolerable at all
without some proper Inscriptions also adjoined: As upon the Picture of the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ some such Inscription as that of Saint
Paul, Coloss. 3.1.
If you be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above. Upon the
Picture of the Passion of Christ some such as these, John 12.32.
When I am lifted up, I shall draw all men unto me. Those that are of Christ,
Gal. 5.24.
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Greater love has no
man then this, John 15.13.
that he lay down his life for his friends, This is my commandment, John 13.34.
that as I have loved you, so you would likewise love one another.

And thus every Piece, which are not to be many, should have their proper
Inscriptions, without which they should not be permitted in the Church, as
being fit for nothing but to amuze the sight. But now they are no sooner seen,
but they set a man's Mind awork, and cause him to think of the most important
meaning of the chief passages of the History of Christ. Of which none are more
effectual then that of his Passion; which together with the Passion-songs and
Tunes and Organs may wound the Heart of a man, and let out more corrupt blood
at one touch, then the faint hackings of a dry Discourse of an hour or two
long. Which helps and ornaments of Public worship will fill up all the numbers
of all warrantable splendor and comeliness, and keep out, if precisely kept
to, all shadow and suspicion of either Superstition or Idolatry.

But if any should be so weak or scrupulous as to take offense at so
unexceptionable use of Pictures in the Church, and particularly, if our
Religion should be the less recommendable thereby to either Jews or Turks,
whose conversion we are not only to desire, but with seriousness and
faithfulness to apply our selves to, at least to remove all scandals and
stumbling blocks out of their way; rather then any such dispensable Punctilios
should hinder the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom in the essential Sovereignty
thereof comprehended in the express Precepts of the written Word, a full Pencil
of white directed by Charities own hand should wipe out all these well-meant
delineations and Inscriptions, and to compensate the loss, 1 Cor. 11.16.
that one of S. Paul should succeed, If any man seem to be contentious, we have
no such custom, neither the Churches of God.

18. To conclude, Such is the Truth and Simplicity of Christian Religion, that
if the authority of the Church think good to recommend any Additional
circumstances of divine Worship, they must not be for ineffectual Pomp and
Show, but for real Use and Edification; affecting such a beauty and comeliness
as Nature does in living Creatures, whose pulchritude is the result of such a
Symmetry of Parts and tenor of Spirits as implies vigor and ability to all
the functions of life. And truly there should be no more Ceremony in the
Church, then the Use thereof may be obvious to understand, and the Life and
Power of Holiness may thoroughly actuate; that our Minds may not be amused,
lost, sunk in, or fixed upon any Outward things here, but be carried from all
Visible pomps to the love and admiration of our Blessed Savior in Heaven, and
of that Heavenly and Divine Life that he came into the world to beget in the
hearts of all true Believers.

And what we have said of additional Ceremonies, there is the same reason of
deductional Opinions, they are to have their recommendation from their Use and
Efficacy in promoting Life and Godliness in the Souls of men. But their
obtrusion is as unwarrantable as of the other, if not more. Forasmuch as
Ceremonies are most-what indifferent, Opinions never, but determinately true or
false, or to be held so by them that either doubt or think the contrary: Which
therefore is a greater violence to ingenuous Natures. As also the Usurpation
greater to intrude into either the Prophetic or Legislative office of Christ,
then to affect to be only the master of the Ceremonies; and the Superstition
alike, since Superstition is nothing else but a fear and scrupulosity about
such things as bear no estimate in the eyes of God: as certainly neither of
these do one way nor other, neither Opinions that concern not Life and
Godliness, nor Ceremonies that are of an indifferent nature, and may of
themselves be either practiced or omitted. And therefore for men to be affected
timorously and meticulously in these things, it is a sign they understand not
the royal Law of Christian Liberty, and commit that which is the main vice
included in (...) or Superstition, in that they phansy to themselves a pettish
and captious Deity.

Whence it is manifest that the over-careful using or scrupulously omitting of
indifferent Ceremonies, as also overmuch solicitude in the rejecting or
embracing of useless and uncertain Opinions, is no commendable Worship or
Service, but rather an implicit Reproach of the Holy Godhead they profess to
adore.

THE END.
The CONTENTS.
PREFACE.
1. THE Authors natural averseness from writing of Books. fol. v 2. That there
was a kind of necessity urged him to write what he has wrote hitherto. ibid. 3.
The occasion of writing his Psychozoia. ibid. 4. As also of his Poem Of the
Immortality of the Soul. vi 5. His Satyricall Essays against Enthusiastic
Philosophy. ibid. 6. The great usefulness of his Enthusiasmus Triumphatus and
of this present Treatise for suppressing Enthusiasme. ibid. 7. The occasion and
preparations to his writing his Antidote against Atheism and his Threefold
Cabbala. vii 8. The urgent occasion of writing this present Treatise, as also
of his Discourse Of the Immortality of the Soul. ibid. 9. His account of the
Inscription of this present Treatise. viii 10. His Apology for his so copiously
describing the Animal Life. x 11. And for his large Parallel betwixt Christ and
Apollonius. ibid. 12. The reason of his bringing also Mahomet upon the Stage
and H. N. and of his so large Excursions and frequent Expostulations with the
Quakers and Familists. xi 13. That the wonderful hopes and expectations of the
Religious of the Nation, yea of the better-meaning Fanatics themselves, are
more likely to be fulfilled by this happy restoring of the KING then by any
other way imaginable. xii 14. Wherein consists the very Essence and Substance
of Antichristianisme. xiii 15. That the Honor of beginning that pure and
Apostolic Church that is so much expected seems to have been reserved by
Providence for CHARLES the Second our gracious Sovereign, with pregnant
arguments of so glorious an hope. ibid. 16. The reasons why he did not cast out
of his Discourse what he had written concerning Quakerisme and Familisme,
notwithstand^ng the fear of these Sects may seem well blown over through the
happy settlement of things by the seasonable return of our Gracious Sovereign
to his Throne. xiv 17. The reason of his opposing the Familists and Quakers
above any other Sects. xv 18. His excuse for being less accurate in the
computation of Daniels weeks. ibid. 19. As also for being less copious in the
proving the expected restorement of the Church to her pristine purity; together
with a Description of the condition of those happy ages to come. xvi 20. That
this Discourse was mainly intended for the information of a Christian in his
private capacities. xvii 21. What points he had most probably touched upon if
his design had urged him to speak any thing of Church Government. ibid. 22. A
Description of such a Bishop as is impossible should be Antichristian. xx 23.
Why he omitted to treat of the Reasonableness of the Precepts of Christ. xxi
24. That the pains he took in writing this Treatise were especially intented
for the Rational and Ingenuous. xxii 25. His Apology for the sharpness of his
style in some places. ibid. 26. An Objection against Mr. Mede's Apocalyptick
Interpretations from the supposed sad condition of all Adherers to the Apostate
Church; with the Answer thereto. ibid. 27. The Adversaries Reply to the
foregoing Answer, with a brief Attempt of satisfying the same. xxv 28. An
Apology for his free dislike of that abused Notion of Imputative Righteousness.
xxvi 29. His Defense for so expressly declaring himself for a duly-bounded
liberty of Conscience. xxvii
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. THe Four main Properties of a Mystery. 2. The first Property,
Obscurity. 3. The second, Intelligibleness. 4. The third, Truth. 5. The fourth,
Usefulness. 6. A more full Description of the Nature of a Mystery. 7. The
distribution of the whole Treatise. fol. 1. CHAP. II. 1. That it is fit that
the Mystery of Christianity should be in some measure Obscure, to exclude the
Sensual and Worldly. 2. As also to defeat disobedient Learning and Industry.
3. And for the pleasure and improvement of the godly and obedient. 4. The high
Gratifications of the Speculative Soul from the Obscurity of the Scriptures. 3
CHAP. III. 1. The Obscurity of the Christian Mystery argued from the Effect, as
from the Jews rejecting their Messiah; 2. From the many Sects amongst
Christians: 3. Their difference in opinion concerning the Trinity, 4. The
Creation, 5. The Soul of Man, 6. The Person of Christ, 7. And the Nature of
Angels. 5 CHAP. IV. 1. That the Trini^y was not brought out of Plato's School
into the Church by the Fathers. 2. A Description of the Platonic Trinity, and
of the difference of the Hypostases. 3. A Description of their Union: 4. And
why they hold All a due Object of Adoration. 5. The irrefutable Reasonableness
of the Platonic Trinity, and yet declined by the Fathers, a Demonstration that
the Trinity was not brought out of Plato's School into the Church. 6. Which is
further evidenced from the compliableness of the Notion of the Platonic
Trinity with the Phrase and Expressions of Scripture. 7. That if the Christian
Trinity were from Plato, it follows not that the Mystery is Pagan. 8, 9, 10.
The Trinity proved from Testimony of Holy Writ. 7 CHAP. V. 1. That the natural
sense of the First of S. John does evidently witness the Divinity of Christ. 2.
A more particular urging of the circumstances of that Chapter. 3. That S. John
used the word (...) in the Jewish or Cabbalistical notion. 4. The Trinity and
the Divinity of Christ argued from Divine worship due to him, and from his
being a Sacrifice for sin. 5. That to deny the Trinity and Divinity of Christ,
or to make the Union of our selves with the Godhead of the same nature with
that of Christ's, subverts Christianity. 6. The uselesness and sauciness of the
pretended Deification of Enthusiasts, and how destructive it is of Christian
Religion. 7. The Providence of God in preparing of the Nations by Platonisme
for the easier reception of Christianity. 11 CAAP. VI. 1. The danger and
disconsolateness of the Opinion of the Psychopannychites. 2. What they allege
out of 1 Cor. 15. set down. 3. A Preparation to an Answer advertising First, of
the nature of Prophetic Schemes of speech. 4. Secondly, of the various
vibration of an inspired Fancy. 5. Thirdly, of the ambiguity of words in
Scripture, and particularly of (...) and (...). 6. And lastly, of the
Corinthians being sunk into an Unbelief of any Reward after this life. 7. The
Answer out of the last and foregoing Premisse. 8. A further Answer out of the
first. 9. As also out of the second and third, where their Objection from verse
32. is fully satisfied. 10. Their Argument answered which they urge from our
Saviors citation to the Sadducees, I am the God of Abraham, etc. 15 CHAP. VII.
1. A General Answer to the last sort of places they allege that imply no
enjoyment before the Resurrection. 2. A Particular Answer to that of 2 Cor 5.
out of Hugo Grotius. 3. A preparation to an Answer of the Author's own, by
explaining what the Greek word (...) may signify. 4. His Paraphrase of the six
first Verses of the forecited Chapter. 5. A further confirmation of his
Paraphrase. 6. The weakness of the Reasons of the Psychopannychites noted. 19
CHAP. VIII. 1. That the Opinion of the Soul's living and acting immediately
after Death, was not fetched out of Plato by the Fathers, because they left out
Preexistence, an Opinion very rational in it self, 2. And such as seems
plausible from sundry places of Scripture, as those alleged by Menasseh Ben
Israel out of Deuteronomy, Jeremy, and Job. 3. As also God's resting on the
seventh day. 4. That their proclivity to think that the Angel that appeared to
the Patriarchs so often was Christ, might have been a further inducement. 5.
Other places of the New Testament which seem to imply the Preexistence of
Christ's Soul. 6. More of the same kind out of S. John. 7. Force added to the
last proofs from the opinion of the Socinians. 8. That our Savior did admit,
or at least not disapprove, the opinion of Preexistence. 9. The main scope
intended from the preceding allegations, namely, That the Soul's living and
acting after death is no Pagan opinion out of Plato, but a Christian Truth
evidenced out of the Scriptures. 21 CHAP. IX. 1. Proofs out of Scripture That
the Soul does not sleep after death: as 1 Peter 3. with the explication
thereof. 2. The Authors Paraphrase compared with Calvin's Interpretation. 3.
That Calvin needed not to suppose the Apostle to have writ false Greek. 4. Two
ways of interpreting the Apostle so as both Grammatical Soloecisme and
Purgatory may be declined. 5. The Second way of Interpretation. 6. A second
proof out of Scripture. 7. A third of like nature with the former. 8. A further
enforcement and explication thereof. 9. A fourth place. 10. A fifth from Hebr.
12. where God is called the Father of Spirits, etc. 11. A sixth testimony from
our Saviors words, Matthew. 20.28. 25 CHAP. X. 1. A pregnant Argument from the
State of the Soul of Christ and of the Thief after death. 2. Grotius his
explication of Christ's promise to the Thief. 3. The meaning of (...). 4. How
Christ with the Thief could be (...) and in Paradise at once. 5. That the
Parables of Dives and Lazarus and of the unjust Steward imply That the Soul
has life and sense immediately after death. 28
BOOK II.
CHAP. I. HE passes to the more Intelligible parts of Christianity, for the
understanding whereof certain preparative Propositions are to be laid down. 2.
As, That there is a God. 3. A brief account of the Assertion from his Idea. 4.
A further Confirmation from its ordinary concatenation with the Rational
account of all other Beings, as first of the Existence of the disjoynt and
independent particles of Matter. 31 CHAP. II. 1. That the wise contrivances in
the works of Nature prove the Being of a God; 2. And have extorted an
acknowledgement of a General Providence, even from irreligious Naturalists. 3.
That there is a Particular Providence or Inspection of God upon every
individual person: Which is his Second Assertion. 32 CHAP. III. 1. His Third
Assertion, That there are Particular Spirits or Immaterial Substances, and of
their Kinds. 2. The Proof of their Existence, and especially of theirs which in
a more large sense be called Souls. 3. The Difference betwixt the Souls or
Spirits of Men and Angels, and how that Pagan Idolatry and the Ceremonies of
Witches prove the Existence of Devils. 4. And that the Existence of Devils
proves the Existence of Good Angels. 34 CHAP. IV. 1. His Fourth Assertion, That
the Fall of the Angels was their giving up themselves to the Animal Life, and
forsaking the Divine. 2. The Fifth, That this fall of theirs changed their
purest Vehicles into more gross and feculent. 3. The Sixth, That the change of
their Vehicles was no extinction of life. 4. The Seventh, That the Souls of Men
are immortal, and act and live after death. The inducements to which belief are
the Activity of fallen Angels. 5. The Homogeneity of the inmost Organ of
Perception. 6. The scope and meaning of External Organs of Sense in this
Earthly Body. 7. The Soul's power of Organizing her Vehicle. 8. And lastly, The
accuracy of Divine Providence. 35 CHAP. V. 1. The Eighth Assertion, That there
is a Polity amongst the Angels and Souls separate, both Good and Bad; and
therefore Two distinct Kingdoms, one of Light and the other of Darkness: 2.
And a perpetual fewd and conflict betwixt them. 3. The Ninth, That there are
infinite swarms of Atheistical Spirits, as well Aereal as Terrestrial, in an
utter ignorance or hatred of all true Religion. 37 CHAP. VI. 1. His Tenth
Assertion, That there will be a final Overthrow of the Dark Kingdom, and that
in a supernatural manner, and upon their external persons. 2. The Eleventh,
That the Generations of men had a beginning, and will also have an end. 3. To
which also the Conflagration of the world gives witness. 39 CHAP. VII. 1. His
Twelfth Assertion, That there will be a Visible and Supernatural deliverance of
the Children of the Kingdom of Light at the Conflagration of the World. 2. The
Reason of the Assertion. 3. His Thirteenth Assertion, That the last vengeance
and deliverance shall be so contrived, as may be best fit for the Triumph of
the Divine life over the Animal life. 4. Whence it is most reasonable the
Chieftain of the Kingdom of Light should be rather an Humane Soul then an
Angel. 5. His last Assertion an Inference from the former, and a brief
Description of the General nature of Christianity. 41 CHAP. VIII. 1. That not
to be at least a Speculative Christian is a sign of the want of common Wit and
Reason. 2. The nature of the Divine and Animal life, and the state of the World
before and at our Savior's coming, to be enquired into before we proceed. 3.
Why God does not forthwith advance the Divine life and that Glory that seems
due to her. 4. The First Answer. 5. A Second Answer. 6. A Third Answer. 7. The
Fourth and last Answer. 43 CHAP. IX. 1. What the Animal life is in General, and
that it is Good in it self. 2. Self-love the Root of the Animal Passions, and
in it self both requisite and harmeless in Creatures. 3. As also the Branches.
4. The more refined Animal properties in Brutes, as the Sense of Praise,
natural Affection, Craft: 5. Political Government in Bees, 6. And Cranes and
Stags, 7. As also in Elephants. 8. The Inference, That Political Wisdom, with
all the Branches thereof, is part of the Animal life. 46 CHAP. X. 1. That there
is according to Pliny a kind of Religion also in Brutes, as in the
Cercopithecus; 2. In the Elephant. 3. A confutation of Pliny's conceit. 4 That
there may be a certain Passion in Apes and Elephants upon their sight of the
Sun and Moon, something a kin to that of Veneration in Man, and how Idolatry
may be the proper fruit of the Animal life. 5. A discovery thereof from the
practice of the Indians, 6. whose Idolatry to the Sun and Moon sprung from that
Animal passion. 7. That there is no hurt in the Passion it self, if it sink us
not into an insensibleness of the First invisible cause. 49 CHAP. XI. 1. Of a
Middle life whose Root is Reason, and what Reason it self is. 2. The main
branches of this Middle life. 3. That the Middle life acts according to the
life she is immersed into, whether Animal or Divine. 4. Her activity, when
immersed in the Animal life, in things against and on this side Religion. 5.
How far she may go in Religious performances. 51 CHAP. XII. 1. The wide
conjecture and dead relish of the mere Animal man in things pertaining to the
Divine life, and that the Root of this life is Obediential Faith in God. 2. The
three Branches from this Root, Humility, Charity and Purity; and why they are
are called Divine. 3. A description of Humility 4. A Description of Charity,
and how Civil Justice or Moral Honesty is eminently contained therein. 5. A
Description of Purity, and how it eminently contains in it whatever Moral
Temperance or Fortitude pretend to. 6. A Description of the truest Fortitude:
7. And how transcendent an Example thereof our Savior was. 8. A further
representation of the stupendous Fortitude of our Savior. 9. That Moral
Prudence also is necessarily comprised in the Divine life. 10. That the Divine
life is the truest Key to the Mystery of Christianity; but the excellency
thereof unconceivable to those that do not partake of it. 52
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. THat the Lapse of the Soul from the Divine life immersing her into
Matter, brings on the Birth of Cain in the Mystical Eve driven out of Paradise.
2. That the most Fundamental mistake of the Soul lapsed is that Birth of Cain,
and that from hence also sprung Abel in the mystery, the vanity of Pagan
Idolatry. 3. Solomon's universal charge against the Pagans, of Polytheisme and
Atheism, and how fit it is their Apology should be heard for the better
understanding the State of the World out of Christ. 4. Their plea of
worshipping but one God, namely the Sun, handsomely managed by Macrobius. 5.
The Indian Brachmans worshippers of the Sun: Apollonius his entertainment with
them, and of his false and vain affectation of Pythagorisme. 6. The Ignorance
of the Indian Magicians, and of the Demons that instructed them. 7. A
Concession that they and the rest of the Pagans terminated their worship upon
one Supreme Numen, which they conceived to be the Sun. 56 CHAP. II. 1. That the
abovesaid concession advantages the Pagans nothing, forasmuch as there are
more Suns then one. 2. That not only Unity, but the rest of the Divine
Attributes are incompetible to the Sun. 3. Of Cardan's attributing
Understanding to the Sun's light, with a confutation of his fond opinion. 4.
Another sort of Apologizers for Paganism, who pretend the Heathens worshipped
One God, to which they gave no name. 5. A discovery out of their own Religion
that this innominated Deity was not the True God, but the Material world. 60
CHAP. III. 1. The last Apologizers for Paganism, who acknowledge God to be an
Eternal Mind distinct from Matter, and that all things are manifestations of
his Attributes. 2. His Manifestations in the External World. 3. His
Manifestations within us by way of Passion. 4. His more noble emanations and
communications to the inward Mind, and how the ancient Heathen affixed personal
Names to these several Powers or manifestations. 5. The reason of their making
these several Powers so many Gods or Goddesses. 6. Their Reason for worshipping
the Genii and Heroes. 62 CHAP. IV. 1. The Heathens Festivals, Temples and
Images. 2. Their Apology for Images. 3. The Significancy of the Images of
Jupiter and Aeolus. 4. Of Ceres. 5. Of Apollo. 6. Their Plea from the
significancy of their Images, that their use in Divine worship is no more
Idolatrous then that of Books in all Religions; as also from the use of Images
in the Nation of the Jews. 7. Their Answer to those that object the
impossibleness of representing God by any outward Image. 8. That we are not to
envy the Heathen, if they hit upon any thing more weighty in their Apologies
for their Religion; and why. 65 CHAP. V. 1. An Answer to the last Apology of
the Pagans; as first, That it concerns but few of them, 2. and that those few
were rather of the (...), then pure Pagans. 3. That the worship of Images is
expressly forbid by God in the Law of Moses. 4. That they rather obscure then
help our conceptions of the Divine Powers. 5. That there is great danger of
these Images intercepting the worship directed to God. 6. He referrs the
curious and unsatisfied to the fuller Discussions in Polemical Divinity. 68
CHAP. VI. 1. A new and unanswerable charge against Paganism, namely, That they
adored the Divine Powers no further then they reached the Animal life, as
appears from their Dijoves and Vejoves, 2. Jupiter altitonans, Averruncus,
Robigus and Tempestas. 3. From the pleasant spectacle of their God Pan: what is
meant by his Pipe, and Nymphs dancing about him. 4 What by his being deemed the
Son of Hermes and Mercury, and what by his beloved Nymph Syrinx, his wife Echo
and daughter Iambe. 5. The interpretation of his horns, hairiness, red face,
long beard, goats feet, and laughing countenance. 69 CHAP. VII. 1. That as the
World or Universe was deified in Pan, so were the parts thereof in Coelius,
Juno, Neptune, Vulcan, Pluto, Ops, Bacchus, Ceres, etc. 2. That the Night was
also a Deity, and why they sacrificed a Cock to her, with the like reason of
other Sacrifices. 3. Interior Manifestations that concern the Animal life,
namely that of Wrath and Love, which are the Pagans Mars and Venus. 4. Minerva,
Mercurius, Eunomia, etc. Manifestations referred to the Middle life. 5. The
agreement of the Greeks Religion with the Romans, as also with the Egyptians.
6. Their worship of the River Nilus, etc. 7. That the Religion of the rest of
the Nations of the world was of the same nature with that of Rome, Greece, and
Egypt, and reached no further then the Animal life. 8. And that their
worshipping of men deceased stood upon the same ground. 71 CHAP. VIII. 1. That
Judaisme also respected nothing else but the Gratifications of the Animal life,
as appears in all their Festivals. 2. That though the People were held in that
low dispensation, yet Moses knew the meaning of his own Types, and that
Immortality that was to be revealed by Christ. 3. That their Sabbaths reached
no further then things of this life; 4. Nor their Sabbatical years and
Jubilees; 5. Nor their Feasts of Trumpets; 6. Nor their Feast of Tabernacles;
7. Nor their Pentecost; 8. Nor lastly their Feast of Expiation. 74 CHAP. IX. 1.
The Preeminency of Judaism above Paganism. 2. The Authors of the Religions of
the Heathen, who they were. 3. How naturally lapsed Mankind falls under the
superstitious Tyranny of Devils. 4. The palpable effects of this Tyranny in the
Nations of America. 5. That that false and wild Resignation in the Quakers
does naturally expose them to the Tyranny of Satan. 6. That their affectation
of blind impulses is but a preparation to Demonical possession, and a way to
the restoring of the vilest Superstitions of Paganism. 76 CHAP. X. 1. The
Devil's usurped dominion of this world, and how Christ came to dispossess him.
2. The largeness of the Devil's dominion before the coming of Christ. 3. The
Nation of the Jews, the light of the world; and what influence they might have
on other Nations in the m^dst of the reign of Paganism. 4. That if our
Hemisphere was any thing more tolerable then the American, it is to be imputed
to the Doctrine of the Patriarchs, Moses and the Prophets. 5. That this
Influence was so little, that all the Nations besides were Idolaters, most of
them exercising of obscene and cruel Superstitions. 78 CHAP. XI. 1. The
villainous Rites of Cybele the Mother of the Gods. 2. Their Feasts of Bacchus:
3. Of Priapus, and the reason of sacrificing an Ass to him. 4. Their
Lupercalia, and why they were celebrated by naked men. 5. The Feasts of Flora.
6. Of Venus, and that it was the Obscene Venu^ they worshipped. 7. That their
Venus Urania, or Queen of Heaven, is also but Earthly lust, as appears from her
Ceremonies. 8. That this Venus is thought to be the Moon. Her lascivious and
obscene Ceremonies. 79 CHAP. XII. 1. Of their famous Eleusinia, how foul and
obscene they were. 2. The magnificency of those Rites, and how hugely
frequented. 3. That the bottom thereof was but a piece of Baudery, held up by
the Obscene and ridiculous story of Ceres and Baubo. 4. Of their foul
superstitions in Tartary, Malabar, Narsinga, and the whole Continent of
America. 82 CHAP. XIII. 1. The bloody Tyranny of the Devil in his cruel
Superstitions. The whipping of the prime youth of Lacedaemon at the Altar of
Diana. 2. The sacrificing to Bellona and Dea Syria with the Priests own blood.
The blood of the sick vowed to be offered in Cathaia and Mangi, with other vile
and contemptuous abuses of Satan. 3. Other scornful and harsh misusages in Siam
and Pegu. Men squeezed to death under the wheels of an Idols Chariot in the
Kingdom of Naisinga and Bisnagar. 4. Foul tedious Pilgrimages in Zeilan,
together with the cuttings and slashings of the flesh of the Pilgrim. 5.
Whipping, eating the earth, plucking out eyes before the Idol in New-Spain,
with their antic and slovenly Ceremonies in Hispaniola. 6. The intolerable
harshness of their Superstitious Castigations in Mexico and Peru. 7. That these
base usages are an infallible demonstration of the Devil's Hatred and Scorn of
Mankind. 84 CHAP. XIV. 1. Men sacrificed to the Devil in Virginia, Peru,
Brasilia. They of Guiana and Pa^ia also eat them being sacrificed. The Ceremony
of these-Sacrifices in Nicaragua. 2. The hungry and bloodthirsty Devils of
Florida and Mexico. 3. Their sacrificing of Children in Peru, with the Ceremony
of drowning a Boy and a Girl in Mexico. 4. The manner of the Mexicans
sacrificing their Captives. 5. The huge numbers of those Sacrifices in Mexico,
and of their dancing about the City in the skin of a man new flayed. 6. And in
New-Spain in the skin of a woman. 86 CHAP. XV. 1. The sacrificing of Children
to Moloch in the valley of Hinnom. 2. That it was not a Februation, but real
Burning of them. 3. That this custom spread from Syria to Carthage. 4. Further
Arguments thereof, with the mistake of Saturn being called Israel rectified by
Grotius. And that Abraham's offering up Isaac was no occasion at all to these
execrable sacrifices. 5. Sacrificing of men in Britain, Lusitania, France,
Germany, Thrace and in the Isle of Man. 6. In sundry places also of Greece, as
Messene, Arcadia, Chios, Aulis, Locri, Lacedaemon. 7. That the Romans were not
free neither from these salvage sacrifices. 8. To which you may add the
Cimbrians, Lituanians, Egyptians, the Inhabitants of Rhodes, Salamis, Tenedos,
Indians, Persians, etc. 87 CHAP. XVI. 1. Four things still behind to be briefly
touched upon for the fuller Preparation to the understanding the Christian
Mystery; as First the Pagan Catharmata. The use of them proved out of Caesar;
2. As also out of Statius and the Scholiast upon Aristophanes. 3. That all
their expiatory Men-sacrifices whatsoever were truly Catharmata. 4. The Second,
their Apotheoses or Deifications of men. The names of several recited out of
Diodorus. 5. Of Baal-Peor, and how in a manner all the Temples of the Pagans
were Sepulchers. Their pedigree noted by Lactantius out of Ennius. 6. Certain
examples of the Deification of their Lawgivers. 90 CHAP. XVII. 1. The Third
Observable, The Mediation of Demons. 2. This Superstition glanced at by the
Apostle in (...). And that Demons are the Souls of men departed, according to
Hesiod. 3. As also according to Plutarch and Maximus Tyrius. 4. The Author's
inference from this position. 92 CHAP. XVIII. 1. The Fourth and last thing to
be noted, namely their Heroes, who were thought to be either begot of some God,
or born of some Goddess: the latter whereof is ridiculous, if not impossible;
2. The former not at all incredible. 3. Franciscus Picus his opinion of the
Heroes (feigned so by the Poets) as begot of the Gods: that they were really
begotten of some impure Demons, with Josephus his suffrage to the same
purpose. 4. The Possibility of the thing further illustrated from the
impregnation of Mares merely by the Wind, asserted by several Authors. 5. The
application of the History, and a further confirmation from the manner of
Conception out of Dr. Harvey. 6. Examples of men famed for this kind of
miraculous Birth of the Heroes, on this side the tempus (...) or (...). 94
CHAP. XIX. 1. That out of the Principles we have laid down, and the History of
the Religions of the Nations we have produced, it is easy to give a Reasonable
account of all matters concerning our Savior from his Birth to his Visible
return to Judgment. 2. That Christianity is the Sum and Perfection of
whatever things were laudable or passable in any Religion that has been in the
world. 3. The Assertion made good by the enumeration of certain Particulars. 4.
That our Religion seems to be more chiefly directed to the Nations then the
Jews themselves. 5. An Enumeration of the main Heads in the History of Christ,
that he intends to give account of. 97
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I. THat Christ's being born of a Virgin is no Impossible thing. 2. And
not only so, but also Reasonable in reference to the Heroes of the Pagans. 3.
And that this outward birth might be an emblem of his Eternal Sonship. 4.
Thirdly in relation to the Sanctity of his own person, and for the
recommendation of Continence and Chastity to the world. 5. And lastly for the
completion of certain prophecies in the Scriptures that pointed at the Messiah.
99 CHAP. II. 1. That as the Virginity of Christ's Mother recommended Purity, so
her Meanness recommends Humility to the world; as also other Circumstances of
Christ's Birth. 2. Of the Salutation of the Angel Gabriel, and of the Magi. 3.
That the History of their Visit helps on also belief, and that it is not Reason
but Sottishness that excepts against the ministry of Angels. 4. His design of
continuing a Parallel betwixt the life of Christ and of Apollonius Tyaneus. 5.
The Pedigree and Birth of Apollonius, how rank they smell of the Animal life.
6. The Song of the Angels and the dance of the musical Swans at Apollonius's
birth compared. 101 CHAP. III. 1. That whatever miraculously either happened to
or was done by our Savior till his Passion cannot seem impossible to him that
holds there is a God and ministration of Angels. 2. Of the descending of the
Holy Ghost, and the Voice from Heaven at his Baptism. 3. Why Christ exposed
himself to all manner of hardship and Temptations. 4. And particularly why he
was tempted of the Devil, with an answer to an Objection touching the Devil's
boldness in daring to tempt the Son of God. 5. How he could be said to show him
all the Kingdoms of the Earth. 6. The reason of his forty days fast, 7. And
of his Transfiguration upon the Mount. The three first reasons. 8. The meaning
of Moses and Elias his receding, and Christ's being left alone. 9. The last
reason of his Transfiguration, That it was for the Confirmation of his
Resurrection and the Immortality of the Soul. 10. Testimonies from Heaven of
the Eminency of Christ's person. 103 CHAP. IV. 1. What miraculous accidents in
Apollonius his life may seem parallel to these of Christ's. His superstitious
fasting from flesh and abstinence from wine out of a thirst after the glory of
foretelling things to come. 2. Apollonius a Master of Judiciary Astrology, and
of his seven Rings with the names of the seven Planets. 3. Miraculous
Testimonies given to the eminency of Apollonius his Person by Aesculapius and
Trophonius how weak and obscure. 4. The Brachmans high Encomium of him, with an
acknowledgment done to him by a fawning Lion. The ridiculous Folly of all these
Testimonies. 107 CHAP. V. 1. Three general Observables in Christ's Miracles. 2.
Why he several times charged silence upon those he wrought his Miracles upon.
3. Why Christ was never frustrated in attempting any Miracle. 4. The vanity of
the Atheists that impute his Miracles to the power of Imagination. 5. Of the
delusive and evanid viands of Witches and Magicians. 108 CHAP. VI. 1. Of
Christ's dispossessing of Devils. 2. An account of there being more Daemoniacks
then ordinary in our Saviors time. As first from a possible want of care or
skill how to order their Madmen or Lunaticks. 3. The second from the power of
the Devil being greater before the coming of Christ then after. 4. That not
only Excommunication but Apostasy from Christ may subject a man to the Tyranny
of Satan, as may seem to have fallen out in several of the more desperate Sects
of this Age. 5. An enumeration of sundry Daemoniacal symptoms amongst them. 6.
More of the same nature. 7. Their profane and antic imitations of the most
solemn passages in the History of Christ. 8. A further solution of the present
difficulties from the premised considerations. 9. A third and fourth Answer
from the fame of their cure and the conflex of these Daemoniacks into one
Country. 10. A fifth from the ambiguity of the word (...). 11. The sixth and
last Answer, That it is not at all absurd to admit there was a greater number
of real Daemoniacks in Christ's time then at other times, from the useful end of
their then abounding. 110 CHAP. VII. 1. That the History of the Daemoniack
whose name was Legion has no incongruity in it. 2. That they were a Regiment of
the Dark Kingdom that haunted most the Country of the Gadarens; and that
whether we conceive their Chieftain alone, or many of his army to possess the
man, there is no absurdity therein. 3. How it came to pass so many Devils
should clatter about one forty person. 4. The Reason of Christ's demanding of
the Daemoniacks name, and the great use of recording this History. 5. The
numerosity of the Devils discovered by their possession of the Swine. 6.
Several other Reasons why Christ permitted them to enter into the Gadarens
herds. 7. That Christ offended against the laws of neither Compassion nor
Justice in this permission. 114 CHAP. VIII. 1. Of Christ's turning water into
wine. 2. The Miraculous draught of Fish. 3. His whipping the Money Changers out
of the Temple. 4. His walking on the Sea, and rebuking the Wind. 5. His
cursing the Fig Tree. 6. The meaning of that Miracle. 7. The reason why he
expressed his meaning so aenigmatically. 8. That both the Prophets and Christ
himself (as in the Ceremonies he used in curing the man that was born blind)
spoke (...), in Typical Actions. 9. The things that were typified in those
ceremonies Christ used in healing the blind; as in his tempering Clay and
Spittle. 10. A further and more full Interpretation of the whole Transaction.
11. Some brief touches upon the Prophesies of Christ. 117 CHAP. IX. 1. The
Miracles of Apollonius compared with those of Christ. 2. His entertainment at a
Magical banquet by Iarchas and the rest of the Brachmans. 3. His cure of a
Dropsy and of one bitten by a mad dog. 4. His freeing of the City of Ephesus
from the plague. 5. His casting a Devil out of a laughing Daemoniack, and
chasing away a whining Spectre on Mount Caucasus in a Moonshine night. 6. His
freeing Menippus from his espoused Lamia. 120 CHAP. X. 1. Apollonius his
raising from death a young married Bride at Rome. 2. His Divinations, and
particularly by Dreams. 3. His Divinations from some external accidents in
Nature. 4. His Prediction of Stephanus killing Domitian from an Halo that
encircled the Sun. Astrology and Meteorology covers to Pagan Superstition and
converse with Devils. 5. A discovery thereof from this prediction of his from
the Halo compared with his phrantick Ecstasies at Ephesus. 6. A general
Conclusion from the whole parallel of the Acts of Christ and Apollonius. 122
CHAP. XI. 1. A Comparison of the Temper or Spirit in Apollonius with that in
Christ. 2. That Apollonius his Spirit was at the height of the Animal life, but
no higher. 3. That Pride was the strongest chain of darkness that Apollonius
was held in, with a rehearsal of certain Specimens thereof. 4. That his whole
Life was nothing else but an exercise of Pride and Vainglory, boldly
swaggering himself into respect with the greatest wherever he went. 5. His
reception with Phraotes King of India, and Iarchas head of the Brachmans. 6.
His intermedling with the affairs of the Roman Empire, his converse with the
Babylonian Magi and Egyptian Gymnosophists, and of his plausible Language and
Eloquence. 7. That by the sense of Honor and Respect he was hooked in to be so
active an Instrument for the Kingdom of Darkness. 8. That though the Brachmans
pronounced Apollonius a God, yet he was no higher then the better sort of
Beasts. 124 CHAP. XII. 1. The Contrariety of the Spirit of Christ to that of
Apollonius. 2. That the History of Apollonius, be it true or false, argues the
exquisite Perfection of the life of Christ, and the Transcendency of that
Divine Spirit in him that no Pagan could reach by either Imagination or Action.
3. The Spirit of Christ how contemptible to the mere Natural man, and how dear
and precious in the eyes of God. 4. How the several Humiliations of Christ were
compensated by God with both suitable and miraculous Privileges and
Exaltations. 5. His deepest Humiliation, namely, his Suffering the death of the
Cross, compensated with the highest Exaltation. 127 CHAP. XIII. 1. The
ineffable power of the Passion of Christ, and other indearing applications of
him, for winning the World off from the Prince of Darkness. 2. Of his preceding
Sufferings and of his Crucifixion. 3. How necessary it was that Christ should
be so passive and sensible of pain in his suffering on the Cross; against the
blasphemy ^f certain bold Enthasiasts. 4. Their ignorance in the Divine life,
and how it alone was to triumph in the Person of Christ unassisted by the
advantages of the Animal or Natural. 5. That if Christ had died boldly and with
little sense of p^in, both the Solemnity and Usefulness of his Passion had been
lost. 6. That the strange Accidents that attended his Crucifixion were
Prefigurations of the future Effects of his Passion upon the Spirits of men in
the World. 7. Which yet hinders not but that they may have other
significations. 8. The third and last reason of the Tragical unsupportableness
of the Passion of Christ, in that he bore the sins of the whole World. 9. The
Leg^^leious cavils of some conceited Sophists that pretend That it is unjust
with God to punish the Innocent in stead of the Guilty. 10. The false Ground of
all their frivolous subtilties. 129 CHAP. XIV. 1. That Sacrifices in all
Religions were held Appeasements of the Wrath of their Gods. 2. And that
therefore the Sacrifice of Christ is rather to be interpreted to such a
Religious sense then by that of Secular laws. 3. The disservice some corrosive
Wits do to Christian Religion, and what defacements their Subtilties bring upon
the winning comeliness thereof. 4. The great advantage the Passion of Christ
has, compared with the bloody Tyranny of Satan. 132 CHAP. XV. 1. An Objection
concerning the miraculous Eclipse of the Sun at our Savior's Passion, from its
not being recorded in other H^storians. 2. Answer, That this wonderful
Accident might as well be omitted by several Historians as those of like
wonderfulness; as for example the darkness of the Sun about Julius Caesar's
death. 3. Farther, That there are far greater Reasons that Historians should
omit the darkness of the Sun at Christ's Passion then that at the death of
Julius Caesar. 4. That Grotius ventures to affirm this Eclipse recorded in
Pagan writers; and that Tertullian appealed to their Records. 5. That the Text
does not imply that it was an universal Eclipse, whereby the History becomes
free from all their Cavils. 6. Apollonius his Arraignment before Domitian, with
the ridiculousness of his grave Exhortations to Damis and Demetrius to suffer
for Philosophy. 134
BOOK V.
CHAP. I. OF the Resurrection of Christ, and how much his eye was fixed upon
that Event. 2. The chief Importance of Christ's Resurrection. 3. The World
excited by the Miracles of Christ the more narrowly to consider the Divine
quality of his Person, whom the more they looked upon, the more they disliked.
4. Whence they misinterpreted and eluded all the force and conviction of all
his Miracles. 5. God's upbraiding of the World with their gross Ignorance by
the raising him from the dead whom they thus vilified and contemned. 6.
Christ's Resurrection an assurance of man's Immortality. 137 CHAP. II. 1. The
last End of Christ's Resurrection, the Confirmation of his whole Ministry. 2.
How it could be that those chief Priests and Rulers that hired the Soldiers to
give out, that the Disciples of Christ stole his body away, were not rather
converted to believe he was the Messiah. 3. How it can be evinced that Christ
did really rise from the dead; and that it was not the delusion of some
deceitful Demons. 4. The first and second Answer. 5. The third Answer. 6. The
fourth Answer. 7. The fifth Answer. 8. The sixth and last Answer. 9. That his
appearing and disappearing at pleasure after his Resurrection is no argument
but that he was risen with the same Body that was laid in the grave. 139 CHAP.
III. 1. The Ascension of Christ, and what a sure pledge it is of the Soul's
activity in a thinner Vehicle. 2. That the Soul's activity in this Earthly Body
is no just measure of what she can do out of it. 3. That the Life of the Soul
here is as a Dream in comparison of that life she is awakened unto in her
Celestial Vehicle. 4. The activity of the separate Soul upon the Vehicle argued
from her moving of the Spirits in the Body, and that no advantage accrews
therefrom to the wicked after death. 141 CHAP. IV. 1. Christ's Session at the
Right hand of God interpreted either figuratively or properly. 2. That the
proper sense implies no humane shape in the Deity. 3. That though God be
Infinite and every where, yet there may be a Special presence of him in Heaven.
4. And that Christ may be conceived to sit at the Right hand of that Presence,
or Divine Shechina. 143 CHAP. V. 1. The Apotheosis of Christ, or his Receiving
of Divine Honor, freed from all suspicion of Idolatry, forasmuch as Christ is
God properly so called, by his Real and Physical union with God. 2. The Real
and Physical union of the Soul of Christ with God being possible; sundry
Reasons alleged to prove that God did actually bring it to pass. 3. The vain
Evasions of superficial Allegorists noted. 4. Their ignorance evinced, and the
Apotheosis of Christ confirmed from the Immortality of the Soul and the
political Government of the other World. 5. That he that equalizes himself to
Christ is ipso facto discovered an Impostour and Lier. 144 CHAP. VI. 1. An
Objection against Christ's Sovereignty over Men and Angels, from the meanness
of the rank of Humane Spirits in comparison of the Angelical Orders. 2. An
Answer to the Objection so far as it concerns the fallen Angels. 3. A further
inforcement of the Objection concerning the unfallen Angels, with an Answer
thereto. 4. A further Answer from the incapacitie of an Angels being a
Sacrifice for the Sins of the World. 5. And of being a fit Example of life to
men in the flesh. 6. That the capacities of Christ were so universal, that he
was the fittest to be made the Head or Sovereign over all the Intellectual
Orders. 7. Christ's Intercession: his fitness for that Office. 8. What things
in the Pagan Religion are rectified and completed in the Birth, Passion,
Ascension and Inercession of Christ. 146 CHAP. VII. 1. That there is nothing in
the History of Apollonius that can properly answer to Christ's Resurrection from
the dead. 2. And that his passage out of this life must go for his Ascension;
concerning which reports are various, but in general that it was likely he died
not in his bed. 3. His reception at the Temple of Diana Dictynna in Crete, and
of his being called up into Heaven by a Quire of Virgins singing in the Air.
4. The uncertainty of the manner of Apollonius his leaving the World, argued
out of Philostratus his own Confession. 5. That if that at the Temple of Diana
Dictynna was true, yet it is no demonstration of any great worth in his Person.
6. That the Secrecy of his departure out of this world might beget a suspicion
in his admirers that he went Body and Soul into Heaven. 7. Of a Statue of
Apollonius that spoke, and of his dictating verses to a young Philosopher at
Tyana, concerning the Immortality of the Soul. 8. Of his Ghost appearing to
Aurelian the Emperor. 9. Of Christ's appearing to Stephen at his martyrdom,
and to Saul when he was going to Damascus. 149 CHAP. VIII. 1. The use of this
parallel hitherto of Christ and Apollonius. 2. Mahomet, David George, H.
Nicolas, high-pretending Prophets, brought upon the stage, and the Author's
Apology for so doing. 3. That a misbelief of the History of Christ, and a
dexterity in a moral Mythology thereof, are the greatest excellencies in David
George and H. Nicolas. 4. That if they believed there were any Miracles ever in
the world, they ought to have given their reasons why they believe not those
that are recorded of Christ, and to have undeceived the world by doing Miracles
themselves to ratify their doctrine. 5. If they believed there never were, nor
ever will be any Miracles, they do plainly betray themselves to be mere
Atheists or Epicures. 6. The wicked plot of Satan in this Sect in clothing
their style with Scripture Language, though they were worse Infidels then the
very Heathen. 7. That the gross Infidelity of these two Impostours would make a
man suspect them rather to have been crafty profane Cheats then honest
through-crackt Enthusiasts. 8. That where Faith is extinct, all the rapturous
Exhortations to Virtue are justly suspected to proceed rather from Complexion
then any Divine principle. 152 CHAP. IX. 1. Mahomet far more orthodox in the
main points of Religion then the above named Impostours. 2. The high pitch this
pretended Prophet sets himself at. His journey to Heaven, being waited upon by
the Angel Gabriel. His Beast Alborach, and of his being called to by two Women
by the way, with the Angels interpretation thereof. 3. His arrival at the
Temple at Jerusalem, and the reverence done to him there by all the Prophets
and holy Messengers of God that ever had been in the world. 4. The crafty
political meaning of the Vision hitherto. 5. Mahomet bearing himself upon the
Angel Gabriel's hand, climbes up to Heaven on a Ladder of Divine light. His
passing through seven Heavens, and his comm^nding of himself to Christ in the
Seventh. 6. His salutation of his Creator, with the stupendous circumstances
thereof. 7. Five special favors he received from God at that congress. 8. Of
the natural wilyness in Enthusiasts, and of their subtle pride where they
would seem most humble. The strange advantage of Enthusiasme with the rude
Multitude; 9. And the wonderful success thereof in Mahomet. Other Enthusiasts
as proud as Mohamet, but not so successful, and why. 155 CHAP. X. 1. That
Mahomet was no true Prophet, discovered from his cruel and bloody Precepts. 2.
From his insatiable Lust. 3. From his wildeness of Phansy, and Ignorance in
things. What may possibly be the meaning of the black speck taken out of his
Heart by the Angel Gabriel. 4. His pretense to Miracles; as his being
overshadowed with a cloud, when he drove his Masters Mules. 5. A stock of a
Tree cleaving it self to give way to the stumbling Prophet. The cluttering of
Trees together to keep off the Sun from him; as also his dividing of the Moon.
6. The matters hitherto recited concerning Mahomet taken out of Johannes
Andreas the Son of Abdalla a Mahometane Priest, a grave person and serious
Christian. 158 CHAP. XI. 1. Three main Consequences of Christ's Apotheosis. 2.
Of the Mission of the Holy Ghost, and the Apostles power of doing Miracles. 3.
The manner of the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them at the day of Pentecost.
4. The substantial Reasonableness of the circumstances of this Miracle. 5. The
Symbolical meaning of them. 6. What was meant by the rushing wind that filled
the whole house. 7. What by the fiery cloven tongues. 8. A recital of several
other Miracles done by or happening to the Apostles. 9. The Congruity and
Coherence of the whole History of the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles
argued from the Success. 161 CHAP. XII. 1. Three main Effects of Christ his
sending the Paraclete, foretold by himself, John 16. When the Paraclete shall
come, etc. 2. Grotius his Exposition upon the Text. 3. The Ground of his
Exposition. 4. A brief indication of the natural sense of the Text by the
Author. 5. The Prophecy of Christ fulfilled, and acknowledged not only by
Christians but also Mahometans. 6. That the Substance of Mahometism is Moses
and Christ. Their zealous profession of one God. 7. Their acknowledgment of
Miracles done by Christ and his Apostles, and of the high privilege conferred
upon Christ. 8. What Advantage that portion of Christian Truth which they have
embraced has on them, and what hopes there are of their full conversion. 164
CHAP. XIII. 1. The Triumph of the Divine Life not so large hitherto as the
overthrow of the external Empire of the Devil. 2. Her conspicuous Eminency in
the Primitive times. 3. The real and cruel Martyrdomes of Christians under the
Ten Persecutions, a demonstration that their Resurrection is not an Allegory.
4. That to allegorize away that blessed Immortality promised in the Gospel is
the greatest blasphemy against Christ that can be imagined. 167 CHAP. XIV. 1.
The Corruption of the Church upon the Christian Religion becoming the Religion
of the Empire. 2. That there did not cease then to be a true and living Church,
though hid in the Wilderness. 3. That though the Divine life was much under,
yet the Person of our Savior Christ, of the Virgin Mary, etc. were very richly
honored; 4. And the Apostles and Martyrs highly complemented according to the
ancient guize of the Pagan Ceremonies. 5. The condition of Christianity since
the general apostasy compared to that of Una in the Desert amongst the Satyrs.
6. That though this has been the state of the Church very long, it will not be
so always, and while it is so, yet the real enemies of Christ do lick the dust
of his feet. 7. The mad work those Apes and Satyrs make with the Christian
Truth. 8. The great degeneracy of Christendom from the Precepts and Example of
Christ in their wars and bloodshed. 9. That though Providence has connived at
this Pagan Christianism for a while, he will not fail to restore his Church to
its pristine purity at the Last. 10. The full proof of which Conclusion is too
voluminous for this place. 168 CHAP. XV. 1. Grotius his reasons against Days
signifying Years in the Prophets, propounded and answered. 2. Demonstrations
that Days do sometimes signify so many Years. 3. Mr. Mede's opinion, That a
new Systeme of Prophecies from the first Epoch begins Chap. 10. v. 8. cleared
and confirmed. 4. What is meant by the Three days and an half that the
Witnesses lie slain. 5. Of the Beast out of the bottomless pit. 6. Of the First
Resurrection. 7. The conclusion of the matter in hand from the evident truth of
Mr. Mede's Synchronisms. 173 CHAP. XVI. 1. Of the Four Beasts about the throne
of Majesty described before the Prophecy of the Seals. 2. Of the Six first
seals according to Grotius. 3. Of the Six first seals according to Mr. Mede. 4.
Of the inward Court, and the fight of Michael with the Dragon, according to
Grotius and Mr. Mede. 5. Of the Visions of the seven Trumpets. 6. The near
cognation and colligation of those seven Synchronals that are contemporary to
the Six first Trumpets. 7. The mistakes and defects in Grotius his
interpretations of those Synchronals. 8. Of the number of the Beast. 9. Of the
Synchronals contemporary to the last Trumpet. 10. The necessity of the guidance
of such Synchronisms as are taken from the Visions themselves, inferred from
Grotius his errors and mistakes who had the want of them. The Author's apology
for preferring Mr. Mede's way before Grotius's, with an intimation of his own
design in intermedling with these matters. 182 CHAP. XVII. 1. That (...) does
not implie, That most of the matters in the Apocalypse appertain to the
Destruction of Jerusalem and to Rome Heathen. 2. The important Usefulness of
this Book for the evincing of a Particular Providence, the Existence of Angels,
and the ratification of the highest points in Christianity. 3. How excellent an
Engine it is against the extravagancy and fury of Fanatic Enthusiasts. 4. How
the Mouths of the Jews and Atheists are stopped thereby. 5. That it is a
Mirror to behold the nature of the Apostasy of the Roman Church in. 6. And
also for the Reformed Churches to examine themselves by, whether they be quite
emerged out of this Apostasy; with the Author's scruple that makes him suspect
they are not. 7. What of Will Worship and Idolatry seems still to cleave to us.
8. Further Information offered to us from the Vision of the slain Witnesses. 9.
The dangerous mistakes and purposes of some heated Meditatours upon the Fifth
Monarchy. 10. The most Useful consideration of the approach of the Millennium,
and how the Time may be retarded, if not forfeited, by their faithlesness and
hypocrisy who are most concerned to hasten on those good days. 200
BOOK VI.
CHAP. I. THree chief things considerable in Christ's Return to Judgment, viz.
The Visibility of his Person, The Resurrection of the Dead, and the
Conflagration of the World. 2. Places of Scripture to prove the Visibility of
his Person. 3. That there will be then a Resurrection of the dead not in a
Moral but a Natural sense, demonstrated from undeniable places of Scripture. 4.
Proofs out of Scripture for the Conflagration of the world, as out of Peter,
the 3 Chap. of his second Epistle. 5. An Interpretation of the 12 and 13
verses. 6. A Demonstration that the Apostle there describes the Conflagration
of the World. 7. A Confutation of their opinion that would interpret the
Apostle's description of the burning of Jerusalem. 8. That the coming of Christ
so often mentioned in these two Epistles of Peter is to be understeod of his
Last coming to Judgment. 9, 10. Further confirmation of the said Assertion. 11.
Other places pointed at for the proving of the Conflagration. 212 CHAP. II. 1.
The Fitness and Necessity of Christ's visible Return to Judgment. 2. Further
arguments of his Return to Judgment, for the convincing of them that believe
the Miraculousness of his Birth, his Transfiguration, his Ascension, etc. 3.
Arguments directed to those that are more prove to Infidelity, taken out of
History, where such things are found to have happened already in some measure as
are expected at Christ's visible Appearance. 4. That before extraordinary
Judgments there have usually strange Prodigies appeared by the Ministry of
Angels, as before great Plagues or Pestilences. 5. As also before the ruin of
Countries by War. 6. Before the swallowing down Antioch by an Earthquake. 7. At
the firing of Sodom and Gomorrha. 8. And lastly, before the destruction of
Jerusalem. 217 CHAP. III. 1. The Resurrection of the dead by how much more
rigidly defined, according to every circumstance and punctilio delivered by
Theologers, by so much^ the more pleasant to the ears of the Atheists. 2. That
the Resurrection in the Scholastic Notion thereof was in all likelihood the
great Stone of offense to those two Enthusiasts of Delph and Amsterdam, and
emboldened them to turn the whole Gospel into an Allegory. 3. The incurable
condition of Enthusiasts. 4. The Atheists first Objection against the
Scholastic Resurrection proposed. 5. His second Objection. 6. His third and
last Objection. 7. That his Objections do not demonstrate an absolute
impossibility of the Scholastic Resurrection, with the Author's purpose of
answering them upon other Grounds. 221 CHAP. IV. 1. An Answer to their first
and last Cavil, from those Principles of Plato's School, That the Soul is the
Man, and That the Body perceives nothing. 2. An Answer to their second, by
rightly interpreting what is meant by Rising out of the grave in the general
notion thereof. 3. That there is no warrant out of Scripture for the same
numerical body, but rather the contrary. 4. The Atheists Objection from the
word Resurrectio answered, whose sense is explained out of the Hebrew and
Greek. 5. (...) and (...), what the meaning of them is in that general sense
which is applicable as well to the Resurrection of the unjust as of the just.
223 CHAP. V. 1. An Objection against the Resurrection, from the Activity of the
Soul out of her Body, with the first Answer thereto. 2. The second Answer. 3.
The special significations of (...) and (...), the first belonging to the
unjust, the latter to the just. 4. That the life that is led on the Earth or in
this lower Region of the Air is more truly a Death then a Life. 5. The manner
of our recovering our Celestial Body at the last Day. 6. And of the
accomplishment of the Promise of Christ therein. 226 CHAP. VI. 1. That he has
freed the Mystery of the Resurrection from all Exceptions of either Atheists or
Enthusiasts. 2. That the Soul is not incapable of the Happiness of an Heavenly
Body. 3. And that it is the highest and most suitable Reward that can be
conferred upon her. 4. That this Reward is not above the power of Christ to
confer, proved by what he did upon Earth. 5. That all Judgment is given to him
by the Father. 6. Further arguings to (...) same purpose. 228 CHAP. VII. 1.
Caecilius his scoffs against the Resurrection, and Conflagration of the World:
That against the Resurrection answered already. 2. In what sense the soberer
Christians understood the Conflagration of the World. 3. That the Conflagration
in their sense is possible, argued from the Combustibleness of the parts of the
Earth. 4. As also from actual Fire found in several Mountains, as Aetna, Helga,
and Hecla. 5. Several instances of that sort out of Pliny. 6. Instances of
Vulcanoes, out of Acosta. 7. The Vulcanoes of Guatimalla. 8. Vulcanoes without
smoke having a quick fire as the bottom. 9. Vulcanoes that have cast fire and
smoke some thousand of years together. 10. Hot Fountains, Springs running with
Pitch and Rosin, certain Thermae catching fire at a distance. 230 CHAP. VIII.
1. A fiery Comet as big as the Sun that appeared after the death of Demetrius.
Comets presages of Droughts. Woods set on fire after their appearing. 2. Of
falling Stars. Of the tail of a Comet that dried up a River. 3. Hogsheads of
Wine drunk up and men dissipated into Atoms by Thunder. 4. That the fire of
Thunder is sometimes unquenchable, as that in Macrinus the Emperors time; and
that procured by the Prayers of the Thundering Legion. 5. Of conglaciating
Thunders, and the transmutation of Lot's wife into a pillar of Salt. 6. The
destruction of Sodom with fire from Heaven. That universal Deluges and
Earthquakes do argue the probability of a Deluge of Fire. 7. That Pliny counts
it the greatest wonder, that this Deluge of fire has not ha^^ed already. 233
CHAP. IX. 1. The Conflagration argued from the Proneness of Nature and the
transcendent power of Christ. 2. His driving down the Powers of Satan from
their upper Magazine. 3. The surpassing power and skill of his Angelical Hosts.
4. The efficacy of his Fiat upon the Spirit of Nature. 5. The unspeakable
corroboration of his Soul by its Union with the Godhead; and the manner of
operation upon the Elements of the World. 6. That the Eye of God is ever upon
the Earth, and that he may be an Actour as well as a Speculatour, if duly
called upon. 7, 8. A short Description of the firing of the Earth by Christ,
with the dreadful effects thereof. 236 CHAP. X. 1. The main Fallacies that
cause in men the Misbelief of the Possibility of the Conflagration of the
Earth. 2. That the Conflagration is not only possible but reasonable. The first
Reason leading to the belief thereof. 3. The second Reason, the natural decay
of all particular structures, and that the Earth is such, and that it grows dry
and looses of its solidity, whence its approach to the Sun grows nearer. 4.
That the Earth therefore will be burnt, either according to the course of
Nature, or by a special appointment of Providence. 5. That it is most
reasonable that Second way should take place, because of the obdurateness of
the Atheistical crew. 6. That the Vengeance will be still more significant, if
it be inflicted after the miraculous Deliverance of the Faithful. 239 CHAP.
XI. 1. A Recapitulation or Synopsis of the more Intelligible part of the
Christian Mystery, with an Indication of the Usefulness thereof. 2. The
undeniable Grounds of this Mystery, The existence of God, A particular
Providence, The Lapsableness of Angels and men, The natural subjection of men
to Devils in this fallen Condition. 3. God's Wisdom and Justice in the
Permission thereof for a time. 4, 5. Further Reasons of that Permission. 6. The
Lapse of Men and Angels proved. 7. The Good emerging out of this Lapse. 8. The
exceeding great Preciousness of the Divine Life. 9. The Conflagration of the
Earth. 10. The Good arising from the Opposition betwixt the Light and Dark
Kingdom. 11. That God in due time is in a special manner to assist the
Kingdom of Light, and in a way most accommodate to the humane Faculties. 12.
That therefore he was to send into the World some Venerable Example of the
Divine Life, with miraculous attestations of his M^ssion of so sacred a Person.
13. That this Person, by reason of the great Agonies that befall them that
return to the Divine Life, ought to bring with him a palpable pledge of a
proportionable Reward, suppose, of a Blessed Immortality, manifested to the
meanest Capacity by his rising from the dead and visibly ascending into Heaven.
14. That in the Revolt of Mankind from the Tyranny of the Devil, there ought to
be some Head, and that the Qualifications of that Head ought to be opposi^e to
those of the old Tyrant, as also to have a power of restoring us to all that we
have lost by being under the Usurper. 15. That also in this Head all the
notable Objects of the Religious propensions of the Nations should be comprised
in a more lawful and warrantable manner. 16. That this Idea of Christianity is
so worthy the Goodness of God, and so suitable to the state of the World, that
no wise and virtuous Person can doubt but that it is or will be set on foot at
some time by Divine Providence; and that if the M^ssias be come, and the
Writings of the New Testament be true in the literal sense, it is on foot
already. 242 CHAP. XII. 1. That the chief Author of this Mystical Madness that
nulls the true and literal sense of Scripture is H. Nicolas, whose Doctrine
therefore and Person is more exactly to be enquired into. 2. His bitter
Reviling and high Scorn and Contempt of all Ministers of the Gospel of Christ
that teach according to the Letter, with the ill Consequences thereof. 3. The
Reason of his Vilification of them, and his Injunction to his Followers not to
consult with any Teachers but the Elders of his Family, no not with the
Dictates of their own Consciences, but wholly to give themselves up to the
leading of those Elders. The irrecoverable Apostasy of simple Souls from their
Savior by this wicked Stratagem. 4. His high Magnifications of himself, and
his Service of the Love, before the Dispensation of Moses, John the Baptist, or
Christ himself. 5. That his Service of the Love is a Third Dispensation, namely
of the Spirit, and that which surpasses that of Christ; with other Encomiums of
his doctrine, as That in it is the sounding of the last Trump, the Descent of
the new Jerusalem from Heaven, the Resurrection of the dead, the glorious
coming of Christ to Judgment, and the everlasting Condemnation of the wicked in
Hellfire. 6. That H. Nicolas for his time, and after him the Eldest of the
Family of the Love in succession, are Christ himself descended from Heaven to
judge the World, as also the true High Priest for ever in the most Holy. 247
CHAP. XIII. 1. An Examination of all possible Grounds of this fan^tick
Boaster's magnifying himself thus highly. 2. That there are no Grounds thereof
from either the Matter he delivers, or from his Scriptural Eloquence, Raptures
and Allegories. 3. The unspeakable Power and Profit of the Letter above that of
the Allegory, instanced in the Crucifixion, Resurrection, Ascension of our
Savior, and his coming again to Judgment. 4 That Allegorizing the Scripture is
no special Divine gift, but the fruit of either our Natural Fancy or
Education. 5. That he had no grounds of magnifying himself from any Miracles he
did; 6. Nor from being any Special Preacher of Perfection or Practiser thereof.
7. Of that Imperfection that is seated in the impurity of the Astral Spirit and
ungovernable tumult of Fancy in Fanatic Persons. 251 CHAP. XIV. 1. That
neither H. Nicolas nor his Doctrine was prophesied of in Holy Scripture. That
of the Angel preaching the Everlasting Gospel groundlesly applied to him. 2. As
also that place John 1.21. of being That Prophet. 3. His own mad Application of
Acts 17. v. 31. to himself. 4. Their Misapplication of 1 Cor. 13. v. 9, 10. and
Hebr. 6. v. 1, 2. to the Doctrine of this new Prophet. 5. Their arguing for the
authority of the Service of the Love from the Series of Times and
Dispensations, with the Answer thereunto. 6. That the Oeconomie of the Family
of Love is quite contrary to the Reign of the Spirit. 7. That the Author is not
against the Regnum Spiritus the Cabbalists also speak of, but only affirms that
this Dispensation takes not away the Personal Offices of Christ nor the
External comeliness of Divine Worship. 8. That if this Regnum Spiritus is to be
promoted by the Ministry of some one Person more especially, it follows not
that it is H. Nicolas, he being a mere mistaken Enthusiast, or worse. 255 CHAP.
XV. 1. That the Personal Offices of Christ are not to be laid aside: That he is
a Priest for ever, demonstrated out of sundry places of Holy Writ. 2. That the
Office of b^ing a Judge is also affixed to his Humane Person, proved from
several Testimonies of Scripture. 3. Places alleged for the excluding Christ's
Humanity, with Answers therein. 4. The last and most plausible place they do
allege, with an Answer to the same. 258 CHAP. XVI. 1. That Hen. Nicolas does
plainly in his Writings lay aside the Person of Christ, as where he affirms
That whatever is taught by the Scripture learned is false, and That all the
Matters of the Bible are but Presigurations of what concerns the Dispensation
of his blessed Family. 2. Other Citations to the same purpose, and his accursed
Allegory of Christ's celebrating his Passover with his disciples, whereby he
would antiqu^te and abolish the true Historical knowledge of him. 3. Several
places where he evidently t^kes away the Priestly Office of Christ. 4. Others
that plainly take away his glorious Return to Judgment and the Resurrection of
the dead in the true and Apostolical sense. 262 CHAP. XVII. 1. His perverse
Interpretation of that Article of the Creed concerning Life everlasting. 2. His
misbelief of the Immortality of the Soul, proved from his forcible wresting of
the most pregnant Testimonies thereof to his Dispensation and Ministry here on
Earth. 3. Their interpreting of the Heavenly Body mentioned 2 Cor. 4. and the
unmarried state of Angels, to the signification of a state of this present
Life. 4. That H. Nicolas as well as David George held there were no Angels,
neither good nor bad. 5. Further Demonstrative Arguments that he held the Soul
of man mor^al. 6. How suitable his laying aside of the Person of Christ is to
these other Tenets. 7. That H. Nicolas, as highly as he magnifies himself, is
much below the better sort of Pagans. His irreverent apprehension of the Divine
Majesty, if he held that there was any thing more Divine then himself. 268
CHAP. XVIII. 1. The great mischief and danger that accrues to the World from
this false Prophet. 2. The probable Ferocity of this Sect when time shall
serve, and eagerness of executing his Bloody Vision. 3. That Familisme is a
plot laid by Satan to overthrow Christianity. 4. What the face of things in
likelihood would be supposing it had overrun all. 5. The Motives that enforced
the Author to make so accurate a Discovery of this Imposture. 271 CHAP. XIX.
1. That Familism is a Monster bred out of the corruptions of Christianity, and
ill management of affairs by the Guides of the Church. 2. The first Particular
of ill Management intimated. 3. The second Particular. 4. The third Particular.
5. The fourth. 6. The fifth Particular. 7. That this false Prophet H. Nicolas
was raised by God to exprobrate to Christendom their universal Degeneracy,
Profaneness and Infidelity. 8. That though the Evil be discovered, it is not
to be remedied but by returning to the ancient Apostolic Life and Doctrine.
274
BOOK VII.
CHAP. I. THat the Subject of the Third part of his Discourse is The Reality of
the Christian Mystery. 2. That the Reasonableness of Christian Religion and the
constant Belief thereof by knowing and good men, from the time it is said to
have begun till now, is a plain Argument of the Truth thereof to them that are
not over-Sceptical. 3. The Averseness of slight and inconsiderate Wits from
all Arguments out of Prophecies, with their chiefest Objections against the
same. 4. That the Prophecies of the Messiah in the Old Testament were neither
forged nor corrupted by the Jews. 5. An Answer to their Objections concerning
the Obscurity of Prophecies. 6. As also to that from Free Will. 7. That all
Prophecies are not from the fortuitous heat of men's Phansies but by divine
Revelation, proved by undeniable Instances. 8. A particular reason of true
Prophets amongst the Jews, with some examples of true Prophecies in other
places. 9. A notable Prophecy acknowledged by Vaninus concerning Julius
Caesar's being killed in the Senate. 279 CHAP. II. 1. The genuine sense of
Jacob's Prophecy. 2. The Inference therefrom, That the Messiah is come. 3.
That there had been a considerable force in this Prophecy, though the words
had been capable of other tolerable meanings: but they admitting no other
interpretations tolerable, it is a Demonstration the Messiah is come. 4. The
chief Interpretations of the Jews propounded. 5. That neither Moses nor Saul
can be meant by Shiloh, 6. Nor David, 7. Nor Jeroboam, nor Nebuchadonosor. 8.
That in the Babylonian Captivity the Scepter was rather sequestered then quite
taken away; with a further urging of the ineptness of the sense of the
Prophecy, if applied to Nebuchadonosor. 9. Their subterfuge in (...) noted and
refuted. 10. The various significations of (...), and their expositions
therefrom. 11. An Answer to them in general. 12, 13. An answer to their evasion
by interpreting of (...) a Tribe. 14. An Answer to their interpreting of (...)
a staff of maintenance. 15. An Answer to their interpreting it a rod of
correction. 16. An Answer jointly to both these last Interpretations. 17. That
their Variety of Expositions is a demonstration of their own dissatisfaction in
them all. 283 CHAP. III. 1. The Prophecy of Haggai. 2. The natural sense of
the Prophecy. 3. That the Second Temple could not be more glorious then the
First but by receiving the Messiah into it. 4. That Herod's Temple could not be
understood hereby. 5. An Answer to their sub^erfuge concerning Ezekiel's
Temple. 6. That the Prophecy of Malachi adds further force to that of Haggai.
7. That the Prophet could understand no other Temple then that which was then
standing. 288 CHAP. IV. 1. The Prophecy of Daniel. 2. The Exposition of the
Prophecy. 3. That the said Exposition is as easy and natural as the meaning
of any writing whatsoever; and what an excellent performance it would be to
demonstrate out of Chronology, That the Passion of Christ fell two or three
days after the beginning or before the end of the Last week. 4. The sum of
the sense of the whole Prophecy. 5. That the Circumscription of the
Prophetical Weeks is not made by the vastation of the City, but by the
accomplishment of those grand Prophecies concerning the Messiah. And that no
Epoch can be true that does not terminate upon them. 290 CHAP. V. 1. The
Application of the First verse of the Prophecy to prove That the Messiah is
come. 2. The Jews evasions propounded and answered. 3. An Application of the
Second verse of the Prophecy, with a Confutation of those Rabbis opinions
that make Cyrus, Jehoshua and Zerobabel, or Nehemiah their Messiah. 4. An
Application of the Third verse, with a Confutation of the Jews fiction of
Agrippa's being the Messiah to be cut off. 297 CHAP. VI. 1. How convincing
Evidences those three Prophecies of Jacob, Haggai and Daniel are, That the
Messiah is come. 2. That it was the General Opinion of the Jews, That the
Messiah was to come about that time we say he did. 3. Josephus his
misapplication of the Prophecy of Daniel to Vespasian. 4. A further
confirmation out of Tacitus, that the Jews about those times expected their
Messiah. 5. Another Testimony out of Suetonius. 301 CHAP. VII. 1. That it being
evident the Messiah is come, it will also follow that Jesus is he. 2. That the
Prophets when they prophesied of any eminent King, Priest or Prophet, were
sometimes carried in their Prophetic Raptures to such expressions as did more
properly concern the Messiah then the Person they began to describe. 3. That
these References are of two sorts, either purely Allegorical, or Mixed; and of
the use of pure Allegories by the Evangelists and Apostles. 4. Of mixed
Allegories of this kind, and of their validity for Argument. 5. That eminent
Prophecy of Isaiah, that so fully characterizes the Person of Christ. 6. That
the ancient Jews understood this of their Messiah, and that the modern are
forced hence to fancy two Messiahs. The Soul of the Messiah appointed to this
office from the beginning of the World, as appears out of their Pelikta. 7. The
nine Characters of the Messiah's Person included in the above-n^med Prophecy.
8 A brief intimation in what verses of the Prophecy they are couched. 9. That
this Prophecy cannot be applied to the People of the Jews, nor adequately to
Jeremie's person. 10. Special Passages in the Prophecy utterly unapplicalbe to
Jeremie. 303 CHAP. VIII. 1. Further Proofs out of the Prophets, That the
Messiah was to be a Sacrifice for sin. 2. That he was to rise from the dead.
3. That he was to ascend into Heaven. 4. That he was to be worshipped as God.
5. That he was to be an eminent Light to the Nations; 6. And welcomely received
by them. What is meant by His Rest shall be glorious. 7. That he was to abolish
the Superstition of the Gentiles. 8. And that his Kingdom shall have no end.
9. That all these Characters are comp^tible to Jesus whom we worship, and to
him only. 308 CHAP. IX. 1. The peculiar Use of Arguments drawn from the
Prophecies of the Old Testament for the convincing the Atheist and
Melancholist. 2. An Application of the Prophecies to the known Events for the
conviction of the Truth of our Religion. 3. That there is no likelihood at all
but that the Priesthood of Christ will last as long as the Generations of men
upon Earth. 4. The Conclusion of what has been urged hitherto. 5. That Christ
was no fictitious Person, proved out of the History of Heathen Writers, as out
of Pliny, 6. And Tacitus: 7. As also Lucian, 8. And Suetonius. 9. That the
Testimony out of Josephus is supposititious, and the reasons why he was silent
concerning Christ. 10. Julian's purpose of rebuilding the Temple at Jerusalem,
with the strange success thereof, out of Ammianus Marcellinus. 314 CHAP. X. 1.
Further Proofs that both Jews and Pagans acknowledge the Reality of the Person
of Christ and his doing of Miracles. 2. The force of these allegations added to
the Prophecy of the Time of Christ's coming and the Characters of his Person.
3. That the Characters of his Person are still more exact, but not to be
insisted upon till the proof of the Truth of the History of the Gospel. 4, 5.
That the transcendent Eminency of Christ's Person is demonstrable from what has
already been alleged and from his Resurrection, without recourse to the
Gospels. From whence it necessarily follows That his Life was writ. 6. That the
Life of Christ was writ timely, while Eyewitnesses were alive, proved by a
very forcible Demonstration. 7. That Eternal Happiness through Christ was the
hope of the First Christians, proved out of Lucian and S. Paul; and of a
peculiar Self-Evidence of Truth in his Epistles. 8. That the first and most
early meaning of Christianity is comprised in those Writings. 9. That Eternal
Salvation depending upon the Knowledge of Christ, it was impossible but that
the Apostles should take care betimes that the Miracles of Christ should be
recorded. 10. That the Apostles could not fail to have the Life of Christ
written, to prevent the erroneous attempts of the Pragmatical, to satisfy the
Importunity of Believers, or in obedience to divine Instigation. 11. That it is
as incredible that the Apostles neglected the writing of the Life of Christ, as
that a wise man in the ^ffairs of the World should neglect the writing of his
Will when he had opportunity of doing it. 12. That, it being so incredible but
that the Life of Christ should be writ, and there being found writings that
comprize the same, it naturally follows, That they are they. 320 CHAP. XI. 1.
Other Proofs, That the Life of Christ was writ by his Apostles or his
Followers, out of Grotius. 2. An Answer to a foolish surmise that those Records
writ by the Apostles might be all burnt. 3. That the Copies have not been
corrupted by either carelessness or fraud. 325 CHAP. XII. 1. More particular
Characters of the Person of the Messiah in the Prophecies. 2. His being born at
Bethlehem; 3. And that of a Virgin. 4 His curing the lame and the blind, 5.
The piercing of his hands and feet. 327 CAAP. XIII. 1. That if the Gospel of
Christ had been false and fabulous, it would not have had that success at
Jerusalem by the preaching of the Apostles. 2. The severity also of the
Precepts and other hardships to be undergone would have kept them off from
being Christians. 3. As also the incredibleness of the Resurection of Christ,
and of our being rewarded at the Conflagration of the World. 4, 5. The meanness
also and contemptibleness of the first Authors would have turned men off, nor
would they have been listened to by any one, if the Resurrection of Christ had
not been fully ascertained by them. 6. Which the Apostles might be sure of,
being only matter of Fact; nor is it imaginable they would declare it without
being certain of it, by reason of the great hazards they underwent thereby. 331
CHAP. XIV. 1. Objections of the Jews against their Messiah's being come,
answered. 2. A pompous Evasion of the Aristotelean Atheists supposing all
Miracles and Apparitions to be the Effects of the Intelligences and Heavenly
bodies. 3. Vaninus his restraint of the Hypothesis to one Anima Coeli. 4. His
intolerable pride and conceitedness. 5. A Confutation of him and the
Aristotelean Atheism from the Motion of the Earth. 6. That Vaninus his
subterfuge is but a Self-contradiction. 7. That Christianitie's succeeding
Judaisme is by the special counsel of God, not by the Influence of the Stars.
8. Cardanus his high folly in calculating the Nativity of our Savior, with a
demonstration of the groundlesness of Vaninus his exaltation in his impious
boldness of making Mahomet, Moses and Christ sidereal Lawgivers of like
Authority. 9. That the impudence and impiety of these two vainglorious
Pretenders constrains the Author more fully to lay open the frivolousness of
the Principles of Astrology. 334 CHAP. XV. 1. The general Plausibilities for
the Art of Astrology propounded. 2. The first Rudiments of the said Art. The
Qualities of the Planets, and their Penetrancy through the Earth. 3. That the
Earth is as pervious to them as the Air, and of their division of the Zodiac
into Trigons, etc. 4. The essential Dignities of the Planets. 5. Their
accidental Dignities. 6. Of the twelve Celestial Houses, and the five ways of
erecting a Scheme. 7. The Requisiteness of the exact Knowledge of the moment of
Time, and of the true Longitude and Latitude of the place. 8. Direction what it
is, and which the chiefest Directours or Significatours. 9. Of the (...) and
(...) or Apheta and Anaereta, and the time when the Anaereta gives the fatal
stroke. 339 CHAP. XVI. 1. That the Stars and Planets are not useless though
there be no truth in Astrology. 2. That the Stars are not the Causes of the
Variety of Productions here below. 3. That the sensible moistening power of the
Moon is no argument for the Influence of other Planets and Stars. 4. Nor yet
the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, and direction of the Needle to the North Pole.
5. That the Station and Repedation of the Planets is an argument against the
Astrologers. 6. That the influence attributed to the Dog Star, the Hyades and
Orion, is not theirs but the Sun's, and that the Sun's Influence is only Heat.
7. The slight occasions of their inventing of those Dignities of the Planets
they call Exaltations and Houses, as also that of Aspects. 8. Their folly in
preferring the Planets before the fixed Stars of the same appearing magnitude,
and of their fiction of the first qualities of the Planets, with those that
rise therefrom. 9. Their rashness in allowing to the influence of the Heavenly
Bodies so free passage through the Earth. 10. Their groundless Division of the
Signs into Moveable and Fixed, and the ridiculous Effects they attribute to the
Trigons, together with a demonstration of the Falseness of the Figment. 11. A
Confutation of their Essential Dignities. 12. As also of their Accidental. 13.
A subversion of their Erection of Themes and distributing of the Heavens into
twelve Celestial Houses. 14. Their fond Pretenses to the knowledge of the exact
moment of the Infants birth. 15. A Confutation of their Animodar and Tru^ina
Hermetis. 16. As also of their Method of rectifying a Nativity per Accidentia
Nati. 17. His appeal to the skilful, if he has not fundamentally confuted the
whole pretended Art of Astrology. 344 CHAP. XVII. 1. Their fallacious
Allegation of Events answering to Predictions. 2. An Answer to that Evasion of
theirs, That the Error is in the Artist, not in the Art. 3. Further
Confutations of their bold presumption, that their Art always predicts true.
4. That the punctual Correspondence of the Event to the Prediction of the
Astrologer does not prove the certainty of the Art of Astrology. 5. The great
Affinity of Astrology with Daemonolatry, and of the secret Agency of Demons in
bringing about Predictions. 6. That by reason of the secret or familiar
Converse of Demons with pretended Astrologers, no argument can be raised from
Events for the truth of this Art. 7. A Recapitulation of the whole matter
argued. 8. The just occasions of this Astrological excursion, and of his
showing the ridiculous condition of those three high-flown Sticklers against
Christianity, Apollonius, Cardan and Vaninus. 356
BOOK VIII.
CHAP. I. THE End and Usefulness of Christian Religion in general. 2. That
Christ came into the World to destroy Sin out of it. 3. His earnest
recommendation of Humility. 4. The same urged by the Apostle Paul. 361 CHAP.
II. 1. Christ's enforcement of Love and Charity upon his Church by Precept and
his own Example. 2. The wretched imposture and false pretensions of the Family
of Love to this divine Grace. 3. The unreasonableness of the Familists in
laying aside the person of Christ, to adhere to such a carnal and
inconsiderable Guide as Hen. Nicolas. 4. That this Whifler never gave any true
Specimens of real love to Mankind, as Christ did and his Apostles. 5. His
unjust usurpation of the Title of Love. 6. The unparalled endearment^ of
Christ's sufferings in the behalf of Manki^d. 364 CHAP. III. 1. The occasion of
the Familists us^rpation of the Title of Love. 2. Earnest precepts o^t of the
Apostles to follow Love, and what kind of Love that is. 3. That we c^nnot love
God, unless we love our neighbor also. 4. An Exposition of the 5 and 6 verses
of the 1 chapter of the 2 Epist. of S. Peter. 5. Saint Paul's rapturous
commendation of Charity. 6 His accurate description thereof. 7. That Love is
the highest participation of the Divinity, and that whereby we become the Sons
of God. And how injurious these Fanatics are that rob the Church of Christ of
this title to appropriate it to themselves. 368 CHAP. IV. 1. Our Savior's
strict injuction of Purity; from whence it is also plain that the Love he
commends is not in any sort fleshly, but Divine. 2. Several places out of the
Apostles urging the same duty. 3. Two more places to the same purpose. 4. The
groundless presumption of those that abuse Christianity to a liberty of
sinning. 5. That this Error attempted the Church betimes, and is too taking at
this very day. 6. Whence appears the nec^ssi^y of opposing it, which he
promises to do, taking the rise of his Discourse from 1 John 3.7. 373 CHAP. V.
1. The Apostle's care for young Christians against that Error of thinking they
may be righteous without doing righteously. 2. Their obnoxiousness to this
contagion, with the Causes thereof to be searched into. 3. The first sort of
Scriptures perverted to this ill end. 4. The second sort. 5. That the very
state of Christian Childhood makes them prone to this Error. 6. What is the
nature of that Faith Abraham is so much commended for, and what the meaning of
(...). 7. A search after the meaning of the term Justification. 8.
Justification by faith without the deeds of the Law what may be the meaning of
it. 9. Scriptures answered that seem to disjoin Real Righteousness from Faith;
10. And to make us only righteous by imputation. 11. Undeniable Testimonies of
Scripture that prove the necessity of real Righteousness in us. 376 CHAP. VI.
1. Their alledgement of Gal. 2.16. as also of the whole drift of that Epistle.
2. What the Righteousness of faith is according to the Apostle. 3. In what
s^^se those that are in Christ are said not to be under the Law. 4. That the
Righteousness of faith is no figment but a reality in us. 5. That this
Righteousness is the New Creature, and what this new Creature is according to
Scripture 6. That the new Creature consists in Wisdom, Righteousness and true
Holiness. 7. The Righteousness of the new Creature. 8. His W^sdome and
Holiness. 9. That the Righteousness of faith excludes not good Works. The
wicked treachery of those that teach the contrary. 384 CHAP. VII. 1. That no
small measure of Sanctity serves the turn in Christianity: 2. As appears out of
Scriptures already alleged. 3. Further proofs thereof out of the Prophets; 4.
As also out of the Gospel, 5. And other places of the New Testament. 6. The
strong Armature of a Christian Soldier. 7. His earnest endeavor after
Perfection. 388 CHAP. VIII. 1. That the Christians assistance is at least equal
to this task. 2. The two Gospel-powers that comprehend his duty. 3. The first
Gospel-aid, The Promise of the Spirit, with Prophecies thereof out of Ezekiel
and Esaias. 4. Some hints of the mystical meaning of the last. 5. Another
excellent prediction thereof. 391 CHAP. IX. 1. The great use of the belief of
The Promise of the Spirit. 2. The eating the flesh of Christ and drinking his
blood, what it is. 3. Further proof of the Promise of the Spirit. 4. That we
cannot oblige God by way of Merit. 5. Other Testimonies of Scripture tending to
the former purpose. 395 CHAP. X. 1. A Recapitulation of what has been set down
hitherto concerning the Usefulness of the Gospel, and the Necessity of
undeceiving the world in those points that so nearly concern Christian Life. 2.
The ill condition of those that content themselves with Imaginary
Righteousness, figured out in the Fighters against Ariel and Mount Sion. 3. A
further demonstration of their fond conceit. 4. That a true Christian cannot
sin without pain and torture to himself. 398 CHAP. XI. 1. That the want of real
Righteousness deprives us of the Divine Wisdom, proved out of Scripture: 2. As
also from the nature of the thing it self. 3. That is disadvantages the Soul
also in Natural speculations. 4. That it stifles all Noble and laudable
Actions; 5. And exposes the imaginary Religionist to open reproach. 6. That
mere imaginary Righteousness robs the Soul of her peace of Conscience, 7. And
of all divine Joy; 8. Of Health and Safety, 9. And of eternal Salvation. 10.
That God also hereby is deprived of his Glory, and the Church frustrated of
public Peace and Happiness. 400 CHAP. XII. 1. Of the attending to the Light
within us, of which some Spiritualists so much boast. 2. That they must mean
the Light of Reason and Conscience thereby, if they be not Fanatics, Madmen
or Cheats. And that this Conscience necessarily takes information from without;
3. And particularly from the Holy Scriptures. 4. That these Spiritualists
acknowledge the fondness of their opinion by their contrary practice. 5. An
appeal to the Light within them, if the Christian Religion according to the
literal sense be not true. 6. That the Operation of the Divine Spirit is not
absolute, but restrained to certain laws and conditions, as it is in the Spirit
of Nature. 7. The fourth Gospel-Power, The Example of Christ. 8. His purpose of
vindicating the Example of Christ from aspersions, with the reasons thereof.
408 CHAP. XIII. 1. That Christ was no Blasphemer in declaring himself to be the
Son of God; 2. Nor Conjurer in casting out Devils. 3. That he was unjustly
accused of Profaneness. 4. That there was nothing detestable in his Neutrality
toward Political Factions: 5. Nor any Injustice nor Partiality found in him. 6.
Nor could his sharp Rebukes of the Pharis^es be rightly termed Railing; 7. Nor
his whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple tumult^ary Zeal; 8. Nor
his crying out so dreadfully in his Passion be imputed to Impatience or
Despair. 9. The suspicion of Distractedness and Madness cleared. 10. His
vindication from their aspersions of Looseness and Prodigality. 11. The c^o^ked
and perverse nature of the Pharisees noted; with our Saviors own Apology for
his frequenting all companies. 12. That Christ was no Self-seeker in undergoing
the Death of the Cross for that joy that was set before him. 412 CHAP. XIV. 1.
The reason of his having insisted so long on the vindicating of the Life of
Christ from the aspersions of the Malevolent. 2. The true Character of a real
Christian. 3. The true Character of a false or Pharisaical Christian. 4. How
easily the true members of Christ are accused of Blasphemy by the Pharisaical
Christians. 5. And the working of their Graces imputed to some vicious
Principle. 6. Their censuring them profane that are not superstitious. 7. The
Parisees great dislike of coldness in fruitless Controversies of Religion. 8.
Their Ignorance of the law of Equity and Love. 9. How prone it is for the
sincere Christian to be accounted a Railer, for speaking the truth. 10. That
the least Opposition against Pharisaical Rottenness will easily be interpreted
bitter and tumultuous Zeal. 11. How the solid Knowledge of the perfectest
Christians may be accounted Madness by the formal Pharisee. 12. his Proneness
to judge the true Christian according to the motions of his own untamed
corruptions. 13. His prudent choice of the vice of Covetousness. 14. The
Unreasonableness of his censure of those that endeavor after Perfection. 15.
His ignorant surmise that no man lives virtuously for the love of Virtue it
self. 16. The Usefulness of this Parallelisme betwixt the Reproach of Christ
and his true Members. 422 CHAP. XV. 1. The Passion of Christ the fifth
Gospel-Power, the Virtue whereof is in a special manner noted by our Savior
himself. 2. That the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness was a prophetic Type of
Christ, and cured not by Art but by Divine Power. 3. That Telesmatical
Preparations are superstitious, manifest out of their Collections that write of
them; 4. Particularly out of Gaffarel and Gregory. 5. That the Effects of
Telesmes are beyond the laws of Nature. 6. That if there be any natural power
in Telesmes, it is from Similitude; with a confutation of this ground also. 7.
A further confutation of that ground. 8. In what sense the Braz^n Serpent was a
Telesme, and that it must needs be a Typical Prophecy of Christ. 9. The
accurate and punctual Prefiguration therein. 10. The wicked Pride and
Conceitedness of those that are not touched with this admirable contrivance of
Divine Providence. 11. The insufferable balsphemy of them that reproach the Son
of God for crying out in his dreadful Agony on the Cross; wherein is discovered
the Unloveliness of the Family of Love. 429 CHAP. XVI. 1. The End of Christ's
Sufferings not only to pacify Conscience, but to root out Sin; witnessed out
of the Scripture. 2. Further Testimonies to the same purpose. 3. The Faintness
and Uselesness of the Allegory of Chr^sts Passion in comparison of the
Application of the History thereof. 4 The Application of Christ's Sufferings
against Pride and Covetousness. 5. As also against Envy, H^^red, Revenge, vain
Mirth, the Pangs of Death, and unwarrantable Love. 6. A General Application of
the Death of Christ to the mortifying of all Sin whatsoever. 7. The celebrating
the Lords Supper, the use and meaning thereof. 436 CHAP. XVII. 1. The sixth
Gospel-Power is the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ. The privilege of
this Demonstration of the Soul's Immortality above that from the Subtilty of
Reason and Philosophy. 2. The great power this consideration of the Soul's
Immortality has to urge men to a Godly life: 3. To ^ean themselves from worldly
pleasures, and learn to delight in those that are everlasting: 4. To have our
Conversation in Heaven. 5. The Conditions of the Everlasting Inheritance. 6.
Further enforcements of duty from the Soul's Immortality. 440 CHAP. XVIII. 1.
The Day of Judgment, the seventh and last Gospel-power, fit as well for the
regenerate as the unregenerate to think upon. 2. The Uncertainty of that Day,
and that it will surprise the wicked unawares. 3. That those that wilfully
reject the offers of Grace here, shall be in no better condition after Death
then the Devils themselves are. 4. A Description of the sad Evening-close of
that terrible Day of the Lord. 5. The Affrightment of the Morning-appearance
thereof to the wicked. 6. A further Description thereof. 7. The Translation of
the Church of Christ to their Ethereal Mansions, with a brief Description of
their Heavenly Happiness. 443 CHAP. XIX. 1. That there can be no Religion more
powerful for the promoting of the Divine Life then Christianity is. 2. The
external Triumph of the Divine Life in the person of Christ how thoroughly
warranted and how fully performed. 3. The Religious Splendor of Christendom.
4. The Spirit of Religion stifled with the load of Formalities. 5. The
satisfaction that the faithfully-devoted Servants of Christ have from that
Divine homage done to his Person, though by the wicked. 447 CHAP. XX. 1. The
Usefulness of Christianity for the good of this life, witnessed by our Savior
and S. Paul. 2. The proof thereof from the Nature of the thing it self. 3.
Objections against Christianity, as if it were an unfit Religion for States
Politic. 4. A Concession that the primary intention of the Gospel was not
Government Political, with the advantage of that Concession. 5. That there is
nothing in Christianity but what is highly advantageous to a State-Politick. 6.
That those very things they object against it are such as do most effectually
reach the chief end of Political Government, as does Charity for example, 7.
Humility, Patience, and Mortification of inordinate desires. 8. The invincible
Valor that the love of Christ and their fellow members inspires the Christian
Soldiery withal. 449
BOOK IX.
CHAP. I. THe four Derivative Properties of the Mystery of Godliness. 2. That a
measure of Obscurity begets Veneration, suggested from our very senses. 3.
Confirmed also by the common suffrage of all Religions, and the nature of
Reservedness amongst men. 4. The rudeness and ignorance of those that expect
that every Divine Truth of Scripture should be a comprehensible Object of their
understanding, even in the very modes and circumstances thereof. 5. That
Contradictions notwithstanding are to be excluded out of Religion. 6. And that
the Divinity of Christ and the Triunity of the Godhead have nothing
contradictious in them. 453 CHAP. II. 1. That there is a latitude of Sense in
the words of Athanasiu^ his Creed, and that One and Unity has not the same
signification every where. 2. The like in the terms God and Omnipotent. 3. Of
the word Equal, and to what purpose so distinct a knowledge of the Deity was
communicated to the Church. 4. In what sense the Son and Holy Ghost are God.
That Divine adoration is their unquestionable right. And that there is an
intelligible sense of Athanasius his Creed, and such as supposes neither
Polythe^sme, Idolatry nor Impossibility. 5. That there is no intricacy in the
Divinity of Christ but what the Schools have brought in by their false notions
of Suppositum and Union Hypostatical. 6. That the Union of Christ with the
Eternal Word implies no Contradiction, and how warrantable an Object he is of
Divine worship. 7. The Application thereof to the Jews. 8. The Union of Christ
with God compared with that of the Angels that bore the Name Jehovah in the Old
Testament. 9. The reasonableness of our Saviors being united with the Eternal
Word, and how with that Hypostasis distinct from the others. 455 CHAP. III. 1.
That the Communicableness of Christian Religion implies its Reasonableness. 2.
The right Method of communicating the Christian Mystery. 3, 4. A brief example
of that Method. 5. A further continuation thereof. 6. How the Mystagogus is to
behave himself toward the more dull or illiterate. 7. The danger of debasing
the Gospel to the dullness of shall^^ness of every weak apprehension. 459 CHAP.
IV. 1. The due demeanor of a Christian Mystagogus in communicating the Truth
of the Gospel. 2. That the chiefest care of all is that he speak nothing but
what is profitable for life and godliness. 3. A just reprehension of the
scopeless zeal of certain vain Boanerges of these times. 4. That the abuse of
the Ministry to the undermining the main Ends of the Gospel may hazard the
continuance thereof. 5. That any heat and zeal does not constitute a living
Ministry. 461 CHAP. V. 1. The nature of Historical Faith. 2. That true Saving
Faith is properly Covenant, and of the various significations of (...). 3. In
what Law and Covenant agree. 4. In what Law and Testament. 5. In what Covenant
and Testament agree. 6. That the Church might have called the Doctrine of
Christ either the New Law or the New Covenant. 7. Why they have styled it
rather (...) then (...). The first Reason. 8. Other Reasons thereof. 9. The
occasion of translating (...), The New Testament. 463 CHAP. VI. 1. That there
were more Old Covenants then one. 2. What Old Covenant that was to which this
New one is especially counterdistinguished: with a brief intimation of the
difference of them. 3, 4. An Objection against the difference delivered; with
the Answer thereto. 5. The Reason why the Second Covenant is not easily broken.
6. That the importance of the Mystery of the Second Covenant engages him to
make a larger deduction of the whole matter out of S. Paul. 466 CHAP. VII. 1.
The different states of the Two Covenants set out Galat. 4. by a double
similitude. 2. The nature of the Old Covenant adumbrated in Agar: 3. As also
further in her Son Ismael. 4. The nature of the New Covenaent adumbrated in
Sarah: 5. As also in Isaac her Son and in Israel his offspring. 6. The
necessity of imitating Abraham's faith, that the Spiritual Isaac or Christ may
be born in us. 7. The grand difference hetwixt the First and Second Covenant,
where in it does consist. With a direction, by the by, to the most eminent
Object of our Faith. 8. The Second main point wherein this difference consists,
namely Liberty, and that, First, from Ceremonies and Opinions; 9. Secondly,
from all kind of Sins and disallowable Passions; 10. Lastly, to all manner of
Righteousness and Holiness. 468. CHAP. VIII. 1. The adequate Object of saving
Faith or Christian Covenant. 2. That there is an Obligation on our parts, plain
from the very Inscription of the New Testament. 3. What the meaning of Blood in
Covenants is. 4. And answerably what of the Blood of Christ in the Christian
Covenant. 5. The dangerous Error and damnable Hypocrisy of those that would
persuade themselves and others that no performance is required on their side in
this Covenant. 6. That the Heavenly Inheritance is promised to us only upon
Condition, evinced out of several places of Scripture. 476 CHAP. IX. 1. What it
is really to enter into this New Covenant. 2. That the entering into this
Covenant supposes actual Repentance. 3. That this New-Covenanter is born of
water and the Spirit. 4. The necessity of the skillful usage of these newborn
Babes in Christ. 5. That some Teache^s are mere Witches and Child Suckers. 479
CHAP. X. 1. The First Principle the New-Covenanter is closely to keep to. 2.
The Second Principle to be k^pt to. 3. The Third and last Principle. 482 CHAP.
XI. 1. The diligent search this new-Covenanter ought to make to find out
whatsoever is corrupt and sinful. 2. That the truly regenerate cannot be quiet
till all corruption be wrought out. 3. The most importunate devotions of a
living Christian. 4. The difference betwixt a Son of the Second Covenant and a
Slave under the First. 5. The Mystical completion of a Prophecy of Esaias
touching this state. 483 CHAP. XII. 1. That the destroying of Sin is not
without some time of conflict. The most infallible method for that dispatch. 2.
The constant ordering of our external actions. 3. The Hypocritical complaint of
those for want of power that will not do those good things that are already in
their power. 4. The danger of making this new Covenant a Covenant of Works, and
our Love to Christ a mercenary friendship. 5. Earnest prayers to God for the
perfecting of the Image of Christ in us. 6. Continual circumspection and
watchfulness. 7. That the vilifying of outward Ordinances is no sign of a
new-Covenanter, but of a proud and carnal mind. 8. Caution to the
new-Covenanter concerning his converse with men. 9. That the branches of the
Divine life without Faith in God and Christ, degenerate into mere Morality. The
examining all the motions and excursions of our Spirit how agreeable they are
with Humility, Charity and Purity. 10. Cautions concerning the exercise of our
Humility; 11. As also of our Purity, 12. And of our Love or Charity. The safe
conduct of the faithful by their inward Guide. 485
BOOK X.
CHAP. I. THat the Affection and esteem we ought to have for our Religion does
not consist in damning all to the pit of Hell that are not of it. 2. The
unseasonable inculcation of this Principle to Christians. 3. That it is better
becoming the Spirit of a Christian to allow what is good and commendable in
other Religions, then so foully to reproach them. 4. What are the due
demonstrations of our Affection to the Gospel of Christ. 5. How small a part of
the World is styled Christians, and how few real Christians in that part that
is so styled. 6. That there has been some unskilful or treacherous tampering
with the powerful Engine of the Gospel, that it has done so little execution
hitherto against the Kingdom of the Devil. 7. The Author's purpose of bringing
into view the main Impediments of the due Effects thereof. 490 CHAP. II. 1. The
most fundamental Mistake and Root of all the Corruptions in the Church of
Christ. 2. That there may be a Superstition also in opposing of Ceremonies, and
in long Prayers and Preachments. 3. That self-chosen Religion extinguishes true
Godliness every where. 4. The unwholesome and windy food of affected
Orthodoxality; with the mischievous consequences thereof. 5. That Hypocrisy of
Professors fills the World with Atheists. 6. That the Authoritative Obtrusion
of gross falsities upon men begets a misbelief of the whole Mystery of Piety.
7. That all the Churches of Christendom stand guilty of this mischievous
miscarriage. 8. The infinity inconvenience of the Superlapsarian doctrine. 492
CHAP. III. 1. The true measure of Opinions to be taken from the design of the
Gospel, which in general is, The setting out the exceeding great Mercy and
Goodness of God toward mankind. 2. And then Secondly, The Triumph of the
Divine Life in the Person of Christ, in the warrantableness of doing Divine
Honor to him. 3. Thirdly, The advancement of the Divine Life in his members
upon Earth. 4. The Fourth and last Rule to try Opinions by, The
Recommendableness of our Religion to Strangers or those that are without. 497
CHAP. IV. 1. The general use of the foregoing Rules. 2. A special use of them
in favor of one another persons in matters of opinion. 3. The examination of
Election and Reprobation according to these Rules. And how well they agree with
that Branch of the Divine Life which we call Humility. 4. The disagreement of
absolute Reprobation with the first Rule; 5. As also with the third, 6. And
with the second and fourth. 499 CHAP. V. 1. That Election and Reprobation
conferrs something to Humility. 2. That some men are saved irresistibly by
virtue of Discriminative Grace. 3. That the rest of Mankind have Grace
sufficient, and that several of them are saved. 4. The excellent use of this
middle way betwixt Calvinisme and Arminianisme. 5, 6. The exceeding great
danger and mischief of the former Extremes. 502 CHAP. VI. 1. The Scholastic
Opinions concerning the D^vinity of Christ applied to the foregoing Rules. 2.
As also concerning the Trinity. 3. The Application of the Antitrinitarian
Doctrine to the said Rules. Its disagreement with the third, 4. As also with
the second. 5. The Antitrinitarians plea. 6. An answer to their plea. 7. How
grossly the denying the Divinity of Christ disagrees with the third Rule. 504
CHAP. VII. 1. Imputative Righteousness, Invincible Infirmity and Solifidianism,
in what sense they seem to comply with the second and last Rule, and how
disagreeing with the third. 2. The groundlesness of men's Zeal for Imputative
Righteousness, 3. And for Solifidianism. 4. The conspiracy of Imputative
Righteousness, Solifidianism and Invincible Infirmity to exclude all Holiness
out of the Conversation of Christians. 5. That large confessions of Sins and
Infirmities without any purpose of amending our lives is a mere mocking of God
to his very face. With the great danger of that Affront. 507 CHAP. VIII. 1. The
flaunting Hypocrisy of the Perfectionists, and from whence it comes. 2. The
easy Laws whereby they measure their Perfection. And the sad result of their
Apostasy from the Person of Christ. 3. That there is far more Perfection in
many thousands of those that abhor the name of Perfection then in these great
Boasters of it. 4. In what consists that sound and comely frame of a true
Christian Spirit. 510 CHAP. IX. 1. Sincerity the middle way betwixt pretended
Infirmity and the boast of Perfection: with the description thereof. 2. A more
full character of the Sincere Christian. 3. That they that endeavor not after
that state are Hypocrites, and they that pretend to be above it, Conspiratours
against the everlasting Priesthood of Christ. 4. The Personal Reign of Christ
upon Earth, and the Millennium in the more sober meaning thereof applied to the
above-named Rules. 512 CHAP. X. 1. That in those that believe There is a God,
and a life to come, there is an antecedent Right of Liberty of Conscience not
to be invaded by the Civil Magistrate. 2. Object. That no false Religion is the
command of God; with the Answer thereto. 3. That there is no incongruity to
admit That God may command contrary Religions in the World. 4, 5. The utmost
Difficulty in that Position, with the Answer thereto. 6. That God may introduce
a false persuasion into the mind of man as well for probation as punishment. 7.
That simple falsities in Religion are no forfeiture of Liberty of Conscience.
8. That though no falsities in Religion were the command of God, yet upon other
considerations it is demonstrated that the Religionist ought to be free. 9. A
further demonstration of this Truth from the gross absurdities that follow the
contrary Position. 515 CHAP. XI. 1. That there is a Right in every Nation and
Person to examine their Religion, to hear the Religion of Strangers, and to
change their own, if they be convinced. 2. That those Nations that acknowledge
this Right and act accordingly, have naturally a Right to send out Agents into
other Nations. Their demeanor there, and the right of revenging their
injuries. And how this Method had justified the Spaniards Invasion of the
Indians. 3. The unpracticableness of the present Theory by reason of the
general perverseness of the World. The advantageousness of it to Christendom,
and suitableness of it to the Spirit of a Christian. 4. That Religion
corruptive of manners is co^rcible by the Magistrate. 5. And that which would
plainly destroy the defense of the Country. 6. As also whatsoever Religion is
inseparably interwoven with Principles of Persecution. 7. An Answer to that
Objection, That all Sects are persecutive, and that therefore there can be no
Liberty of Conscience given. 521 CHAP. XII. 1. To what Persons and with what
Circumstances the Christian Magistrate is to give Liberty of Conscience. And
the great advantage thereof to the Truth of Christianity. 2. That those that
are not Christians, are not to be admitted into places of trust by the
Christian Magistrate, if he can supply himself with those that are. 3. That the
Christian Magistrate is to lay aside the fallible opinions of men, and promote
every one in Church and State, according to his merit in the Christian life,
and his ability of promoting of the interest of the Church of Christ and the
Nation he serves. 4. That he is to continue or provide an honorable and
competent allowance for them that labor in the word and doctrine. 5. That the
vigilance of the Christian Magistrate is to keep under such Sects as pretend to
Immediate Inspiration unaccountable and unintelligible to sober Reason, and
why? 6. That the endeavor of impoverishing the Clergy smells rank of
Profaneness, Atheism and Infidelity. 7. That the Christian Magistrate is
either to erect or keep up Schools of Humane Learning, with the weighty grounds
thereof. 8. A further enforcement of those grounds upon the fanatic
Perfectionists. 9. The hideous danger of casting away the History of the Gospel
upon pretense of keeping to the Light within us. 525 CHAP. XIII. 1. The Authors
application to the better-minded Quakers. 2. He desires them of that Sect to
search the grounds and compute the gains of their Revolt from Christ. 3. That
there are no peculiar Effects of the Spirit of God in the Sect of the Quakers,
but rather of Pythonism. 4. That their Inspirations are not divine, but
diabolical. 5. The vanity of their boasting of the knowledge of their
mysterious Allegories. 6. The grounds of their insufferable bitterness against
the Ministers of Christ. 7. That he was urged by the light within him to give
witness to the Truth of the History of the Gospel, and to admonish the Quakers.
His caution to the simple-minded among them how they turn in to Familism. 8.
His ease and satisfaction of mind from disburdening himself of this duty. 9.
The compassionableness of their condition, 10. And hope of their return to
Christ. 530 CHAP. XIV. 1. That Public Worship is essential to Religion, and
inseparable when free from Persecution. The right measure of the Circumstances
thereof. 2. Of the Fabric and Beauty of Churches according to that measure. 3.
The main things he intends to touch upon concerning Public Worship. 4. That
the Churches of Christians are not Temples, the excellency of our Religion
being incompliable with that Notion. 5. The vanity of the Sectarians exception
against the word Church applied to the appointed places of Public Worship. 6.
That though the Church be no Temple, yet it is in some sense holy, and what
respect there is to be had of it, and what reverence to be used there. 7. Of
Catechizing, Expounding and Preaching. 8. Of Prayer, and what is the true
praying by the Spirit. 9. The Excellency of public Liturgies. 10. What is the
right End of the Ministry. 11. Certain special uses of Sermons, and of the
excellency of our Savior Christ's Sermon on the Mount. 12. The best way for one
to magnify his Ministry. 13. Of the Holy Communion, who are to be excluded,
and of the posture of receiving it. 14. Of the time of Baptism, and the Sign of
the Cross. 15. Of Songs and Hymns to be composed by the Church, and of
Holy Days. 16. Of the celebrating the Passion-day and the Holy Communion. 17.
Of Images and Pictures in places of Public Worship. 18. A summary
advertisement concerning Ceremonies and Op^nions. 535
An INDEX of Places of Scripture that are interpreted in this Treatise.
Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis. 3. 15. 328. 4. 1, 2. 56, 57. 49. 10. 283, to 288.
Exodus. 3. 14, 32, 34. 457. 34. 8. 457. Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. 22. Job. 19.
25. 224. 38. 19, 21. 22. Psalms. 22. 14, 16, 18. 329, 330. 45. 6. 310. 68. 17,
18. 309. 110. 3, 4. 310. Proverbs. 4. 18. 401. Isaiah. 7. 14. 305, 328, 329. 9.
6. 310. ^1. 10. 312. 28. 1. 399. 41. 10. 393. 42. 1, to 16. 394. 49. 5, 6, 7.
311. 53. 12. 169. 57. 8, 11. 397. 15. 12, 158. Jeremiah. 1. 5. 22. 33. 1, to
12. 306, to 308. Ezekiel. 43. 10, etc. 289. Daniel. 9. 24, to 27. 291, to 300.
Micah. 5. 2. 12, 327. Haggai. 2. 6, to 9. 288. Malachi. 3. 1. 290. Title of the
New Testament. 464. Matthew. 2. 4, 5. 327, 328. 5. 5. 363. 17. 362. 10. 28. 28.
12. 23, 24. 415. 16. 14. 24. 20. 25. 363. 21. 12. 117. 17. 118. 24. 30, ad
finem. 212. 25. 1, etc. 212 27. 45. 134, 135, etc. Mark. 3. 21. 418. 6. 5, 6.
409. 13. 11. 12. 16. 19. 143. Luke. 6. 27. 415. 9. 34. 106. 23. 42, 43. 28, 29.
John. 1. 1, to 14. 11, 12. 14. 99. 3. 14. 430, 431. 31. 23. 4. 23, 24. 536. 5.
26. 505, 507, 6. 26. 24. 38. 23. 63. 396. 9. 6. 119. 10. 34, 35. 413, 414. 12.
31. 78. 13. 34. 364. 14. 28. 9. 16. 8, to 11. 164, 165. 13, 14. 9, 10. 28. 23.
17. 4, 5. 23. Acts. 7. 51. 410. 13. 19. 380. Romans. 3. 28. 380. 4. 1. 380. 5.
382. 18. 379. 24, 25. 380. 5. 1. 381. 12. 383. 8. 10, 11. 381. 15. 13. 10. I
Corinthians. 1. 30. 382. 11. 26. 439. 15. 32. 16, 17, 18, 224. II Corinthi. 5.
1, to 6. 19, 20, 21. 8. 27. Galatians. 2. 16, 19. 384. 3. 21. 380, 384. 4. 15,
16. 385. 21, 22, 23. 468, to 476. Ephesians. 4. 30. 410. Philippians. 1. 21, to
24. 27. 2. 6, 7, 8. 23. 3. 11. 21. Colossians. 2. 18. 93. I Thessalon. 5. 19.
410. II Timothy. 1. 12. 19. 4. 8. 19. Hebrews. 11. 26. 23. 12. 2. 420. 9. 27.
22. ibid. I Peter. 3. 15. 459. 18, 19, 20. 25, 26. II Peter. 1. 5. 370, 371.
13, 15. 27. 3. 5, to 12. 213, 214. 16. 384. I John. 2. 14. 12. 3. 7. 375, 376,
etc. 4. 2. 23. 5. 7. 11. Revelation. 1. 1, 3. 200. 2. 10. 180. 4. 1, 2, etc.
182. 6. 1, to 12. 183, 184, 185. 8. 7, to 12. 186. 9. 1, to 20. 187, to 190.
10. 7, 8, 11. 176. 11. 1, 2. 185, 191. 3, 11. 207, 208. 7, 8, 9, 11. 177, 178,
192. 14, to 19. 190. 12. 6. 173, 174, 195. 7, 10, 11. 185, 186. 13. 1, 2. 178,
193. 11, 12. 194. 17, 18. 194 to 197. 14. 6. 255. 17. 3. 192. 8. 193. 19. 7.
198. 20. 3. 198. 4, 5, 6. 179, 180. 21. 2. 198. 15, to 22. 195, 198. 22. 537.
22. 6, 7. 200, 201.

Mistakes in the COPY.
PRaef. page ix. lin. 44. for (...), read (...). BOOK, page 20. l. 19. r.
(...). page 25. l. 22. r. Soul or Spirit. page 26. l. 8. r. Damoniacal. page
77. l. 24. r. mankind; and the Devil and. page 95. l. 35. r. mettled. l. 41. r.
The all. page 99. l. 41. r. eternity; when. l. 42. r. in time, who. page 242.
l. 4. r. true in. l. 7. r. needful. Before. l. 8. r. Idea, we. page 349. l.
46. r. is built but. page 376. l. 37. r. dangerously as in Christianity. page
379. l. 27. r. righteous; As. page 426. l. 14. r. sindge. page 491. l. 37. r.
near two thirds. page 525. l. 10. r. any other Religion.

In Printing.
Page 25. l. 23. for Souls and Spirits, read Souls or Spirits. p. 42. l. 10.
Embraces, r. Embracers. p. 80. l. 38. Pan, Lycaeus, r. Pan Lycaeus. p. 87. l.
30. That, r. 3. That. p. 188. l. 22. but not better, dele not. p. 190. l. 12.
clap' r. clapped. p. 224. l. 7. weary. r. were. p. 372. l. 2. glisning, r.
glinsening. p. 309. l. 39. or men, r. for men. p. 339. l. 42. hat, r. tha^, p.
342. l. 37. (...), r. (...). p. 379. l. 34. whatsoever: So, r. whatsoever. So.
p. 412. l. 33. 7. r. 8. p. 470. l. 5. conveies, read conveighs.


