A SERMON Preached at the Magnificent CORONATION OF The Most High and Mighty
King CHARLES the IId. KING of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc.

At the Collegiate Church of S. PETER Westminster, The 23d of April, (being S.
GEORGE'S DAY) 1661.

By The Right Reverend Father in God, GEORGE Lord Bishop of Worcester.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON: Printed by R. Norton for T. Garthwait, at the Little North Door of S.
Paul's. 1661.

To the Most High and Mighty King, CHARLES the IId. By the Grace of God, King
of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Gracious SOVEREIGN,
HOw unwilling I am that any thing of mine should be made public, needs (as I
conceive) no other proof but this, That I am now past my great Climacterical,
and this is the First time that ever I appeared in Print: Neither would I have
done so Now, unless Your Majesty's own immediate and express Command (which in
all things not evidently forbidden by God, is always to be obeyed) had obliged
me to do it.

And truly I am somewhat the more willing to comply with this Obligation;
because since the preaching of this Sermon I have been informed, that some
Exceptions have been taken against it. As first in General, That I meddled with
matter of State, an argument Excentrick to my Profession, and Improper for the
Pulpit. And secondly in Particular, That by Repeating and Reviving some passed
miscarriages, I had trespassed against the Act of Indemnity

Now for Answer to the Former of these Charges, I shall humbly offer it to Your
Majesty's Consideration, Whether a Divine, even in the Pulpit, may not without
exceeding the Compass of his Commission, endeavor (as much as in him lies) to
recommend to the Consciences, and to endear to the Affections of his Auditors,
the legally established Government both in Church and State; And what more
effectual Motive is there to make men Conscionably and cheerfully to submit to
the legally established Government, then by making it to appear, That it is the
best of Governments in it self, and the best for them also, by putting them in
mind of the miseries they have brought upon themselves by the Alteration of it,
and of the unhappy trials they have made of all other forms of Government that
differ from it; and consequently, how much they are obliged to be thankful
unto* God for being Restored to it, and to be so much the more Obedient for the
future to the Laws of it, for having heretofore so Foolishly, as well as
Wickedly, Revolted from it. Now if this be no part of a Divines business, or if
a Discourse of this Nature be Improper for a Pulpit, why does God himself in
Scripture command us to put men in mind of these things, as he does, Tit. 3.1.
Romans 13.1. 1. Pet. 2.13. and in many other places? Or why are there Homilies
for Subjection, and against Rebellion, commanded by Sovereign Authority to be
read unto the people? Or lastly, Why are we enjoined by the very first Canon of
our Church, to preach four times a year at least, upon this Argument, I mean,
for the Asserting the Kings Supremacy and Sovereign Authority over all his
Subjects? And consequently, for the condemning of all taking up of Arms against
him, as likewise all pretenses of Jurisdiction over him, or of Coordination
with him, together with the Exercising of any Power Military, Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, that is not derived from him; which being all of them evidently
inconsistent with the Kings Supremacy and Sovereignty, the same Authority which
enjoins us to preach for the one, must needs allow us at least, to preach
against the other. Which being as much, or more then I have done in This
Sermon, I hope that neither Your Majesty, nor any other impartial Hearer or
Reader of it will blame me, for not keeping within the verge of mine own
Profession, or for taking more liberty then ought to be made use of in the
Pulpit; especially at such a time, and upon such an occasion, when after so
long a series of several forms of Tyranny and Usurpation, Monarchy (which
seemed to have been Put to Death with Your Majesty's blessed Father) was again
Revived by Your sacred Majesty's Personal Inauguration in so solemn, so
magnificent, and so glorious a manner, beginning with as loud shouts and
Acclamations, as could be made here on Earth, and ending with much louder
shouts and Acclamations even from Heaven it self; For they that take that voice
of God for a sign of his being Displeased with the foregoing Action, would
perhaps (if they had been then present) have taken the same voice of God for a
sign of his being Displeased with Christ's Baptism; for it was in Thunder that
he spoke, even then also.

But whether I am Guilty of the First Charge, or no, in Meddling with things
Improper for a Pulpit, which (if true) had been but an Indiscretion only; I am
very sure, I am not Guilty of the Second, I mean, of speaking any thing to the
prejudice of the Act of Indemnity; which had been an high Presumption in any
man, and in me a sin against mine own Judgment and Conscience.

For I humbly conceive, That whatsoever promise a Sovereign Prince makes unto
his subjects (so the matter of it be not sinful) he ought in Prudence, as well
as in Conscience to perform it, yea though perhaps he must needs prejudice
himself by it. Because a Sovereign Princes Word, being the best and highest
Security he can give unto his Subjects, he were better suffer a very great
Incovenience by keeping it, then weaken the public Security, or hazard the
losing of his Credit with his People by breaking it. Which Consideration made
that wise and great Prince HENRY the fourth, Your Maj^sties Grandfather, so
Religious an observer of his Word, that neither the Duke of Main, nor any
other of his Subjects, that had formerly stood out against him, when they came
to an Agreement with him, did ever desire or demand any other Caution for
security of their Persons and Interests, but the Kings word only. And
therefore God forbid, that I, or any man else, should dare to suggest any thing
unto Your Majesty, either publicly, or privately, in order to the violation of
so Sacred a Bond, as the Word of a King is, and has always been esteemed to
be.

Especially, when the thing it self, which a King has Granted, or given his
Word for, is so Necessary in order to the settling of Himself, and of his
Kingdom, as I believe an Act of Indemnity (at this time, and in this
conjuncture of Affairs) to be: There being no other way (as I humbly conceive)
after so General and Long a disturbance and confusion, to compose and quiet
men's minds by Securing them from their Fears, or to beget a Mutual Confidence
betwixt the Prince and his People, without which, it is Impossible either for
the Prince or People ever to be Happy in one another.

And therefore Your Majesty's Grandfather, whom I before named, did not only
pardon All his Subjects that came in to him ( how much soever they had before
offended him) but to secure them the better from their fears, and to oblige
them the more to his service, he Honored some of them with Titles of great
Quality, and with Offices of great Trust and Importance; and I do not find,
that any of them gave him Cause to repent of it. And I hope Your Majesty will
find the same success that he had, in doing as He did; Or rather as God himself
did; when he did not only receive the Prodigal Child, but feasted him, and
made as much of him, as if he had never given him cause to be displeased with
him, though his Elder Brother repined at it.

But then, as Your Majesty has been pleased to remember and imitate, what that
most Exemplary Prince, Your Grandfather, did; so it will well become those,
whom Your Majesty has so much obliged, to Remember and Consider, what the same
Great and Wise King used often to say, namely, That though he would be always
ready to make Peace with any of the Leaguers, yet he would never make Peace
with the League. His meaning was, That though he would pardon any that had
engaged against him, yet he would never endure that the Engagement it self
should afterward be owned, or justified by any of his Subjects; This being in
Effect not an Act of Indemnity for what they had done against him for the time
past; but an Act of Allowance for what they should do against him for the
future: And consequently, not so much a Pardon of sin, as an Invitation to sin.

Whereas an Act of Indemnity, as it is merely an Act of Grace and Favor in him
that Grants it; so it supposes both Confession and Repentance of a fault in
him that Receives it* And he that truly Repents of a fault, will not be Angry
when he is told of it, especially, when he is told of it by way of Caution
against it, and not by way of upbraiding him with it, or for it. And how can a
Preacher be said to upbraid any man in particular, when he speaks against sin
in General? and that in order to the humbling of all men before God, and not to
the shaming of any man before men? Especially, when in clear and express Terms
he professes, that it is not his meaning, to charge the Meritorious Cause of
Gods Judgments upon any one party, Order, or sect of men, and much less upon
any one man in particular, but upon the whole Nation in general, and
consequently, as well and as much upon himself, as upon any of those that heard
him?

And now, if this be not enough to clear me from having any Intention in any
thing I said, to derogate from the Act of Indemnity, All that I have to say
more is, That Your Majesty having Heard me, and Commanded me to Print what I
then spoke, must either Absolve me, or Suffer with me. And having This
Security, I confess, I do not much apprehend, what has been, or can be said of

Your MAJESTY'S most Humble and most Obedient Subject, GEOR. WORCESTER.

PROVE. cap. 28. verse. 2. For the Transgression of a Land, Many are the Princes
thereof; But by a Man of understanding and knowledge shall the state thereof be
prolonged.
THe Queen of the South, (says our Savior, meaning the Queen of Sheba) came
from the uttermost parts of the Earth, to hear the VVisdome of Solomon, Luke
11.31. And we read in the fourth of the first Book of the Kings, that not
only the Queen of the South, but some of all sorts of People were sent from
all the Kings of the Earth that had heard of him, upon the Same Errand, namely,
to Hear his VVisdome, and to Learn of him, how to Govern Themselves and their
Subjects as he did, that they might be as Happy in Themselves and their
Government as he was. And to this end may I say of Solomon (as the Scripture
says of Abel, Heb. 11.4.) that being dead He yet speaks.

For though it has pleased God to suffer all that this great King and Wise
Philosopher has written of natural Speculation ( from the Cedar to the Hysope,
and from the greatest of beasts and fishes, to the least of creeping things, 1
King. 4.33.) to be utterly lost; as being a kind of knowledge that was more
likely to puff up, then to edify, and to make men by too much poreing upon the
creature, to forget or neglect to look up to the Creator: Yet as for that
practical kind of knowledge, whereby men become better as well as wiser
(whether it concern us in relation unto God, as Divinity; or in relation to our
selves, as morality; or in those relations which one man has unto another, as
the Politics and Oeconomicks) in order to the making of us honest Men, good
subjects, good neighbors, and good Christians, whatsoever I say was written by
Solomon to any of these ends, is all of it, or most of it, or at least as much
of it, as is sufficient for our use and practice, yet extant in the Books of
the Canticles, the Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes; of which the First and the Last
are almost wholly Theological: the Book of the Canticles being an Holy charm,
as it were, to draw us unto Christ, and to make us in love with him, by an
Allegorical, but most Emphatical description of Christ's Loveliness in Himself,
and of the excellency of His Love unto us; And the other of Ecclesiastes being
an holy Satyr against the world and worldly things, written on purpose to wean
us from them, by showing us the vanity and vexation of them. But this book of
the Proverbs is a Divine Miscellany or mixture of Theological, Moral, Political
and Oeconomical Aphorisms or Observations: and those not like links of the same
chain, having a natural dependence one upon another; but rather like Pearls
upon the same string, which though they are all of them equally useful and
precious in their several kinds, yet few of them have so necessary a connection
with one another, but that we may take most of them asunder, and consider them
apart by themselves, without any prejudice at all either to the Text or Context.

And thus we are now to consider the words I have read unto you, which are an
Aphorism, or Observation partly Political, and partly Theological; for as it
observes many Princes in a Land to be a National Calamity, so it is Political;
but as it observes, That Calamity to be a National Judgment, or a Judgment of
God upon the Land, for the sins of the people of that Land, so it is
Theological.

Again, as it observes, That by a man of understanding and knowledge the state
of a Land is prolonged, so it is Political; but as by a man of understanding
and knowledge, it means (as you shall see it does) a man that understands and
knows what God would have him to do and does it, so it is Theological; and
seems to be the Observation, not of Solomon the King, or of Solomon the
Statesman only, but of Solomon the Divine, or of Solomon the Preacher also.
And therefore as it deserves a much better Preacher then I am, to Discourse
upon it: so it may become the Greatest of Kings, and Wisest of Statesmen to
Hearken to it. Neither can there be a more Seasonable Occasion then this for
the consideration of it: and therefore, if it have not somewhat more then
ordinary influence upon our affections for the present, and upon our actions
for the future, it must be, and I am afraid it will be my want of skill and
ability, either to open it clearly, or to apply it pertinently, or to enforce
it powerfully; which I hope, notwithstanding all my infirmities, God will give
me grace to do in some measure. Howsoever being by command of my Superiors to
speak before a great King at such a solemn time, and upon such an extraordinary
occasion as This, I would not presume to do it, but in the words of a King, and
of such a King as was both the wisest of Kings, and the wisest of men, and that
not of his own time only, but of all that ever was before him, or ever shall
be after him. And therefore as he was most fit to prescribe to Princes, how
they are to govern, and to Subjects* how they are to obey; so was he most able
to foresee and judge how and by what means a State and Kingdom might either be
ruined or preserved, and the date thereof either shortened or prolonged. For as
the body Natural, so the body Politic is either shorter or longer lived,
according to the good or bad constitution of it, or according to the more or
less skill or care of Him that governs it, or lastly, as there is more or less
of the fear of God in the Subjects of it. For though the constitution of a
State be never so sound and healthful, and though He that sits at the Helm be
never so skilful and careful, yet if the generality of the People be wicked and
willful, God does usually punish the madness and folly of such a People, with
permitting them to be instruments of their own misery, by changing the best
form of Government under one lawful Hereditary Prince, into the worst kind of
Tyranny, under many lawless Usurpers and Oppressors. For it is for the
transgression of a land, says the Wiseman in my Text, that the Princes thereof
are many: But by a man of understanding and knowledge, shall the state thereof
be prolonged. Where from the word [ But] which stands in the middle of my Text,
and divides the Latter Clause of it from the Former, we may collect that what
follows this dividing Particle is to be understood in opposition to that which
is before it.

And therefore by a man of understanding and knowledge, as there must needs be
meant a single person in opposition unto many: so the single person, that is
here meant, must needs be a Prince, because he is opposed not to many simply
and indefinitely; but to many Princes: And then from this Aphorism, thus
understood, we may conclude;

1. That plurality of Princes, or the government of a Nation or Land by many
Princes, is a National Judgment, or a Great judgment of God upon a Nation.

2. That Monarchy, or the government of a people by one Sovereign Prince only,
(especially if he be a Man of Understanding and knowledge,) is a great National
blessing, or a great blessing of God upon a Nation.

And as we have found the one of these Conclusions to be true by our own woeful
experience already; so I hope we shall find the other of them to be as true, by
our own joyful experience hereafter. And that this Nation of ours, which was so
near perishing under the Conduct of many, shall by one man of understanding and
knowledge not only be recovered from its former distempers and dangers for the
present, (as thanks be to God for it, it is in a great measure) but settled and
established, and the state thereof prolonged (if it be not our own fault) for
the future.

But as the Passover, the greatest of the Jewish Festivals, was not to be
celebrated without eating of sour herbs, to put them in mind of their former
slavery, and thereby to make them the more thankfully sensible of their present
liberty; so at this great Festival of ours, to make us relish the better our
present Happiness, and to prepare us the better for our future Hopes, it will
not be amiss to make a reflection upon our past Sufferings, and the Causes of
them, to the end that God being first justified in his late great judgments
deservedly inflicted upon us, may afterward be the more heartily magnified for
his present great mercies undeservedly vouchsafed unto us.

We shall begin therefore with the former of these conclusions, namely,

That plurality of Princes in a State is a great judgment of God upon a Nation.

Which may be proved, first a priore, from the cause; and secondly, a
posteriore, from the effects of it.

And first for the proof of it a priore, or from the cause, we need go no
further then my Text, which makes good this Conclusion in all the parts of it.

For first, it proves it to be a judgment, because it is for transgression, or
because transgression is the meritorious Cause of it; from whence by the way we
may observe likewise, That if plurality of Princes be for transgression, then
if there had been no transgression, there would not have been a government by
plurality of Princes; and consequently, that such a government is originally
neither from God, nor from Nature, nor from the Dictates of Right reason, but
from sin, which is always the Meritorious, and sometimes the Efficient cause
of it.

Secondly, it appears from the Text, that plurality of Princes is not only a
judgment because it is for transgression, but a National judgment, because it
is for the Transgression of a Land, that is, of a Nation, or the Inhabitants of
a Land, or because national provocations are the Causes of it.

Thirdly, it may be proved from my Text likewise, that, as it is a national
Judgment, so it is a great national judgment, or a great judgment of God
upon a Nation, because it is not for any ordinary or common national sin, but
for the greatest provocation that a nation can be guilty of. For though (...)
the word in the Original which we translate transgression, do indeed signify a
transgression; because the greatest sin as well as the least may be called a
transgression; yet the transgression which is here meant is such a
transgression as transgresses or exceeds all other transgressions; for it is
prevarication, which is the literal, proper and most emphatical signification
of the word (...) And prevarication (as the Civilians tell us) is a betraying
of the cause and interest we would seem to maintain. As when Divines pretending
to guide men in the way that leads unto Heaven, do persuade them to do such
things as will bring them unto Hell; or when Lawyers, whose office is to be
guardians of liberty and property, do by false glosses upon the Law justify or
excuse those that invade, and oppress, and destroy both; or lastly, when any
Man, Sect, or party of men, pretending to serve God, and the King, do indeed
serve themselves and their own wicked designs against God and the King. This is
prevarication, and for such prevarication as this, does God punish a Land
(says my Text) with many Princes; which must therefore be one of the greatest
National judgments, because it is the punishment of one of the greatest
National sins; for so is prevarication. And thus much briefly for the proof of
my first Conclusion a priore, or from its Cause.

I proceed to the proof of it a posteriore, or from its effects. For as great
national sins are the cause, so great national miseries are the effects of many
Princes; as will appear first from the consideration of Policracy, or of a
government by plurality of Princes, in its own nature, or in the general: and,
Secondly from the experience we our selves have had of it in our own Particular.

And first, it is true in it self and in the general, That where there are many
Princes in a Land, there the People must needs be exposed to many and great
miseries.

But then by Princes we are not to understand such Princes as the hundred
twenty seven were, that were feasted by Ahashuerus, under whom they were the
Governors of so many several Provinces, nor such Princes as are now in France,
Poland, Naples and other Kingdoms, who are but Princes in name only; and
though some of them greater then others, yet all of them subject and
subordinate to their own Sovereign princes. For of such princes there may and
perhaps ought to be many, that is, more or fewer according to the Grandeur of
the Monarch they live under. And yet there may be too many even of this kind of
princes also; as when the Sun of Sovereign Majesty, from whence they borrow and
derive their light, is either Eclipsed by their Magnitude, (as it was in
England in the time of the Barons wars) or clouded by their multitude; or when
the Title and dignity it self is embased and profaned by admitting too many,
and too mean persons to be pertakers of it. But of this the Sovereign prince is
the only and best judge, neither are these the princes my Text speaks of.

For by many princes in my Text, are meant such as are, or take upon them to be
Sovereigns in the same Land or State; and that not successively; for then, how
could they be opposed to a single person, seeing in that sense they would all
of them be but so many single persons succeeding one another? And besides, I
cannot see, why many princes in succession should be said to be a judgment or
a punishment inflicted by God upon a nation for their sins; and therefore by
many princes in my Text must needs be meant many pretending to sovereignty in
the same country at the same time.

And this may be either when the Country is Cantoned into many several
Independent principalities, by setting up many petty Soveraignties instead of
one, or when the Sovereign power over a whole Nation is shared and exercised by
many; whether they be more, as in a Republic or Democracy; or fewer, as in a
State or an Aristocracy.

And first for the former way of Polycracy, or having many Princes, by
Cantoning the Country, and making several distinct bodies of the several
members of the same body Politic, it is that which was attempted by Korah,
Dathan and Abiram, when they told Moses he took too much upon him, because he
alone did govern in chief all the twelve Tribes of Israel. And you know what
the issue of that attempt was, namely, the sudden death of almost fifteen
thousand men, besides the swallowing up quick of some, and the burning alive of
others of the Conspirators, together with their wives and children, and all
that belonged unto them; as you may read in the fifteenth Chapter of the Book
of Numbers. The same was afterward attempted by Abner upon a pretense of zeal
for his Masters House, but indeed by dividing Israel from Judah, to govern
Israel himself; as he did during the War betwixt the house of David and the
house of Saul, which was a long and a bloody one, says the Text; as such wars
use to be, when a whole Nation is engaged to fight against it self, and to cut
one another throats to gratify the malice or ambition of a few. But that
which was but attempted by Dathan and Abner, was shortly after effected by
Jeroboam, who divided Israel from Judah, beginning a War, which neither he nor
his successors could ever see an end of; till Israel and Judah being weakened,
and wasted, and consumed by one another, became a prey to the Assyrian, who at
length swallowed them up both. And thus (to say nothing of other Nations, which
of old and of late have been thus Cantoned) our own Country of England, of a
Monarchy became an Heptarchy, by setting up of seven several Soveraignties in
the time of the Saxons, which never left encroaching and warring upon one
another, till all of them were reduced again under one. By all which Instances
it is evident enough, that there cannot be many Sovereign princes over several
parts or provinces of the same country, without much effusion of blood in the
erecting, and great oppression of the people for the maintaining of them. And
consequently that the having of many Princes in this sense must needs be a
great Judgment upon the people.

And yet secondly it is as bad or worse for the people; when the Sovereignty
over the whole, which ought to be vested in one, is usurped and shared, and
exercised by many; who, whether they be more, or fewer, do always under a
pretense of Law and Liberty assume unto themselves an Illegal, Arbitrary and
tyrannical power, and that as really in a Senate or Aristocracy; though not so
grossly and visibly, as in a popular State or a Democracy.

For even in a Senate, (where many govern in chief with equal Authority)
supposing them (as we must needs suppose them to be) men subject to the same
passions, appetites, and infirmities as all men are, there will always be
jealousies, envyings, and emulations amongst them; and where there are
jealousies and emulations, and no superior authority to check and overruled
them, there must needs be factions and divisions also; and where there are
factions and divisions among those that govern, there the government it self
must needs be obnoxious to many dangers and difficulties, both in
administration of Justice at home, and in defending themselves against enemies
abroad; there being nothing more natural or more usual in such kind of States,
then the sacrificing of the public Interest to private and particular
concernments; whilst every man is apt to gratify himself, and his own
covetousness, ambition, or animosity, by becoming a pensioner to any other
State that will give most for him; and to gratify his own party at home, by
thwarting and crossing and crying down whatsoever is said or done by the
contrary faction, though the State it self be often endangered, and sometimes
ruined by it. As we see it happened in the State of Carthage, where Hanno and the
rest of his faction, to comply with their own envy and Malice against
Hannibal, they forced that great Captain to quit Italy, and the prosecution of
his Victories for want of supplies, though by drawing Hannibal out of Italy,
they drew the Romans into Africa, and saw Carthage and themselves made slaves
to Rome, rather then they would endure Rome should be subdued by Hannibal. So
powerful, and so mischievous are the passions of Covetousness, Ambition, Envy,
Malice, and Revenge, where there is no Authority to prevent or restrain the
dangerous malignity, and effects of them, as there is not, where the
Sovereignty is equally shared amongst many. And yet though they differ in all
things else, they will always agree in this, to enrich their own private
families as much as they can, by drawing, not as much as is needful, or can be
spared, but as much as is to be had, or can be extorted from their poor
Subjects. And yet such is the simplicity, and folly of some deluded people,
that they could be content to beggar themselves and to become slaves indeed, to
purchase the empty name of a free State, or a free born People; as some of us
would have done, and some of our neighbors have done, who are as arbitrarily
governed, and as heavily taxed, as the vassalls of the Grand Seignior himself:
whereas if they were wise, they would consider, that supposing a Sovereign
Prince were indeed a Tyrant, yet the Tyranny of a State or Senate would be much
more grievous and insupportable then any one sovereign Prince can be; and that
not only because it is easier, and safer, and cheaper to satisfy the lust,
the covetousness, the cruelty, or any other inordinate or immoderate passion of
any one man, then of many* but likewise* because the Tyranny of one man is, as
himself is, mutable and mortal; for a bad Prince may, and many times does mend;
and whether he mend, or no, he must end, and a better may succeed him; but the
tyranny of a State is, as the State it self is, immutable and immortal. A
tyrannical State being nothing else but a standing tyranny, or a succession of
several men in the same tyranni^al form of government. Whereunto may be added,
that a Sovereign Prince knowing himself, and none but himself liable both to
the blame and shame of whatsoever is amiss in matter of Government, as having
no partner or sharer in it, upon whom for excusing himself, he may transferr
the blame of it, he will always have the restraint of shame (if he have not
the restraint of conscience) upon him; and consequently supposing he feared not
God, nor what he could do unto him, yet he will care for men, and what they are
likely to say of him. But where the Sovereignty is in many, and all of them for
all things they do equally accountable in the general, none of them thinks
himself accountable either to God or man, for any thing in his own particular;
and therefore cares not how the one is provoked, or the other injured, as long
as he thinks it is the State, and not he, that is to answer for it. And States,
being bodies without souls, have neither Conscience to awe them, nor shame to
restrain them from doing any thing. So that it seems to be a judgment of God
upon a Nation when it has many Princes at once even in this sense. I mean when
the Nobility or some of the better sort of the people do share betwixt them the
Sovereignty over all the rest.

And yet this is the best kind of Polycracy, or the best kind of Government
under more Princes then one. Because it is better to be subject to fewer then
to more, and to some of the best and noblest, as it is in a Senate of
Aristocracy, then to a multitude of the worst and basest of the people, as it
is in a Democracy, or that which is commonly called a Republic, which
notwithstanding all its vain pretenses to freedom, Equity and Equality, is
absolutely the worst of all kind of Government whatsoever.

1. Because it is most unnatural; for though it be monstrous enough for one
body Politic to have more heads then one, yet it is much more monstrous and
unnatural, when that which should be the body is the head, or when the body and
the head are but one confused, undistinguished mass or lump; there being in a
popular State no difference betwixt those that Govern, and those that are
governed, unless it be this, that those that seem to govern, are indeed
subjects; and those that seem to be governed, are indeed Sovereigns, the
Magistrates in a Commonwealth being servants and vassals unto the people, as
being created by them, and accomptable to them, and consequently always in
danger and fear of them.

2. As this kind of Government is most unnatural, so it is most unreasonable;
for what can be more unreasonable then that the wisest, the justest, the most
valiant and most virtuous persons (which are always the fewest) should be
governed by such as are fools, or knaves, or cowards, or vicious and vile
persons? which are always the major part, and consequently must needs
domineere and give Law to all the rest, where all things are carried by
plurality of voices, as they are, where the sovereign authority resides in the
body of the People; which are most of them such, as were intended by God and
nature (says Aristotle) to be servants, as being of low and servile
dispositions, and such as have not wit enough to govern themselves, and much
less to govern others.

As this kind of Government is most unnatural and unreasonable in its frame and
constitution, so it is most insolent, injurious and tyrannical in its managery
and administration. And that first in regard of the peoples folly and
credulity, which makes them apt to be abused and deceived by false informations
and misrepresentations of Things and Persons; and apt to be persuaded by those
that flatter them most, against those that counsel them best, mistaking their
friends for their enemies, and enemies for their friends; and from thence apt
to magnify and exalt the one, and to disgrace and undo the other. Secondly, in
regard of their levity and inconstancy, which makes them rash and inconsiderate
in their deliberations, sudden and precipitate in their Resolutions, and
consequently Irresolute and variable in their affections, and in their actions,
crying up that to day, which they will cry down to morrow, and oftentimes
condemning and executing as Traitors and Malefactors those whom they had a
little before applauded and adored as their Tutelary gods and saviors.
Thirdly, in regard of their Fears and jealousies, which as weak men, so weak
States are always most subject unto. And these fears and jealousies make them
suspect whatsoever is above their capacities for plots and conspiracies; and
make them look jealously upon men that are eminent, as if because they may do
harm, they cannot be innocent, so that the more wise, or virtuous, or valiant
any man is in a popular State, or the more he has deserved of his Country by
noble and Heroical actions, the less safe he is, because when any man seems to
excel and out-grow others, he presently becomes the fear and envy of all. And
then whatsoever any of his enemies, or any mean or base companion will accuse
him of, is greedily heard, and easily believed; and whatsoever can be said for
him by himself or by his friends, does but hasten his condemnation; because it
is his merit that is his crime, and that which ought to make him beloved and
honored, is that which makes him to be feared and hated. Thus were
Themistocles, Aristides and Alcibiades rewarded by the people of Athens; thus
were Corialanus, Camillus and Scipio the African rewarded by the People of Rome
after all their meritorious services. And thus should Julius Caesar (after he
had added Gaul, Germany and Brittany to the Roman Empire) have been rewarded
by the same People of Rome, if he had not prevented it, by taking that power,
they would have used against him, away from them. And now consider I beseech
you, whether there can be a worse form of Government, then where either the
State it self, or the worthiest and best deserving men in a State must needs be
ruined; and where the State has no other way, but by ingratitude and cruelty,
to secure it self against the best of its own subjects; and when the best
subjects, after they have done the best service, have no way, but by Rebellion
and Parricide, to secure themselves, against their own Country. Whereunto may
be added in the last place the aptness of the Common People in any State, and
much more in a Popular State, where they are under no restraint, to be suddenly
incensed and transported by the violence of their own Passions beyond all rules
and bounds of Religion, of Reason, of Modesty, of common Honesty, nay of
Humanity it self, to do the most absurd, extravagant and outrageous actions,
without considering, or careing, or fearing what may be the issue of them.
Espe^ially when those that are so apt to kindle of themselves, are set on fire
and inflamed by their seditious Demagogues, I mean their Orators and Preachers,
who being men of turbulent and unquiet spirits, are never pleased themselves,
nor will ever suffer the people to be content with their present condition, but
are always either secretly whispering false fears and dangers into their
heads, or openly complaining and inveighing against things and persons, as
prejudicial to the public good, till at length they so poison, and enrage
their foolish Auditors, that there is nothing so difficult or dangerous, but
they will attempt it, nor nothing so injurious or impious, that they will stick
at it; neither is there any remedy for their Rage, or cure for their madness,
till these Fiends that possessed them, are cast out of them; which I am afraid
will hardly be done by fasting and prayer only. Such were Corath, Dathan, and
Abiram, who stirred up the people against Moses and Aaron; such was Sheba the
son of Bichri, who blew a Trumpet and said, We have no part in David, neither
have we any portion in the son of Jesse, Every man to his Tents O Israel: such
were the Scribes and Pharisees, who made the people cry out, Crucify him,
Crucify him, meaning their King, and their Savior, and to choose Barabbas
rather then Jesus. Such was Demetrius the Silver-smith, who with one Seditious
Oration filled with uproar the whole City of Ephesus. To conclude, such were
Cleon the Tanner of Athens, the Gracchi at Rome, and many other seditious
Orators in both those Commonwealths; And such are now adays many of the
Preachers amongst Christians: who are by so much the more wicked, and execrable
in themselves, and dangerously pernicious to a State, then any of those Heathen
Orators were, by how much more damnable a sin it is to make use of Scripture
then of Sophistry to wicked and ungodly ends, and by how much more dangerous it
is, for men to be misguided by their consciences, then by their passions, the
one being but a fit of frenzy, which will soon over, and the other being a
settled and a sober madness which is hardly cured. And in this respect a
popular State is much worse amongst Christians then ever it was or could be
among Heathens. And yet even amongst Heathens, it was by the wisest of them
accounted the worst of all Goverments, as Thucydides and Aristotle confess,
though both of them were born and bred in a popular State, and were as able as
any to judge of it.

And yet the Evils I have hitherto spoken of, are but such as every popular
State is subject unto, even when it is orderly and regular (I mean as orderly
and regular as a Popular State can be) and that is when the body of the People
governs it self by Laws, and Civil Magistrates of its own making; but there is
a kind of popular Government, when a part of the people being got into Arms,
Governs by the sword and military Officers of their own choosing, and this is a
Stratocracy, or military kind of Democracy; which must needs be a much more
terrible and insupportable yoke then the former; because besides its being
subject to all the evils and inconveniences before spoken of, it is always
able to do all the mischiefs it has a mind to do, without opposition in the
doing of it, and without fear of being punished for it. And this is indeed to
rule with a rod of iron, and break the people in pieces like a Potters vessel.

And now there is but one way more of having many Princes, or more Sovereigns
then one in the same kingdom, and that is as dangerous and as inconsistent
with the Public peace, as any of the former: namely, the setting up of two
Scepters, two Lavv-givers, or two Supreme Judicatories, the one Civil, and the
other Ecclesiastical in one and the same State; which two Supreme Judicatories
must needs have two Supreme Judges without subordination of the one to the
other, and without Appeal unto the one from the other; And consequently when
they differ (as they must needs do often) about the rights and extent of their
several Jurisdictions, the People will not know which of them to obey, being
threatened by the material sword, if they obey the one, and with the spiritual
sword, if they obey the other; so that such a State must needs be divided
within and against it self; and then Christ himself will tell you it cannot
stand.

So that it must needs be ill for the people in what sense soever they have
many Princes; whether it be by Cantoning the Country into parts, or by sharing
the Sovereignty of the whole, either amongst many, as in Aristocracy, or
amongst all, as in a Democracy, or amongst the Swordmen only, as in a
Stratocracy; or lastly by dividing the soul of the State from the Body, the
Church from the Commonwealth, and by making two Sovereigns, one in causes
Civil, and the other in causes Ecclesiastical over the same subjects, whether
the Conclave, or the Consistory be the Cause of it. In all which cases I say it
is a Judgment of God upon a Nation to have more Princes then one, as I hope I
have made it appear both from the causes and effects of it.

But notwithstanding all the Evidence can be given of this truth, either from
Scripture or Reason, from the Cause, or the Effects of it, we would not believe
it till we felt it. And therefore in the third place it has pleased God,
because we were like beasts without understanding, to teach us, as he does
Beasts, by our senses, and to visit us of late, as much or perhaps more then
ever he did any nation with this very Judgment, I mean plurality of Princes
in all its kinds and degrees, and with almost all the effects of it.

For after we had said in our hearts Nolumus hunc regnare super nos; I mean,
as soon as we had rejected that EXCELLENT PRINCE, who only had right by all
Laws Humane and Divine to reign over us, presently many of our fellovv
subjects took upon them to be our Princes, and to govern us arbitrarily at
their own pleasure, in order to their own avaritious and ambitious ends. And
that first in an Aristocratical way, as a Senate or Council of State, wherein
nothing could be done without consent of some of the Nobility and Gentry. But
it was not long (after Royalty was gone,) but Nobility followed, and was
excluded also. And then came in Democracy or the Government of the Common
People by their own Representatives only; which increased the number of our
Princes, and the vileness of our slavery by the meanness of our Masters. But
these their own Mercenaries did quickly deprive of the power they had Usurped
and Abused; And then came in Stratocracy or the Government by the Sword, and
thereby we had as many Princes as there were Bashaws or Major Generals, who
perhaps, if they had outlived their great Sultan, they would have Cantoned the
Kingdom, and erected their several Provinces into so many several
Principalities. But by this means the very name of Liberty and property, which
were before pretended, were quite taken away. Only there was liberty enough
and too much, indeed a Lawless, boundless license in matter of Religion; all
ways of worshipping God being allowed, but the true one; and all admitted to
the Sacred Function, but such as were lawfully called unto it; In the mean time
every Sect, had its head, and every one that was head of a Sect was Prince of a
Party; so that we have seen what it is to have many Princes, nay we have felt
it to be a sore Judgment by the terrible effects of it; which did spread
themselves over the face, and through the Veins, and into the Bowels of the
three Kingdoms; at once embracing, involving, and confounding all places, all
persons, and all conditions, public and private, high and low, sacred and
profane; For from the King in his Throne, to the Beggar in the dust, no thing,
place, or person almost has been without feeling some or other the terrible
effects of this Judgment. How many have lost their Limbs, their Liberty, their
Country, their estates, their friends, and have been reduced to extreme
poverty, both at home and abroad? How many noble and Ancient Families have been
ruined? How many goodly buildings and Churches (the glorious evidences and
Monuments of our Ancestors Piety and charity) have been profaned and defaced?
How many poor innocent persons of both sexes, all ages, and all conditions,
have been either murdered or banished, or, imprisoned or oppressed with
extortion of all kinds, and of all Degrees without possibility of help, or hope
of remedy? Lastly, how many poor souls, for which Christ dyed, have been
betrayed into Rebellion and Sacrilege, Schism and Heresy, Uncharitableness
and Cruelty, by the horrible abuse of Preaching, Praying, Fasting, Vowing, and
all other the sacred ordinances of God?

And now if our poor Country, (when she felt these painful strugglings and
Convulsions within her bowels) should have asked, as Rebecca did (when she felt
Esau and Jacob striving within her womb) If it be so, why am I thus? There
could no other reason be given her for it, but this in my Text, It was for her
Transgression, it was for the Transgression of the Land, it was for our
National sins of Atheism, of Profaneness, of Sacrilege, of Hypocrisy, of
Idleness, of Gluttony, or Drunkenness, of uncleanness, of Pride, of Heresy,
together with our prevarication against God, or* our treacherous dealing with
God, in pretending to serve him best, when we dishonored him most; nay in
pretending to serve him, when we intended to serve our selves of him, by making
use of his Name, his Word, and his Ordinances, in order to the pal^iating,
promoting, and effecting our own ungodly and unrighteous designs. These I say
were our National sins, and by these or some of these we have all of us
contributed to the provocation of this Judgment. So that they were not the
sins of the Court only, nor of the City only, nor of the Country only, nor
of any one particular order of men (whether Clergy or Laity) and much less of
any one particular man or party of men, that we can say were singly and
abstractedly the cause of our Calamities; no it was too great, too universal,
to be the effect of little or few Provocations; they were therefore the sins of
the whole Nation, the sins of All and every One of us, which rising up as a
Cloud from us, fell down again in a shower of Judgments upon us; so that there
is not one of us, to whom it may not truly be said, Perditio tua ex te, Thou
have deserved whatsoever thou have suffered: For if the best of us had been as
good as we might, and ought to have been, it would not have been in the power
of the worst of us, to have made us so miserable as we were. Indeed if all of
us had not rebelled against God, none of us would have Rebelled against the
King; at least their Rebellion would not have prospered as it did; and
consequently the Sovereignty would never have been shared amongst so many, as
it was. Which as at first it was the effect of our sins, so it has been ever
since the cause of our Miseries. And as the Consideration of the former,
namely, that our having of many Princes was an effect of the sins of us all, or
of our National sins, will make us instead of judging, condemning, upbraiding,
and hating one another, to judge, condemn and abhor our selves, and
consequently to justify God in his Judgments upon us all; so the
consideration of the later, namely, that the having of many Princes has been
the cause of all our late many and great miseries, will First Convince us of
our former folly, in believing, so easily as we did, those, that upon false
pretenses of bettering our condition by a change, did persuade us (as the
Serpent did Eve) out of the Paradise we were in, because something or other,
which perhaps we had a mind to, was wanting to us. Secondl^, it will arm us
against the like Temptation for the future with a resolution never to meddle
any more with those that are given to change. And Lastly, it will make us the
more thankfully sensible of Gods infinite goodness and mercy, in Delivering us
from the slavery we were in under the Tyranny of many (which is, as we have
found it to be, the greatest of National Judgments,) and Restoring us again to
our former freedom and happiness under one Lawful Hereditary Sovereign Prince,
which is (and I hope we shall find to be so) the greatest of National blessings.

ANd this was my second Conclusion, deduced from these words in my Text. But by
a man of understanding and knowledge the State thereof shall be prolonged:
where (as I told you before) by a man of understanding and knowledge as there
must needs be meant one single Person in opposition to those Many which the
former Clause of My Text speaks of; so by That one single Person must needs be
meant such an one as is a Prince, a Sovereign Prince, because the man here
spoken of is opposed not to many simply and indefinitely, but to many Princes.

And indeed no private person, though a man of never so much understanding, and
knowledge is able to prolong a State, because that is a work which requires not
only Wisdom and Prudence to conduct it, but Sovereign Power and authority to
Perform it.

And yet I will not deny, but that it may be sometimes in the power even of a
private man to do much toward the recovery, and preservation, and consequently
the prolonging of a State; as we read Epaminondas the Thebane did, when being
but a Private man, he rescued his Country from the bondage of the
Lacedaemonians: The like did Thrasibulus a private man also, when he delivered
his Country of Athens from the Thirty Tyrants: And so did Camillus, who was not
only a Private but a Banished man, when he recovered Rome from the Gauls.

But what need we Instances out of Foreign Antiquity? when we have a Modern
example of our own (to the honor of our Nation be it spoken) which equals, and
exceeds all I have named, or can name, in deserving from his Prince and from
his Country, by his Courage in attempting, his Prudence in conducting, and his
Felicity in effecting, that generous, glorious and Heroical design, whereby he
has at once redeemed his Country both from slavery and infamy, by restoring
the King to His People, and the People to their King; and withal, has
purchased unto himself Honor without Envy, Greatness with Safety, and (which
is the best reward of virtue in this world) a perpetual satisfaction and
complacency in himself, for having so nobly performed his duty. And this was
indeed to be a man of understanding: Whereas others, who being private men,
would needs be Princes, though they thought themselves men of understanding,
have proved themselves fools; their heads being lifted up indeed, but so as
they little thought they would be, and themselves, after they had blazed and
blustered for a while, going out like a snuff, and have left nothing but a
stink behind them.

But to return to what we have in hand; though it be true (as I have said
before) that any private man may do something (at least by his prayers) and
some private men may do much toward the preserving and prolonging of a State,
if they be men of understanding and knowledge, that is, if they understand and
know how to serve their Country, by serving of their Prince, either in Peace
by their Counsels, or in War by their Courages; yet it is the Prince himself,
who understanding and knowing how to serve himself of several men's abilities in
their several professions, does indeed preserve and prolong the State of his
Country. And such a Prince, say I, is the greatest blessing of God upon a
Nation: because the state or flourishing condition of a Nation, says Solomon,
is preserved and prolonged by Him.

So that according to the judgment of Solomon, (that is) according to the
judgment of the wisest Statesman that ever was, or will be in the world. In
order to the prolonging of a State, there must,

1. Be one Sovereign Prince.

2. That Sovereign Prince must be a man of understanding and knowledge.

And then 3ly He must so make use of that understanding and knowledge, as that
his own and his peoples happiness may be procured, and preserved, and prolonged
by him.

And first, in order to the procuring and prolonging the happiness of a Nation,
it must have one Sovereign Prince (that is) the Government of it must be
Monarchical: And of this there needs little more to be said for the proof of
it, then what has been said already for proof of my former conclusion, and
what we our selves have felt already by the late trial we have made of all
other forms of Government; together with the uneasiness we found under them,
and the miseries we have drawn upon our selves by them; from whence we may
undoubtingly conclude, that at least, for us of this Nation, there is no other
form of Government but Monarchy, under which we ever were, or ever can be happy.

Whether all other forms of Government be Always, and Absolutely Unlawful, I
will not take upon me to determine; Stent aut cadant Domino suo, Let them stand
or fall to their own master: But as Christ (when he was asked, whether it were
lawful for a man to put away his wife) answered, A principio non fuit sic; so
may I say of all other forms of Government except Monarchy, A Principio non
fuit sic, from the beginning there was no such Government: For as God made man
upright at first, because he made him after his own Image; so he made the
Government of mankind upright at first also, because he made it after the Image
of his own Government; which surely is Monarchical. And no doubt it was Gods
intention, it should always continue to be so; because, as we find no example
of any other Government of his approving, so we find no rule of direction for
any other Government; nor no precept of subjection to any other Government, of
his prescribing: Those we are commanded to submit to by Gods word, being
either, (...), Kings as Supreme; or (...), such as are sent and set over us by
Kings, as is evident from the whole Book of God in general, and from 1 Pet. 2.
v. 13, 14. in particular.

And indeed till the world was above 3000. years old, there was no other
Government in it but Monarchy only. For in Homers time all Greece had Kings,
and they were the Graecians from whom the (...) and the (...), Aristocracy and
Democracy had their beginning. For the Greeks being men of subtle wits and
unquiet spirits, finding Monarchy to be a curb to their Ambition, they devised
such forms of Government, wherein the Sovereignty being not Confined unto one,
but Shared amongst many, Every man might hope to have his turn and his part in
it: From the Grecians by their Colonies were these Heresies and Innovations in
Government derived to some few other Nations; but as they spread not far, so
they continued not long; for at the coming of Christ there was nothing but
Monarchy in the World; so that Monarchy as it was Instituted by God at the
Creation, so it seems to be restored by Christ at the Redemption of Mankind,
and to be recommended both by the Father and the Son as the best and only form
of Government for all Nations. And indeed nature it self does seem to recommend
it, and that not only because every Species of all Creatures whatsoever seems
to have a subordination to some one of the same kind; but likewise because
amongst men also, those that have no other Rule but the light of nature to live
by, I mean, those of America, and other lately discovered Nations, as there be
none of them without some Government, so none of them have any other form of
Government, but Monarchy.

Now as Monarchy is more natural and more according to Divine Institution, and
consequently a better form of government then any other; so of Monarchies, that
which is by Succession is much more natural and much more according to Divine
Institution, then any other kind of Monarchy. I mean, then that which either is
by Usurpation, or by Election.

And first it is better then Monarchy by Usurpation; for as no man can take to
himself the honor or office of a Priest; so much less can any man take to
himself the honor or office of a King; but he must have it from God himself,
either by Gods own Immediate designation, as Moses and the Judges had (for the
Judges were Kings) and as Saul and David had; or by Gods Ordinary way of
Dispensation, which was by succession of Children unto their Fathers: According
unto which Method, as Families grew into Nations, so Paternal government grew
into Regal, and consequently an Usurper, as he has no claim to Divine
Institution, so he has no title to Divine benediction or protection. And
besides, because what is Gotten by the sword, must be Maintained by the sword,
an Usurper must be a Tyrant, whether he will, or no. Lastly, a Monarchy by
Usurpation is Res sine titulo, a Possession without a Title; which seldom
lasts Long, or ends Well, for he that takes the sword shall perish by the
sword, says our Savior. Mat. 26.52.

Again, as Monarchy by Usurpation is Res sine titulo, so Monarchy by Election
is titulus sine re, a Title without the Thing; for Elective Kings are but
Conditional Kings; and Conditional Kings are no Kings. Besides, a King is to
have the Power of Life and Death, which none, that have it not themselves, can
give unto Him; And therefore, how He that is Elected by those that have not the
power of Life and Death, comes to have the power of life and death, and
consequently how he comes to be a King, is, as I conceive, not easy to
imagine. But supposing an Elective King, to be indeed a King; yet considering
first, the Dangers and Inconveniences of Inter-regnum's or Cessations of
Government betwixt the Death of one King and the Election of another; Secondly,
the Factiousness and partiality of the Electors, together with the envy and
emulation of the Competitors; Thirdly, the necessity of Him that is chosen, to
gratify those that Chose him, with the prejudice of those that were against
him; And lastly, considering that every Elective King has a Particular
Interest of his own; divided from that of the Public, and consequently, that
it is more then probable, that he will have more respect to the interest of his
Family, wherein he is to be Succeeded by his Children, then to that of the
Kingdom, wherein he may be Succeeded by a Stranger; Considering all these
things, I say, we may well conclude, that as Monarchy is the best form of
Government, so successive, hereditary Monarchy is the best form of Monarchy;
because where there is an undoubted right, there is no Need of Tyranny to
support it, as there is in an Usurpation; and because, where the Princes and
the Public Interest is the same (as it is in Hereditary Monarchy) there is no
need of Defrauding the one, to Provide for the other, as there is in Elective
Kingdoms.

But yet even of Hereditary Monarchies one may be more desirable then another,
as a Political rather then a Despotical; for a Despotical Monarch governs his
Subjects as a Master does his Servants, arbitrarily according to his own will
and pleasure, whether it be Right or Wrong; But a Political Monarch governs his
Subjects as a Father does his Children, by Equal and Just Laws, made with
their own consent to them, The former is the Government of the Turk and
Muscovite; the later is, or ought to be the Government of all Christian Kings;
I am sure it is of Ours; and therefore such a kind of Monarchy as Ours, is not
only the most just and reasonable, but the most plausible and popular
Government of all others. Especially, if the Supreme Governor be so Qualified,
as he ought to be, and that is (says Solomon) if he be a man of understanding
and knowledge.

And first, he would have him to be a Man; for Woe unto thee, O Land, (says
the same Wiseman) when thy King is a child, Ecclesiastes 10.16. But blessed art
thou, O Land, (says he in the very next words) when thy King is the son of
Nobles; so that it seems Solomon would have his Prince, neither to be a Child,
nor an Vpstart, or a Man meanly born; not a Child; because even then his
Authority, though it may be Abused, is to be Obeyed; not an Vpstart or a man of
mean birth, because such a One being to govern better men then himself, he
thinks there is no way to ^revent their Contempt of him, but by making himself
by his Cruelty to be feared by them; And hence it is that Asperius nihil est
humili cum surgit in altum, Mean persons, when they are mightily Exalted,
become Cruel and Insolent, and Imperious in their Own Defense; whereas Those*
that are born great, need not venture the being hated, for fear of not being
Reverenced by their Subjects, who have always an inbred reverence to the Royal
Blood and Family (if they be not Debauched from it); even whilst the Prince is
but a Child; And much more if he be a Man, and a Man before he is a King; A man
at his full Growth of Mind as well as of Body, and of Body as well as of Mind;
even just such an one, as we may imagine Adam to have been, when he was newly
made Monarch of the World; But till a King be a Man, we know not what kind of
Man he will be, either for his Person or for his Parts; whereas when we see him
a Man, and such a Man as we would wish to be our King, though he had not been
born to be so, we are very unworthy of him, if we be not very Thankful to God
for him. We know, that the Comeliness and Gracefulness of a private man's
person, and much more of a Princes, does exceedingly either excuse the defects,
or set off the excellency of his parts, and wonderfully indears him. And
whatsoever he does or says unto his people; for, Gratior est pulchro veniens de
corpore virtus; the same things said or done by a comely or uncomely, by a
graceful or ungraceful person, have very different operations and effects in
the minds of men. Philip de Comines tells us, that our Edward the fourth (who,
as he says, was the goodliest Gentleman that ever he saw) got twice possession
of London and the Crown, by the favor of the people, whom the beauty and
excellenlency of his shape had gained unto him: So that it is a great felicity
in a Sovereign Prince, when it cannot be said of him, as it was of Galba,
Galbae ingenium male habitat; but rather, that he has formam Principe dignam,
a shape worthy of a Prince; such an one as Saul had, then whom, (says the
Text) there was not a goodlier person among all the children of Israel; as well
for the symmetry of his Limbs, as the tallness of his Stature; or such an one
as Absalom was, in whom (besides his goodly Head of Hair) from the sole of his
foot to the crown of his head (says the Text) there was no blemish: And no
doubt it was by this silent Rhetoric (I mean, the comeliness and gracefulness
of his person) as well as by his courteous and fair language, that he stole
away the hearts of the people, which though it ill became a Subject, yet
nothing can more become a Sovereign Prince, then to have it in his power to
Captivate by his Looks and by his Words the hearts of his People at his
pleasure, without being at any Charge at all for it.

But if besides Comeliness and Gracefulness of shape; Courtesy, and Affability
of Speech and behavior, together with Gravity, and yet Serenity, and Benigness
of Aspect, there be a Vigorous Manliness in his Mind, and a promise of Long
Life in the Healthfulness of his Constitution, I know not what is to be wished
for more, but that he may have Mentem sanam in corpore sano, that the Beauty of
his Mind may be answerable to the beauty of his Body; as it will be, if he be a
man of understanding and knowledge, or such an one, as understands and knows
how to make Himself and his People happy.

And First, he must be a man of Understanding, and then of Knowledge: because,
if a man have not some Measure of Understanding, he is not capable of
Knowledge; as we see Natural fools and Madmen are not. Again, though a man have
understanding to such a Degree, as to make him Capable of the Knowledge of many
things that are well worth the Knowing, yet if he have not judgment and
discretion to make use of that Knowledge, or if that Knowledge make him never a
whit the wiser, it were as good for Himself, and the World too, that he knew
nothing: For, though a man have Read never so many Books, and Seen never so
many Countries, and Searched never so many Languages, and Gone through never so
many Arts and Sciences; yet if he be not naturally a man of judgment and
understanding, he may be a Fool for all this; nay he may be a much more
incurable Fool, then he would be otherwise; because his knowing so much makes
him think himself wise, when indeed he is not: and this is such a Fool, as
Solomon says, Though you bray him in a Mortar, yet will not his foolishness
depart from him; Prove. 27.22. which makes good our English Proverb, that the
greatest Clerks, are not always the wisest men; or as it is more sharply
expressed in the Scotch Dialect, an ounce of Mother wit is worth a pound of
Clergy.

Again, because there may be a bad as well as a good use made of a man's natural
understanding and of his knowledge too; therefore if a man have not such an
understanding, as to make a right use of his wit and of his knowledge, in order
to his Own, and the Public good, it were better for such a man and the world
too, that he had no understanding nor knowledge at all; for these are the men,
whose understanding and knowledge the Devil makes use of, as he does of his own
Serpentine subtilty for the disturbing, distracting, and confounding of States
and Kingdoms. But the understanding my Text speaks of, preserves and prolongs
States and Kingdoms. And therefore by a man of understanding in my Text, is
meant one that may be truly so called; not in a Natural sense only, but in a
Moral and Theological sense also; One that has good Morals, as well as good
Intellectuals; one that is not Biassed by his own passions, nor swayed by the
flattery of others; one that can, and does conform his will and affections unto
his reason, and his reason it self to Gods will revealed in his word; as
knowing, his own reason may deceive him, but Gods word rightly understood
(which is Gods Reason) cannot.

To conclude, by a man of understanding in my Text, is meant one that has an
understanding heart, as well as an understanding head, Vir cordatus, as the old
Latins called a wise man. And indeed generally through the whole Scripture,
wisdom is ascribed to the heart, or seated in the heart; thereby implying,
that True wisdom consists rather in practice then speculation, and in doing
our Duty, rather then in knowing of it; so that a man may be a very wise man in
the sense of the world (as all crafty men are) though never so false and
wicked, and a very fool in the sense of the Scripture, which calls every good
man a wiseman, and every wicked man a fool, according to that of DAVID, The
fool has said in his heart there is no God, Psalm 14. and according to that of
Job, To fear the Lord, That is wisdom, and to depart from Evil That is
understanding. Job 28.28. And that's indeed the understanding a Sovereign Prince
ought to have in order to the making himself and his people happy; but not
exclusively to a good natural understanding, for he must have that too; Because
otherwise, He that is to see with other men's Eyes, and to hear with other men's
Ears, and to execute his Commands by other men's hands (as Princes do,) may
easily, and will frequently be imposed upon, unless he be able to Discern
clearly, and to Judge rightly of Men, as well as Things, and of their Moralls,
as well as their Intellectuals: for an understanding Prince will take heed how
he trusts or employes a vicious or an impious person in any Charge of
importance; because where he sees neither Piety nor Honesty, he can never be
secure of such a man's fidelity any longer, then such a man's own interest and
the Princes is the same.

Besides, a Prince that has not a sound and solid Judgment of his own, though
he have never so wise a Counsel, yet he can never be sure that he is well
advised by them. Because the wisest and best men are but men, that is, such as
may have an Eye to themselves, and their own particular interest, more then to
the Public: but the Kings, and the Public interest being always the same, if
he be a man of understanding, he will easily discern, whether the Counsel, that
is given him, be in order to the Public interest, or no; and accordingly,
either admit it, or reject it. And therefore the Question, Whether it be better
for the People to have a weak King and a wise Counsel, or a wise King and a
weak Counsel, is very well decided by Machiavel, That of the Two, it is much
better to have a wise King, and a weak Counsel; Though indeed, it be not to be
imagined, but that a wise King will always have a wise Counsel: for if he do
not find them so, he will quickly make them so. But that other Question,
Whether a Prince ought to be Virtuous and Religious indeed, or in appearance
only, is very ill decided, by the same Machiavel: as if it were necessary
indeed for a Prince to appear virtuous and religious, but not necessary for him
to be so; Whereas no doubt if it be necessary for him to appear Virtuous and
Religious, it must needs be much more necessary for him to be virtuous and
Religious: For whatsoever advantages he may have upon the People by seeming so,
the same and more he may have by being so, besides the blessing of God upon
him and his People for his sake: but this Machiavel perhaps did either not
think of, or not care for.

Besides, I cannot see how a Prince can be said to be a man of understanding,
if he do not master his passions by his reason, and if he do so he must needs
be virtuous in Deed, and not in Appearance only; Neither do I see, how a
Prince, especially a Christian Prince, that believes there is a Providence
here, and a Judgment hereafter, can be a man of understanding, if he do not
seek the Protection, and assistance of the One, and Endeavor to Secure himself
from the danger of the Other; and if he do so, he must of necessity be
Religious in Deed, and not (as Machiavel would have him) only seem to be so.

But it is Solomon's, not Machiavel's PRINCE we speak of; and therefore he must
be a man of understanding, not in Machiavels sense (which is to be a man of
Falsehood and Dissimulation) but in Solomon's sense, which is to be a man of
Virtue and Religion. And then He will be wise for the Present, and wise for the
Future, wise for Himself, and wise for his People also.

Especially if he be a man not of understanding only, but of knowledge also;
And indeed if he be a man of Understanding, he will be a man of Knowledge; for
he will Understand that his Understanding it self must be perfected by
Knowledge. For though the Understanding be Naturally, Morally, and Religiously
never so well disposed; yet seeing of it self it is but a mere Capacity, it can
inform the Soul of no more, then what it self is informed of by the senses,
because Nihil est in intellectu, quod non prius fuit in sensu; this kind of
knowledge is neither Innate, nor infused, but acquired: so that as a man must
have a good understanding to make him capable of knowledge, and to enable him
to make a good use of that knowledge; so he must have knowledge likewise, to
furnish, improve and perfect his understanding. And therefore a SOVEREIGN
PRINCE, especially a great Monarch, who has many millions of bodies and souls
too, under his conduct; as he ought to have a clear, a sound, a solid and a
capacious understanding; so ought that capacity to be filled, and beautified
and adorned with the best, the choicest, the most necessary and most excellent
notions, maxims and habits, that humane nature is capable of, or moral industry
can attain unto. For, seeing no humane capacity is comprehensive enough to
excel in all things; therefore the most Excellent Persons will apply
themselves to the knowledge of the most excellent things, that is, such as best
become them, and such as most concern them. I remember I have read that Philip
of Macedon finding his Son Alexander playing skilfully upon the Lute, Art thou
not ashamed my Son (said he) to be so skilful a Musician? Thereby implying,
that to lose their precious time in learning little and low arts does not
become Princes.

The truth is, that all knowledge worthy of a Prince is reducible to these two
heads, the Art and Science of governing himself, and the Art and Science of
Governing his people.

In order to the governing of himself, he is to consider himself either as he
is a man, and as he stands in relation to God only; or as he is a Prince, and
stands in relation to God and men also.

In the First of these considerations, he is to divest himself of all his
Majesty, and to look upon himself as made of the same Clay, and of the same
brittle Constitution that other men are; that he came into the world as other
men did, and must go out of the world as other men do; for though Princes are
called GODS, yet they shall dye like men, says one that was a Prince himself,
Psalm. 82.7. and though they be accomptable to no Tribunal here, yet they are to
be Judged hereafter, and Judged by One, who is no respecter of persons, and
from whom no secrets can be hid. And for this reason a Prince is to consider
how careful he is to be of Governing himself, not according to that License,
which his Exemption from the penalty of humane Laws may prompt him to, but
according to that stricktness which the severity of the Divine justice does
require of him, For those that can be punished by none but God, shall be sure
to be most severely punished by God, if because they can be punished by none
but him, they presume the more to sin against him.

And therefore the best way for a Sovereign Prince, who is not subject to the
Judgment of Men, to secure himself from the Judgment of God, is to Judge
himself, and to exercise his Kingly authority, First within and upon himself.

First, by curbing, Restraining, and Regulating the inordinateness and
immoderateness of his own passions.

Secondly, by keeping a strict Guard and Watch over his own Senses, that his
Eyes may not look after Vanity, nor his Ears hearken unto Flattery.

And Thirdly, by carefully fortifying himself against all Temptations;
especially such, as are most agreeable unto him, and therefore most likely to
Prevail with him. Always remembering, that Fortior est qui se, quam qui
fortissima vincit Maenia, that Conquest is the glory of Princes, and that no
Conquest is so glorious as that over a man's own Self; For he that has once
mastered himself, will afterward find nothing too hard for him.

But this Consideration is Common to Princes with other men;

And therefore, Secondly, he is to consider himself as he is a Prince, and as
he stands in relation to his People and to God too; I mean, as he is Gods
Representative unto the People, and to Govern the People in Gods stead. Now as
in the former Consideration he could not be too humble, so in this
Consideration, he cannot be too Majesticall, nor too careful of keeping up the
Dignity of his Quality, nor in exacting that Reverence which is due to Gods
Vicegerent from the Greatest as well as from the meanest of his Subjects; For
tanti eris aliis, quanti tibi fueris, is a Truth, which all men in authority,
especially Sovereign Princes, ought to consider, and to behave themselves
accordingly; doing nothing unworthy of their Greatness, or that may lessen them
in the Eyes of their People. For there be many things that are not only
excusable, but commendable in private men that are not so in Princes. And even
of things that are lawful in themselves, all are not expedient for all persons
of all Conditions. And here the Rule is, That such things that are most
agreeable to our Inclination, are to give place to such things as best become
our Condition, especially when our condition is such as that many thousands
besides our selves are concerned in it. It is a notable saying that of
NEHEMIAH, Should such a man as I flee? Nehem. 6.11. And I wish that all men in
Authority, especially Sovereign Princes, would have that Reverence unto
themselves and to their quality, as when any suggestion from within, or
temptation from without, prompts them to the doing of any thing unworthy of
them, they would say unto themselves as NEHEMIAH did Shall such a man as I,
that am the Representative of God, and therefore ought to be like God in
Greatness, in Goodness, in Justice, in M^rcy, in rewarding those that do well,
and in punishing those that do evil, shall I do any thing that is either mean,
or sinful, or unjust, or cruel, or that may any way dishonor the Person I
represent? Again, Shall such a Man as I, that am appointed by God to govern
others, show my self so weak, as not to be able to govern my self, and mine own
Passions? Lastly, Shall such a Man as I, that am to be an example to all other,
carry my self so that others by my example may be the worse Subjects unto God,
and consequently the worse Subjects unto my self also? God forbid; For seeing
how apt the People are to follow the example of their Prince, especially in
that which is evil; Princes ought, for their Peoples sake as well as for their
own, to be very careful how they behave themselves, especially in public,
where all men's eyes are upon them. But because the People, though they are apt
enough to follow the ill, yet they are not so apt to follow the good example of
their Princes; it is not enough for a Prince to be a good Man, and consequently
to give a good example; but he must be a good Prince: that is, such a one as
knows how to make his Subjects such as they should be, by the severity of his
Laws, if they will not be persuaded to be so by his example, Eli we know was a
good Man, and so was our HENRY the sixth, but neither of them was a good
Prince, and therefore they were both of them unhappy in themselves, in their
Families, and in their Subjects. So that a Prince is not only to go before his
People by way of example, but he is to make them follow him, by countenancing,
encouraging, employing, and rewarding those that are virtuous, pious,
industrious, and men able and willing to do God and Him service either in the
Church or State; as likewise to discountenance, discourage, cashiere, and
punish such as are vicious, and impious, especially Atheistical and profane
persons* who are the Plague-sores of Courts and States, and such as ought to be
abhorred by all men, especially by Princes; who being Gods Vicegerents, are
above all other things to take care of Gods Honor and Worship, and
consequently not to suffer those that openl^ either deny him or affront him, to
live under their Protection, and much less to receive any countenance or favor
at all from them.

By this means, one good Prince will do more good toward a public Reformation
both in Church and State, then never so many or never so good Preachers
(without such a Prince) will do, or can do. As appears by the many Reformations
that were made in the Kingdom and Church of Judah, whereas none at all were
made in the Kingdom and Church of Israel; the reason whereof was, not because
there were not as good Preachers, and as great Prophets, but because there were
not as good Kings in Israel as there were in Judah: For Israel had its Elijahs
and Elisha's, the greatest of Prophets; but it had not its HEZEKIAH'S and
JOSIAH'S, the most pious of Kings; and they are pious and good Kings that must
make a pious and good People, by providing such subordinate Governors under
themselves both in Church and State, I mean such Magistrates and Judges for the
one, and such BISHOPS and Ministers for the other, as may give a good account
of the great Trust which by God and the King is committed to their ca^^*

And now when a Sovereign Prince knows how to govern himself both in relation
to God and to his People, he will the better know how to govern his People in
relation to Himself, and in order to His own and their Happiness.

And this indeed is the knowledge which is Proper and Peculiar to Princes as
they are Princes. Excudant alii spirantia mollius era, etc. Let others excel
in other Arts; but in Art been imperandi, in the Art of governing well, (which
is Ars (...), the Mistress of all Arts,) Princes ought to excel all men.

Tu regere imperio populos Roman memento;
Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos:
Hae tibi erunt Arts.
But no man can excel in any Art that does not study it, and with intension of
mind apply himself to it, by making use of those Means that are Necessary for
the acquiring of it, and for the making of himself perfect in it. I remember
Xenophon in his (...) observing that all kind of Cattle are ordinarily and
easily governed by those that have the charge of them, without Rebelling
against them, or Revolting from them; and yet that Societies of men, who are
reasonable Creatures (and for that Reason one would think much more Governable)
are rarely and difficultly kept in order by their Princes seems very much to
wonder at it: But then considering likewise, that Cyrus (of whom he writ) did
govern infinite multitudes of men of several Nations, Languages, and Manners,
as easily and quietly as ever any Herd of Cattle was governed by their
Herdsman, he concludes it is neither impossible nor very difficult to do as he
did, if Princes would study the Art of Governing, and apply themselves to it,
and were as well qualified for it as He was*

So that in order to Governing well, a Prince must First be qualified for it,
and Secondly he must mind it, and make it his business by applying himself to
it.

To Qualify him for it, many things are necessary, especially these two:
First, the knowledge of Humane Nature in General, how it works, and how it is
wrought upon; and Secondly, the knowledge of the particular Genius and
Disposition of the People he is to govern.

In order to the former, it is a great felicity when a Prince, before he begins
to govern at home, has seen much of the World abroad, especially those parts
of the World with which he is likely to have most to do; when he has learned
their Languages, observed their Manners, by conversing with them in their
Camps, and in their Courts, and has considered* their Interests, both as they
relate to his own, and to other Nations. This is a great advantage, I say, in
order to his future Government, when a Prince happens to have such an
Education. And hence it is that both Homer and Virgil (the one in his Ulysses,
and the other in his Aeneas) meaning to give us the pattern or Idea of a
perfect Prince, they make them both to be long abroad amongst foreign Nations,
before they settle at home; and so was our HENRY the seventh, one of our ablest
Princes.

Neither is it amiss for a Prince, in order to the felicity of his future
Government, to be for a time under a Cloud, and to be Hardened both in his Body
and his Mind by suffering Affliction, and thereby to know his Friends from his
Enemies, both at home and abroad; an important advantage, which no Prince that
never was in Adversity, can have, or make use of. Besides, Princes that are
bred up in that School of Affliction, are commonly much more prudent, and
pat^ent, and wary, and thrifty, and more inclinable to Piety, to Charity, to
Clemency, to Modesty, and Moderation in time of Prosperity, and to all other
Moral and Religious Virtues, then they would be otherwise. And therefore we see
that God thought fit to breed up the man after his own heart in this School of
Affliction; and perhaps it was his breeding in this School that made him to be
so: However, it is evident, that even after he was King, God would not admit
him to the Exercise of his Kingly Power, till he had spent some years under
this Discipline; which is the very case of our present SOVEREIGN, as well as it
was David's; and therefore I doubt not but God had the same Design in the
breeding of them both; namely, to make them as Glorious afterward by their
Actions, as they had been formerly by their Sufferings: Neither do I doubt, but
our David will do, as that other David tells us He did, He will rule us
prudently with all his power. Psalm. 78.71.

But Ars longa, vita brevis; No one Princes own experience is sufficient to
make him a Master of this Art: He must take in therefore the experience of
former Ages, as well as of his own, and consequently he must spend some time in
Books as well as in business; especially in Histories, whereby he shall be
truly and impartially informed, how, and by what means some Princes in all Ages
have made themselves happy and glorious, and others have made themselves*
miserable and infamous: And (considering that ordinarily the same Causes
produce the same Effects) a wise Prince will imitate them in his Actions, to
whom he desires to be most like in his Fortune and Reputation.

More especially he ought to acquaint himself with the Histories of his own
Nation, that he may not be a stranger at home, but may know the particular
temper and humor of his own People, and how he is to apply himself to them, to
make himself honored* and obeyed, and beloved by them; carefully observing
which of his Predecessors were so, and which of them were not so, and what
difference it was in their Actions, which produced that difference in their
Subjects Affections, and in their own Fortunes^

But of all other Books, let him especially acquaint himself with the BOOK of
God; which David (though no Prince had less time to spare from Action) made his
daily study, nay he studied it night and day, as himself tells us: And good
reason had he to do so; for by reading this Book he came to have more
understanding then all his Teachers, as he tells us in one place; Psa. 119.9
nay to have more wisdom then all the Ancients, Verse. 10
when he was yet Young, as he tells us in another place; and to be wiser then
all his Enemies, (not excepting Achitophel himself) as he tells us in a third
place. Verse. 9


But though all that is written in Gods Book was written for our Instruction,
yet because all of it was not written for the Instruction of Kings, as they are
Kings, I wish Kings would find leisure to read so much of it at least, as was
written of Kings, or by Kings; I mean the Books of the Kings and Chronicles,
wherein they will find the Best Direction they can have in point of Government
by way of example; together with the Psalms of David, and the Proverbs of
Solomon, wherein they will find the best Instruction that can be given them in
order to the same end, by way of Precept and Counsel. Or if this be still too
much, that they would but read once a week the Votum Davidis, that Vow of
David, (as I may so call it) I mean the 101. Psalm, which though it be but a
very short one, yet, as I conceive, what most concerns a King, in order to the
governing of Himself, his Family, and his Kingdoms, is either expressly or
virtually contained in it.

And now when a lawful Hereditary Sovereign Prince is thus Qualified, when he
is of as Ancient and as Royal an Extraction as any Prince can be (as having all
the Royal Blood of Europe concentred in his Veins) when he is Comely in his
^erson, Healthful and Vigorous in his Constitution, Graceful and Obliging in
his Behavior, of a Clear, sound and and solid Understanding, Improved by an
Extraordinary Education, Seasoned by Affliction, Confirmed and ^erfected by the
Knowledge of Men, Books, and Business; when a Prince, I say, Is thus Qualified,
and withal intends the Work he has to do, by an actual application of his mind
to it, and by a careful and constant prosecution of it, have we not reason to
believe that such a Prince is marked out by the Divine Providence for some
Great and Glorious Work, or other? And what can be a greater, or more glorious
Work, then the settling and prolonging the State of a great Empire, after it
has been so much, and so long shaken and shattered, as This of ours has been?
And what more Evident Prognostics can we have, that this, and none but this is
the Man marked out by Heaven for the effecting of this great and glorious work,
then those, which the Star at his Birth did point to, and which we our selves
have since seen come to pass with our own Eyes? especially in the two most
Memorable and most Remarkable Particulars; I mean, First, His almost miraculous
Preservation from many and great Dangers, especially in, and after the Battle
of Worcester; And Secondly, His as much if not more miraculous Restitution to
his Crown, after his second Exile. The immediate hand of God indeed was visible
in them both; but (as I think) more signally and more remarkably in the latter,
then in the former; For many Princes perhaps have in as wonderful a manner
escaped as great dangers; but was it ever heard of in the World before, that a
King, after having been so long excluded, and after the Government it self of
his Kingdom had been so often changed, and after a new generation of men, that
knew not Joseph, was sprung up in it; Nay, that even when the most violent men
against him, and most irreconcilable men to him were in possession of the
Present Power, and were Enacting a final Abjuration of him, that then, even
then, I say, so beyond and above the hopes of his Friends, so contrary to the
desires and expectations of his Enemies, and so much to the amazement of the
whole World, he should be so solemnly Invited, so magnificently Conducted, so
triumphantly Received* and so joyfully and universally Acknowledged and
Welcomed by all the Subjects; And all this, without blood, without blows,
without bargain, and without any obligation* at all to any Foreign Prince or
State for it? And is not this as much as if God should have said to us in plain
terms, Behold the Man; behold your King; Behold Charles the Sufferer, the Son
of Charles the Martyr; the Grandchild of James the Wise on the one side, and
of Henry the Great on the other, and Heir to the several Excellencies of them
both: Behold the Man, that must build up the Walls of Jerusalem, and make up
the breaches in Sion, by Restoring and Settling whatsoever is yet wanting,
either in regard of our Civil concernments, or our Spiritual: Behold the Man,
that must Cure all our Jealousies, Banish all our Fears, Confirm all our Hopes,
and Settle all our Distractions? Lastly, Behold the Man, that was Designed by
the Divine Providence, that has been Preserved by the Divine Power, that is
Qualified by the Divine Wisdom, and Brought home again to us by the Divine
Goodness and Mercy, to settle and prolong the State of the three Kingdoms.

The State, I say; and that First, as it signifies the Government it self in
the Essential and Legal Frame and Constitution of it; And Secondly, as it
signifies the Outward splendor of that Government, arising from Peace, Plenty,
Wealth, Strength, Security, Reputation, and whatsoever other ingredients there
are, to make a Nation happy.

But first the State must be settled in the former of these Notions, as it
signifies its Ancient Legal and Essential Constitution, before it can be settled
in the latter; I mean, in its outward splendor and prosperity. All we have
suffered under so* Many Changes hitherto, has been to no purpose, if we do not
yet believe This Truth, if we are not yet grown so much wiser then we were, as
to be convinced, That our Old Government, without any alteration at all in the
Fundamentals of it, is best for us. And by the old Government, I mean the
thing, as well as the name of Monarchy; and that in all its parts, as well as
in some of them; You cannot have the Old Government in the Civil part of the
State, if you have it not in the Ecclesiastical; neither can the King be
supreme in one, unless he be supreme in both: For, where there are two
Supremes, there can be no Monarchy. Now we know, that Monarchy is from God, and
therefore we may know, that whatsoever is Destructive to Monarchy, or
Inconsistent with Monarchy, is not from God, because Gods Ordinances cannot
destroy or clash one against another. But Thanks be to God and the King for it,
our Old Government is already Restored in both the parts of it; and yet it
cannot properly be said to be restored, until it be settled, as it was before;
and settled as it was before, I am afraid, it is not yet, I hope it will be; And
when our Good Old Government Civil and Ecclesiastical is once settled; then, but
not till then, we may expect, that the Ancient Splendor and Honor, together
with the Peace, Prosperity and Security of the English Nation will be Restored
and Settled also. And as the Restoring and Settling of the latter, d(...) depend
upon the Restoring and Settling of the former; so it is the preserving of the
former, that must be the prolonging of the latter; for a^ long as our Old
Government is Preserved, so long and no longer will our Peace and Prosperity be
Prolonged; And therefore let all those that Desire and Hope for the continuance
of the one, Endeavor and Pray for the continuance of the other,

In the mean time, Blessed be the great and good God, for all those great and
good things which he has already done for us. For which of us would have
Believed a little above a year ago, that ever he should have lived to have
seen this Day? Nay, who is there amongst us, that upon condition he might have
lived to see this Day, would not have been content to have Died the next Day
after? And now we do see it, do we not almost doubt, whether we see it indeed
or no? or do we not seem unto our selves to be like unto those that Dream? May
we not say of this so great, so sudden, so wonderful a Change from what we
were of late, to what we are now, as Saint Paul says of the calling of the
Jews, that it is like the Resurrection from the Dead? Certainly, no Joy on
Earth can exceed it, and I do verily believe, that the Angels in Heaven have
their share in it. For if there be so great Joy in Heaven (as our Savior tells
us there is) at the Conversion of any one Sinner; how much greater Joy is it
then, that is now there, at the Conversion of three so great, so sinful
Nations? Nay, if the Saints above know any thing of what is done here below,
either by Intuition of God, or Revelation from God, certainly that great and
blessed Saint, that happy and glorious Martyr, the Father of our present
Sovereign, was never so much Grieved with the Injuries and Indignitities that
were done unto himself, as he is now well-pleased with this Days Solemnity,
and with the Due Rights and Honors which are now, with so universal a
Cheerfulness paid unto his Son. And therefore with Angels* and Archangels, and
all the Host of Heav^n, let us Laud and Magnify the glorious Name of God, and
join with the Heavenly Quire in that Heavenly Anthem, which was first sung at
the Birth of our Savior, and may most seasonably be sung over again at the
Inauguration of our King, Glory be to God in the highest, on Earth Peace, Good
will toward men. And may this Day be Annually and for ever repeated with the
same Joy and Exultation wherewith it is now Celebrated. Let the King have
always more and more cause to bless God for his People, and let the People
have always more and more cause to bless God for their King; and let the
prolonging of days to the one, be the prolonging of happiness to the other.
And to this End, may he live to see his Subjects, as well as his Children, to
the third and fourth Generation. And when he has settled Gods House, and his
own, the Church and the State, and seen them both flourish, and like to
continue in a flourishing condition; when he is full of days and Honor, and
when God has no more work for him to do here; then, and not till then, may he
exchange the Crown of cares he is to put on now, for a Crown of Glory which he
shall wear for ever; And let all that Love God and the King, their Country,
and themselves, say, Amen.

FINIS.

