A LETTER FROM AN Anti-Phanatique, TO The most Illustrious and truly Virtuous
LADY, the LADY MONK.

By a true lover of his Country.

London, Printed in the year, 1660.

TO The most Virtuous LADY, THE LADY MONK.
MADAM,
IT is commonly seen that Honors change Manners, no sooner are we
circumferenced with the bright Clouds of Magnitude, but presently forgetting
what Nothings we were and are, we swell our selves into imaginary Somethings:
But your Ladyships Virtues are a sufficient charm against this kind of folly,
or rather great madness; and your acquaintance (which now compared to your
Ladyship, are but as shrubs in comparison of the tallest Cedars) will make this
good; who speak your deportment, Madam, to be as sweet and friendly, as affable
and courteous, as humble and free from all Pride and Vanity, as before your
Ladyship ascended the glistering Mount of Honor: whilst others pride it with
noble descent, and deck themselves with borrowed rays from honorable
Ancestors, your Ladyship being eminently Virtuous, is a most clear Fountain of
Honor your self; such as these, the sails of whose Greatness swell with Pride
and Vanity, have but the shadow of true Nobility, the substance dwells with
your Ladyship: you are a burning Lamp, and shining light to all your Sex, and
the noblest Madams cannot have a fairer Copy to write by than is your Ladyship.

Truly, Madam, I am glad you are great, only because you are good, and am glad
to see the luster of your goodness outshine the luster of your greatness. This
may dazel and attract vulgar eyes, but the most sweet contemplation of your
incomparably good and virtuous Soul captivates, and draws all hearts after
your Ladyship. Greatness is vanishing and mortal, to day a Prince, to morrow a
Beggar; to day a Conqueror, to morrow a Captive; to day a Madam, to morrow
none, and sadly weeping that ever she was one. But Goodness which is your
Ladyships chief aim and study, is immortal; and will not only dignifie you
here, but will eternize you hereafter. Not to flatter, but inform, you are
looked upon, Madam, by all, with singular delight, as one raised up by God like
Queen Hester, for the good of your languishing Country: and his Excellency is
reputed the miracle of men, and Englands blessed Peacemaker. How many years
has this Land been rent and torn in pieces by self-interest interest Persons
and Parsons? How many changes have we had, and still from bad to worse? and had
not our Joshua the Lord General stood up for us against our Rampant Enemy, it
is to be feared before this time City and Country had been ruined, and England
made a Monument of Blood and Ashes: Such a blessing never came out of Scotland
before, such an opportune deliverance, even when bloody Sectaries had armed
themselves with weapons and resolution to destroy the Protestant party, and make
Merchandise of Churches and Universities was never heard of, never read of. And
had the Lycaonians been present at your Ladyships and the Generals coming
amongst us, and seen the many Miracles then done, the almost incurable diseases
and sad distempers which we lay groaning under a long time, presently cured,
and our creepled Commonwealth set upon its legs again, and leaping for joy;
his Sword not wounding, but healing our wounds; his Victory not died in blood;
and our Peace procured, not by war, according to that cursed Motto [PAX
QUAERITUR BELLO] but by his most excellent Wisdom, and incomparable Prudence.
Had the Lycaonians seen all this, they would have cried out in admiration of
your Honors, as once they did concerning Paul and Barnabas, The Gods are come
down amongst us in the likeness of men. We now see what the Saints are which
have Lorded it over us all this while, not Saints but Devils; mere cheats,
pretenders only to Religion and Honesty, having not the least dram of either;
not Physicians, but Butchers, mangling and murdering their King and Country;
but your Honors like the good Samaritan, have poured oil abundantly into the
wounds which those Thieves and Robbers made: you are true Israelites in whom we
all hope there is no guile: you are a most blessed couple may England say, and
the shrill sound of your fame for what you have already done, is heard afar
off; and if you make the Epilogue like the Prologue, and Crown the great good
work you have begun, every where, and in all places we will hang up Trophies,
and erect Monuments to your Honors, which shall make your Memories bloom and
blossom to all Posterity; future Chronicles shall blazon your Ladyship the best
of Women, and his Excellency the best of Men; all Ages shall bless you, and
dwell upon your praises till they swell in Volumes bigger than Foxes
Martyrology: nay we will all write your Histories, and fill whole Libraries
with Folioes only of your Commendations, and there shall be no end of your
Eulogiums: Never were any received by our Metropolis with such acclamations of
Joy, and such high expressions of Love as your Honors; and may you both still
continue and grow very aged in all estimation and honor amongst us, that when
your most precious lives shall periodize, our dropping eyes may witness our
loss, and your pious Souls wrapped in a sable Mantle of our sighs and groans
mount the Battlements of the highest Heavens, is the hearty prayer of,

MADAM, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant, HEN. MORLEY.

FINIS.

