REMARKS Upon Two late Ingenious Discourses: The One, An Essay touching the
Gravitation and Non-Gravitation of FLUID BODIES: The Other, Observations
touching the TORRICELLIAN EXPERIMENT; So far forth as they may concern any
Passages in his Enchiridium Metaphysicum.

By Dr HENRY MORE.

(...). Aristot. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St
Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

IMPRIMATUR

Antonius Saunders.
Ex Edibus Lamberhanis, November. 13. 1675.
THE PREFACE.
Reader,
I Had not given thee the trouble of a Preface, were it not for apologizing for
a Phrase which I observe something frequently to occur in my Remarks, which may
seem to thee hugely Paradoxical, if not very absurd. It is Gravitation upwards:
I made use of it in imitation of the Learned Author, upon whose Discourses I
make my Remarks. Wherefore that thou may the better discern how allowable or
disallowable this form of speech is, and that I may withal offer to thee that
which may perhaps tend to the better opening thine understanding in
Hydrostatical Theories, I will lay down a simple Hypothesis for the
illustrating that natural poize, libration or Gravitation that Philosophers
suppose they discover in the Fluid matter of this our Terrestrial world.

First, therefore, Let us imagine our Earth environed only with the Materia
subtilis, that Des Carts has so curiously described; or more plainly and
intelligibly, with the pure subtle Ether which is a liquid body of that
subtilty, that it will with ease penetrate all bodies in some measure, but
abundantly the pores of Glass.

Secondly, Let us consider, that a Hail-shot, Gravel, Quicksilver, and the
like may be poized in Water, and Corn, Chaff, Currants, Powders, and such like
in the Air, and that they will subside or weigh one against another in the said
Elements; so the particles of these Elements themselves, Water and Air, and the
vapors therein, are as it were weighed or poized in this more universal
Liquidum of the Ether.

Thirdly, That the particles of Quicksilver, Water, Vapors, Air, and, in
brief, what ever is contained in that which they call the Atmosphere, if there
be no let nor new emergent mutation, are in this poizing placed according to
their solidity, chiefly of the very particles they do consist, suppose Air,
Water, Quicksilver, according as I have declared in my first Hydrostatical
Axiom, Enchirid. Metaphys. cap. 13. sect. 10.

Fourthly, That in some sense all the parts and particles of the Atmosphere,
even the thinnest Air at the Convexity thereof, are heavy, namely thus; That if
they were upon some occasion raised higher than the convexity, those thin parts
of Air would descend again to the said convexity as sure as the vapors do in
Dew on the Grass, or raised Dust does upon any pavement or floor.

Fifthly, That this we call heaviness is nothing else but a capacity in the
parts or particles of the Atmosphere to be placed according to their solidity,
by that, what ever it is, that moves them, or disposes them.

Sixthly, That when these particles of Fluids in the Atmosphere are so
disposed, with regard to their different solidity, as is according to the Laws
of this moving Principle, they press not then on one another, but, as to any
actual Gravitation on one another, they are at rest.

Seventhly, This diversity of solidity in the particles is the cause why we see
Elements and liquids in such different places, and of such different
Consistencies. As Quicksilver below water, water below, air, the thicker air
below the thinner, and their Consistencies accordingly.

Eighthly, That the more solid the particles are in fluids, the more strong
their consistency is, as well as they are thereby more heavy.

Ninthly, That as the moving or disposing Principle brought the several Liquids
to such various differences of consistency by a positive action, so it keeps
them in the same consistency by a like positive action or force, though upon
occasion mutable or vincible.

Tenthly, That there may be a very strong consistency in Liquids without any
elasticity or springiness at all, as in Quicksilver and Water which are not
compressible.

Elevently, That there may be a compressible consistency considerably strong
where there is little or no elasticity of parts. A thing easily discernible in
the wringing or pressing in a man's hand a wet Handkerchief; and of such a
compressible consistency may be our lower Air, stuffed with thick vapors, as
also consisting of the grosser Aereal Particles.

Twelfthly, That all poizings, suspensions or librations of heavy liquid
bodies, are not by a mere counterpoize of perpendicular pressure of another
body, but may be by the firmness or force of its consistency. I speak this in
reference to the Torricellian experiment, and the standing of the water in
Pumps and Syringes, which is thus solved with the greatest ease and
intelligibleness that may be, by supposing so strong a consistency in this
lower Air, that the firmness thereof will resist the weight of suppose 29
inches of Mercury in a Tube, or of 34 foot of water in a Pump, but will be
broke by the weight of 30 or 31 inches of Mercury, and 35 or 36 foot of water,
and suffer compression, to the letting in the subtle liquidum or Ether (in
which the whole Atmosphere is poized into the Glass or Pump, whereby the
Mercury or Water is made capable to descend. And 29 inches of Mercury being of
one weight with 34 foot of water in a Tube of the same diameter, it is plain,
that this is the poize that equals either the firmness of consistency, or else
the weight of the Air.

Thirteenthly, But here now I say lies the curiosity of the Theory, whether
this suspension, suppose of the Mercury in the Tube, be to be conceived to be
by perpendicular pressure or actual Gravitation of the Air upon the restagnant
Mercury; or else, as I intimated before, by the firmness of its consistency, it
being not compressible, by no greater weight than that of 29 inches of Mercury,
and so there being no vacuum, nor penetration of dimensions, the circle of
motion is necessarily stopped, and the Mercury stands at that pitch. To which I
conceive is most safely answered, That when the Mercury is fallen to 29 inches,
that there is a kind of libration betwixt the air jointly with the restagnant
Mercury, and the Mercury in the Tube. For upon the infusing of water upon the
restagnant Mercury, that in the Tube will proportionably ascend. And this the
Learned Author upon whom I make the Remarks, will call Gravitation upwards,
because its tendency is toward that more subtle matter in the derelicted space
in the Glass. And this Libration is not much unlike that in a Siphon with one
leg much higher than another, into which putting some quicksilver (which will
presently poize it self into an equality in each shank) if you pour water into
the longer shank, the quicksilver in the other will ascend accordingly: which
is again a kind of Gravitation upwards against the thin Air, and answers to the
ascending or gravitating of the Torricellian Mercury in the Tube against the
subtle Ether there. But that the parts thus librated in this liquidum
subtilissimum, (in which the whole atmosphere is poized by the moving or
disposing Principle) when they are settled in their poize, press or gravitate
one upon another, I do utterly deny. But then secondly, I say, the firmitude of
the consistence of the Air is as it were the string of this balance, which if
it break, or so far forth as it breaks or relaxates, the Mercury in the Tube
will fall down. And thirdly, that the Mercury is kept up by this string of
firmness of the consistency of the Air, and not by the actual gravitation of an
Atmospherical Cylinder of an equal diameter on the restagnant Mercury, appears
from that experiment of the Mercury in the Tube not falling, though the Vessel
of Mercury be close covered in a Glass, and so the supposed pressure of the
Atmospherical Cylinder intercepted, and a commodious Valve made, that upon the
falling of the Mercury would let the Air out, though there be none let in by
it; which Valve the weight, suppose, of ten pounds of Mercury would be sure to
fling open, if it were the weight of the Atmospherical Cylinder that held up
that ten pound of Mercury in the Tube before. Nor fourthly, can it be the
spring of that Air included in the Glass that upholds the Mercury in the Tube,
since it must be so great, that it must hold up no less than the weight of ten
pound of Mercury; and if the elasticity of the Air be so great or strong,
considering the subtilty of the parts of the Air that make this spring, which
are hugely more subtle and thin, and consequently more cutting than the edge of
a Razor, it is impossible but that they should cut with all imaginable ease
into the Quicksilver, and so piercing into it prove unserviceable for the
pretty feat they are intended. To say nothing here of the excellent arguments
of this Learned Author upon whom I remark, by which he seems to me quite to
have defeated that modern Paradox of the monstrous elasticity of the Air, which
yet some eximious Wits have so favorably entertained.

Wherefore lastly, to detain my Reader no longer in a less needful Preface,
From what has been said he may easily discern, that this Phrase of Gravitation
upward is not destitute of all good ground, since such libration upward
terminates on a thinner Element, as true and proper Gravitation always does;
and he may in the mean time observe there is no proper Gravitation but in such
cases, when a heavier fluid sways upon a lighter, but that the parts of the
heavy fluid do not press or gravitate one upon another at all, nor a lighter
upon an heavier, but are moved jointly by that Principle which disposes them
according as we have above described; and finally consider with himself,
whether it be not more likely there should be such a subtle Element penetrating
all Bodies, in which they, or (to speak more compendiously) the whole
Atmosphere is librated, and that there is likewise that vincible consistency of
the lower Air, than that there should be that Tension this Learned Author
stands up for (which cannot be without penetration of dimensions, nor is it
conceivable how such an extended Funiculus should hold together) or (which this
Author is as much against as for the other) that there should be such a
monstrous elastick pressure of the Air, and actual gravitation of the parts of
the same elements one upon another, when the Particles are of the against more
solid and searching Reason, that enquires after the final cause of things, and
duly relishes that excellent Aphorism of Aristotle, Natura nihil agit frustra:
So is it manifestly against common sense and experience. Methinks the
Hypothesis I have here briefly described, is far less obnoxious than any of the
other. But if any one be otherwise minded, I know right well, that liberty of
philosophizing is the common right of all that in good earnest profess
themselves free Philosophers.

On the Essay touching the Gravitation and Non-Gravitation of Fluid bodies.
REMARK the First. OF Gravity and Gravitation, that it is nothing but Mobility
and Actual Motion, and upon what terms it is fit to conclude actual motion to
be in a body. REMARK the Second. Whether Motion downwards belong to solid
bodies as such, and whether some fluids have not a stronger tending of that
kind than some solid bodies. REMARK the Third. The true reason why the parts of
solid bodies do not gravitate one upon another.
Upon Chapter the Fourth.
THE attempt of supplanting my demonstration in Enchirid. Metaphys. Cap. 13.
Sect. 4. by introducing a Cap or Cone of water only gravitating on the Lamina
lignea, succinctly explained. REMARK the Fourth. The disparity betwixt the Cap
or Cone, and Cylinder of Water and the Pyramid of Bricks. REMARK the Fifth.
That the former instance of Masonry in the Pyramid of Bricks, will not so much
as hold in Wheat, Sand, and Hail-shot. REMARK the Sixth. The suspended Sand in
the top of the body of a Cylinder no argument for any such supposed Masonry in
the element of water. REMARK the Seventh. The Mechanical Incumbency of the
particles of Sand on the Eggshel in the manner of an Arch, whence to be
enervated. REMARK the Eighth. Of the lateral Direction of the parts of Sand and
such like bodies. REMARK the Ninth. Four Arguments to show the invalidity of
this pretended Masonry in water against my demonstration from the round Lamina
lignea in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum. REMARK the Tenth. The intrinsecal
Gravity of water how to be understood. REMARK the Eleventh. That water in its
fluid consistency gravitates, and in what sense it so does, infused on
Quicksilver, into which a Tube is immit'ted, etc. REMARK the Twelfth. That a
Bucket of Water is not as much one continued body as a Bucket of Pitch, and
wherein the nature of Fluidity does consist, and how eminent in water. REMARK
the Thirteenth. The Learned Author's mistake touching the Principium
Hylarchicum, with a brief description thereof. REMARK the Fourteenth. The
distinction of considering water as a solid body and a fluid body examined.
REMARK the Fifteenth. A twofold Mechanical account of the Non-Gravitation of
the particles of water on subjected bodies, viz. from the Continuity of the
particles, and from their Architecture or Masonry, with a confutation of both.
REMARK the Sixteenth. That the Learned Author himself at last admits, that the
parts of water are not continuous but contiguous. His refuge to the Masonry of
the particles also confuted. REMARK the Seventeenth. Whether the Cartesian
aqueous particles be more fit for this supposed Masonry, than those of Wheat,
Hail-shot, and Sand. REMARK the Eighteenth. Whether water be quid continuum or
contiguum. REMARK the Nineteenth. A Column of water gravitating on a Rundle
upon a perforated bottom of a Bucket, how reconcilable with this supposed
Masonry of the Arch. REMARK the Twentieth. An experiment of two Rundles urged
against this supposed Architecture, together with an experiment that clearly
takes away both his Mechanical accounts at once, that of Continuity and this of
Masonry.
Upon Chapter the Eighth.
THat the Author lays his main stress on his natural account of the
Non-Gravitaion of water, etc. REMARK the Twenty first. Intrinsecal Heaviness of
a body, how ex pacto to be understood from my first Remark. REMARK the Twenty
second. The Author's description of his Natural Account of the Non-Gravitation
of Fluids, etc. REMARK the Twenty third. The Author's distinction of the
terminal motions of water as a heavy body and as of a fluid body examined by
our Agreement in the first Remark, and conluded, That all the directions of
Motion in water as to Primitiveness and Intrinsecalness are of one kind. REMARK
the Twenty fourth. That the Learned Author has abundantly well proved the
various tendencies and pressures of water every way, but not every way at once
or the same time. REMARK the Twenty fifth. The usefulness of the conjunction of
primitive Gravitation with the motion of water downwards, as to the Author's
scope; this primitive Gravitation of the aqueous particles remaining, as if it
were alone, the motion of water upwards defeating that downwards; and primitive
Gravitation taken away making a Bucket of Air and Bucket of water
aequiponderant. So that either way this natural account is subverted. REMARK
the Twenty sixth. That the various lines of direcion of motion, beside the
perpendicular, can contribute nothing to the abating of the intrinsic
Gravitation. REMARK the Twenty seventh. That the imagined continuity in water
more than in Callis-sand, nor the motion per declive, can abate the Intrinsic
Gravitation of water if there were any in it. REMARK the Twenty eighth. That
the tumbling of the Callis-sand per declive, does not prove, that when the
granules rest, they press per declive but downwards. REMARK the Twenty ninth.
How from the supposition of just 12 l. stock of intrinsic weight in a Cubick
foot of water to be dispensed to all the various lines of motion in water, and
yet there being felt just 12 l. weight still, it is demonstrable, that all the
other motions are merely imaginary not real. REMARK the Thirtieth. The
ineffectual Answer of the Author to this difficulty; with a further
Confutation of this natural Account of his from a Bucket of Ice.
Upon Difficiles Nugae, or Observations touching the Torricellian Experiment.
THE Transition from his Remarks upon the Essay touching the Gravitation of
Fluids to this other touching the Torricellian Experiment. REMARK the First. Of
Rarefaction and Tension, and of Condensation and Restitution in the Author's
sense. The groundlessness of them proved, by proving there are subtiler
particles in the Air than those that are properly Aereael. As also their
repugnancy to reason and experience. REMARK the Second The distinction of
Gravitatio ad motum, and Gravitatio ad pondus. And that it is unconceivable,
how the latter should be without the former; if there be any intrinsic Gravity
in heavy bodies so called, together with the true reason why the parts of lead
do not gravitate one upon another. REMARK the Third. That the increase of
Renitence or Pressure of the water against its being raised higher in B, more
than in A, and in C, more than in B, is not the reason that the Oil in the Tube
does not go out at B, and ascends at C. Also why a Peuter Porringer full of
Hail-shot weighs alike in water from the bottom to the top. REMARK the Fourth.
Smaller particles in the Air acknowledged by the Author himself, together with
a disprovement of his supposed continuity of the greater. REMARK the Fifth.
Compressed Air appearing heavier no proof that it had innate Gravity in it
before, but rather that there is no such thing as intrinsic Gravity in the
world. REMARK the Sixth. The Cohaesion of the parts of water weaker than that
of Air, according to the Author, a manifest Argument against his pretended
Masonry in the parts of water. REMARK the Seventh. His experiment of the
Glasssiphon with Quicksilver and Water, and his mistaken conclusions
therefrom: And what excellent use there may be made of it against his imaginary
Architecture in the element of water. REMARK the Eighth. His invention of the
Cap or Cone enervated from Stevinus his experiment of a Rundle on the bottom of
a Vessel with an hole in it. REMARK the Ninth. The Gravitation of the water in
that case on the Rundle whence it is, whether simply because of the Air
underneath, or because the Air is in the state of Abituriency. Where something
by the by of the Spirit of Nature. REMARK the Tenth. Why an empty Glass-bottle
carefully stopped and sunk into the Sea is broken, and why in some cases Oil
drives Water, and Water Quicksilver upwards, and what shroud insinuations such
Phenomenon are, that there is no such thing as inward Gravitation in bodies,
but that matter is ranged according to the Laws of the Spirit of Nature. REMARK
the Eleventh. That the reason why a small Glass-Tube filled up with water, and
immitted into a Vessel of water, the water in the Tube will sink till it be
even with the superficies of the water in the Vessel, is not from the force of
the water in the Tube to press downwards, but from some higher Principle.
REMARK the Twelfth. The pretended obscure solution in Enchirid. Metaphys. cap.
13. or reason of the falling off, and sticking to of the Obturaculum in a Tube
with a Valve, according as the Tube is more or less immersed in the water, more
fully explicated. REMARK the Thirteenth. That the sticking of the Obturaculum
to the Valve, is not simply from the Tubes pressing up a portion of water of a
greater weight than it, because if the Abituriency of the air in the Tube be in
a due measure sufflaminated, the Obturaculum at the same depth will fall.
Together with a farther confutation of this reason from Glass-bottles well
stopped and immitted into the Sea. Whence the operation of the Principium
Hylarchicum is farther discovered* REMARK the Fourteenth. A notable Experiment
of the Author's in a Tube of Quicksilver, which if he had rightly improved,
might easily have led him to an acquaintance with the Hylostatick Spirit of the
world. REMARK the Fifteenth. Two more Experiments out of Honoratus Faber, a
farther confirming of our solution of the former. REMARK the Sixteenth. The
Authours's mistake in making all bodily motion to be wrought by the contact of
some active body, whenas most bodily motions in the world are not Mechanical
but Vital. REMARK the Seventeenth. The Author's mistake conceiving that there
are no pores in Glass, and that if the Ether pass those pores it must pass
freely. REMARK the Eighteenth. His mistake further discovered from his own
Experiments and Observations made in a Glass-Tube of Mercury inverted in the
Air, and the Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment. REMARK the Nineteenth. And
further still detected by demonstrating the incredibility of the ascending of
any vapors or steams from the Mercury into the derelicted space in the Tube.
REMARK the Twentieth. A notable Objection of the Author's against the Opinion
of Mercurial effluvia occupying the derelicted space of the Tube, and such as
himself does not answer. REMARK the Twenty first. A sound and ingenious
demonstration of the Author's against the Hypothesis of an Atmospherical
Cylinder suspending the Cylinder of Mercury in the Tube, from the Tube of
Mercury hung upon a Balance, with its mouth some half an inch immersed in
restagnant Mercury. REMARK the Twenty second. His ingenious obviating that
evasion of a Cylinder of Air pressing on the top of the Tube of Mercury so
hung, as if that supplied the place of the Mercury in the Tube, whose weight
was discovered in the opposite Scale of the Balance. REMARK the Twenty third.
His dextrous defeating as weak a subterfuge, whereby they would elude the force
of his former Answer. REMARK the Twenty fourth. Two neat Experiments of the
Author's, whereby he meets with all such elusions, and unexceptionably
demonstrates, that the pressure of an Atmospherical Pillar in such like
Hydrostatical Experiments is a mere mistake. REMARK the Twenty fifth. Another
ingenious demonstration against the pressure of Atmospherical Cylinders from
the standing of the Mercury in the Tube, when the surface of the restagnant
Mercury is not passing one fourth part of the Basis of the Cylinder of Mercury
in the Tube. REMARK the Twenty sixth. His Argument from the Torricellian
Experiment succeeding as well in a closed Receiver as in the open Air not
imputable to the elasticity of the Air which supposes pressure; it being
already confuted here, and more particularly in his sixth Chapter by the two
Brazen Cylinders in the water. REMARK the Twenty seventh. His Experiment of the
Bottle and heated Bolts-head, how well it is levelled against the elasticity of
the Air, but his solution of the Phenomenon unsatisfactory. REMARK the Twenty
eighth. The Author's Opinion that all those Experiments which the Virtuosi
would give an account of from the pressure and elasticity of the Air, are
performed by suction and attraction, more strictly to be examined, in reference
to that Experiment of the weight hung at the Embolus of the Air-Pump. REMARK
the Twenty ninth. The various standing of the Mercury in the Tube, according to
the change of weather, or placing it in higher or lower Air; how that
Observation is manageable against the opinion of Tension and Mercurial
effluvia. REMARK the Thirtieth. The unexpected motions and agitations of things
(put into the Receiver) upon a strong exhaustion of the Air-Pump, that it is
not from Tension of the rarefied Air, but from some such Principle as the
furious and rapid motion of winds is, raised from the dissolution of the
aqueous particles of the clouds. REMARK the Thirty first. That Experiment of
Regius, of drawing Tobacco smoke through water in a covered Cup, by two pieces
of a Tobacco-pipe, can be no instance of such an Attraction and Rarefaction as
this Author stands for, but will serve to illustrate some of the Phenomenon in
the foregoing Remark. REMARK the Thirty second. A description of the
Torricellian Experiment in the chiefest example. The groundlesness of the
Author's reasons of this Phenomenon from the tension of the Mercurial
effluvia in the derelicted space, discovered. REMARK the Thirty third. A
discovery of the Repugnancies of his solution of this Phenomenon. His
ingenuous confession touching the Phenomenon of Gravity, that mechanical
reasons are in vain attempted thereof. That Aristotle's Philosophy implies a
Spirit of Nature. REMARK the Thirty fourth. That the suspension of the Mercury
is not to save the Universe from Discontinuity, but to preserve the Air in its
due consistency. And that it is not Air but one common Spirit that is the
Cement of the Universe. REMARK the Thirty fifth. That Attraction is not to be
proved from Cupping-Glasses, or the expansion of squeezed Bladders at the top
of the Torricellian Tube. REMARK the Thirty sixth. What account is to be given
of the jointly weighing of a Tube and Mercury, of a Tube and Water, and of a
Glass and Water inverted on Mercury and Water. REMARK the Thirty seventh. The
Author's plain declaration, that the Laws of Nature are not mechanical,
together with the consequences of that concession, and the necessity of
introducing a Spirit of Nature. The fond humor of the Philosophizers of this
Age, who whenas their Nature consists of Spirit as well as Body, take all their
measures of Philosophizing from Body, none from Spirit. REMARK the Thirty
eighth. Of the sticking together of two Marbles; and that Fuga Vacui is but the
final cause thereof: and what may be the Efficient. REMARK the Thirty ninth.
Stevinus his Experiment of a Rundle of wood lighter than water laid upon the
hole of a bottom of a Vessel to be filled with water, etc. What an Argument it
is against the Gravitation of water on water, and against that monstrous
Elasticity (by some supposed) of the Air. REMARK the Fortieth. Of the close
sticking together of the Magdeburg Hemispheres. That neither Tension of the
inward rarefied matter, nor the Elasticity of the outward Air is the cause of
it, as also what in all likelihood is. REMARK the Forty first. The Author's
ingeniously contrived Pump, and his mistake in attributing a Phenomenon in it
to inward Tension, which is rather to be referred to the strength of the
Consistency of the outward Air. REMARK the Forty second. Other Phenomenon
observable in the Author's Pump, and how there is no need of Tension for the
solving of them, but that they are notable intimations of the necessity of an
Hylostatick Spirit in the world. REMARK the Forty third. An Argument from the
Author's own Pump, that water is not suspended in Pumps by Tension, but by
Gravitation upwards, more expressly here explained, and at last resolved into
the Hylarchick Principle, together with a particular reason why in the proposed
case of the Author's Pump, upon the elevation of the Embolus, not one drop of
water comes out. REMARK the Forty fourth. The uncertainty of success, if the
Pump were longer, or heat applied to the Glass; but certain, Tension would find
no place therein. REMARK the Forty fifth. The raising water and suspension of
it in a Pump how it is effected. REMARK the Forty sixth. The insinuation of the
Air into the Cavity of a Well, whether it be the effect or the cause of the
recession of the water, or whether not rather both. REMARK the Forty seventh.
Whether the protrusive force in a Pillar of free Air add any thing to the
Elastick pressure thereof, and whether the least proportion of Air has the same
strength of spring that a greater. As also a notable Argument from the
elasticity of Air not raising the water in the Author's Pump one inch, whenas
it is pretended, that it will sustain 10 l. of Mercury 29 inches high; that
there is no such Elasticity at all.
The Conclusion.

Errata sic corrige.
PAGE 9. line 21. read bodies. p. 37. l. 17* r. intrinsecalness. p. 107. l. 21.
r. Tube. p. 146. l. 6. r. ordered. p. 177. l. 1. l. r. considerate,

Remarks upon two late ingenious Discourses, THE ONE An Essay touching the
Gravitation and Non-Gravitation of Fluid Bodies, THE OTHER observations
touching the Torricellian Experiment.
On the Essay touching the Gravitation or Non-Gravitation of Fluid Bodies, etc.
Upon Chapter the Second.
The first REMARK.
IN this Chapter there are things said that are repugnant one to another. For
in the very entrance of the Chapter the learned Author asserts that Gravity is
an intrinsecal quality of bodies whereby they tend Downwards to or toward the
Center of the Earth; and yet afterward toward the end of the Chapter, he
affirms that fire may rightly be said to gravitate Upwards, etc. Now if that
Definition be true, That Gravity is an intrinsecal quality of bodies whereby
they tend toward the center of the Earth; whether by Gravity be understood a
faculty or capacity of so tending, or the actual exercise thereof, we cannot
avoid a repugnancy. For if an actual exercise thereof be understood, that is
Gravitation: Which here being affirmed to be the tending downwards of bodies
toward the center of the Earth, it is a contradiction that the tendency of
them upwards should be Gravitation, but rather Levitation. But if by Gravity be
understood only their Capacity of tending downwards to the center, yet the
actuality thereof will be Gravitation, as that of Levity, Levitation; and
therefore according to this Notion of Gravity, can be only downwards, when as
the learned Author after asserts that Gravitation is also upwards, which, I
say, seems a contradiction. But I rather interpret it an emendation of his
former assertion, and by after affirming that Gravitation is upwards as well as
downwards, that he would insinuate, that it is really and in truth, (against
that sense that Gravity and Gravitation is understood in the Schools) as well
upwards, transverse, oblique as downwards, there being no way such Gravity or
Gravitation as the Schools dream of, that is, from any inherent quality of the
body it self, that may be called Gravity, but that it is a mere Idolum Fori, as
My Lord Verulam would call it, a false Notion sticking to the vulgar use and
sense of that word, which me thinks this learned Author does apertly
acknowledge, and consequently explode that usual Notion, in these words where
he says; That Gravitation is nothing else but Motus, or Nisus ad motum secundum
lineam directionis ejusdem; and a little before, That Gravitation is nothing
else but motion, or at least Conatus or Nisus ad motum: Which in my judgment
plainly takes away that false notion of Gravity and Gravitation, entertained by
the Vulgar and the Schools. For it as plainly follows, by denying all
intrinsecal nature to Gravitation saving motus or nisus ad motum, that that
Scholastic Gravitation, or the specific nature thereof is taken away, as by
denying that Homo is any thing but Animal vita sensuque praeditum, would take
away the specific nature of man out of the Universe.

The first part therefore of this mobility and actual motus or Nisus ad motum,
however they may be disguized under the vulgar Phrases of Gravity and levity,
of Gravitation or levitation, etc.

Secondly, That the Author, Gravity and Gravitation, he is to remember that the
true and Philosophical sense of them is nothing else but Mobility, and actual
motion, or actual Nisus ad motum; which if it be considered in its direction
toward the Center of the Earth, is more specially noted with the name of
Gravity or Gravitation.

Thirdly, That if we will cautiously and severely Philosophise, we are not to
imagine this actual motion or actual Nisus ad motum to be in any body, unless
it be discovered there to be, by clear sense or reason; but rather not to be
when we have diligently used these two faculties for to discover them, and yet
they appear not.

Nisus ad istiusmodi motum, but that as to any such motion, it was at rest.

Nisus of the water upwards, even then when it has no such occasion to discover
it self, the quickness of the ascent of the water is so great, and so equal to
the descent of water in a crooked Tube of water opened at one end in the Air,
after it is immersed into the water, I mean the other orifice stopped also with
ones finger and them opened again when it is let down at a sufficient depth,
that the actual Nisus of the water, (suspended, suppose in a Bucket) downwards
and upwards will be in a manner equal. So that the water will have no weight at
all; in so much that another Bucket of the same weight and size, without any
water in it, would be equiponderant to it.

From whence Sixthly and Lastly Nisus downwards, there must be a Being distinct
from the water, that directs its motion thitherward. But this is an Observation
beyond my present scope. The rest, at least, will be useful for the better
understanding our selves in our following Remarks.

Upon Chapter the Third.
The second REMARK.
IN the beginning of this Chapter the Author seems to affirm that it belongs to
solid bodies as such to have an actual pressure, or Conatus ad Motum toward
the Center of the Earth, but to fluids only as they are reducible to solids by
being put into some Vessel; when as yet it is evident that some fluid bodies
have a stronger pressure toward the Center of the Earth than many solid
bodies. Thus bulk for bulk water presses more strongly toward the Center than
most kinds of Wood, and Quicksilver than most kind of metals. Whence it is
plain that Gravity is not to be esteemed from the fixedness of parts, but from
the solidity of the particles, which that Principle that orders matter ranges
accordingly.

REMARK the Third.
That also I conceive is a mistake, in that he says, p. 15. l. 3. That though
solid bodies do actually gravitate, yet the parts thereof do not gravitate one
upon another because mutually and mechanically sustained one by another, and in
a state of continuity. For first, the continuity and fixedness of solid dodies
in Nature is not Mechanical but per (...). And then that the parts do not
gravitate one upon another is not from their continuity, but Homogeneity or
equal solidity of particles rather. Whence it is, that in fluids of an
homogeneal Nature, the parts do not gravitate one on another; but in solid
bodies and continued, if one side be pumiceous suppose and the other metalline,
the metalline will gravitate on the pumiceous or spungie side.

Upon Chapter the Fourth.
IN this Chapter and in the eight are laid down the two main Principles, which
seem to be intended against the force of my Demonstration in my Enchiridium
Metaphysicum, in which I so much exult, Cap. 13. Sect. 4. Both which therefore
I shall more carefully examine. The Principle in this Chapter aimed at is: That
in liquid bodies, suppose in water, that a whole Column of water from the
subjected body to the surface of the water does not gravitate, but only a Cap
or Cone of it, at a little distance from the subjected body. Whence it might
seem hopeful, That my Lamina lignea in a bucket, being pressed upon but by such
a low Cone, and that the rest of the weight of the water discharging it self
betwixt the sides of the Bucket and the lamina, might well raise it up, etc.
But that this is only a witty fancy, I hope I shall make appear from these
following Remarks.

REMARK the Fourth.
That the Residue of the Pyramid ( p. 23. l. 13.) would stand without any
gravitation upon the Cavity left by the subsiding of those sixteen stones and
those that are merely supported on them can be no argument, that only a Cone or
Cap of water gravitates on the round Lamina lignea, both because the Lamina
lignea does not subside from the rest of the column of water above it, but
bears against it, and also because if it should be imagined a little to
subside, the particles of water being flexible would still lean toward the
subsiding Cone, and being so infinitely small would certainly tumble after it
if the Cone subsided to any distance. So unfit is this comparison, though in
other respects sufficiently ingenious.

REMARK the Fifth.
And whereas this Learned Author says, ( p. 24. l. 8.) That this Instance of
Masonry which he has given in square Stones, will hold in smaller and more
irregular bodies, Experience will prove they will not in those he instances in,
Wheat, Sand, and Hailshot. For if there were an Hole made at the bottom, that
that Cap, he imagines, might really subside and be taken away, the expected
Arches in each experiment would prove ill built by their sudden tumbling to the
ground. Nor would the Egg-shell and its little Cap or Cone of Wheat stand as
under an Arch supported by the rest of the Grains in the whole heap, as he
affirms p. 26. l. 6. And therefore that the Egg-shell scapes so well is to be
referred to some other cause. As for that lateral pressure per declive which
may refract the perpendicular Gravitation of the grains of Wheat, I shall
examine that conceit in its Remark 8. 28.
due place.

REMARK the Sixth.
That the Sand remained suspended in the body of the Cylinder, is to be
attributed to the weight of Lead that had crammed the Sand together, that
especially toward the top, next to which it was, that it stuck by renitence of
its irregular parts, one against another, p. 27. l. penult. But what is this to
the nature of water, where all is so infinitely glib and passable, one particle
by another, not the least show of stuffing and cramming? A man might make a
pair of Pinsers that set into a bed of Sand, (though the Pinsers be open above
and beneath and Tube-like) which would pull up more sand than stuck in this
Tube. And it is all one whether the Sand be pinched by such Pinsers or be
pinched by cramming into such a Tube. That Is all the Mystery of Masonry that I
can discern in this experiment.

REMARK the Seventh.
But that there was not any such Mechanical Incumbency of the particles of the
Sand as left the Egg-shell as it were under an Arch, so that from thence it was
that only a small Cap or Cone of Sand gravitated upon it, seems to me to be
manifest, in that if there were an hole made of the same diameter with the
Egg-shell, and the Egg-shell taken away, not only the Cap of Sand but the Arch
would come tumbling down to the ground, and therefore that the Egg-shell is not
damnified must proceed from some other cause. The Sand about the sides
apparently protects it from the weight of the Lead.

REMARK the Eighth.
That the lateral direction in the parts of Sand or such like bodies, p. 29. l.
3. should refract the perpendicular Gravitation, when as it self is but a
lateral Gravitation or an hindered perpendicular direction, in a Tube suppose or
Vessel, may justly be questioned. For the Particles once checked by the sides
of the Tube or Vessel, in all likelihood spend then all their direction
downward, or may be reflected more dangerously from the sides to the hazard of
the Egg-shell: If the reason of things lay this way.

REMARK the Ninth.
Non-Gravitation of the small bodies, p. 31. l. 3. of Sand, Gravel and Shot, do
not sufficiently prepare our minds to apprehend one of the Reasons of
Non-Gravitation of Fluids, is manifest from that so often inculcated instance
of the tumbling down of the Arch at the real removal of the Cone or Cap with
the body subjected, and an hole made of equal bigness on an upper flore or
table.

Besides, though in such gross Physical Monads, if they were imagined heavy,
this would not at all be; so in water whose parts are so infinitely little in
comparison of Shot, Wheat, or Sand, this Masonry of parts leaning upon parts
would have no effect at all.

Thirdly, If there were any Masonry in the lying of the parts of water as might
answer some way to the Figure, p. 21. all that artifice would be spoiled in
boiling water or in water jumbled, in which notwithstanding there is as little
Gravitation of the parts as in that which is quiet.

Masonry in water, this will not destroy the firmness of my demonstration from
the round board at the bottom of the Bucket, since the Diameter of the bottom
of the Bucket may bear such a proportion to the altitude of the Bucket, and so
little distance left betwixt the round board and the sides of the Bucket, that
there will be a great Horizontal section of the Cone in the Air above the
Bucket or surface of Water in it, whence the residue of this supposed hollow
Arch impendent on the residue of the Cone must needs fall to it, and
consequently the whole Cylinder of water over the board gravitate on it, which
shall be, suppose, 30 times more than that hollow Cylinder which is contained
betwixt the unequal of this Cylinder of water and the concave of the Bucket. And
yet shall the round board ascend. This is plain enough already, but if there
could be any scruple, I could so increase the proportion of the diameter of the
bottom of the diameter of the bottom of the Bucket to its height, that the very
remainder of the Cone shall be, suppose, 30 times bigger than the remainder of
the Vault that environs the Cone, besides See Remark 20.
other ways by which this invention of the Cone or Cap in the subjected body in
the water will be plainly deprehended to be only a witty Invention.

Upon Chapter the Fifth.
REMARK the Tenth.
THose words p. 30. l. 9. [That it is certain, water has an intrinsecal
Gravity of its own as it is an heavy body] these words are the most clearly
understood. Whether they be true or false, from what I thought we were agreed
on in the first and second part of my first Remark, That Gravity is nothing
else but mobility, and Gravitation nothing else but motion or nisus ad motum.
Gravity therefore being nothing else but mobility or a capacity of being moved
downwards; this capacity is most certainly in it intrinsecally, and indeed in
all other bodies besides. But if by Gravity should be understood such a
principle in water or any heavy body else, as by virtue whereof they would upon
occasion move themselves downwards, That I make account not at all certain but
ra^^er false.

REMARK the Eleventh.
Water so long as water, p. 34. l. 21. is ever in its fluid consistency, and
therefore sometimes does gravitate in its fluid consistency, that is, has an
actual motion or an actual nisus ad motum ad centrum Terrae. But that pressure
it seems to have, p. 35. l. 1. upon Quicksilver in a Vessel, is but ex
accidenti toward the center of the Earth it aims at the thin matter in the
Torricellian Tube, or rather to reduce the matter to a due aequilibrium. Nor
does it press upon the Quicksilver but with it, and vis unita fortior, as
appears by the rising of the Mercury in the Glass.

Upon Chapter the Sixth.
REMARK the Twelfth.
THat a Bucket of Water should be as much one continued body as a Bucket of
Pitch or Wax, is a me a Paradox, p. 42. l. 10. This cannot be unless the water
were frozen. And Pitch, and Wax, and Butter, and Ice, applied to the fire, and
so having their parts put upon motion, and thereby being made fluid, show
plainly the nature of fluidity that it consists in smalness of parts and the
slippery motion of them one by another, which in water is very eminent; and
their discontinuity is notably discernible also in that they are so exhalable
by the Sun, and do so easily convey themselves into piles of Wool, a Vessel of
Water placed in the room, if that experiment be true, as I never heard it
contradicted.

REMARK the Thirteenth.
I only take notice here, p. 42. l. 14. that this learned Author is mistaken
in his Notion of the Principium Hylarchicum, which so often occurrs in my
Enchiridium Metaphysicum See Difficiles Nugae. Remark 9.
. For I do not understand thereby any intelligent Nature, but vital only, or at
least mainly: I mean a Spirit endued with the plastic power of ordering the
matter according to certain general Laws which the Divine Wisdom has vitally
and essentially, though not intellectually implanted in this Spirit of Nature
as I elsewhere call it. For that there is no life but what is Cogitative, is a
conceit taken up but yesterday, and I believe will as soon expire. That it is
Plastical, and that it is not intelligent, these two things I think I can and
have demonstrated; but whether it may have some more sleepy drowsy sense in it
also, I have not yet determined, and for the present think it hard to prove
either one way or other, and I am loath to assert any more than I can prove.

Upon Chapter the Seventh.
REMARK the Fourteenth.
THE distinction of considering water as a solid body and as a fluid body ( p.
49 and 50.) does not go well down with me. For Water so long as it is Water and
not Ice, is always fluid, even then when it is envesselled; and if its entire
tendency then toward the earth argue its solidity, it is a solid body also out
of the Vessel, for it also then tends entirely and directly toward the earth,
as is seen in the drops of Rain. Wherefore we see no reason of reducing of
envesselled water to the nature of a solid body, that upon that pretense the
problem of its parts not gravitating one upon another may be thence solved.

REMARK the Fifteenth.
The Non-Gravitation of the particles of water ( p. 52. l. 1.) upon subjected
bodies, is resolved into two Accounts. The first Mechanical, the second
Natural. The Mechanical is proposed and applied in this Seventh Chapter, the
Natural in the next. The Mechanical account is twofold; The first from the
Continuity of the particles of Water, the second from their Architecture or
Masonry, supposing they were not continued. Now that that Account from the
continuity of parts, whereby the Learned Author would have it to be a kind of
solid body, That this is invalid appears from the 3. and 12. Remarks. And
indeed discontinuity of the parts of water is palpable from their extreme
softness to our very fingering: as when any thing is ground, the samller the
Powder is the softer it feels to our fingers, and continuity is nothing else
but the fixtness of part to part, whence hardness would necessarily arise, as
appears in Water turned into Ice, which is nothing else but the fixing the
aqueous parts one to another.

REMARK the Sixteenth.
And therefore this Learned Author does well ( p. 52. l. 21.) to admit at
length, That water has the nature of separate bodies, and that its parts are
only contiguous. But then when he flies for a solution of the present problem
(why a whole column of water does not gravitate on the subjected body) to his
Instances ( p. 53. l. 8.) of a Pyramid of square Stones, a heap of Wheat and of
Callice-sand, wherein an Arch is made over the subjected bodies, etc. the
invalidity of this Reason I have abundantly discovered in my 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. and
9. Remarks. There is no comparison betwixt those gross parts in Rest, and these
infinitely small particles of water, which are in Motion.

REMARK the Seventeenth.
The Author seems to affirm that the Cartesian aqueous particles are
infinitely more improveable ( p. 53. l. 8.) for making an Arch for the ease and
security of subjacent bodies, See Difficiles Nugae. Remark 6, 7.
than those of Wheat, Hail-shot or Sand, whenas doubtless they are infinitely
less improveable, as being in promiscuous motion according to Descartes, the
materia subtilissima and the globuli intermingled, nor are they in any order
but what they perpetually slip from; and how perfectly they are dis-intangled
one from another, and slippery, is manifest to our very senses, as I noted
Remark 9. 15.
before.

REMARK the Eighteenth.
He supposes ( p. 54. l. 6.) that the union of the parts of water are much more
close than that of the Monads of Callice-sand, because the water is quid
continuum, though fluidum. But I have Remark 12. 15.
offered reasons that I hope are sufficient to evince, that it is not quid
continuum but contiguum; and I farther add, that the parts of Sand being
crammed so hard together and at rest, come nearer to the nature of continuity,
than where the parts are in motion and come closer together, as it is in water.

REMARK the Nineteenth.
The Learned Author ( p. 57. l. 3.) does acknowledge that in a Bucket of Water
with a rundle at the bottom, if the bottom have an hole in it, the whole column
of Water will gravitate on the Rundle, and not only a Cap or Cone. Here I
demand how this hole at the bottom of the Vessel under the Rundle, the Water
not running out, can concern the supposed Arch, and cause a whole Cylinder of
Gravitation on the Rundle, if there was this Masonry in this Phenomenon and it
were not to be salved by another Principle?

REMARK the Twentieth.
Again, upon what occurrs, l. 12. That the Water will undermine a lighter body
than the like quantity of water commensurable to its bulk, I would propound
this experiment: Supposing the Bucket with an hole at the bottom, as before,
and that heavier-wood-rundle almost equal to the bottom of the Bucket placed on
it, and then a lighter-wood-rundle of equal diameter with the heavier placed on
it, Whether the whole Cylinder of Water does not press on these Rundles, and
not a Cap only, and whether notwithstanding the upper Rundle will not ascend?
which is a sign that its ascending at other times is not to be imputed to the
Architecture of the Arch so ingeniously excogitated by this Learned Author.

But I will appeal to one Experiment more which will take away both these two
mechanical Accounts at once, that of Continuity, and this of Architecture; and
the Experiment is this: Let there be a Bucket, whose concavity is perfectly
Cylindraceous, and the diameter of the bottom 63 parts: Let there be another
Cylindraceous Vessel, whose internal diameter shall be 61 parts, external 62:
Let there be at the bottom of this Vessel 4 little equidistant holes in the
sides slooping inwards so as to come just to the bottom, that the Water may no
otherwise go out than just from the bottom upwards, nor ascend at all but by
pressing to the bottom first. Put this Vessel into a Bucket to the bottom
thereof, and hold it there so as that the top of the Vessel shall be equal to
the top of the Bucket. Then pour in water till they be full to their brims,
then take away your hand that held the Vessel to the bottom of the Bucket. The
Vessel in the Bucket will rise up higher and higher till there be no more
thereof immersed in water than is equal to such a moles of water as is equal to
the whole Vessel in weight.

The weight of the water on the bottom of this Vessel is near upon thirty times
more than the water betwixt this Vessel and the sides of the Bucket, which
should undermine it, and yet the Vessel rises, of which no account can be
given, neither from the Continuity of the water; for the water in the Vessel is
not continued with the exterior water in the Bucket, but is only contiguous to
the sides of the Vessel: nor from that Masonry of an Arch upon the Rundle or
bottom of the Vessel; for the whole moles of the water in the Vessel does as
much entirely press on the bottom of the Vessel, as the whole moles of water in
any Bucket does upon the bottom thereof. So wholly ineffectual are these
Mechanical Inventions of Continuity, and the Arch or Cone on the subjected
bodies in water, for solving the Non-Gravitation thereof. We shall now examine
the Natural Account.

Upon Chapter the Eighth.
I observe that the Author ( p. 58. l. 13.) lays the main stress of all upon
this Natural Account of the Non-Gravitation of Water, either upon its inferior
parts, or any subjected body heavier or equal in weight to the like bulk of
water. For this, says he, I take to be the true natural specifical reason of
the Non-Gravitation of Fluids, though the Mechanical reason before given is not
wholly useless, but contributes its part to it. We will therefore be more
diligent in examining this Natural Account.

REMARK the Twenty first.
And for the better procedure in this business, upon his mentioning the
intrinsecal Heaviness of a body, p. 59. l. 16. we are here to remember what we
were, I thought, agreed upon in my first Remark, part the first and the second;
That Heaviness or Gravity in a Body, is nothing but its Mobility, nor
Gravitation but its motion or actual Nisus ad motum, and that that Notion of
Gravity in the Schools is but Idolum Fori. That mobility and motion upwards is
as intrinsecal to a body as mobility and motion downwards. That there is no
motion nor Nisus ad motum discernible in water to any term, but when it is
misplaced, so that all such motion is only upon occasion in it. And therefore
when water ascends in a Tube in such sort as is described, Remark 1. part 4.
That Mobility and Motion upward is as intrinsecal to the water as its Nisus
downward; for that Nisus downward is not but pro re nata, when it is misplaced.
These things I hope will not be stuck at, if we have but recourse to my first
Remark and the parts thereof.

REMARK the Twenty second.
This Natural Account of the Non-Gravitation of Fluids, which the Author lays
so much stress upon; is this, p. 62. l. 5. That they have several lines of
their direction of Gravitation (that is of their motion, by Remark the first)
and therefore necessarily one must be refracted, impeded, and abated by the
other; and consequently the direction of its perpendicular or lateral
Gravitation (or motion downward) is corrected or very near wholly suspended by
the other tendencies or directions of its motion. This is the Learned Authors
Natural Account of the Non-Gravitation of the parts of water upon water, etc.

REMARK the Twenty third.
The Learned Author brings in again ( p. 63. l. 5.) the notion and distinction
of the terminal motions or tendencies of water as it is an heavy body, which
are perpendicular toward the earth, which he calls the primitive Conatus of
all heavy bodies and the effect of their intrinsic Gravity; and the other
motions and directions as it is a Fluid body. This distinction he repeats
again, p. 68. l. penult. Which language if we will uncipher according to our
agreement in my first Remark, the sense is this, That water as it is a body
moveable downwards, or has an intrinsic mobility downwards, has its direction
toward the earth. But here I demand, If the mobility of water upwards be not
as intrinsic to it as downwards, and the one conatus as primitive as the
other, since they are both only ex data occasion, by the waters being
misplaced? for where the water is rightly placed, it has no terminate motion at
all, and therefore all the directions of motion in water as to primitiveness or
intresecalness are of the same kind. And it has, as all other bodies have, a
mobility every way, but their actual nisus or motus is pro re nata.

REMARK the Twenty fourth.
And the Learned Author, from p. 63. to p. 66. has abundantly well proved this
mobility of water or its parts, that data occasion it will be moved upward,
downwards, horizontally, obliquely, and indeed every way, and that to opposite
terms in the very same lines. That is, that this may be caused at several
times, and upon several occasions. But that water has all these tendencies or
pressures at once, that his experiments will no way reach to. This I think will
plainly appear to any one that considers well my first Remark, part 3. 4. and 5.

REMARK the Twenty fifth.
In his description of this his Natural Account ( Remark 22.) he declares that
by the many other directions and tendencies in a fluid body, the perpendicular
is very near wholly suspended, but here ( p. 68. l. 27.) that ^t possibly may
be, that the line of direction in a perpendicular descent may be considerably
stronger and more efficacious, and consequently the Gravitation stronger,
because there contributes to that motion, not only the nature of water as a
fluid body, but also as a heavy body. But besides what I have Remark 2, 14.
above noted, that the distinction betwixt a heavy body and a fluid, where one
and the same body is both heavy and fluid at once, is not so congruous, and
that there is Remark 1, 10.
no such primitive Gravity or Gravitation distinguishable from the mobility and
actual motion or tendency of any body downwards: admit this intrinsic Gravity
or Gravitation over and above to the mobility and motion of the water
downwards, yet seeing the mobility and motion of the water upwards is as urgent
and nimble as that downwards, they do one utterly defeat another, and for all
these the water retains its intrinsic Gravitation still, so that this
invention seems utterly useless, and the parts of water would press upon one
another notwithstanding this Hypothesis. But if this intrinsic Gravity be a
mistake of the Schools, as I doubt not but that it is, then that inconvenience
will return which I mention in my first Remark, part 5. That a Bucket of water
will have no more heaviness in it than if it had no water in it, which is
contrary to experience, which are plain indications of the invalidity of this
Natural Account.

REMARK the Twenty sixth.
He says notwithstanding, ( p. 70. l. 9.) That if the line of the perpendicular
descent of the Fluid be compared with all those various and many lines of its
direction, etc. that the perpendicular motion of its Gravitation as an heavy
body will be near altogether abated. But it is to be observed, that take all
those various motions in, whereby it may seem hopeful that the intrinsic
Gravitation will be abated, they will yet contribute nothing thereto, because
there is no tendency in any one line of them, but there is an equal
contertendency in the same, so that their force is every way utterly defeated,
as I noted of the perpendiculars before.

REMARK the Twenty seventh.
What he is observed to say in the former Remark, he farther illustrates and
confirms ( p. 71. l. 13.) by a like instance of Callice- sand, where he
supposes their perpendicular Gravitation so hugely abated by their motion per
declive, and repeats the advantage Water has above the Callice-sand, because
the parts of water are conjoined in one continuum. But that it is quite
contrary I have Remark 12, 15.
above proved concerning the continuity, as Remark 10, 21, 23, 25. See also
Difficiles Nugae. Remark 2, 10, 11.
also in that kind of perpendicular Gravitation, which is not pro re nata, but
intrinsic. But we will here farther add, That if there were any such thing as
intrinsic Gravity, every upper part would press on the lower, and the greatest
pressure would be at the lowest, the least at top. So little service does this
conceit of Continuity. And every grain of Sand where ever sited, would ad
summum virium thrust downwards.

REMARK the Twenty eighth.
But that they do not thrust so peremptorily downwards, he says ( p. 72. l.
10.) the cause is apparently beyond all contradiction, that the accidental
tendency of the Sands per declive does break the perpendicular Gravitation, so
that it does not gravitate upon the most fragil subjected body in its full
weight. That this is no such apparent cause, besides what we have noted Remark
8.
above, that in the foregoing Remark does further confirm, if there were any
such thing as intrinsic Gravity; and though the Sands tumble per declive, it
does not at all follow when they are stopped and rest, that they press per
declive, but downwards. That an Animal therefore is not damnified under an high
heap of Sand, may have some such reason as the suspension of Fluids.

REMARK the Twenty ninth.
Touching the further explication and enforcement of this Natural Account of
the Non-Gravitation of the parts of Fluids in a Cubick foot of water, which he
supposes just twelve pound weight perpendicular, (p. 73. l. 3.) and that it is
the common stock of all its pressures (p. 74. l. 2.) to be distributed as from
one common cistern through so many Pipes (l. 6.) to serve all those
Gravitations or Conatus ad motum, for it has not above twelve pound intrinsic
weight to serve all these Conatus or Gravitations. Here methinks it is most
apparently. deprehensible, that where there is acknowledged to be no other
stock of intrinsic weight but this twelve pound to be derived to those
multifarious actual Gravitations, Horizontal, Oblique, and directly upward, and
yet the virtue of this twelve pound perpendicular ponderancy is felt entire
still, that all the other actual Gravitations are mere imaginations of a
curious mind and no real effects in Nature.

REMARK the Thirtieth.
Indeed the Learned Author seems aware of this difficulty and propounds it as
such ( p. 76. l. 3.) but I must confess I understand not the force of his
answer, though he says it is plain. For he says the water in the Bucket is as
fluid a body as so much water in the Ocean, but the Bucket of water is as one
solid body. The Bucket of water is the water in the Bucket, which cannot be
fluid and solid at once. It is a perfect repugnancy in Nature. It is therefore
most certainly a fluid body even in the Bucket, and will have all that belongs
to a fluid body as such, all those several Gravitations, Oblique, Horizontal,
and upward, if there were any such, and that upward especially, there being
nothing to bound it or check it, which yet is of the greatest force to lessen
the perpendicular Gravitation. But that there are none such, is manifest from
the entireness of the Gravitation downwards in the water of the Bucket: Suppose
12 pound weight still, and were the bottom of the Bucket taken out at once as
it hangs, the water would not as it comes out immediately spread Horizontally,
but descend directly down. So that the Horizontal sallies are only pro re nata
made, when the water cannot get down perpendicularly, nor attempted ever but ex
data occasion, when the moving Principle is invited to act, which is true also
of its Gravitation downwards, which is never actual, but upon the waters being
misplaced. But to fancy there is such a perpetual Conatus every way and
strong pressure to no purpose, is too much akin to those elastick thrusts and
croudings imagined by others in the air, or that furious every way agitation of
the matter in the Cartesian Philosophy. The Laws of Nature assuredly are more
orderly and still.

To all which we will add, That if this were the main reason why the parts of
water do not gravitate one upon another in the Bucket, because the
perpendicular Gravitation is so refracted, mitigated, and as it were brought to
an aequilibrium, by the other Gravitations; it would necessarily follow, that
the water in the Bucket being wholly turned into Ice, and so really becoming a
solid body, whereby all those other Gravitations saving the perpendicular would
be extinct, that the perpendicular Gravitation which was 12 pound weight
before, will be well nigh doubled, when as on the contrary it is rather
lighter, proportionable to that moderate rarefaction it received in the
congeling: which plainly demonstrates that those other imagined Gravitations
were not actual before, but that they are only made pro re nata, as I have
intimated in my first Remark, part 4.

UPON DIFFICILES NVGAE; OR, OBSERVATIONS Touching the TORRICELLIAN EXPERIMENT.
HAVING by the former Remarks cleared my Demonstration of the existence of the
Principium Hylarchicum, Enchirid. Met aphys. cap. 13. sect. 4.
or Spirit of Nature, by that Experiment of the Wooden Rundle rising from the
bottom of a Bucket of water, from what obscurity or uncertainty the Invention
of the Cap or Cone and the Every-way-Gravitation, or Tendencies of motion
imagined in Fluid bodies as such, might involve it in: I shall now chiefly
raise such Remarks on this second Treatise, namely the Authors Observations
touching the Torricellian Experiment, which will make good a like Enchirid.
Metaphys. cap. 12.
demonstration of mine from the ascending weight hung at the Embolus of the
Air-pump, against this Learned Authors solution thereof, and of all such like
Experiments. The cause whereof he lays chiefly on Rarefaction and Tension of
matter, etc. which he supposes to be real affections of Nature: and therefore I
shall take these Notions at the first Rebound, as they occur in the second
Chapter of this present Treatise.

Upon Chapter the Second.
The First REMARK.
THE Learned Author here takes up Principles unproved, p. 21. and such as
cannot be proved by any Experiment or Reason in Nature, nay such as are
repugnant to Reason, and absurd if we more closely canvase them, and more
considerately search into them.

That he has not proved them

And that they cannot be proved Rarefaction and Condensation, and of Tension
and Restitution, p. 21. l. 12. For Rarefaction and Tension is when one and the
same corporeal substance occupies a greater space than before, but Condensation
and Restitution when it occupies less. These are the general natures (which is
enough for my present purpose) in which they agree, I mean Rarefaction and
Tension, and Condensation and Restitution, which were rashly admitted by some
ancient Philosophers as well as by modern, because they conceited there were no
bodies in the Universe, at least near our Earth, whose parts were more subtle
than those of the Air, or else phancied the Air an absolute homogeneous body,
nor looked upon it as consisting of any particles. So confused were their
notions of this natural Phenomenon.

to divide it in any assigned part, which were a thing incredible, did not the
Air consist of parts merely contiguous, and that small ones too, and yet not of
an infinite smalness; for as much as Air will not pass the pores of some
bodies, though of other some it will.

And therefore seeing there is vacuum, as is agreed on all sides, and that the
parts of the Air are exceeding yielding to the least touch, which could not be
if the main parts of the Air were of such Figures as would adequately fill all
the space it is conceived to occupy; For then it would be so crammed that
nothing could move easily or without forcible penetration of dimensions:
Wherefore there must be particles to fill the little intervals betwixt the
parts of the Air, and those exceeding small, that motion may be easy, and that
the fluitant parts of the Air in this more subtle Fluid may nimbly yield to
motion every way, as we see it does. This is one way of proving there are
exceeding small particles in the Air, distinct from the main and more proper
particles thereof.

But there is yet a more visible detection thereof in the Phenomenon of light,
in that it passes the pores of Glass, which the Air cannot pass. And that light
is a subtle body, besides the Authority of the Ancients, the Reflection and
Refraction of it makes it abundantly manifest. How can the figure of a body, as
in a Burning-Glass, direct the rays so to one point, if they were a mere
quality and not thinner particles of matter in the Air? And as for the conceit
of Species Intentionales, which they make Lumen Solis to be in respect of his
Lux: that it is an impossible Notion, I have demonstrated in my Enchiridium
Metaphysicum. Cap. 19. Sect. 2.
These hints are sufficient in an Argument so easily allowed by all
unprejudiced Philosophers to demonstrate, that there are See Remark 4.
smaller parts of matter than those that are properly Aereal, and such as can
penetrate the pores of bodies when the Aereal parts shall be forced to stand
without.

From whence therefore it will Rarefaction and Condensation, of Tension and
Restitution of the Air cannot be proved to be in Nature, in such cases as this
Learned Author and others fancy they are. Because the coming in and
re-ceding of the subtiler particles we have proved to be in Nature, will salve
these Phenomenon, and show that it needs not be the same substance entire when
it is rarefied, but subtiler parts may come in as water into a Sponge; nor when
it is condensated, but the subtle parts may go out as water out of a Sponge.
And there is the same reason of the Tension of the Air and its Restitution; it
may be salved by egress and regress of subtiler particles, and the Tension and
Restitution like a Lute-string may be a mere conceit.

de facto a mere conceit, as appears from that we have already proved, That the
Air is so well replenished with matter far subtiler than it self, even such as
will penetrate Glass, and from what is acknowledged on all sides, that the Air
is also compressible. For from hence it will necessarily follow, that upon the
compression thereof, that there may be no vacuum, or by a necessary circle of
motion, those smaller particles will pierce any Glass, as suppose the
Glass-Tube in the Torricellian Experiment, of which we shall speak more
particularly in its due place.

Besides, the very notion of such a Rarefaction and Condensation, Tension and
Restitution, as this Author would have, is contrary to the nature of a body,
which the ancient Philosophers defined (...), a substance of trinal Dimension
and impenetrable. And impenetrability of body or matter is so generally
acknowledged as a real and inseparable property thereof, that even those
Philosophers that are for such a Rarefaction and Condensation, as Aristotle has
broached, and this Author maintains, have labored tooth and nail, though in
vain, to defend it from that absurdity of penetration of Dimensions. To say
nothing how it is a mere confounding of the properties of Body and Spirit. For
such a Rarefaction and Condensation as is here supposed, is too like the
Dilatation and Contraction that belongs to particular Spirits.

Rarefaction, it must be either by increasing the bulk of every Particle,
suppose of Air, thus rarefied, or by increasing the number of the Particles
(every Particle (a wonderful imagination!) sending Particles out of it self to
occupy a greater room) both the emissitious and original particles in the mean
time being without pores, at least so far forth as they are thus increased
(this new acquired extension being not by opening and filling of pores (as in
the Cartesian way) but by new continued quantity, or at least newly emitted) It
is, I say, here manifest, That if the increase of the Particles be in bulk
(since there is no other imaginable or at least rational notion of Solidity,
but Imporosity of matter, and close continuity of parts undivided into
particles (For natural experience teaches us that looseness of Particles is
the Original of Fluidity and softness) those Particles becoming bigger, in some
cases it may be an hundred or a thousand times, and being likewise solid; the
effect of the Rarefaction would be, that the body rarefied would feel more
gross than before, which is against experience. But however in the other case
where the number is only increased, those emissitious Particles by reason of
their imporosity and close continuity of parts, are as really solid as those
bigger. And therefore it is as hard to conceive that they can ever enter again
into the particles out of which they were emitted. To say nothing (since there
is no vacuum) how hard a thing it is to conceit upon every such Rarefaction
there is necessarily this crouding of hard or solid bodies into the like hard
or solid bodies, so that they really penetrate, not pores but the very
dimensions of one another, though thus hard and solid. And this in bodies
unraresied, and that upon slight occasions and small force, which I must
confess to me seems hugely harsh and absurd, and plainly against experience,
even in soft bodies as in water; those forcible experiments that disprove its
Elasticity, proving therewithal the Impenetrability of its parts.

Tension takes away all starting holes that might be sought in bringing in any
interspersed vacuities or empty pores in bodies, which would be a Discontinuity
or Discontiguity of matter in the world, which this Tension is pretended a
Fence against. And besides, if there were any such interspersed vacuities, so
that matter might be driven up closer into them, that would still make my
Demonstration from the Air-Pump more firm, and the ascending of the weight
would be still the more mavelous, and require the more necessarily a
Principium Hylarchicum, the Defense of which is the great scope of my present
Remarks. But to admit so incredible and unconceivable affection in Nature as
the mutual Penetration of Dimensions, even in hard or solid bodies, (for the
littleness of them hinders not but that they are really hard or solid) is an
Hypothesis so like the rude crouding and intolerable pressing, in that
prodigious Elasticity of the Air, that I hope this ingenious Author will be as
cautious how he over-firmly adheres to the one, as he has been judicious in
exploding the other.

Upon Chapter the Third.
The second REMARK.
THE Learned Author says, That the upper parts, p. 30. of a Cube of Lead do
not actually gravitate upon the inferior parts, because the upper are
Mechanically impeded by the lower from their actual gravitation upon them; yet
every Atom thereof contributes to the gravitation of the whole upon the Scale.
The former he calls, p. 32. Gravitation ad motum, the latter Gravitation ad
pondus. But it is very hard to conceive if there were any such thing as
Intrinsic Gravity, that is, a nature in the Lead it self whereby it was
carried downward, that it should not have every part of it Gravitationem ad
motum, or Conatum ad motum, since no inferior part can Mechanically hinder the
superior part from this Conatus, and every natural Agent is supposed to act ad
extremum suarum virium: And that no parts are idle, appears from the
Gravitation ad pondus, if there were any such Intrinsic Gravity. Wherefore in
that they do not Gravitate one upon another, as they do when Lead and Clay are
continued together, and the Clay undermost, p. 31. l. 16. is not from any
Mechanical continuity, but from the same reason that is in Fluids of the same
kind, the parts press not one upon another because they are not misplaced, but
are ranged in that order that is agreeable to the Laws of that Immaterial
Principle. But if the parts were not thus ordered by a Principle distinct from
them, but their Gravitation were from their own innate Gravity, it were
incredible, nay impossible that there should be a Gravitation ad pondus of the
parts, and none ad motum. For if the innate Gravitation of each part of the
Leaden Cube did not bear against its fellow downwards, there would be no
bearing against the Scale at all; as is manifest to any one that thinks close
on the matter.

The Third REMARK.
He says, p. 42. l. 16. That the reason why a Glass Tube of Oil immersed to
such a depth into a Vessel of Water, will some of it go out, but immersed lower
it will stay in, and if lower, will ascend in the Tube, etc. is this; because
there is a greater pressure or renitence in the last place than in the second,
and in the second than in the first, and therefore less force is required to
raise the superficies in this first case than in the second, and in the second
than in the third. This is ingenious, but there is this obstacle to the truth
thereof: For let the first place be A. the second B. the third C. And let us
consider that the Oil going out at A. the whole body of the water from A. to
the superficies is raised up at once, and there appears no hillock of water
above the Oil at A. on the superficies or on a Vessel of Oil above the water at
A. supposing water let into a Vessel of Oil after the same manner by a Glass
Tube. Now besides that it is incredible that so little portion of water or Oil
effused at A. should at all be able to-raise the whole bulk of water or Oil in
the Vessels, from the whole superficies where A. is (though never so little)
toward the to^p of the Vessels; it is also further demonstrable that the
increase of Renitence or Pressure of the water against its being raised higher
in B. more than in A. and in C. more than in B. is not the reason that the Oil
in the Tube put in Water, or Water in a Tube put into Oil, does not go out at
B. and ascends at C. For it would follow, that a Tube of Oil put into a Vessel
of Water of a far greater diameter than before, suppose twice as great, and the
Tube again immersed to A. that is, to an equal depth as before, the Oil would
not go out, since the bulk of the water from A. to the superficies is four
times as big as it was before, and therefore the Renitence against being raised
higher, should nigh hand increase in proportion. And yet the Oil goes out at A.
as before, notwithstanding this imagined Renitency. Whence it is plain it is
not the force of effused Water in the Oil, or Oil in the Water, that can raise
the Water or Oil one Atoms breadth higher, but the preventing activity of that
immaterial Principle that disposes all the parts of the Liquors in the Vessel,
orderly and at once, there being no crowding nor pressing any way, one part on
another. And that the Pewter Porringer full of Hailshot weighed in Water, p.
43. l. 23. is found from the bottom to the top in a manner of equal weight, is
not because it forces the superficies of the water no higher in one position
than another, but because the water is no heavier at one depth than another,
that is, is not heavy at all.

Upon Chapter the Fourth.
REMARK the Fourth.
P. 50. l. 23. IN this page the Learned Author does in a manner acknowledge
what I so diligently endeavored to prove in my first Remark, part 4. For he
compares the Air to a vast Net with small Mashes or interstitia, fitted
gradually with parts more and more subtle, wherein he judges right, saving that
by the comparison of the Net he would insinuate a continuity of the Air, which
I have sufficiently disproved, Remark 1. part 3.

REMARK the Fifth.
The Compression of diverse particles of the Air, says our Author, p. 51. l.
13. may render that compressed body of Air sensibly heavy: whence he inferrs,
that we may not wholly exclude those Particles from all kind of Gravity before
compression. For no weighty body can arise from the coalition of such parts as
had no manner of Gravity before. The conclusion bears some show of concinnity
with it; but methinks the Inference would be more safe, if one should argue
from hence that there is no such thing as innate Gravity, since that which
appeared a light body before, without adding any real quality, but by only
thrusting the parts nearer together, it got a motion downwards. Which therefore
implies that that motion is from some other substance, not from the compressed
Air it self, and that fire, if it could be compressed, would also tend
downwards. As the matter thereof does tend downwards plainly in wood, but the
parts of wood attenuated and agitated tend upwards in the form of fire; which
is no obscure intimation that it is not any inward particular form or quality,
that is that which moves things upward or downward, but a distinct immaterial
Principle that is the orderer and disposer of the matter of the universe,
according to the more or less solidity in its consistency.

REMARK the Sixth.
He asserts in this page 63. as also p. 51. l. 2. That there is not that strict
cohaesion of one part of water with another, as with one part of air with
another, and yet as I have above noted, the Air is dividable by the thread of a
Spinner hanging on ones Hat; how dividable then and separable is one part of
water from another, that is more easily disjungible than Air it self, and how
unfit for such Architecture of the imagined Cone or Cap in the former Treatise?

REMARK the Seventh.
After an experiment made with a Glass-Siphon with Quicksilver and Water, the
longer leg of the Siphon being 32 inches, the shorter 8. and the shorter leg
having something a larger Diameter than the longer (which experiment is thus:
1. He filled the shorter leg with Mercury till it ran up as high in the longer,
that is 8 inches according to the law of Fluids, and stopping the shorter with
his finger filled the residue of the longer with water, whereupon the Mercury
in the longer leg subsided to two inches and a quarter, 24 inches of water
driving it so far down, though 28 inches of water is the usual counterpoise to
two inches of Mercury. 2: Having filled again the Siphon with Quicksilver as
at first, and immersing it into a Tube of water 32 inches high, so that the
column of water over the shorter leg was full 24 inches, yet those 24 inches
drive the Mercury in the shorter leg but one inch down, and raised it one inch
in the longer. 3. Having poured water into the longer leg of the Siphon, so
that the Mercury subsided two inches, and as much flowed out at the shorter,
and then immersing again the Siphon into the Glass-vessel 32 inches deep filled
with water, the Mercury subsided near an inch in the shorter leg, and
accordingly impelled the Mercury into the longer.) Upon this experiment, I say,
he makes this observation, p. 67. l. 1. That notwithstanding the advantage of
the larger Diameter of the shorter leg, the Gravitation of the external water
or any imaginary column thereof, was not half so much as the Gravitation of the
Cylinder of water included in the Tube, he means, the longer leg of the Siphon,
which I conceive to be a plain mistake; For neither is that larger Diameter in
the shorter leg any advantage, but a disadvantage; the motion of Fluids being
swifter out of a narrow passage into wide than vice versa: nor is there any
indication in all these experiments, that the Gravitation of the 24 inches of
water in the longer leg does gravitate as much more as the column of water of
24 inches impendent over the orifice of the shorter leg. For in the first
instance, where 24 inches of water drives the Quick-silvver 2 inches and
downward in the longer leg, it is because of the largeness of the Diameter of
the shorter leg, or by reason of its wideness. So when the 24 inches of water
and the Quicksilver was to balance against it, it required more Quicksilver
to be at a counterpoise with it, than if it had had the same Diameter with the
longer shank; and hence it is, that the Quicksilver subsides so far in the
longer shank, and not the discontinuity of the water in it from other water.
And now we come to the second instance, it is to be noted that the impendent
column of water driving the Mercury one inch downward in the short leg, and so
consequently raising it one in the longer, that there will be 9 inches in the
longer leg, and but 7 in the shorter; so that upon the matter the column of 24
inches in the water poizes as much against the Quicksilver in this experiment,
as that water in the longer shank did in the former. For here it ponderates
against 2 inches of Quicksilver, there but against 2 and, nay I may safely say
against above two in this; For if it was driven down one inch in the shorter
but wider shank, it must needs rise above one inch in the other; and I doubt
not but a quarter of an inch or thereabout, if the Author had taken so
punctual notice of it. And as in these two instances in several, the column of
the water in the water is found to be aequiponderant to a column of so many
inches in the longer shank of the Siphon, so we shall find them in this last
and joint experiment. For upon the pouring water into the long leg of the
Siphon there remained but 6 inches of Mercury in that leg, and 8 in the other,
wherefore upon the immitting of the Siphon into the Glass-Tube, and there being
found about an inch subsiding in the shorter leg, and a rising as much in the
longer; it is manifest that in each leg there was about 7 inches height of
Quicksilver a piece, and that the column of water in the water gravitates as
much as the column of water in the longer shank of the Siphon, and not only
half as much, as our Author would have it; which is an excellent experiment
against his supposed Masonry in the element of water, and that each part of
water by each part does most glibly slip: And that therefore this imaginary
Architecture can contribute nothing to the rising of the round wooden Rundle
from the bottom of the Bucket, on which I build that notable demonstration of
mine in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum.

Upon Chapter the Fifth.
REMARK the Eighth.
THat experiment of Stevinus, that a Rundle placed on the bottom of a Vessel
with a hole in it, so that the Rundle somewhat overlaps the hole, p. 94. l. 4.
that the Rundle will gravitate upon that hole and the incumbent Cylinder of
water commensurate in base to that Rundle so hard and close, that it requires a
weight in a pair of Scales near commensurate to the weight of the impending
Cylinder of water to raise it from the bottom; I say this Experiment is an
Argument against that Invention of the Cap or Cone, and the rest of that
Architecture in the foregoing Book. For the hole under the Rundle cannot be
conceived any Mechanical cause at all, why the same Architecture may not be
that was imagined before, and yet the Rundle arises not in the Vessel, nor
does the water sile thorough.

REMARK the Ninth.
That the Rundle arises not in the Vessel the Learned Author offers this
reason, because the water gravitates now upon the Rundle, as having mediately a
lighter element, namely the Air upon which it gravitates, l. 23. But being as
firmly sustained as before from passing to the Air, why should it gravitate any
more than before? And besides if the bottom of the Bucket be somewhat higher
than the Basis of the Ribs of the Bucket on which it may stand, and there be a
second bottom made to keep the Air betwixt this second bottom and the former
perforated bottom from communicating with the rest of the Air; it is worth the
enquiring whether the Rundle then will not rise, because the Abituriency of the
Air which was in the other case, is thus sufflaminated? Whence it would be
plain, it was not simply because there was Air beneath, that the water
gravitated on the Rundle, but because that Air was in the state of Abituriency,
or at least in sufficient quantity to colluctate with the water, the Principium
Hylarchicum upon such hints, by reason of the quick motion of those Laws of
Life in it, putting this under-Air into that Abiturient state, and therewithal
carrying the water raptu consensus into an actual tendency downward, and so
thrusting the Rundle closer to the Hole, intangles it self in its own attempt,
as not acting by free reason and counsel, but by some general Laws of instinct
of life, which in some such by-cases do not further but hinder the effect
generally produced by Nature. Whence it is evident that this Spirit of Nature
is not the first Cause, which is the Aeternal Wisdom, but a mere inferior
Creature. But this is but by the by.

REMARK the Tenth.
Our Author mentions an experiment of an empty Glass-bottle carefully stopped,
and sunk a great depth into the Sea, that the pressure of the water will break
it a-pieces, p. 95. l. 9. And he resolves it into this reason, because the
water presses against a lighter Element, the Air, though mediately through the
Glass. But I say, that is not the adequate cause thereof, that it has a lighter
Element near to it, but because that the Element is misplaced, for the upper
part of the water in a Vessel does not press against the Air in the Vessel that
is incumbent on it; but if a Bottle of Air were let down into the Sea with its
mouth downward, and well stopped to keep out water, yet the water will thrust the
Cork upward and drive it in. But that is because the Air is misplaced, and put
in the Element of water, which methinks are very apert insinuations, that there
is no such thing as intrinsic Gravity, but that matter moved is moved by a
principle distinct from it self. For the parts of the water of the Sea do not
press one against another, neither before nor after the Bottle is let down, and
yet there is such a pressure on the Bottle once let down, that either the Cork
is driven in or the Bottle broke in pieces. The other two instances also the
Author mentions in this page tend to the same purpose, I mean those of Oil
driving Water upwards, and Water Quicksilver, of which he declares p. 96. 1.
thus. For in these instances though the immediate contiguity be of the heavier
body to the lighter, as Oil to Water, and Water to Mercury, yet the Air being
behind the Mercury in the longer leg of the Siphon, and behind the Water in the
Tube, the Water in the one case and the Oil in the other, does in truth
gravitate upon the Air mediately and effectively, rather than upon the
immediate heavier fluid. Which would plainly be a Gravitation upwards, and
therefore the more harsh phrase and sense, but may justly insinuate to this
Author the reasonableness of their opinion that hold, there is no inward
Gravitation at all, but that the matter is moved pro re nata, and ranged by the
Spirit of Nature, according to certain Laws generally good for the Universe,
and essentially implanted in the said Spirit. And these last Phenomenon are
easily resolved into the first Hydrostatical Axiom in my Enchirid. Metaphys. c.
13. sect. 10.

Upon Chapter the Sixth.
REMARK the Eleventh.
The reason assigned, p. 101. l. 6. why a small Glass-Tube of so many Inches
long, and filled up with water, and stopped with ones finger at the lower end,
and let into a Vessel of Water of a competent diameter and depth, upon the
unstopping of the lower end, all the water in the Tube above the superficies of
the water in the Vessel will run down till' it be no higher than the said
superficies, namely, because if it obtain never so little more height in the
Pipe than in the Vessel, it has a greater force to press downwards than the
water in the Vessel has strength to resist it; this reason I conceive does not
quite exhaust the difficulty: For suppose this Pipe of but a quarter of an inch
diameter, and a Bucket of a foot and a half, and deep a foot, and the Pipe 9
inches and half a quarter long, and 9 inches thereof in the water, so that
there is but half a quarter of an inch of the water to press up by its force to
some, though very little, height, a moles of water of 9 inches deep, and a foot
and an half diameter, how is it possible that the force of intrinsic Gravity
of a Cylinder of water but a quarter of an inch diameter, and half a quarter of
an inch altitude, should raise at all a Cylinder of 18 inches diameter and 9
inches in altitude, if some principle distinct from both, did not assist? For
the one Cylinder exceeds the other above some hundred thousand times, and yet
the pressure of this little Cylinder must raise the great one by its own force,
if there be no other principle to help, nor penetration of dimensions, which is
even as absurd as the other. Or if you take the 9 inches of water more in the
Tube into your compute, yet this added to the abovesaid Cylinder of but half a
quarter of an inch high, will be above 5000 times less than the exterior
Cylinder. So big is the absurdity still.

REMARK the Twelfth.
The falling off and sticking to of the obturaculum in a Tube with a valve
according as the Tube is less or more immersed in the water; my reason of this
Phenomenon given in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum, cap. 13. sect. 17. this
Learned Author says, p. 103. he is as much dissatisfied with, as with the
reason of the excellent Author of the Hydrostatical Paradoxes, but he alleges
nothing against it but that it is an obscure solution. When as yet this I think
therein is very plain and intelligible, that if there be what I declare,
quaedam quasi sursum suctio Aeris in Tubo contenti, and conformis ac
contemporanea aquae compulsio in obturaculum GIH etc. that that is a very solid
Reason why the obturaculum when this suction is strong enough (which is when
the Tube is let down deep enough) by a circle of motion, or at least a joint
compression of the water at the same time against it, should be kept up from
falling. For upon this abiturient state of the Air, it being more vigorous than
that impulse that should carry down the Obturaculum, (or rather that Principle
that moves the matter being rapt into one consent of circular motion from the
bottom of the Air in the Tube to the top, and then down into the water till it
reach the Obturaculum under the Tube, urging the water as if it would ascend
up, (which it would do but for the Obturaculum) in pursuit of the Air so drawn
upwards, till it was even with the superficies of the water) it is manifest
that the Obturaculum upon that abituriency is driven upwards, and that the
motion in order of Nature is first there in the air of the Tube; for as much as
if the abituriency of the Air in the Tube be stopped with a man's finger at a due
nearness, or by a moveable Embolus, the Obturaculum that at such a depth clave
close before to the Valve, will presently fall down, which is a plain
demonstration that the rise of the motion of pressure against the Obturaculum
is from the air in the Tube first moved, according to that Law of the
Principium Hylarchicum contained in my first Hydrostatical Axiom, Enchirid.
Metaphys. cap. 13. sect. 10. which causes this joint motion or pressure against
the Obturaculum. This cannot be obscure to any that acknowledge that a Spirit
endued with plastic life, though devoid of understanding, and it may be of any
acute sense, is able to move matter.

REMARK the Thirteenth.
And from what we have said in the foregoing Remark, it is evident I conceive
that this Learned Author is out in the account of this Phenomenon. For p. 110,
and III. he resolves the sticking of the Obturaculum to the Valve, into the
Tubes pressing up a portion of water of a greater weight than it. If the
Sucker, says he, (which answers to that which I call the Obturaculum) be drawn
up (p. 110. l. 12.) and then immersed so low that the portion of water impelled
up by the Tube does exceed the weight of the Sucker, the Sucker will be
sustained by the pressure of the water upon it: But if the weight of a moles of
water, says he, commensurate to so much of the Tube as is immersed in the
water, be less than the weight of the Sucker, the Sucker by its own weight will
subside. That this reason is maim, is apparent from hence; That if the Tube be
let in so low that it raised a moles of water whose weight is much greater than
the weight of the Obturaculum, or Sucker, and that for the present the
Obturaculum will stick to the Valve, yet if the Tube be stopped with ones finger,
or rather by a moveable Embolus at a due nearness to the Valve, the Obturaculum
will suddenly fall; whence it is manifest, that the Solution is not finally to
be made into the raising of the water to several heights, upon which its
pressure should increase against the Obturaculum, but into the abituriency of
the Air in the Tube or just quantity thereof, and of the several forces of that
abituriency into the laws of motion, innate or essential to the Spirit of
Nature or universal Transposer of the parts of the matter of the world. For
where there is no raising of the water higher at a deeper descent to make its
pressure greater in the immitting Air into Water, as in a Glass filled with Air
and well stopped let down into the bottom of the Sea, upon a deep descent it will
break, though upon a moderate it will not (though it raises the water alike in
both cases.) Which is resolvible into nothing but the greater excitement of the
force of the Principium Hylarchicum, upon the greater transgression of those
Hylostatick laws vitally and essentially included in it. For the parts of water
in water do not gravitate one against another, and they have as much room to
play in when a Bottle of Air is sent down into the Water, as when a Bottle of
Water of the same size is sent thereinto. But the Air in the former is
misplaced, contrary to the Hylostatick laws of the Universe.

Upon Chapter the Seventh.
REMARK the Fourteenth.
IT is a very notable and pleasant Experiment the Learned Author mentions, p.
118. l. 19. It is most evident to any man's sense, quoth he, that will but try,
that if a Tube be open at both ends and filled up with Mercury, and then one
end stopped with the finger, and the other end inverted and immersed in the
restagnant Mercury, whereby it descends from the top of the Tube, a strong and
sensible attraction is wrought upon the pulp of the upper finger that closes
it, which continues and grows more and more forcible, sensible, and evident,
the further the Mercury is removed from the upper end, and approaches to its
usual station of 29 inches. This is his experiment, which to me is a seasonable
confirmation of what in the foregoing Remark I observed. That the force of
activity in the Principium Hylarchicum or Hylostaticum is excited
proportionably to the measure of misplacement of the parts of the matter of the
Universe. But as for the Learned Authors solution of this Phenomenon, I mean
of this attraction of the pulp of his finger at the top of the Tube, I must
confess I am not at all satisfied with, and look upon it as a kind of
Philosophical incivility, whenas so eminent a fellow Creature as this
Hylostatick spirit, took the opportunity of pulling him by the finger, when he
could not shake him by the hand, that he would not embrace this offer of
acquaintance, nor take notice of the existence of such a Being in the world,
which I must confess, I think, this Phenomenon is a notable evidence of, so
circumstantiated as this Author has described; for it is not Impulsion ab
extra as he describes it. For, says he, most evidently the force the finger
feels is from within and not from without: and when he says, it is upon the
pulp of the finger and not the quitching of the skin, it is apparent that that
force is in his very finger, not on the outside, whether in the Tube or
without. And therefore it cannot be the contiguity of any body in the Tube, as
our Learned Author would have it, by which this attraction is made, but it is
the Hylostatick spirit of Nature, that upon unexpected occasions, after an
unexpected manner moves the matter, and it was a kind of an attempt of this
Hylarchick Principle to expand and rarifie the pulp of the finger to supply the
absence of the Mercury. Its tugging therefore of the pulp of the finger toward
the Cavity of the Tube, made the sense of the Attraction into it. But that this
Attraction could be by no contiguity of any body in the Tube, appears from
hence, that then it would have been felt more particularly and distinctly in
the very exterior skin.

REMARK the Fifteenth.
The other two instances out of Honoratus Faber which this Learned Author
brings, p. 120. seem to favor my sense of the first. For the Papyr extendible
by force, but otherwise contracting it self, made fast at the upper end of the
Tube, and upon the descent of the Mercury being extended, as also a Bladder so
fastened and close tied in the neck, and being blown out at the descent of the
Quicksilver, both these seem effects of an ineffectual effort in the
Hylarchical Spirit of the world to supply that nakedness or emptiness of the
Tube of that matter it ought to be replenished with, as far as it can, and that
makes it extend the Papyr to supply as far as it will go, and to blow up the
Bladder by putting the grosser Particles in it upon motion, that is, rarefying
what moisture there is in the Bladder, which, it is no wonder, when there is a
hole in the Bladder, is not done, for then those Particles get out and are
dispersed throughout the whole vacuity. But that the whole Bladder should be
blown up by attraction, I shall take occasion Remark 32.
hereafter to show to be a mistake.

REMARK the Sixteenth.
That Aphorism of our Learned Author, p. 122. That regularly all natural
bodily effects are wrought by a contact of some active body upon the patient.
This to me seems to contradict the Phenomenon of Nature, and in motion
confessedly so called, most numerously and universally, which is not, unless ex
accidenti, Mechanical but vital. The descent of a stone is vital, as I have
proved in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum, but its hitting or occursion against any
thing whereby it moves, that is only Mechanical motion in the thing so moved,
otherwise motion is not by knocking or crowding, but by vital transposing of
parts, as is most manifest in Fluids, the parts not gravitating one against
another, but being jointly and freely moved by that vital Principle, which we
call the Hylarchick Spirit of the world.

Upon Chapter the Eighth.
REMARK the Seventeenth.
OUR Author reasons passing-well against a free permeation of the Ether into
the Glass-Tube derelicted of the Quicksilver, because the Quicksilver then
would subside to the bottom, as when there is but a hole at the top of the Tube
no bigger than a Pins point, because then the Air he thinks may come in freely,
so if the Ether could come in freely through the pores of the Glass, the
Mercury would subside in that case too. But that the subtiler parts of the Air
or Ether cannot upon occasion (though not so freely) penetrate the pores of
the Glass, His Arguments for this Assertion seem to me altogether
unsatisfactory. For if I understand him aright, the first thing he offers to
prove it by, is, That if they could penetrate at all they would penetrate
freely, and then the former Inconvenience would return. The second is a denial,
or supposal that there are no such pores in Glass as any such smaller Particles
can go thorough. But to the first I answer. That though the pores of the Glass
be pervious enough to the Ether or subtiler parts of the Air, yet the
R^nitency of the natural consistence of the Air will not for-go them but by
some force, and a less pressure or force than of a column of Quicksilver of
about 30 inches high will not prevail, any above it will. To the second, That
in my first Remark I have hinted that (part 4.) which will sufficiently prove
that there are pores in the Glass as well as particles subtiler than the Air to
pass through them, as is apparent in the direction of the rays to one point
through a Burning-glass, against what our Author here declares that there is
only a vis, virtue or vigor corporeal, no substance that penetrates the Glass.
For as bodies are only tangible, so they are only reflexible and refractable;
To which you may add, that the lightness and frangibleness of Glass are farther
Indications of its porosity. These things are so plain to the unprejudiced that
it is needless to insist on them.

REMARK the Eighteenth.
And yet we may use a further confirmation of the subtiler parts of the Air
passing the pores of the Glass, from the Authors own concession, p. 128. l.
18. that they pass not through the Mercury, as he conceives they do in the
inverting a Glass-Tube of Mercury on the free Air, in which case he observes
bubles ascending in the Mercury as it descends; but there being no such
tumultuary motion of the Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment, he concludes,
no parts of Air pass through the Mercury into the Tube. And therefore say I, it
is the plainer case they pass through the pores of the Glass only in this
experiment.

Upon Chapter the Ninth.
REMARK the Nineteenth.
Of which we shall be the better assured, after we understand that the Authors
Reasons in this Ninth Chapter for the ascent of steams or vapors from the
Mercury it self, p. 139. l. 13. are not sufficient. For the two ways that he
offers for the separating these steams or vapors from the body of the Mercury
are, The first, expression or driving them out by the strong descent of the
Mercury and compression of the inferior parts by the superior. The other, is
extraction or straining out those parts that are more subtle and fluid, and
capable of expansion, etc. To which I answer, that these two ways are in a
manner one and the same, or at least the stress lies upon that one first, which
if it fail the other will signify nothing. And methinks it is apparent at
least in such a case as this, that it will signify nothing, namely, if the
Tube filled with Mercury be immitted into the restagnant Mercury, very much
inclining, and be raised to a perpendicular by degrees and leasurely, for then
there being no such jolting of one part against another, but a gently bringing
one part over another perpendicularly, and being so posited, they according to
the law of Fluids not gravitating one part upon another in the Tube above the
surface of the restagnant Mercury, and having but little under to gravitate
upon, nor the restagnant Mercury (according to the same law of Fluids, even
then when it was made something to ascend by the Mercury descending from the
Tube) gravitating one part upon another, it is manifest there was no
compression able to separate any particles from the Mercury and send them into
the Tube.

REMARK the Twentieth.
The Author himself raises a notable objection, p. 141. l. 26. against this
opinion of Mercurial effluvia supplying the derelicted place of the Mercury in
the Tube: Suppose, says he, the Tube were ten foot long, or the upper end were
a Bolts-head that should contain 4 pounds of Mercury, this Mercury subsiding to
29 inches, where should there be effluvia to fill so great a space? His answer
is, the more Mercury descends to 29 inches, the more effluvia there will be to
fill the space; but I say if the Tube of Mercury be let down obliquely, as
before, and be gently and leasurely raised to a perpendicular, according to the
law of Fluids the compression will be even just nothing. From whence then can
that vast empty space be supplied but by the subtiler parts of the Air coming
in through the pores of the Glass-Tube? which is that we aimed at.

Upon Chapter the Eleventh.
REMARK the Twenty first.
HIS confutation of the use of the Atmospherical Cylinder in the solving of the
Torricellian Experiment is very ingenious, p. 158. l. 4. namely from the
supposal of a Glass-Tube half an inch diameter in Cavity, and as much in
thickness of 3 foot long, and sealed at one end, filled with Mercury and
immersed to the bottom of a Vessel of restagnant Mercury 7 inches deep, so that
29 inches and 1/2 will be above the restagnant Mercury, the Tube remaining full
to the top. But the Glass being lighter than the Mercury, it will be driven up
thereby near to the superficies thereof. So that about 6 inches of the upper
end of the Tube will be empty, but the Tube continues till 39 inches of Mercury
and 1/2, the bottom of it immersed but 1/2 an inch; and the supposition is,
that the 29 inches of Mercury and an half, weighs one pound, and the Tube just
as much. This Tube of Mercury now in these circumstances fixed by a String to a
Beam of a pair of Scales, two pound in the adverse Scale will counterpoise, and
any little advantage of weight added will make it preponderate. Whence he
clearly deduces from the Mercury's contributing the weight of a pound to the
counterpoizing the Scale, that it is not sustained by a Cylinder of Air of
equal diameter and weight with it self, for then there would be but that one
pound weight of the Tube alone to counterpoize the two pound in the Scale;
which is a firm and ingenious demonstration against the Hypothesis of the
Atmospheres pressing the restagnant Mercury.

REMARK the Twenty second.
Nor can it be eluded by saying, p. 161. l. 8. that though the column of
Quicksilver in the Tube be indeed sustained by a column or Cylinder of Air of
equal diameter with the column of Mercury in the Tube, and so weighs not at all
against the Scale; yet a column of Air whose basis is the top of the Tube does
ponderate upon it, and so supplies the place of the Cylinder of Quicksilver to
which it is equal in weight. For since the diameter of the Quicksilver is but
half an inch, and the diameter of the whole Tube 3/2 of an inch, it is
manifest, that the weight of the column of Air on the head of the Tubes, if it
weighed at all in their sense, would be nine times as much in weight as that of
the Mercury in the Tube, which is a very gross absurdity.

REMARK the Twenty third.
And as weak a subterfuge is that whereby they would elude this Answer, namely
by pretending, that the Glass-Tube being a body specifically lighter than
Mercury, is it self sustained by the restagnant Mercury, as if that broke the
force of the column of Air that presses 9 times as strong on the head of the
Tube as the other column of Air on the restagnant Quicksilver; when as it is a
thing plainly prodigious that a single force should keep Mercury 29 inches and
1/2 above the surface of the restagnant Mercury up in the Air, though it be I
know not how many thousand times lighter than Mercury, and yet that the Glass
should not be kept down 6 inches under the surface of the restagnant Mercury,
though not fourteen times heavier than Glass, by a force nine times as great as
the former.

REMARK the Twenty fourth.
But the Author does very handsomely meet with all such elusions by two neat
experiments. The one is of a Glass-Tube, the Diameter of whose Cavity was 48,
the Diameter of the whole 58 of an inch, the length 18 inches, the weight
thereof in the Air 2 ounces 34, the water it would contain, near 1 ounce 34.
This Tube tied at the closed end to the Scale of a Balance, and being filled
with water and stopped with ones finger, and so let down into water, and so
settled there as that the lower end was near about a quarter of an inch from
the surface, there was required in the opposite Scale four ounces and 12, which
is equal to the weight of the Water and Tube together to hold the Tube in an
Aequilibrium, and here the Glass-Tube is not held up by the restagnant water,
the Glass being so heavy that it would sink to the bottom, as being a body
specifically heavier than water. Wherefore this Aequilibrium being from hence,
according to the Principles of those that hold the pressure of the Atmosphere,
either because the Tube and the water jointly do weigh against the Weights in
the other scale, or because the column of Air on the head of the Tube with the
Tube weigh against them, this second being impossible, for as much as the
diameter of that column is five such parts as the diameter of the column of
water in the Tube, and that of Air on the restagnant water is four, and
therefore would press at least half as much again as the water in the Tube,
namely in the proportion of 25 to 16, which the Scale discovers to be false,
for there is only one ounce ^/4 added to the two ounces 3/^, not 1/^ 3/2 of an
ounce more; it remains that it is the Water with the Tube jointly that weighs
against the Weights in the other Scale, for as much as the restagnant Water
does not hinder the Tube: from whence it follows, that the water in the Tube is
not sustained by any column of Air on the restagnant Water, which will be more
apparent in the other experiment, which is this: He took, suppose, the same
Tube, heated it very hot, and hung the closed end upon one Scale of a Balance,
and let the open end sink a little into a Vessel of water, and counterpoized it
in the other Scale with 2 ounces 3/^, the weight the empty Tube weighed in the
Air, which, because the end of it did little more than touch the water, it
still retained, but within the space of half a quarter of an hour the Tube was
filled 12 inches of its 18 with water, which 12 inches of water was found to
weigh one ounce and, and one ounce and more put in the opposite Scale, and the
Scales held so that the Tube might only touch the surface of the water, the
Tube with the 12 inches of water in it was found to weigh just 4 ounces. Now
therefore since the Tube could weigh no more, if so much, on the top of the
water, than it did when it was hung only in the Air, for the pillar of Air
incumbent on the top of the Tube is the same in both cases, it is manifest,
against the principles of those that hold the pressure of the Atmosphere, that
the water in the Tube weighs its part, namely one ounce and to make the weight
4 ounces, and consequently that the water in the Tube is not sustained by any
pressure of a Pillar of Air incumbent on the restagnant Water.

REMARK the Twenty fifth.
That also is an ingenious demonstration against the opinion of the pressure of
Atmospherical Cylinders, p. 175. l. 9. namely the inverting a Glass-Tube of
Quicksilver, suppose of a diameter of 9. such parts as the Vessels diameter of
restagnant Quicksilver is 10. so that it may be apparent that the Rim or round
superficies of the restagnant Mercury in the Vessel, is not a full fourth part
of the area of the Mercurial Cylinder in the Tube, and yet the Mercury in the
Tube will be sustained as in other cases. Which therefore cannot be from the
pressure of the Air on the restagnant Mercury, the superficies thereof being
less than one fourth part to the area of the Cylinder of Mercury.

REMARK the Twenty sixth.
And this last Instance surely is no wise to be contemned, That the
Torricellian experiment will succeed as well in a great Receiver as in the open
Air, when as notwithstanding there can be no Atmospherical column on the
restagnant Mercury in the Receiver, nor is there any refuge here to the
elasticity of the Air, p. 186. because that supposes the Gravitation thereof,
which has been so plainly disproved by the Author, not only by these last
Experiments, but in his 6. Chapter, and particularly by the two Brass Cylinders
weighed in water of Diameters of a double proportion one to another, and the
one side of a quadruple to the other. For things being so contrived that a
column of Air of two inches diameter press on the one, and not a quarter of an
inch diameter on the other, the Cylinders yet shall be equiponderant in the
water. The Experiment there has a threefold improvement, and the very first
strong enough, considering there is no elasticity or rebounding in the water,
see p. 75. l. 4. though the Author fancy there is, and that equal weights
pressed by unequal force, the stronger must prevail. And moreover if this
elasticity of the Air were admitted, he does not unskilfully urge, that every
part of the included Air does act so equally in a manner against every part
every way, that there is a suspension of the pressure any way to any effect,
etc. p. 194. l. 23.

Upon Chapter the Thirteenth
REMARK the Twenty seventh.
THat Experiment also of the Bottle and the Bolts-head is notably levelled
against the elasticity of the Air, p. 196. l. 22. That a Bolts-head soundly
heated, and placed upon a Glass-bottle, with some fix ounces of water in it,
which may fill it about half full, but not so closely luted but that some Air,
though but at a pins hole, may come in, the water in the Bottle will be wholly
drawn up into the Bolts-head. But if the Bolts-head were hastily so closed that
no Air could enter into it, some water would indeed rise as far as into the
shank of the Bolts-head, but the whole water would not ascend into the
Bolts-head as before it did, which, says this Learned Author, is a plain
argument against that huge elasticity of the Air that some imagine. For no
fresh Air being let in by this strict closure, the force of the rarefied Air in
the Bolts-head is more entire, and as he conceives the attraction more powerful
to raise the water as before, if there were any thing near that elasticity in
the common Air that is imagined there, that it can expand it self into 40 times
a larger space if need be; nor would the weight, says he, of the interposed
water be too great for the Elatery of the Air in this case to drive it up so
high as before, since in a close Receiver it is able, according to their
opinion, to thrust and keep up a column of Mercury to 29 inches high, possibly
of a pound weight or more. Why therefore, if there were any such forcible
Elatery of the Air, cannot it thrust up 5 or 6 ounces of water about 5 or 6
inches high into the Bolts-head, which is rationally argued against that huge
elasticity of the Air. But as for the Authors own solution of this Problem
from Tension and Attraction, I am as little satisfied with, as he with their
elastacity, and am reminded of that saying in Pliny, Quid mirabilius esse
potest aquis in coelo stantibus? But the same miracle is in the Bolts-head,
neither of which I can resolve into any meaner Principle than that which I call
the Hylarchical or Hylostatical Spirit of the world. As for that of Tension we
shall consider in Chap. 14 and 15.

Upon Chapter the Fourteenth.
REMARK the Twenty eighth.
HEre the Learned Author does declare himself, that all those experiments
which the Virtuosi would give an account of from the pressure and elasticity of
the Air, p. 203. are plainly performed by suction and Attraction of the Air,
when put under a greater Tension or Rarefaction; which I must confess I am much
concerned to examine how true it is, in reference to what I have writ of the
experiment of the weight hung at the Embolus of the Air-pump in my Enchiridium
Metaphysicum. Cap. 12. Sect. 2.
On which therefore I may touch something in this Chapter, but more fully
discover the mistake of this opinion in the next, where the Learned Author
pretends to deliver the true cause of the suspension of the Mercury in the
Torricellian Experiment.

REMARK the Twenty ninth.
That the Mercury in the Torricellian Experiment, p. 203. l. 12. will fall 2 or
3 inches, as it shall be placed at the bottom of an hill or at the top of the
hill, or upon the change of weather, is reasonable to me, because of the
different consistency of the Air, which abounds more or less with the materia
subtilissima, and so can more easily transmit it through the pores of the Glass
with less violence done to its consistence: Which very experiment methinks to
me is an argument against the opinion of Tension, and subtle parts coming from
the Mercury it self, for then it were all one in what weather, or where the
Glass were placed. But the Mercury subsiding in clearer and colder weather, in
higher places on the top of the hills, where the Air is not so much stuffed with
vapors, it is plain this change depends on the more easy entrance of the
materia subtilissima through the pores of the Glass, and that the consistency
of Air is not so strong there, but a lesser weight will break it than in a
thicker.

REMARK the Thirtieth.
That upon a strong exhaustion in the Air-pump, a dry Bladder well tied and
blown moderately full, is broken, as likewise Glassbubbles, etc. That a
Bladder, the greatest part of its air squeezed out, and the neck tied very
close, and a weight fastened to it and put into a large Glass filled with water
to be placed on the Airpump, and then covered with a large Receiver well luted
to the Pump, the Air pumped out of the large Receiver, this Bladder below the
water would swell till by continuing the pumping it will be full blown. And
lastly, that Water, Spirit of Wine, etc. will be raised to run out of a Glass,
and that Bubbles will be formed at the bottom of an included Glass of Water in
such a great Receiver, so that all is put into a various agitation; All this
the Learned Author resolves into the Tension of the rarefied Air in the
Receiver: Which I must again confess I am as little satisfied with as he is
with their elasticity of the Air, nor do I think either of them true; but this
I think, that in the Bladders and Glassbubbles, that break, there is a stronger
agitation of the parts of the Air, and that it is that which materially acts
against the inward-sides of the Glass-bubbles and Bladders, not the exterior
matter by attraction, but there is a furious agitation of the interior, which
is not from any former elasticity, but which it acquires pro re nata, as
furious winds are raised in the North in the great world upon dissolution of
aqueous particles of the clouds, which furious and rapid motion it is
impossible for them to acquire from mere heat, but from some higher principle,
and the same principle I suppose to act here, being raised into a fierce or
quick activity, to reduce the matter in the exhausted Receiver as near as it
could to a consistency more suitable to the rest of the Air at this pitch from
the Earth, but there is no heat in the Bladder or Glass-bubles, or in the
Receiver, that can so furiously agitate the matter in them; and that here is
such a boiling agitation and bubling in water, spirit of Wine, etc. it is a
plain indication, that these things happen not by way of tension, but of
excitation and a furious dispersion of the parts to thicken, as much as may be,
the whole matter in the Receiver, that is so highly thin above the measure of
matter so near the Earth, and amidst our crass Air. Not to speak of other
things that may be alleged, which I shall reserve for the ensuing Chapter.

REMARK the Thirty first.
As for that Experiment in Regius, it is very improperly brought in, p. 212. l.
21. for such an attraction as our Author stands for, namely such as is made
upon this kind of Rarefaction and Tension. For there is not the least pretense
to any Rarefaction or Tension of this kind in that experiment, but only a
circle of motion in the Air, The mouth draws in the air into the thorax by one
part of a Tobacco-pipe, and the thorax being distended presses the external
Air, which find its way into the other Tobacco-pipe lighted with Tobacco in it,
the smaller end immersed into the water; and through the water the air and
smoke passes, and continues its course till it come into the other piece of a
Tobacco-pipe, which, though it passes the close cover of the Vial, yet does not
pass into the water it self, but falls short of it, and so getting into that
piece of a Tobacco-pipe after it has passed through the water and got into the
Air betwixt the cover of the Glass and water, it goes into the Tobacconists
mouth, and so completes the whole Circle; but here is not one jot of Tension or
Rarefaction of the Air all this time, but only of the Tobacco which is turned
into a fume. But that all the parts of the water to the very bottom of it, and
the granules of Sand lying at the bottom of the water are put into a tumultuary
motion, that is no wonder, (when as the Air and smoke are forced to find their
way through the water) and may a little illustrate and facilitate the
conception of the true reason of those tumults and agitations of water and the
spirit of wine above mentioned, observed in the exhausted Receiver, namely
because a more subtle and active element came in through the pores of the
Glass, as the hurry of the Tobacco-fume and Air through the water in this last
experiment, and that they had a more than ordinary excitation in them from the
moving Principle, for the reasons above specified: but that Tension has nothing
to do in these things, I shall further confirm upon what occurrs in the
following Chapters.

Upon Chapter the Fifteenth.
REMARK the Twenty second.
In this Chapter the Learned Author lays down the true cause, as he conceives,
of the suspension of the Mercury in the Glass-Tube in the Torricellian
experiment, and he takes occasion to speak of three kinds thereof, but I shall
take notice only of one, and that the chief of them, in which if I plainly
discover his mistake, I suppose there will be no controversy touching the
other two. This experiment then is, when a Tube, suppose of four foot long, is
filled full of Quicksilver, and so inverted and immitted into a vessel of
restagnant Quicksilver, upon which the Mercury in the Glass-Tube will descend
to 29 inches and an half, and leave about 18 inches in the Tube destitute of
Mercury. The reason of this Phenomenon the Author gives to be this; The
expression and ascension of some mercurial vapors or particles at large,
forced up by the agitation and pression of the parts of the Mercury, and withal
their Tension, that they may be able to fill so great a space as the 18 inches
of the Tube devoid of the body of Mercury. This is his solution of this
Problem. But the Reasons upon which this solution is built, are not
sufficiently firm. For first, He supposes no Aereal particles passing through
the Mercury to get into the derelicted space of the Tube, that it must
necessarily be the effluvia of the Mercury it self that ascends; when as by the
3. and 4. part of my first Remark there are such subtle parts in the Air that
they penetrate the pores of the Glass. And then secondly, For the pression and
agitation of the parts of the Mercury, the pression of Fluids on Fluids of the
same kind, is nothing in a manner, and the agitation observed might be much
diminished, if not wholly prevented by a leasurely oblique immission of the
Tube, and so by degrees bringing it to a perpendicular; whence there would be
either no mercurial effluvia raised, or else the copiousness of them so varied
accordingly as they shall take heed to prevent the tumultuary agitation, that
the suspension of the Mercury will not be the same at all times, but sometimes
lower, sometimes higher. Nor is that lucta in the Mercury from the endeavoring
of Nature to give Tension to the effluvia, but betwixt the weight of the column
of Mercury, and the resistency of the consistence of the compressible Air. Nor
lastly will that experiment of the Quicksilver, so forcibly rising against the
top of the Tube, if it be suddenly lifted up, prove any such Lute-string-like
Tension in the supposed effluvia. For in this case there is that, which this
Learned Author admits of, both phrase and thing, that is, Gravitatio sursum,
and upon the more sudden plucking up the Tube, the consistence of the Air not
letting in the subtle Element, and there being no vacuum any where, nor
penetration of dimensions, the Air is driven upon the restagnant Quicksilver,
and the restagnant Quicksilver into the mouth of the Tube, and so is as it
were a flux of water into a far straiter Channel, and therefore it must there
proportionably run the swifter. And this swift motion in so heavy a body as
Mercury must needs be the stronger and more peremptory, coming against so thin
a body as that subtle matter in the Tube, even to the danger of breaking it. So
that the whole is as it were a quick Gravitation sursum, by a circle of motion
against that thin Element at the upper end of the Tube. Which plainly shows,
that there is no ground for Tension, there being such reason for Circumpulsion.
And thus I have shown the groundlesness of his Reasons, but in the next Chapter
I shall discover the repugnancy of his assertion.

Upon Chapter the Sixteenth.
REMARK the Thirty third.
In this Chapter he sets down the two suppositions he holds necessary for the
maintaining of his former solution of the Torricellian Phenomenon. The first
is, that there is no vacuum in Nature. The second, that thin or subtle bodies
are capable of Tension, and of attraction and strong adhaesion to other bodies,
and cohaesion of one part to another, as in a Lute-string, as is his familiar
illustration, saving that in a Lute-string the Tension one way straitens it
another way, and makes the Lute-string narrower, but here the Tension and
Cohaesion is every way at once. As for the first, that there is no vacuum, it
is granted, which makes his denial of the passing of any aerial parts or
particles in the Air, through the Glass or Mercury, repugnant to his own
supposed principle. For it being plain that the immersion of the Tube may be
made so obliquely and leasurely as neither to press out nor fridge out any
mercurial effluvia; it follows there would be a vacuum; or if some few should
arise, what would they do when the top of the Tube is like a Boltshead,
containing the capacity of many pounds of Mercury, there must be a vacuum, or
such a Tension of those few effluvia, that I should think it would exceed all
belief in the very Author himself. But let this go; There is enough in what
remains utterly to destroy this Hypothesis of the Author, I mean these two
things comprised in the second member; mere Tension it self, such as is
ordinarily supposed in an usual Tube, in the descent of the Mercury to 29
inches, and that tough adhaesion and cohaesion of the particles thus extended.
For first as for the Tension, in a Tube so obliquely immitted and leasurely
raised to a perpendicular, no man can rationally imagine one inch of effluvia
either pressed or fridged out of the Mercury by its descent; and if there were,
and these taken or let out by some artifice at every trial, some 18 trials
would lessen the Mercury 18 such inches of the Tube, which would prove very
sensible. But though this were not, there would in the mean time by this
Tension of one inch of matter into 18, be seventeen inches penetration of solid
matter and hard, or else it would not be penetration, and this by so small a
force as the weight of a Cylinder of Mercury of no greater diameter than would
make it weigh one pound, when as the Author himself acknowledges that an 100
pound weight will not press water so as to make it yield at all, and yet here
upon the least gentle motion of the Tube from a perpendicular to an inclined
posture, and from an inclined posture to a perpendicular, there shall be more
or less penetration of dimension, as if that which wise and considerate
Philosophers have held impossible, were as easy as the running an hot Bodkin
into a pound of Butter, which methinks to any one that indifferently perpends
the matter, must seem a clear demonstration against this solution of the
Problem, as I have already noted in the sixth and seventh part of my first
Remark; and what I have there already writ, will save me the labor of any
further enlarging my self in this point.

But now for that tough and peremptory adhaesion of this thin body in the Tube,
to the top and sides thereof, and cohaesion of one part thereof to another, and
the lowest part to the highest part of the Quicksilver in the Tube, as if the
top of the Tube were instead of so many Peggs, and the upper part of the
Quicksilver the Bridge of the Lute, and the subtle matter betwixt, under this
actual Tension, so many Lute-strings, in virtue whereof the column of Mercury
hangs suspended as a weight. This to me I must confess is unimaginable. For
first I cannot but conceive, that if I could come to this thin matter, which is
thinner than Air it self, I could cut through it with a Spinners thread, or by
any other line subtiler and weaker than it; nor can I imagine that that which
can be so easily cut asunder, holds so fast together, as that it will sustain
in this experiment one pound weight, in some others it may be some hundreds.
Besides, if every part held together so toughly, no Fly could move in it, nor
Fly nor Feather fall down from the top of the Tube to the upper Bafis of the
mercurial Cylinder, which is against experience, but they would hang like dust
or flies on the webs of Spiders, or indeed the whole consistence of that subtle
matter would be viscous or glutinous and so impassable to them. To all which
you may add, If it had this strong retraction as a Lute-string, it taking hold
only on the upper part or surface as it were of the mercurial Cylinder, it
would pluck up the Bridge. Wherefore the mercurial Cylinder is not held up by
Suspension but by Circumpulsion and Gravitation upwards, if I may use the
language of this Author, the Air and Quicksilver both gravitating against the
thin subtle matter in the upper end of the Tube, through the Mercury in the
lower end, as the water does against the stopple of the Valve in the Remark 12.
abovementioned experiment, that is, there is a sistency of them in this order
and Libration by the Hylostatick Spirit of the Universe, which also directs the
motion of heavy bodies downward, of which this learned Author does ingeniously
confess men have tired themselves in vain to find out any mechanical cause, and
I have in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum proved that it is contrary to the laws of
Mechanics. And he seems to resolve these things into Nature, which is the
Principium matus and quietis, as Aristotle defines, and also declares of her,
That Natura nihil agit srustra. Whereby, but that his words have stuck in his
teeth and he has not spoke out, Aristotle acknowledges what I contend for, a
Spirit of Nature or Hylostatick Principle, which he must of necessity
acknowledge, unless he contradict himself, for as much as he makes matter
merely passive, which it cannot be, if what moves it and orders it be but a
modification of matter, and not a Spirit distinct therefrom: for that
modification would be from its own essence, and consequently it would be
self-moved, and move it self so, (unless we play tricks with it) that it does
nihil agere srustra, which is far from being a mere passive Principle. But this
is more than I intended to say upon this occasion. We have plainly enervated
the main of this Chapter; what little matters remain, we will dispose into the
following Remarks.

REMARK the Thirty fourth.
The Learned Author endeavors to prove the attraction of tensed bodies, p.
239. l. 12. from Natures affectation of a strict contiguity, it being a kind of
continuity of the Universe and all its parts. But I observe, if there were any
such attraction, the final cause only is there indigitated, but we seek after a
natural efficient cause. And I deny moreover that there is any scope in the
suspension of the Mercury to save the Universe from discontinuity, but only to
preserve the Air in its due consistency. Nor is the Air the common Cement of
the parts of this inferior world, but it is one common Spirit that holds the
parts of the whole Universe together, no Atomi hamatae, or any such corporeal
contrivances. And where the matter is never so subtle, the contiguity of the
world is as much as where it is more crass. And therefore where we see strange
things done upon any place, being filled with only extreme subtle matter, it is
not because there is any more fear then of discontiguity or a vacuum, but
because that matter is misplaced, and the Hylostatick Spirit of the Universe
would dispose of it better.

REMARK the Thirty fifth.
The Learned Author, p. 240. and 242. would prove this attraction in his
supposed tensed and rarefied bodies in this sense, from the experiment of
Cuppingglasses and the Bladder in the top of the Tube in the Torricellian
experiment. But that these are no proofs for Attraction I have showed Remark 30.
in former Remarks.

REMARK the Thirty sixth.
He here mentions again, p. 242. l. 12. the heated Tube we have spoke of,
Remark 24. of its attraction and suspension of the water in it, the water in
the Tube and the Tube weighing as one body; and the like experiment he makes
here again of a heated Beer-glass with a more flew mouth, drawing up water, and
weighing as one body with the water, he attributing the suspension of the water
in both to the attraction of the rarefied Air. But that Hypothesis being so
fully confuted by me, I am more sollicitous in these instances to give an
handsome account of the jointly weighing of the Tube and Mercury, of the Tube
and Water, and of the Glass and (...), each of them as one joint (...), than of
confuting what is already confuted. And the case I conceive stands thus: By the
Hylostatick laws of the Universe it is, that heavy bodies will even press
upwards, as light upon heavy, and jointly both against a far lighter, though
there be an heavy body betwixt, which I a little Remark 32.
above noted in the resiliency of the Quicksilver against the top of the Tube.
Now as there the Air and restagnant Quicksilver gravitated against the subtle
matter in the top of the Tube through the column of Quicksilver in the Tube,
so the Air and Water gravitate both in the Tube and Drinking-glass, against the
rarefied Air therein, it being thinner than the common Air, and ascended in
each so far according to Hylostatick laws; As I doubt not but that if a whole
Tube of such subtle matter as is at the top in the Torricellian experiment
could be had and were inverted into restagnant Mercury, the Mercury would be
seen to ascend to 29 inches in the Tube as the water is seen to ascend in the
Beer-glass and Tube. In all which cases both the Mercury and Water ascend by a
Libration which this Author calls a Gravitation upwards, and are held there by
the same Law at such a gage, and not by attraction or suspension. But how then,
will you say, does the Tube and Mercury, the Tube and Water, the Beer-glass and
Water, weigh each of them together as one joint body? It Is a considerable
Problem, but I answer, The same Hylostatick Principle that thus librates them,
which is the Spirit of Nature, does also, but with a vincible and mutable
union, unite them. For both motion and union is from Spirit, as I have showed
in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum. And from hence it will be easily understood,
how when with the hand, p. 247. l. 12. you lift up the Beer-glass toward the
superficies of the restagnant water, the water included will arise with it much
above the superficies of the external water. Which though it be not by that
monstrous Elastick pressure of the Air that some are for, yet it is by a
Gravitation of the Air upon the water, and of the water upwards, and both of
them jointly against the rarefyed Air in the Concave of the Glass. So little
need is there of any Tension, but merely of this Hylostatick Libration.

REMARK the Thirty seventh.
The Learned Author, p. 248. l. 16. speaks of the power and efficacy of the
Laws of Nature, in colligating strictly parts of the most distantial Textures
and Consistencies without the help of Vellicles, Hooks, or Grappers, or Atomi
hamatae, and p. 238. he says, and that very truly and eloquently, That all the
men in the world can never give any satisfactory Reason, why the motion of a
Stone is downwards to the Earth more than to the Moon, but only Nature that is
the principium motus and quietis, or rather the God of Nature, whose standing
and statuminated Law Nature is, has so odered it, and ordered it so in the best
way for the use, beauty and accommodation of the Universe: Wherein he does
plainly declare that the laws of Nature are not mechanical, which if they be
not, they must be vital, and if they be vital Laws, what is the immediate
Fountain next to God, and subject in which this life is, or this principium
motus and quietis? Is it a substance distinct from matter, or is it an
essential power or modification of matter it self? For every thing is either
substance or modification of substance. If these Laws of Nature be an essential
power, or modification of matter, matter is self-moving, and is also
herself-orderer, even to the expression of all those curious footsteps of the
Divine Wisdom in the Creation, which is most apertly against Aristotle, whom
our Learned Author has no mean respect for, and who expressly gives only
passivity to matter, but derives activity from another Principle. This is his
frequent doctrine. And then which is still worse, it confounds the nature of
Body and Spirit, the motive and unitive power being immediately and originally
in Spirit, but the moveable and unitable in matter. But if these vital Laws in
Nature that conduce to the good of the Universe, be not essential to the matter
and act from it, it remains there is a Spirit of Nature to which they are
essential, which is the mover and moderatour of the matter, which wants no
Vellicles, Hooks, or Grappers, to hold those parts of matter together that are
to be held, or while they are to be held together, nor Chissels to loose them,
as the Laws of Nature shall require. This this Learned Author seems to be
assured a Spirit is capable of, by the union of his Soul and Body; and it is a
wonder to me, being we consist of those two Principles, that the Genius of the
Age is so generally such, that they take all their measures of Philosophizing
from their corporeal part, none from their Spiritual, as if they had forgot
they had any such, or were utterly unacquainted with its faculties, or as if
their entire personal compages were nothing else but a certain modified mass of
Philosophizing matter: But that mere matter should so peremptorily hold
together without those Atomi hamatae the Epicureans talk of, would be to me a
greater wonder than that they should with them; but that there remains the same
wonder still how the parts of the Atomi hamatae hold together, for Physical
parts they must have, or else they could have no figure.

Upon Chapter the Seventeenth.
REMARK the Thirty eighth.
OUR Learned Author, p. 251. l. 12. resolves the close sticking together of two
smoothed Marbles, with a weight hung at the lowermost, into Fuga vacui, for as
much as if there should be a parallel divulsion of them, there would be some
time, (motion not being in an instant,) before the interior distance could be
supplied with matter. Which therefore would cause a Vacuum in Nature. Which no
question Nature does abhor from, and which might be without any Logical
Repugnancy, (there being so plainly an Extensum every where distinct from
matter, as I have abundantly demonstrated in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum) did
not the Laws of Nature oppose it. Cap. 6:
But we must note also that Fuga vacui is but the final Cause, but those that
slight this solution, seek after an efficient Cause; and here again we must
either make matter self-moving and self-uniting, or self-fixing, or else we
must have recourse to the Spirit of Nature and its Hylostatick Laws, whereby it
governs the matter; and whereby indeed it holds the whole compages of the world
together. For the world being finite, as I have proved in my Enchiridium
Metaphysicum, Cap. 10. Sect. 6.
and consisting of an indefinite number of vortices and what ever other liquid
matter, if the motion of the matter were mechanical, and not from a vital
Principle actuating it, which I call the Spirit of Nature, there would be a
dehiscency of the parts of it, and nothing would be so plentiful as vacuities,
whenas now there is either none at all, or as little as may be imagined. For
the divuision of the Marbles incliningly or angularly, will very hardly be
conceived without some infinitely small vacuity, unless motion can be conceived
to be in an instant.

REMARK the Thirty ninth.
Upon Stevinus his Experiment occurring here again, p. 259. l. 10. how that a
Rundle of wood, lighter than water, laid upon the hole of the bottom of a
Vessel to be filled with water, that the pillar of water on that wood will keep
down the Rundle, and indeed will gravitate to the full weight of such a
dimension of water, when as, if that hole be not under the Rundle, it of it
self will come up. I say, this were a great Paradox in Nature, if the parts of
water gravitated on water, and that there were such a monstrous elasticity of
the Air. For the recoiling column of Air bearing against the Rundle through the
hole, of such a diameter, as that such a column would overcome in some other
cases some hundred pounds weight, this should make the Rundle arise with far
greater ease, than when the bottom of the Vessel is whole and is not
perforated; therefore it is a plain indication that there is no such constant
pressure of the parts of water on water, nor any such prodigious elasticity of
the Air, but that the motion and rest of matter is pro re nata, according as
the Hylostatick spirit of the world guides it. For certainly that upper Elater
of the Air that presses the water on the Rundle, is less resisted by far, by
the bottom unperforated, which does not heave at the Rundle to lift it up, than
it is by the column of Air below, that heaves so strongly as might match some
hundred pound weights. Which consideration will be most unexceptionable if for
a Rundle we place a lesser Vessel with thin sides, with four small holes made
sloopingly through the sides at the bottom, as I have above described upon
another Occasion. It will be hard then to find any evasion if the inward Vessel
ascend not as it does when the bottom is unperforated.

Upon Chapter the Eighteenth.
REMARK the Fortieth.
THat the divulsion of the Magdeburg Hemispheres, p. 267. is so far much easier
sideway, than from their Center, I easily accord to; for in such a divulsion
there is as it were the power added of a double wedge, but in pulling directly
from their Centers, it comes nearer to the case of one attempting to pull a
Billet into two, by taking hold of this side and that side of the middle of it,
and so to part it into two, in a parallel separation of each part. But that
they are held together by any such Tension of Filaments, or the contraction of
them, while they adhere to the concave of the Hemispheres, seems not to me at
all credible. For though the Learned Author argues indeed shroudly against the
elasticity of the Air being the cause of their adhesion, because, if the
Hemispheres after they have grown cold adhere so close together, that the
weight of 30 pound will not sever them, (by reason of the elasticity of the Air
or weight of the Atmosphere pressing them together,) yet though they were put
again into a considerable heat, they would adhere as strongly still, the
elatery of the Air being not at all diminished, but rather increased by warmth,
it exciting the spring thereof to a more forcible expansion, which therefore
must press the harder against the Hemispheres; but that it is observed that if
they be but made blood-warm they will easily fall asunder, which I confess is
no contemptible argument against the elasticity of the Air's being the cause of
this so strong cohesion:

Yet it is in my opinion one argument amongst others, that it is not the
contraction or restitution of the tensed matter in the Hemispheres, that is the
cause thereof. For if it were upon so strong a stretch and contraction, as he
ordinarily expresses by the stretch of a Lute-string, it is incredible that so
small a moment of heat should so suddenly and hugely relaxate it, that the
Hemispheres should as it were fall asunder of themselves, that before stuck so
strongly together that they bore 30 pound weight, which Relaxation neither can
be without penetration of Dimensions, which immensly heightens the
incredibility of it, that so small a force should cause penetration of
Dimensions, as I have also observed Remark 1. part 7, and 8. Remark 33.
before in the Torricellian experiment, besides all other repugnancies that
recurr here again. And therefore as the Learned Author would conclude from the
remotion of the elasticity of the Air, there none other appearing, that his
Tension and Restitution must take place; so I by like reason, by the remotion
of the elasticity of the Air and his Tension and Restitution, may infer that my
Hylostatick Spirit of the world ought to take place, which acts pro re nata
upon the matter, constringes and relaxes as occasion is. And here I say, upon
cooling of the Hemispheres, here is a gravitation of the Air inwards, toward
the common Center of the Hemispheres, by reason of the subtilty of the matter
there contained in an undue place, and the sides of the Hemispheres are kned
together, as a man may sometimes feel his Ribs to be in some subtle cold Air,
and we feel this contraction not from within, but rather from without or in our
very Ribs. I say therefore there is an occasional Gravitation of the ambient
Air and Hemispheres themselves against the rarefied Air or subtle matter within
them, to squeeze it out, as there is of water against a Bottle of Air let into
the Sea, which sometime this very pressure breaks: Which cannot be expected in
these brass Hemispheres; but this compression being not mechanical but vital, a
little hint changes the operation, as in the board that ascends in a Bucket, if
there be a hole in the bottom of the Bucket it will not ascend, but if there be
a false bottom below that, at a due nearness, it will, and the obturaculum of
the Valve in the Tube that will adhere to the Valve, if the Tube be open into
the Air, yet do but stop it with your Embolus at a right distance, the
obturaculum will descend. So a little warmth here makes the Hylostatick spirit
of the world quit her compressive operation, and relaxate her hold, without
penetration of Dimensions or any other absurd supposition; only suppose vital
motion instead of mechanical, and all will go off glibly.

Upon Chapter the Nineteenth.
REMARK the Forty first.
The Author's ingeniously contrived Pump, p. 293, 294. will require some few
more Remarks, and then we shall have done. The Orifice B being luted up, the
Embolus was raised, but not with equal facility as it was when it was open, the
reason whereof the Learned Author resolves into the violent Tension every
elevation of the Embolus gives to the Air in the upper Cavity of the Glass,
that it may thereby be able to supply the place of the water drawn up by the
Pump. But I conceive it is to be resolved into the strength of the consistency
of the Air without, which without some violence will not suffer the materia
subtilis to be squeezed out of it into the Cavity of the Glass. So that there
wants no Tension for the making up this Phenomenon.

REMARK the Forty second.
The Glass-bottle A B C holding 5 quarts of water, and first freely by pumping
being evacuated of 2, the Orifice at B after being luted close, a quart more
with much ado was pumped out, so that there was but one and 1/2 left, into
which notwithstanding the Pipe of the Pump did reach. But after this, be the
Embolus never so often listed up, not a drop of water comes. But the Air only,
says our Author, included in the Pump is rarefied by lifting up the Embolus,
and condensated by depressing it. Which very experiment methinks should be a
sufficient confutation of this kind of rarefaction and condensation, as if one
man's strength were able to cause so monstrous a thing as Penetration of
dimensions, see Remark 1. part 6, and 7. Nor is the reason of no more water
coming, because the Air is now tended to the utmost that such a strength of the
pulling up the Embolus can extend it, but it is from the greater firmness or
obsistency of the external Air, whose strength is invigorated by the
Hylostatick spirit of the world, against that unfit constitution of having
already so much subtle matter misplaced; as in the Magdeburg Hemispheres:
besides that it were against the Hylostatick laws, that so heavy a body as
water should shoot up so high into so extreme thin a body as that subtle matter
in the Glass See Remark 27^
, and that without any fresh Air succeeding thereinto, or extreme heat
preceding. And I do not question but that if the Torricellian experiment were
made under water, the Quicksilver in the Tube would stand hugely much higher
than it does now in the Air. And therefore that consideration may have also its
weight in this Phenomenon. But it is apparent there is no need of any Tension
in these Problems, there being subtle matter to supply its room. And yet for
this subtle matter, if the motions of the parts of the Air were wholly
mechanical and not vital, we can find no reason but that the force of the
Embolus, that at first pumping overcame the consistence of the Air, should not
overcome it still, that Glassful of subtle matter being nothing to that Ocean
of it in the Air. So evident every way is our Hypothesis of an Hylarchick
Principle.

REMARK the Forty third.
Moreover the Embolus reaching near H, and being elevable near to the top of
the Laton Syringe or Pump, the Air, if we can gather any thing from the figure
of the Instrument and its proportions, is upon the elevation of the Embolus to
its full height, stretched in the Pump so (when as the Tension of the Air in
the Cavity of the Glass occupies a space to what it did before, but in the
proportion of 7 to 5.) as to occupy a space that is to its former at least as 5
to 1. which is a greater sign that there is no such Tension, (For if there
were, the Air in the Cavity of the Glass that is but tended as 7 to 5. would
receive more Tension, and so make the water ascend) than that in the Pump
should be so overproportionately tended. And consequently that the water is not
suspended in a Pump by Tension, nor made to ascend to such an height by that
means, but by Gravitation-upwards, either upon an actual misplacement of the
subtiler Element, or upon the imminent danger thereof, which would be if the
water receded, therefore it goes up till such an height or measure, the Air and
Water above the bottom of the Pump gravitating upwards, not being so much
crowded by reason of impenetrability of matter, as conducted and vitally moved
by the Hylarchick Principle in this Gravitation-upwards. The force whereof is
according to the solidity of the Elements that thus gravitate. And hence also
may emerge a reason why in this case not one drop of water comes, upon the
elevation of the Embolus, namely because the Gravitation of the rarefied Air in
the Cavity of the Glass, added to the restagnant water above the Orifice of the
Pipe, by reason of the tenuity of the one, and small quantity of the other, is
too weak to raise or sustain a pillar of water in the Pipe, that would reach up
into the Pump, and so no water comes.

REMARK the Forty fourth.
But now upon supposition that the Pump were longer, p. 297. I. penult. or that
there were a strong external heat applied to the superior Air in the Glass, if
the water in that case would be as easily raised as at the first, as our
Author affirms; In the first way, it must be when the Pump is so long, that
the space the subtle matter occupies there upon the pulling up the Embolus, is
larger than that it occupies in the Glass, or the matter rather more subtle.
And in the second the reason might be, that the application of this heat
changes the vital energy, that is, that peremptory firmness and obsistency I
spoke of before, into a more relaxate operation, as I noted in the
Magdeburg-Hemispheres. But I am not certain that either way will find success.
But certain I am, upon no account of Tension and Restitution it will be, if
success answer expectation.

REMARK the Forty fifth.
The Learned Author collects out of the experiments of his Pump, p. 298. I.
16. That the Gravitation or pressure of the external Air is not the cause of
raising the water in a Pump; and as touching that springie Atmospherical way,
his collection I conceive is true, but I said above and here again repeat, That
the raising of water, and the suspension of it in a Pump, is by a circular
pressure and Gravitation of the Air and Water incumbent on the superficies of
water that the bottom of the Pump is on, which jointly gravitates upward with
the water ascending in the Pump, as I above declared the Air and Quicksilver
gravitates upward in regard of that subtle Element in the top of the Tube, and
here the Air and Water gravitate upwards, that there may be no bare subtle
matter in the Pump, to the disorder of the Universe: which gravitation of Air
and Quicksilver, and of Air and Water upwards, is not, as I said, by any
crouding or gravitating part upon part, but they are all carried by the
Hylostatick spirit of the world in this orderly way and to so good an end, that
there may be no inconvenience by misplacing the Elements of the Universe, of
which I hold the materia subtilis to be one.

REMARK the Forty sixth.
His collections also against the very elasticity of the Air from the said
experiments are ingenious, but I cannot insist on them, I shall rather take
notice of what occurrs, p. 302. l. 6. where he supposes that the immission or
insinuation of the Air into the Cavity of a Well (for there is the same reason
as in the Glass-bottle, that is, as it were, the Well of his Pump) is the
effect not the cause of the recession of the water. The scruple here is,
whether it may not rightly be said, to be both. For in that circle of Air and
Water that is made in the going of the Pump, the moving of the Air, that by the
coming out of the water is carried either toward the Well or into it, as it is
the effect of the waters coming out of the Well and Pump; so, it making part of
the circle of Air and Water that gravitates even to the bottom of the Bucket in
the Pump, where the hazard of an hiatus, and the baring of the subtle element
is, is also a cause, I mean instrumental cause, (for the principal efficient is
the Hylostatick Spirit of the world) of the getting the water out of the Pump,
it being part of that material circle in motion, caused by that Principle that
guides the matter.

REMARK the Forty seventh.
The two arguments against the elasticity of the Air, which the Learned Author
concludes with, are, if they be well weighed, very considerable. The first is,
that if the elasticity of the Air in a low roof'd Room, or a Glass Receiver, is
able to sustain the Mercury in the Tube at the same height in the Torricellian
experiment, that it is sustained in the free Air where there is the weight of
the Atmospherical Cylinder superadded to the said elasticity of the Air, it is
a sign that they are both but a mere conceit, and that the Mercury is suspended
by the pressure of neither. I must confess I cannot imagine how those elastick
Philosophers can evade the evidence of this argument, unless they hope to
escape by saying, That the elasticity of the Air being brought to its highest
vigor or force the Atmospherical pressure can give it, so it be but kept at
the same springiness and tightness by the Glass or the roof of the Room, the
elasticity being the same still, the effect will be the same. This a man might
fancy at first sight, but if he more distinctly consider the matter, it will
not satisfy: For let the force elastick of the Air in the Glass or Room caused
by the pressure first of the Atmosphere be as 10, and this conserved entire in
the Glass or Room which does not press against this elastick Air, but stands
immoved, nor would the Atmosphere, if it were incumbent on this Air, add any
thing more to the elasticity thereof, but it will still remain as 10, yet
though it add nothing to the elasticity of the Air, seeing it has a pressure
and protrusive force in it, which the Roof and Glass have not, it will
notwithstanding have its distinct force superadded to that 10 of the
interjacent elastick Air, through which it will effectually act for the easier
raising or suspending of the Quicksilver, and consequently will suspend at an
higher pitch than the Air in a Room or Glass can do, there being a small
convenient Valve that would let out the Air, but hinder any from coming in.
There is a nicety in this business, but I doubt not but the truth will be found
on our Learned Author's side, and the urgency forward or progressive conatus
of the elastick Air, will add something to the account.

And besides, as an Appendage to this Argument, if we compare portions of this
elastick Air without regard to the Atmosphere, the least proportion of it will
have equal effect with the greatest, and a Cylinder of elastick Air reaching
from the roof of the Room to the restagnant quicksilver, shall have no more
force for the sustaining of the Mercury in the Tube, than one of but the tenth
part of an inch high, which is again a sign there is no such elasticity at all.
For no man will say that the smallest charge of Gunpowder will, when it is
fired, explode the Bullet with equal force, that a due quantity of Powder will;
for all its elasticity or expansiveness is more quick and smart than this of
the Air. Or that, if but a quarter of an inch of Air, or less, were condensated
to that proportion that a due measure of air in a Wind-Gun uses to be, that it
will discharge with that force that the other does, and yet both their motions
here are by elasticity properly so called. Wherefore there being these
differences where elasticity is really, but none in the pretended elasticity of
the Air, it is a sign it is a mere pretense and no true Phenomenon in Nature.

And now for the Author's other Argument which he raised out of his Pump,
which is this; If there were any such elasticity of the Air, suppose in a close
Room or Glass that could keep up a Cylinder of Mercury, (I add, and raise it
too, if a Tube of Materia subtilis only, could be let down into it) to 29
inches high, which yet according to the amplitude of its Diameter may weigh
two, four, or ten pound, it were impossible but that the elatery of the air in
his Pump (it being open at K and B, so that the Air may come in at B, and
either Air or Water go out at K) should drive a portion of water into the Pipe
of but half an inch diameter, so that it may rise above the surface of the
restagnant water in the Glass-bottle, suppose an inch or half an inch high,
which is nothing in a manner to the raising of 10 pound weight. Which we shall
understand still more clearly and convincingly, if we will suppose the Pipe of
this Pump of such a diameter that 29 or 30 inches of Mercury in it would weigh
10 pound, and a Glass-bottle of a diameter 18 times larger than that of the
Pipe, which is the proportion that this Glass-bottle does really bear to this
Pipe in the Pump: Then imagine this Glass-bottle so well replenished with
Quicksilver, that the restagnant Quicksilver will reach somewhat above the
middle of the Glass, the Pipe in the mean time filled 29 or 30 inches full of
it, it will stand at thereabout, though it be 10 pound weight; nay I dare
appeal to any considered Philosopher if there were a Glass-Tube of 4 foot, or
longer, of mere materia subtilis immitted into this Glass-bottle of Mercury,
sufficiently replenisht therewith, if he can otherwise think but that the
Mercury will rise up to about 29 or 30 inches high. But for the sustaining of
it, it is acknowledged of every side, that 10 pound weight of Mercury 29 inches
high, is susustained, whatever it be that sustain it. The elastick Philosophers
say, it is the elatery of the Air in the Glass-bottle, which bears so strongly
against the restagnant Mercury, that the 29 inches of Mercury, that weigh 10
pound weight, cannot descend into the restagnant Mercury. But our Learned
Author here most rationally denies it, averring, that if there were so strong
an elatery of the Air as to drive up or bear up 10 pound weight of Mercury,
which is here 29 inches in the Pipe or Tube; certainly the same elasticity
would drive or bear up one inch of water into the Pipe or Tube, it being many
hundred times lighter than those 29 inches of Mercury. But here the elastick
Philosophers seek a witty refuge, viz. That it is the Nonresistence of the
materia subtilis that is destitute of all elasticity, which is the reason of
the prevalency of the elatery of the Air to mount up or sustain so great weight
of Quicksilver, but there being Air in the Pipe of like elasticity with that
in the Glass-bottle in this other case, that it is that that stops all such
motion of the water upward. But this is to indulge to pretty phancies against
palpable sense and all true reason. It is already acknowledged by these
elastick Philosophers, that there is an elatery of the Air in the Glass, that
will at least sustain, if not raise up a ten pound weight. Now if there be not
an elatery in the air of the Pipe so strong as might resist such a force, but
exceedingly far weaker, if any at all, the water must rise or stand an inch
high at least, neither which is done. But now you may feel with your fingers
end how exceeding weak the elatery of just such a Cylinder of Air is, as is in
the Pipe, if you make a Tube of the same diameter with that Pipe, and make an
Embolus of some wood equiponderant, or at least not lighter than water, and so
fit it to the Pipe that it may slip up and down with all ease imaginable, which
it may do and be close enough if it be oiled. And this easy slipping up and
down of it, might be an argument how weak the elatery of the Air is in it, but
that they will straight answer that you move the Emboblus so easily upward,
because the recoiling elatery helps you; but does not the direct as much hinder
me? But put your Embolus in the water, whose surface I suppose the upper end of
the Embolus will lie even with, then put the Tube on the Embolus, and putting
your hand into the water, with your finger move up the Embolus, which you shall
find to move against the elatery of the air in the Tube, if there be any, with
extreme ease; you will discern that the force of 1/4 of a pound weight at most,
will repel the air with its elatery. How then can it resist the force that will
draw up or sustain forty times as much? Wherefore it is plain upon supposition
that the elasticity of the Air is so strong that it will raise or sustain ten
pound weight, that it will so forcibly press the water in the Glass-bottle into
the Pipe, that by reason of the straitness thereof in comparison of that part
of the Glass, that contains the water, it will send it packing through that
Pipe as Air sent out through the nozel of a pair of Bellows, by him that
presses the Bellows with his hands. All the air of the Bellows is pressed at
once, and the motion of that in the Bellows being much slower, that in the
nozel comes out quick and smart, and so would the water through the Pipe be
driven with a swifter force by reason of its straitness, and new air coming in
at the Orifice B, it would never leave running out at K, till the water were
exhausted as low as E, which we seeing not done, we see hereby, that there is
no such elasticity in the Air at all, as our Elastick Philosophers suppose.

We will obviate the vanity of but one evasion more and then conclude. The
pretense of the recoiling elatery of the Air we took away by placing the little
Tube and Embolus of wood in the water. Here perhaps they will say, that the
Elatery of the Air on the surface of the water, causes the Embolus so easily to
be pressed against the elatery of the Air that is incumbent on it. But how can
that be, whenas the water has no elatery to lift up my hand, or bear against
the bottom of the Embolus, and the water only succeeds the pressure of my
finger against the Embolus, does not press with it, if we can believe our
senses? so that there is merely a circule of such strength as the pressure of
my finger makes and no more. And besides this, if this be any such advantage,
the same is found in this Learned Authors Pump, the air coming in at B to make
a circle of pressure by its elasticity to E and so to A and out at K, till it
come to B again, and yet there is not one inch of water raised by this
elasticity above the surface I, though this elasticity is pretended to sustain
29 inches of Quicksilver of 10 pound weight. And that this mistake may still
be laid more open, and no creep-holes lest for further evasion, from the Valves
or littleness of the passages at K and B, let us turn this round Glass into a
large open Vessel, that the pressure of the air may come as free as heart can
wish, and let into it a Tube, 29 inches whereof would contain 10 pound of
Mercury, and which being immersed in Mercury, so many inches of Mercury would
be suspended in: put upon such an Embolus as was above described, (whose upper
Basis lies equal with the water) this empty Tube, and then put in your hand
into the water, and believe your senses, with what ease that Embolus is to be
pressed up against the elatery of the air in the Tube, it requiring as I said
before, scarce the force of a of a pound weight. Can therefore the elatery of
the air sustain 40 times that weight, and keep the Mercury about 30 inches high
in the same Tube, and not raise water into the Tube one inch high, which is
above 400 times lighter than the 30 inches of Mercury it is pretended to
sustain, whenas the elatery of air in the Tube is deprehended not to make the
fortieth part of resistance against the elatery of air incumbent on the
restagnant water, which is pretended to press forty times stronger? Wherefore
the elatery of the air being so certainly deprehended not to do that which is
forty times easier for it to do, it is impossible that it should do that which
is forty times harder, and is a manifest demonstration there is no such elatery
at all.

Conclusion.
But now to bring all home at length to the intended scope, and to recount the
chief fruits of our labor in making these Remarks on the Learned Authors two
Treatises. If I be not out in my account, I conceive in my Remarks on the first
Treatise (to say nothing of several in the second) I have clearly demonstrated
the invalidity of all this Author's inventions, though otherwise ingenious,
whether mechanical or natural, (and yet such as would exclude the Spirit of
Nature) whereby he might seem to undermine the strength of my Demonstration
from the rising of the wooden Rundle in a Bucket of water, Enchirid. Metaphys.
c. 13. sect. 4. Which demonstration therefore remains unshaken in the behalf of
the Principium Hylarchicum or Hylostatick Spirit of the Universe. And as for
that other like notable demonstration, from the ascending of so great a weight
hung at the Embolus of the Airpump, the chief undermining of the force thereof
being by either the Elatery of the Elastick Philosophers, or this Author's
Tension, the former this Learned Author himself has so abundantly confuted
with such plain and solid arguments, that any discerning person may easily
discover the desperateness of that cause. And now for that other, I think I
have offered abundant reasons for the incredibility', or rather impossibility
thereof See Remark 1. 29. 32, 33.
Wherefore the conceit of the elasticity of the Air, and of Funiculus Lini, or
Tension in general being thus utterly defeated, it is manifest, the force of my
Demonstration, Enchirid. Metaphys. cap. 12. sect. 2, 3, 4, etc. from the weight
at the Embolus of the Air-pump, for the Hylarchick Spirit of the world holds
strong and entire still. And therefore I account, in a more distinct compute,
that the fruits of my labor in making these Remarks are these. First, This
Learned Author I hope is freed from that anxiety and solicitude touching me,
and is by this time satisfied that I have not incurred the guilt of that
rashness and heedlesness as to make choice of small and feeble Arguments to
sustain great and concerning Truths. For it is very judiciously said of him,
and I am wholly of his mind, That the most important and surest Truths in the
world never receive so much detriment by Arguments and Sophistry of Opponents,
as they do by those Arguments in their favor which have improper mediums to
support their conclusions, or such as are capable of other solutions: which I
am very confident mine will never be found capable of. And I think from these
Remarks this Learned Author by this time may be sensible, is no rashly
grounded confidence.

Secondly, There is the redounding of no small commendation to this Author for
his industry and dexterity, and special sagacity in making and improving
Hydrostatical Experiments, that are so considerable succors to such useful
Truth. For he has very stoutly and pertinently assisted me in a more full
defeating of that which always appeared to me an incredible Paradox, I mean
that prodigious elastick pressure of the Air, and therefore I impute it to the
modesty of this writer, that he has entitled his second Book Difficiles Nugae.
For though there may be some difficulty and curiosity in making and examining
such like Hydrostatical experiments, yet believe me there is no Nugality at
all, unless to those that make experiments for experiments sake, or to pass
away the time, or to be thought great natural or rather mechanical
Philosophers, and that in hope to show, that all the Phenomenon of Nature may
be performed without the present assistance or guidance of any immaterial
Principle. But to try and consider these Experiments and Phenomenon with that
carefulness and distinctness, and penetrancy of discernment, as to discover
there must of necessity be some immaterial mover underneath, there is no
nugacity at all in this, but sound and serious Philosophy.

Thirdly therefore, This is no small fruit of this Author's two Treatises, and
of my labor in making my Remarks on them, that it does more plainly and
evidently appear, that there is nothing of real strength can be said against my
Demonstrations for the Spirit of Nature, but that of necessity there is such a
Being in the world.

Fourthly, And that therefore it being so plain that there is this inferior
immaterial Being endued only with life, or some more obscure sensation, and
that has the general strokes of the Laws of the Universe, but cannot act by
reason and counsel pro re nata, it is manifest that there is a more noble and
divine Being in the world that gave this inferior immaterial Being its
existence, and allotted to it in measure, or limited out to it those general
Laws of vital Activity, which we discover in it in the Phenomenon of Nature.
Beside, that this certainty of the existence of the Spirit of Nature
demolisheth the strongest Bulwark that ordinarily the Atheist has, namely his
confidence that there is no such thing as a Spirit or Immaterial Being in the
world. Whence he securely hugs himself in that fond and foul Conclusion, That
there is no God.

Fifthly, Whenas many men are driven quite out of all conceit of ever
understanding the nature of their own Spirit or Soul, by that sophistry put
upon them, that if it is a Spirit or Immaterial Being, it would pass through
the body, but could not take hold of it or unite with it to move it; the
discovery of the Spirit of Nature, moving as well as penetrating all the matter
of the world, will as solidly and palpably confute the Sophism, as he did that
against motion, by walking before the face of the Sophister that would prove
there was none in the world.

Sixthly, Whenas this Spirit of Nature moves all the tenuious matter, and fluid
as well as solid in the Universe, we easilier discern how rational it is, that
particular Spirits, Angels suppose, or Demons, may have a faculty of moving
their tenuious vehicles, and the souls of men the animal spirits in the body.

Seventhly and lastly, Whenas others according to the thickness of their
conceptions cannot believe they have any soul at all, but take it for granted
they have none, what a rousing argument ought this to be to them, to awake them
out of this dull dream, to consider that a stone does not descend to the earth,
but by the virtue of a Spirit that moves it downwards, nor a wooden Rundle
ascend up in a Bucket of water, but by the same means? How then can it be
possible, but that we being conscious to our selves of more free and
spontaneous motions, of motions contrary to the tuggings of the Spirit of
Nature, of motions heavenly and divine, that these can be performed by mere
matter and body, and not by a particular Spirit really distinct therefrom?
Wherefore there being that unexceptionable evidence for the existence of the
Spirit of Nature, and that egregious usefulness of the knowledge thereof, I
shall conclude for this ancient Platonic or rather Pythagorick. Opinion in
this Lucretian strain of confidence. Ergo etiam atque etiam est in Mundo
SPIRITUS ILLE
NATURAE, qui Materiam regit atque gubernat.


THE END.

