TETRACTYS ANTI-ASTROLOGICA, OR, THE Four Chapters in the Explanation of the
GRAND MYSTERY OF GODLINESS, Which contain a brief but solid CONFUTATION OF
Judiciary Astrology, With Annotations upon each Chapter: Wherein the wondrous
Weaknesses of JOHN BVTLER, B. D. his ANSWER CALLED A VINDICATION of Astrology,
etc. are laid open to the view of every intelligent Reader.

By HEN. MORE, D. D.

Jerem. Chapter 10.2. Thus says the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be
not dismayed at the signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.



THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
I Present thee here with the four last Chapters of the seventh Book of my
Explanation of the grand Mystery of Godliness, which comprize, as I conceive, a
solid Confutation of the pretended grounds of Judiciary Astrology. The occasion
of my thus publishing them apart is this. There was lately sent to me a Book
written by John Butler Bachelor of Divinity, and Minister of the Gospel in the
Church of England; the first part whereof is entitled, The most sacred and
Divine Science of Astrology, the other, Astrology vindicated from the Calumnies
of Dr. More, in his Explanation of the grand Mystery of Godliness. I read them
both with care and patience. But find my self concerned most in the second. Of
which casting up the sum, I found it to consist of these two parts, Railing and
Reasoning. And truly to give the Author his due, in the former he is admirable.
I mean admirably copious, coarse and scurrilous, insomuch, that if there were
any such thing as Judiciary Astrology, one might rationally suspect him so
profoundly skilful therein, that he chose such a nick of time for his assault
upon me, as the whole Spouts or Cataracts of Influence from the so fitly
posited Heavens, might carry him on with a stream or flood as it were of dirty
Eloquence, and drive him into so foul a flux or Diarrhoea of frothy wit and
filthy language, as to stain so many sheets of paper as he has done. But Nobis
non licet esse tam disertis.
We are bound up to more sober and sacred Laws, as we are men, one would think,
and most of all as Christians. And truly I thought every Minister of the Gospel
had been a Christian, at least a man.

Not to render railing for railing, we are taught by St. Peter, but rather
blessing. And our Savior himself commands us to bless them that curse us, to
do good to them that hate us and despitefully use us and persecute us. Now I
demand of this Minister of the Gospel, or word of God, as he styles himself,
how well he has kept to this Rule of the word and Gospel of our Lord Jesus, of
which he boasts himself a Minister, that he should thus fiercely worry, not
only his fellow Creature, and his fellow Christian, but his fellow Minister of
the word and Gospel; and that always of the Church of England, never
Communicating with any other Church besides. When as this angry man, that his
wit may be sure to appear not to exceed his malice, has not been content to use
all imaginable scurrility against me, but also represents me as one stained
with the Schism of the late times, and as if I were either Presbyterian or
Independent. When as my nearest Relations were deep sufferers for the King, and
my self exposed (by constantly denying the Covenant) to the loss of that little
preferment I had before those times, as I never received any employment or
preferment in them. So deep a malice has this Minister of the Gospel conceived
against me, that he will not stick to raise slanders of me at all adventures,
for my being an Anti-Astrologer, as he would pretend, and for my just
Reprehensions of the folly of that fictitious Art. But I am resolved exactly to
follow those Rules that he has so notoriously neglected or transgressed, and to
give no answer to his Railing, but that of St. Peter, That we ought not to
render railing for railing: Which is a just and necessary excusing me from
engaging in that more ungentile and ungrateful part of my task.

Only I hold it fit so far to concern my self in his Railing, as to show he had
no just pretense thereto: And for this cause especially have I set before thee
these four Chapters which he pretends to be the occasion of his being so
provoked, though never any Astrologer that I heard of was provoked by them
before. Nay, there was of the most able of them, as I have been told by those
that were thoroughly acquainted with them, that confessed that I had solidly
confuted the ordinary acknowledged grounds of Astrology, though they had found
so much truth in the experiencing the feats of that Art, that they could not of
a sudden quit it for all that.

I but there are passages, will Mr. Butler say, that particularly concern my
person, in your Confutation, forasmuch as I have adventured to Calculate our
Saviors Nativity as well as Hieronymus Cardanus, of whom you write, That
nothing but levity of mind and vainglory could induce him to engage in so rash
an Act. And in another place, you call it, The unparalled presumption, and
wicked sauciness of the vainglorious Cardan. Here it seems it is that the
shoe pinches him. But alas! Mr. Butler, how could I possibly help this? My
self was never any Astrologer, nor ever had any conceit of that Faculty, though
you are pleased to account it a Divine Science; And what I have wrote I writ
twenty years ago. How could I then possibly prognostic that one Mr. John
Butler, as great Zealot for Astrology, would parallel the then unparalled
presumption, as I thought, and wicked sauciness of vainglorious Cardan? I
beseech you, Sir, whose fault is it, mine who writ this some twenty years ago
(justly condemning, as I will stand to it, that profane presumption of Cardan)
or your own, who of your own accord, without any invitation from me, I trow,
would imitate so foul an Example? And this charge against Cardan I will make
good in my Annotations when I come to the place, and will examine there
impartially what you have said for him or for your self in defending of him.

In the mean time I will only advertise the Reader, what was the true occasion
of my writing with that quickness and sharpness of Reprehension against
Astrology and Astrologers, and with some Scopticism, as Elias spoke against the
Priests of Baal. For sharp, nay Scoptical Reprehension when it is used from a
right principle, and upon a due object, not out of any self-design, but to
suppress poisonous Error and Imposture, and to signify a man's just contempt of
the conceitedness and loftiness of Atheistical Wits, by Mr. Butlers favor, is
no Railing but wholesome Reproof. Now that which moved my zeal and indignation
was this, That when I had demonstrated the real and literal truth of the
History of Christ, his miraculous Birth, Resurrection, Ascension, Apparition of
Angels, and the hardest and most incredible things of our Religion declared in
Scripture, so that Vaninus himself could not deny the matter of Fact, That this
sure ground, I say, of our Salvation should be whifled away by that
Fantastical supposition of Astrologers, viz. That all things here upon Earth
are done or caused by the Influence of the Stars and various Aspects of the
Heavenly Bodies, and as Pomponatius, Cardan, and Vaninus would have it, that
famous Lawgivers and Prophets have no other Original, whose Religions come on
and go off according to the Configurations of Heaven, and that Christ himself
and his Religion is subjected to the same Laws; there being indeed no Religion
exempted from the virtue and power whether good or bad of the Stars: so that
all Miracles, Prophecies, Apparitions of Angels, Resurrections from the Dead,
are but transitory blasts of their Influence. Certainly any body that has any
sincere sense and kindness for true Religion, I mean the Christian, cannot but
be moved with Indignation at such mischievous and impious Fopperies as these.
This is that which made me write against Astrology and Astrologers with that
scorn and contempt of both their Art and them, I mean the profaner sort of
them, that neither Christian Religion nor any well-meaning Christian may
receive any prejudice by them. And moreover, that not any phrase has slipped from
me that exceeds the demerit of their profane or frivolous pretenses shall be
made good in its proper place.

From all which it will appear, that there was no just occasion given to Mr.
Butler to rail, from any railing of mine against Astrology or Astrologers,
unless he will call just and necessary Reproof, with a quickness and sharpness
proportioned to the measure and nature of the fault, and pride, and
conceitedness of the persons, Railing and Reviling. And if he had conceived
that I railed, he being a Minister of the Gospel, (and so expressly professing
himself, and as it were boasting himself, in the Title Pages of both his Books,
so to be, and therefore pretending not only to be a Christian, but a Light and
Guide to Christians) he should have practiced that word, that he says he is a
Minister of, and not have rendered Railing for Railing, and thus dishonored his
Ministry in the sight of all the World, and that in the behalf of a cause,
which if it were true (as it is ridiculously false) is of no such consequence
(the Fortunes of Greece, as the Proverb is, do not depend upon it) as that he
should fare so like a distempr'd man in the behalf of it, as if it were his
great Diana, and the sole Sovereign or Mistress of his Heart.

And this is all that I intend by way of Answer to the railing Part of his
Book, namely, the thus showing that he had no just occasion for his so
barbarous and scurrilous Revilings, and that it is against my Principles, as I
am a man, much more as I am a Christian, to render Railing for Railing. And
truly I am of that temper, that I have always avoided to have any contests in
points of Divinity especially, with any Members of our own Church, it but
making sport for the common Adversary; but this looking more like a controversy
of Philosophy, it goes the less against the hair with me. And therefore, having
rid my hands thus of this worse part of his Book, viz. his Railing, I shall now
not stick to apply my self to the other part, and examine his Reasoning. Which
I doubt not but I shall, in my Annotations, make to appear, to the
unprejudiced, to be as weak, as the other is rude and virulent.

H. M.

THE EXPLANATION OF THE GRAND MYSTERY OF GODLINESS.
BOOK VII. CHAP. XIV.
1. Objections of the Jews against their Messiah's being come, answered. 2. A
pompous evasion of the Aristotelean Atheists, supposing all Miracles and
Apparitions to be the effects of the Intelligences and Heavenly Bodies. 3.
Vaninus his restraint of the Hypothesis, to one Anima Coeli. 4. His intolerable
Pride and Conceitedness. 5. A Confutation of him, and the Aristotelean Atheism
from the motion of the Earth. 6. That Vaninus his subterfuge is but a self
contradiction. 7. That Christianitie's succeeding Judaism is by the special
Counsel of God, not by the Influence of the Stars. 8. Cardanus his high folly
in Calculating the Nativity of our Savior, with a demonstration of the
groundlesness of Vaninus his Exultation in his impious boldness of making
Mahomet, Moses and Christ sidereal Lawgivers of like authority. 9. That the
impudence and impiety of these two vain glorious pretenders constrains the
Author more fully to lay open the frivolousness of the Principles of Astrology.
1. THE Chap. 13. Sect. 1.
Objections we were a mentioning are from two hands; from the Jew, or from the
Atheist. That from the Jew is chiefly this, That the condition of the times
under Christ is not conformable to what is Prophesied concerning the times of
the Messiah. * There is not that Peace and Concord, no not in Christendom it
self, neither in the Church nor State; nor is Idolatry extirpated, nor the
Israelites replanted and settled in their own Land: all which things
notwithstanding are foretold to come to pass in the days of the Messiah.
Whence, say they, it is plain he is not yet come. But I briefly answer, 1. That
the Prophetical Promises of the coming of the Messiah were absolute, as I have
See Book 7. Chap. 1. Sect. 6.
already noted, the extent of the effect of his coming, conditional; men being
free Agents, and not fatal Actors, in all things, as the Jews themselves cannot
deny. 2. That the nature of the Gospel tends altogether to the accomplishing of
those promises of Universal Peace and Righteousness, and did begin fair in the
first times of the Church as much as respects the Church it self. 3. That
whatever relapse or stop there has been, things are not so hopeless but in time
they may be amended; and that they in those days when they are true Converts to
Christ, may, if they will then desire it, return to their own Land. But after
this serious Conversion and real renovation of their Spirits into a true
Christian State, I cannot believe they will continue so Childish as to value
such things; but will find themselves in the spiritual Canaan already, and on
their march to that Jerusalem which is above, the Mother of us all, and that it
will not be in the power of any but themselves to turn them out of the way.

2. The other Objection, or rather Evasion of that wholesome use that may be
made of the Truth of the History of Christ, is from that sort of Atheists that
love to be thought Aristoteleans: For there are two chief kinds of Atheism,
Epicurean and Aristotelean. The former denies all Incorporeal substance
whatsoever, and all Apparitions, Miracles and Prophecies that imply the same.
Who are sufficiently confuted already by this undeniable Declaration we have
made. The other are not against all Substances Incorporeal, nor against
Prophecies, Apparitions, and Miracles, though of the highest nature; insomuch
that they will allow the History of Christ, his Resurrection, and Appearance
after Death, the Prophecies concerning him, and what not? But they have
forsooth this witty subterfuge to save themselves from receiving any good
therefrom, in imagining that there is no such particular Providence, as we
would infer from hence, because all this may be done by the Influence of the
Celestial Bodies, actuated by the Intelligences appertaining to each Sphere,
and deriving in a natural way from him that sits on the highest of the Orbs,
such Influences as according to certain Periodical Courses of Nature will
produce new Lawgivers, induing them with a power of working Miracles,
assisting them by Apparitions and Visions of Angels, making them seem to be
where they are not, and appear after they cease to be, namely after their
Death: when in the mean-time there be neither Angels, nor Souls separate, but
all these things are the transient Effects of the power of the Heavens and
Configurations of the Celestial Bodies, which slacks by degrees, and so the
influence of the Stars failing, one Religion decays and another gets up. Thus
Judaism has given place to Christianity, and Christianity in a great part of
the World to Mahometism, being Establishments resulting from the mutable course
of Nature, not by the immediate finger of God, who keeps his Throne in the
eighth Sphere, and intermeddles not with humane Affairs in any particular way,
but aloof off hands down, by the help and mediation of the Celestial
Intelligences and power of the Stars, some general casts of Providence upon the
Generations of the Earth.

3. * A goodly speculation indeed, and well befitting such two witty Fools in
Philosophy as Pomponatius and Vaninus: the latter of which seem not to give
himself up to this fine figment altogether fully and conformably to the ancient
Doctrine of Aristotle, but having a great pique against Incorporeal Beings, is
desirous to lessen their number as much as he can, and seems pleased that he
has found out, That one only Soul of the Heavens will serve as effectually to
do all these things as the Aristotelean Intelligences; and therefore ever and
anon doubts of those, and establishes this as the only Intellectual or
Immaterial Principle and highest Deity; but such as acts no otherwise than in a
natural way by Periodical Influences of the Heavenly Bodies. Where you may
observe the craft and subtilty of the man, what a care he has of his own
safety, and how he has imprisoned the Divinity in those upper rooms for fear of
the worst, that he may be as far out of his reach as the Earth is from the
Moon. So cautious a Counselor in these matters is an evil and degenerate
Conscience.

4. This is the chiefest Arcanum that the Amphitheatrum and famed Dialogues, of
this stupendous Wit will afford; who was so tickled and transported with a
conceit of his own parts, that in that latter Book he cannot refrain from
writing down himself a very God for Wisdom and Knowledge. When as, assuredly, *
There was never any man's Pride and Conceitedness exceeded the proportion of his
wit and parts so much as his. For there is nothing considerable in him, but
what * that odd and crooked Writer Hieronymus Cardanus had, though more
modestly, vented to the World before: only Vaninus added thereto a more express
taste of bold Impiety and Profaneness.

5. I have elsewhere intimated how the attributing such noble Events to the
Power of the Stars, is * nothing but a rotten relic of the ancient Pagan
superstition; and have in my Book of the Sea Pref. Sect. 4. and Book 2. Chap.
14.
Immortality of the Soul, plainly enough demonstrated, that there is no such
inherent Divinity in the Celestial Bodies as that ancient superstition has
avouched, or modern Philosophasters would imagine. And I shall evidently prove
against this great Pretender, That his removal of the Deity at that distance
from the Earth is impossible. For there are scarce any now that have the face
to profess themselves Philosophers, but do as readily acknowledge the motion of
the Earth, as they do the reality of the Antipodes, or the Circulation of the
Blood. I would ask then Vaninus but this one question, whether he will not
admit that the Sun is in that Heaven where he imagines his Anima Coeli; and
whether this Heaven be not spread far beyond the Sun, and be not also the
residence of this Celestial Goddess of his? There is none will stick to answer
for him, that it is doubtlesly so. Wherefore I shall forthwith infer, that let
his unskilful phansy conceit us at this moment in as low a part of the Universe
as he will, within the space of six months we shall be as far above or beyond
the Sun as we are beneath him now, and yet then phansy our selves as much
beneath him as before. Which plainly implies that our Earth and Moon swim in
the liquid Heavens, which being every where, this Deity of Vaninus must be
every where, though his degenerate Spirit was afraid of so holy a
Neighborhood, nor could abide the belief of so present a Numen. Thus has the
Annual course of the Earth dashed off all that superstitious power and sanctity
that ancient Paganism has given, and the Aristotelean Atheist would now give to
the Sun, Planets and Stars; and we are forced even by the light of Nature and
humane reason to acknowledge the true Principle from whence all Miraculous
things come, that is, a God, every where present, in whom we live, and move,
and have our being.

6. Besides this, suppose that all Prodigies, Apparitions and Prophecies were
from the intermediate influence of the Celestial Bodies, these Intelligences,
or that Anima Coeli working thereby upon the persons of men, to inspire them,
and turning the Air into representations and Visions to converse with them;
This covering is too scant to hide the folly of this sorry Sophist, his
supposition plainly ruinating it self. For he does acknowledge that those
inspirations and Prophecies are true that are thus derived from those Sidereal
Powers. But it is evident, that those that have been the most illustrious
Prophets, have had converse with Angels, and talked with them, and have so
recorded the matter to the World. As for Example, the Prophet Daniel, who
discoursed with the Angel Gabriel; Christ also discoursed with Moses and Elias
on Mount Tabor, and Moses with the Angel of God on Mount Sinai. Besides,
Christ, who was so highly inspired and assisted from Heaven, has over and over
again pronounced a future happiness after this life. All which, allowing them
for a while to be the Dictates or Representations of the Astral Influences, I
demand of Vaninus, how he comes to be wiser than those, who were so
miraculously assisted, That these Visions of Angels should not be so as they
that saw them have related, That Moses and Elias should not be the Spirits of
Moses and Elias, but only transient Figurations of the Air raised by the
influence of the Heavens? Moreover I would ask of him if he think that that
Heavenly assistance that can according to his own acknowledgment inform men of
things to come at a thousand years distance, (for such was the prediction of
the Death of Julius Caesar in the Senate, though a matter very contingent,)
cannot certainly inform them whom it pleases so wonderfully to assist, whether
the Souls of men be mortal or immortal? which is far more cognoscible to those
ethereal powers than the other. Wherefore this wretched Figment of his to
excuse himself from the acknowledgment of the Existence of Angels or Demons,
and the subsistence of the Soul after Death, from which he so much abhors, will
stand him in no stead, but argues him more intoxicated, whifling and giddy, in
admitting the truth of such Narrations, and yet denying the genuine
consequences of them, than they that give no credence to the Narrations
themselves.

7. That which was objected of Christianity justling out Judaism, and of
Mahometism (in a great part of the World) justling out Christianity, is partly
false, and partly nothing to the purpose. That Christianity has properly
justled out Judaism is very false. For Judaism has rather been ripened into the
perfection of Christianity, than been stifled and sufflaminated by any
Counter-blast of those Sidereal Influences he dreams of. For we see how things
have gone on in one continued design from See Book 5. Chap. 17. Sect. 2.
Abraham to Christ, as the Prophecies and Predictions in Scripture plainly
testify. God promised to Abraham, that in his Seed all the Nations of the
Earth should be blessed. Jacob foretells on his Deathbed, that the Jewish
Polity and Religion should not fail till the Messiah, a Jew and Son of Abraham,
was come, to whom the gathering of the Gentiles should be: and so in other Book
7. Chap. 5, 7, 8.
Prophecies which we have already recited and applied. From whence it is
manifest, that it is the hand and counsel of God who is constant to himself,
and whose Wisdom and Providence reaches from end to end, that has begun and
carried on this matter according to his own will and purpose, and not any
Bustles or Counter-Blasts of various Aspects of the Heavenly Bodies, that do
and undo according to the diversities and contrarieties of their Schematisms
and Configurations.

8. * Nor could any thing but levity of mind and vainglory induce Cardan to
pretend the Calculating of our Saviors Nativity, when as the Year of his Birth
is so uncertain amongst the most accurate Chronologers; and Astrology it self a
thing wholly groundless and frivolous, as I shall demonstrate anon. Nor is it
any Specimen of his wit, but of his gross impiety, so boldly to equalize the
rise of Mahometism to that of Judaism and Christianity, as if Moses, Christ and
Mahomet were all Astral Law givers, alike assisted and inspired from the
influence of the Stars. A conceit that Vaninus is so transported with, that he
cannot tell what ground to stand upon when he cites the passage out of Cardan,
he is so tickled with joy. But that this exultation of his is very Childish and
groundless, appears, both in that he falsely attributes Prophecies, Divine Laws
and Miracles, to the influence of the Stars (a superstitious error that arises
only out of the ignorance of the right Systeme of the World;) and then again
(if it were true) that he imagines Mahomet (who was a mere crafty Politician,
and did neither Miracles, nor could Prophecy) to be a Lawgiver set up by the
Miraculous power of the Heavens, such as enables Divine Lawgivers and Prophets
to do real Miracles. To which you may add the ridiculous obstinacy of this
perverse Sophist, who the more we give him of what he contends for, ( viz. that
Mahomet also is a Star-inspired Prophet, that is to say, illuminated from the
Anima Coeli, which according to his opinion is the highest and most infallible
principle of Miracles and Divine Wisdom) the more ample testimony we have
against his own Folly, that so peremptorily denies the existence of Demons,
and subsistence of the Soul after Death. Which are openly avouched by this
third witness of his own introducing: and therefore he abhorring so from such
truths as are certainly dictated from the Celestial Bodies, did not excess of
Pride and conceitedness blind his judgment and make him senseless, he could not
but have found himself stung with that lash of the Satyrist, O curvae in terris
animae, and coelestium inanes!
But I have even tired my self with running the Wildgoose Chase after these
fickle and fugitive Wits, whose careless flirts and subsultorious fancies are
as numerous as slight and weak, against the firm and immovable foundations of
solid Reason and Religion.

9. I should now pass to the fourth part of my Discourse, * did not the
reflection upon the insufferable impudence of Cardan, in pretending to cast our
Saviors Nativity, and that villainous insulting of Vaninus thereupon, (as if
all Religion were but an influence of Nature and transient blast of the Stars)
invite me, nay indeed provoke me, * to lay open the vanity of their accursed
Art, wherein they have combined together to blaspheme God, and to make Religion
contemptible and useless to the World.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XIV. Sect. I.
THere is not that Peace and Concord, no not in Christendom it self, neither in
Church nor State, nor is Idolatry extirpated, etc. I had brought my
Demonstration for the truth of Christianity to that completeness in the
foregoing part of my Mystery of Godliness, that I could find nothing to
pretend to enervate it, but this Objection of the Jews, and that other of the
Aristotelean Atheists, that impute all things to the natural Influence of the
Heavens and Stars. And though the former is nothing to our present purpose, yet
I thought fit not to leave it out, that the Chapter might be entire. And since
it is here, I will only note that besides those Answers I give here to this
Objection of the Jews, there is one special Answer more taken notice of in my
Preface to my Exposition of the Apocalypse, Sect. 11. That this Idolatry of the
Church was predicted by Christ himself in that excellent Volume of Prophecies.
The study of which ancient Prophecies, I think, much better becomes a
Protestant Minister of the Church of England, as Mr. Butler styles himself,
than the vain Affectation of Astrological Prognostications. But he is so full
of that empty Phantastry, that he does not only neglect that laudable and solid
study of the Prophecies of Holy Scripture, himself, but derides them that are
followers thereof, as he does me, in his Vindication of Astrology, p. 24. The
Doctor, says he, has been all day in deep study of the Revelation of S. John
the Divine, etc. which plainly reflects upon the very Title Page of my
Exposition of the Apocalypse; and may have respect also to his own Book coming
out so immediately upon mine, namely his Hagiastrologia, which he interprets,
The most sacred and Divine Science of Astrology, as if he would set up this his
most sacred and Divine Science of Astrology as a Corrival with the serious
study of the Revelation of St. John the Divine, so that instead of being
Divines or Theologers, we may turn phancyful Star-gazers or Astrologers.

And wot you not what great encouragement there is for it? For besides his
Hagiastrologia, which is newly come out piping hot, he mentions a little Tract
of Astrology written by himself, for the satisfaction of the ignorant, and his
Christologia, or his Treatise of Christ, For so the word will signify whether
he will or no, which Treatise notwithstanding pretends only to tell us the Time
of Christ's Birth: As if that Genethliacal or Astrological moment of his
Nativity were J. B.'s whole Christ. And lastly, He tells us (which I might have
put in the first place, it occurring Hagiastr. p. 4.) of the Doctrine of
Nativities, written by his Friend Mr. Gadbury, a person famous as well for
Astronomy as Astrology. These I must confess are great Motives, and if I did
not consider, that the Apocalypse is a Book writ by truly Divine and infallible
Inspiration, and that the Rudiments of Astrology are but the mere imaginations
and gross Hallucinations of deceived Mortals, unacquainted with sound
Philosophy and the true knowledge of Nature, they might have made me seem to
give ground a little. But being as it is, I stand perfectly unmoved in my self,
and do in the mean time take notice, That J. B. in his publishing presently,
upon the coming out of my Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, this rudely swaggering
piece of his (where there is nothing of Reason or Philosophy, but a mere
endeavor in the grossest way of Buffonry to make my person as vile and
contemptible as he can) acts like one that does not endeavor more to
vindicate his beloved Astrology than to stifle the good effect of my studying
those Divine Oracles, which tell not into what quarter an Horse, or Sow and
Pigs have gone astray, but how much the Church pretended Catholic and
Apostolic have gone astray from the Rule of the Word, and wandered from the
City of God, the holy Jerusalem, to the bloody, profane, and Idolatrous City
of Babylon. I say his virulent Book coming out in such a nick of time as this,
may justly move a suspicion in me or any one else beyond the probability of any
figure cast by an Astrologer, that this latter is the principal meaning and
chief scope of his publishing this Book of his at this time. Which thing I
leave to his own Conscience and the judgment of others to consider: especially
if they will but take along with them what he writes in his Astrology
Vindicated, p. 3. where speaking of my Mystery of Godliness. It was full ten
years date, says he, from its first coming out, ere I had the hap to meet with
a fight of this Explanation, etc. And my Christologia was in the Press first;
and also I had written my little Tract of Astrology, for the satisfaction of
the ignorant in that Art; and an Answer to Mr. Seldom, by way of Post script,
before this of Dr. Mores came to my hands. Only I had heard of such a Treatise,
and heard it very much commended by certain Anti-Astrologers, etc. Out of which
passage it is plain, that his Christologia was writ some ten years ago, my
Mystery of Godliness having been published near these twenty years. Wherefore
that he should either be or feign himself to be in such a rage, so soon after
the publishing of my Apocalypsis Apocalypseos, I leave to the sagacious to
smell out the Reason. But this is only by the bye. We come now to what in these
Chapters concerns Astrology and Astrologers.

Sect. 3. A goodly speculation indeed and well befitting two such witty Fools
as Pomponatius and Vaninus, etc. Answer. But what (says J. B. p. 11.) are all
Fools that just jump not with the Doctors will? Repl. I must confess I think
all are Fools that close with that Atheistical Hypothesis, which I have above
described in the foregoing Section, and deny a particular Providence. And that
Vaninus was a Fool, is demonstrable out of the Scripture, which this Minister
of Gods word cannot for shame deny. Psalm 14. The Fool has said in his heart
there is no God. If he be a Fool that says in his heart there is no God, what
a great Fool is he, that not only says it in his heart, but speaks it out with
his mouth, and makes it his business to Proselyte others to the same Impiety?
Which was the Case of Vaninus, who was so great a Fool or Madman as to become
Martyr for Atheism. The History whereof you may see in that ingenious Writer
Dr. Sam. Parker, in his Disputationes de Deo, Disp. 1. Sect. 26. as he has
taken it out of Gabr. Barthol. Gramond. in his History of France, from the
Death of Henry the Fourth, lib 3. His story is sufficiently Tragical, and his
Case to be lamented; an Atheist being a more proper object of scorn or pity,
than of the extremity of such severity. It were a more expeditious way to free
the World of this kind of Cattle, to exhibit Religion in a more credible and
creditable dress than it has been for over many Ages. And yet they that have
been the most effectual makers of Atheists, have been the most forward to burn
them. But this I have also complained of elsewhere. But J. B. further objects.
But why a witty Fool, does not wit make wise? Repl. I say no, Wit may make
witty, but it is Wisdom that makes wise. It is called Wit when Imagination and
Reason dance the Anticks, and show a dexterity by freakish Tricks to insinuate
false and mischievous Opinions, and disparage what is true and useful, what is
holy, sacred and serious. But Wisdom is an ability of maintaining weighty and
useful truths, by firm and invincible Arguments. But the Atheist being so great
a Sot that he is sunk from the belief and relish of any such things, I look
upon him, let his Wit otherwise be what it will, as on one, that is not wise,
but a Fool. And most assuredly he will find himself so in the Conclusion.

Sect. 4. Never any man's pride and conceitedness exceeded the proportion of his
Wit and parts so much as his. Here J. B. being he does merely rail and offer no
Reason to confute what I say, I am excused from answering any thing to him. But
for the Readers satisfaction I will not stick to declare, That Vaninus as to
his Philosophy is a mere Pedant, and that his Dialogues he bears himself so
high upon, are very shallow things, and tiresome to any man of any skill and
judgment to read them; And would be the flattest entertainment to all men that
can be, but that some have a Palate for Atheism and Infidelity, though never so
homely dressed or poorly served up: I never met with any one yet, though never
so free a Philosopher, but he had the same opinion of Vaninus that I profess.
And what freakish nay doltish conceits he has of Apparitions, will appear to my
one by what I have writ against him in my Immortality of the Soul, Book 3.
Chap. 16. and in my Enchiridium Metaphysicum, Cap. 26. Now for his pride and
conceitedness none can be greater, he making himself a very Gold for Wisdom and
Knowledge, as I have observed in this Section. And if any one would have a more
full description of his excessive Pride, let him either read Vaninus his own
Dialogues, or what Dr. Parker has transcribed thence in in the abovesaid
Treatise, and in the same place I named before. That odd and crooked Writer
Heironymus Cardanus, etc. Here J. B. p. 13. cries out, He all to be calls him,
and yet gives no account why he was either the one or the other, unless because
he was a learned Astrologer. Repl. This Character of Cardan is so notoriously
known to them that are conversant in his Writings, that it wanted no proof. Of
what an odd, or if you will uneven temper and irregular he was, he himself does
freely confess, and calls it, Anomalam suae Naturae indolem. Which makes him
write of things off and on, in so much that it is Thuanus his Elogium of him,
In quibusdam plus homine, sapere, in pluribus minus pueris intelligere videri.
And Dr. Parkers censure of him is with good judgment, in that he esteems him
rather a Fanatic or Madman, than an Atheist. But to descend to instances of
these things would swell my Annotations too much.

Sect. 5. Nothing but a rotten Relic of the ancient Pagan Superstition, etc.
Answ. To this J. B. answers p. 33. Lo, in sacred times where we find Moses and
Daniel famous Astrologers amongst the best of Jewish Writers, and in Christian
times we have Cardan, Junctinus, Philip Melancthon, Pezelius, Morinus, and
diverse others famous Christian Astrologers, and yet the Doctor blushes not to
call it a rotten Relic of Pagan Superstition. Repl. That there have been
several good men amongst the Christians that have without any ill mind, studied
Astrology properly so called* as some also, nay, many Myriads of Mortals* out
of ignorance have practiced Idolatry, I will easily grant. But that Moses and
Daniel were such Astrologers as Calculated Nativities, and answered Horary
Questions by casting of Figures, I utterly deny. As Theologia signifies the
Doctrine or Learning touching the nature of God from (...) and (...), so
Astrologia from (...) and (...), may signify the doctrine of the nature of the
Stars, their situation, distances, and motion, which now adays is more properly
called Astronomia. Of which Calculation of Eclipses is a part. But Astrologia
of it self signifies no more the Art of predicting or Divining, touching the
Fate and Affairs of men from the Stars, than Theologia signifies the Art of
predicting things from God.

But because J. B. is so far from thinking Astrology, properly so called, to be
a Relic of Pagan Superstition, that he pretends it to be a sacred and Divine
Science, I will here in this very place, before I go any further, examine all
his allegations, wherever they occur, in either of his Books, for the proveing
it so sacred and Divine.

First then he pretends that Astrology came out from Paradise, and that our
Father Adam after the fall Communicated it out of his Memoires of the state of
Innocence, to his Son Seth, and that Seth made Impressions of the same in
certain permanent Pillars which were able to withstand both Fire and Water, and
that hence Enoch had it and Noah, and from him Shem, and so it came to Abraham,
who taught the Chaldeans and Egyptians the principles thereof. Pref. to
Hagiastrolog. p. 18.

Again, (p. 27. of the same Book) he contends that Moses, that great man of
God, was an Astrologer, as being learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians,
of which Astrology was a part, which they were taught by Abraham when he was in
Egypt.

Thirdly, That Moses was an Astrologer, he says is apparent by his Predictions
touching the Tribes, as to what should betide them for the time to come,
Deuteron. 33. which he not doing by Revelation, nor Dream, nor Vision, (for
when it was so, the Scripture was wont to say how it was so) he must needs have
done it by Astrology.

Fourthly, The Patriarch Jacob was also an Astrologer, by his Predictions to
his Sons, and that the Opinion of the learned Origin was, that he was so indeed.

Fifthly, That Joseph was also an Astrologer, he being the very Hermes
Trismegistus that Diodorus speaks of, who taught Osiris and Isis many learned
matters both concerning Religion and State, and concerning things to come, and
who lived about the same time that Joseph, and taught a Religion by himself,
contrary to all the ways of worship as was ever known amongst the Egyptians,
before him, he assisted Osiris in the Art of the Plough, and counseled many
things conducing to the benefit of man's life, and was in great honor with King
Osiris, as Joseph with Pharaoh: so that Osiris must be Pharaoh and Hermes
Trismegistus, Joseph. And of this man, says Diodore, he was one of the first
that was skilled in the Stars: And the Astrological Aphorisms of Hermes
Trismegistus, are extant to this day.

Sixthly, The Children of Issachar were Astrologers, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. For so are
they described, Men that had understanding of the times to know what Israel had
to do. These were also among the number of the bands that were ready armed to
war, and came to David to Hebron to turn the Kingdom of Saul to him according
to the word of the Lord: These Issacharians therefore were learned Astrologers,
able to answer an Horary Question in such a Case as was now depending, whether
they should follow David or Saul.

Seventhly, The Seers in Samuels time were Horary Question-men (p. 47.) who
gave answers to them that enquired after lost goods, what was become of them.
Which was not by any Divine Prophecy or extraordinary Revelation, but by some
industrious Art, because it was mercenary, as it appears, 1 Samuel chapter 9. v. 7.
But behold if we go, what shall we bring the man? which is said concerning
Samuel himself, who v. 11. is called the Seer, and of whom was enquired what
was become of the lost Asses of Saul's Father.

Eighthly, Daniel, Shadrach, Mesech and Abednego, were Astrologers (p. 30.)
Students of the Faculty under their Tutor Melzar, Dan 1.11. and were accounted
as members of some Schools in Babylon, where the Science was taught by Abraham,
and after that, Belus the Father of Nimrod built the School-House of Learning,
and much propagated the Art: and in these Schools studied the learned Daniel,
etc.

Ninthly, and lastly, Several passages in Scripture favor Astrological
Influences and Predictions; As Deuteronomy. 33. concerning Joseph, it is said by
Moses, That his blessing shall be of the precious things of the Sun and Moon.
Again, Deuteronomy. 4.19. Moses says, that the Sun, Moon and Stars, God has
distributed to all Nations under Heaven, p. 16. Thirdly, p. 77. When Barak and
Deborah were victorious against King Jabin and Sisera his Chieftain, the Stars
of Heaven (Judge. 5.20.) were at the Battle, and fought in their Courses against
Sisera. And in the last place, which J. B. ever and anon harps upon, there is
brought in our Savior his Concession or assertion, That the redness of the
sky prognostics fair weather at Evening, and that a red and lowering sky in
the Morning prognostics foul, Matthew. 16.2. These are all the Forces that my
memory can muster up, which J. B. has produced to make good that Astrology is a
sacred and Divine Science.

Which how strong they are, now let us try. The first indeed is a sweet amiable
conceit, as fetching Astrologies first Original from Paradise. But he brings no
proof for it but that one passage in Josephus, Antiqu. lib. 1. c. 3. which
makes against himself. For what is impressed of the knowledge of the Celestial
Bodies, upon those Pillars of stone and brick, were no Paradisiacal Traditions
but the inventions of the Sons of Seth (who also built the Pillars) The words
in Josephus are, (...). They excogitated the knowledge or science of the
Heavenly Bodies; that is, the order, situation, and motion of them, and so
understood the true Systeme of the World, or were well skilled in Astronomy.
But there is not the least hint here of Judiciary Astrology, which J. B. is so
fond of.

To the second I answer, That Moses was indeed learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians as it testified, Acts 7.22. of which I admit Astronomy to be one
part; but J. B. precariously supposes Astrology properly so called, the same
that I write against, to be another. Now I say, and I have proved, that that
pretended Art is no part of Wisdom but Folly, and therefore never professed nor
acknowledged by Moses; he can be said to be an Astrologer in no sense, but as
Astrology and Astronomy is taken for one and the same thing.

And to his third Argument (whereby he would enforce the former) that he was an
Astrologer, from his predicting the future conditions of the twelve Tribes; I
say it was no fruit of his Astrology, but an effect of the Divinity of his
pious soul inacted by the Spirit of God. And it is a fond thing to think in
these circumstances, he should take up the Form, after usual amongst the
Prophets, Thus says the Lord. Was it by Astrology that our Savior predicted
the destruction of Jerusalem, because it is not set down whether it was by
Revelation, Dream, or Vision, that that Prophecy of the destruction of the City
and of the end of the World was communicated to him? Not to add, that the
entrance into this Prophecy of Moses is too high and majestic for an
Astrological Figure-Flinger. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Mount
Seir unto them, he shined forth from Mount Paran, etc.

To the fourth; where he would make Jacob also an Astrologer, because though he
was blind or exceeding dim-sighted, could contrary to Joseph's mind lay his
right hand on Ephraim, and his left on Menasseh, Genesis 48. and predict the fates
of the twelve Tribes, chapter 49. To this I say, That truly I thought when men had
lost their sight, they had not been so fit to cast Figures. But he seems to
urge this more faintly, and would support it only by the Opinion of learned
Origin, as if he in his Homilies upon these two Chapters, had made Jacob an
Astrologer. But here J. B. is either imposed upon himself by those that play
the wag with him, or else would impose upon his Reader. For there is no Homily
of Origin on the 48. Chapter, and in his Homily on the 49. not one syllable of
Jacobs being an Astrologer. There is something in Eusebius touching Origen's
making Jacob to predict the destinies of the Tribes, as having read them in
Tabulis Coeli, but this J. B. seems ignorant of, or to omit it, as not deeming
it much to his purpose. If he had produced it we had had an answer ready for
it, but to say any thing now is superfluous.

And to the fifth I answer, That I acknowledge that according to Chronologers,
Osiris and Joseph lived about the same time, else all the fat had been in the
fire, and that Hermes to Osiris, in assisting him in Husbandry, and in being in
such high favor with him, was such as Joseph to Pharaoh. But Diodorus whom he
cites for this fair story, does not represent Hermes as one professing and
practicing a Religion by himself, contrary to the Religion of the Egyptians,
but that he ordered matters of Religion for them touching Sacrifices and the
worship of the Gods: which is incredible that Joseph did for Pharaoh. And as
touching the telling of them of things to come, there is not one syllable of it
in Diodorus. And on the other side he is said to teach them letters, and to
speak articulately, and to teach them to wrestle and play on the harp and other
feats of Music. Of which not one syllable in the History of Joseph. But let
Hermes and Joseph be the same man. What then? O then it is plain that Joseph
was an Astrologer, because Diodorus writes he was one of the first that was
skilled in the Stars. And Astrological Aphorisms go under Hermes the Egyptian
his Name. But I answer, that his skill in the Stars is set down in Diodorus,
only in these words, that he was, (...), an observer of the order of the Stars
for their situation and motion, which Josephus above called (...), the
disposition and order of the Celestial Bodies; which expressions in neither
place reach any further than to Astronomy, there is not the least hint here of
Judiciary Astrology, properly so called. For to know when it will be Summer and
Winter, Spring and Fall, I do not call Judiciary Astrology, though J. B. do,
Hagiastrolog. p. 62. Such is Astronomy with me. And for those Hermetical
Aphorisms, it is so frequent to father new spurious Inventions upon ancient
Names, that J. B. himself is justly diffident in that point of the Argument, if
there be any such extant.

To the sixth I answer, That the phrase concerning the Issacharians, That they
were men that had understanding of the times, implies no more than that they
were sagacious men and good Politicians, and knew, in rebus agundis, when to
act and when to forbear. The Hebrew words are (...), That had skill to act pro
re nata, as the time and occasion required. But what is this to Astrology? I
remember a Doctor of Physic that so doted on the Philosophers stone, that he
would allege places of Scripture from Genesis to the Revelation, in the behalf
thereof. The Application is easy, I go on.

The seventh Argument looks the most handsomely of any. As if the ancient Seers
were Horary-Question-men, because they told men where their lost goods were, as
our Figure-Flingers pretend to do in this Age; and because they were mercenary
and took an hire or reward for their pains. But that these Seers were no such
men but Prophets. J. B. might have discovered out of the very Text, if he had
not overlooked it, 1 Samuel 9.9. Before time in Israel when a man went to enquire
of God, thus he spoke, Come and let us go to the Seer. For he that is now
called a Prophet was before time called a Seer. Wherefore it is manifest, that
these Seers were Prophets divinely inspired, no Horary Astrologers as J. B.
would have them. Nor is Saul's solicitude for a Present to bring to Samuel the
Seer, as he is here called, any Argument that these Seers were mercenary
Figure-Flingers. For (...) is, as our English Translation renders it, a
Present, properly made to a great person in way of honor and respect. Which
these ancient Seers or Prophets might accept or refuse as they saw occasion.
See Grotius on the place, and what he has written on Matthew. 10.8. For it will
satisfy any unprejudiced man.

To the eighth I say, That there is nothing in the Book of Daniel whereby it is
apparent that Daniel, Shadrach, Mesech and Abednego, were students in Judiciary
Astrology under their Tutor Melzar, but only learners of the Chaldee tongue,
that they might be fitted the better to serve the King and converse with him as
occasion might be. But as for the knowledge of things they are supposed to have
it already, chapter 1. v. 3* 4. where Ashpenaz the Master of the Eunuchs is ordered
to bring of the Children of Israel, well-favoured persons, skilful in all
wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, whom they might
teach (...), to be able to read and spoke Chaldee. Wherefore Melzar was a Tutor
to them in nothing but this. And when they got the ready use of the Chaldee
tongue, and communed with the King, all his Magicians and Astrologers seemed
but a Company of Idiots to him, in comparison of them, v. 20. He found them ten
times better than all the Magicians and Astrologers that were in all his Realm.
But that Daniel was a Student in any Astrological Schools, is as true as that
Belus the Father of Nimrod built them, after Abraham had taught Astrology in
Babylon. When as Belus reigned above two hundred years before Abraham was born.

And now in the ninth place, As for those passages in Scripture; To the first I
answer, That the precious things of the Sun and of the Moon, are the fruits of
the Earth produced or helped on by the heat of the one, and moisture from the
other. Of these Virgil speaks in his Georgicks. -- Vestro si numine Tellus
Chaoniam pingui glandem mutavit arista.
And to Deuteronomy. 4.19. I shall answer when I have brought into view the whole
Context. And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto Heaven, and when thou see the
Sun, and the Moon and Stars, even all the Host of Heaven, should be driven
to worship them and serve them, which the Lord thy God has divided unto all
Nations under the whole Heaven. But the Lord has taken you and brought you
forth out of the Iron Furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto him a people of
Inheritance, as ye are this day. He must have a strong imaginative faculty that
can fancy an Argument for the sacredness and Divineness of Judiciary Astrology
from this place. For whether we interpret the distributing the Stars to the
Nations, as Vatablus and others have done, In ministerium omnium gentium
creavit, as they are palpably useful to them all, by the enjoyment of their
light, and by the observation of their course for the knowing of times and
seasons, besides the comfortable heat of the Sun, and the refreshing moistness
of the air from the Moon, to further the growth of Herbs and Plants. (But what
is all this to the whimzies of Judiciary Astrology?) Or if with St. Augustine
(and Grotius seems also thither inclined) we conceive that this Host of Heaven,
Sun, Moon and Stars, are divided to the Nations and permitted by God for a time
to be worshipped by them, though strictly forbid to his own peculiar people
(see Drusius and Grotius upon the place) what is this to the sacredness of
Astrology, but rather a Confirmation that it is a Rag of the old Pagan
Idolatry? And I have heard with mine own ears from them that have been addicted
much to that Art, that they have prayed to the Stars; as Anne Bodenham the
Witch confessed she prayed sometimes to the Planet Jupiter.

To the third I answer, The Stars in their courses fighting against Sisera
makes nothing for Astrology, Stars there according to the Prophetic and
Cabbalistick style signifying Angels. And it is a Song framed in the height of
Prophetic, and if you will of Poetic Eloquence. And Vatablus likewise
interprets it of the Angels, as also Grotius, who adds, Angeli stellarum nomine
appellantur ob coelestem naturam ac splendorem. See my Alphabet of Prophetic
Iconisms.

And as for the last allegation, the prognostic of weather from the Redness of
the sky acknowledged by our Savior, though J. B. often mentions that
instance, I do not see how it makes more for Astrology than the Neat-herds
brended Cow, by whose frisking and gadding he could prognostic it would be
rain, or any of those (...), which Aratus recites in his Astronomical Poem.
These things are Meteorological not Astrological, neither is that redness of
the sky in the Heavens but in this lower part of our Atmosphere.

Thus I think I have sufficiently answered all his Arguments whereby he would
prove Astrology a sacred and Divine Science. And at most all these Allegations,
if they had any weight in them at all, could but prove it is a lawful Science,
not sacred or Divine. Because Joseph taught the Egyptians Astrology, therefore
Astrology is a sacred or Divine Science. You may as well argue, Because he
taught them the use of the Fiddle, and of the Plough, as Diodorus says Hermes
did, That Fidling and Ploughing are Divine Sciences. But enough of this.

And that it is rather a Rag of old Paganism than a Divine Science, appears
from that of Deuteronomy above cited, the Pagans being worshippers of the Host
of Heaven, as Rulers and Disposers of all things here on Earth. What then could
be a greater accomplishment of a Pagan Priest, than to know in what time and
order, and in what aspects one with another these Celestial Deities dispose
things here below, and what a Temptation to him to pretend he knew it whether
he did or no, and also to the vagrant Demons of the air, to further him in the
entanglements of this vanity. This I hope J. B. himself will think no rash
conjecture, especially if he consider withal what Jeremias says, chapter 10. Thus
says the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the
signs of Heaven. For the Heathens are dismayed at them. By which Text, not only
Clarius, but the Catholic Church and chiefest Fathers, do hold Astrologers and
they that believe them, to be perstringed; the conceit, That the Configuration
of the Heavenly Bodies is the cause of all our woe or weal here below, driving
the Nations headlong into Idolatry. And Grotius himself upon the Text, Juxta
vias gentium nolite discere. Chaldaeos, says he, maxim intelligit, unde nomen
Arti Chaldaicae, that is to say, Astrologiae.

Sect. 8. Nor could any thing but levity of mind and vainglory, induce Cardan
to pretend the Calculating our Saviors Nativity, etc. This sentence of mine
with others (p. 2.) J. B. perstringes, as if it were unjustly spoken concerning
Cardan. But for his levity of mind and vainglory, that (...) that so
frequently occurs in his writings, is sufficient Testimony to any one that has
read them, though not altogether so much as I have done. And that ingenious
Writer whom I above mentioned names this amongst the chiefest things that
hurried Cardan on to that madness and disorder of mind he seemed to labor
under, viz. Immoderatam gloriae Cupidinem, Excessive desire of Fame and Glory,
or of an immortal Memory, which himself acknowledges himself thirsty after. So
little wrong is done to him in this.

And there was a levity of mind and temerity in this feat of his, both because
the Year of Christ's Birth was accounted uncertain amongst the learned, and
because Astrology it self is but a thing groundless and vain, as I hope I have
made plain in the ensuing Chapters, and shall solidly maintain what I have said
against all J. B. his Evasions or Exceptions.

And Astrology it self a thing wholly groundless and frivolous, etc. To this he
Answers ( p. 34.) But he forgets, says he, his former acknowledgments (he
means my After-acknowledgments, for those acknowledgments are made in the
following Chapters, if at all, not in the Chapter going before) how there was
much in the Effects and Acts of the Moon, and that the effect of the Sun in his
course is conspicuous, in making an Annual Resurrection as it were of Plants
and Animals, etc. Repl. But he is to consider, that this is no part of that
Astrology that I oppose, which is that which stands upon such imaginary
Fundamentals as I have described from the second Section of chapter 15. to the end
of that Chapter. And besides, in that whole fifteenth Chapter I set down what
Astrologers hold, not what I acknowledge. And I expect that their grounds
should be established either upon sense or reason. Now the pretended Qualities
and Effects of the other Planets, are not sensible to us as those of the Sun
and Moon, nor is it rationally deduced, that if these two Planets whose
Discus's appear so big; have a real influence upon things here on Earth, that
therefore all the Planets and Stars, be their Discus's never so little in
comparison of the others, shall have considerable effects and influences also.
Which methinks is as unskilfully concluded, as if one should say, because the
Moon Eclipses the Sun, therefore Mercury and Venus must Eclipse the Sun, they
being Planets as well as the Moon, not considering how much nearer they are to
the Sun and further off from us, so that the Cones of their shadows cannot
reach us.

Sect. 9. Did not the Reflection upon the insufferable Impudence of Cardan,
etc. It will not be amiss here to take notice what J.B. has writ touching all
the hard language (as he conceives) in this Chapter against Cardan and Vaninus,
and how he concerns himself in it. Which I do the rather to do J. B. right,
that his Protestation whereby he would clear himself, may be heard. J. B.
therefore on this Chapter writes thus (p. 2, 3.) And whereas my self missing of
the hap to read the Mystery of Godliness according to this Doctors Explanation,
and therefore little dreaming of any Blasphemy or Irreligion, or accursedness
in the Art of Astrology, but rather verily expecting to do God Almighty and his
Holy Church all possible right and honor by it, even I my self also, without
consulting Cardan, have Calculated a Scheme of our ever blessed Saviors
Nativity, and made use of this very Astrology, against which the Doctor is so
bitterly angry, together with other circumstances to demonstrate the certainty
of the Day and Year of Christ's Birth, which the Doctor says is so uncertain
amongst the most accurate Chronologers: and ere I was aware, by so doing, I
find my self dropped within the compass of the Doctors long lash, and unhappily
situated in Company with the high-minded, vainglorious, insufferably impudent,
villainous, insulters, Blasphemers, and irreligious Students of the accursed
Art. Only I have this advantage, that I am yet alive, and have my Pen in my
hand to answer for my self. Which had Cardan and Vaninus also been able to
perform, certainly the Doctor had never written of them at this rate as we read
him.

I have transcribed this long passage mainly in behalf of Mr. Butler himself,
for whom I must confess I have so much Charity as to believe his profession,
touching his Calculating our Saviors Nativity to be so far true, namely that
he had no irreligious design in it. And if Cardan and Vaninus had been persons
of whom I suspected as little as of Mr. Butler, knowing nothing at all of him,
I should never have run out into this sharpness of style against them, nor
against Astrology. But by reading of Vaninus, understanding that Cardan fetched
the Law of Moses from Saturn, of Christ from Jupiter and Mercury, of Mahomet
from Sol and Mars, and the Law of Idolaters from the Moon and Mars, making
Moses, Christ and Mahomet, all of them mere Sydereal Prophets alike, as I have
here described in this fourteenth Chapter, and how Vaninus exults in these
principles of Cardan, in whose writings I had observed many passages that tend
to Irreligion and Atheism, though it may be he was more a Madman than a fixed
Atheist; these things I say, how could they but excite any serious man's
indignation against them, they offering such Principles to the World as must
needs make the Christian Religion contemptible, and defeat the ends thereof:
And, which I was here more particularly concerned in, elude the solidity of
such Arguments as I had brought for the demonstration of Christianity. And,
would it not raise any man's zeal to see the truth and usefulness of such a
Religion whifled away by so vain an Imposture as Astrology. Read my
Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, Sect. 48. which I wrote before my Mystery of
Godliness.

Now let us compare the harshness of my language with the hainousness of the
offense in Cardan and Vaninus. Touching Cardan's light-mindedness and
vainglory, I have spoke already, and need not repeat it. For the terming of
it, his insufferable impudence in pretending by his Calculating Christ's
Nativity that he had found him to be but a Brat of the Stars, whom we believe
to have been conceived by the Holy Ghost; if that Language, insufferable
impudence; be not within moderation here, let the whole Christian World judge.
And it is the greater impudence that he durst declare so from such a
groundless, whimzical, and falsely so called Science, as Judiciary Astrology is.
And the Case standing thus, and Vaninus so exulting in these fantastic
principles of Cardan, and insulting over the Christian Religion in virtue of
them, how can this gear be called less than villainous, unless such words must
be expunged the Dictionary, and never come into use amongst men? And then for
Cardan and Vaninus, their combining together to blaspheme God; Is it not
manifest they blaspheme God, when they deny his particular Providence, and
reproach Christ who is the Son of God, and miraculously conceived by the Holy
Ghost, in making him but the Offspring of the Stars, which they make every
Brute as much as he. And if any Instrument which is made use of for some
direful and accursed Action, in an ordinary strain of Rhetoric is called
accursed, much more may such a vain Art made use of for such impious purposes
be called an accursed Art also.

But that J. B. conceits, that if Cardan and Vaninus had been alive with their
Pens in their hands, I had never adventured to write at this rate against them,
that is only his surmize. For they had nothing but Railing and Reasoning to
oppose me with, and as for the former, I should have served them as I have J.
B. their fellow Astrologer, neither be troubled at it nor have troubled my self
with answering it. And as for the latter, I am confident, Vaninus was a less
skilful Astrologer than J. B. and Cardan not more able to shuffle for himself
in a sophistical show of Reason than he. And therefore if I vanquish J. B. it
may justly go for a Victory over them both. Which we shall try when I come to
reply upon his Allegations against my sixteenth Chapter, where I confute the
Fundamentals of Astrology. But in the mean time I will observe the injurious
cunning of J. B. who has thus raked together all the harsh language of this
Chapter against Cardan and Vaninus and their beloved Art, but concealed the
occasions given for such sharpness of speech, that it may the easilier seem
railing. But the Reader I hope, having perused the whole Chapter will readily
acquit me of that unjust charge.

I will only take notice what he says (p. 34.) particularly touching that
passage, To lay open the vanity of their accursed Art, and then I shall pass to
the following Chapters. Ans. But then belike, says he, Moses and Daniel, and
the three Children, and the famous Melancthon, were all accursed persons for
studying of it, at least they were so in the Doctors eye, how ever holy Writ
and all good men may say to the contrary. Repl. As for the making of Moses and
Daniel, and the three Children students of Astrology, that it is a mere amiable
Dream of J. B.'s, I have proved above. And admit that Melancthon was a Student
of Astrology, it follows not from any thing that I have writ, that he was an
accursed person, or that I thought him so. The Axe that cut off King Charles
his Head, would any think it a forced strain of speech to call it an accursed
Axe, it being abused to such an accursed purpose as I have answered above? I
think it argued Melancthon less considerate, that he would embrace or
countenance so vain a study, if he did so, but that will not amount to make him
to be, or to be esteemed by me or any one else that is reasonable, an accursed
person. My self had, but that more important occasions drew me away, turned
student of the Astrological Game, a Friend of mine giving me a Copy of his MS.
he wrote of it, and my self providing my self with Astrological Chess-men, as I
may so call them, a double set of the seven Planets, and of Caput and Cauda
Draconis. Which, if Mr. J. B. be a practitioner of the sport, they are at his
service. And I think the study of Astrology is rather a Play or Game, such as
Chess, which is not (...) but (...), than any natural Science, much less
Divine. Nor am I of so rude a nature as not to bear with the ludicrous humors
of others, nor yet so senseless as not to be offended with their impieties, or
what ever approaches over near it, as any serious Christian ought to be.

And therefore though J. B. has made a fair protestation in his own behalf, as
if he verily expected to do God Almighty and his holy Church all possible right
and honor by Calculating the Nativity of our Savior, and that any candid
Reader ought to accept of his Protestation so far forth as it excuses him from
any evil intent against Religion and our blessed Lord: yet I cannot but
declare, that no man can excuse him from great Temerity and Imprudence, who
reads and observes, in his descant on Christ's Nativities-Scheme, which he
pretends to have described, those things he has writ in that bold and rash
manner. Christolog. p. 276. Though Jupiter, says he, on the Ascendant promises
well, yet Mars is set as if he stood on purpose to destroy a Nativity, so
opposite to Jupiter and the Ascendant, and being strong withal, he seems to
threaten all good qualities with an overturn, infusing nothing but choler,
fury, and malice into the Natives head, and disposing of the Moon he makes her
do so too. The Sun also looks upon the Cusp ascending with an evil Quadrature,
and such as usually renders a Native much more proud and ambitious than either
wise or good natured, and Mercury complying with Sol in the same Aspect,
endeavors to incline this sacred person to theft and lies. This, to speak
freely, looks like a Nativity-Libel against our Savior, and an anticipative
Accusation exhibiting an ill Character of him, before by his Age he was in a
capacity of doing either good or evil.

But to do J. B. right, after he has thus broken our Saviors head, he gives
him a Plaster. But what now, says he, was Jesus thus, or rather does not
Astrology belly him? No neither. For had these evil Aspects courted an ordinary
nature unto evil manners naturally, yet would they not have forced him, but he
might have overcome all by gracious habits; but much more than this must we
note in the ever blessed our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. For my own part I am
willing to receive this as a (...), as a Plaster broad enough to cover the
wound he has given our ever blessed Lord Jesus. But how he will be able to hold
the Fingers of his beloved Vaninus, that great Patron of Astrology, and his
Atheistical Followers from raking into this sore, notwithstanding the fence of
his Plaster, I cannot tell. I have heard of a story of an Hector-like Wit, who
hearing this descant of J. B.'s on our Saviors Nativity-Scheme, that Mercury
in such a posture inclined him to theft, rapt out a great Oath and said it was
very likely, and that his sending his Disciples for another man's Colt (Luke
19.) to bring him to him, was an effect of that Aspect of Mercury. Which
notwithstanding was very ignorantly as well as impiously applied; the Colt
being brought away not without the Owners consent; besides that Christ was true
Owner and Lord of all. The Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, as the
Psalmist speaks: Not to add that Cabbalistical Notion, that the Soul of the
Messiah is Domina quatuor Mundorum. And to this in all likelihood might our
Savior allude when he bad his Disciples say, The Lord has need of him. See
Psalm 24. But to hold on.

And now will not others be as prone to impute his high zeal in whipping the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple, to the influence of Mars infusing nothing
but choler and fury into the Natives head, as J. B. phrases it? And his
declaring himself to be the Son of God, and that his Father works hitherto and
he works, and that he is said, Hebr. 12. for the joy that was set before him to
have endured the Cross, and to have despised the shame, and to have sat down at
the right hand of the throne of God; will they not be prone to impute all this
to the Sun's looking upon the Cusp ascending with an evil Quadrature, and such
as renders the Native more proud and ambitious than either good-natured or
wise? For such certainly would be his beloved Vaninus's descant upon this last
point, who suggests in his Dialogues, that Christ offered himself to be
crucified, ad comparandam apud posteros aeterni nominis gloriam, which, if that
had been all, had proved him indeed more ambitious than wise, to cut himself
off in the midst of his days, for an empty name. And in the same Dialogues he
says; Great Conjunctions of the Stars happening, and by their influences
Miracles here appearing upon Earth, some cunning man observing this, and being
thirsty after eternal Fame, gives himself out for a Prophet and one sent from
God, and ascribing these Miracles to his own fictitious Omnipotency, (they
being indeed done by the Stars) is admired and adored by the deluded People.
And thus Vaninus will accommodate the Aspect of Mercury, not only to Theft, but
also to Lies, and all that Christ assumed to himself, or did or suffered, that
made way to his Exaltation, he will apply to the evil Quadrature of the Sun so
looking upon the Cusp ascending. Insomuch, that considering the wound, and the
Plaster that J. B. has given our Savior, as touching his Nativity, I must
confess, though I am loath to speak any thing harsh or grating, that his venting
of such strange stuff, is too apparent an Argument of either gross Imprudence,
or deep Hypocrisy, the thing being so abusable by wicked and Atheistical men,
such as Vaninus and his Crew; notwithstanding the whole business of Astrology
is a mere imposture, and if there were any thing in it, that J. B. is quite
out, not only in the hour or minute, but in the year of Christ's Nativity (as I
shall show in its due place) and that our Saviors zeal in whipping the buyers
and sellers out of the Temple, was out of a deep love and pity to the Gentiles,
despised by the Jews, not out of rage and malice, which Mars is pretended to
infuse in his Nativity, nor the joy set before him the gratifying any ambition
that the evil Quadrature of the Sun might signify, but his desire of being in
an universal capacity of saving the Souls of men. Nor lastly, was it suggested
to him by Mercury to give out that he was a Prophet, and the Son of God, but a
voice from Heaven witnessed so in audience of the people, and his own sense and
Conscience illuminated by the Holy Ghost, and answered by the perpetual
assistances and operations of him that sent him assured him thereof. But
notwithstanding, I say, all these most certain truths the Vaninian Atheists
will click at and stick to what they would have, and will be gaily gratified by
this extravagant, immodest, and imprudent Essay of J. B. for I would be loath to
charge him of so deep Hypocrisy as he would lie obnoxious to, if he had been
aware of these grand inconveniences.

And therefore, I hope, by this time he is so sensible of his mistake, that he
could wish he had employed his time better than in such a mischievous and
scandalous Curiosity, and that he will think more favorably of my just though
sharp reprehensions of Cardan and Vaninus, than either to deem it or term it
Railing or Reviling.

CHAP. XV.
1. The general plausibilities for the Art of Astrology propounded. 2. The
first rudiments of the said Art. The Qualities of the Planets, and their
penetrancy through the Earth. 3. That the Earth is as pervious to them as the
Air, and of their division of the Zodiac into Trigons, etc. 4. The Essential
Dignities of the Planets. 5. Their Accidental Dignities. 6. Of the twelve
Celestial Houses, and the five ways of erecting a Scheme. 7. The requisiteness
of the exact knowledge of the moment of time, and of the true longitude and
latitude of the place. 8. Direction what it is, and which the chiefest
Directors or Significators. 9. Of the (...) and (...), or Apheta and Anaereta,
and the time when the Anaereta gives the fatal stroke. 1. I Shall therefore
make this short digression to expose to your view the extreme folly and
frivolousness of the whole pretended Art of Astrology, whose main general
Reasons and particular Principles are in brief as follows.

First, they allege, that it is a thing beyond all belief, that such an
innumerable Company of Stars, whose light is not considerable, nor their
position so exact for ornament, should be made for nothing else but to look
upon. Therefore, say they, there is some other mystery in it, and that they are
endued with certain hidden influences, and have their several peculiar virtues,
as distinct as the Herbs and Flowers of the Field, and it is their Art of
Astrology that professes the knowledge thereof.

Again, The Earth and Water being such simple Bodies as they are, the various
productions in Nature could not be, were it not for that infinite variety of
those Celestial Bodies, the Stars, and their several influences upon the Earth.
This their great Champion Sir Christopher Heydon urges as a principal Argument
for them.

Thirdly, That it is plain that the Moon has a moist Influence, and that at
her full the Brains of Beasts generally, the Eyes of Cats, and the meat of
Shell-fishes are swelled to a greater bigness; and that they are lessened in
the Change.

Fourthly, That the Moon also, to our wonderment, guides the Ebbing and Flowing
of the Sea, whose influence is equally seen when she is under the Horizon as
when above, when near our Nadir as when near our Zenith. Whence, say they, it
is plain, that the Heavenly Bodies have not only a power or influence, besides
Light, but more searching and penetrating than light it self, as being able to
make its way through the thickness of the Earth, and to reach its effect on the
further side thereof. Both which wonders they further confirm from the
Magnetical Needle, that looks toward the Pole Star, though on the other side of
the Tropic of Capricorn; where the North Pole will be hidden twenty or thirty
degrees below the Horizon. Whence it is manifest, say they, that the influence
of the Pole Star pierces through the bowels of the Earth; and is a notorious
Argument of that secret and irresistible virtue of the rest of the Heavenly
Bodies.

Fifthly, The Station, Direction and Repedation of the Planets is a thing so
strange and mysterious, that it is not likely they should make those odd
motions, unless those waglings this way and that way, those goings backward and
forward were a certain reeling or spinning the Fates and Fortunes of things or
persons here below.

Sixthly and lastly, Yearly experience teaches us that the approach of the Sun
renews the World and makes an annual Resurrection of Plants and Insects, and
such living Creatures as are born of putrefaction, and have no other Father
than the fiery-bearded Sun. If then this one Planet does such rare feats,
certainly the rest of the Planets and fixed Stars do not stand for Ciphers, but
have their virtues and operations as well as he, whose efficacy and influence,
say these Star-gazers, our Art does punctually and particularly define. You may
add if you will out of Origanus, the heat of the Dog Star, and the moist
influence of Arcturus and the Hyades. * These are the general plausibilities
that these Deceivers endeavor to countenance their profession by. But we shall
now set down the main particular Principles and Fundamental Rudiments of their
so much-admired science, as they would have it esteemed, and then shall orderly
answer to them both.

2. According therefore to Origanus, whom I shall chiefly follow in setting
down these Astrological Principles, I do not say all, but what is sufficient;
nor will I set down any but what they acknowledge for Principles, nor omit any
that are so considerable as these I set down:

First, It is thought by them, that the Planets have the most influence upon
Terrestrial Bodies, but that the fixed Stars also as well as they have virtues
so potent as to pierce the very penetrals of the Earth: * That of the Planets
the Sun is hot and moist rather than drying: That Mars is hot and parchingly
drying: That Saturn hinders the warm influence of the other Stars, and is in an
high degree frigefactive, as also exsiccative. From these two Qualities
contrary to the Principles of life, Saturn is termed Infortuna major, Mars,
Infortuna minor; because heat is not contrary to life, though dryness be.
Jupiter is also deemed Fortuna major, because he has sufficient moisture well
tempered with heat: But Venus, Fortuna minor, because her moisture exceeds her
warmth. From this distinction of hot, cold, dry and moist, the Planets are also
divided into Masculine and Feminine, Diurnal and Nocturnal, etc. So that if
these conceits of dryness, moistness, coldness and heat fail, all the rest fail.

3. But I think that principle more observable which is touched upon already,
That the influence of the Stars and Planets do pass freely through the Earth;
which is implied in that Aphorism of Ptolemy cited by Origanus, Masculescere
and efficaciores dici Planetas, qui ab Horizonte ortivo vel occiduo deducuntur
ad Meridianum supra vel infra terram, Effoeminari vero qui contra. Which
plainly implies, that their Influences pass as easily through the Earth as
through the Air: otherwise surely those Planets that tended from the Western
Horizon toward the Meridian under the Earth, would have the disadvantage of it.
That also goes upon the same Hypothesis, that the Earth is no impediment,
namely, that Jupiter being Consignificatour in the second House, denotes
riches; and that by how many more Planets there be in the sixth House, by so
much more subject to Diseases the Child will be. That the fixed Stars and
Planets do most potently act in the Cardines of the Celestial Theme, of which
Imum Coeli is one. Which supposes the Earth as pervious as the very Air to the
Celestial Influences.

To omit other divisions of the Signs into Mobilia, Fixa, and Bicorporea, into
Masculine and Feminine, etc. I shall only set down that more noised division of
them into Trigons, viz. the Fiery Trigon, Aries, Leo, Sagittarius; the Earthly,
Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn; Aerial, Gemini, Libra, Aquarius; Watery, Cancer,
Scorpius, Pisces.

4. They teach us also fine things of the Dignities of the Planets: which are
either Essential or Accidental. An Essential Dignity is nothing else but the
increase of the innate virtue of the Planet by being in such or such a sign of
the Zodiac, as Origanus has defined.

The first Essential Dignity is the House of the Planet. As for Example, Leo is
the House of the Sun, Cancer of the Moon. And because there are more signs than
Planets, it falls to the share of the rest to have two Houses a piece, so
aspected to the Houses of the Luminaries as becomes the Goodness or Malignity
of their Natures. As for Example, Capricorn and Aquarius must be the Houses of
unfortunate Saturn, because their aspect is opposite to the Houses of the
Luminaries. Sagittarius and Pisces the Houses of Jupiter, because the Aspect to
the foresaid Houses of the Sun and Moon, is a benign Aspect, namely, Trine. But
now Mars has Aries and Scorpius for his Houses, because he forsooth himself
being a malignant Planet may have his * Houses in a malignant posture to the
Houses of the Sun and Moon, namely, in a Quartile Aspect, etc. And as to be in
their own Houses is a dignity, so to be in the sign opposite they call Exilium,
and account it a great detriment to the Planet.

The second Essential dignity is Exaltation: as Aries is the Exaltation of the
Sun, because his Efficacy is so apparent in Spring, and therefore his casus
must be in Libra: which must on the contrary be the exaltation of Saturn, that
Planet being of a cold temper contrary to the Sun. The Dragon's Head also is
exalted in Gemini, as Albumasar out of Hermes has given us to understand, and
depressed in Sagittarius.

The third Essential Dignity is Triangularity or Triplicity, whereby certain
Planets are constituted the (...) of their respective Trigons. Sol and Jupiter
of the Fiery Trigon; The Moon and Venus of the Earthly Trigon; Saturn and
Mercury of the Aereal: and because there are not eight Planets, but seven only,
Mars is the sole Trigonocrator of the Watery Triplicity. I omit to say any
thing of the (...) or Dignity of Terms in which the two Luminaries are not
concerned. Carpentum, which is the fifth Dignity, is but * a coacervation of
the four precedent. Persona or Almugea is when there is the same Configuration
betwixt the Sun and Moon, and another Planet, as there is betwixt their Houses.
Decanat is the prefecture of the Planets * over every ten degrees of the signs
in the Zodiac. Mars over the first ten degrees of Aries, Sol over the second,
Venus over the third; Mercury over the first ten of Taurus; the Moon over the
second; Saturn over the third; and so on according to the order of the Planets,
till all the ten degrees of the Zodiac be gone through.

The last Essential Dignity is Gaudium, which is competible only to those
Planets that have two Houses, and is when a Planet is placed in that House
which is most agreeable to his nature.

The chief of these Dignities are House, Exaltation, and Triplicity. For the
first has five powers, the second four, the third three. But (...) has but two,
and Almugea and Gaudium but one apiece.

5. The Accidental Dignities arise either from their posture to the Sun, or
from their motion in their Orbs, or from their mutual Configuration.

In regard of their Position to the Sun, they are either in Cazimi, or Combust
or (...), or free from Combustion, or Oriental or Occidental. To be in Cazimi
is to be corporally joined with the Sun, and gives the Planet five Fortitudes.
To be Combust or (...) is to be distant some ten or fifteen degrees from the
Sun, etc. This position puts four or five Detriments on the Planet. To be free
from combustion adds five Fortitudes. Saturn, Jupiter and Mars from their
Conjunction to their Opposition with the Sun are Oriental, and gain two
Fortitudes; but from their Opposition to their Conjunction are Occidental, and
incur two detriments.

In regard of their motion the Planets are either Direct, Retrograde, Swift,
Slow or Stationary. Direction has four Fortitudes, Retrogradation five
Debilities, Station two Debilities.

Configuration or Aspect is either Sextile, Quartile, Trine, Opposition or
Conjunction. The Conjunction of benign Planets adds five Fortitudes, of malign
five Debilities. Sextile and Trine are benign Aspects, Quartile and Opposition
malign, etc.

6. But to climb nearer to the top of their Artifice, let us now set down their
witty contrivance of the Heavens into twelve Houses in their Erection of their
Astrological Scheme. The first House begins at the East Horizon, and is to be
numbered according to the series of the Signs Eastward, and is called Horoscopus
and Domus vitae. The second (...) and Domus lucri. The third (...) and Domus
Fortunae. The fourth (...), Imum Coeli, and Domus Patrimonii. The fifth (...)
and Domus liberorum. The sixth (...) and Domus Aegritudinum. The seventh (...)
and Domus Nuptiarum. The eighth (...) and Domus Mortis. The ninth (...) and
Domus Religionis. The tenth (...), Cor coeli and Domus Honorum. The eleventh
(...), or Domus Amicorum. The twelfth (...), or Domus Carceris. Every one of
these Houses has its Consignificator. The first House, Saturn, the second
Jupiter, the third Mars, the fourth Sol, and so on, according to the
Ptolemaical Order of the Planets. According to which also they constitute their
(...), or Alfridarii, giving the Planets a septennial Dominion in succession
from the Nativity. The first Septennium to the Moon, the second to Mercury, the
third to Venus, etc.

Now this Erection of a Scheme and distribution of the Heavens into twelve
Houses, is no less than five manner of ways, as De motibus Part. 2. Cap. 11.
Origanus has set down. The first of Julius Firmicus, who draws his Circles
through the Poles of the Zodiac. The second of Aben Ezra, who divides the
Equator into twelve equal parts, as the other did the Zodiac, by the drawing
of six great Circles through the mutual Sections of the Horizon and Meridian,
and through each thirtieth degree of the Equator. The third is that of
Campanus, who divides the principal Vertical into twelve equal parts, by Arches
drawn through the common intersections of the Meridian and Horizon. Fourthly,
Alcabitius draws the Circles through the Poles of the World, and certain
equidistant points in the semidiurnal and seminocturnal Arches of the Ascension
of the Ecliptic. And lastly, Porphyrius divides the two Oriental parts of the
Zodiac intercepted betwixt the Horizon and Meridian above and below into three
equal parts apiece. So many ways are there of building Houses or Castles in the
Air.

7. That the Erection of a Scheme may foretell right the Fate of the Infant, the
time of the Birth is to be known exactly. For if you miss a degree in the time
of the Birth, it will breed a Years error in the Prognostication; if but five
minutes, a month, etc. For which purpose also it is as necessary to know the
Longitude and Latitude of the place.

8. After the erection of so accurate a Scheme, they pretend to be able to
foretell the time of the main Accidents of a man's life, and that either by
Profection annual and Transition, or by Direction. The last is the chief: and
therefore not to fill your Ears overmuch with the wretched gibberish of
Gypsies, when I have intimated that the first of the two former run all upon
Aspects, and that Transition is nothing else but the passing of a Planet
through the places of the Nativity, whether its own, or of other Planets, or of
the Horoscope, etc. I shall force my self a little more fully to define to you,
out of De motibus Part. 2. Cap. 15.
Origanus, the nature of Direction. Which is, The invention of the Arch of the
Equator, which is intercepted betwixt two Circles of Position, drawn through
two places of the Zodiac, the one whereof the Significator possesses, the
other the Promissor, and ascends or descends with the Arch of the Ecliptic in
the posture of the sphere given. The term from which the computation is made is
the Significator, the term to which, the Promissor. As if Sol be directed to
Mars, Sol signifies Dignities, and Mars the nature of those Dignities; and the
distance of the time is computed by Direction. I shall omit to tell you that
all the Planets and all the Houses are capable of Direction, if we would
accurately examine a Scheme. But the chiefest Directors or Significators are,
1. * The (...), which the Arabians call Hylech from (...), the Latins, Emissor
or Prorogator vitae. 2. The Moon for the affections of the mind. 3. The Sun,
even then also when he is the (...) for the condition of life and Dignities. 4.
The Horoscope for Health and peregrinations. 5. The Medium Coeli for Marriage
and Procreation of Children. 6. * The (...), or the Part of Fortune for
increase or decrease of riches.

9. But the chiefest of all is (...), as respecting life it self, which is
directed to the (...), or Interfector, or Slayer. Which is, suppose, either
some Planet which is present in the eighth House, as Saturn or Mars, or the
Almuten of the eighth House, or the Planet joined to the Almuten, or the
Almuten of the Planet, or the Almuten of the Lord of the eighth House. But the
huge mystery is, and that a sad one, that when the (...) comes to the place of
the (...), that is, the Emissor to the place of the Interfector, then woe be to
the Brat that ever he was born under so unlucky Stars; for there is no remedy
but he must die the Death. Nor will his * Alcochodon, or Almuten Hylegii avail
him any thing, when his Hyleck or Emissor is once come into the hands of the
(...), or that Celestial Butcher.

These are the most fundamental and most solemn Fooleries (for so I must call
them) of their whole Art: and I shall now set my self to demonstrate them to be
so, after I have answered those more general plausibilities they would
countenance themselves by.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XV. Sect. I.
THese are the general Plausibilities, etc. I shall only here note how faithful
I have been, and impartial in setting out with the utmost advantages the cause
of the Astrologers, in laying down the most plausible Arguments they can
allege, with the best gloss I could. Which is a thing so notorious, that my
Antagonist himself cannot but acknowledge it. Which he does with a free and
pretty humoursome strain of Rhetoric, p. 41. And the truth is, says he, the
Doctor has so ingeniously compiled the Arguments on Astrologies behalf
altogether in one Chapter, and set them out in such neat Apparel and so good
order, that as they stand holding together so unanimously, and maintaining
their cause so cheerfully, methinks they look so confidently sweetly on the
Opposer, as if they were at strife whether to woo, or daunt the Adversary to
their side. With such an overcoming beauty, it seems, have I drawn the
Portraiture of his beloved Mistress, the most sacred and Divine Science of
Astrology, that either awe or pity would turn any one off from defacing so fair
and lovely an Image as his enamoured fancy conceives it to be. But it is in
pity to himself and all others that are deluded with this fair but false show,
that I have discovered the foul flaws thereof, and as much as in me lies
demolished this deceitful Idol. Which, that I have really done, I shall show
anon by making good my sixteenth and seventeenth Chapters against the Answers
of my Adversary, where he offers any show of Reason. But for his ill language,
I shall not so much as bring it into play, whether it come alone or attended
with some offers at Reasoning, which I shall ever strip of the ill language as
near as I can, and deal with the bare Argument it self.

Sect. 2. That of the Planets the Sun is hot, and moist rather than drying,
That Mars is hot and parchingly drying. Because my Antagonist ( p. 25.) denies
this to be acknowledged by the Astrologers, I will set down the very words in
Origanus, Part. 3. de Effect. Cap. 1. Where, of the Sun, he says, Solis natura
est quam sensu percipimus, 1. Potenter calefacere. 2. Paululum exsiccare.
Vivificus enim ejus calor est and non vehementer siccus, quoniam quasi humido
jungitur, As if the heat of the Sun were mingled with moisture, and had
something of the nature of warm Oil, according to Origanus his mind, who is one
of their prime Astrologers. And then of Mars, Martis est, says he, 1.
Exsiccare and arefacere. 2. In calefaciendo urere; which surely will amount to
what we have expressed, That Mars is hot and parchingly drying.

Sect. 4. In a malignant posture to the Houses of the Sun and Moon, namely in a
Quartile Aspect, etc. For that Quartile is a malignant Aspect with the
Astrologers is expressly acknowledged by Dariot in his Judicial Astrology, chap.
10. Some of these, says he, are Aspects of Amity, as the Trine, and Sextile,
others of Enmity and Hatred, as the Quadrate and Opposition. See also Origanus,
Part. 3. de Effect. Cap. 6.

A Coacervation of the four precedent, etc. Rather an Adjection of some of the
precedent dignities. Quinta dignitas, says Origanus ( Part. 3. de Effect. cap.
4.) composita est ex aliis simplicibus quae hactenus declaratae sunt, and
vocatur Carpentum, Thronus, seu Regium Solium; Veluti Venus in Tauro and Domo
and Trigono potens, Signo illo ut Regio curru utitur.

Over every ten Degrees of the Signs of the Zodiac. These Decads Dariot calls
Faces, as Origanus, Facies Signorum.

Sect. 8. The (...) which the Arabians call Hylech, etc. The entire place in
Origanus is this. Part. 3. de Effect. Cap. 2. Prorogator vitae (qui Graecis
(...), item (...) quasi Emissarius, Arabibus vero Hylech Ambulator ab Herbraeo
(...) ambulare, dicitur) est vel Planeta vel locus Coeli ex cujus digressione
vel directione de statu vitae judicant Astrologi. And a little after, Plerique,
says he, imprimis nobilis ille Cyprianus Leovitius, gradum Ascendentis
tantummodo assumunt pro Hylech. And near the beginning of that Chapter,
Horoscopus, says he, propriissimus est significator vitae, foelix futura sit
an infelix. Foelix quidem est foelicis and benefici Planetae signo ac Termino,
vel etiam beneficorum Planetarum radiis, vel praesentia. Veluti, vitae validae
statuuntur quibus Aries vel Leo ascendit and Sol est in nona, decima, undecima,
vel septima domo. Vel Taurus aut Cancer and Luna in his existit. Infelix autem
est vel Termino malo, quando videlicet, Maleficus corpore obsidet Horoscopum,
vel etiam Horoscopus incidit in malignum aspectum Malefici, praecipue
Interfectoris.

The (...), or the Part of Fortune, etc. Pars Fortunae is defined by the
Astrologers, locus Zodiaci in quem, numerando ab Ariete, cadit numerus
conflatus ex gradu orient seu Horoscopi, and distantia Solis and Lunae.

Sect. 9. Nor will his Alcochodon, etc. Alchochoden est stella virtutis ex qua
de annis quibus Natus secundum Naturae cursum victurus est judicium sumitur (
from whence the reason of the name seems to be derived from (...) stella ad
(...) judicare) nisi ratione Directionis vel alterius violenti and subiti casus
vita Nati citius abrumpatur. Origan. Part. 3. de Affectibus cap. 2.

These few things I thought worth the while to add for the more easy and full
understanding of these brief Rudiments of Astrology, rather than to seem to
have said nothing on this Chapter: As indeed there was very little to be said
of it, J. B. with other Astrologers, being agreed on the Principles which I
have laid down as theirs. But now we are to see how well J. B. has defended
them against my Objections, or Confutation of them in the following Chapters.
Which we will do with what brevity and clearness we can.

CHAP. XVI.
1. That the Stars and Planets are not useless though there be no truth in
Astrology. 2. That the Stars are not the causes of the variety of productions
here below. 3. That the sensible moistening power of the Moon is no Argument
for the Influence of other Planets and Stars. 4. Nor yet the Flux and Reflux of
the Sea, and Direction of the Needle to the North Pole. 5. That the Station and
Repedation of the Planets is an Argument against the Astrologers. 6. That the
Influence attributed to the Dog Star, the Hyades and Orion, is not theirs but
the Suns, and that the Suns Influence is only heat. 7. The slight occasions of
their inventing of those Dignities of the Planets they call Exaltations and
Houses, as also that of Aspects. 8. Their folly in preferring the Planets
before the fixed Stars of the same appearing magnitude, and of their fiction of
the First Qualities of the Planets, with those that rise therefrom. 9. Their
rashness in allowing to the influence of the Heavenly Bodies so free a passage
through the Earth. 10. Their groundless division of the signs into moveable and
fixed, and the ridiculous Effects they attribute to the Trigons, together with a
demonstration of the falsness of the Figment. 11. A Confutation of their
Essential Dignities. 12. As also of their Accidental. 13. A subversion of their
Erection of Schemes, and distributing of the Heavens into twelve Celestial
Houses. 14. Their fond pretenses to the knowledge of the exact moment of the
Infants Birth. 15. A Confutation of their Animodar and Trutina Hermetis. 16. As
also of their method of rectifying a Nativity per Accidentia Nati. 17. His
appeal to the skilful, if he has not fundamentally confuted the whole pretended
Art of Astrology. 1. WHerefore to their first general pretense, That the very
Being of the Stars and Planets would be useless, if there be nothing in the Art
of Astrology, I answer, That though there were certain Influences and virtues
in every one of them, yet it does not follow that they are discovered in their
Art: And then again, That though there were none saving that of Light and Heat
in the Fixed Stars, it will not follow that they are useless. * Because the
later and wiser Philosophers have made them as so many See Book 3. Chap. 1.
Sect. 6. Also Immortal. Book 3. Chap. 19. Sect. 4, 5, 6.
Suns: * which Hypothesis our Astrologers must confute before they can make
good the force of their first Argument. And for the Planets, they have also
suggested that they may have some such like use as our Earth has, i. e. to be
the Mother of living Creatures, though they have defined nothing concerning the
natures of them; whereby their opinion becomes more harmless, and
unexceptionable * as it is in it self highly probable: Forasmuch as the Earth,
as well as Saturn, Jupiter, and the rest, moves about the Sun, and is as much a
Planet as any of them; as the best Astronomers do not at all stick now adays to
affirm. Which does utterly enervate the force of this first general pretense of
the Astrologians.

2. To the second I answer, That the Stars are but Lights of much the same
nature as our Sun is, only they are further removed, so that their contribution
is much-what the same. And again, nothing turns off their more subtle
influence, according to their own concession; and therefore though there were
this variety in them, * yet because all this variety reaches every point of the
Earth, the product would be the same, unless the particles of the Earth were
diversified by some other cause, which assuredly they are. And thirdly, That
neither their own variety, nor the Influences of the Heavens, if they be merely
material, are sufficient causes of productions here below. Fourthly, * That the
Celestial matter is every where, and that the Earth swims in it, as Wood does
in Water, so that we need not have recourse to so remote, unknown, activities.
And lastly, That that general (...), or Spirit of nature, is also every where
ready to contrive the matter into such shapes and virtues as its disposition
makes toward. And this is enough and more than enough to take off the edge of
the Knights Argument.

3. I do acknowledge that the Moon in her Full swells certain things with
moisture; which effect is both sensible and palpable, and also reasonable, by
reason of her proximity, and of the reflection of the Suns beams from her body,
which being but of a moderate power, * melt the Air and vapors into an
insinuating liquidness, but do not dissipate them, as his direct beams do by
day. Which feat I do not doubt but that any other of the Planets would perform,
* if they were so placed that their Discus would seem of equal bigness with the
Moons, and she were removed into their place. * But it is an unsufferable folly
to argue from such both reasonable and palpable effects of the Moon, that the
other Planets also and Fixed Stars, have as powerful effects upon us; which yet
we can deprehend by neither Reason nor Experience.

4. The like may be answered concerning the Flux and Reflux of the Sea; the
ground whereof is rational from what Des Carts has set down in his Princip.
Philos. Part. 4. namely, * That the Ellipsis of the Celestial matter is
straightened by the Moons Body, which makes the Ether flow more swift: which is
a plain and mechanical solution of the Phenomenon. And then we find by certain
experience, that this Flux and Reflux depends on the course of the Moon, so
that there can be no deceit in the business. But when there is no reason nor
sufficient experience, that this is the cause of that, to attribute the one to
the other is no good Logic. And to that of the Lodestone and Polar-Star, I
say again, as I have said already, that it does not follow, because there are
some sensible Effects from the Heavens, certain and constant, that therefore we
may imagine what effects we please to proceed from this or that particular
Star, without due experience or reason for the same. And then in the next
place, That it is not so much the Influence of the Heaven, as the Magnetism of
the Earth, in which this Direction of the Needle toward the North consists. For
the Needle varies in certain Meridians, and some three miles from Rosseburg, a
Town near upon the very Corner where the Finnick Seas, and sinus Finnicus are
joined, the Needle amidst a many Sea Rocks turns about, nor ceases so to do for
the space of a whole Mile. Which is a further demonstration that the direction
of the Needle depends upon the Magnetism of the Earth. But truly if the Events
which the Astrologers take upon them to predict, did as steadily point to the
causes they allege, This Planet or that Configuration of Planets, Signs or
Stars, as the Needle and Axis of the Earth to the North; though they could give
no reasons thereof, I could easily allow their Art. But there being such
demonstrative Reasons against their Grounds, and no certain experience for
them, these particular Allegations concerning the Moon and Pole Star will stand
them in no stead.

5. The Station and Retrogradation of the Planets is a very considerable
Argument against them, and shows how foolish and imaginary their Art is, that
is upheld by such gross mistakes. For they that understand the right Systeme of
the World, * know very well that those Phenomenon are not real but seeming:
which is a Scurvy Slur to the Astrologers. But this I shall meet with again
hereafter.

6. To the last I answer, * That neither the Dog Star, Arcturus, the Hyades,
nor Orion, are conceived to have any such effects as are attributed to them,
but then when the Sun is in such places of the Zodiac as himself without them
would bring forth. And therefore they do fallaciously attribute to those Stars
what is really the virtue of the heat of the Sun approaching nearer us, or
abiding longer upon us. And as for the wrath of the Dog, which is abated
already in some considerable manner, how tame a Creature think you will he be,
when the Anticipation of the Aequinoxes shall appoint him his Kennel as low as
Capricorn, if the World should so long continue? These may serve for Poetical
expressions (such as that of Virgil, who attributes that to the Signs which
belongs to the Sun; Candidus auratis aperit cum cornibus annum Taurus --
When the white Bull opens with golden horns The early year:)
but they will not endure the severity of the Laws of an Art, which is, to
speak properly, not to entitle things circumstantial and concomitant to real
causality. But as for the Suns efficacy it self, I will not deny it, nor yet
acknowledge it any more than in the general influence of Heat, which cherishes
and excites the seminal Principles of things into act and perfection. * Which
is no more mysterious than the Egyptians and Livia's Maids of honor hatching
of Eggs without the help of the Hen; the same which the Sun does to the
Ostriches left upon the sand. And I will also acknowledge that the rest of the
Stars do not stand for Ciphers, but that at a competent distance they will have
their effect: which the Sun it self has not when removed from us but to the
other side of the Equator, whereby his rays become more oblique. How
inconsiderable then think you would he be, if he were removed as far as the
fixed Stars, all whose influence put together cannot supply his absence in the
depth of Winter? Whence it is plain, that it is a very fond inference to argue
that those remote bodies of the fixed Stars and Planets have an influence upon
us, because the Sun and Moon that are so near us have; when as if they were as
far removed, their influence would assuredly be as insensible as that of the
five Planets and fixed Stars.

7. And yet notwithstanding such is the intolerable impudence of the Inventors
of Astrology, that they have at random attributed such things to the other
Planets and Stars as they have only ground for, if any at all, in the two
Luminaries. As for Example, * because they might observe some more sensible
mutation in the Air and Earth at the Suns entering Aries, it would be the more
tolerable to fancy that sign his Exaltation. But now to appoint places of
Exaltation to other Planets, as Taurus to the Moon, Libra to Saturn, is a mere
running the Wild-Goose Chase, from one single hint to matters where there is
nothing of like reason or experience. So likewise because they had some
intimation * to make Leo the House of the Sun, his heat being then most
sensible, and Cancer the House of the Moon, because then she would be most
vertical to us; * they have without either fear or wit bestowed Houses, two a
piece, upon the rest of the Planets, though there be neither Reason nor Effect
answerable.

And lastly, For Aspects. In all likelihood the sensible varieties of the
Phases of the Moon in Opposition, Trine, and Quartile, gave them first occasion
to take notice of Aspects: * and then another thing happening, though
independent on the course of the Moon, namely, that every seventh day, in an
acute Disease, is Critical, and that there are usually at those returns the
greatest stirs and alterations in the Patient, and the Quartile Aspect of the
Moon happening also about seven days from the Conjunction, and then about seven
days more she being in Opposition; this natural Circuit of Fermentations in
acute Diseases, has given them occasion to slander the Moon in those Cases, and
for her sake to reproach the Aspects of Opposition and Quadrature, in all the
rest of the Planets. Such small hints as these are the solidest Foundations of
the fantastic structure of Astrology. Which we shall now something more
nearly lay battery to, and so shatter it, that it shall not so much as find
room in the imaginations of men.

8. To begin therefore with the first of their Principles I have set down, That
they prefer the Planets before the fixed Stars (I mean those so remote ones,
that they seem but about the bigness of the greater Stars) is without all
reason; * the Planets being but heaps of dead matter much like that of the
Earth, and having no light but what they reflect from the Sun. For that which
seems to be the innate light of the Moon, is but the reflection of the Suns
beams from the Earth. Wherefore their activity and influence may justly seem
less * than that of the fixed Stars, which shine not with borrowed but innate
light. And for their powerful penetrating into the Bowels of the Earth, that is
a mistake arising from the supposed influence of the Moon, on the Flux and
Reflux of the Sea, even when she is on the other side of the Earth; to which
with the like fallacious inference I have See Sect. 4.
answered already. But then, for the Qualities of the Planets, where they
define the Sun to be hot and moist, rather than drying, but Mars hot and
parchingly dry, and Saturn dry and cold; what will not these impudent Impostors
dare to obtrude upon us, when they will vent such stuff as is liable to
confutation by our very senses? For does not our very sense tell us that the
Sun is the most hot and drying Planet that is? His heat it is, and not that of
Mars, that withers the Grass and Flowers, and parches the tops of Mountains,
and even roasts the Inhabitants of the Earth, when they expose their Bodies to
his more direct rays. But what faculty could ever inform us, that Mars was such
a parching and heating Planet, and Saturn so cold? Assuredly he that will
expose his head to their Acronycal Rays, which are most potent, and profess he
feels more cold from one, and heat from the other, than he does from the other
parts of Heaven, will approve himself as mad as that old Dotard that pretended
that he could as often as he listened, plainly hear the Harmony of the
Celestial Spheres. * All the Planets are opaque Bodies, and whatever their
color is, are as cold as Earth. For neither yellow nor red clay cast any more
heat than white, nor has any soil any sensible influence but what is drawn in
by the nose, which sometimes proves wholesome and savory, and sometimes
offensive. But how our Star-gazers Proboscides should be drawn out to that
length as to smell out the different virtues of the Planets, I can no way
understand. Wherefore the pronouncing of Mars hot and dry, and Saturn cold and
dry, etc. is a shameless Foolery, and a demonstration of the vanity of the rest
of their allotments of the first Qualities to the Planets. * And since from
these they are reputed Malign or Benign, Masculine or Feminine, and the like,
all this part of their pretended Science is but a Rhapsody of Fooleries also.

9. To the second, of the Earths being so pervious to the influence of the
Stars and Planets, I say* first, that it is a Principle without proof, as I
have already evinced: and then secondly, if I give them it, they will be fain
to vomit it up again, it being destructive to their whole Art. For if the rays
and influence of the Stars and Planets have free passage through the body of
the Earth, the whole Ceremony of erecting a Scheme for such a Longitude and
Latitude is needless; nay, as to the Heavens, the fates of all men would be
alike. * For that hidden influence which governs all would reach to all points
from all parts of Heaven at once.

10. Thirdly, Concerning the division of their Signs into Mobilia, Fixa and
Bicorporea. The mobilia are the Aequinoctial and Solstitial Signs. The latter
whereof might deserve better the name of Fixa than Mobilia. And in my
apprehension the tempers of the Year might as well be said to be begun, suppose
the cold in Sagittarius, and fixed in Capricorn, and the heat in Gemini, and
fixed in Cancer, as begun in Capricorn, and fixed in Aquarius, etc. But we will
wink at small matters. * That of the Fiery, Aerie, Earthy and watery Trigons is
more notorious, and I cannot but smile when I read the effects of them. As for
Example, in Physic, as Dariot has set down, the Moon and Ascendent in the
Fiery Signs comfort the virtue attractive, in the Earthy signs the retentive,
the Aerie the digestive, and the watery the expulsive. Would any man dare to
administer Physic then without consulting the Precepts of Astrology? See Sir
Christopher Heydon his defense of judicial Astrology, c. 7. p. 186.
Also in Husbandry that is a notable one of Sir Christophers, who tells us how
we may cause a plant to shoot deep into the Earth or higher into the Air, by
setting of it at such an Aspect of the Moon; namely, if the Moon be in the
Earthy Triplicity, the root will shoot more downward into the Earth; if in the
Airy more upward into the Air. Which is a rare secret. Now, to omit the
groundless and arbitrarious division of the Zodiac into these four Trigons, of
which there is only this one hint, that I can imagine, namely, the fitness of
Leo for one part of the Fiery Trigon, the Sun being most hot in that Sign;
(from which little inlet all the four Elements flew up into Heaven, and took
their places in their respective Triplicities in the Zodiac, with great
nimbleness and agility, playing at leap Frog and skipping over one another
backs in such sort, that dividing themselves into three equal parts, every
Triental of an Element found it self a Fellow-member of a Trine Aspect:) The
best jest of all is, * that there is no such Zodiac in Heaven, or, if you
will, no Heaven for such a Zodiac as these Artists attribute these
Triplicities to. For this Heaven, and this Zodiac we speak of is only an old
error of Ptolemie's and his followers who not understanding the true Systeme of
the World, and the motion of the Earth, in which in salv'd the Anticipation of
the Aequinoxes, have phansied a Heaven above the Coelum stellatum, and a
Zodiac that did not recede from West to East as the Starry Zodiac does. And
this figment which later Ages have laughed off of the Stage, is the only
subject of these renouned Trigons and Triplicities, which therefore are justly
laughed off of the Stage with it. Which discovery is a demonstration that the
whole Art of Astrology is but upon frivolous and mere imaginary Principles, as
we shall further make manifest. And therefore Physicians proclaim themselves
either Cheats or Fools, that would recommend their skill from such vain
observations.

11. Fourthly, Now for the essential Dignities of the Planets, since it is
nothing but the increase of their innate virtue by being in such or such a
sign, and these being the Signs of that Zodiac which has no Heaven, nor is any
thing; it is manifest, that the whole Doctrine of Essential Dignities falls to
the ground. But we will also cast our Eye upon the distinct parts of this vain
Figment. And therefore as to the first Essential Dignity, the House of the
Planet; there is no sagacious person but can easily smell out the meaning of
making Leo the House of the Sun, namely, not that that Sign has any virtue to
increase heat, but that the Sun then has been long near the Tropic of Cancer,
and so has more than ordinarily heated the Earth by so long a stay in so
advantageous a posture. And this is it, not the being in his House then, that
makes the heat so great; for those beyond the other Tropic sure are cold
enough. The same may be said of Cancer, the Moons House, that it is posture,
not the nature of the place, that makes her virtue more then to us, but less to
our Antoeci. From this small hint from sense and mistakes of Reason, have they
without all reason and sense bestowed Houses on the rest of the Planets, *
guiding themselves by the conceit of the malignity and benignity of Aspects.
Which to be a mere figment I have See Sect. 7.
noted already, it having no ground but that rash joining together of Critical
days with the Aspects of the Moon.

What a small preferment Astrological Exaltation is, you may understand from
Albumazar's liberality, who amongst the Planets has advanced the head and tail
of the Dragon to the same Dignity, which yet are * nothing else but
intersections of the imaginary Circles of the course of the Moon and the
Ecliptic. But of this Dignity I have See Sect. 7.
spoke enough already, and therefore I pass to the next.

As for the (...), or Lords of the Trigons, what great pity it was there were
not just eight Planets, * that each Trigon might have had its two Consuls, and
Mars not rule solitarily in his watery one? But the foolery of the Trigons
being already confuted, I need add nothing further concerning this Dignity. *
The Prerogative of the (...) is destroyed by that first general Argument, the
parts of the Signs being as fictitious as the whole. And as for the Carpentum
or Royal Seat or Throne, it being a compound Dignity compacted of the former,
the parts being but imaginary, it is evident, that the whole is a mere nothing.

And that Persona Planetae, or Almugea is as little, appears from hence, in
that Aspect is an empty conceit, raised upon no solid ground, as I have more
than once already intimated.

And that the Lords of the Decanats have but imaginary Provinces, is again
plain, For that their whole Zodiac wherein all those Fripperies are lodged, is
but imaginary, and their Order also of assignation upon a false Hypothesis,
viz. according to that rangeing of the Planets that is in Ptolemie's System.

And lastly, Gaudium, the last of the Essential Dignities, supposes two
falsities; that there are Houses in this fictitious Zodiac, and that Planets
are Masculine and Feminine: which supposition has been confuted already. So
that all these Essential Dignities are devoid of all substance and reality, and
the numbering of their particular fortitudes is the telling out so many
nullities to no purpose.

12. Nor can you hope for a better account of their Accidental Dignities.
Cazimi, Combustion and Freeness from Combustion. How fond and inconsistent
conceits are they? For first it is unreasonable, if they know the nature of the
Planets, of the Sun, and of the Celestial Vortex, to make a Planet in Cazimi to
gain five fortitudes: * For beyond the Sun the Planet is at the furthest
distance it can be from us: and Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, a whole Diameter of
the Suns Orbit, more distant than when they are in Opposition to the Sun: and
Venus and Mercury half of their own. * Besides, how can their virtue pass the
body of the Sun, * or the bearing of the Vortex against the Planet and against
us, and all the attempts of influence from the Planet not be eluded? * Again,
if Cazimi on this side the Sun be good, why should not beyond the Sun be bad?
And if Venus or Mercury in the body of the Sun be so considerable, * how much
more are the Spots of the Sun that are far greater? which their ignorance could
never reckon in the compute of their Dignities. Besides, what wild and
disproportionable jumps are these, * That Cazimi should be five fortitudes, and
yet combustion, which is to be but a little distance from the Sun, should be
five debilities; and yet to be free from Combustion, that is further removed
from the body of the Sun, should be again five Fortitudes? Things so
arbitrarious and groundless, that none but sick-brain'd persons can ever
believe them.

That also is notoriously foolish, * That Saturn, Jupiter and Mars from See
Chap. 15. Sect. 5.
their Conjunction with the Sun to their Opposition should have two fortitudes,
and from their Opposition to Conjunction should have two debilities. For in a
great part of that Semicircle that carries from Opposition to Conjunction,
they are far nearer, and therefore much stronger than in the beginning of that
Semicircle that leads from their Conjunction to Opposition.

Moreover those Dignities and Debilities that are cast upon Planets from
Direction, Station and Retrogradation, the thing is mainly grounded upon a
mistake of the System of the World, and ignorance of the Earths Annual motion,
and from an Idiotick application of accidents or phrases amongst men. And
therefore because when things succeed ill they are said to go backwards, and
when we are weary we go more slow, or stand still to breath us, or when we are
most vigorous we run swiftest; therefore must Station be two debilities,
Retrogradation no less than five, but Direction must be five fortitudes:
whereas in reason * Station should rather seal on the effect of the Planet more
sure. But the truth is, a * Planet is neither Stationary nor Retrograde truly,
but in appearance, and therefore these Debilities no true ones but imaginary.

The last Accidental Dignity is Configuration or Aspect, the vain grounds
whereof have been See Sect. 7.
already taxed. To which I add, that it is utterly unreasonable to conceive, *
that Sextile and Trine should be good, and yet Quartile that is betwixt both be
stark naught. Nay, it were far more reasonable to conceive, that if Conjunction
and Sextile were good, * that Quartile should be better than Trine, as being
further from Opposition, and because * the Planets thus aspected are in better
capacity both of them to strike with more direct rays on the Earth, than if
they were in a Trine Aspect. And therefore I know no reason imaginable that
could move them to have so ill a conceit of Quartile Aspect, but because of the
great unquietness of acute Diseases that happens about every seventh day, which
is the time also of the Quartile Aspect of the Moon: and therefore the whole
mystery of Aspects is to be resolved into this rash misapplication.

You have seen now how little worth all the Astrological Dignities are; and yet
out of these huge Nothings of their fictitious Art is the whole Fabric built
of whatever predictions they pretend to: So that we may be assured that all is
vain and ridiculous.

13. Concerning their twelve Houses of the Nativity, the Division is
arbitrarious, * and their erecting of a Scheme so many ways, and that with like
success, an evidence that the success is not upon Art but fortuitous. * The
Configuration also of the Houses and those See Chap. 15. Sect. 6.
Septennial (...) or Alfridarii do intimate that the whole business is but a
figment, going upon that false Hypothesis of Ptolemy, That the Planets and the
Earth have not the Sun to their Center. But this is not all we have to say
against these Celestial Tenements. * For either the Earth is pervious to all
the rays of the Planets and Stars, as well beneath as above the Horizon, or
only they above the Horizon shed their virtue on the Child. If the former be
true, all Nativities are alike. If the latter, why have they any more than six
Houses, and why any at all under the Horizon? And in good sadness what is the
meaning that their Horoscope, and the sixth House, being Houses of so great
concernment, should be under the Horizon; especially when they are pleased at
other times to pronounce; * that a Star or Planet that is Vertical is most
efficacious? And can it be thought any thing but a mere fancy that led them to
make the Horoscope the House of life, namely, because the Stars arise from
thence, and are as it were born into the World? whence (as I have showed their
custom to be in other things) they have feigned the rest of the Houses at
random. And that you may still be more sure that there is nothing in these
Houses, (or rather that the Houses themselves are nothing) they are but the
distribution of that imaginary Zodiac and Heaven, which (I told you See Sect.
10.
before) the error of Ptolemy brought into the World, into twelve imaginary
Sections, beginning at the East point of this Zodiac: So that their Art is
perpetually built upon nothing.

14. Now for the exact time of the Nativity, that one should know the very
moment when the Child is born, I say it is a curiosity nothing to the purpose.
For first, if the hard and thick Earth be pervious to the Rays of Heaven, how
easily may those thin coverings of the Womb be penetrated continually by the
power of the Stars? and therefore * even then is the Child as much exposed to
them, as when it is newly born. Or if it be not; why may not it some moments
after its being born, be still as liable to their influence as in the moment
when it was born? For cannot these Influences that pierce the very metalline
bowels of the Earth, pierce a Child's tender skin without any resistance? But
supposing this curiosity to be to the purpose; how hard and lubricous a matter
is it to come to that exactness they pretend to be requisite? * For first they
must know the exact Longitude of the place, (a thing of extreme uncertainty) or
else the exactness of time will do them no good. And yet again, their
affectation of exactness seems ridiculous, when we cannot well determine the
proper time of his Birth. * For he is born by degrees, and few or none come
out, after first they appear, in a shorter space than half a quarter of an
hour. Wherefore their head being exposed to the starry influence, why should
not that Celestial infection pervade their whole body? But suppose that to be
the moment of their birth wherein the whole body is first out, how shall this
moment be known? By an exact minute watch, such as Tycho had, and Sir
Christopher Heydon professes himself to have had, which would exactly give him
the minute and second scruple of time. But how few Nativity-Casters can boast
of the same privilege? Or if they could, to what purpose is it, when it seldom
happens that they are in the same House, much less in the same room where the
party is delivered? Wherefore the report of the Midwife is the best certainty
they have: and how many Nativities have been cast without so much as that? And
yet they will confidently predict Fates and Destinies upon an uncertain time
given them. For they can, say they, correct it, and reduce it to the right
moment of the Nativity, and that by no less than three several ways; by Trutina
Hermetis, Animodar, and Accidentia Nati: which how bold and groundless a boast
it is, let us now see.

15. Trutina Hermetis goes upon this ground, That that degree of the Zodiac
the Moon is in at the time of Conception, the same is the Horoscope of the
Nativity. But what a Foolish subterfuge is this when as the exact time of
Conception, is as hard to be known as that of the Nativity? And if it were
known, there is yet no certainty, some coming sooner, some later, as every
Mother, Nurse or Midwife knows full well; nor will any of them presume to tell
to a day when a Woman shall be brought to Bed.

In Animodar the Nativity is either Conjunctional or Preventional, that is,
either after or before the Conjunction of the Sun and Moon. If the Interlunium
precede the time of the Birth, the degree is to be noted in which it happens;
if the Plenilunium, that degree in which that Luminary is that is above the
Horizon in the time of Opposition, the Sun by day, the Moon by night. The
degrees thus given, the Almuten Almusteli is to be found out, which is the
Planet that has most Dignities in that place of Opposition or Conjunction;
which are Trigon, House, Altitude, (...), and Aspect. Then the degree of the
sign is to be noted, in which the Almuten was at the time of the estimated
birth, See Origan. Par. 2. Cap. 13.
etc. For I need not hold on; enough has already been said to demonstrate the
whole process a Ceremonious Foolery. For the computation being to be made from
the place of the Almuten Almusteli, and his Election by Dignities, and
Dignities being nothing but empty phansies and vanities, as I have already
proved, the Correction of the Nativity by Animodar must needs be idle and vain.
Besides that, the Almuten being one and the same, as belonging to one and the
same Conjunction or Opposition of the Luminaries, how can it be a rule to
Children born at the same times in diverse Climates? For it is evident, the
Horoscope alters with the Clime. And lastly, not only Picus, a Foe to
Astrology, professes how false both this method of Animodar, as also that rule
of Hermes is, and clashing one with another; but Origanus himself, a Friend to
the Art, advises us rather to listen to the Relations of Mother Midnight, than
to give any credit to either of these ways.

The most certain way of correcting a Scheme of Nativity in Origanus his
judgment, is per Accidentia Nati, whether good or bad, as Honors, Preferments,
Gifts, Sickness, Imprisonment, Falls, Conflicts, etc. which way notwithstanding
at the first sight is very lubricous. For it is at least disputable and
uncertain, whether there be Liberty of Will in man or no. But I will venture
further, that for my own part, I think it demonstrable from inward Sense,
Reason and Holy Writ, that there is free will in men; whence it will
necessarily follow, Quod multa accidunt hominibus praeter naturam praeterque
fatum. Diseases therefore, Imprisonments, Disgraces and Preferments may be
brought upon us by the free Agency of our selves or others, and that sooner or
later, according as men's Virtues or Vices act. * Which takes away all certainty
of computation per Accidentia Nati.

16. Besides, that the manner of it is very frivolous and ridiculous. For it
being threefold, as Origanus has set down, Profection Annual, Transition and
Direction; there is none of them that are any thing more than mere phancies and
figments. For what can be more vain and imaginary than their Annual Profection,
which makes the Horoscope and the rest of the Houses move thirty degrees a Year
till the whole period be finished in twelve? * Is this Circuit of the
Nativity-Scheme any where but in their own brain? And then their Predictions or
Corrections, are by Aspects of the Cusp of the Root with the Cusps of the
present Scheme Calculated for this or that Year. And how Aspects themselves are
nothing, I have again and again taken notice.

And for Transition, what is more monstrous than to think that a Planet by
passing the same place in which it self or others Planets were at the Nativity,
should cause some notable change in the party born? As if the Planets walked
their rounds with perfumed Socks, or that they smelt stronger at the Nativity
than at other times, and * that another Planet come into the trace thereof
should exult in the scent, or the same increase the smell: or what is it that
can adhere in these points of Heaven that the Planets were found in at the
Nativity? or why is not the whole tract of the same scent, or why not expunged
by the passage of other Planets? But what will not madness and effascination
make a man phancie to uphold his own prejudices? And truly these two Origanus
himself is willing to quit his hands of, as less found and allowable: but
Direction is a principal business with him.

Which yet in good truth will be found as frivolous as the rest. For as in
Transition, so also in Direction, the great change must happen when a Planet,
or Cuspe, or Aspect come to the place where such a Planet or Cuspe were at the
Nativity. When the Significator comes to the place of the Promissor, then the
feat does not fail to be done. For the Promissor is conceived as immovable,
and such as stands still and expects the arrival of the Significator: * which
is a demonstration that this Promissor is either imaginary space or nothing:
and which of these two think you will keep promise best? nay, the significator
also, if it be the Horoscope or any other House, is imaginary too, as I have
demonstrated. And if it be a Planet, seeing yet the Planets move not as a Bird
in the Air, or Fishes in the Waters, but as Cork carried down the stream; * it
is plain, how this Planet never gets to that part of the Celestial matter in
which the Promissor was at the Nativity, the Promissor ever sliding away with
his own matter in which he swims: and therefore if he has left any virtue
behind him, it must again be deposited in an imaginary space. Which is an
undeniable Argument that the whole mystery of Direction is imaginary.

Wherefore if Profection annual, Transition and Direction are so vain that they
signify nothing forward, how can we from Events (though they should be judged
and reasoned from exactly according to these fantastic Laws) argue backward
an exact indication of the time of the Nativity? If they could have pretended
to some rules of nature or Astronomy to have rectified a Geniture by, they had
said something; but this recourse to their own fantastic and fictitious
Principles proves nothing at all.

17. And thus have I run through the eighth and ninth Sections of the foregoing
Chapter before I was aware. And he that has but moderate skill in the solid
Principles of natural Philosophy and Astronomy, and but a competent patience to
listen to my close reasonings therefrom, cannot but acknowledge, that I have
fundamentally confuted the whole Art of Astrology, and that he has heard all
their fine terms of Horoscope, and the Celestial Houses, Exaltation,
Triplicity, Trigons, Aspects benign and malign, Station, Retrogradation,
Combustion, Cazimi, Significator, Promissor, Apheta, Anaereta, Trigonocrator,
Horecrator, Almugea, Almuten, Alcochodon, together with the rest of their
sonorous nothings, to have fallen down with a clatter like a pile of dry bones
by the battery I have laid against them. And truly here I would not stick to
pronounce I have perfectly vanquished the Enemy, did I not spy a little blind
Fort, to which these Fugitives usually make their escape. And surely by the
Title it should be a very strong one; They call it Experience or Observation of
Events, which they boast to be accurately agreeable to their predictions.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVI. Sect. I.
BEcause the later and wiser Philosophers have made them as so many Suns. Ans.
As if because they are Suns, says J. B. (p. 54.) it were excuse enough for
them to stand for Ciphers. Whereas standing for Suns the more rather is
expected from them, the Sun being the Prince of all Stars, etc. Repl. If they
be Suns they cannot stand for Ciphers, but be of the same import that our Sun
is, who administers light and heat to those in his respective Vortex. Neither,
it being once admitted, that the fixed Stars are Suns, can any one Sun be the
Prince of all the Stars, but only of the Planets of his own Vortex. J. B. his
ignorance of the Cartesian or rather ancient Pythagorick Philosophy, makes him
argue so weakly in this point.

Which Hypothesis our Astrologers must confute, etc. Answ. The Hypothesis it
self, says he, (p. 55.) is but a mere conceit without proof, and yet forsooth
we must confute it. Repl. Amongst the learned in Philosophy, especially the
Cartesians, it is so well known and generally admitted, that it wanted no
proof. And it were too long here to insist on it. Let J. B. lay his beloved
Astrology a while aside, and read Galilaeus his Systema Cosmicum, or Descartes
his Principia, or my first Epistle to V. C. and then let him tell me whether
the opinion of the fixed Stars being Suns be a mere conceit without proof. But
suppose them so many Suns, says he, and without all Influence but light and
heat, whom is it that they are made to shine to or make warm? As for us we feel
nothing of their heat, and make ten times more use of a Candle than of their
light. Repl. As if there were no sensitive Creatures in this vast liquid Ether
of the Universe, but the Men and Brutes on our Earth. Our Sun having the
Satellitium of so many Planets of which our Earth is one, why may we not
rationally conclude, that other Suns have Planets about them, at least some of
them, as well as our Sun, as also that the Vortices of all the Suns or fixed
Stars are replenished with Intellectual Inhabitants, or Ethereal Genii? And
all Genii or Angels according to the ancient Cabbala and Primitive Fathers,
having Bodies of Ether, or the Celestial matter, and being able to see, and in
a capacity of having their Bodies conveniently and inconveniently affected, why
may not the Sun minister to the gratifications of these Ethereal Inhabitants,
and that be true of the blind Poet, as you call him in reproach (who was not
the less capable of Philosophizing by being bodily blind, since Democritus
deprived himself of his Eyesight that he might the better Philosophize) why
may not that, I say, of his be true concerning the Sun. (...).
that is to say, He rose to shine to Gods as well as Men.


And it is in it self highly probable; forasmuch as the Earth as well as
Saturn, Jupiter, etc. Answ. It is highly probable, and that is the utmost of his
Argument, says J. B. (p. 56.) and yet how confidently he concludes, That this
first general pretense is utterly enervated! Repl. What a vain Insultation is
here over the modesty of an expression, though backed with little less than a
Demonstration from the proof and acknowledgment that our Earth is a Planet as
well as those other so called? And the Earth being habitable and created to
that end, unless Nature be defective, what less can be surmised of the rest of
the Planets, especially those that are called Primary Planets? And if the
Secondary Planets as the Moon which the Pythagoreans called (...), which is as
much as Terra ex opposito sita (and the spots in it show, that there is Water
or Sea there as well as Land) be habitable as some contend she is, much more
the Primary. These things are highly rational to them that have reason, but men
of fancy phancie things as it happens. But J. B. goes on. But what says he, if
the Earth were certainly a Planet, and the Planets Saturn, Jupiter, etc. were
all Mothers of living Creatures as well as the Earth, what is all this to the
purpose? God made the Stars for us and to influence us, etc. Repl. But if they
be Mothers of living Creatures, it is manifest they were not made for us alone.
Nor does it follow they being made also for us, that they were made in an
Astrological sense to influence us, but to be marks of time and serviceable to
Chronology, and to exercise the wit of man in making Observations touching
their courses, which is the Art of Astronomy. So that it is manifest, that they
have manifold uses, partly in regard of others, and partly in regard of our
selves, without Astrological Influence, and that therefore the force of this
first general pretense of the Astrologians is defeated.

Sect. 2. Yet because all this variety reaches every point of the Earth, the
product would be the same, etc. Ans. The Doctor knows, says he (p. 60.) that
the Weapon-salve points merely at one wound, viz. that which the Weapon made,
besmeared now with that salve, and be there ten thousand wounds between, yet it
misseth them all. And so may he as well conceive, that the influence of every
star and of every part of Heaven, does not like Water scatter it self into all
pores of the Earth as it flies along, but though one Star may have more than
Millions of Influences ( which if they have, what need so many Stars) going at
once, yet as the Weapon salve, sends it forth each unto its proper object, and
all this without diversifying the Earth or any part thereof. Repl. This is very
pretty in good sooth, but altogether as impertinent. It does not reach the case
nor the defense of Sir Christopher Heydon's Argument, which is the thing in
hand. He would prove the necessity of variety of Influence of the Stars from
the Non-variety, Simplicity or Homogeneity of the parts of the Water and Earth.
Wherefore J. B. his reasoning is upon a quite contrary supposition to Sir
Christopher's, whose Argument yet he pretends to defend. And then releasing him
from his obligation to Sir Christopher, whom he has served such a slippery
trick as to slide quite from the concern of his cause, what is this instance of
the Weapon-salve which I mention in my Immortality of the Soul, Book 2. Chapter 10.
Sect. 7. to the Influence of the Stars in a Conception or Nativity? Which
Conception is a pure Crystalline homogeneous liquor, as Dr. Harvey describes
it, unvariegated of it self, and to be variegated or modified by the Stars. But
the wound is modified already to cause a peculiar sympathy betwixt it and the
Weapon-salve on the knife that made it. Wherefore there being no
premodification in the Conception, but it being to be modified by the Stars,
and the Stars by reason of the simplicity of it, reaching it by their Influence
alike, can give no peculiar modification unto it. And so for the Nativity it
self. Forasmuch I say as it is supposed, that whoever is born under such a
precise Positure of the Heavens, is impressed precisely by such an Influence,
it is plain, that the difference of impression he is modified with, is not at
all from himself but from that particular Positure of the Heavens at his birth,
and therefore cannot be resolved into this Principle of distinctive sympathy.
And indeed, if the difference of modification of the Birth, came not from the
Stars, but from the Birth it self, as the healing of the wound from being the
wound of such a knife with salve upon it, this would destroy the very pretense
of Astrology, which differenceth the Birth according to the difference of the
Schemes of Heaven. And therefore the distinction not being in the Birth, it is
liable to be impressed upon by all the Stars alike.

The Celestial Matter is every where and the Earth swims in it, etc. Ans.
Neither the Earth, says J. B. (p. 58.) nor the Air about it can be so situated
as to swim all parts of it at once in the Celestial matter, much less to apply
every part of the Earth to its proper Instrument of nature, so as to be wrought
by it with an immediate Conjunction, but these productions here below must
necessarily be caused by the activity of remote Instruments and their
Influences, etc. And these Instruments, as remote as they are, that they may
send down their Influence to the Earth, he would prove from the Polar Star,
which draws the Magnetical Needles pointing upon it self from the utmost
Southern Coasts. And from the working of the Weapon-salve at a great distance
by Sympathy. This is the main of what he alleges against this passage. Repl.
The former part whereof is from his being not skilled in the Cartesian
Philosophy, and his want of rightly conceiving what the Celestial matter is, it
being a substance so subtle, that it will pass the very pores of glass, much
more of Air, and Water and Earth, so that all parts of this Terraqueous Globe,
together with its Atmosphere, is easily understood to swim in the Celestial
matter, it penetrating throughout. And this is the most immediate material
Instrument of Nature, that is to say, of the Omniform Spirit of Nature, that
guides and modifies the gross matter according to certain vital Laws the
Creator of all things has endued it with. So that we need not have recourse to
those remote Instruments for the production of the varieties of things below,
and himself avows there is such a spirit of the World, and acknowledges it to
be Vegetative or Plastical, but the delicacy of his fancy it seems carries him
out to such remote Instruments of Generation according to the Proverb, That far
fetched and dear bought is good for Ladies. And for the mystery of the Load
stone I will refer him to Gilbert and Des Carts, in whose Philosophy he will
find rationally asserted, that the Magnetical Particles, which the Cartesians
call the particulas Striatas, come from a certain part of the Heaven, and cause
this posture of the Earth's Axis, and of the Magnetical Needles accordingly.
But if J. B. has been so profoundly taken up with his Divine Science of
Astrology, as to neglect Philosophy, these brief Annotations will not afford
space to instruct him therein. But in the mean time he may take notice, that
some few certain effects from the Heavens, that are constant and palpable, are
no warrant for the uncertain, slight and imaginary pretenses of Astrology. And
as for the sympathy of the Weapon-salve, how little it makes to his
Astrological purpose I have shown above, and that its distinctive symphathy is
ill applied to the free Influence of the Stars, their operation being
determinative not determined in Nativities. And that there are de facto any
such remote Influences, besides those that are constant and palpable, his own
concession of the Spirit of the World shows to be vain and needless.

Sect. 3. Melt the Air and vapors into an insinuating liquidness, etc. Ans.
Well but which way, says J. B. (p. 42.) gets this liquidness into the Brains or
Eyes of living Creatures? Repl. How come wooden Doors to be so much swelled in
a moist Air? Why may not the subtle moisture of the Air thus liquified by the
moderate beams of the Moon, insinuate it self into the Head, Brains and Eyes of
Animals, as well as ordinary moisture does in rainy weather into wooden Doors?
Certainly there are as open passages to the Brains and Eyes of living Creatures
as there are into the body of wood, and more open too.

If they were so placed that their Discus would seem of equal bigness with the
Moon's, etc. From this passage J. B. (p. 48.) would collect that I grant that
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, have indeed Astrological Influences
in them, but that they only want proximity to discover them. But for the matter
of proximity, says he, the Doctor it seems is yet to learn how the Heavenly
Bodies are neither helped by proximity, nor hindered by longinquity in the
exercise of their power, or in the pouring down of their Influences. It seems
either he had forgotten, or did not know that the farther the Moon is from the
Sun the greater is the light she receives from him, and the nearer she is to
him, she receives still less and less. Repl. But as for the moistening faculty
of the Moon, I deny that it is any Astrological Influence, I having given so
apparent reason of the Phenomenon. And that of the Flux and Reflux, we shall
consider it in the next Section, and therefore if Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus
and Mercury, should exhibit any such effect as the moist Moon by their
proximity, it were not properly Astrological. But for that Astrological Axiom
of his, that the Heavenly Bodies are neither helped by proximity, nor hindered
by longinquity, it is point blank against what he writes (p. 21.) where his
express words are these. All Astrologers do hold the Moon to be the nearest to
us, and nimblest plying about us above all other Planets, and therefore to have
more powerful effects upon us than any other Planet has. And then for his
Argument, it is utterly false, nay the thing is quite contrary. For the Moon,
the nearer she is the Sun, the more she is illuminated, according to the known
principles of Optics, though by reason of her positure the light is less
reflected to us. But it seems J. B. was yet to learn that Optic Maxim, That a
round opaque body, whose diameter is less than that of a round lucid body, the
nearer it approaches the lucid body the more it is illuminated.

But it is insufferable folly to argue from such both reasonable and palpable
effects of the Moon, etc. Ans. If the Moon, says J. B. (p. 60.) which is one
Planet, have such and such Influences, which are so apparent that they cannot
be denied, what hinders but that it may aptly follow, that her fellow Planets
may have Influences too, etc. Repl. The fellow Planets of the Moon are all
secondary Planets, she being of that Classis and attending her primary Planet
the Earth, and so the conclusion is rational enough for her fellow Planets,
that is, the secondary Planets, that they may have some palpable effects on
their own Primary Planets, as this secondary Planet the Moon has on its primary
Planet the Earth. But it does not hence follow, that other Planets so far
removed and of so small an appearance, have any effect on our Planet to cause
any considerable change to any thing there.

Sect. 4. That the Ellipsis of the Celestial matter is straightened by the
Moon's body, which makes the Ether flow more swift, which is a plain and
mechanical solution of the Phenomenon, etc. In answer to this section, J. B.
(p. 44, 45, 46, 47.) by reason of his not being acquainted with either Gilbert
de Magnete, or, which is of most consequence, with the Theory of the Flux and
Reflux of the Sea in Des Carts his Principles, Part. 4. Artic. 49, 50, etc.
and of the Magnet, Artic. 145, 146, etc. he is so bewildered in his phancies
and reasonings, that it would be too operose a business to reduce him into the
way. It is not worth the while for me to read Philosophy Lectures to him, but I
desire that himself would set so much time apart from the Divine Science of
Astrology, as to be vacant a while to the study of these Theories in Natural
Philosophy. And then I don't despair but that he will discern the solidity of
what I return in answer to the experiment of the Loadstone, and to this
Phaenomen of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea depending on the course of the
Moon. I will only advertise thus much by the by, that whereas I say, it is a
plain and mechanical solution of the Phenomenon, the sense is, That this
mechanical way of solution makes the Doctrine of the Flux and Reflux, plain and
intelligible. But that it is not merely Mechanical, I have showed in my
Enchiridion Metaphysicum, cap. 14. Of which the natural upshot is, that the
Laws of the Aestus marinus are executed sympathetically and synenergetically by
the spirit of the World, and by the body of the Moon Mechanically as by his
Instrument, and not by any strange Influence from her. And so the spirit of the
World in Magnetical Phaenomenons acts Synenergetically and sympathetically from
it self, but mechanically by those instruments of his operation, the Magnetic
Particles which Cartesius calls the particulae striatae.

Sect. 5. Know very well that these Phenomenon are not real but seeming, etc.
Ans. Here J. B. (p. 62.) But however seeming, says he, this Station and
Retrogradation is, by experience such is it found unto us as if it were really
so. And a little above he says, It is well known that we Astrologers understand
the Phenomenon beyond mistake. Repl. But did your great Author Ptolemy
understand it? And your Rules went upon the faith of his Hypothesis. And what
was taken upon this ground, credulity phansied afterward to be confirmed by
experience.

Sect. 6. That neither the Dog Star, Arcturus, the Hyades, nor Orion, etc.
Touching this notion of ours of the nature of these Stars or Constellations, J.
B. spends almost three whole pages, 63, 64, 65. But the main lies in a very
little room. For as touching Arcturus, the Hyades and Orion, he quotes Job
38.31. Can thou bind the sweet Influences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands
of Orion? Can thou bring forth Mazaroth in his season, or can thou guide
Arcturus with his Sons? This is in Job, which is acknowledged to be an highly
Rhetorical Poem, and therefore to use such figures of speech as other Poetry
does, and accordingly it is expounded by sober Interpreters.

Wherefore not taking notice of J. B. his confounding of Hyades and Pleiades,
as if they were the same, I shall set down Grotius his Gloss, and it is the
sense of Vatablus, and other Interpreters. Can thou bind the sweet Influences
(the Hebrew word is (...) Deliciae simply, there is nothing of Influence in the
word) of the Pleiades? Which are a clustre of little Stars in Taurus a vernal
sign, in which when the Sun is, it is Spring. Whence Grotius glosses it thus,
Potesne impedire flores vernos Vergiliarum? And loose the bands of Orion? The
Hebrew word is (...) which Hierom translates, Orion sydus hybernum, says
Grotius, Est autem frigoris constringere. And, Orion tempore hyberno assurgit,
says Vatablus, and adds this short gloss on this last part of the Verse,
Efficiesne, says he, ut tempore hyberno flores erumpant? And Grotius, Poterisne
tu rusticis facultatem dare laborandi ubi labores Orion inhibet? But this
constriction of cold is attributed to Orion, because when he rises
Achronychally the Sun is in his Winter signs. So that it is really the absence
of the Sun, or his lowness that occasions this cold. But to fancy any Stars
efficiently and positively to cause cold, is as extravagant and ridiculous as
that conceit of Paracelsus, that imagined that it was not the absence of the
Sun but certain Tenebrificous Stars that caused Night. But now as for Arcturus,
there is nothing touching him but his motion. And the sense of both the Verses
put together is only this, Can thou change the seasons of Summer and Winter,
or is it thou that make Mazaroth, viz. the twelve signs of the Zodiac to
ascend, and guidest Arcturus with the lesser Stars about him in their Circuit?
But of Astrological Influence in the Hebrew Text there is not one syllable.

And, as to the Pleiades and Orion is attributed what really belongs to the
site of the Sun, so is it also in the Dog Star, whatever J. B. will pretend to
the contrary, which I will give you in his own words, p. 64, 65. But when the
Doctor, says he, does thus entail the heat and cold to the place of the Sun, he
forgets how that in Ptolemie's time, when the Dog Days were long since
observed, they happened in May and June, a whole month before what they do now.
And therefore had the sultry season pertained to the Sun only after he had
heated the Earth, how came it to pass that in those olden days it happened so
soon ere the Sun came to its full heat? Or why is it that this sultry Air goes
along with the Dog as he meets with the Sun, and that varying as the Dog
varies, and not fixing to any point of the Sun's Circle? Repl. That the
Dog Days should happen in Ptolemie's time a whole month before they do now, is
not likely. For Timocharis, who lived about three hundred and thirty Years
before Christ observed Azemech or Spica Virginis to be placed in the beginning
of the 23. degree of Virgo. And two hundred Years after Abrachis, who usually
is called Hipparchus, observed the same Star to be in the beginning of the 25.
degree of Virgo. Whence it is concluded, that the motion of the Coelum
stellatum, to speak in the Ptolemaick language, moves from West to East about
one degree in an hundred Years. And from that time and Ptolemie's, who was a
little Junior to Hipparchus, to this day, it has got but to the 18. degree of
Libra. So that from Ptolemie's time to this it has not gone passing 23.
degrees, which falls short about a fourth part of a month. And therefore
reckoning from the 19. of July, to the 26. of June, it will want some 25. days
of having the Dog Days begin in any part of May, and in those hotter Countries,
where Ptolemy lived, it is no wonder that the Sun being entered so many degrees
into Cancer, should cause very hot weather though the Dog Star stand for a
Cipher in the Case. But by reason of the Sun's heat coming into that Sign,
Cancer is called, though figuratively, yet judiciously, the burning Crabb by
Dionysius Afer in his Geographical Poem.

(...),
that is to say,

Round in the Heavens is whirled the burning Crabb. But here let J. B. give me
leave to ask him whether he thinks that when the Dog Star and the Sun join
forces together, that our Antoeci feel any such sultry heat. And for my own
part I have observed more sultry hot weather before the Dog Days as they are
now placed, than in them. So that this sultry heat is by no string tied to the
Dog's Collar. And because he will have Adam and Seth Astrologers, I desire to
know of him whether in their Almanacks (reckoning according to his account,
that makes the Dog Days in May, in Ptolemies time, which therefore would be in
March in those olden times) whether, I say, in the Month of March in Adam or
Seth's Almanac it was writ down, Weather hot and sultry.

Which is no more mysterious than the Egyptian 's and Livia 's Maids of Honor
hatching of Eggs without the help of the Hen, etc. Here J. B. (p. 51, 52, 53.)
makes long but weak ambagious steps toward an answer, but the most pertinent
part of it is this, That in these Eggs there was a seed of life fore-prepared
by the Influence of the Sun and Moon, and other Planets, insomuch that nothing
was wanting but heat only to perfect the act of producing the fruit. And that
that very heat too, whereby they were produced, was influenced by the
quickening and qualifying faculty of the Sun. Repl. This is the main, and shows
that my Antagonist can fancy rather any thing than disphansie his Divine
Science of Astrology, or be brought out of conceit with it. For certainly he
must have a wonderful peremptory fancy, that can imagine that Plastic power,
which is in the seed of Animals or their Conception, to be the mere Influence
of the Stars, as if they guided the work into Organization. And as needless a
fancy it is with J. B. he acknowledging a spirit of Nature and arguing better
for it, than for any thing that I see he manages in his whole Book. Wherefore
there being a Plastic Power, whether the spirit of nature, or proper to the
soul of the Animal it self, what needs any other vivisick power but this and a
well moderated heat to make the matter more pliable to the operations of the
Plastic upon it? What ever is besides this is precarious and imaginary.

Sect. 7. Because they might observe some more sensible mutation in the Air and
Earth at the Sun's entering into Aries, etc. Ans. There are some, says J. B.
(p. 66.) who are not satisfied with this reason, if that were all, because
there is the like sensible mutation at his entrance into Cancer, Libra and
Capricorn. Repl. Who those some are I know not, But Origanus Part. 3. de
effect. cap. 4. writes expressly thus. Sol exaltatur in Ariete, quia cum id
Signum ingreditur, in septentrionalem mundi partem supra Aequatorem exsurgens,
calorem vivificum, quo in subjectam Terram ac Animantium corpora agit,
vehementer intendit, lucisque diurnae sensibile incrementum efficit. And Dariot
speaks to the like purpose in his Judicial Astrology, Chap. 5. And it is
evident to sense that mutations are not so notable, either in Cancer, Libra, or
Capricorn, as in Aries, when the World seems to awaken into a natural
Resurrection.

Omnia tunc florent, tunc est nova Temporis Aetas. as Ovid (fast. lib. 1.)
argues it with Janus, for the beginning of the Year with Spring.

To make Leo the House of the Sun, his heat being then the most sensible, and
Cancer the House of the Moon, because she would then be most vertical to us,
etc. Ans. As for Leo, says J. B. (p. 66.) if that were Sol's House only for his
sensible heat there, why then was not Capricorn the Moon's House because of her
sensible cold there, she being a Planet as much delighted in coldness as the
Sun in heat? And as for Cancer, were that the Moon's House only because there
she is most vertical, why then was not Cancer Sols House too, because he is
also most vertical there as well as the Moon? And if that were all, how is it
that the Moon does not change her Houses as she has to do with the change of
Countries, seeing that in some places she is vertical in Gemini, and elsewhere
in Taurus and Aries. But had the Doctor a little better perused Ptolemy, or the
Arabians, or Origanus, whom he sometimes quotes, he would have found that
Cancer is generally esteemed the Moons House, as well in those Countries where
she is not Vertical, as where she is. And that Leo is the House of the Sun, as
well there where he has less heat as where he has most. Repl. Full Moon in
Capricorn causes no more cold than full Moon in Cancer, nor so much I trow. For
if she be in the full in Capricorn, the Sun must be in Cancer, and then I think
J. B. will acknowledge it hot enough. But full Moon in Cancer supposes the Sun
in Capricorn, and therefore I should think her cold and moist Influence should
be most sensible then, though I be not so deeply studied in this Divine Science
of Astrology as J. B. And that Cancer is not Sol's House, though he be more
Vertical to us then, is, because the effects of his heat are more sensible in
Leo than in Cancer, as also the Moon's in Cancer more than any where else. And
therefore these two Signs are with fairest color constituted the Houses, the
one of the Moon, the other of the Sun, and they the proper (...) of them. But
that the Moon's being more vertical to us in Cancer, should make that Sign her
House, does not at all infer that her Houses should change with the change of
Countries, to which any Sign is Vertical. And J. B. is to remember that his
Divine Art of Astrology was invented by them that lived on this side the
Tropic of Cancer, and that to all those of this side that Tropic the Moon is
most vertical in that Sign, that is, is the nearest to them, but the inventers
of the Art were not concerned for any that lived in the Torrid Zone or beyond
it. And I would have J. B. to consider, where he says, that Leo is the House of
the Sun, as well in those Countries where he was less heat as where he has
most, whether the Inhabitants of the Temperate Zone beyond the Tropic of
Capricorn, if they had made an Astrology, would ever have constituted Leo the
House of the Sun, his heat being so inconsiderable to them when he is there.

They have without either fear or wit bestowed Houses, two apiece, upon the
rest of the Planets. etc. Ans. That there is the very same reason (p. 68.) why
Aquarius should be the House of Saturn, as he himself alleges, why Leo should
be the House of the Sun. And as much reason why Capricorn should be the other
House of Saturn, as he affirms why Cancer Should be the Moon's House. For if
the hottest Planet may have that House where is at hottest; why may not the
coldest Planet have that House where he is the coldest? And if the Moon who is
a friend of Nature, may be Housed in the most vertical Sign, why may not Saturn
who is the Enemy of Nature, dwell in the most unvertical? And a little after in
the same page: Why does he charge us to have no reason for the Houses of the
other Planets, besides the Sun and Moon? For if he had asked we could have told
him reason enough. Repl. But I answer first, that it is not so apparent that
Saturn is cold, as that the Sun is hot, but it is only the Astrologers
imagination; nor that Saturn is such an Enemy to Nature, as it is that the Moon
is friendly to her by her kindly moisture. And besides, this account does not
reach down to the rest of the Planets. But I perceive J. B. has other reasons
in his budget if he would produce them, nor do I question but they are those
that Origanus and Dariot offer, the latter, Astrolog. Judicial. Chap. 4. the
former, Part. 3. de Effect. Cap. 4. Briefly therefore Saturn has Aquarius and
Capricorn for his two Houses, because he being a malign Planet his two Houses
are to be in a malign Aspect to the Houses of Sol and Luna, and Capricorn is in
Opposition to Leo, and Aquarius to Cancer. But Sagittarius and Pisces beholding
the Lion and Crabb with a Trine Aspect, are the Houses of the benign Planet
Jupiter. But Aries and Scorpio beholding the Crabb and Lion with a Quartile
Aspect, which is a malign Aspect, are the Houses of Mars who is no friend to
Nature. And Taurus and Libra which are in Sextile Aspect to Cancer and Leo,
which is a benign Aspect, are the Houses of Venus, she being more friendly to
Nature. And lastly, Mercury has for his Houses Gemini and Virgo, because they
behold the Houses of the two Luminaries with no Aspect, neither benign nor
malign, as he himself is a Planet neither good nor bad of himself, but such as
he keeps Company with. And is not this a trim distribution of the Houses
amongst the Planets? But yet it seems such, as J. B. himself thought would not
hold water, else why did he not produce it? If the benignity and malignity, as
well of Aspects as the Planets, were Solidly made out, this account were
handsome, and had some show of congruity in it; but these being imaginary
figments, not grounded upon reason and certain experience, to give such an
account of things, is but cum ratione ineptire.

And then another thing happening, though independent on the course of the
Moon, namely, that every seventh day in an acute Disease is Critical, etc.
Answ. As for acute Diseases, says J. B. (p. 67.) all men are not apt to
believe the Doctor, that every seventh day they are so Critical and stirring,
etc. Repl. Whether all will believe me or no I know not, but that this has been
an ancient tradition, that every seventh day from the beginning of an acute
Disease is Critical, you may read in A. Gellius, Noct. Attic. lib. 3. cap. 10.
who calls them dies (...) or (...). And that famous Physician Daniel Sennertus,
in his Chapter de Causis Dierum Criticorum writes thus, and I suppose pretty
well to the tooth of J. B. himself. Quantas Luna, says he, in Conjunctionibus,
Oppositionibus and Quadraturis mutationes in inferioribus hisce efficiat
notissimum est. And then a little below, Non sine causa statuitur, Lunam etiam
in morbis insignes quasdam mutationes excitare in iis locis, quae locum in quo
Luna initio morbi fuit Quadrato vel Opposito radio aspiciat, and cum eousque
progressa sit, ut novam (...) and insignem luminis mutationem subeat. Crises
tamen fortiores sunt ubi septenarii exact incidunt in Lunae quadras. And
lastly, Quocunque ergo die, says he, in morbum quis incidat, in primo morbi
insultu conjunctio quasi fit Morbi and Lunae. Hinc ubi tria signa emensa est
Luna seu 90 gradus peragravit, and primum quadratum attigit, primus fit dies
Criticus. Ubi sex signa seu 180 gradus peragravit, oppositumque Signum attigit,
secundus dies Criticus incipit. Ubi ab opposito Signo and secundum Quadratum
pervenit, tertius Criticus initium sumit si eousque extendatur morbus. Where it
is plainly asserted by Sennertus, that every seventh day in A. Gellius his
sense and mine, is Critical, though most Critical of all when the very
Conjunction of the Moon falls in with the beginning of the Disease, or with the
beginning of some quarter of the Moon.

But from hence may any sagacious person easily smell out, that the Phases of
the Moon were the shop wherein this Conceit of the Aspects of the Planets was
forged, and the natural determination of the Crises of acute Diseases to
Septenaries, gave that unfortunate Character of malignity to the Quartile
Aspect and Opposition. For that there is no real malignity in the Moon's
Oppositional Aspect more than in her Conjunctional, appears by the frequent
prescribing Medicines about the time the Moon is in Conjunction and Opposition.
But the seventh day being Critical, and the night before the Crisis happens
being most trouble some and painful, according to that known Aphorism, Nox ante
Crisin est molestissima, hence Opposition and Quartile, first in the Moon, and
then in all the rest of the Planets and parts of Heaven, have been phansied
inauspicious or malign. And that it is the Critical days independent of the
Moon, that has given occasion of phansying this malignity in the Aspects of
Quartile and Opposition, is plain from that passage in Sennertus, In primo
insultu morbi conjunctio quasi fit Morbi and Lunae, and then they number by
those Critical Septenaries, that answer to the seven days of the Moon's
Quarters, as if the Moon were in Quartile Aspect and then in Opposition in
reference to the beginning of the Disease. Which plainly betrays the
Imaginariness of the business as to the Moon and her Aspects, as also the
Imaginariness of the malignity or benignity of Astrological Aspects in general;
the Critical Septenaries depending nothing on the Moon but on the Nature of the
Disease, no more than the Paroxysmes of a Tertain or Quartan do of the Moon,
but of the Nature of these Diseases. These things cannot but seem plain to those
that are not effascinated with Astrological prejudices.

Sect. 8. The Planets being but heaps of dead matter, much like that of the
Earth, and having no light but what they reflect from the Sun, etc. Here J. B.
(p. 69, 70, 71.) trifles egregiously and flutters in empty words, of which the
most weighty are those that pretend that I only think so, as if the Assertion
were without proof, or as if it were my private conceit, whenas there is no
Philosopher of note now adays, but thinks the Planets as inert and opaque
Masses of matter as our Earth is, the Earth it self so apparently approving it
self to be a Planet by moving about the Sun as other Planets do. And J. B.
himself in that passage seems to acknowledge the Moon to be opaque. The Moon,
says he, has no innate light but what she borrows, this is reasonable and
palpable, but what reason or experience can deprehend that Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars and Mercury, must therefore have none also? Repl. It was wisely or luckily
done of the man that he left out the mention of Venus, in whom Philosophers
observe so palpably such Phases as are observed in the Moon. And she moreover
is a Primary Planet. So that it is manifest, that two Primary Planets are
opaque: to say nothing of Mercury in whom such like Phases have been also noted
by some, though not with like confidence. But his body appearing blackish when
he is in the Discus of the Sun, as well as the Moon's body does, it is a plain
Argument of his Opacity. Wherefore four of the Planets being found opaque, viz.
the Moon, Mercury, Venus, and our Earth, it fairly leads to the belief that
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, are so too, since it cannot be expected of them by
reason of their situation, that they should either be seen in the Discus of the
Sun, or exhibit such Phases as the Moon. But Mercury shining with the briskest
rays, and Saturn with the dullest, the one being the nearest, the other the
remotest from the Sun, it is a sign their light is mutuatitious and borrowed
from him. These hints are sufficient and beyond a Think so, to assure us that
all the Planets properly so called are opaque. But J. B. had rather think or
unthink any thing than that his beloved Astrology should be thought a Foolery,
as it will undoubtedly be so thought by all wise men and considerate. But he
will at last allow them opaque ( p. 71.) and yet pretends to gain by the
bargain, because they are thereby more nearly apt to suit with and make
impression upon our bodies, which are neither Light nor Air, but rather Earth,
whence, says he, the Planets are the greatest Agents at least, if not the
noblest bodies. Repl. As if opaque bodies at such a vast distance acted by
virtue of their similitude. No more than one bullet of lead at a distance acts
upon another. And what Influence more than a Bullet of lead has our Earth, or
any other Planet beyond their Atmospheres? Besides that there is a great deal
of Fire and Air in men's Constitutions, or else they could not so nimbly weild
their bodies of Earth.

Then that of the fixed Stars which shine not with borrowed but innate light,
etc. To this J. B. answers ( p. 71.) That is the Doctors think so touching the
innate light of the Stars. For he has no other proof. Repl. And who I beseech
you ever thought otherwise? So that there was no need of any proof. The light
of the Planets we see depend of the Sun. But no such discovery is made of the
fixed Stars. Nay it is impossible they should be illuminated by the Sun so far
distant from them, that if we were where they are, the Sun would seem no bigger
that an ordinary Star. What light therefore could such a solitary Star afford
when so many put together afford so little light in the night? Besides it is a
thing well known amongst the best Philosophers, that the fixed Stars are so many
Suns, they being fixed as he is? Wherefore if our Sun have innate light, the
fixed Stars have innate light also. And lastly, the Scintillation of the fixed
Stars which is not observed in the Planets, is another Argument of their innate
Light. And he must be blind in the mysteries of Philosophy that does not see
the reasonableness of these things.

Define the Sun to be hot and moist rather than drying, etc. Ans. I will not
say, says he ( p. 72.) the Doctor lies, but I am sure it is false that he says,
Astrologers holding no such thing, as that either the Sun is hot and moist, or
that Mars is parchingly dry. Repl. And yet that famous Astrologer David
Origanus, expressly declares, that the Sun is not vehementer siccus quoniam
quasi humido jungitur, But that Mars does exsiccare and arefacere, and in
calefaciendo urere. What in Latin can be more significant of what we have
declared in English? See what we have said upon Chapter 15. Sect. 2.

All the Planets are opaque bodies, and what ever their color be are as cold
as Earth, etc. Here again J. B. swaggeringly denies ( p. 83.) the Planets to be
opaque bodies, but I have proved them already to be opaque, so that I need
insist no further thereon. And whereas he would insinuate that in [all the
Planets] I do imply the Sun, it is a mere cavil, the Planets that move about the
Sun being peculiarly called Planets, and the Sun improperly as being fixed, and
having no Planetary motion at all.

And since from these they are reputed (namely from the first qualities) benign
or malign, masculine or feminine, etc. Ans. Here says J. B. (p. 83.) the
consequence is unsufferable, that if the Planets be opaque bodies they cannot
be Male and Female. Ash-Trees are opaque bodies without dispute, and yet by all
Herbarists are allowed to be Male and Female, etc. Repl. He makes here a
foolish consequence of his own, and then Tragically exclaims against it, as if
I were the Author of it. I no where say, if the Planets be opaque bodies they
cannot be Male and Female; but that since Astrologers account the Planets Male
and Female from those first qualities phansied in them without any reason, the
grounds of this distinction into Male and Female failing, the Astrological
distinction it self necessarily fails. So that all the course Buffoondry he
uses in this page returns upon himself. But (p. 72.) to repair the loss of the
first qualities in the Planets he will not have Mars hot and dry as is the Sun,
or as Fire, but as Pepper or Salt. Repl. Certainly J. B. must have a long neck
or a long tongue to reach a taste of the Planet Mars to perceive it has a smack
of Salt or Pepper, which is as true as that the Moon is made of green Cheese.
Which if it were, the Salt or Pepper of Mars were excellent Correctives of the
Phlegmatickness thereof, that it may the easilier digest in an Astrologers
Stomach. But in good sadness, how can we be more assured of this Salt or Pepper
in Mars, or internal cold in Saturn, than of the Elemental heat or cold in
either? So evident is it, that these are pitiful subterfuges, and that the
whole distinction of Planets into hot and cold, and consequently into Masculine
and Feminine, is a mere phancie.

Sect. 9. For that hidden Influence which governs all, would reach to all
points, etc. Here J. B. has recourse again to the Weapon-salve (p. 74.) and to
the Magnetical Particles. But I have so sufficiently baffled this evasion upon
Sect. 2. of this Chapter, that I need say nothing here.

Sect. 10. That of the Fiery, Earthy, Watery, and Aerie Trigons, is more
notorious, etc. In this Section, because I seem to bestow a silent smile or two
upon the pretty conceits of Dr. Dariot, and Sir Christopher Heydon, of the one
in Physic, the other in Husbandry, in observing these Triplicities; J. B. (p.
77, 78.) takes occasion to play the Robin good Fellow, or laughing Goblin at
such a rate, and to raise such Horse-play, that if the Parish of this Minister
of Gods Word, as he styles himself should spy him in such a vain pickle and
scandalous strain of levity, they would be tempted much to despise his person
for his fond buffoondry and idle mirth, as all sound Philosophers would be
ashamed of him to see him so triumphantly exulting in his own gross ignorance
and unskilfulness in matters of Philosophy. That I smiled at the conceived
virtues of the abovesaid Triplicities, which Dr. Dariot and Sir Christopher
attribute to them, is from my firm assurance, that they are placed in no
subject but the imagination of the Astrologer, there being no such Zodiac in
Heaven, or as I have said already, no Heaven for that Zodiac, which is divided
into these Triplicities. For to make a distinct Impression of the truth of the
case upon the Readers mind, and upon J. B.'s too, if it be penetrable or
impressible, I shall set forth the mistake of these Astrologers by this plain
Scheme. Where ABC is their supposed Heaven, that does not move from West to
East, and in which the Zodiac cast into four Triplicities, is imagined to be.
The Fiery Triplicity is,,, the Watery,,,, the Airy,,, the Earthy,,,, DEF is the
Coelum stellatum, where the real signs of the Zodiac, namely the
Constellations called Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc. are to be seen, and from
whence the other had their names. For certainly they gave the names to these
visible Constellations before they were given to that invisible Heaven, which I
say is only imaginary. And this Coelum stellatum in Aristotle's time was
accounted the Primum Mobile that did not recede from West to East. And
therefore the Zodiac of the Coelum Stellatum then and this imaginary Zodiac
was all one, that is, there was no Zodiac conceived, but this of the Coelum
stellatum. And consequently the supposed Astrological Influences were
necessarily attributed to the Signs of the Zodiac of this Coelum stellatum.
And indeed from whence should they be conceived to come, but from this visible
Heaven?

But by reason of the Anticipation of the Aequinoxes, a Phenomenon, whose
cause is to be resolved into the motion of the Earth, the unskilful in
Philosophy rashly collected these two things. 1. That there was a motion of the
Coelum stellatum from West to East. 2. And then a Primum Mobile that had only a
diurnal motion, not any from West to East, in which a fixed Zodiac was, wherein
the course of the Sun observed his Cardinal points, and did not anticipate. And
this is the Astrologers Zodiac divided into Triplicities or Trigons, the main
Basis of their Art for Houses and Triplicities, which if it had any truth in it
when they used the real Signs of the Zodiac of the Coelum stellatum, must now
necessarily be judged vain and ridiculous. For now for Example, the Fiery
Trigon is not the real Aries, Leo, Sagittarius in the Coelum stellatum, DEF,
but the imaginary one,,, in the Figure above described, and so of the rest.
Whence it is plain, that when Dr. Dariot and Sir Christopher attribute such
virtues to such a Triplicity, they miss almost a whole Sign in their account,
pitching upon AD for DG, and so of the rest, if you respect the Coelum
stellatum, and so they put one Triplicity for another, the Watery Trigon for
the Fiery, and suppose Aries the Horoscop. when it is Pisces. And if you respect
a Heaven distinct from the Coelum stellatum, which was forged upon the
ignorance of the true cause of the Anticipation of the Aequinoxes, they do yet
toto coelo errare, that fictitious Heaven being a mere mistake as all
Philosophers now of any note are well assured of. And therefore I think any
understanding man may well smile at these sweet conceits of Dr. Dariot and Sir
Christopher, touching the use and observation of the Heavenly Trigons in
Physic and Husbandry.

That there is no such Zodiac in Heaven, or if you will no Heaven for such a
Zodiac, etc. Ans. This is a very confident one, says he, (p. 75.) all
Astronomers agreeing to the contrary that there is such an one, etc. Repl. I
speak of that Zodiac which Clavius and other Ptolemaick Astronomers call
Zodiacus Fixus, and conceive to be in the Primum Mobile, and whose Signs do not
recede from West to East, as those of the Coelum stellatum are said to do. And
I beseech J. B. to tell me if all Astronomers agree that there is such an one.
No Copernican can without a contradiction to his profession admit of such a
Zodiac. But this Zodiac is the subject of these four famous Triplicities of
Astrologers. Which therefore for all the pudder J. B. makes (p. 75, 76.) are
plainly deprehended to be a mere figment, a conceit at least worth a smiling
at, if not laughing outright. If J. B. had but read the first rudiments of
Astronomy in Johannes de Sacro Bosco, he might easily understand the strength
of my Argument, but he seems to study Astrology in an implicit Faith, and to be
either of a slow Saturnine Perception, or else an exercised Shuffler off of
such reasons as himself cannot but be convinced of, that they are unanswerable.

Sect. II. Guiding themselves by the conceit of the Benignity and Malignity of
the Aspects, etc. Ans. Thus strangely, says J. B. (p. 79.) abounds the Doctor
in his own sense, concluding all the utmost of our reasonings not to extend one
tittle farther than just as he imagines, etc. Repl. That these Aspects, their
Benignity and Malignity, are the grounds of conferring such Houses upon such
Planets, is manifest both out of Dariot and out of Origanus. For after the
Astrologers had assigned Leo for the House of the Sun, and Cancer for the House
of the Moon ( undoubtedly for the reasons I have alleged in this Section) and
they looking upon these two Luminaries as the Parents of Generation and Friends
to Nature, Saturn being a malign Planet, they gave him two Houses in a malign
Aspect to the Houses of the Moon and of the Sun, namely they assigned to him
Capricorn and Aquarius. But Jupiter who is a benign Planet, has Sagittarius and
Pisces for his Houses, because they behold the Lion and Crabb with a benign
Aspect, namely, with Trine. But Mars being a malign Planet, Aries and Scorpio
are his Houses, because they behold Cancer and Leo with a malign Aspect, viz.
that of a Quartile. But of this I having spoken so fully upon Sect. 7. I need
give no further intimations here, saving only to remind the Reader, that I
having above made it good against J. B. that Aspects are a mere fancy, it
plainly follows, that the assignment of Houses to the Planets, upon that
ground, must be a mere fancy also.

Nothing but Intersections of the imaginary Circles of the course of the Moon
and the Ecliptic, etc. Here J. B. (p. 79.) instead of [Intersections of
imaginary Circles] puts [imaginary Circles] and is so fond himself, or would
make me so fond as to call the Caput, and Cauda Draconis, imaginary Circles,
whenas they are the same with the Nodi, which are points rather than Circles.
They are the Intersections, or as it were points of the Intersections of two
imaginary Circles. Such a nullity are they of themselves, and yet forsooth they
must have their Exaltation. For which empty conceit he brings only the bare
pretense of a sound Argument, that is Experience. Which is impossible to
discover to be from the Caput Draconis it self, suppose in Gemini, if the Moon
be not near that Node, or to conceive the Node it self, which is a mere
imaginary thing, and only a phancying that in that place the Moon has or will
cut the Ecliptic, to have any effect, unless she be a cutting it, and then it
is the Moon not the Nodus that gives the effect, if there be any. And let J. B.
if he can, produce any Astrological authentic Record where it has been
discovered that the mere Nodes themselves, or Caput and Cauda Draconis, have
had their distinct effect and did not stand for Ciphers.

That each Trigon might have its two Consuls, and Mars not rule solitarily in
his watery one, etc. Ans. This is like a man, says J. B. (p. 81.) that would
confute the Doctrine of the Antipodes by crying [Pish] Repl. As if there were
no force of Argument in this passage, because J. B. is either so blind as that
he cannot see it, or so perverse that he will not see it. For whereas it is a
Maxim in Philosophy, That Nature is neither wanting in necessaries, nor
affects superfluities, surely if this business of Trigons and Trigonocratores
were a real thing in Nature and not a mere fancy of Astrologers, she would not
have been so superfluous as to have furnished three of the Trigons with two
Lords apiece, or so defective as to afford but one to the fourth. For if one
will serve one Trigon, it is superfluous to have two, and if two be requisite,
it is a defect to have but one.

The Prerogative of the Horecratores is destroyed by that first general
Argument, etc. Ans. When the Doctor is at a full point, says he (p. 81.) as his
Ha, ha, will extend no further, then flies he to the main shift that there is
no Zodiac, etc. And a little after, Yet for certain there is an Heaven as no
body can deny. Repl. It is to me a wonder, that J. B. should have so little
skill in the first Rudiments of his own professed Art, which supposes a Heaven
distinct from the Starry Heaven, which I say is a fictitious Heaven, and the
Zodiac fictitious in it; or yet so little Conscience, that understanding this,
and that I oppose this fictitious Heaven only, which has a Zodiac that is said
not to have a motion from West to East, as the Starry Heaven's Zodiac is said
to have, he should play the buffoon for almost two pages together to prove
there is a real Heaven, and that it is divisible into parts, and that these
parts are real, which neither I nor any one else will deny, but the weakness of
his cause puts him upon such sorry and sordid tricks.

But being conscious to himself of his inability of answering my confutation of
the rest of the essential Dignities as well as the former, he shuffles all off
(p. 82.) with saying, the Doctor goes madly on in a kind of Enthusiastic
humor, that the Heaven is nothing, and the parts of Heaven is nothing, whereby
I would destroy the rest of the Essential Dignities. Repl. But that that Heaven
on which these Essential Dignities are founded, is nothing, I have noted above,
that the best Philosophers are now agreed upon it, and that the Zodiacus fixus,
distinct from the Zodiac of the Starry Heaven, is a figment forged in the dark
shop of the gross ignorance of the true System of the World. And I would have
J. B. seriously to consider that truth I hinted, That in Aristotle's time there
was only one Zodiac, which was that of the Starry Heaven, whose real Signs
gave names to that fictitious one that Astrologers now build their Houses upon,
and that therefore that ancient and venerable divine science of Astrology,
which J. B. would have as old as Adam or Seth, divided the Starry Heavens
Zodiac into twelve Houses, and supposed the peculiar virtue of each House
placed there in each Sign of the Starry Heaven. From whence it will follow,
that our modern Astrologers building their Houses on that Zodiacus immobilis,
or fixus, and the Zodiacus mobilis of the starry Heaven having receded since
those older times, at least two whole Signs from West to East, (and the antique
Astrology conveyed out of the Memoirs of Adam when he was in Innocence, being
the most holy, sacred, certain, and authentic Astrology) I say it will follow
that our modern Astrologers, and J. B. good man amongst the rest, do err no
less than two whole Signs in all their Astrological Calculations. This is a
morsel that I leave to J. B. to chamble in his mouth to see how he relishes it,
or to swallow it down as a Pill to purge out the Astrological humor, if it may
happily cure his sick mind and rid him of this malady.

Sect. 12. For beyond the Sun the Planet is at the farthest distance it can be
from us, etc. Ans. The distance of situation, says he (p. 84.) can no ways
impede the force of the Planets operation, as is apparently seen by the Moon,
which never receives more light and force of Solar virtue than when she is
farthest from him. Repl. Since all created Beings are of a finite virtue, it is
impossible but that the Spheres of their operation must be finite, and
therefore according as they are more and more distant from the object, their
virtue be less and less. Again, he contradicts his own self and the vote of
Astrologers, as I have noted above. For p. 21. he writes thus: All Astrologers
do hold the Moon to be the nearest to us, and nimblest plying about us above
all other Planets, and therefore to have more powerful effects upon us than any
other Planet. Which yet is a perfect contradiction to what he says p. 48. viz.
The Doctor it seems is yet to learn how the Heavenly Bodies are neither helped
by proximity, nor hindered by longinquity in the exercise of their powers, etc.
Thus vacillant and contradictious to himself is J.B. but the Astrologers are on
my side, as appears by the former citation, and if that will not suffice, I
will also add the particular authority of Origanus, who De Effectibus Part. 3.
Cap. 1. writes thus, Omnes Planetae juxta Excentrici and Epicycli Apogeum
minorem efficaciam habent and Aerem minus movent. In opposito autem Augis
robustiores sunt, Aeremque validius turbant. Omne enim Agens natural tanto
validius agit quanto proximius est passo. Which is point blank against J. B.

But his Instance of the Moons having most light at the greatest distance from
the Sun, heals his credit again. And of this Example he is so fond that he
could not stay but brought it in in another place as well as here, viz. p. 49.
where he says, I either had forgotten or did not know, that the further the
Moon is from the Sun, the greater is the light she receives from him, and the
nearer she is to him she receives still less and less. But this shows J. B. his
gross ignorance in Optics, as I have noted above. Nor did I forget but ever
knew to the contrary, even from my youth, when I wrote my Philosophical Poems,
namely, That the Moon the nearer she is the Sun the more light she receives, as
I have expressed it in my Psychathanasia, Book 1. Cant. 2. Stanz. 7.

Nor being hid after my monthly wane,
Long keppen back from your expecting sight,
Dull damps and darkness do my beauty stain;
When none I show, then have I the most light:
Nearer to Phoebus more I am bedight
With his fair rays. And better to confute
All vain suspicion of my worser plight,
Mark aye my Face after my close salute
With that sharp-witted God seem I not more acute?
Wherefore it is as clear as the Sun, that J. B. has said nothing to the
purpose hitherto in his answer to my confutation of this first Accidental
Dignity called Cazimi.

Besides, how can their virtue pass the body of the Sun, etc. Ans. The Sun is a
thin and pure body as the Air, etc. Repl. But it is an hot consuming body being
as it were a boiling fire, as they that have made the most accurate
observations of him have described him, and the Maculae are his scum. How can
then the Influential vapors of a Planet pierce his body, and not be spent and
lost?

Or the bearing of the Vortex against the Planet, etc. Ans. He says, the
Planets in Conjunction do comply and not at all clash Influences. Repl. I had
thought that that had been a peculiar humor of Mercury to be so sociable and
compliable with that Planet he is conjoined. But besides this, Though the
bearing of the Vortex against us is no such matter, yet it bearing against the
Planet, and transfusing a Celestial stream of most subtle matter against it,
carries away the Planets Influence from us, as a contrary wind does odours and
sounds.

If Cazimi on this side the Sun be good, why should not beyond the Sun be bad?
Ans. Because, says he, Cazimi works a perfect compliance betwixt the Sun and
the Planets in Cazimi. Repl. Learnedly spoken! It is so, because it is so. A
body is white by whiteness, black by blackness, Hoosibus and Shoosibus, as Sir
Kenhelm Digby pleasantly applies that Country story. But I leave J. B. to
excogitate a better answer to this present difficulty. The subtle matter
flowing from the Sun, and driving the Effluvia of the Planet in Cazimi on this
side of the Sun upon us, if this be good how can Cazimi beyond the Sun be good,
the stream of the subtle matter from the Sun driving the effluvia from us?
That is the point, consider it at leisure.

How much more are the spots of the Sun that are far greater, etc. Ans. Here J.
B. gives us a taste of his education and elegancy of wit. Does not every
Scullion-Girl, says he (p. 85.) know the difference betwixt a blemish and a
beauty-spot, though both at once on the same face? Repl. I confess I never
converse with Scullion Girls to know the extent of their capacity and judgment;
if J. B. does, I envy him not that piece of curiosity of knowledge. That and
Astrology together may strike far to the making up a complete Gentleman. But
now as to the fitness of the comparison, I would know of J. B. touching the
Macula Solaris, and the Planet in Disco Solis, suppose Venus or Mercury, which
is the Blemish and which the Beauty-spot, or what he means by a Beauty-spot, an
artificial black patch, or some Naevus in Venere; let him consult with his
Sibyl in the Kitchen to be able to give a right answer to these Queries, and
then I shall give him a more full reply. But he stills holds on, which I did
not observe, and makes his Sibyl of the Kitchen wiser and wiser; adding, Or
between a mere dead Patch and an operative Plaster: what a discerning Girl is
this! But to avoid ambages I shall ask J. B. himself which is the dead patch
and which the operative Plaster. And methinks I hear him promptly answer, the
dead Patch are the Maculae Solares, and the operative Plaster the Bodies of
Mercury and Venus in Cazimi on this side the Sun. How well the Bodies of
Mercury and Venus, which are as round as any mustard Ball, and God knows how
many thousand miles distant from the face of the Sun, resemble a flat spread
plaster applied immediately to the face of any Male or Female, I dare refer to
his stale Girl, or Sibyl of the Kitchen. But as for the Philosophy of his
Answer, that the Maculae Solares are dead Patches, it is an unskilful
supposition of his, and contradictious to his own profession, that allows a
Soul or Plastic Spirit of the World, which implies, that all the matter of the
Universe is enlivened, and those spots assuredly as much as either Venus or
Mercury (which are no more alive than our Earth) and therefore as fit for
Astrological Influence as either Mercury or Venus. But for such a Caput mortuum
as some Chemists fancy, there is none such in Rerum Natura, unless it be the
heads of those that are devoid of wit and judgment.

That Cazimi should be five Fortitudes, and yet Combustion which is to be but a
little distance from the Sun, should be five Debilities, etc. To shuttle off
this invincible Argument he abounds with similitudes, as if he were
unacquainted with that trite Aphorism, Similia non probant. But that I may not
be tedious, I will bring only one of them into view, there being the same
reason of the rest. And indeed it is a sweet one and remarkable one. Behold,
says he ( p. 86.) but the Rosy bush, how it is set with now a sweet Rose, and
next an offensive Prickle, and then a Rose again. Repl. And even so there must
be three Fairy Circles about the Sun, one of Fortitudes, the next of
Debilities, and the third of Fortitudes again. For the Earth moving about the
Sun there is neccessity of whole Circles of this difference to go about the Sun
to salve the supposed Astrological Phenomenon. Nay moreover there must be twice
three such Circles; the one three for Mercury, the other for Venus, and thrice
three such for the superior Planets, yet all this will not do. For the Circles
of the Planets are the same in Cazimi as out of it, and if in Cazimi by reason
of the Circle there all to bestrewed with Roses, it have five Fortitudes, it
being still as much as ever it was in the same Circle, removed from Cazimi, it
must have five Fortitudes still. So that J. B. his Rosy comparison withers to
nothing: To let pass here his contradiction to himself, who in his
Hagiastrologia, plainly affirms the Heaven to be a most simple and clear body
like to refined Crystal* which is inconsistent with this Heterogeneity, which
to stop a gap he has introduced in this place. And lastly, how Homogeneal the
Celestial matter is, the Cartesian Philosophy does well set out to them that
have a capacity to understand it.

That Saturn, Jupiter and Mars from their Conjunction with the Sun to their
Opposition, etc. Ans. Here he bewrays more of his old ignorance. Says he (p.
86.) As if the Fortitudes of Planets stood in the nearness of their distance,
etc. Repl. But that it is none of my ignorance but his that he does not think
as I do, I have sufficiently proved above, and therefore need say nothing
further here.

Station should rather seal on the effect of the Planet more sure. Ans.
Experience, says he ( p. 87.) and reason joined together do evidence the
contrary, namely, that a Stationary Planet is standed in the Influence of his
virtues as well as of his body during that Station. This is his Answer entire.
Repl. But as for reason he brings none unless he thinks that a reason, That
because the Influence is then standed as he calls it, it is called the Station
of the Planet from thence. When as by the consent of all Astronomers a Planet
is said to be Stationary, because he seems to stand still as to any motion from
West to East. And as for experience, as I said above, let him bring any
authentic Astrological Record whence it does appear that a Planet for being
Stationary was clogged with two Debilities. And the truth is, the Annual
Motion, as I may so call it, of the Planets, especially the superior, is so
slow, and their Diurnal in comparison so exceeding swift, that it is incredible
that the modifications of their Annual Motion by Station, Direction, or
Retrogradation, should signify any thing.

Is neither Stationary nor Retrograde truly but in appearance, etc. Ans. It is
not so, says he (p. 87.) For although the Planet of it self make no returns,
but is always moving directly on, yet going round his Circle after he has past
his utmost distance, as we stand, he really returns upon us in his
perambulation, and the time between this going on and return is unto us a real
Station, his motion looking upon us for some days altogether from the same
point. This is his entire Answer in his own words whereby he would prove that
there is a real Retrogradation and Station in the Planets, which is his first
Answer. But he has another which I will give you also in his own words: But
however, says he, were the Retrogradation and Station no more but in a mere
appearance, yet it does not follow but the Debilities arising from that
appearance, shall be real and not imaginary. Repl. But as touching the first, I
dare say he had no distinct notion of what he uttered, though he give his
suffrage for Copernicus, Hagiastrolog. p. 83. and if he ever knew, had forgot
the nature of the Station and Retrogradation of the Planets, This Answer of his
being encumbered with such gross absurdities and harsh repugnancies to these
Astronomical Phenomenon. For by this account which is taken from the circular
perambulation of the Planet it self in its own course secundum ordinem
Signorum, which may by Analogy be called the Annus of that Planet, or Annual
course thereof; Jupiter suppose shall make but two Stations and one
Retrogradation in the space of twelve years, when as he makes twelve
Retrogradations in that time; and Saturn who in thirty years makes about thirty
Retrogradations, and sixty Stations, shall make but two Stations and one
Retrogradation in that time. Which gross ignorance of J. B. makes me suspect
that he bore himself merely upon his faculty of sordid and foul language when
he adventured to publish this pretended Answer to my Confutation of the vain
Art of Astrology.

And to do the man all right that may be, as being something conscious to
himself of his own confused ignorance in the present point, not knowing whether
his first Answer was sense or nonsense, he offers at a second, wherein he
says, were the Station and Retrogradation no more but in mere appearance, yet
it does not follow but the Debilities arising from that appearance shall be
real and not imaginary. Repl. But I beseech you, Mr. J. B. how do you prove
that there do arise any such Debilities from that appearance? If there were any
such Debilities arising, it would follow they were real not imaginary. But how
can any thing real arise from what is mere appearance, unless it be that the
subject it acts upon be a perceptive subject, and the action or impress upon it
quatenus perceptive: as the mere appearance of truth in the Divine or Sacred
Science of Astrology, so deemed by J. B. has had a real effect of intoxicating
all his faculties both moral and intellectual, whereof this present Book of his
is an ample testimony. But that Station or Retrogradation of Planets that is in
mere appearance or imaginary should have any real effect upon the Nativity of
Infants, who have no imagination thereof, is as perfect a contradiction, as if
one should say there is an effect without any cause. But J. B. it seems is so
taken up with his Divine Science of Astrology derived to us from the sacred
Memoirs of Adam in Paradise, that it has drowned in him all the sense and
memory of the indubitable principles of Logic and Philosophy.

That Sextile and Trine should be good, and yet Quartile which is betwixt both
be stark naught. Ans. Do but observe him, says he (p. 88) A Quartile cannot be
stark naught, because betwixt a Sextile and a Trine. His slovenly comparison I
will omit, as being as well nasty as superstuous, because the force of his
reason is as entirely couched in his following comparison, where he says, Nor
can that Creature be an Ass which stands betwixt two men. As if he should say,
That Quartile Aspect betwixt two good Aspects, Sextile and Trine, may as well
be bad as an Ass be an irrational Creature placed betwixt two men, who are
rational ones. Repl. But this is a reason only to impose upon Asses. For the
Ass here is specifically distinct from the two men, nor can their site destroy
this specification. But the degrees in Heaven being homogeneal, that sixty of
them should be good, and an hundred and twenty good, but ninety which takes up
all the same sixty, and also thirty of the whole hundred and twenty, should be
naught, is such a repugnancy, that it can fit the head of no Animal but that of
J. B's naming, placed betwixt two men.

But he has a more seemingly material Answer (p. 89.) That Astrologers do not
account the Quartile Aspect stark naught. For first they hold it better than
Opposition, and the Quartile Aspects of the Fortunes in some senses are good.
Repl. If they don't account it stark naught, how comes it to pass that in the
Table of Aspects it has no better credit than that of Opposition? For first
they divide the Aspects of Planets into good, as Sextile and Trine; and evil,
as Quartile and Opposition: And of these latter Aspects it is expressly said,
that Quartile and Opposition in good Planets is not evil, as Quartile or
Opposition in Jupiter and Venus, which Jupiter and Venus are the two Fortunes.
But Quartile and Opposition in evil Planets is evil, as Quartile or Opposition
in Saturn and Mars. And Quartile and Opposition of good with evil is evil, as
Quartile and Opposition of Jupiter with Mars. And so Quartile and Opposition go
hand in hand in property through the whole Table of Aspects. But it is no where
said, that Quartile Aspect of the Fortunes is in some senses good, much less
very good; whence it is apparent, that if Opposition be stark naught, Quartile
is very little better. See G. C. his Mathematical Physic, p. 153.

That Quartile should be better than Trine as being further from Opposition.
There is a most fulsome, slovenly Answer to this passage, as stinking and
noisome as one I omitted before, which no ingenuous pen would deign to
transcribe or Answer, and it is the less requisite to do it, it being a like
Argument with that of the Ass betwixt two men, as weak, and more rude and
sordid than it. These are the odoriferous Flosculi of his Saturnine Rhetoric,
as if he had been Nursed in an House of Office, as well as disciplined under
the old Girl, his discerning Sibyl of the Kitchen. For shame Mr. J. B. why
would you write such a Book, and profess your self in the mean time a Minister
of Gods word, and a Protestant of the Church of England, as if you intended a
slur and disgrace to our Church and Function? Both which are very sacred and
honorable, and not to be exposed by such lewd doings to the scorn of their
Enemies.

The Planets thus Aspected are in better capacity, both of them to strike with
more direct rays on the Earth than if they were in a Trine Aspect. Ans. But the
Aspect of Opposition, says he, ( p. 88.) strikes better and with more direct
rays, and therefore by the same Rule should be best of all. Repl. What an
impertinent Answer is this of J. B. to this passage? In the Aspect of
Opposition indeed the Planets seem more directly (as being Diametrically
opposite) to ray one against another, but they do not jointly to one point on
the Earth, suppose where the Foetus is, ray more directly. J. B. his Answers
are such, as if he did either not understand, or not care what he said as to
reason; as if railing and rude language were the only Province he had
undertaken.

Sect. 13. And the erecting a Scheme so many ways, and that with like success,
is an evidence that the success is not upon art but fortuitous. Ans But why
names he not these many ways, says he (p. 89.) For either these many ways are
all the same in effect, and then the Doctors consequence is false; or else they
are not the same in effect, and then the Doctors Allegation is utterly untrue.
Repl. This is an Answer indeed that seems to have some smartness in it, as a
Nettle, if you touch it gingerly, but press it boldly and you feel nothing. To
the former therefore, I reply that I have reckoned up those several ways, Chapter
15. Sect 6. adding at the end, that there are so many ways of building Houses
or Castles in the Air. To the latter, I say, they are the same as to any
certainty of effect. There is never a Barrel better Herring of them, as the
Proverb has it: All alike fond and frustraneous. sometimes hitting, sometimes
missing. For why did they invent this variety, but that the foregoing structure
was vacillant and lubricous? And thus one being supposed as good as another, my
consequence will come in, that the success when it hits right is not from Art,
but fortuitous.

The Configuration also of the Houses, and those Septennial Chronocratores or
Alfridarii, do intimate, that the whole business is but a Figment going upon
that false Hypothesis of Ptolemy, etc. Ans. This is an horrible falsehood, says
he ( p. 89.) For our Configuration of the Houses depends no more upon that of
Ptolemy than it does upon that Hypothesis of Copernicus. Repl. What a
mavelous Antagonist have I got, that huffs, and sputters, and cocks his
Beaver, as the invincible Champion of the Astrologers, and understands neither
the Hypothesis of Ptolemy nor Copernicus? It is the Zodiacus fixus which the
Ptolemaick Hypothesis necessarily implies, that is the ground, which all your
Astrological Houses are built upon, as I observed above more than once. And it
is undeniably true, though this bold Champion for Astrology calls it an
horrible falsehood. But I commend his modesty or discretion rather, that he will
make but one grand vapor at once, when as I intimated also, that the
Alfridarii have their Septennial Dominion according to the order of the Planets
in the Ptolemaick Hypothesis, and Chapter 15. Sect. 6. that the Consignificators of
the Houses observe the same Order. But an Answer to these things he discreetly
declines to make his single bravado more passable.

For either the Earth is pervious to all the rays of the Planets and Stars,
etc. Ans. The Earth is pervious, says he (p. 90.) to all the rays of the
Planets and Stars, as well beneath as above the Horizon. And yet does it not
follow that all Nativities are alike. For is it not plain, that all kinds of
Plants are pervious to the virtues and Influences of the same Earth, and yet
how far off are they from being all alike, or from bringing forth leaves and
flowers alike? Repl. No considerate Philosopher will admit any other Influence
of the Earth but the Particles thereof which constitute several consistencies
and juyces, and the Plants are concerned only in those juyces or moistures that
are next them, nor in any more Particles of them that are fitted for their
pores. Wherein the mystery of placing of Plants near one another consists,
namely, when their construction of parts is such, that they do not suck away,
to speak in the vulgar language, the same Particles of juice, and so do not
beguile one another. But the Astrological Influence of the Stars is a thing so
subtle and penetrating, that it stands not upon pores, but passes peremptorily
through all the Earth from one side to another. So that J.B. his comparison
falls wonderously short in the present case.

That a Star or Planet that is vertical is most efficacious. Ans. As to matters
of honor, says he, a Star is most efficacious when vertical, but as to matter
of Life and Nature, he is most efficacious when he ascends. Repl. This is a
mere put off, For both Origanus and Cardan in Origanus absolutely declare thus.
Stellae supra verticem alicujus Regionis vel Civitatis, quae inde verticales
dicuntur, maximae efficaciae sunt; quae autem remotae sunt, tanto minus possunt
quanto plus a vertice removentur. De Effectibus Part. 3. Cap. 2. Here is no
restriction to Honor, but it is spoke absolutely and at large. And if for
Honor why not for other things as the Nature of the Planet is? Direct and
perpendicular Rays being acknowledged by all to be most effectual. But if the
Earth be perfectly pervious to the rays, then our other Argument holds good
against the Astrologers.

Sect. 14. Even then ( viz. in the Womb) is the Child as much exposed to them
as when it is newly born. Ans. In his Answer to this J. B. does so faulter and
fumble. ( p. 91.) that I profess I can hardly make sense of it. But the main is
couched in the close, That as soon as the Child draws breath of its own, the
former employment of the Heavens upon it being ended, a new begins, and so the
employment of the Stars upon the Child begins immediately as it draws its
breath. Repl. When as the Influence of the Stars freely penetrate the thick
crusts of the Earth from side to side as freely as if there were nothing to
resist; how is it possible the Stars not acting voluntarily but necessarily, as
all natural Agents do, but that they should continue the same Influence in the
Womb and out of the Womb, the respects of the Child's being in or out of the
Womb, signifying nothing as to the Stars, and therefore the time of his
Nativity as little?

For first they must know the exact Longitude of the place, etc. Ans. The exact
Longitude, says he (p. 96.) matters us not, therefore that is false. Repl. Very
pertly and assuredly answered. But those that have been more accurately studied
in this pretended Science, I am sure I have heard complain of this very defect.
And it stands to all reason it should be considered. For there are the same
hours from twelve a Clock numerable from the Meridians of all the degrees of
Longitude, and therefore the true Longitude of a place is also to be known for
the right adjusting of the site of Heaven and Earth one to another at the
Nativity. But what a bold assured thing is Ignorance!

For he is born by degrees, etc. Ans. But the Child, says he ( p. 92.) does not
draw its breath by degrees, nor is the navil-string cut off from the Womb by
degrees. Repl. But I demand of J. B. whether the Child begin to breath first,
or has his Navil-string cut first, concerning which there is a great deal of
circumstances and curiosity, and sometimes longer, and sometimes sooner done.
And whether to the first breathing of Christ, or the cutting of his
Navil-string he refers that minute of the time of Christ's Nativity in his
Christologia.

Sect. 15. Which takes away all certainty of computation, per Accidentia nati.
Though we should allow a particular Influence of the Stars in men's Nativities,
so that they incline them to this or that, yet by reason of man's Free Will
there could be no finding of the time of the Nativity, per Accidentia nati.
This I contend for. Nor can J. B. for his life elude the force of the Argument,
he asserting as he would seem to do (p. 93.) That Sapiens dominabitur Astris,
How much more then shall a serious and sincere Christian? And whereas himself
acknowledges that the Free Will of man, according as he is good or bad, may
retardate or accelerate the effect of the Influence of the Stars, though not
wholly take it away, how is it possible to come to the true time of the
Nativity by the Accidentia Nati? But J. B. writes as if he were asleep and not
minded what he said, else his pen could not pass such gross contradictions. And
it is but said by him not proved, That the Stars will necessarily have their
effect, though slower in time and less violent in good men that make use of
their Free Will, and resist the power of the Stars. For what does J. B. think
of Socrates, who by his Temperance as A. Gellius writes, lived all the days of
his life inoffensa valetudine? And in that great devastating pestilence in the
Peloponnesian War, he in Athens where it raged most, by his course of living
kept his health of body, nor was obnoxious to that common contagion of stronger
force certainly than any Influence of the Stars can be deemed to be.

And if Socrates lived so much above the power of the Stars, what shall we
think of the Prophets and Apostles? what of Christ himself? who was not only
able to resist the power of the Stars, which J.B. allows every wise man able to
do, but was carried in all his actions of concern by the immediate inspiration
of the Holy Spirit. And yet (than which nothing can be more profane and
ridiculous) J. B. in his Christologia pretends per Accidentia Nati, to come to
the very Minute of our Saviors Nativity. But such delirances as these they are
justly permitted to fall into, who mock at the study of the Revelation of Saint
John the Divine, and so highly magnify this vain imposturous Art of Astrology
for a most sacred and Divine Science.

I might add in this place, that not only the Free Will of the Party, whose
Nativity is considered, breaks this pretense of Calculating per Accidentia
Nati, but the Free Wills also of all those that he has to do with, nay the Free
Wills of them that have been before him, his Ancestors, the Lawgivers of the
place or Country, etc. But it would be an endless Argument to enter upon, and
enough has been hinted already to satisfy the unprejudiced.

Sect. 16. Is this Circuit of the Nativity Scheme any where but in their own
brain? Ans. And against Profection, says he (p. 95.) he falls foul, saying, Is
it any where but in their own brain? but produces nothing of absurdity against
it, and therefore needs no answer to it. Repl. How heedless and oscitant is J.
B. here, that neither feels nor perceives what is even put into his mouth! What
greater Argument can there be against Profection Annual having any Influence
upon men and their Nativities, than in that it is only in the brains of the
Astrologer, and therefore can work no change in Nature? And that it is only in
the brains of the Astrologer, the very description of it in Origanus and others
plainly implies. For the very words of Origanus are, Tales significatorum in
consequentia Progressiones quibus, singulis annis singula Signa conficere
cogitantur, Profectiones Annuae appellantur. And a little before, Nam loca
Zodiaci quae vel ipsa significatum aliquod habent vel Aphetas and
Significatores alios cujuscunque Nominis and Muneris continent, fixa perpetuo
non manent, sicut in primo hominis exortu disposita esse deprehenduntur, sed
cum suis Aphetis and Significatoribus subinde aequabiliter progredi secundum
seriem signorum cogitantur, etc. And indeed they can be only imagined to do so.
For, that slow-paced Saturn should go thirty degrees in a Year in consequentia
(much less the Horoscope and Medium Coeli when they are Loca Hylegialia, as
they call them, which are conceived to be in Zodiaco fixo, and therefore can
make no progress at all, secundum seriem Signorum, they being parts of those
immovable signs) is I think an absurdity with a Witness, and implies no less
than a gross contradiction, you imagining the same thing to move slower and
faster, or to move and not to move at the same time.

Or that another Planet coming to the trace thereof should exult in the scent,
etc. Here J. B. for at least two pages together puts himself upon the pin of
extravagant mirth and buffoonry, which is as graceful a spectacle in this grave
Minister of Gods Word, as the Dancing of a Cow or a Camel. But to pass by all
that Horse-play, let us see what reason he offers. Ans. If an Hare, says he (p.
96.) or a Fox, or a Man with Shoes on, does leave such a scent in every step
he treads, that a Dog coming after some hours will discern every place as the
foot went in the wide Field, although Horses, Hogs, or other Men have crossed
the way; how much more shall the Stars be able, etc. Repl. I understand you Mr.
J. B. very well what you would be at, but withal that it is nothing at all to
the purpose. For when Hogs, or Horses, or men pass that way in the Field, their
feet do not fall in exactly with the feet of the Hare or the man, whose scent
is searched after, but the Planets or Stars come into the same place, by reason
of the diffusive subtility of their Rays or Influence, reach every atome of
those parts of the Heaven which you suppose perfumed before. Which perfume
neither can rationally be supposed to continue till the other come, especially
such slow-footed Planets as Saturn and Jupiter, nor indeed in such liquid
subtle matter as the Heavens are, to continue any considerable time at all, if
there were any such Influence: but as the Sun so long as he shines into the Air
makes it Light some, but at his removal the Air is as it was before: such in
all likelihood are the Influential Rays of the Stars and Planets. In short
their Influence if any is so subtle that nothing keeps it out, when it does
come, and the Ethereal matter is so fine, fiery and consuming, that no
Influential Effluvia transmitted into it can be retained, but vanish as
perfumes, when the odoriferous body is removed in the Free Air. Wherefore gross
ignorance in Philosophy and in the nature of the Heavenly matter, is the Mother
of J. B. his beloved Art of Astrology.

Nor will his instance of the Weapon-salve prove any salve for this sore (p.
97.) For both the Weapon salve and the Weapon are bodies of a due consistency,
the Weapon to imbibe the spirits of the body wounded, and the Weapon-salve to
lodge such sanative virtues as are proper in such Cases of wounding. But the
effect is not by a Transit of the Weapon-salve over the Weapon, (which will do
the wounded party no more good than if a Crow flew over his head) but by a
corporeal and tactual application of the Weapon-salve to the Weapon. And yet he
would have me admire with himself how strangely that salve in its Transit only
over the place of that Weapon where the Nativity of the wound was made, does
cause some not able change upon the wound that was then born. It Is pretty, and
pity, that in so amiable a fancy the Analogy will not hold. Nor do I think
that J.B. knew distinctly, or ever thought on it, which were the Termini
Homologi in the comparison. But if he will examine the business he will find
what he would have been at, is this, That as the Weapon-salve is to the Weapon,
so is the Planet in its Transitus by the Cuspes of the Houses, and the rest of
the chief places of the Nativity, to the said Cuspes or places of the Nativity,
wherein it seems some special virtue was lodged of Starry or Heavenly Influence
at the Nativity, by that Nativity-Configuration of the Heavens and Heavenly
Bodies at that time.

Now I appeal to J.B. how like the fluid material Heaven which I have described
above, is to a Weapon of steel, which made the wound, and the transcent Planet
at such a distance to the close corporeally applied Weapon-salve. Nay indeed
how much the Cuspes of the Houses which are so many Nothings phansied in an
imaginary Heaven and Zodiac, are like to one of the most firm Bodies we find
upon Earth. So that this comparison stands upon feet so rotten or
disproportionated, that I will leave it to fall of its own accord. His pretense
to experience is a threadbare shuffle, and liable to so many exceptions that
he can never make any thing of it, and there will be occasion of examining it
in the next Chapter if he will venture there upon the Pikes.

Which is a demonstration that the Promissor is imaginary space or nothing,
etc. Ans. There is, says he ( p. 98.) a certain and real space measured out
into degrees and minutes between the Significator and Promissor. Repl. But what
is this to the Promissor himself, who being supposed immovable, which the real
matter of the Heavens is not, I say, is imaginary space or nothing?

It is plain how this Planet (viz. the Significator) never gets to that part of
the celestial matter in which the Promissor was at the Nativity, etc. Ans. I
wonder, says he ( p. 98.) whether the Doctor knows his own meaning, etc. Repl.
And I wonder that so acute a man, and so well exercised in the Phantastries of
Astrology, does not easily guess at it at first sight. To show how desperate
the cause of the Astrologers is in this point of Direction, I put the case of
the Significator's being a Planet, and the Promissor, we supposing in the same
superficies with him, we cannot allow to be the body of another Planet, but its
Influence levening or tincturing at such a distance the celestial matter. As
for better understanding the business, Let Mars be the Significator (for all
the Planets may be so according to both Origanus and Ranzovius) and Jupiter the
Promissor, to which Mars is directed in Trine Aspect. The Influence of Jupiter
lodged in the celestial matter at this distance from Mars, but in his way is
the Promissor, but both Mars and this Influence of Jupiter being carried along
in the celestial matter as Corks in water, the Significator here will never
overtake the Promissor. But that Mars may overtake Jupiter by way of Transit,
or give him a go-by, he being six times more swift in his course, who can be
ignorant of that? Observe the definition of a Promissor, as Ranzovius has
defined. He says it is, Planetae vel corpus vel radius, etc. ad quem cum
Significator pervenerit, Significatio effectum suum editura creditur. Which is
also the sense of other Astrologers.

But though they phrase it as if the Significator were to come corporally to
the very Promissor, to challenge and receive his promise, yet J. B. does not
interpret it so grossly (as neither do the Persians some passages of the
Alchoran) but glosses thus on it (p. 100.) It is, says he, as much as to say,
the Virtue of the Significator being at a distance, at the Nativity, from the
Promissor, will be a certain number of years and days according to the Rules of
Art in Direction, ere it comes to maturity. Repl. As if the Promissor stood
only for an Index of time but promised nothing concerning the thing it self.
Which is point blank against the Rudiments of Astrology. What Astrologer will
ever say, that the Horoscope for example directed in Trine Aspect to Venus as
Promissor, the same thing is promised as when it is directed in Trine Aspect to
Mars? But while J. B. despoils the Promissor of all office but the indication
of time, he yields the cause to me, and makes it all one as if it were empty
space or nothing. And withal insinuates a very considerable notion to the
sagacious. That these Aspects are so sacred with the Astrologers, merely that
they may hence take occasion or find a pretense to foretell the time of the
Accidents of humane life, as the Physicians do the time of the Paroxysms of the
Disease by the Aspects of the Moon, the phantastry of which conceits I have
above sufficiently laid open.

And that this numbering of years by Direction when the feat will come to pass,
is a mere arbitrarious fancy, does further appear, whenas all the Planets may
be Significators, yet their courses are extremely different in swiftness, the
Moon's being about 360. times swifter than that of Saturn, and yet the Moon
directed in Trine Aspect to Saturn, there are promised such things to the
Infant as cannot easily belong to him till he be thirty or forty years old.
Which is a plain intimation that this pretense of prognosticating the fate of
the Infant by Direction, is a mere phansy, as I have, though briefly, yet
clearly proved against J. B. all the Rudiments of Astrology to be. And whether
he will acknowledge my just triumph hitherto or no, it is all one to me.
There Is no unprejudiced Reader but certainly will. The main subterfuge behind
is their pretense of Events answering to their Art. Which if he speak any thing
material to, we shall have occasion to consider it upon the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
1. Their fallacious allegation of Events answering to Predictions. 2. An
Answer to that Evasion of theirs, That the Error is in the Artist, not in the
Art. 3. Further Confutations of their bold presumption, that their Art always
predicts true. 4. That the punctual correspondence of the Event to the
prediction of the Astrologer does not prove the certainty of the Art of
Astrology. 5. The great affinity of Astrology with Daemonolatry, and of the
secret Agency of Demons in bringing about Predictions. 6. That by reason of
the secret Agency or familiar Converse of Demons with pretended Astrologers,
no Argument can be raised from Events for the truth of this Art. 7. A
Recapitulation of the whole matter argued. 8. The just occasions of this
Astrological Excursion, and of his showing the ridiculous condition of those
three high-flown sticklers against Christianity, Apollonius, Cardan and
Vaninus. 1. BUT here their Hold is not so strong as their Impudence great, that
they will so boldly bear us in hand, that by virtue of the Principles of their
Art they have foretold any thing to come. * There are many ludicrous ways of
Divination wherein no man is in good earnest, and yet the Predictions and
present personal Descriptions of men sometimes fall right; but no sober man
will impute this to Art, but to Chance. It was but a fallacy of Neptune's
Priest, when he would have carried the Spectator into admiration of that Deity
from the many Donaries hung up in his Temple by Votaries. But he whom he would
have thus imposed upon was too cunning for him. For he demanded straightway a
Catalogue of those Votaries that had suffered Shipwreck. And so do I of those
Predictions that have proved false. * Cardan, a reputed Prince in this faculty,
complains that scarce ten in forty prove true: And Picus, a narrow searcher
into the Art, professes that he has found of his own experience nineteen in
twenty false; and that in the Prognostication of weather, where no free Agents
intermeddle to interrupt or turn off the natural influence of the Stars.

2. But all the Aberrations that either themselves or others may have observed,
will not bring off the more devoted Admirers of Astrology to acknowledge the
vanity thereof. For their excuse is, First, that by History, private
Information, and by their own Experience they are assured, that the Predictions
sometimes do fall punctually true to a Year, nay to a Day, and sometimes to an
Hour, and that the circumstances of things are so particularly set out, that it
cannot be chance but Art that arrives to that accuracy. And then, secondly,
That the Profession of others, and also their own observation, does witness to
them, that when there is any mistake, * the Error is in the Artist, not in the
Art. For when they have examined their Astrological Scheme, they find the Event
was there signified, and that it was their own oversight to miss it. But to
Answer to the latter first, I say, they cannot pretend their observation
Universal; and they that understand Astrology best, will acknowledge there is
that intanglement usually and complication of things, that it requires a very
long time to give due judgment according to Art concerning a Nativity. And
therefore, I say, the Representation of the Event being so doubtful, if they
chance to predict right at first, they easily persuade themselves that was the
meaning of the Celestial Theme. If they miss, they will force on their way
further, till they find out what is answerable to the Events; which then must
needs be the meaning of the Art, though the Artist oversaw it: nor will they
urge themselves to any further accuracy of Inquisition, for fear they should
find it disagree again; or rather out of a strong credulity, that if it hit
right, it is surely from the true meaning and Principles of their beloved
Science: when as in truth their Themes have no certainty in their
representation, but are as a piece of changeable stuff, or creased Pictures,
look this way it is this color, that way that, this way a Virgin, that way an
Ape; or like the Oracles of Apollo, who was deservedly called Loxias, whose
crooked Answers winded so this way and that way, that nothing but the Event
could tell whither they pointed.

3. I might add further, that the pretense of the Schemes themselves (be they
never so exact) I say, the pretense of their always representing the Events
aright, is a most impudent and rash presumption; because (as I have intimated
already) * the Objects of their Predictions are so alterable by the interposal
of free Agents, which interrupt ever and anon the series of causality in
natural inclinations. Whence in reason a man can expect no certain Predictions
at all from the significations of the Stars, nor that any trial can be made
whether there be any thing in the Art or no. And it cannot but seem to every
one a very bold surmise, to imagine that all that fall in one Fight by the edge
of the Sword, suffer Shipwreck in one storm, or are swept away in one
Pestilence, had their Emissors and Interfectors in their Nativity answerable to
the times of their Death. *The Artists themselves dare not avouch it, and
therefore bring in an unobserved caution of having recourse to Eclipses.
Comets, and Blazing-Stars, to calculate the general fortune of the place, nay,
of their Parents and Ancestors, and of their familiar friends, of which there
is no news in the most famous Predictions of Astrologers: and therefore these
and the like considerations being left out, it is a sign their Divinations fell
true by chance. Wherefore it is a shameless piece of Imposture to impute the
truth of Predictions to Art, where the Rules of Art are not observed; I may add
where they are so palpably by experience confuted. For so it is in Twins, whose
natures should be utterly the same according to their Art; and if they could be
born at one moment, the moment of their Death should be the same also. And *
yet those undissevered Twins born in Scotland, who lived till twenty eight
years of their Age, proved very often dissenting Brethren, would wrangle and
jangle; and one also died before the other. See his defense of judicial
Astrology, Cap. II.
In answering to which instance, in my judgment, that ingenious Knight Sir
Christopher is very shrewdly baffled.

4. And now to the Sect. 2.
former, I say, the reasoning is not right, to conclude the certainty of the
Art from the punctual correspondence of the Event to the Prediction. For it is
also true, that the Event has been punctually contrary thereto. And therefore
this is as good a Demonstration that it is no Art, as the other that it is: But
* it is easy to conceive that both may happen by chance. Again, as for that
exact punctuality of time, it is most likely to be by chance, because (as I
have proved above) there is no way of rectifying a Nativity to that accuracy
they pretend. And for particular circumstances * in Horary Questions, why may
not they be by underhand information, or some tricks and juglings that are
usual amongst Cheats? But if the Predictions of Astrologers be free from this,
and yet be punctual in time and other circumstances, and so many that it may
seem improbable to be imputed to chance, (though chance has such a latitude,
that it is difficult to say any thing is not by chance that happens, suppose
but four times seldomer than the contrary) it will not yet follow, that they
are free from other things which are assuredly worse, more horrid, and more
execrable; * such as the consulting of Ghosts and familiar Spirits: a
wickedness that that zealous Patron of Astrology, Sir Christopher Heydon,
acknowledges to be too frequently palliated under the pretense of this Art.

5. And truly for my own part I do not much doubt but that Astrology it self is
an Appendix of the old Pagans Superstition, who were Worshippers of the Host of
Heaven, and whose Priests were Confederates of the Devil; and therefore it is
no wonder if Daemonolatry creep in upon Astrology, and renew their old
acquaintance with one enother. And assuredly it is a pleasant Spectacle to
those Aerie Goblins, those Haters and Scorners of Mankind, to see the noble
faculties of men debased and entangled in so vile and wretched a mystery, which
will avail nothing to Divination unless these (...), these malicious Deceivers
act their parts in the Scene. For it is not unconceivable how these invisible
Insidiators may so apply themselves to a man's curiosity that will be tampering
and practicing in this superstition, that, (suppose) in Horary Questions, *
they may excite such persons and at such a time to make their demands, that
according to the fore-known Rules of Astrology the Theme of Heaven will
decypher very circumstantially the Person, his Relations, or his Condition, and
give a true solution of the demand, whether about Decumbitures, stolen goods,
or any such Questions as are set down in Dariot's Introduction. Which needs
must enravish the young Astrologer, and inflame him with the Love and
Admiration of so strange an Art. And as for Nativities and punctual Predictions
of the time of ones Death, and it may be of the manner of it, (which either
only, or most ordinarily happens in such as are addicted to, or devoted
admirers of this Art) it is very suspicable that the same invisible powers put
to their helping hand to bring about the Effect; and * so those whose
misfortunes and deaths are predicted, must to the pot, to credit the Art, and
be made Sacrifices to the lust and ambition of those rebellious Fiends, to
whose secret lash and dominion men expose themselves when they intermeddle with
such superstitious Curiosities as are Appendages to ancient Paganism, and were
in all likelihood invented or suggested by those proud and ludicrous Spirits,
to entangle man in by way of sport and scorn, and to subjugate him to the
befoolments of their tricks and delusions. For it is not unreasonable to think,
that by certain Laws of the great Polity of the invisible World * they gain a
right against a man without explicit contract, if he be but once so rash as to
tamper with the mysteries of the Dark Kingdom, or to practice in them, or any
way to make use of them. For why not here as well as in the Ceremonies of
Witchcraft? (but I must not make too large excursions.) And therefore I think
it the safest way for every one that has given his name to God and Christ, not
to meddle nor make with these superstitious Curiosities of Astrology, either by
practicing them himself, or consulting them that do, that no ill trick be put
upon him by being made obnoxious to the invisible scourge, or by making others
so in whose behalf he consults.

6. I say then, these vagrant Demons of the Air, either secretly insinuating
themselves into the actions of Astrologers, or after, more apparently offering
themselves to familiarity and converse, for to grace their profession by oral
Revelation of things past, present, or to come, in such a way as is above
humane power; I demand how it shall appear that Cardan's, for Example, and
Sueton. in vita Domitiani, Sect. 15.
Ascletarion's Deaths, and others more punctually, that I could name, predicted
by themselves or others, was not by the familiarity of Demons, but the pure
Principles of Astrology? And so of whatsoever Honor or other Events that have
been found to fall out just according to Astrological Predictions, * I demand
how it can be proved that Astrology was not here only for a Vizard, and that a
Magician or Wizzard was not underneath? By how much accurater their Predictions
are, by so much the more cause of suspicion.

7. Now therefore to conclude, seeing that the Principles of Astrology are so
groundless, frivolous, nay contradictious one with another, and built upon
false Hypotheses and gross mistakes concerning the Nature and System of the
World; seeing it has no due object by reason of the interposing of the free
Agency of both men and Angels to interrupt perpetually the imagined natural
series of both causality and events; seeing there is not sufficient experience
to make good the truth of the Art, they that have practiced therein having not
observed the pretended Laws thereof with due accuracy, and therefore if any
thing has hitherto hit true, it must be Chance, which quite takes away their
Plea from Events; so that their Art is utterly to seek, not only for Principles
which I have demonstrated to be false, but for Experience and Effects, which
hitherto have been none; (And assuredly they make nothing to pronounce loudly
that such or such a Configuration will have such an Event, though they never
experienced it at all, or very seldom, as it must needs be in the Conjunction
of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, which returns not in seven hundred years;) seeing
also that those Predictions that are pretended to have fallen right are so few,
that they may justly be deemed to have fallen right by chance, and that if any
thing has been foretold very punctually and circumstantially, * it may as well,
nay better, be supposed to proceed from the secret insinuations or visible
converse with the Aerie Wanderers, than from the indication of the Stars; and
lastly, seeing there is that affinity and frequent association of Astrology
with Daemonolatry and ancient Pagan Superstition, that person certainly must
have a strangely-impure and effascinable passivity of fancy, that can be bound
over to a belief or liking of a Foolery so utterly groundless as Astrology is,
and so nearly verging toward the brinks of Apostasy and Impiety.

8. I have now finished my Astrological Excursion, to which I was strongly
tempted, in a just zeal and resentment * of that unparalled presumption and
wicked sauciness of the vainglorious Cardan, who either in a rampant fit of
pride and thirst after admiration, or out of a malicious design to all true
piety, would make the World believe, that the Divinity and Sacrosanctity of
Christian Religion was subjected to his imaginary Laws of the Stars, and that
the fate of Christ the Son of God, miraculously born of the Holy Ghost, was
writ in his Nativity, which forsooth he pretended to have Calculated: As if all
that Justice, Meekness and power of working of Miracles were derived upon our
Savior from the natural influence of the Configuration of the Heavens at his
Birth; and as if he did not willingly lay down his Life for the World, John
10.18.
as he himself professes, but were surprised by Fate, and lay subject to the
stroke of an Astrological (...), or Sidereal Interfector. As also to meet *
with that enormous Boaster and self-conceited Wit, the profane and
giddy-headed Vaninus, a transported applauder and admirer of that wild and vain
supposition of Cardan, upon which he so much dotes, that it is the very prop
and Masterpiece of his impious Writings, the both Basis and finishing of all
his Villainous distorted Doctrines against the truth and sacredness of the
Christian Religion. To which two you may add also Apollonius, though long
before them, a high pretender to Divine Revelations, and hot Instaurator of
decaying Paganism; but withal, a very silly affecter of See Book 4. Chapter 4.
Sect. 2.
Astrological Predictions, by which it is easily discoverable at what a pitch
he did either divine or philosophize. And methinks it is a trim sight * to see
these three busy Sticklers against Christianity, like three fine Fools so
goodly gay in their Astromantick disguises, exposed to the just scorn and
derision of the World for their so high pretensions against what is so holy and
solid as the Christian Faith is, and that upon so fond and frivolous grounds as
this of Astrology.

ANNOTATIONS. CHAP. XVII. Sect. I.
THere are many ludicrous ways of Divination wherein no man is in good earnest,
etc. Ans. Very good, says he, (p. 102.) and therefore be there never so many
serious ways of Prediction, none shall be believed to be otherwise but mere
chance. As who would say, because Zidkijah the Son of Chenaanah was a false
Prophet, therefore Micaiah the Son of Imlah could not be a true one. Repl. The
serious and solid ways of Prediction are to be attended to, nor do the false
pretenses of some to them, null the right of those whose pretenses are just and
true. But we have abundantly proved, this very way of divining by Astrology to
be vain and frivolous, when as the Answer supposes it solid and serious. And
the instance of Zidkijah and Micaiah is as little to the purpose, they both
pretending to a solid privilege where it is obtained, viz. Inspiration from
the Lord. But judiciary Astrology it self is wholly a cheat and foppery, as I
have made good clearly and evidently against J.B. And lastly, this Answer
shoots quite besides the mark, my Argument here being against their Appeal to
Events answering sometimes to their Astrological Predictions. Which I say makes
nothing for them, the same happening in Divinations confessedly ludicrous.

Cardan a reputed Prince in this faculty complains that scarce ten in forty
prove true. And Picus a narrow searcher into the Art, etc. Ans. He quotes
Cardan, says he, ( p. 103.) but names not where, enquire if he belly him not.
He quotes Picus, but Picus had no skill in Astrology, etc. Repl. I must confess
I have not the Book by me, but it is Cardan Lib. de Judic. Cap. 6. as it is
quoted by Gassendus in his Physics, Sect. 2. lib. 6. Cap. 5. Whereupon
Gassendus cries out, Confessionem habes quam vel ex nolente veritas extorserit.
And a little after in the same place, he notes, how Cardan commends that saying
of Marlianus, Si vis divinare, contrarium ad unguem dicito ejus quod Astrologi
aut pollicentur aut minitantur. And my self have made observation how exactly
false they have spoken. And as for Picus, what he says of his own observation,
the like Gassendus testifies of his. And for their skill in Astrology it must
be J. B's great ignorance of what they have writ touching that pretended Art,
or else excessive Immodesty that he does not readily acknowledge their skill
much to exceed his own. They had indeed so much as clearly to discern the
foppery of it, which he perversely calls their enmity thereto.

Sect. 2. The Error is in the Artist not in the Art, etc. Ans. I would fain
know, says he, what Art or Science humane it is, whose professors are clear of
Error. There be many Physicians miss of their Cure, and yet are there not true
Physicians? Repl. This is again as above a fallacious Answer, it supposing what
is not, That Astrology is a real Art, to be made out by experience and reason,
whenas I have clearly showed it is not, but that all the Principles thereof,
which are proper to it, are merely imaginary, not to be proved by sense nor
reason; but it is quite otherwise in Physic, Theology, and other Arts or
Sciences. A man is certain of and feels the operations of such and such methods
of Physic, that it was that which altered his Body, but who could ever
distinctly perceive, That such a Natalitious Theme of Heaven wrought upon him?
It is merely the fancy of the Astrologer, and of such Fools as believe him.
Cardan, who is accounted the greatest and most skilful Astrologer that ever
was, so that it could not be imputed to the defect of the Artist, yet having
Calculated the Nativity of his eldest Son Johannes Babtista, which you may be
sure he did with all care imaginable, yet he missed the most notorious accident
of his life, his poisoning of his own Wife, and his shameful punishment by the
hand of the Hangman for that villainous crime. This mistake was plainly a
defect in the Art, it being perfectly casual as other ludicrous modes of
Divination are, and not in the Artist, Cardan being accounted the most
incomparable Prince of Astrologers.

Sect. 3. The Objects of their Predictions are so alterable by the Interposal
of free Agents, etc. Ans. All he Answers to this is, He comes up again with the
old objection which needs no more Answer. Repl. A compendious piece of
discretion to decline an Argument too hot and heavy for his fingering, as I
have shown sufficiently above, and that Free Will is a perfect repugnancy to
the pretense of Astrological Predictions.

The Artists themselves dare not avouch it, etc. Ans. The Artists may and do
avouch it, says he (p. 104.) and the recourse to Eclipses is but out of
modesty, etc. Repl. This seems a great piece of Immodesty in J. B. to affirm a
thing so peremptorily that is new, and cite no Author that has broke the ice
before him. But he urges further, It is apparent, says he, in the late Fire in
London, by many Examples, and by all as can be gathered up, that every man's
loss was predicted in his Nativity. Repl. I would here ask J. B. how many those
many were (For they ought to be a very great many indeed to signify any thing
when such an huge multitude. suffered loss) and whether their Nativities were
Calculated before the Fire or after. (For they have a trick to squeeze what
they please out of their Celestial Themes, and to drag them some way or other
to their known Event) And whether he will warrant there were no Themes
suppressed, which served not the Astrologers turn, and could not so hand somely
be forced to confess this loss by Fire. Unless these things be cleared, it is
but a lame Answer, and deserves no further Reply.

Yet those two indissevered Twins born in Scotland proved very often dissenting
Brethren, and one also died before the other, etc. Ans. But what of that, say
he, ( p. 105.) There are some men so froward that they are seldom at peace in
their own selves, etc. And are there not many men afflicted with a dead Palsy,
in whom one side is dead while the other is alive, etc. Repl. But this
frowardness in himself complies well enough with the Astrological Principles
and pretended Influence of the Stars, it being the same person, and so the same
person having the same conflicts with himself. But two persons exactly under
the same Influence of the Stars, from their Nativity to clash one with another,
plainly clashes with the Principles of your Astrology. As also does that other
Answer clash with the same, viz. that a man, who is all of him born as well one
side of him as the other at one time, should have his left side suppose dead
before the other, as if the left side breathed before the right, or had its
Navil-string cut before the other. So that this other Answer is really another
Objection against the Principles of Astrology.

Sect. 4. It is easy to conceive that both may happen by chance. That is, That
the Prediction may prove exquisitely true, or exquisitely false, as I have
observed my self in the latter. And when the former happens it is no more
admirable than the feat of my Tutor R.G. his Linnet, who gotten out of the
Cage, and flying to a Book that lay open, muted upon the very word
Sterquilinium, and yet the Linnets tail could neither write nor read, much less
understand Latin, or any Language else. But J. B. here returns a swaggering
Answer (p. 105.) We are able, says he, to produce our Rules, and by our Rules
to say this Child shall be certainly fortunate, and that unfortunate, this year
it shall have a Fever, and that year it shall be well. But how well this agrees
with Cardan's own profession, who I trow was a far better Astrologer than J. B.
I leave to the prudent to consider.

In Horary Questions they use tricks and juglings to deceive, etc. Ans. And
what then, says he (p. 106.) are these the blame of Astrologers because there
are Cheaters amongst them? Repl. It is the blame of such Professors of
Astrology as impute that to their Art which they do by underhand Information.
And these falsely pretended Divinations filling up the Catalogue of the proofs
for the Art of Astrology, shows plainly the rottenness of that Topic, and that
there is no arguing from Events.

Such as the consulting of Ghosts and familiar spirits, etc. A wickedness which
Sir Christopher Heydon acknowledges to be too frequently palliated under the
pretense of this Art, etc. Ans. What a strange kind of wickedness is here, says
he (p. 107.) We Astrologers are all of us an ancient relic of Pagans,
Confederate with the Devil and guilty of Daemonolatry, etc. Repl. That he may
seem to be able to give an Answer he lays the charge false, as if I had said
all Astrologers consult with Ghosts and familiar Spirits, whenas I only say
some do, which are over many though not all. And to make good the charge that I
have laid, besides the witness of Sir Christopher, I will bring in J.B. himself
to witness against his fellow Astrologers, who in his Preface to his
Hagiastrologia (p. 24.) expressly confesses, That without the Heavenly or
Supernatural Wisdom, Astrological skill would become rank poison to the
Astrologer, as being such a thing as would lead them to the Devil sooner than
to God, and draw them into Sorcery and other evil Arts, whereby they would be
entangled with Diabolical Familiarities ere they were aware, even as are
Witches and Conjurers. And here I would ask J. B. how many of the many
Astrologers now adays have attained to that Celestial and Supernatural Wisdom,
that is requisite to keep them from falling in with the Devil, and becoming
Sorcerers, to use his own phrase, p. 25.

And again in the Treatise it self, p. 35. I would have the Reader to know,
says he, that there are many that under color of Astrology, do practice other
Diabolical Arts of Magic or Sorcery, which are quite different things, and of
no kin to Astrology. And this Theme he writes copiously and freely upon for
three or four pages there together. I will only set down one passage more which
shall serve for all the rest, p. 38. But true it is that too many Astrologers
using their skill more profanely than religiously, and finding that their
Rules of natural Art cannot tell them all things they would know, or so easily
or quickly as they would know them, they fall into the study and practice of
Geomancy, Sorcery, and plain Witchcraft. The Devil though he be a most damned
Apostate, yet is an Angel, and as such has skill in all natural causes, and the
reasons of future Contingencies, beyond the most learned of mortal men that
ever wrote, except such who wrote and spoke by Divine Inspiration. Now if any
man will so far fall from God as to be Confederate with this Apostate, or any
of his Infernal Imps, there is no doubt but he may save the labor of a World
of study which it costs other men, and he shall have his Astrology at second
hand by a kind of Diabolical Inspiration, and that more readily and punctually
to the purpose than they that by great labor and pains come more honestly by
it. Lo, what an ample testimony J. B. has given to confirm this charge of mine
against the Professors of Astrology, whenas he himself confesses of them, that
many betake themselves to the Confederacy of Infernal Imps, and the consulting
with familiar Spirits, or the having some way their assistance, who have a
faculty to raise the very Scene of the things enquired before their sight or
imagination, as I have heard also from experienced parties. Wherefore many
Astrologers Predicting or Divining by these unlawful and Hellish assistances,
and imputing what they do to the Art of Astrology, it is manifest, that this
destroys the force of the Argument fetched from the truth of their Divinations
or Predictions, when they are true: it seldom happening that one can be assured
that it was not from Diabolical assistance, while Astrology is pretended,
besides that other Topic of chance.

Sect. 5. They may excite such persons and at such a time to make their
demands, etc. Ans. Now although, says J. B. (p. 110.) the Devils may very
possibly excite men to make their demands, yet be sure the Heavens at those
times it is not in the Devils power to frame at all, etc. Repl. It need not be
in the Devil's power to frame the Heavens at that time, he having observed in
that frame they then are, that from the fictitious Rules of Astrology the
Artist will give Answer according to truth, that coincidence of things
happening so at that time as to agree with the principles of Astrology (as the
Linnet muted on the word Dunghill) Which coincidence the Devil observing without
any changing the Heavens but only by exciting the party to go at that nick of
time, occasioneth the Astrologer luckily to hit the mark.

So those whose misfortunes and deaths are predicted must to the Pot to credit
the Art, etc. Ans. It seems then with the Doctor ( p. 111.) these Devils can
kill whom and when they list, and that as well Saints as Sinners, and the
Anti-Astrologists as well as the Philo-Astrologists. For thus was predicted the
Death of Picus as well as Cardan, and of Gassendus as well as Ascletarion.
Repl. Neither whom nor when they list. For in this Section I restrain it to the
devoted admirers of Astrology, nor to them, but when they have superstitiously
given their lives or fortunes to be determined by the vain Rules of that Art.
And as for Picus and Cardan I would wish J. B. to read Gassendus touching the
Case, who tells us how Gauricus himself writes how three Genethliaci of those
times predicted only that Picus would die before the thirty sixth year of his
Age, which naturally implies, that he would live to the thirty fifth thereof,
when as he lived but thirty one years. And Ballantius that pretended to hit the
mark at the thirty third year of his Age, over-shot himself two years or
thereabout. So that it is a vain Allegation to say the Devil then had power to
kill Picus the Anti-Astrologist, when he neither did assist those Genethliaci,
or if he did, was ignorant of the time of his death, and consequently was no
cause thereof. And as for Cardan he pined away himself to death, being
impatient of being laughed at for out-living his own Prediction. And for the
Prediction of Gassendus his death by Astrologers, I will consider it after I
know it. He quotes no Author for it, and therefore I shall defer any Answer to
it till he does. And for Ascletarion, Cardan himself suspects it for a Fable,
as you may see in Gassendus. But if there had been any truth, either touching
Cardan's death. as the Astrologers report it, or Ascletarion's, I have spent my
judgment of it already, Sect. 6. And for those other three Predictions he
mentions, after I have certain information how the punctual time of the Birth
of Cromwell, Philip Prosper, and Charles Gustavus was known, and am acquainted
with the person of that most ingenious Artist J. G. as well as himself, I hold
it time enough to give an Answer. And I think I have answered all pretenses
sufficiently already, in maintaining the former Chapter against J. B. and so
plainly demonstrating that all the supposed Rudiments of Astrology are mere
Fooleries.

They gain a right against a man without explicit contract, etc. Ans. What Is
all this to the purpose, says he, ( p. 109.) unless there could be no such
things as Conjurers but what are first Astrologers? Repl. Yes it is to the
purpose. For though this be not the only way to be entangled in Diabolical
superstitions, yet because it is one way, and that a special one, it is worth
the while to take notice of it.

Sect. 6. I demand how it can be proved that Astrology was not here only for a
Vizard, and that a Magician or Wizard was not underneath, etc. Ans: You must
note now, says he ( p. 109.) that to have familiarity with these Demons so as
to predict or tell any thing by virtue of such a familiarity, is punishable
with death both by the law of God and Man, etc. Repl. That there are many that
under the vizard of Astrology are really Magicians or Wizards, I have
abundantly proved already to be the opinion of J. B. himself. And therefore my
Question is raised upon a ground acknowledged in common by us both, and he is
bound to answer any seeming inconvenience from the opinion as much as my self.
Nor does it at all follow, because such an Astrological Prediction, it is
uncertain whether it be the exploit of a Magician or a mere Astrologer, that he
that predicts it is to arraigned for a Magician, but that such a Prediction is
no proof for the solidity of Astrology, unless it can be proved that the
Predictor is no Wizard or Magician; And if he be certainly cleared thereof
(without he predict better than Cardan allows Astrologers to predict) unless it
be proved also that it is not chance but Art, that he predicted true.

Sect. 7. It may as well nay better be supposed to proceed from the secret
insinuations or visible converse of the Aerie Wanderers, etc. Ans. Well now,
says he (p. 32.) we are beholden to the Doctor, he does not call us downright
Conjurers, Sorcerers or Witches, but it is to be suspected so, etc. Repl. But
not always, but when things fall out punctually right. For then unless they
will take sanctuary in the Linnets tail, and acknowledge they predicted so
exactly by chance, according to J. B. his own Concessions, it is too too
probable there was the assistance of some Infernal Imp in the business, with
whom the Astrologer is Confederate, who has this his Astrology at the second
hand as J. B. phrases it, by a kind of Diabolical Inspiration, and that more
readily and punctually to the purpose, than they that by great labor and pains
come more honestly by it; they are his own words above recited. And now let any
indifferent Reader judge, whether these punctual Predictions be not, unless
they happen by chance, better imputed to Diabolical Inspiration, as J.B. calls
it, than to the pretended Art of Astrology; which quite spoils the pretense of
arguing for Astrology from some Events punctually answering the Predictions.

Sect. 8. Of that unparalled presumption, and wicked sauciness of
vainglorious Cardan. Ans. The Answer to this charge or what ever is like it
against Cardan (p. 14.) is very slim and shuffling, and does not at all come
home to the matter. For first, he says, Cardan tells in what Position the
Heavens were at Christ's Birth, which is no more than Astronomers do, who
Calculate the Planets places for any time. Repl. This I confess there is no
hurt in if they knew the time exactly of Christ's Birth; but to pretend to give
the Configuration of the Heavens in a mistaken time of Christ's Birth, as
Cardan and J. B. have done, is an apparent piece of folly. Secondly, says he,
Cardan avers, that as the Heavens were then posited, that such and such
manners, complexion, and ordinary accidents were wont to follow as befell our
Savior. And if this be culpable then woe be to all Physicians, who out of their
readings and experiments collect receipts of Medicines from their skill in
Herbs. Repl. As if the Stars had as natural and effectual operation upon the
person of our Savior to make him to be, do, and suffer, what he was, did and
suffered, as physic has upon a Patient. From whence it will follow that the
Sanctity of his person, which was from the Holy Ghost, the Power of doing
Miracles, which was also supernatural; and the laying down of his life which
was from himself merely and voluntary, should be from the Influence of the
Stars, as Cardan expressly confesses (as I shall note anon) that the Law of
Christ and Moses is from the Stars as well as that of Mahomet and the Pagans.
And here I appeal to all the World if it be not a wild presumption and wicked
sauciness of Cardan thus to subject the Holy Jesus and his Divine Law to the
Influence of the Stars, and place them in the same Classes with Mahometism and
Paganism. If this be not enormous presumption and sauciness, considering the
greatness of our Saviors person, and gross wickedness and impiety, considering
his Holiness, I dare appeal to J. B. himself. But he goes on.

Thirdly and lastly, Cardan asserts, says he, That by virtue of his
Astrological experience ( or at least J. B. phansies he does, that he may seem
to do as he does) and the nature of the position of the Heavens compared with
the life of our Savior, he found some confirmation of the truth of the time of
Christ's Nativity, and that the truth of the time of Christ's Birth was some
confirmation of the truth and worth of Astrology. And if this be blasphemy,
etc. then sure the Scriptures must needs be as much too, which affirm the time
of Christ's Birth, and declare of the wise men how they found him out by their
Starry Intelligence, or indeed by their Astrological skill. Repl. As for
Cardan's making use of his Calculation of Christ's Nativity to find out the
time thereof exactly, or to conciliate authority to Astrology thereby, so far
as I can find, they are the mere surmises of J. B. But to affirm, that there is
as much blasphemy or impious sauciness to set down simply the time of Christ's
Birth as the Scripture does, as there is to pretend to know it by Cardan's
Principles of Astrology, which determine the condition of the person and Law of
Christ to the Influence of the Heavens and Stars in such sort as they do the
Religion of Mahomet and of the Pagans, is such a piece of extravagancy and
wildness, that nothing can be more.

And yet that is a mavelous freak also to understand that, Matthew. 2.9. as J.
B. does. When they had heard the King they departed, and lo, the Star which
they saw in the East went before them till it came and stood over where the
young Child was. Upon which he glosses thus. The Scripture declares of the Wise
men how they found Christ out by their Starry Intelligence, or indeed by their
Astrological skill. Whenas the following this Star required no more skill in
Astrology than to follow a Lantern-Carrier, or a Link-Boy in a Winter Night. It
was neither Planet, nor fixed Star, nor any natural Comet, especially as to its
motion, but rather (...), or an Angel or good Genius displaying his visibility
in the form of a Star, according to the opinion of the Ancients. And that the
Genii do appear in such a form, there is frequent mention in History. I have
already sufficiently made good my charge against Cardan of his presumption and
wicked sauciness in Calculating our Savior's Nativity in that sense, in which
he understands his own act, and we see how weak and vain J. B. his defense is.
Which shall yet be made out more fully by what I shall reply to his Answers to
other passages of this present Section.

With that enormous boaster and self-conceited Wit, the profane and
giddy-headed Vaninus, and transported Applauder and Admirer of that wild and
vain supposition of Cardan, etc. Ans. Has he, says J. B. (p. 12.) named any
thing out of Vaninus that proves either his enormous boasting, or any thing of
his merely self-conceited Wit, or ought that shows him profane and
giddy-headed? Does he name any of his Writings that must needs be impious, or
any of his Doctrines which are so villainous, distorted, and against the truth
and sacredness of Christian Religion? Repl. Has J. B. read Vaninus himself,
whereby he may pretend that I have given a wrong Character of him upon his own
knowledge? As for the proof of Vaninus his boasting and self-conceitedness, I
have put J. B. in a way already (upon the fourteenth Chapter) whereby he may be
satisfied. And for his giddy-headedness and whimzicalness, his admiration of so
vain and frivolous an Art as Astrology, and his building so great matters on
it, is proof enough. To say nothing how he shifts and flings about to shuffle
off those certain truths of Apparitions in the Air of humane shape, etc. One
while phancying that they may be Images or Statues librated in the Air by
certain Mathematical Laws. Another while that an Image full of rifts and little
holes, newly colored and moist, applied to smoke, the smoke carries the
representation of the Image on high. Other sometimes that some light Image may
be carried up into the Air by being hung at the foot of some Kite or Eagle.
Another while that these Appearances are nothing but the reek of men's bodies
which therefore represent humane shapes carried on high. With several other as
vain conceits, whereby he would elude the truth of such Apparitions in the
vulgar sense, and the existence of Demons, which is his main scope. So in like
manner, that there may be no Witches that have any Confederacy with familiar
Spirits, he phansies that old ones do all their mischief by the filthiness of
their breath, by which they corrupt whole Fields of Corn, the young ones by the
strength of their fancy, with many such whimzical things which it would be
tedious to recite. J. B. may read them at his leisure in Vaninus, beginning at
the 50. and holding on to the 60. Dialogue.

But my charge of Profaneness and Impiety is of more consequence to make good.
And here I will appeal to the judgment of J. B. himself, what he may think of
such suggestions as these in Vaninus. 1. Christum se crucifigendum obtulisse ad
comparandam apud posteros aeterni nominis gloriam. 2. Mosen vivum se in abyssum
dejecisse, ut in coelum raptum esse populus crederet. 3. Unicum esse verum
cultum, Legem Naturae, quae and Deus est; caeteras Leges Figmenta esse a
Principibus ad subditorum Paedagogiam excogitata and a Sacrificulis ob honoris
and auri aucupium, confirmata, non miraculis, sed Scriptura (cujus Originale
nullibi invenitur) quae miracula ficta recitet, and bonarum ac malarum actionum
repromissiones polliceatur, in futura tamen vita, ne fraus detegi possit. 4.
Miracula and portenta Religionum aut fuisse sacerdotum imposturas aut ad causas
naturales referri posse. (These you may see in Dialogue the 50. And Dialogue
the 52. which is the fifth passage which I will note.) 5. Omnia orta occidere
and aucta senescere, non solum Arbores, Bruta Animalia, Homines, sed Urbes,
Regna and Religiones. 6. Mundum esse aeternum ideoque qui nunc sunt in usu
ritus centies millies fuisse, totiesque renasci quoties ceciderunt. 7. Corpora
coelestia de Regibus, de Regnis, de Civitatibus and de rebus magnis in
Universum sollicita esse, ac proinde ubi illis immutatio imminet, in Coelo, in
Elementis, in Plantis, in Brutis, and in Hominibus diversa nobis signa and
prodigia objicere. 8. Corpora vero coelestia si Reges, Regna, and Civitates
curant, multo magis Religiones and Legislatores, quos ipsa constituunt Divinae
Voluntatis praenuntios, qui and Dei Filii merito nuncupari possunt. 9.
Religiones in sui ortu and interitu non in medio miracula ostentare, cujus rei
hanc esse causam, quia in longissimis temporum intervallis intercedunt
Planetarum conjunctiones: quo tempore novam Religionem institui ac proinde
veterem cessare. Eque magnis siderum conjunctionibus, quum Inferiora haec
summam nanciscantur potestatem, admiranda opera proferri, hominum voluntates
tunc immutari, phantasian qua Intellectus voluntatis consiliarius utitur Coelo
subjici. Virum igitur sapientem sacrosque aeterni nominis honores appetentem
cum haec futura praevidit, prophetam se a Deo missum praedicare, quaeque
necessaria coelestium corporum vi miracula fiunt, confictae sui ipsius
omnipotentiae adscribere, atque ita delusam plebeculam illum admirari and
adorare. 10. Ea demum esse vera miracula quae post longissimas Coelorum
circuitiones accidunt, non quae naturae vires superant. 11. Coelestia corpora
Vates instruere, rerum futurarum species in ipsorum Intellectu effingendo. Nam
si Sol dat muris formam in fimeto, quanto facilius eventi futuri speciem in
phantasia? 12. Ex Cardani sententia unam in omnibus Animantibus esse animam,
quae pro materiae dispositione plus minusve se alicui communicate.

But I hope by this time J. B. is tired out or surfeited with such profane
stuff, and blushes that he should stand up for such a Patron of Astrology as
this. But if he like it, he may find more of the same suit in the following
Dialogues. So little injury have I done Vaninus in saying he is impious and
profane. Nay, I shall bring Vaninus his self against himself, or the general
sense of all Christians, and upon this very point of Cardans saucy presumption
of Calculating the Nativity of our Savior. In his Amphitheatrum Aeternae
Providentiae Divino-Magicum Exercit. 8. There says Vaninus, that Petrus
Pomponatius allows indeed the miracles of both Religions, Jewish and Christian,
to be true, but that the efficient cause of them is to be referred to the
Stars, or the strength of imagination. And concerning the Stars, he says,
Hieronymus Cardanus is of the same opinion, namely, where he declares, that,
Lex Iudaica est a Saturno, Christiana a Jove and Mercurio, Mahometica a Sole
and Mart, and Idololatria a Luna and Mart, etc. Whereupon Vaninus cries out,
O Os impudentissimum! O Linguam execrandam! O sermones inquinatissimos! O voces
detestandas! Which he speaks either ironically or seriously; if seriously, it
is a testimony with a vengeance, both against himself and J. B. if ironically,
which is more consonant to that in his Dialogues, then it is an exultation of
Vaninus in this bold conceit of Cardan.

But there is another more notable passage to the same purpose in the same
Exercitation. Where Cardan again is brought in speaking thus, Lex nostra and
Servator ipse sub Arietis Conjunctione Superiorum natus est, and ipsa Lex orta;
promulgata vero sub Conjunctione Superiorum in Sagittario, in Regione Arieti
subjecta, etc. Whereupon Vaninus again exclaims, O sacrilegam doctrinam and ex
hominum consortio eliminandam! O impietatem nefariam and post homines natos
inauditam, Prophetarum vaticinia, Christianam Religionem a Deo institutam, a
Deo miraculis confirmatam, ad fabulosam and commentitiam Arietis Conjunctionem
refer! Here I appeal to J.B. if I have spoke any thing either concerning
Cardan or Vaninus more harsh than these Exclamations of Vaninus against Cardan.
In which if he be in good earnest, he does in foulest manner condemn both
Cardan and himself, and let J. B. look to himself too that he come not into the
bargain. But if he speaks by way of Irony, yet being he personates the whole
pious Christian World, and speaks but what they would naturally express, there
is the whole Christian World justifying my sharp reprehensions of Cardan and
Vaninus against the Cavils of J. B. But out of what has been produced above, it
is sufficiently clear, what an impious and profane soul Vaninus was.

To see these three busy Sticklers against Christianity, etc. Ans. He charges
them all three, says he (p. 18.) as Sticklers against Christianity and high
pretenders against the Christian Faith, whenas all well read men do know that
Cardan was a Christian Philosopher and Physician, and died a Professor of the
Christian Faith, and so did Vaninus too. Repl. As if a Professor of
Christianity may not yet be no good Christian, or not really stickle against
it, and more dangerously while he professes it. A very Atheist may be a
Professor of Christianity, which yet I will not say Cardan was. But some
passages of his are so Atheistical that they that befriend him most are fain to
acknowledge him to be mad, that he may not seem an Atheist. What an unchristian
thing is that to make the Religion of Christ draw its Original from no higher a
Principle than Mahometism does, that is, from the Influence of the Planets,
that from Jupiter and Mercury, as this from Sol and Mars, and expressly to
declare of all the miraculous things in Christ that the reason of them may be
resolved into the power of the Stars. The words of Cardan in Vaninus are these,
Amphitheatr. Aetern. Provid. Exercit. 7. Est genesis Domini nostri Jesu Christi
in qua tot videbis and tanta mirabilia ut judices, etsi naturalibus rationibus
solummodo insistendum esset, Christi Nativitatem fuisse admirabilem, Naturamque
illi tribuisse, quantum concursu omnium Coelorum excogitari poterat. And in the
same Exercitation he attributes Christ's poverty, that he had not where to lay
his head, to the (...) which he calls Sors) its being under the Earth in the
Terms of Saturn. And Exercit. 8. His disputing in the Temple at twelve years of
Age, to Jupiter his being in his Ascendant. And his putting an end to the
Jewish Religion, to his having Saturn Retrograde in the ninth House. Which he
says signified, Studium evertendae Religionis in qua natus erat. When yet our
Savior expressly professes he came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it,
that is, to carry it on to further perfection and completion, which ill agrees
with the Retrogradation of Saturn.

And in the same Exercitation. After Cardan has attributed the Jewish Religion
to Saturn, the Christian to Jupiter and Mercury, the Mohammedan to Sol and Mars,
and the Idolatrous Pagan to the Moon and Mars, he madly holds on, saying,
Solvitur autem unaquaeque Lex a suo contrario. Saturnum debellat Jupiter
authoritate, and Mercurius ratione. Iovem and Mercurium debellat Mars non
audiens rations and saeviens contra authoritatem. Martem and Solemn debellant
Saturnus and Venus, haec lascivia, ille dolis. Martem and Lunam debellant Sol
and Jupiter authoritate, dignitate and veritate. Upon which he concludes, Ob
hoc Christiani erigite capita; qui potest capere, capiat. As if he had
predicted some excellent state or overspreading Empire of the Christian
Religion upon the Conversion of the Turks. But what he has writ he acknowledges
to be obscure, though it be in the mean time clear enough that he imputes all
Religions alike to the natural Influence of the Heavens and Stars.

Whence his Faith cannot be Christian but a fancy, the true Faith in Christ
being to believe his Mission supernatural, and the condition in which he was in
all his miraculous respects not to proceed from the Aspects of the Heavenly
Bodies at his Nativity, but from the immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost,
who also overshadowed the Virgin in his Conception. Now I demand of J. B. how
little the distant from blasphemy it is to subjugate the Holy Ghost to the Laws
of the Stars, as if he were determined by them to act, or if he be free, that
he should choose to over-shadow the Holy Virgin at such a time that his Nativity
would fall out under such a Configuration of the Heavens as might indicate all
the great concerns of our Blessed Savior, as proceeding from the Influence of
the Stars, and so expose him to be thought a mere natural Prophet not a
Supernatural one, and give occasion to this damnable conceit of Cardan and
Vaninus, that Prophets and Religions, of what sort soever, are but the effects
of the Stars. Certainly this had not become the wisdom of the Holy Ghost, and
therefore it is a reproach and contumely against him to suppose it. Whence J.
B. his pretense of Calculating of our Saviors Nativity, and finding out the
very minute of his Birth, per Accidentia Nati, is quite blown away. And Christ
himself professes, John 10.17, 18. Therefore does my Father love me, because I
lay down my life that I might take it again. No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down my self. Which I leave to J. B. to consider how well it consists
with his making our Savior obnoxious to an Astrological (...), or Sydereal
Interfector.

But to return to Cardan, I would have J. B. to consider what a kind of
Christian Philosopher Cardan can be reputed, and in what a kind of profession
of the Christian Faith he could die, who made our Savior Christ only an Astral
Prophet, or Sydereal Lawgiver, who makes him born of the Stars, as he phansies
Moses and Mahomet to have been, when as it is an Article of our Creed that he
was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, nor was obnoxious to any Astrological
Anaereta, but laid down his life of himself. And I demand of J. B. did the
Stars unite him hypostatically with the eternal Logos, or raise him out of his
grave the third day? Assuredly therefore there was an immediate power of God
and wholly Supernatural that effected all those wonderful things that all true
Christians believe and profess concerning the Holy Jesus. Besides, Vaninus has
noted in his Dialogues, that Cardan held but one common soul in the Universe,
which diversely communicates it self to diversely prepared matter. How this will
consist with that life and immortality which Christ brought to light through
his Gospel, I leave again to J. B. to consider.

And now for Vaninus himself, how well he could be thought to have died in the
profession of the Christian Faith, let his Dialogues answer for him, out of
which I have above produced so many profane and impious passages, as I had
noted them in my Adversaria. Moreover at the point of his death, when he was
brought to execution, which no good Christian can think of without pity and
horror, he affecting to act the part of a constant and magnanimous
Philosopher, was so far from professing himself a Christian, that in vainly
magnifying himself he insulted over the meritorious Agony of our ever Blessed
Savior. For the Monk that accompanied him offering him a Crucifix to
contemplate, he rejected it with scorn to the Crucified Jesus, saying, Illi in
extremis prae timore imbellis sudor, ego imperterritus morior. And yet J. B.
declares of Vaninus too, that he died likewise in the profession of the
Christian Faith. As if it were impossible for any one that was an Admirer of
Astrology (which J. B. will have a Science most Sacred and Divine) but he
should be also a good Christian. When yet in another mood he will freely
acknowledge that many by the affecting that Art have fallen into the snares of
the Infernal Fiends.

By this time, I hope, I have made it good by these my brief Annotations.
First, that though I writ something sharply and satyrically against Cardan and
Vaninus, and such like Astrologers, yet I have not exceeded their demerit, but
have dealt justly and faithfully in the business. Secondly, That I have clearly
shown the impertinences and weaknesses of the very chiefest of J. B. his
pretended Answers to my Confutation of the main Principles of Astrology. And
thirdly and lastly, that there being nothing considerable in his Answers to my
Arguments against Astrology, that it is very probable he thought to make it up
in sordid railing and rude buffoonry, hoping to engage me in his own Element
that I might so be brought to encombate him as a Cock on his own Dunghill. But
true Philosophy and Christianity has taught us a better Lesson. (...)
(...).
But he thought me to be a very March-Bird at the Game, and as he professes (p.
7.) he expected no better language from me than Cardan and Vaninus met with at
my hands, and therefore arms himself with such a patience, that shall quench
all the utmost brands of my fury, insomuch as can my Pen sputter out altogether
Wildfire, yet I shall never hurt him. So furious an Assailant out of his deep
insight into Judiciary Astrology did he prognostic I would be. But good man,
the superstitious presages of his Art have made him more scared than hurt.
Which might be another Argument amongst the rest of the vanity of his
Astrological Profession, that he cannot tell aforehand in his contentions and
brangles he begins with men, whether he shall carry the Cause or his Adversary.
And yet if he had lived at the time that our Savior was born in, and had been
of that Age or rather skill in Astrology that he was when he wrote his
Christologia, he would infallibly have foretold all the Accidents of our
Savior's Life.

And to give him his due, his Nativity-Schemes of our Savior Christ and S.
John Baptist, with his Astrological descant thereon, by operose pulling and
stretching of things, looks speciously and prettily at first sight, and I must
confess, I have neither the leisure, nor think it worth the while, to examine
them according to the Principles of his own Art, which I have abundantly
demonstrated to be but a Foolery. But in my slight perusal I cannot but
observe, that these two great Astrologers Cardan and J. B. give quite contrary
judgments of the natural Qualities of our Savior's person. For whenas Cardan
will have the Heavenly Influence to breath into him nothing but Piety, Justice,
Faithfulness, Simplicity and Charity, J. B. on the contrary reports, as I have
noted above, that though Jupiter indeed on the Ascendent promises well, yet,
says he, Mars is set as if he stood on purpose to destroy a Nativity so
opposite to Jupiter and the Ascendent, and being strong withal, he seems to
threaten all good Qualities with an overturn, infusing nothing but Choler, Fury
and Malice into the Natives head. And disposing of the Moon he makes her so
too. The Sun also looks upon the Cuspe ascending with an evil Quadrature, and
such as usually renders a Native much more proud and ambitious than either wise
or good-natured. And Mercury complying with Sol in the same Aspect endeavors
to incline this sacred person to theft and lies. Can there be two Characters
more contrary the one to the other than these, or a greater Argument of the
folly and madness of Astrology?

But I noted also, that whereas J. B. out of Christ's Nativity-Scheme declares
our Savior of an healthful, robustious complexion, and exceeding able to
struggle with Death, how ill this consorts with that passage of Scripture which
says, he was found dead on the Cross before the two Thieves that were Crucified
with him, so that there was no need to break his Legs to hasten his dying. And
lastly, I appeal to J. B. who cannot but be acquainted with all the pullings
and stretchings, and the pressing of small things, and the suppressing of what
is not for their turn with Astrologers; if a Turkish Astrologer had been to
give judgment on this Nativity-Scheme of Christ, where the Moon sits upon the
Cuspe of the Eighth House, or the House of Death, whether he would not
(according to that conceit of the Turks, that God would not suffer so good a
man as Christ to be Crucified, but that Judas was trussed up in his stead) have
declared with Albohaly, that the Moon in this posture did not prognostic a
violent death but great straits and danger, and Natum fore fugitivum, and so to
escape with his life. But J. B. will Answer, the Moon was also in near
Conjunction with Algol's Head. Repl. But that (as Astrologers use to do) I
conceive the Turkish Astrologer would either willingly oversee or conveniently
omit. But suppose Algol's Head put in its Nose here too, and that the Moon must
be lethiferous in this Case, yet hear what Cardan says to the point, mergit
aquis Luna in octava existens, the Moon in the eighth House drowns men, not
hangs them either on Cross or Gallows; and any ordinary man would have thought
that he that is orn'd to be drowned could not have been hanged, if there were
any thing in Astrology, as he, according to the Proverb, that is orn'd to be
hanged will never be drowned.

But this is but a slight Velitation in comparison of what I shall now produce
to the convincing of J. B. of his folly in pretending to Calculate our
Savior's Nativity, or indeed in pretending at large that there is any thing in
Astrology. For these two Nativity-Schemes of Christ, and S. John the Baptist,
being as specious and plausible as any of them can offer (I Will appeal to J. B.
himself if it be not so) if I prove that J. B. is so far from telling the day
and minute of Christ's Birth, that he has missed of the Year, I hope he will
according to his promise (p. 7.) observing these two such elaborate
Nativity-Schemes to prove but the fruit of the ludicrous Principles of
Astrology, and his own working fancy, for ever bid adieu to that vain
Imposture.

I will with all possible brevity intimate to him what may convince him of this
his mistake in time. And the first thing is, That his first main ground, which
is, that there are just 4000. years from the Creation of the first Adam to the
Incarnation of the Second, is not only precarious, as being built upon an
uncertain interpretation of the 4000. Cubits of Waters, Ezech. Chapter 47. (those
4000. Cubits being capable of a Symbolical sense as well as a Numeral): But it
is further evident, that his interpretation (S. John having manifestly
prevented him in his description of the River of Paradise, Apoc. Chapter 22. and
determined that Vision in Ezekiel to the times of the new Jerusalem, when the
fullness of the Gentiles will be come in, and all Israel be saved, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 11.25.) It is evident, I say, that his Interpretation is
false; Those Waters measured by the Angel, and the description of the River and
Trees bringing their monthly Fruits, prefiguring such a state of the Church as
will not appear at least till the seventh Vial, but is to be most properly
accomplished under the second and third Thunders: So that he has plainly erred
already near one thousand seven hundred Years.

Secondly, He cannot adjust the seventy Weeks of Daniel to this scope and time
of the Incarnation in which he would have the seventy Weeks end; he founding
the adjustment of them upon a very false ground, namely, upon the three Weeks
or twenty one days of hindrance mentioned Dan. c. 10. v. 2.13. which he
interprets so many Years, that upon the expiration of those twenty one Years of
hindering the building of the Temple, etc. he might fix the going forth of the
Decree, c. 9. on the second Year of Darius Hystaspis. And this he acknowledges
to be the main Argument ( Christolog. p. 32.) that evinceth that there began
the seventy Weeks, namely, upon the expiration of the three Weeks of hindrance.
Which he point blank against the Text interprets three Weeks of Years, when the
Text says expressly (...) three Weeks of Days, and the Septuagint so interpret
it, (...) three Weeks of Days, as the Hebrew has it. Where [of days] is added
on purpose in counterdistinction to the seventy Weeks to be understood of
Years. And the one and twenty days, v. 13. being the same with these three
Weeks, it is manifest that they are to be understood literally too. Moreover he
understands this hindrance of the hindrance from building the Temple, when the
Text says expressly it was the hindrance of the Angel that he could come no
sooner to Daniel to instruct him in such things as his soul was carried in
fervent devotion and desire after. And Daniel is said to afflict himself with
mourning all that time of the one and twenty days, or three Weeks, which
therefore cannot be understood of Years. And lastly, This may he takes he is
fain to pull back the single Week (in the midst whereof the Messiah is said to
make the daily Sacrifice and oblation to cease) and place it in the beginning
of the Weeks (p. 33.) than which nothing can be more wild and preposterous.

But now in the third place, suppose his adjustment were not encumbred with
these absurdities, he can never make sense of the Prophecy of those seventy
Weeks if they expire in the Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, but such an
Epoch is to be chosen of the going forth of the Decree, as the Weeks continued
in the Order they are mentioned, our Savior may be found to be Crucified, and
so to put an end to the Jewish Sacrifies and Oblations, in the midst of the
last Week.

And fourthly and lastly, That incomparable Chronologer and pious Learned
Person Thomas Lydiat, has with solid judgment pitched upon the twentieth Year
of Artaxerxes Longimanus, for this Epoch, reckoning from whence our Savior
will be found to have suffered in the midst of the last of the seventy Weeks of
Daniel, according to the natural sense of the Prophecy. And moreover, which is
more precisely to our purpose, he has convincingly shown, that our Savior was
born, L. Aelius Lamia, and M. Servilius Geminus being Consuls, Anno Juliano 48.
V. C. 755. Whenas J. B. will have him born Anno Juliano 45, or 46. and U. C.
752, or 753. So that there will be two whole Years difference. And whereas J.
B. places the Crucifixion of our Savior in the nineteenth Year of Tiberius,
Thomas Lydiat has proved it to fall out in the twenty second of his Reign,
about the middle of that Year, as also in the middle of the last of Daniels
seventy Weeks, which seals all sure.

And therefore missing so wide of the time of that chief Accident of the life
of Christ, he must be very foully out in the exercise of his Art, if it were
any, of coming to the right time of the Birth of our Savior per Accidentia
Nati. But the Scheme of our Savior's Nativity, as also of S. John the
Baptist's Calculated by him, being so trimly contrived and hitting so
handsomely, as it may seem to himself, and he would persuade others, and so
suitably to the conditions of them both, and the occurrences of their lives,
and yet things falling out so, though their Nativities are grossly mistimed,
methinks it ought to a Conviction to J. B. himself, and to all men, that the
whole business of Judiciary Astrology is a mere piece of phantastry, in which
they may make quidlibet ex quolibet, or that things hit by chance as in other
ludicrous ways of Divination, and that there is nothing sound at the bottom.
And that the boast of J. B. is very vain in pretending to have found out the
Nativity of our Savior to the very Minute of an hour, whenas he has missed in
the Hypothesis of Time, See my Exposition of the Prophecies of Daniel Notes on
Vision VI. p. 120.
some whole Years.

Not to add, that suppose he had arrived to the very minute of his Birth
(whenas yet the exact day is as unnecessary as in the Celebrating his Passion
or Resurrection, which are of as great concernment as his Birth, and Celebrated
with as much devotion, though it is taken for granted they are not the same
days on which he was Crucified, and rose again) or that by a general Council
his Discovery were accepted of, and established by so great an Authority, I
would here demand of J. B. besides the sacrificing to his own vain glory, what
good would come to the Christian Church thereby? For it is a very weak
allegation of those that slight the Celebrating the Nativity of our Savior,
because the day of his Birth is uncertain. For we are certain we do not keep
the day of his Passion and Resurrection, the very same day as they fell, Easter
being acknowledged a moveable Feast, and yet that cools no man's Devotion. It is
sufficient that there be Anniversary Commemorations of these great Occurrences
in the life of Christ the Son of God, that they may take impression on the
minds of our Children, and Childrens Children to all Posterities, and endear
the person of our Savior to them, by the pious performance of the solemnities
of those days.

But were the day and minute of Christ's Birth agreed upon by the Universal
Suffrage of the Church upon the Astrological pretense of J. B. which he seems
rather to wish than hope for, it would look more like the Celebrating the
Resurrection of Astrology, than of the Nativitiy of our Savior, and would set
all men agog so upon studying of J. B. his most Sacred and Divine Science, that
thousands being impatient of not finding themselves so soon Masters as they
would, of what it is impossible for them ever to be Masters of (Astrology being
a mere cheat and vanity, no solid Art at all) would inevitably be drawn into
Contract with that Grand Apostate Spirit Lucifer, or some of his Infernal Imps,
as J. B. himself confesses they are prone to be ( p. 39.) And so this his idle
Astrological freak of pretending to have found out the Birth of our Savior to
the Minute of an hour, if once countenanced by the Church, would make the
Christian World swarm with Witches and Wizards, who by their wicked Confederacy
with the Infernal Powers, would lose their Souls, which Christ was born into
the World to save and redeem from everlasting misery.

Wherefore to make a friendly Conclusion with my so much incensed Adversary, I
do in all meekness and kindness desire him to consider with himself, if it had
not been more advisable for him (being as he styles himself a Preacher of Gods
Word, and a Protestant Minister of the Church of England) and more for the
Honor of the Gospel Ministry in general, and for the credit of our Church it
self, (whose Genius is fair, peaceable, prudent and gentile, as well as serious
and pious) not to have run out in that sordid scurrility and rage against a
professed Member of the same Communion, having no personal provocation from
him, but only the pretense that he had so sharply inveighed against the folly
and vanity of Astrology, and the Impiety of some Astrologers, and this out of
mere zeal for Christianity, whose Authority and Efficacy he saw was undermined
under color of this Art. And whether he had not better have busied himself in
Calculating the Nativity or Conception of Christ according to the Spirit
(answerably to that saying of the Apostle, My little Children of whom I travail
in Birth until Christ be formed in you) I say, in Calculating the Nativity of
Christ in the hearts of those that are committed to his charge, when, and in
how many he had been instrumental to form Christ in them, and so render them
true and living Christians, and to compute when in himself Christ was thus born
(for as face answers to face, so the heart of man to man, and he that has
Christ really living in his own heart, can the more easily discern whether he
be living in another) whether this I say had not been a more proper employment
for a Minister of Gods Word, than to be taken up with so vain and mischievous a
curiosity as I have made good that Astrology is; And experimentally to have
understood what are the greatest Enemies to the Birth of the Spiritual Christ
in us; And what his Birth consists in, and whether the Principle of
Regeneration be not a Divine Reality and living sense quite different from what
is resolvible into the natural Sentiments of Self-Love; And whether Pride and
Selfishness, and Wrath, and Quarrelsomeness with men, be not of a more direful
Aspect to the Spiritual Nativity of Christ than Mars in the Eighth House, or
the Moon conjoined with Algols Head, to the natural Nativity of him.

These great points I leave to J. B. seriously and in the Fear of God to
consider with himself, and shall give him no further disturbance, nor be any
further disturbed by him, nor by any one else that shall write in such an
Unchristian manner as he has done. In which he has wronged himself and his
Profession more than me. But I pray God forgive him it all.

ERRATA sic corrige.
PRef. p. vi. l. 19. r. Influence: Certainly] p. 4. l. 20. r. seems, p. 52. l.
23. r. Alchochodon, p. 112. l. 27. r. ignorance, says he, p. 114. l. 18. r.
near twelve, p. 141. l. 15. r. Baptista, p. 164. l. 2. r. Albohali.

FINIS.

