The most acceptable and faithful Account of the Capitulation the IRISH
Governor of CHARLEMONT Made to D. Schonbergh's Forces, TO Surrender that
Important Garrison, with the Tenor of the Articles, the Number of Men therein,
with other agreeable Relations of the present Condition of the late King
JAMES's Army in Ireland.
OUR Late Account from Lisnegarvy in Ireland, left his Grace the Duke of
Schonbergh speeding away several Detachments from the main Army, which is not
increased to 34000 effective Men, sending some Regiments to reinforce the brave
Colonel OWSLET with a discretionary Commission to enlarge his Quarters, and
attack the Enemy on the side of CAVAN, while Lieutenant General Douglas marches
with a considerable Body into Connaught, to fall upon the Enemy in those Parts:
And, as a wife and experienced General, foreknowing the Inconvenience of
leaving an Enemy in a Garrison behind them, which might incommode the march of
his Forces, at least harass and devast the Country, was resolved to open the
Campaign with the Siege of Charlemont: but the late Succors of Irish which were
Introduced into the Garrison, served rather for the Loss, than the Support
thereof, bringing such a slender Relief of Provisions, that those who were
constrained to remain therein, did hasten the Consideration, which the Duke
understanding, so strengthened the Blocade, that though they several times
attempted to break through, yet were as often frustrated and driven back; and
there being high double the Complement of Men therein, the number of ^00, they
were greatly straightened for Provision, they having eaten up above 10 salted
Horses, and began to feed upon Dogs and Vermin. Whereupon the Garrison upon the
11th Instant beat a Parley, and after Hostages on both sides were exchanged,
'twas Articled and Agreed, That if they were not Relieved by the 14th, they
would put that Garrison into possession of the English, with all the Cannon and
Munitions of War. And are to match out with all the Ensigns of Honor, (...)
Colors flying, Drums beating, Arms and Baggage, and are to be Conveyed by the
English Forces unto Dundalk. In the mean time all Hostility of Arms to cease,
but all Deserters are to be delivered to the English.

There being no appearance or likelihood of its being Relieved by that time,
it is not in the least doubted but that it was actually Surrendered at the time
appointed, which happy Beginning, without any thing of Bloodshed, presages a
most Fortunate Progress of King WILLIAM's Arms the rest of the Campaign. And
that which adds a Furtherance to our just Proceedings, is the present mighty
difference which occurs between the French and Irish Army, being improved to
that height, whereby we are assured that a great number of Irish Officers have
thrown up their Commissions, as distrusting the Event, and retired to their
respective Habitations, Foreseeing that the French Forces betake themselves to
the Garrisons, design to leave the poor Irish to be cut to pleces by the
English, excluding their Retreat therein, and make terms for themselves. The
same Advice adds, That the French have seized upon Tyrconnel, for disclaiming
against their Proceedings. This we are more particularly assured by Cornet K --
one of the late King James's Officers, who escaped from Dublin in an open Boat,
and came to London on Saturday; That the French play the Devil as well with the
Irish as English Protestants, who are under great Pressures and Hardship^. And
adds, That the Irish Army continues still in their Quarters; That they have but
8 Regiments of Horse, and 4 of Dragoons, and those disperited and mean; and
believes they will never endure a Field Battle, but make a defensive War. And
that their Forces consist of about 40000 and pretty, well clothed; but many of
them bear only the Name, but not the Quali^^^^^^ of Soldiers, they being so
strangely Bashful asnot to have the Courage to look our Forces in the face.

LONDON, Printed by L. (...) and (...), 169^.


