THE MOST Christian Turk: Or, a VIEW of the LIFE and Bloody REIGN OF LEWIS XIV.
Present King of FRANCE. CONTAINING An Account of his Monstrous Birth, the
Transactions that happened during his Minority under Cardinal Mazarine;
afterward his own unjust Enterprises in War and Peace, as Breach of Leagues,
Oaths, etc. the blasphemous Titles given him, his Love-Intrigues, his
Confederacy with the Turk to Invade Christendom, the cruel Persecution of his
Protestant Subjects, his Conniving with Pirates, his unjustly Invading the
Empire, etc. laying all Waste before him with Fire and Sword, his Quarrels with
the Pope and Genoieze, his Treachery against England, Scotland, and Ireland,
the Engagements of the Confederate Princes against him; with all the Battles,
Sieges, and Sea Fights, that have happened of Consequence to this Time.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, near Bride^an End, in Fleetstreet, 1690.

depiction of Lewis XIV Behold the Christians Scourge, by fortune hur^ Like
Damned Pandoras Ao^^ to plague ye wor^. No Leagues nor oath's, bind this
Leviathan; With fire and Sword, he madly rushes on.



LICENSED,

^ecemb. 6th. 1689.
THE PREFACE.
THE Reader, at first View, may suppose this History to be written by some
prejudiced hand, and therefore it may Savor of too much Partiality; but if he
more deliberately consult the Actions of this Monarch, and the Reflections the
Calmest Spirits of Europe, and even his own Subjects have made upon them, we
hope the Censure may pass over us. For there be few who allow him not the
Epithet of, Troubler of the Peace of Europe; in which least Part of the Earth,
he has caused more Blood to be shed since his mounting the Throne of France,
than many Ages before had seen, and made so many Towns and Villages sink in
Fire, that no barbarous Nation dares venture to reckon with him on that score.
Nero was a Heathen, and yet we have him painted in the blackest shape, for
setting Fire to Rome, and Persecuting the Christians. What then could have been
expected from those Historians, had they been to set forth the Actions of Lewis
XIV. who is styled, The Most Christian King, who has not only Destroyed one
Town or City, but laid whole Countries and Provinces Waste, with Fire and
Sword, Persecuted and Destroyed a Million of Christians, and joined with
Infidels, to bring Destruction even upon Christendom it self; and, as he
Phrases it, Scorning to be a Slave to his Word, has counted the most sacred
Leagues and Oaths as Trifles, to be made and broken at pleasure, or things only
framed to serve his purpose, and no longer durable than his Interest requires.
Therefore we hope the Candid Reader will not impute i^ too great a Boldness in
a Historian of these times, to lay down in a brief, bu^ compact Series,
undeniable Truths, tha^ have attended his Birth and Reign.

A VIEW of the LIFE and ACTIONS OF LEWIS XIV. The present King of France, etc.
NOT doubting but many are unacquainted with the Life and Actions of Lewis XIV.
of France, especially as to sundry Periods and Particulars; we have undertaken
to compile what has materially happened relating to that Prince, who has for
many Years, but especially of late, made such a noise and bluster in the World,
to the damage and disturbance of all Christendom, and has, as it were, fatted
himself with Christian Blood.

After a tedious War between France and Spain (which began in the Reign of
Henry IV. and continued by Truces and Intervals in the Reign of Lewis XIII.)
nothing was thought more Expedient to put a stop to the Progress of those
Miseries that equally afflicted both Kingdoms, than a Match; and, both Parties
agreeing, a Marriage was made between Lewis XIII. (styled by some The Just) and
Anne of Austria, the Infanta of Spain: But although they were both in the
Flower of Youth, they deceived for a long time the Expectation of the world,
living together in mutual Society Twenty-three Years, without any Appearance of
the Queen's ever being with Child. Insomuch, that France and all Europe
suspected one or both of them Defective or Stiril; but at the end of these
Years, when all were out of hopes, a Crotchet came into the Queen's Head,
(supposed to be put into it by Cardinal Mazarine, who Ruled all at Court) To go
in Procession barefooted to the Chapel of the Virgin Mary near Paris, whom the
Papists hold for a very Lucina, to demand of her a Son and Heir to the Crown of
France. And indeed, when a Man sends his Wife abroad to ask for a Child, it is
but just she should bring one home with her, if she can get it. But, to the
purpose. As if this, as a Miracle, was to be ascribed to the Blessed Virgin,
and an Effect of the Answer of the Queen's Prayers; according to the time of
Childing, the Queen was brought to bed of a Son in September, in the Year One
thousand six hundred thirty and eight. And, that the Miracle might be
increased, or the better to hush some Scruples and Doubts in Court, the
Parliament of Paris welcomed him into the World with the Salutation of Dieu
done, or Given of God; conceiving a Birth, as indeed all Europe did, (though
perhaps in another sense,) to be Miraculous, after so many Years passing over
without any Child, and the Father at that time being Indisposed, etc.

Some things were whispered abroad at the Birth of this Prince, and although
Mazarine labored to still them, yet notwithstanding several of the Blood Royal
(who had promised themselves great Advantages upon the Death of Lewis XIII. who
appeared to them very Infirm, as well in Body as Mind,) could not forbear
speaking aloud. And as a presage of Cruelty, (as it happened to our King
Richard III. of England, and others who have delighted in Blood,) This Prince,
contrary to the Rules of Nature, was born with long and sharp Teeth; which made
many of the Grandees of France look upon so unusual an Accident, as the
forerunner of ill Luck to the World; and upon that consideration Monsieur
Bassampeire, a very Judicious Man, and a great Favorite of the Father, wrote
to the Bishop of Greenoble in these Words:

My Lord,
IN my last I gave you the good News of the Queen's being brought safe to Bed
of a Dauphin. All that I tell you at present is, that her Majesty Recovers
every Day, and the Child is strong and lusty, and seems to promise a long Life.
There is one thing of him much taken notice of by some, That his Gums have
Teeth pointing out already, and there is scarce a Woman that can suffer him to
suckle. He sucks so eagerly, that he brings Blood with his Milk; and, upon this
account, he has had two Nurses changed already. I pray God this may not be an
ill Omen to France. We need Princes of a healing and mild Temper, Corrosives
not agreeing with the good of this Monarchy. The Prince is to be named Lewis
Dieu done, (Given of God,) as his Majesty was pleased yesterday to declare in
Council. I am,

My Lord, Your very humble Servant, Bassampeire.


This Letter is found in the Cologne Edition of Marshall Bassampeire's
Memoirs, page 134. in French. But to return:

Lewis XIII. made great Joy for the Birth of this Son, and all France shined
with Fires of Triumph. And no sooner was he Christened, but he was Inaugurated
into his Principality, as Dauphin of France, and had given him his Officers and
Attendents; the chief of which were his Governess, a Lady of a Masculine
Spirit, and Hardovine de Perefexi, who since obtained to be Bishop of Rhodes,
and after that Archbishop of Paris. This Man served in the nature of his Tutor,
being very cunning and politic.

Whilst Lewis XIV. lay in the Cradle, as we may term it, nothing of Weight or
Moment can be expected. But scarce was he capable of distinguishing Right from
Wrong, before the Scepter of France dropped into his Hand: For Lewis XIII.
declining more and more, at the End of Four Years and a few Months after the
Birth of this Son, left the Stage of this World to sleep with his Ancestors. He
was the Eldest Son of Henry IV. of the House of Bourbon, to whom the House of
Valois had given Place, by the Death of Henry III. who was slain by one
Clement, a Jocobine Monk, with a Consecrated Dagger, in his Tent, when
surrounded by his Army. His Mother was Mary de Medicis, of the House of Medici
of Florence.

The King, before his Death, published a Declaration, bearing Date April 12.
1643; by Virtue of which he appointed the Queen as Regent during the Minority
of his Son, as likewise Governess of the Kingdom; and the Duke of Orleance was
made her Lieutenant. The Chief of the Council, were the Prince of Conde, and
Cardinal Mazarine, the latter swaying all with the Queen, Monsieur Seguire,
Chancellor of France, Monsieur Bauthlier, and Monsieur Chauvigny: And the
Conduct of the Army on Foot, was given to the Duke of Enguin, afterward Prince
of Conde. So that Lewis XIII. giving up the Ghost on the Fourteenth of May
1643. this Order prevented the Contests that would have happened in the Court
about Priority. However a Calm did not ensue; for the King was no sooner in his
Grave, but Discontents, that in respect to him seemed stifled, broke out; both
People and Grandees being dissatisfied with the Cardinal's management of
Affairs, and too great Influence upon the Queen, who Acted all by his Advice;
and he being an Italian, proceeded to impose an Italian Government in many
things, which were highly disgusted. So that they proclaimed their displeasures
at the Head of an Army, with the Noise of Trumpets, Drums, and the thundering
of Cannon, etc. of which the Spaniards taking the Advantage, endeavored to
enlarge their Dominions in the Low Countries, where Don Francisco de Melo the
Viceroy, besieged Rocroy; but his Army was beaten off by the Duke of Enguin,
General of the French Forces, and a considerable Defeat given them, which
happened six days after Lews XIV. came to the Throne. And to flush him with
this Success, the Colors taken were spread before him at Paris, and several
Applauses of Triumph made. And, to say true, this Victory proved a Check to
Spain, and gave the French Army an Opportunity to enter into their Territories,
and take several Towns and Fortresses, as Maubeuge, Borlemont, Aimmerikt,
Binch, and Thionville, with others. Yet the small Castle of Cirke, stopped the
Course of the French, who before rolled on like a Torrent, to the endangering
of all Flanders. But they had not the like Success in Germany; fore there the
Marshall de Gu^briant, General of the French Forces, was slain, and his Army
worsted, with the loss of a great many brave Men, which drew off Enguin from
Flanders. But however, the War ceased not, for the War with Spain engaged most
of the Princes of Europe in the Quarrel. The Trumpets carried the Noise of War
round the Borders of Savoy, as likewise in Italy, Navar, Catalonia, Germany,
Alsatia, Flanders, and other Places. Nor were the Seas free from Blood; for the
Duke of Breze, being Admiral for the French in the Straights, he twice engaged
the Spanish Fleet. Nor did this War end without Rivers of Blood, Burnings,
Plunderings, and great Devastations; and then the Misery it had occasioned in
Europe moved the Princes to send their Plenepotentiaries to Munster, to compose
the Differences, and agree a general Peace. For the Countries were so wasted
and Impoverished in many Places, that more died by Famine, than the Sword; so
that Lewis XIV. began early to build his aspiring Greatness upon Ruin and
Desolation, which threatened the World with a turbulent Prince.

To this Treaty, which was absolutely necessary for the preventing an universal
Famine, the Queen Regent of France sent the Count d' Avaux, and Monsieur
Servien, to manage the Interest of France; and the Duke of Longueville soon
after followed them. So that, after many Debates, and the Interposition of the
uninterested Princes, on the Twenty fourth of October 1648. a Peace was
concluded, and the Monarchs of Europe agreed to lay down their Arms, that
Plenty might be restored by Peace. And this had been done sooner, had not the
French, according to their accustomed Manner, (even in the midst of a Treaty,
when others depending upon the public Faith thought themselves secure,)
surprised several Places, and suddenly brought their Arms into Germany,
Lorrain, Flanders, Catalonia, and Italy at once; as they did early in the
Spring, 1645. which so exasperated the Spaniards, that they requited it before
the Peace was concluded, by setting upon the French Fleet over against Naples,
putting it to Flight, with the loss of a great many Men, and some Vessels; the
Admiral being killed with a Cannon Bullet, and the Marshall de Gassion, a
great General of France, as he laid Siege to Lens, was wounded, and being
carried to Arras, there died; and the Spaniards recovered many considerable
Towns in Flanders and other Places, as Fuens, Courtray, and Lens; and the
French Army suffered very much. However, the Peace held not in France; for the
Prince of Conde, with diverse others of the First Quality, being grieved that
Mazarine (once a poor Priest and of mean Birth) should play the King of France,
making his young Pupil, Lewis XIV. do what he pleased, Impoverishing likewise
the Kingdom, by sending vast Treasures into Italy, to enrich his poor Kindred;
insomuch, that his Father, who had never seen such Sums before, imagined it
rained Gold in France: These things, I say, and the Insolence of that proud
Priest, made them take up Arms to Reform Abuses in the Government, publishing
their Manifesto's to justify their Proceedings, and remove the Cardinal from
the Young King. So that the great City of Paris declared for them, resolving to
defend their Interest to the utmost, as did many other Towns. Insomuch, that
the Crown was visibly at Stake; nor could the Cardinal's Policy have saved it,
had not the Courage and prudent Conduct of the Marshall de Turin put a stop to
the Progress of their Arms, whereby he became a great Instrument of keeping
Lewis the Great in his Throne, who else had by this time been Little and
Insignificant. But in what manner he requited him, the Sequel will demonstrate.

The Prince of Conde, after much Bloodshed in an intestine War, retreated into
Flanders, with diverse of his Party, who would not leave him, and there was set
at the Head of the Spanish Forces. Whereupon Hostilities ensued, and the
Spaniards recovered a great many of the Towns that had been taken from them. So
that where Force could not prevail, Insinuation and Flattery took place, and at
last the Prince was gained upon to return Home, as did the Dukes of Conti and
Longueville, being highly Caressed; and a Pardon was published to all that had
been in the Civil War; and Lewis, who hitherto had acted nothing memorable in
his own Person, being arrived at the Thirteenth Year of his Age, Anno 1651, he
was declared to be of sufficient Years to take upon him the Government, and to
act in Person, which Declaration was approved by the Parliament of Paris, and
Proclaimed throughout the Kingdom. Yet the War continued with Spain, and many
Battles were fought, and Towns lost and won, things being carried on with
various Success. So that the King, that he might say he had been on Horseback,
got up at the Head of his Troops, to show himself to the People, which did
indeed give a little hopes to those that were ready to revolt, that things
might go better than they had done. But how they were mistaken, will appear in
its proper place.

In the Year 1654 great Preparations were made to Crown Lewis King of France
and Navar, and on the Fourth of June the Court arrived at Rhemes, and was
received by about Two thousand of the Citizens on Horseback, about a League
from that place; to which was made a Guard of about Five thousand of the
Inhabitants in Arms, and the Suburbs were crowded with the Soldiery. At the
Entry were diverse Triumphal Arches, beautified with golded Lilies, and many
flattering Devices, the Streets being hung with Tapestry, and other Ornaments.
And upon his approach the Cannons were thundered off, and volleys of small Shot
discharged; and the Aldermen of the City taking him for some petty Deity, fell
on their Knees, and in that posture presented him the Silver Keys of the Town:
And Cardinal Mazarine being at the Church of Nostrodame with the Clergy, the
King alighted there. The Bishop of Soissons officiated in the stead of the
Archbishop of Rhemes, who was a little before dead, the Bishop of Caesaria
being his Coadjutor. The Bishops of Noyon and Beauvais attended in their
Pontificals, the first making an Oration, in which he gave the King many
flattering Epithets, scarce due to mortal Man. However, knowing that Air of
Vanity possessed his Mind, that makes him value himself much upon his own
Praises, nothing was omitted that a Court-parasite could industriously produce.
Then the Archdeacon did the like, and the Deacon gave him a Missal to kiss, who
kneeled down upon two Velvet Cushions, placed on a Foot-cloath under a Canopy
of State; and from thence he went unto the Choire to assist at the Te Deum, and
the Vespers were performed in Music.

The Vespers over, he went to the Archbishop's Palace, which was prepared to
receive him; and the next day the Coronation was Solemnized with great Pomp,
the Queen Mother of England, and the Dukes of York and Gloucester being
present. And there he was anointed with the Holy Oil, which the Priest makes
the ignorant People believe, was miraculously sent from Heaven, on purpose to
anoint their Kings, that they may be the more Dreaded and Reverenced.

And now this spruce young Monsieur being on the Throne, began to make some
Figure in the World, though he still acted by others Heads and Advice. And to
give the World a proof of French Fidelity, he clapped up a Peace, contrary to
all Men's Expectation, with Oliver Cromwell, the English Protector, at the time
when King Charles II. with his two Brothers were at the French Court, and had
been promised, not only Protection, but also aid to regain the usurped Kingdoms
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. Nor was this all, but he proceeded more
treacherously with his near Kinsmen; for in the Treaty, amongst other things,
there was an Article, to Banish them France, and its Territories. Of which King
Charles having private Notice, and finding it fruitless to complain where the
Royal engagement was so little regarded, to avoid a ceremonious Expulsion, with
generous disdain he turned his Back upon that ungrateful Court, and with his
faithful Followers, as Prince Rupert, and other Nobles, he retired into
Germany, and was there received with all imaginable Joy, and found amongst
Strangers that Reception, without any promise or word given, which his Cousin
of France had so generously promised, and afterward so basely denied. But his
Brothers, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, stayed behind; the first having a
Command in the Army, under Maresch^l de Turin, against the Spaniards. But that
weighed nothing; for the League being made, he was ordered to be Packing. Nay,
it went so far, that a Message was sent to their Mother, though Daughter to
Henry the Great of France, to be gone; but she sent Word, That she knew her
Right to be in France, if the King knew not what belonged to his Dignity; and
that a Daughter of Henry IV. from whom he was descended, and held the Crown,
was not so easily expelled from her Native Country. This resolute Answer of the
Queen's, made Lewis XIV. dissemble the Matter, and her stay was winked at,
though not approved.

Here you may see French Faith to distressed Princes, who though never so near
Allied to that King, could obtain Refuge no longer than his Interest moved him
to break his Promises. And this early beginning has been very much improved, as
will appear in the Series of this History.

The League Offensive and Defensive being made with England against Spain, Six
thousand Men were sent into Flanders, who beat the Spaniard, and took Dunkirk,
whilst the French, in a manner, stood still, and looked on. For, as an
Historian of their own truly has it, Though France abound with Men, it is wont
to make use of the Valor of its Neighbors in all Wars against Strangers. For
it has (continues he) been found by Experience, That the French are only for
the first Onset, but cannot abide, nor weather so many Discouragements as the
English, Scots, and Switzers can in War. Besides, their Foot are not to be
compared to Strangers, therefore they may ascribe their most difficult
Conquests to their Money, and the Valor of the English, Scotch, Irish, and
Switzers.

According to the Treaty, Dunkirk was secured by the English. For the crafty
Protector not being ignorant of the Falsehood of the French Court, had given
secret Orders to Lockhart, who Commanded in Chief, immediately upon surrender
to enter it, and Post his Men there, and even to dispute it with the French, if
it was not quietly put into their Hands. However, though Mazarine and his Pupil
had a great Mind to this strong and important Place, yet at that time they were
forced to let it slip through their Fingers, as well knowing the Protector had
a powerful Army on Foot in England. But, some time after, they found means to
Charm it from us with French Gold, to the great endamaging of our Shipping
which Trade on that Coast.

In the Year 1656. the French relying upon their own Strength, at the
remarkable Siege of Valenciennes, received a great Overthrow. But the English
had better Success; for whilst the French stood looking on, and concluded it
utterly impossible, Sir Thomas Morgan, who Commanded the English Forces,
Stormed Mardike, recovering the Top of the Walls almost before they were
expected, passing through showers of Bullets and Fire, to the Astonishment both
of the French, and the Besieged, and possessed themselves of that strong
Fortress, and after that they saved it from a Surprise, attempted by the
Spaniards in the dead of the Night. And indeed, most of the Towns that were
taken, during this War, may be justly ascribed to the English Valor; which
Valor peradventure Lewis XIV. may one day Experience in the Heart of France,
as several of his Predecessors have done.

The Spaniards grown weary of this War, the usual way of Accommodation was
proposed, viz. a Match between the Spanish Infanta, and the French King. This
Match was greatly opposed by Mazarine, who concluded, if a Peace ensued, and
the King gave himself up to the Embraces of a Young Wife, his Authority would
be lessened. But the Queen Mother declared resolutely for it; saying, That
whether he would or no, it should be done; for that her Son should marry one of
her Kinswomen. But this had like to have broken off by the Sickness of Lewis,
which every one concluded would terminate in his Death. Whereupon Cardinal
Mazarine knowing the many Villainies he had committed in France, and the
Mischief done by his Evil Council, was about to pack up his Awls and trudge for
Italy; fearing, if the King should die, he should fall a Sacrifice to the Fury
of the Rabble. And thereupon he sent a Gentleman to the Marshall de Turin, to
know if he might have a safe Retreat in the Army, till he could otherways shift
for himself. But that Protestant General returned him so cold an Answer, that
he was put out of all Hopes. However, whilst he was studying what to do, the
King began to recover; and accordingly escaped that Death that threatened him,
to be the cause of the Death and Ruin of more than a Million of People.

The King being Recovered, Mazarine was sent to Bayon, and Don Louis d' Ardo de
Gusman came to Saint Sebastians, the more commodiously to treat about the
Peace, being constituted for that end Plenepotentiaries. And accordingly it was
concluded on sundry Articles, to the great Joy of the Frontier-Towns, who by
Burning, Plundering, Quartering Soldiers, and Contributions, were reduced to
extreme Misery. And Lewis sent a Procurator to Don Louis d'Ardo, in his Name to
Espouse the Infanta, and the Marriage was consummated at Fonterabia, in the
presence of the Court of Spain; and the two Kings met in the Isle of
Conference, situate between both Kingdoms, where Mary of Spain was delivered to
Lewis of France as his Wife, and both Kings solemnly swore to keep and confirm
to one another the Treaty of Peace, and the Young Queen entered Paris in an
open Chariot, shining with the Treasure of both the Indias. But Card. Mazarine
for Grief to see his Purpose crossed, as some gave out, fell sick, and died on
the Nineteenth of March 1661. to the Joy of all France; to whom he had a long
time been a Scourge, and instilled that Spirit of Cruelty into Lewis XIV. that
has since been manifested to the World in Characters of Blood.

This Cardinal had his first Rise under Richelieu, the great ^ardinal of
France, and from a mean Birth raised himself and his Family to the greatest
Dignity France could afford a Subject. He was born an Itaelian, and by his
cunning bore himself up in the Favor of this King and his Father, in spite of
all the mighty Opponents he met withal. For beside the Prince of Conde, Duke of
Conti, and most of the Nobles; he stood the Envy of the People in general, whom
he had sorely vexed by Taxes and Oppressions. The Court went into Mourning for
him, but continued it not long; for, an occasion of Joy soon after made it
vanish. The Duke of Orleance falling in Love with the beautiful Daughter of
Charles I. of England, the Lady Henrietta, at the public Ceremory of that
illustrious Marriage the Mourning went off.

Thus far we have traced this Monarch, as we may term it, in his
Leading-strings. For the Cardinal, whilst he lived, had the absolute Rule of
his Mind, whatever share he had in his Body; and from thence we may hitherto
conclude him an Engine, that moved by the Dictates of that covetous and
ambitious Prelate; but for the future we must consider him moving more directly
in his own Sphere. It is observed of Nero, by Suetonius and others, That the
beginning of his Reign, was tolerable, and not comparable to those Cruel and
Irregular practices that followed, and left a Lasting stain upon him to all
Posterity.

Notwithstanding the terrible Name Lewis XIV. supposed to have gained in the
year 1662, his Ambassador contending with the Spanish Ambassador for
Precedence, at the Reception of another Ambassador near the Tower, was there
worsted, had several of his Horses, and some of his Attendence killed and
wounded. For the King of England's Council not undertaking to determine in this
Matter, they were left to dispute it; and a Proclamation was put out,
forbidding any English to meddle in this Matter, upon great Penalties; so that
the Ambassador of Lewis the Great appeared but very Little, being forced to
sneak to his Lodging by all the by-Ways he could find, though they pretend to
claim Precedence of all the Ambassadors of Europe unless at the Court of
Vienna, where the Lords of Austria bear Rule. Yet this made Monsieur to storm
and bluster at a strange rate, insomuch, that the King of Spain being of a
quiet disposition, and not desirous to involve himself in another War, gave him
such satisfaction as contented him upon his sending complaints to Madrid,
preferring the Quiet of his Kingdoms before a Punctilio of Honor. Which so
puffed up the Frenchman, that he had a great Mind to be Quarrelling with
England; and not well knowing how to begin, he pitched upon a peremptory demand
of Dunkirk that was then in the Hands of King Charles II. This Demand was
looked upon by the French themselves as so Extravagant, that they could not
imagine the English would hearken to the delivery of a place gained with the
loss of the Life's of so many brave Men, and extremely strengthened and
fortified, at the Expense of vast Treasure, lying at the same time so
Commodious for Trade, and other Advantages.

The pretenses the French King made were, That there was an Agreement with
Oliver Cromwell, that upon the Payment of a certain Sum of Money, it should be
delivered to the French. But no body, as we can hear of, was privy to this
Contract but himself. However, contrary to all Men's Expectation, his French
Pistols gained that strong Town, which all the Cannon and Forces of France, had
the King of England defended it, could never have done. But now we Experience
the damage of that Oversight, when too Late. For Dunkirk was delivered for
Money, and Lewis had the unexpected Pleasure of entering into it in Triumph, on
the Second of December, in the Year 1662.

These Successes flushed his Ambition to greater Attempts, nothing less now
than the Dukedom of Lorrain will serve his turn, and thereupon he sent his
cunning Sophisters to wheedle the Duke out of it by Threats and Promises.
First, That he had an Army ready to fall into it, if it were refused. Secondly,
That he would consign him Lands more secure in Lieu of it in another place.
And, to make the old Duke more fond, promised to declare him Heir to the Crown
of France, in Case the Family of Bourbon failed, although there was a Dauphin
born of the young Queen. These, and other inveiglings between Force and fair
Means, wrought so powerfully, that the Agreement was made the Sixth of February
1662. and in March following confirmed in the Parliament of Paris, to the
apparent Wrong of Prince Charles, the present Duke of Lorrain; who, though of
years, was no ways consenting to his Father's Act. And upon this Agreement, the
French Troops were immediately sent, who seized upon all the Cities and Country
of that fertile and spacious Dukedom, except Marsal, which being garisoned and
influenced by the young Prince, opposed their Progress. This made Monsieur
storm and immediately he ordered his Generals to be ready for an Expedition, to
make War, as he termed it, for the Glory of his Arms; and came on so terribly
in the Head of his Forces, that the old Duke, though he repented of what he had
done, foreseeing the ruin that would ensue to his People if he opposed, and
being altogether unfurnished, by the surprise of his Towns, to Encounter a
great Army, thought it his best way to submit to his Misfortune. And thereupon,
in an humble manner he went to Metz in Lorrain to excuse himself to Lewis, who
received the venerable old Man after a haughty manner, and would hear of
nothing but the surrender of Marsal; which not being able to hold out against
such a powerful Army, as he had brought into the Country, it was put into
French hands on the Third of September 1663.

Much about this time, Lewis fell a cavelling, like an Unchristian Son, with
his Holy Father at Rome, and the Manner was thus. Monsieur de Crequi, his
Ambassador in that City, bearing himself with too high a hand, and putting
Abuses even upon the Pope himself, it so enraged some of the Pope's Guards,
that (whether willingly, or by chance, remains doubtful) a Harquibus was shot
into his Coach, which wounded some of his Servants. This Affront made such a
noise in the Court of France, that Lewis, instead of going in Devotion,
immediately prepared to make a Procession to Rome with his Dragoons, which so
frighted Pope Alexander II. that then held the Chair, that he was forced to
send and meet his Army with Protestation of his Trouble for what had happened,
and that he should have any satisfaction. This stopped his Carier a little, and
Pisa was pitched upon as the City to examine the matter. And on the Twelfth of
March 1664. it was agreed between the French and Pope's Deputies, (a thing that
the Pride of the Popes of Rome never submitted to for many Hundred years;) viz,
that Flavio Chigi, the Pope's Nephew, should come to the King, and beg the
Pope's Pardon, (so that it seems, the Great Pardoner was forced to creep at
this Time for a pardon from one of his Sons.) And farther, That a Monument
should be raised in the place where the Affront was done, with an Inscription,
declaring the Cause of its being erected. This was performed, but it did not
satisfy: For whilst it was a doing, the French fell into the Pope's County
Palatine of Avignon, drove out the Garrisons, and without respect to St. Peter,
Mother Church, or Father Pope, plundered his Patrimony; for which the most
Christian King highly applauded them. But soon after, the Queen Mother of
France died; and now Lewis XIV. began to take his pleasure without Regard to
the young Queen. Wherefore, though it may be looked upon as a digression, it
may not be amiss to see a few of Lewis the Great's Intrigues with his Little
Mistresses; for you must understand, his Inclinations have been as well to Love
as Glory.

Since Lewis XIV. was Married to Maria Theresa of Austria, daughter of Spain,
the first Mistress (though the Queen was charming enough, young, brisk, and
lively,) that he publicly owned, was Madam de la Valliere, and that she might
come up the better to his Humor, he made her Duchess of Vaujour. And although
the Queen grew jealous, and the Queen Mother very much reproved his
over-fondness of this Woman, yet he little regarded their Reproaches. Whereupon
they used many devices to draw off his Affections, but those not succeeding,
one Father Anat, a Jesuit, and at that time his Confessor, was prevailed upon
to reprove him. So that he took upon him boldly to represent to him the
Scandal, and bad Effects such a loose way of Living occasioned, by making an
ill Impression upon the Minds of the People, and that if, he did not Reform, he
must enjoin him sharper Penance at his next Confession. But the most Christian
King, little satisfied with this Discourse, coldly replied, That he thanked him
kindly for his good Advice, and his past Service, but that for the future, he
would make use of no other Confessor, but the Parson of the Parish. And so the
old Fellow was turned out of Service for his Ill timed Preachment, which made
the Society of Jesuits curse him for being so scurvy a Politician, on such an
occasion; which he might have Improved to their Advantage. But however, though
this was Cashiered, yet others of the Society, more cunning and facetious, made
a shift to creep into the King's Bosom, making their own Advantages by
embroiling a great part of Europe. And the more to flatter his Ambition,
contrary to the Rules of their Order they took away the Name of Jesus from off
the Gates of one of their Colleges in Paris, and placed the King's Name instead
of it, which occasioned this Distich.

Abstulit hinc Jesum, posuitque Insignia Regis
Impia Gens, Alium non habet Illa Deum.
They Jesus name have taken from their Abode,
And placed the King's, he only is their God.
After a long Caressing of this Mistress, (by whom he had some Children, and is
said, in a great Immergency, to play the Man-Midwife to one of them himself,)
and Entertaining her with all the Glory and Gallantry of his Kingdom, he grew
weary of those Beauties-himself had sullied, and searched for those that were
fresher. Whereupon he cast his Eyes upon Madam Montespan, who charmed his
Affections a very considerable time; which so vexed the former to see her self
outed, that she went into a Nunnery, and there turned Penitent, leaving the
King to take his full swinge with Montespan, who made her Advantage by
preferring all her Kindred to places of Honor and Trust. Her Brother, who
would otherways have never deserved it, was made Duke, and Peer General of the
Galleys, and a Marshall of France. These Qualifications rendered him of the
greatest Quality for a Subject in the Kingdom, which caused a pretty Retort,
when one was comparing this Vivone with Feillade, viz. that the last was made
Marshall by the Sword, and the first by the Scabbard. Yet many were of Opinion
that the Kings passion was not so great for Montespan as he pretended; for if
fame be true, one Madam Du Lude, a Nun of Lorrain, came in with her for a
share, though privately, to save the Credit of that Order; which occasioned
these following Verses.

La Valliere of common Race,
Montespan of Noble was,
And Du Lude a pious Nun,
All for Mistresses are Known;
If you would know the Reason why
These three his Favorites he creates,
Our great Prince has a mind to try
To Unite the three Estates.
But his mind continued wavering; for not long after Montespan was laid aside,
and Madamosel de Fontagne was taken into Favor; but she lived not long
afterward, as being supposed to have received a Dose from her she had rivalled:
and the Prince of Marsilack, who brought her to the King, was, for finding the
Game so well, made Chief Huntsman of France. To her succeeded Madam de
Maintenon, who joining with Montespan, as a Testimony of their Repentance,
built the Abbey of St. Cry, by some called the Seraglio, to train up young
Women: Which occasioned this Epigram; Two of fair Venus's Votaries,
Their Souls with holy Zeal inflamed,
Have founded two new Nunneries
With the Revenues by their Pleasure gained.
But, without Miracle, they seem
To be in a pitious taking,
Since that that founded and supporteth them
Is now in a continual shaking.


But to cut off this Digression, if it may properly be so termed, as to what is
consistent to History of this Nature, we find that Lewis XIV. was not satisfied
with having Dunkirk delivered to him; but dreading the Growing Greatness of his
Protestant Neighbors, viz. England, and the United Provinces, by some
extraordinary Contrivance they were set together by the Ears, and engaged in an
Unhappy War, occasioning much bloodshed on either Part, whilst France was a
looker on. But when that Court perceived the Dutch inclined to a Peace, as
being wearied with an Expensive and hazardous War; then, and not till then, the
French put in to assist the States, to keep the flame still blazing; that so
the two most powerful Nations at Sea under Heaven, might weaken each other, and
thereby lay themselves more open and exposed to the Projects of France, which
has but too apparently been manifested. For, although in the Year 1666. the
French Fleet was abroad, yet it was only in a bravado; for we could never learn
from any hand, That that Fleet (though the Ships carried many terrible Names,
as Tempest, Lightning, Thunder, etc.) effected any thing; but rather stood as a
looker on, whilst the English and Dutch battered each other; though at the same
time they might have come up, the Wind being favorable. Nor were the English
better served when they were on their part, as will hereafter appear: So that
if there was not (as let those believe who are very credulous, if they please,)
a design in it for the weakening the Protestant Interest; at least we may
conclude, That this produced nothing as to the Reputation of making War, for
the Glory of the Arms of Lewis XIV. However, after several Fights, and much
Bloodshed, though little or none of the French in these Actions, upon more
deliberate Considerations, a Peace was concluded in 1668. Yet in this Interim,
there are other Remarks than what we have mentioned.

The French, during this Naval War, had not the Courage to make any descent
upon England, or any of the Three Kingdoms; but upon our People in the
West-Indias their Treachery appeared in a Crimson dye, especially in the Island
of St. Christophers; where the French and English, as planters of that Island,
had lived together in neighbourly Love, as every one thought, for many years,
reciprocally and with much satisfaction enjoying the Fruits of their Labor.
But upon Notice of this War, and the iustigation of French Popish Cruelty, they
fell unawares upon the English, and Massacred them without mercy, or so much as
giving them time to think of a future State, seizing upon their Goods and
Possessions, to the eternal Infamy of the French Nation. They likewise seized
upon the Islands of Antigo, Saint Eustach, and Tobago. Yet all this while the
Court of France pretended they had no Quarrel against the English, but what
they did was in the defense of their Allies, pretending a great Kindness for
the Dutch; who since have experienced it to their no small Detriment, which
however may in time be repaid. How the Port at Constantinople, and the French
Court have hitherto taken equal Measures, never observing any Obligation longer
than it tended to their Interest, we leave the World to judge.

This was not all the design of Lewis XIV. for by embroiling England and
Holland, he had leisure (notwithstanding the Peace solemnly sworn to, and
concluded with the King of Spain) to enter Flanders, under Pretense of some
Particulars not performed, relating to the Contract of Marriage with the
Infanta. Nor could his Queen persuade him to reason, but in May 1667. he
entered Flanders with an Army of 30000. Horse and Foot; upon which unexpected
surprise, many of the Garrisons drew off, as Armantiers, Labassee, Conde,
Bergues, S. Guilhain, and Furves; of which the Marshall d' Aumont took
Possession. And the better to secure the Frontiers, Lewis commanded Charleroy
to be Rebuilt and Fortified. Many other Towns of Note were taken, being rather
got by surprise than by true Valor on the part of the Franch: For many of
them, in this security, were unprovided of many things that might have
contributed to a longer Defense, or secured them from falling into the Hands of
the Invader. Lille was the only Place that made a resolute Defense; for in this
place was a Governor of great Repute, under whose Command was a Garrison of
4000 Foot, and 800 Horse: Nor was it gained but by a bloody Siege, when the
Governor found all hopes of expecting Relief vain, through the want of timely
Notice of the French King's Intentions to Invade those Provinces, or the
unpreparedness of the Court of Spain to send an Army to oppose the Torrent of a
French Power, advantageously poured into those Countries. The Town Surrendered
upon Articles on the 28. of August, and Lewis, who then was in the Army,
entered into it. Notwithstanding, the Spaniards during the Siege made some
Attempts to Relieve it, but, their Forces being small, they were frustrated.

In the Year 1668. for the Glory of his Arms, Lewis XIV. thought of another
Enterprise, which was, to take into his Possession by Force the French Comte,
which, as a kind of a Palatinate, or separate Principality, had enjoyed many
Privileges and Immunities; which being altogether unarmed or capable of Defense
upon such a Surprise, the Inhabitants were forced to send to the King's
Deputies to treat of Yielding; thereby to prevent the Spoils and Ravage of a
Hunger starved Army. However, in the midst of the Treaty, Besanson was
possessed by a forced Surrender on the Sixth of February. Salines was also
Surprised; and many other places not being sufficiently Garrisoned, or provided
with Stores, were obliged to their Gates. Dole only was capable of making a
show of Resistance; but the French Army being numerous, and suddenly possessing
themselves of the Outworks, they were forced to accept of such Terms as were
offered by the French King, and thereupon they sent him the Keys of the City.

It may be guessed what little Expectation this Country had of a French Army,
when in the space of Twelve Days so many strong Places Yielded, that were
capable of holding out many Years, had they had timely Notice, and well
provided. But it has ever been observable, that this King gains most of his
Advantages by this way, or the force of golden Pistols, charged into the
Governors Pockets.

The French King perceiving that the Dutch (weary of his Alliance, who had done
so little for them, and pretended so much,) were inclined to make a Peace, and
join with the Spaniards; and thinking he had gained sufficiently, if he could
keep what he had got, Overtures of Peace where thereupon proposed, and Monsieur
Colbert was sent to Aix la Chapelle to meet the Ministers of the Mediating
Princes. And accordingly the Articles of Peace between France and Spain were
signed on the Sixth of May, and made Public at Paris and Brussels. Yet Lewis
was not well pleased to be frustrated in his Expectation of swallowing the
Spanish Provinces, attributing his disappointment to the Dutch; who declaring
for the Interest of Spain, had obliged him to this Peace. But his Threats were
retarded by another Enterprise. It so happened, that the Turks, with a nurous
Army, had besieged the City of Candia, situate in the Island formerly called
Creet, belonging to the Venetians: So that may of the French Nobility, who had
prepared their Equipages for the ensuing Compaign, and being prevented by the
Peace the French King was forced to comply withal, went thither, and upon their
Return gave an account of the place. Insomuch that Lewis thinking to have the
Honor of relieving that Bulwork of Christendom, which had held out a long,
doubtful, and bloody Siege, and upon the Event of which the Eyes of all Europe
were fixed, sent an Army of French men, under the Command of the Dukes of
Beaufort and Navailles, consisting of 10000 Men; who, without any detriment,
entered that City, which was laid almost in Ruins with the Bombs shot in by
the Infidels. Whereupon, it was concluded in a Council of War, that it could be
no longer tenable without performing some extraordinary Exploit; and after a
farther-Consult, it was agreed, That a vigorous Sally should be made, in Order
to the raising of the Siege.

The French indeed were very forward; and, to give the Duke of Beaufort his
Due, he behaved himself like a man of good Courage and Conduct. The Sally was
accordingly made, with great Resolution, and the Turks at first were beaten out
of their Trenches: But the Christians possessing themselves of a Magazine of
Three hundred Barrels and Sacks of Powder; whether by Matches laid on purpose
by the Enemy, or fired by chance, it blew up and destroyed almost one whole
Regiment, in which it was thought the Duke of Beaufort was killed, and buried
by the overthrowing of the Earth; for his Body was not afterward found. Which
terrible thundercrack so dismayed the Frenchmen, who were the foremost in the
Sally, that they retired in great confusion, thinking by the Earthquake it
made, that all the Ground was hollow, and charged with Mines. So that the Turks
Rallying, and being reinforced with great Numbers that came pouring from the
Hills, the Belieged were driven into the City, and the French never after that
could be persuaded to make any other Sally, or so much as to stay for the
Defense of the Place, although the Governor almost with Tears besought it. But
the Duke of Novailles, who now Commanded in Chief, pretending Orders from his
Master, took Shipping, and with those Forces he had left, returned to France;
which was not for the Glory of the King's Arms. For, had they stayed, and done
what became Soldiers, that famous City had undoubtedly been saved, which by
this Defeat, was in a short time after delivered to the Turks, with whom Lewis
XIV. has since had a better Correspondence; as will appear in due Place and
Order.

In the year 1669. the Duke of Lorrain, grieved that he had so easily parted
with his Countries, hoping it was not yet too late to retract, he required Aid
of the Emperor, and King of Spain, laboring to engage them against France.
Whereupon Lewis sent the Marshall de Crequi with an Army of 18000 Men into his
Country, who dismantled and pulled down the Walls of diverse Towns, making great
Ravagement, though he found little or no opposition. For only the little Towns
of Epinal and Chate made some show of a Resistance. But there being no Army
that could promise them Relief, they were compelled to surrender, and the old
Duke to fly his Patrimonial Country, and foregoe those vast Promises the French
Court had made him. The Eyes of all Europe being upon this unfair dealing, and
greatly Regretting it; to keep the Inhabitants quiet, he ordered they should be
treated with somewhat more Mildness than is usually observed in the French
Conquests, (as they term them, though for the most part got by Surprise or
Treachery.) And finding the Hollanders were no way satisfied with his
proceedings, (for he had infringed upon their Commerce,) he resolved to begin
first; and having visited and strengthened his Towns in Flanders, and upon the
Frontiers, he by a subtle Negotiation (as some Historians will have it) of
Henrietta, Duchess of Orleance, who had an Interview with her Royal Brothers at
Dover, drew the King of England into an Expensive War against the States. But
whether by the means of that Princess, who died upon her return into France, or
otherwise, we determine not. However, it is certain that great Naval
Preparations were made before it was publicly known to what Intent.

The Duchess of Orleance dying suddenly, and not without Suspicion of evil
Practice; the Duke, by the persuasion of Lewis XIV. was Married to the Daughter
of the Prince Palatine of the Rhine. Upon which Country no doubt (and it since
has but too plainly appeared) he had an Eye.

In the Year 1672, on the 7th of April, the French King's Declaration was put
forth, prohibiting all Trade and Commerce with the States of the United
Provinces. And, out of a Bravado, he marched in person at the Head of an Army
of 150000 Men. By which surprising Invasion, he like a Torrent carried all
before him. So that many looked upon the Low Countries to be lost, if no speedy
Stop was put to this Progress. But it has always been observed, that though the
first Motions of the French are impetuous, yet the least discouragement makes
them Recoil. They had on a sudden filled with their Troops the Duchy of Cleves,
the Electorate of Collen, the Duchy of Limburg, the County of Zutphen,
Vtreitcht, and its Territories, with many other places, and got into their
hands several strong Towns; and into this Combination the Bishop of Munster was
drawn, who took Groll and some other places, though not very considerable. They
passed the Rhine likewise, and did considerable damages in such places as were
found unprovided, Committing great Outrages. Which so puffed up Lewis XIV. that
being returned to Paris, he was congratulated with Flatteries and Applauses
from all the Societies of the Kingdom. And in Imitation of the Heathen
Idolaters, the Queen caused a Chapel to be built at Roan, dedicated to our Lady
of Victories. The King was styled the invincible Hero, though he was always so
tender of himself, that he neither engaged in any Battle or Skirmish, or seldom
came within Cannon shot of any place that resisted, doing what best suited his
Valor, which has not overmuch of the Hero in it. But indeed the Progress of
his Arms had a Recoil: for the Provinces being recovered out of the Amaze this
sudden Attempt put them into, and the Prince of Orange (now King of England)
confirmed in his Patrimonial Offices, and honorable Trusts, as Stadtholder,
Admiral, and General of the United Provinces; he presently took the Field with
an Army of 24000 Men, recovering several places, and causing the French to
retire, and performing many other Exploits worthy himself, and the Glory of his
Ancestors. But having taken a view of the French King's Affairs hitherto at
Land, let us cast our Eyes a little upon the Ocean

The Fleets being Abroad in May 1672. on the 28th of that Month a sharp
Engagement ensued, the then Duke of York commanding as Admiral. It continued a
long time bloody and doubtful, during which many brave Men were lost, as the
Earl of Sandwich, etc. who would not leave his Ship, though all in Flames, till
it was too late to succor him. His Body was found sloating, and afterward
honorably buried; but we cannot learn that the French did any thing
considerable in this Action, or that any more than their Reer-Admiral, Monsieur
de Rabiniere Trees les Bois, came up to a close Fight; who behaving himself
like a man of Courage was slain, and afterward honorably Interred at Rochel;
the rest lying off in a Line and firing at a Distance, and many times greatly
endamaging the English, especially in their Rigging, though they perceived only
the Blue Squadron Engaged, the Red not being able to come up in time. So the
French stood rather Neuters, or Lookers on, than any ways concerned in the
Battle.

From this there grew a suspicion, that they had Orders to keep from Engaging
as much as possible, that the two Fleets of England and the United Provinces
might batter each other, that through their weakness the French King might
become strong at Sea; which more visibly appeared the following Year, 1673.

This Year the Valiant Prince Rupert Commanded the English Fleet, where the
French joining him, he made One hundred and twenty Sail of stout Ships. The
Dutch were Commanded by Du Ruytter and Van Trump; so that a sharp Engagement
happened. But the French no sooner heard the Bullets begin to rattle, and saw
with what Fury and Violence the Dutch and English Engaged, but almost all that
Fleet stood away, pretending to gain the Weather-gage, the which, when they had
very favorably got, they even kept it for the Glory of their Master's Arms;
for they never came up again during the Fight. And those few Captains, that had
so much Sense of Honor, as not to follow their Admiral, (who were but very
few,) had secret Intimation that they were in danger of being hanged, when they
came into France, for not following their Flag, or Orders. But how they came
off, has not yet occurred.

The Prince, though he made good the Fight, and came off with Honor and
Bravery, stormed to be thus deserted. Whereupon, when the French Admiral came
on board him to make his Excuse (which proved but a very lame one) the Prince
is reported to look upon him with Indignation, and after reproaching him with
Baseness, told the Monsieur, That had he been one of his Master, the King of
England's Subjects, he would have killed him with his own Hand.

And to let the World see how much the English Valor surpasses that of the
French, and how much Lewis is beholden to it for his Greatness, I need instance
but one Particular, viz. During this War the strong City of Mastreicht was
besieged by an Army of about Forty Thousand, and the King came as near as he
durst venture, that his Men might be the better encouraged. It was invested on
the Sixth of June, and there was in it a Garrison of 7 or 8000 Men, one Faro, a
Valiant Man, being Governor. The besieged made a stout resistance, and many
were killed on both Sides; insomuch that the French began to saint. At what
time the Heroic Duke of Monmouth, who was at the Head of the English, in the
height of Youthful Valor, despising Danger, went on to the Assault through
Showers of small and great Shot; and Commanding in the Trenches, though Two or
Three Mines were sprung to obstruct his Passage, he and the few that followed
him, charged with such resolution, that they carried the Half Moon, contrary to
the Expectation of all Men, in less than half an Hour; though the Shot flew
round him as thick as Hail, maintaining it till he had delivered it to a French
Colonel, who was sent to relieve him. But no sooner was the Duke and the
English retired, but the French, though strongly possessed, not being able to
endure the fire of the Besieged, quitted it. This vexed the Duke to see that a
Regiment could not keep, when put into their hands, what himself and a very few
English had got. Insomuch, that he prepared to regain it, which he did with
such daring Resolution, that, accompanied only by Twelve Voluntier-Gentlemen,
he threw himself over the Works and Trenches, with his Weapon in his Hand, and
beat out the Defendents, gaining the Half Moon a second time, and delivered it
Monsieur de la Feuvilade, whom then shame more than true Valor compelled to
secure it. And indeed, it is conjectured by many, that this strong Place had
put a stop to the French Arms, had not the English, who bore all the brunt of
the Siege, done things to a wonder; so that at last it surrendered upon
honorable Conditions on the Thirteenth of June. But the French fury, like a
blazing Comet, having by this time spent it self, and the Confederate Armies
gathering like a black Tempest around them, Lewis found that this had been but
a kind of a Frolic, to make him more known. For he was not capable of
Garrisoning the Towns he had possessed and keep an Army in the Field, which
made him spue them up as fast as he had swallowed them; withdrawing his
Garrisons, and Abandoning them to their true Owners. which occasioned a Comical
Portraicture of Lewis the Great, Spewing and Sh -- ing Towns and Castles.
However, upon leaving those places, many of them were dismantled, and the
Inhabitants obliged to part with almost all they had, for their Contribution or
Ransom, at the discretion of the Soldiers.

King Charles II. of England, by this time grown weary of a War, into which he
had been unadvisedly drawn, and the which without any advantage to England, had
cost a great deal of Blood and Treasure, whilst the French reaped the Profit; a
Peace was concluded with the States for himself on very honorable Terms. So
that the English Fleet being laid up, the French durst be little at Sea; yet at
Land the War continued, where the French Gold did the greater Service, as
indeed it has all along had the Luck to do. And in this State things continued,
till the beginning of May, 1674.

Lewis XIV. finding he had engaged himself too far, and that his violent
Proceedings had drawn a great many Princes upon him, (for they found it high
time to Confederate against the Disturber of Christendom,) some Overtures of
Peace were made, and a Treaty set on Foot in the City of Cologne, where diverse
were assembled, in hopes of bringing it to Perfection. But upon the Emperor's
seizing of the Prince of Furstemburg, (who worked the French Interest, though a
Subject of the Empire, and ought to have done the contrary,) it greatly
disgusted the French King, and proved a Remora to this Treaty. So that
Hostilities continued, and the Prince of Conde seized on Navaigne; which, after
a short Siege was delivered up; and the King himself laid Siege to Dole, which
made a stout resistance, and killed him a great many Men. But not being timely
succored, it at last fell into their Hands.

These proceedings made the Confederate Armies draw together to oppose them; so
that on the Fifteenth of June, the Duke of Lorrain, and the Count of Caprara,
gave Turin Battle; but wanting Foot, as having but One Regiment of Foot to
Seven thousand Horse, and hourly Expecting the Duke of Bournonville, who was
coming toward them, the French on the other hand being Twelve thousand strong,
notwithstanding a desperate Fight, they were forced to retire over the Necker,
many brave Men being killed, and diverse taken Prisoners. The loss of the slain
are held to be equal; and had not the Duke wanted Foot, the French had been
utterly routed: For he Charged with such Fury and Resolution, at the Head of
his Troops, as if he had been weary of his Life, and expected a Dukedom in
another World, rather than this.

Whilst these things passed, the Dutch scoured the Seas with their Fleet, the
French not daring to peep abroad; for now they had nothing to fear on the
Ocean, having made a Peace with the English. Whereupon they braved the French
in their Harbors, and made a Descent on Bell Isle, but could make no Advantage
on that strong Place. But the Dutch Forces at Land took the Grime, a very
strong Place, after a hard Siege. And now Lewis XIV. betook him to the French
Policy, of tampering abroad: And finding by his Agents, that the Inhabitants of
Messina in Sicily, grew weary of the Spanish Government, he encouraged them to
Rebel, and sent them Succors under the Command of the Duke de Vivone; seizing
that City, and taking an Oath of Fidelity of the Inhabitants. But when he had
brought them to this Revolt, and kept a Garrison there a very considerable
Time, contrary to the Expection of all Men, and out of what Caprice none
perhaps but himself knows to this Day, he suddenly recalled his Forces, leaving
so many of the Inhabitants, as would not leave all they had to Ship themselves
and fly into France, (where they could rely upon no Succor,) to the Mercy of
the Enraged Spaniards, whom they had highly offended by this Revolt. Nor had
they above four Hours Notice: Yet as many as could, crowded on Board, and
afterward lived in Exile, not daring to return.

King Charles II. of England having made a Peace with the States of the United
Provinces, issued out a Proclamation on the Nineteenth of May, 1675. commanding
all his Subjects in the French Service as Soldiers, since the Treaty of Peace,
to quit forthwith that Service, and return Home; and prohibiting any
Englishmen to engage themselves in the like for the future; which proved a
great Detriment to the Progress of the French Arms, as soon after appeared: For
the Army as not only overthrown, but Turin, the most Experienced General of
France, was slain. But, because this Action was very Memorable, we shall not
think it amiss to give a brief Account of it.

On the Eighteenth of July 1675, the Marshall de Turin commanded out the
Regiments of Horse of Campaigne and Orleance, with Nine Squadron of Horse,
under the Command of the Marquess de Rone, Marshall, to pass the River
Renchau, by the Means of Two Bridges he had laid over. And being informed, That
the Imperialists had laid an Ambuscade on the other side, he went in person to
see if he could discover it from a certain Height, near the Bridge: When the
Imperialists, having planted Two small Pieces in a Wood hard by, fired one of
them without any considerable Execution; but the secoud being Charged with
Iron, or Cartridge-shot, put a period to Turin's Life; killing likewise, the
Lieutenant General of the Ordnance, and diverse others of Quality about him;
though some Accounts say, he was killed with a Cannon Shot. However, thus ended
that great General, who had been brought up in War, as we may properly term it,
from his Infancy, and seen many Rivers of Blood; whose Death gave a great check
to the French Affairs, and the Army was so much discouraged, that it
immediately retired in some disorder; when being pursued, and hotly engaged by
Montecuculi, the Imperial General, between Six and Seven thousand of them were
slain, and several Colors, with some Cannon and Baggage taken; the Count de
Lorge, who Commanded after the Death of Turin, being wounded, and many Persons
of Quality killed.

This was seconded by the Overthrow of the Marshall de Crequi, near Treves:
For the Confederates having besieged that place, which had been surprised by
the French, the Marshall came to Succor it; but the Besiegers drawing off,
and giving him Battle, his Forces were totally defeated, with the loss of Three
or Four thousand Men, and of all the Baggage and Cannon, etc. the broken Army
scattering, and getting into the adjacent Town. The Marshall with sive or six
men got into Treves, and, the Governor being killed, took upon him to defend
the place; but the Besiegers having made Three Breaches so wide, that Forty Men
abreast might enter; the Officers finding the Ditches likewise filled up, and
the Storm ready to be made, they Capitulated without Crequi; who, to regain in
some measure the Credit he had lost, suffered himself to be made a Prisoner of
War. Binch was likewise taken by the Dutch, and many other Advantages gained.
So that Lewis the Great, began to think that he had overstood his Markets, and
thought it high time to look out for Confederates. Whereupon he drew the King
of Sweeden into an Alliance with him, to divert the War on that side of the
King of Denmark and Duke of Brandenburg. But the Sweeds had but little Success
in his Quarrel, as being worsted by Land and Sea, and having nothing but the
French King's Word for Reparation. Insomuch that they were obliged to sit down
by the Loss, and thereupon Lewis XIV. began to tamper with the States of
Holland, to clap up a Peace without the Consent of their Allies. But whilst it
was on Foot, which made the King grant the larger Terms, his Forces under the
Duke of Luxemburg were beaten near Mons by the English, Dutch, and Germans. In
which Action, his present Majesty of England signalized his Valor and Conduct
to a wonder; and the Duke of Monmouth being a Voluntier in the Army, by his
Example so animated the English, that they let the French see they were capable
of turning the Scale of Victory.

These Bad Successes making Lewis the Great fear he should be reduced to Lewis
the Little, he made such Offers (which were seconded by many Promises and
Crafty Insinuations) that the States did conclude a peace, and had all their
Towns, except Maestreicht, delivered into their possession; which made many
wonder. But those that have weighed the Matter, give these Reasons for their
making a peace, when other Princes their Confederates were in Treaty; for that
of Nimeguen was still on Foot:

First, They perceived the Ambassadors of their Allies, had been several Years
in debate at Nimeguen, without bringing any thing to Perfection as to the
Treaty with France; and they had greatly wasted their Treasure in the War, and
found a peace was necessary to Recruit.

Secondly, Their Trade, on which the Provinces mostly depend, was greatly
obstructed; by which means the People were Impoverished.

Thirdly, They were Constrained to take up Moneys on the public Trust, to
supply the Charge of the War; which being of long Continuance, could not but
have consumed vast Treasures

Fourthly, That the Spaniard had not those Forces on foot in the Netherlands
that was Expected; which might have hindered the French from taking several
Towns in Flanders, of which, without any considerable Opposition, they had
possessed themselves.

Fifthly, That all things were restored to them that had been taken away, which
would have been difficult to have Recovered by other means.

Sixthly, By this Treaty they caused to be rendered up to Spain, part of what
had been taken during the War.

Seventhly, That the French Ministers assured the States, that they would
speedily make a Peace with their Allies, and that they, the States, should be
Arbitrators of that Peace.

These are given as Reasons. And indeed, considering how the Ministers of
France pressed it with Eagerness, and declared the Extreme Passion and Desire
the King their Master had to be at peace; it might have been thought, that he
mean'd as he said. The King himself, during the Negotiation, sent them a
Letter, wherein he styled them, His good Friends, Allies, and Confederates;
promising wonderful things in the most obliging Flattery. But no Words or
Promises can bind this Leviathan; for Lewis knew well enough what he did by
making a Separate Peace; considering, if he should be brought to Strict Terms
with all the Allies, he must of Necessity part with Lorrain to the Duke, its
Rightful Lord, and with the Franche Compte of Bourgogne, to the King of Spain,
taken, contrary to faith given, since the Pyrenean Treaty. But, by not having
the Dutch Army upon his back, he sound himself able to deal with the rest, and
to tire them out by delays. And indeed, by taking these Measures, he
constrained the Duke of Brandenburg, and the Prince of Zel, to restore all they
had taken from the Sweed, since that King stood for the French Interest.

King Charles II. of England, perceiving Lewis XIV. delayed the Treaty to
incroach upon Flanders, found his Honor touched, since he became a Mediator,
and was to be Guarrantee of the Peace. And thereupon sent over five or six
Thousand Men, to defend the Spanish Netherlands, where the French, during the
Treaty, and daily Expectation of Peace, were like so many Tartars, or wild
Arabians, Ravaging and destroying the Country; but the Terror of the English
put a Check to their Progress.

Lewis XIV. having obtained a Peace with the States of the United Provinces, he
more and more delayed the Treaty of Nimeguen, as not doubting to bring the
other Confederates to more Advantageous Terms, than otherwise he could have
been capable of doing. And that which made the French King more urgent for a
Separate Peace, was, that he knew well enough that it could not be Reasonably
made with the Allies in Conjunction, but that the Country of Lorrain would be
required for that Duke, and the Franche Compte for the King of Spain, or what
ever had been snatched from that Crown since the Pyrenean Peace, which had been
so openly violated by France. And therefore he concluded, to divide the Allies
was to make his own Terms. And indeed it so fell out, to the great prejudice of
the Confederaters, Especially Spain and the Empire, as in due place will
appear. And indeed, Lewis XIV. by this means preserved most of his important
Conquests at that time, whilst the Elector of Brandenburg, and the Prince of
Zell, found themselves in a Necessity to Restore to Sweden all they had taken,
or, by standing out, run the Hazard of a French Army Ravaging their Countries;
whilst their Allies, who had already made peace, could not fairly give them any
Assistence; unless, like him with whom they had made the peace, they laid no
Stress upon Leagues, any longer than it tended to their purpose. But the
Emperor, as well as Holland, having concluded with France, the rest found
themselves too weak long to contend with a Monarch of such vast Territories,
and one whose Flatterers style Invincible; though, the contrary has often
appeared. And, according to the opinion of Politicians and those Experienced in
war, had that vast Army of the Confederates been unanimous, and vigourously
pushed on, they might, by entering the very Heart of France, have reduced the
Greatness of Lewis, and have made their own Terms. Sed, divide, et Impera.

The Peace, as is already said, being concluded with Holland at Nimeguen, about
the latter End of the Year 1678, was soon followed by his Imperial Majesty.
But, before either of these were concluded, it will not be amiss to show the
plausible pretenses of Lewis XIV. to the former, in a Letter in Answer to a
Letter to the States General, presented him by their Ambassador, the Here Vain
Beverning, in these Words:

Most dear great Friends, Allies, and Confederates,
WE have with much Pleasure understood, as by the Letter you writ us, so by the
Assurances which the Here Van Beverning, your Extraordinary Ambassador, has in
your Name given us, the Dispositions in which you profess your selves to be at
Peace. We cannot better let you know how firm and sincere our Intentions are,
to procure so great and so general a Good for Europe, than by a Writing, which
we have Commanded to be put into his Hands. You will see the new Facilities we
offer, to put you in a State to bring your Allies to consent to the Conditions,
which we cannot doubt but you will judge Equitable. And having nothing farther
to add thereunto, we only assure you of the Satisfaction we shall have of
giving you back with the Peace our old and real Friendship, and in entering
with you into the strongest and most capable Engagements, for securing ever
your Liberty; which we have more amply explained our self upon to the Here Van
Beverning, whose Conduct and Person has been very acceptable to us. There
remains only, That we pray God to have you, most dear great Friends, Allies,
and Confederates, in his holy Keeping.

Given in our Camp at Wetteren, the First Day of June, 1678. Your good Friend,
Ally, and Confederate, LOVIS.
Underneath Signed Arnauld.


The Matter to which Lewis XIV. refers them to, is a Memorial delivered to the
aforesaid Ambassador by his Order, in these following Words:

THE King has with Pleasure seen, as by a Letter from the States General, so
by the Assurances which they have given him by the Here Van Beverning, their
Extraordinary Ambassador, that their Intentions to a general Peace, correspond
with the Desires his Majesty has always had to procure the same; and that they
are ready to accept the Conditions that his Majesty has offered them by his
Ambassadors and Plenepotentiaries at Nimeguen. But, at the same time the Here
Van Beverning has made known to him the Sentiments of the said States General,
he has in their Names prayed, that his Majesty would grant a Cessation of Arms
for six Weeks, and has represented to him, that they had need of that time to
Communicate with their Allies, and obtain their Consent for the concluding so
great a Work: The Condition in which his Majesty's Arms are at present, and the
favorable Opportunity that would be lost in deferring their Acting, would not
permit him to consent to this Proposal, if the desire of giving Peace to Europe
did not much more prevail with him, than that of enlarging his Frontiers by new
Conquests. It is upon this Consideration, of contributing to the public
Repose, that he will agree, at the desire of the said States General, to a
Cessation of Arms for Six Weeks; such a one as was stipulated between France
and Spain, Anno 1668. But for as much as it would not be just, if the Enemies
of his Majesty should let the time pass fruitlesly; and that, instead of its
serving to Advance the Peace, they should make Advantage of it, to avoid the
Effect of his Majesty's Arms, that he should have lost the advantageous
Conjuncture that is at present in his Hands: His Majesty desires of the said
States General, that they do promise him, that in case during the Time of
Cessation of Arms, they cannot bring their Allies to accept the Conditions he
has offered, that they will not assist them directly or indirectly against him
or his Allies, during the whole Course of the War. In Exchange, his Majesty
will in such Case renew to them the same Engagements, which he has taken with
them, by his Letter of the Eighteenth of the last Month, as well as what
concerns these same Conditions, which he will be always ready to agree to. As
for the security of the Places in the Spanish Netherlands, his Majesty has
thought fit to make known unto the States General, by this Memorial which he
has appointed to be delivered to the Here Van Beverning, the sincerity of his
Intentions for a Peace. And to give yet a greater Testimony thereof, he does
Command the Duke of Luxemburg, General of his Army, to go and expect their
Answer, during this Month, in the Neighborhood of Brussels, with Orders not to
Attack any Place during that time.

In this we may observe no small piece of French Policy, not so much desiring
the Peace of Europe, (which has never been the aim of this Ambitious Prince,)
as during the time of this Truce, to draw his Army farther into Flanders, which
soon after proved almost the Ruin of many delicious places in that fruitful
Country, when Peace was in the highest Prospect. And these Flatteries served
only to render those he treated with somewhat more secure, whilst he made his
own Markets. And indeed by these, and such like Artifices, he gained upon the
Belief and good Intention of the Confederates, more than by open sincerity he
thought convenient to do. For Lewis XIV. having earnestly sued for Peace,
though under a Reserve or Mask of Disguise, which was not then sufficiently
looked through, all the Princes and States of Christendom supposed they should
remain at rest; and those Countries that were at the brink of Ruin, by being
the Seats of a tedious War, began to rejoice, thinking the French King in good
earnest; and that he would (after so much Waste and Desolation, by Firing,
Plundering, Quartering, Exactions, Contributions, Slaughters, and making the
Fields white with the Bones of the Slain, whilst the Rivers were discolored,
and run red to the Sea with Christian Blood,) take pity on the languishing
Estate of; Europe, there being a powerful Enemy in the East, viz. the Ottoman
Emperor. But, instead of Sincerity, all proved but outside and formal. For
France rather coveted time to breath a little, than to give over. And Lewis,
who so often pretends to make War for the Glory of his Arms, that he might with
less trouble Invade the Netherlands, secretly Negotiated with Teckely, to
Invade with an Army, such as he could gather in the Turkish Territories, the
Emperor's Hereditary Countries in Hungary, etc. furnishing him with Money, and
folliciting by his Ambassadors at Constantinople, with Gifts, Presents, and
promise of Diversion on the other-side, to break the Truce. And all this under
the glorious Title of the most Christian King, and Eldest Son of the Church;
which even barbarous Nations have detested in a time of Peace. And yet, such
have been the Humors of this King's Flatterers, that they have more and more
blown up his Ambition, by comparing him to the Sun, as, to the Star of Stars,
from whence all other Kings and Potentates receive their Luster, with many
other Attributes, as if they intended to set him up for an Idol for all the
World to fall down before. And of these we shall give the Reader a touch;
because those Parasites strive, by glorious Epithets, to make him appear white
and shining, almost, if not altogether, to a height of Blasphemy, whom all
unprejudiced and unbiassed Men behold clothed with Oppression and Cruelty, and
dying his Scarlet Robes yet deeper in innocent Blood.

Amongst other things attributed to him, passing over what is mentioned as to
the placing his Name on the Jesuits College, instead of that of Jesus, we find
these that follow, which may be said to exceed what the Heathens have ascribed
to those they foolishly Worshipped for Gods, viz.

1. Lowis the Great, born for the Glory of France, and Happiness of his People,
in whom there lives an admirable Argument of Divine Wisdom and Fortitude, that
alone is sufficient to convince Atheists, etc.

2. Lewis the Great, a King indeed, since he Reigns not only over his Subjects,
but his own Passions; being Invincible, and strongly and sweetly overcoming all
things; who, just as a God, by one single Act of his Will, subjects all things
to his supreme Power, etc.

3. Lewis the Great, strong in Zeal for Justice, a powerful and most just
Rewarder of all good Actions, the severe Punisher of Duels, Blasphemy, and all
Iniquity, the true Imitator of God, who is so Good to repay by way of
Recompense what he promises by way of Mercy.

4. Lewis the Great, according to God's own Heart, anointed with his own Holy
Oil, whom in a particular manner God commanded his Holy Angels to preserve in
all his Ways, and whence the Existence of Angels is deduceable, etc.

5. Lewis the Great, meditating only on eternal Things, and knowing that the
gaining the World with the Loss of the Soul profits nothing, and therefore
seeking of God the alone Happiness which God of his Goodness has called Man to.

6. Lewis the Great, Intent upon the Extirpation of public Sin, and the
Increase of Integrity, of Manners and Virtue, and for that Effect giving most
sure Laws, through the Inspiration of God, the Supreme Law giver, by whom Kings
Reign, etc.

7. Lewis the Great, the Prodigy of the Grace of God, and of so thankful a Mind
toward him on that Account, being Careful to Exalt that Grace, has commanded
all the Faculties of his Kingdom to explain that Grace, conform to the Edicts
of the Popes, etc.

8. Lewis the Great, the Eldest Son of the Church, who has restored to their
See the Bishops that had been banifhed by Heretics; the Enemy of Heresy; the
Vanquisher of the Turks, confiding only in God, and burning in Love toward
him; the Example of Faith, Love, and Charity, etc.

9. Lewis the Great, a Prince of Peace, the Scourge of War, having so far laid
aside his Majesty, that he might Remember the Mercies of Christ, etc.

10. Lewis the Great, destroying all Vice, and decreeing Several punishments on
the Infringers of Divine and Ecclesiastical Laws. In all things he has
demonstrated himself a most obedient Son of the Church.

13. To declare the kinds of Sin, though hard to some, yet not to perfect
Christians, whose defender Lewis the Great, justly to be named the King of
Glory, Strong and mighty in Battle, etc.

We might recite a number more of this Kind, which we find in print, Exceeding
the boasting Language of the Turks, in their denunciation of War, or magnifying
their Emperor.

They have not only put them in print, no doubt, with the Approbation of this
King, who is not a little Ambitious of his own Praise, but the Duke De
Fevillade has erected his Effigies Crowned with Rays and Stars, as the old
Romans used to do their God Jupiter, and in another place he is figured driving
the Chariot of the Sun, with this Motto, I shine to All. And indeed, this very
much Resembles him; for Europe has found him a very Phaeton, if we consider the
almost numberless Towns and Villages he has caused to fall in Flames. At other
times, they call him Homo Immortalis, an Immortal Man, the same Character the
Heathens were wont to give to those they fansied to be deified; gathering the
Conduct, Courage, Wisdom, etc. not only of his Ancestors, but of all the
Renowned Heroes that ever have been, which they will have center in him, who
indeed is but Mortalis Homo, cum Fistula in. Ano, notwithstanding all the
Flattery of Medals, Prints, Landskips, Inscriptions, Statues; or, as they have
in one place made the Figures of Europe, Asia, Africa and America, Kneeling at
his feet, as if he gave Laws to the whole Earth. But how far he answers any of
these Characters, let us lay aside for a time his Actions and Behavior toward
his Neighbors, and look a little into the Interior parts of his Dominions,
and there see how he keeps his word, and uses his own Subjects, by whose Help
and faithful Assistence, his Ancestors mounted, and himself as yet is fixed in
the Throne of France.

King Henry IV. Grandfather to Lewis XIV. had, for the Many memorable and
signal Services done him, granted the Protestants the free Exercise of their
Religion by an Edict, and other Privileges that were granted them by Lewis
XIII, Father to this King. The Edict of King Henry was given at Nantes in April
1598, under the favor of which, the Protestants that had escaped the bloody
Massacre in the Reign of Charles IX. and the Sword of War that had continued
for many Years, revived, as we may term it, or multiplied in their Generations:
But when they thought themselves most secure, and every one sat under their
Vines of plenty, this King by the Instignation of the Jesuits and his own
Inclination, began to thirst after their wealth, as Ahab in another place had
done after Naboth's Vineyard. And finding whilst this Edict was in force, it
could not be attempted with the least Color of Justice, he published a Strict
Decree to disannul it, as likewise the Edict of Nismes given in July 1629.
together with all the Concessions granted in them, as well as other
Declarations, Edicts, and Arrests, of what nature soever; forbiding any of the
Reformed Religion, under great Pains, Penalties, and Forfeitures, to have any
public Worship amongst them; as knowing, like those who sought to destroy
Daniel, he could not make them disobey him in any thing Lawful.

The Bloody Decree being signed by the King at Fountainbleau, in October 1685,
it was Registered and Published by the King's Attorney General. And in order to
its being put in Execution, and the Copies being examined and compared, it was
sent into the several Bailiffwicks, and Courts of Justice, Sherifs-Courts,
Districts, etc. there to be Registered, and Charge given to the Deputies of the
Attorney General, to take care they were put in Execution, with all Imaginary
Force and Rigor, and to certisie the Court thereof at Paris in the Court of
Vacation on the 22d of October.

Lewis XIV. when he did this, had, it seems, forgotten that he had on the Word
of a King Engaged the contrary, or he concluded, it was no dishonor for a King
to break his Word whenever he pleased. Wherefore, before we begin to take a
view of his persecuting his best Subjects, it will be convenient to Insert his
own Letter in Answer to a Letter of the Duke of Brandenburg's on the behalf of
the Protestants.

Lewis XIV's Letter to his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg.
Brother,
I Would not have discoursed the matter you writ to me about, on the behalf of
my Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion, with any other Prince, beside
your self: But, to show you the particular Esteem I have for you, I shall begin
with telling you, That some Persons disaffected to my Service, have spread
Seditious Pamphlets among Strangers, as if the Acts and Edicts that were passed
in Favor of my said Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion by the Kings
my Predecessors, and Confirmed by my self, where not kept and executed in my
Dominions, which would have been contrary to my Intentions: For I take Care
that they be Maintained in all the Privileges which have been granted them, and
be as kindly used as my other Subjects. To this I am engaged by my Royal Word,
and in Acknowledgment of the Proofs they have given me of their Loyalty during
the late Troubles, in which they took up Arms for my Service, and did
vigorously oppose and succesfully Overthrow the ill Designs which a Rebellious
Party against my Authority Royal, etc.


This, one would think, was sufficiently binding; but, as it appears by a
Clause in the Decree, bearing date long since this Letter, the King never
intended to be as good as his Word, viz.

Whereas, (says the Decree,) That it has pleased God to grant that our
Subjects enjoy a perfect Peace, and we our selves being no longer taken up with
the Cares of protecting them against our Enemies, are now in a Condition to
make good use of the said Truce, viz. of Nimeguen, which we have on purpose
facilitated, in order to the applying our selves entirely to the searching out
of means, which might succesfully effect, and accomplish the Design of the
Kings, our said Grandfather and Father, our Intentions ever since we came to
the Crown; we see at present, (notwithstanding a just acknowledgment of what we
owe to God on that account,) that our endeavors have attained the end we
proposed to our selves, forasmuch as the greater and better part of our
Subjects of the said pretended Reformed Religion, have already Embraced the
Catholic; and since by means thereof the Execution of the Edict of Nantes, and
all other Ordinances, in favor of the said pretended Reformed Religion become
useless, we judge that we can do nothing better toward the entire effacing the
memory of those Troubles, Confusions, and Mischiefs, which the Progress of that
False Religion have been the cause of in our Kingdom, and which have given
occasion to the said Edict, and to so many other Edicts and Declarations which
went before it, or were made since, with reference thereto; than by a total
Revocation of the said Edict of Nantes, and particular Articles and Concessions
granted therein, and whatsoever has been Enacted since, in Favor of that
Religion, etc.

By this it is evident, That when he passed his Word to the Elector, and
approved the Loyalty of his Protestant Subjects, he had it in his thoughts upon
his first coming to the Crown to suppress them. But this is the very Genius of
Lewis XIV. and now let us see how gently he deals with them, and what Reward
they have for their Fidelity, and the Expense of their Blood and Treasure to
keep him in the Throne, against a powerful Faction under the Prince of Conde
and others, who were at the point of supplanting him; why those that were to
see the bloody Decree Executed, fell to Consulting how they should raise the^r
Malice high enough in Cruelty against People that had never injured them;
whilst the Protestants, like the Jews, when Ahasuerus's Decree went forth,
mourned their hard Fate, and made their Application to the King; but Hester's
Tears could not prevail with his Most Christian Majesty, though they had power
to make a Heathen relent.

The Intendent of the Upper Guienne, who Resided at Montauban, summoned the
Chief Protestants of that City to appear before him, and let them know, That it
was the unalterable Pleasure of the King, to have but one Religion in his
Kingdom, and that they must prepare to comply with it; giving them time to
assemble themselves in the Townhouse, where they unanimously agreed, rather to
die than violate their Consciences, and by one deputed by the rest sent their
Resolution, when, the following Day, a Batallion of La Far, consisting of
Sixteen Companies, entered the City, and were followed by a greater Number. The
Protestants thereupon consulted each other, and resolved to submit to what
should befall them, not caring for the Spoil of their Goods, so they might
preserve their Religion, resolving to rely on Providence; and the Richer agreed
to help the Poorer to the last of their Substance. But whilst they were thus
consulting, the Dragoons entered their Houses like the Locusts of Egypt, and
having eaten up all they found, fell to destroying their Goods, suffering their
Wines and other Liquors to run about the Cellers, scattering also their Corn in
the Streets. And when they grew even weary of this wasteful Destruction, they
carried Linen, Plate, Puter, and other things, to the Marketplace, and
offered it to Sail, where the Jesuits and Popish Priests bought them for
trivial Prices, and encouraged the Lay-Papists to do the like. So that the
Protestants, in four or five days, lost to the value of a Million; yet they
might be said, even to take joyfully the spoiling of their Goods: But when this
availed not to shake their Constancy, these Missionaries of Lewis XIV. very
proper Fellows to convert Souls, fell to Out-raging their Persons with
Cruelties and Barbarities worse than Death. One Bervois they dragged to the
Guards, and there for a whole Night the Soldiers continued in turns to kick and
buffet him. Monsieur Solignack's Hand they bound to a Spit, and forced him to
turn it, till, by the Excessive Fire they made, he himself was near Roasted to
Death: And, to show their farther Malice, made a Stable of his Dining Room,
where the Furniture was worth Ten thousand Livres, which they afterward
destroyed. Another Person they dragged to Mass, and because he hung back, and
cried out, He would never do it, they beat him to Death. But should we come to
particular Persons, the Numbers would fill a Volume as large as those of the
Martyrs.

Monsieur de Garrison, a Venerable Man, who had done great Kindness for the
Intendent, went to wait upon him in this extremity to entreat his Protection;
but he, like a true Papist, who holds no Faith to be kept with Heretics,
notwithstanding he offered him all his Goods, not only rejected his suit, but
caused him, beyond what he had suffered, to be dragged through the Streets, and
miserably misused, as a means to deterr others from Petitioning him. This sort
of converting was not only used in this City, but throughout all the Dominions
of the King, though in different Methods of studied Cruelty. Some they tossed
from one Soldier to another, kicking, buffeting, and beating them with Rods
three or four Days and Nights together to keep them waking; and when at any
time they fainted, or sunk down, then they used them in that manner on the
Ground, or on Beds, and when they had rested, roused them again: Some they hung
up by the Heels, and smoaked them with burning wet Straw, till they were almost
dead Some again they blew up almost to bursting, by putting a pair Bellows into
their Fundaments: They basted the Soles of the Feet of others with Lard, and
held them to a Fire till almost Roasted. One Isaac Favin, a Citizen of
Negroplisse, they hung up by the Armpits a whole Night, and pinched off his
Flesh with Pincers, yet could not prevail to make him abjure.

These Cruelties, and many more, were committed not only upon Men, but also
upon Women, and even upon Children that were of any Years. The younger Infants
were every where taken from their Parents by force, and thrust into Monasteries
and Nunneries; Wives, Widows, and Virgins were in many Places Ravished and
Deflowred. Some Children, though of very tender Years, they kept fasting till
they fainted, and then brought them before their Parents, as imagining they
would rather turn, than see their Children Perish. Many times the Priests would
persuade some to Abjure, declaring, it should be only seemingly, to comply with
the King's Decree; but when they had unadvisedly done that, in hopes of some
respite, then they compelled them to torment their Friends and Relations into
an Abjuration; the which, if they did not in three Days, or so much time as was
given them, the Booted Apostles are sent to them again, upon a scruple of their
not being thoroughly Converted. Sometimes they bind the Mothers, that give suck,
to Posts, and lay their Infants to perish in their sight, unless they will
Abjure. And when these Dragoons were weary of tormenting, and inventing new
manner of Torments, tired with the patience of the Sufferers, and despairing to
bring them to their Terms, the Officers Rate them, and send them back to
torture them worse, saying, The King has Commanded it, and it must be done;
bawling out, That the King intends to have but one Religion in his Dominions.

These are the pleasant Paths by which Lewis XIV. invites his Protestant
Subjects to enter into the Bosom of Mother Church, exceeding those of the
Heathen Emperors; for they only killed, and made way for the triumphing Martyr
to enter into Glory; but here they have a lingering Death, and by a Series of
Torments, above what humane Nature is able to bear, their Hearts are sometimes
forced to give their Tongues the Lie. Some Persons they tortured with Engines,
and put brass Pans or Kettles over the Heads of others, and with continual
beating upon them, made the Party in a manner distracted. Those of the better
Sort fled to Paris, thinking the Dragoons would not come so near the King's
Palace: But alas, there they found no Re^uge; for a Decree was set forth,
commanding them to depart the City, and retire to their respective Habitations
on greater Pains and Penalties. Nor did these Monsters of Converters only
spightfully misuse their Persons, but likewise showed their Malice upon the
poor Cattle; as if the King had commanded them to bring the Hogs, Cows, Sheep,
and Oxen over to the Church, as well as their Owners; for some of them they
Hoxed, and so suffered them, for want of Legs, to go to perish in the Fields;
others they killed outright, and suffered to rot on the Ground. Some again
they drove into Rivers and drowned. They cut down the Timber, and burnt it;
destroyed their Vineyards, and sold their Houses; drew their Fish Ponds, and
threw their Fish into the Street.

These Missionaries exceeding the Barbarity of Tartars, were attended by a
multitude of Rascally Friars and Priests to take Confessions and Abjurations,
as likewise by a Bishop, before whom they were to be Examined. And when those
that through Torments, and being tired out, had Abjured, were at Mass, they had
Spies set upon them; and if it appeared that they did it not sincerely, then
they were thrown back into their former Misery. And although these Loyal People
(as the King himself confessed them to be) would have left all they had, and
forsaken the Country; yet that was forbid them on strict Penalties, as even
Death, or perpetual Imprisonment. The Ports were strictly watched, and Ships on
pain of Forfeiture forbidden to take them in; yet, through Providence, many
escaped into England, Holland, Germany, etc. and found Succor and Shelter.
Their Ministers only found the Favor to be Banished, but to leave behind them
their Wives, Children, and Relations: Nay, they hardly escaped sending to the
Galleys; for such are the Unchristian Ways of the Most Christian King, that he
will have it a Crime, in his Country, for Men to be Learned and Virtuous: So by
this means a Million of Families were ruined, and many Thousands perished
through Want, Torture, and in Prisons; for all the Gaols of the Provinces were
filled with these distressed People. Nor did their Malice and Cruelty stop
here; for although the Ministers had Liberty to go into Banishment, under the
hardest of Conditions; yet the King's Ministers on the Frontiers, frequently
stopped them, under frivolous pretenses, till the time given them to depart was
expired; and then charged them with breaking the Orders, in not departing
within the limited time, and that they must go to the Galleys; by which means
they stripped them of all that little they had left; and well they thought it,
if they so escaped, to wander in strange Lands, and rely upon Providence,
which indeed did almost every where plentifully provide for them. The Elector
of Brandenburgh put out a Declaration in Favor of them, inviting and
encouraging as many as would or could Escape, to take up their Habitations in
his Territories; commanding all his Subjects to Comfort, Harbor, Cherish, and
Entertain them; and gave Order to his Ministers, to see it carefully observed
in all his Cities, and Towns, throughout his Dominions. The like, in effect,
was observed in England, Holland, and other Places, where Briefs were granted,
and large Contributions given for the Support of such poor Refugees as took
shelter, and by many Difficulties escaped the Unchristian Cruelties of the Most
Christian King. Nor will it be improper, for the better informing the
Protestant Reader, to give a brief Account of what the Manner and Form of the
Abjurations and Subscriptions those of the Reformed Religion were to make, for
the Pleasure of Lewis XIV. in which Popery is briefly anatomized: viz.

IN the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen. I Believe and Confess
with a firm Faith, all and every thing and things contained in the Creed, which
is used by the Holy Church of Rome, viz. I Receive and Embrace most Sincerely
the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and other Observances of the
said Church. In like manner I Receive the Scriptures, but in the same sense as
Mother Church has and does now understand and expound the same, for whom and
to whom it only does belong, to Judge of Interpretation of the sacred
Scriptures; and I will never take them or understand them otherwise than
according to the Unanimous Consent of the Fathers.

I profess, that there be truly and properly Seven Sacraments of the New Law,
Instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary for the Salvation of
Mankind, although not Equally needful for every one, viz. Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders, and Marriage;
and that they do confer Grace, and that Baptism and Orders may not be
reiterated without Sacrilege. I receive and Admit also the Ceremonies Approved
by the Catholic Church, in the Solemn Administration of the forementioned
Sacraments.

I Receive and Embrace all and every thing and things, which have been
determined concerning Original Sin and Justification, by the Holy Council of
Trent.

I likewise profess, that in the Mass there is offered up to God a true, proper
and propitiatory Sacrafice for the Living and Dead, and that in the Holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is truly realy and Substantially the Body and
Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ; and that
in it there is made a Change of the whole Substance of Bread into his Body, and
of the whole Substance of the Wine into his Blood. Which Change the Catholic
Church calls Transubstantiation. I confess also, that under one only of these
two Elements, whole Christ, and the true Sacrament is Received.

I constantly believe and Affirm, that there is a Purgatory, and the Souls
there detained are relieved by the suffrages of the faithful.

In like manner I believe, that the Saints Reigning in Glory with Jesus Christ,
are to be worshipped and Invocated by us, and that they offer up Prayers to God
for us, and that their Relics ought to be honored.

Moreover, I do most steadfastly Avow, that the Images of Jesus Christ, of the
blessed Virgin, the Mother of God, and of other Saints, ought to be kept and
^^ained; and that due Honor and Veneration must be yielded unto them.

I also do affirm, that the Power of Indulgences was left to the Church by
Christ Jesus, and that the use thereof is very beneficial to Christians.

I do acknowledge, the Holy Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church, to be the
Mother and Mistress of all other Churches; and I profess and swear true
Obedience to the Pope of Rome, Successor of the blessed St. Peter, Prince of
the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.

In like manner, I own and profess, without doubting, all other things left,
defined, and declared by the Holy Canons and General Councils, especially by
the most Holy Council of Trent; and withal, I do condemn, reject, and hold
accursed, all things that are contrary thereto, and all those Heresies that
have been condemned, Rejected, and Accursed by the Church.

This is the Goodly stuff to be Imposed on the Consciences of the Protestants,
which even an Ignorant Indian, almost by the Light of Nature, might detect. And
for refusin, this, they were forced to undergo all the Torments that witty
Horror could Invent. And to this those that Recanted were obliged to swear in
the following Words:

I Promise, Vow, and Swear, and most constantly profess by God's Assistence, to
keep entirely and inviolably, till death, this self-same Catholic and
Apostolic Faith, out of which no Person can be saved. And this I do most truly
and willingly profess; and that I will, to the utmost of my power, endeavor
that it may be maintained and upheld, as far as any ways belongs to my charge.
So help me God, and the Holy Virgin.

And now to conclude this part of the Glorious Actions of Lewis XIV. who would
be taken for the very Champion of Mother Church, we shall give you a Copy of
the Certificate, that the Recanting party is to leave with the Priest, when he
makes his Abjuration:

I A. B. of the Parish of C. do certify to all whom it may concern, that
having acknowledged the Falsness of the Protestant or pretended Reformed
Religion, and the Truth of the Catholic Religion, of my own free Will, without
any Compulsion, have accordingly made profession of the said Catholic Roman
Religion, in the Church of D. in the Hands of W. G. In testimony of the Truth
whereof, I have signed this Act, in the presence of the Witnesses whose names
are underwritten This (...) day of the Month of (...) in the Year of the Reign
of our Sovereign Lord the King (...) and of our Redemption (...) etc.

By this the Reader may see how Innocent Lewis XIV. would appear, when the
Person is compelled to say he makes his Abjuration, without any manner of Force
and Compulsion, voluntarily and willingly; when indeed, all People, even the
Priest that takes it, knows it to be a palpable Lie. Indeed Pope Innocent XI.
(and the Pope we must conclude to be no Friend to the Protestant Religion,
which is diametrically opposed to his Interest,) when Lewis XIV. by his
Ambassador at Rome, bore himself so much upon the Meritorious Service he had
done the Church, in converting such a number of Heretics, (as he styled them,)
told the Ambassador, That if his Master had nothing else to boast of, it would
be little to his Glory; for his manner of Converting Heretics, was neither
pleasing to God nor Man. But, to trace this ambitious Prince a little farther,
let us see how little he regards Religion, when his Interest or Wilfulness
calls him on to Violent and Arbitrary Motions. For even the Pope himself fared
little better in his Hands, as far as lay in his power to attempt against him,
though he would be styled, the Eldest, and most obedient Son of the Church:
Whereby it will appear, that his Hand is against all, without distinction.

Whilst Lewis the Great was so earnestly persecuting his Protestant Subjects,
Pope Innocent XI. (of a Pope, reckoned to be the best that has been for some
hundreds of Years) finding an Increase of Murders, Outrages and Villainies in
the City of Rome, and that those that committed them were harbored and
protected; he thought the best way to prevent such disorder for the future, was
to deprive them of their shelter, by taking away the Franchises of all the
Ambassadors, that none might have cause to complain. And, in order thereto, he
revoked those Privileges by a Bull, bearing date the 12 of May, Anno -- which
was mightily opposed by the Marquess D' Lavardine, Ambassador for Lewis XIV.
though none else opposed it, as holding the Pope a Sovereign Prince: in his own
City. But he proceeded not only to shelter Murderers and Thieves, even in the
City of Rome, but to Protect them, and with armed Force stood upon his Guard to
oppose the Officers that were sent to demand them, sending a Dispatch to his
Master, to let him understand what had happened; who, in a Bravado, fell to big
Words against his Holy Father, resolving not to part with any part of his
Franchises. However he seized upon the City of Avignion, whch had been held for
many Ages as part of St Peter's Patrimony, and caused the Pope's Supremacy to
be denied in the Parliament of Paris, as appears by the Speech of Monsieur de
Tolon, Advocate General, who likewise plays with the great Thunderbolt of the
Roman See, (which has so long been a Bugbear to all the Roman Catholic
Princes,) like a Tennis-Ball, when he has this Expression; And to add, (says
he,) to that Bull, (meaning that by which the Franchises were taken away,) vain
Threats of Excommunication, that are not capable of creating the least Terror
in the most timorous Minds, and in the nicest Consciences, etc. But neither
these big Words, nor his frequent Solicitations, nor his many Purses of Gold
distributed amongst Favorites, could bring the Old Man to buckle to his Most
Christian Son's Humor: For the Ambassador persisting to contemn the Pope's
Orders, he Excommunicated him, and Interdicted the Church of St Lewis in Rome,
for admitting him in the Nightime to the Holy Sacrament, forbidding all
manner of Persons to have Converse either with them, or him. But the
Circumstances of this Matter we shall see in an Act of Appeal, put in by the
Attorney General of France to the Council, upon the Subject of the Pope's Bull
concerning the Franchises, etc. in these Words:

Before the underwritten Apostolic Notory, was present in his own Person
Messire Achilles de Harlay, Counselor of the King in his Conncil of State, and
his Majesty's Attorney General; who (in the Presence, and by the Advice and
Counsel of Messire Denis Talon, and Messire Fra^cois Critean de la Moignon,
also Counselors of the King in his Council of State, and his Advocates General
in his Courts of Parliament,) has declared,

That having some time since seen Copies of a Bull given on the 12th of May
last past, by our Holy Father, Pope Innocent XI. concerning the Franchises,
which certain Persons are in Possession of in the City of Rome; he could not
have imagined, that His Holiness could have conceived the Design of
comprehending the Ambassadors the King was willing to send to him, in the
general Menaces of Excommunication, which he judged convenient to insert
therein, contrary to the use observed by other Popes in the Bulls made by them.
He had hoped, that if the remembrance of the sovereign Power, which the King's
Majesty's Predecessors exercised in Rome, of their Liberalities to the Holy
See, and of the Protection they gave to several Popes, could not induce this
Pope to cause to be rendered to the King, in the Person of his Ministers,
Honors and Testimonies of Acknowledgment, proportionable to his Bounties: At
least his Holiness, as visible Head of the Church, would not be insensible to
the Prodigies the King had performed before his Eyes, for the Reuniting within
the Bosom of his Good Mother, so vast a number of Children that were gone
astray from her;( by these he means the Dragoon'd Converts;) but that he would
be Affected with the Piety of this Prince, and the powerful Protection he
continually gives to Prelates; though he insists not on his Victories and
Power, and that he would not enter into Disputes with him about Rights that had
not suffered any Invasion under his Popedom for many Years: But being informed,
that His Holiness had given Orders to the Cardinal, that is his Vicar in Rome,
to declare the Church of St Lewis, in that City, and the Ecclesiastics that
officiate in it, Interdicted, for having admitted to the participation of the
Holy Mysteries of the Sacrament, on the Night wherein is Celebrated the
Solemnity of our Lord's Nativy, Monsieur Le Marquis de Lavardin, the King's
Ambassador Extraordinary to His Holiness, and that it was supposed upon the
Ordinance delivered upon this Subject, that he was notoriously Excommunicated,
for pretended Contraventions to the Bull; the said Attorney General did not
think he could, without being wanting to his duty, remain any longer in Silence
he has hitherto kept.

Now, if the matter which has given an occasion to so great an Excess, did
concern the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction that belongs to the Pope, he would
easily show the Errors that have been committed by proceeding against a person
that has not been particularly specified in that Bull, to whom the State of the
matter has not been signified since his being at Rome, who might be ignorant of
them in France where it was not published, that the Pope could condemn him as
an Ambassador, though his Character ought to secure him from these Thunders, in
regard of his Functions; yet His Holiness would not so much as hear him, or own
him in that Quality, whatever Addresses he has caused to be made for that
purpose; and that, in fine, the very Rules of the Canon Law requires, that
Persons of so eminent a Dignity should be pointed out by Name in Bulls of that
Nature, before they incurr the Penalties they utter.

But the Pope, in a matter purely Temporal, as are these Franchises, has made
use of the Spriritual Arms, which he is entrusted with, only for the Conduct
and Edification of the Church. (Here, by the way, the Pope might have demanded
of Lewis XIV. Why he used Temporal Arms in Spiritual matters, as his
Dragoon-Converts can testify. But to go on:) And having constituted himself
Judge in his own Cause, the Excommunication which his Holiness Cardinal Vicar
declares to be Incurred, is so Null, that there is no occasion for any
Proceeding to annihilate it; and those that are therein comprehended ought not
to receive Absolution, though it were offered them even at their own homes. And
indeed the said King's Attorney does, with all the French, expect from his
Majesty's Single Power, the Reparation which these Proceedings challenge, and
the Conservation of those Franchises which only depend on the Judgment of God,
as the Rights of this Crown, which can admit of no Dominion but such as the
King's Moderation and Justice may give them. But as not any thing can
Contribute more to lessen, in the Minds of shallow Persons and Libertines, the
Veneration which people ought to have for the Power of the Church, than the Ill
use which it is Ministers may make of it; the King's said Attorney General
declares, that he is Appealing, as indeed he appeals by the present Act, from
the Abusive use that is made of it in the said Bull and Ordinance, not to our
Holy Father Pope Innocent XI. so as has been practiced by some of his
Predecessors: When that they had the True Ideas of their Power that their years
allow them to act of themselves, there might be hopes that in time they might
be brought to know the Justice and Truth of the Complaints that were brought
before them: And, that neither the preventions in favor of their Country, or
the Partialities of those they honored with their trust, did prevail over the
obligations which the Quality of Common Father of all Christians does Impose;
Protesting to carry on this his said Appeal upon this grievance, and upon
others which he reserves to represent to the first General Council that shall
be held, as the Tribunal truly Sovereign and Infallible of the Church, to which
it is Visible Head must Submit as well as it is other Members; and therein to
further, amongst other things, a Regulation that shall prevent the Employing so
Holy an Authority, in uses so far from those for which it was consided in the
Church in the Person of Sr Peter. This may make the Pope be mindful, that God
having separated the two Powers of the Priesthood and of the Empire, the Pope
cannot make use of the Authority of the First, for the Rights that depend on
the Second; that is, according to Temporal Laws, he ought to possess those
Large Territories which his Predecessors have received from the Liberality of
Temporal Princes, and particularly from that of our King's. And, in short, he
would consider upon a Truth, which a Great Archbishop in France wrote to one of
his Predecessors, that a Prelate who Excommunicates a Christian, contrary to
the Rules, and for Rights of a Kingdom of the Earth, may in such an occasion
lose the Power of binding and unbinding, which his Character gives him, but he
cannot deprive of Eternal Life him to whom he does this Injustice, if his Sins
do not render him unworthy of the Mercy of God.

This Act was signed on the 22d of January 1688.

We hope the Reader will pardon us the tediousness of this Matter, when by it
he may perceive how little Zealous Lewis XIV. is for the Church of Rome, when
he thus violently affronts his Father, the Pope, its Visible Head, only about a
place of shelter for Thieves, Murderers, and such like Villains; when at the
same time he will not allow his pious Subjects of the Reformed Religion, (whose
Loyalty himself has owned, and whose Estates have been always ready to furnish
his Wars,) to have any shelter or abode in his large Dominions, though they
have all along appeared the very sinews of his Kingdom, and held with a strong
Hand, and open Purses, the Crown he wears on his Head. However the Pope would
not yield to Revoke the Bull, but the Franchises remained Null; the Pope
publicly declaring Lewis XIV. the apparent Enemy of Christendom, and the only
Person that influenced the Turks to break the Truce, and with an Inundation of
Barbarians to Invade the Empire.

We have several times had Advice, That the Ambassador of France has been
Abused in the Divan at Constantinople, being not only denied the Sofra, but
beaten by the Command of the Grand Vizier, for throwing up his Cushion that
chanced to fall upon the said Vizier, as he was going out. And although himself
has placed, and held his Stool upon the Sofra, it has been removed; nay, he has
had of late an Ambassador Imprisoned there, whose Liberty was not gained
without 100 Purses of Money. And whilst all Europe was wondering what Measures
this Great Monarch would take to revenge the Affront, alas! the Business was
tamely clapped up, the Ambassador was recalled, and another sent in his stead,
and as good Friends as ever, though the Kingdom of France, at the same time
Reaps no extraordinary Benefit in the Turks Dominion. But those that have more
narrowly pried into this Affair, give their Opinion, That these Affronts were
agreed on, to cast a Mist before the Eyes of the Christian Princes, so that
they might not see the underhanddealings that were carried on between the Most
Christian and Mahomitan Turk. For this way of misusing the Ambassador, was
indeed looked upon by most, as tending to a Breach, and a Rupture was daily
expected. But it seems the Most Christian King delights most in shedding
Christian Blood, and his Zeal for Religion is manifested, in Burning, and
Blowing up Churches of all Christian Persuasions, as well those of the Roman
Catholics as the Protestants.

Let us look now a little back, and we shall find Count Teckely in Hungary
destroying with Fire and Sword, raising Troops with French Gold; and though a
Protestant, secretly encouraged to Invade the Empire by the French Emissaries,
with Promise of greater Assistance. But proving too weak of himself to oppose
the Armies that were drawn that way, the Turks broke the Truce at the
Instigation of France, as will more largely appear when we come to insert the
Emperor's Declaration of War with France. And under that Advantage, the
Imperial Troops being drawn off, Lewis XIV. very Piously Besieged and took the
City of Strasburg, a Free Imperial Town, when hardly any Body expected any
Hostility. His pretense was, to restore the Bishop, which that Protestant City
refused to admit with his Popish Trnmpery. The Articles of Surrender were very
advantageous to the Citizens; as, a promise of their Religion, Liberties, and
any thing they desired. But the French gaining Possession, soon barred them of
a great part, delivering many over to the Mercy of the enraged Bishop, who
never was any Favourer of the Protestants; and likewise restored Popery,
building a Citadel, or Castle, for the better curbing the Citizens; many of
whom finding themselves so hardly dealt with at first, and fearing worse,
secretly withdrew, with what Substance they could, to other Cities remote;
whereupon the Effects they left were seized, a strict Charge was given to have
an Eye upon the Inhabitants, and such as they suspected going off were
Imprisoned, and all the small Towns and Villages were taken in as Dependences,
and constrained to pay great Contributions; and such as could not, or refused,
were threatened with Military Execution. A great Army also of the King's, lay
hovering on the West Frontiers of the Empire, whilst Cara Mustapha, the Grand
Vizier, was coming down on the East like a Deluge, with about Two hundred
thousand Turks and Tartars, who burnt and destroyed all before them: For by
this time, Mahomet IV. had proclaimed War against the Emperor, and detained the
Count de Caprara, his Ambassador. All Princes of the Empire, upon the sudden
Allarm, were in doubt, and suspense, which of these Turks they ought most to
fear. Though Lewis XIV. out of a seeming pretense for the House of Austria, had
made an offer to assist the Emperor; but this was only shadow, as appeared
afterward, by his violent falling upon the Spanish Netherlands, whereby the
Forces of the King of Spain were hindered from Assisting in the common Cause.
And although most of the Princes of Europe used their Interest with him, though
all Christendom in a manner lay at stake, nothing would prevail, till he
perceived the Turks could not effect what they purposed. For, in the Year 1683*
they were totally Routed, and beat off from the Siege of Vienna, the principal
City of Austria, when it was at the last Crisis, and could have held out but a
few days longer.

It is no wonder that the Jesuits, who, on all Hands, are detested, and
accounted the Incendiaries of Christendom, by the moderate Roman Cotholicks,
have so great an Influence in France, since Father Maimburgh, and Father La
Chese have had so great an Influence over Lewis XIV. to whose fiery Spirit they
labor to add Fuel, and plunge him into Cruelty without Remorse, or
distinguishing Protestants from Roman Catholics. And these were the blessed
pair, that laid the Foundation of the Misery of his Subjects of the Reformed
Religion, by persuading him, That by Rooting the Protestants out of his
Kingdom, he would render himself greater than his Ancestors, who were never
able to accomplish that matter; and, that if he could bring it to pass, it
would render his Name Immortal in the Roman Calendar. And, no doubt, as many
Instances affirm, these Locusts who seek to devour every thing that is
pleasant, have had as great an Influence in the Ruin of the Neighboring Roman
Catholics. For, from the Wideness of his Conquests, they could not but promise
to themselves great Advantage, where they have so great an Influence over the
Conqueror, as to have his very Conscience in their keeping and dispose. We have
not of late heard that any, like Father Ante, have reproved him for Exorbitancy
of Lust, or other Vices, but rather encouraged him therein, that they might
reap the profit at the Price of his Eternal State. And of this we may give some
hints, as we find it in a Letter that has of late been frequently Printed, and
held to be Authentic, sent from La Chese, Confessor to the French King, to
Father Edmund Petre, late Great Almoner to King James II. though fatal in his
Counsels to the repose of that unfortunate Prince. Wherein, amongst other
matters, undertaking to give the Jesuit directions to put forward affairs, by
his Counsels, Interest, and Power with King James, and others great at Court,
he thus proceeds:

Most Reverend Father,
TO satisfy the desire I have to show you by my Letter, the Choice you ought
to make of such persons fit to stir up, etc. I will, in few words, since you
desire it, inform you of the Genius of the people of our Court, of their
inclinations, and of them we make use of, that, by a Parallel you make between
them and your English, you make use of, you may know them. Therefore I shall
begin with the Chief, I mean our Great Monarch. It is certain, he is naturally
Good, and loves not to do Evil, unless desired to do it. This being so, I may
say, he never would have undertaken the Conversion of his Subjects, without the
Clergy of France, and without our Society's Correspondence abroad. He is a
Prince Enlightened, who very well observes, what we put him upon is contrary to
his Interest, and that nothing is more opposite to his great Designs and his
Glory, he aiming to be the Terror of all Europe. The vast number of
Malcontents he has caused in his Kingdom, forces him in time of Peace, to keep
up three times more Forces than his Ancestors did in the greatest Domestic and
Foreign Wars, which cannot be done without prodigious Expense.

The Peoples Fears also begin to lessen as to his aspiring to an Universal
Monarchy, and they may assure themselves he has left those Thoughts, nothing
being more opposite to his designs, than the method we enjoin him. His Candor,
Bounty, and Toleration to the Heretics, would undoubtedly have opened the door
of the Low Countries, Palatinate, and other States of the Rhine, and even of
Switzerland; whereas things are at present so altered, that we see the
Hollanders at present free from any fear of Danger, the Switzers and City of
Geneva resolved to lose the last drop of their Blood in their defense. Beside
some Diversions we may expect from the Empire, In case we cannot hinder a Peace
with the Turks.

Sir, His Majesty's Brother is always the same, I mean, he takes no notice of
what passes at Court. It has sometimes happened, the King's Brothers have acted
so, as to be noted in the State: But, this we are sure, will never do any thing
to stain the Glory of his Submission and Obedience, and is willing to lend a
helping hand for the Destruction of the Heretics, by the Instance he makes to
his Majesty, who now has promised him to cause his Troops to enter the
Palatinate the next Month. The Dauphin is passionately given up to Hunting, and
little regards the Conversion of Souls; and therefore we do not care to Consult
him, how or which way the Heretics shall be destroyed. He openly laughs at us,
and slights all the Designs of which the King his Father makes great Account.


The Letter goes on to Characterize the Dauphiness in her witty Humor, and
Hatred to the Protestants; as likewise Monsieur Lovois, the Archbishop of
Paris, and others, who labor to Agrandize Lewis XIV. by following the Methods
of the Society of Jesuits, who have always been held the Foxes with Firebrarnds
at their Tails, who have labored to promote Violence, War, and Bloodshed in
all Places where they come. Henry IV. Banished them France, and demolished
their Houses, for setting one of their Pupils to kill him in his
Presencechamber amidst his Nobles, because he would not hearken to their
Counsels, but detested their pernicious Ways. Yet, knowing them to be
Sycophants, fraught with Malice and Revenge, after he had frustrated many of
their Attempts, that great Prince, who had faced Death in all its Shapes,
fearing their wicked Purposes, thought fit to make fair Weather with them, and
to recall them; which being opposed by a Lord of his Council, who alleged how
pernicious they were in all Kingdoms, States and Governments, the King
passionately broke out into this Expression, viz. Secure me my Life then. And
indeed, this King who had remained safe in forty Battles, found his Death, as
has been said, in the midst of his Capital City, amongst his Friends and
Guards. Nor could the Obstinacy of the Assassinate and Paricide denote any
thing else, but that he was set on by these Men. For Raviliack, the bloody
Actor, neither sought to fly, nor excuse the Fact: nor, when his Flesh was
plucked off with hot Pincers, would he confess who inspired him to do it, but
remained obstinate in the midst of the most horrid Tortures, which
demonstrated, that he had been decoyed by such as made him believe, the Fact
was no less than Meritorious, and that Eternal Life was entailed upon him for
the Deed. And no boubt, Lewis XIV. is not fearless, (notwithstanding his
Bravadoes) of some such Fate, if he should reject them and their Counsels;
which makes him so far comply with their Maxims, as to involve the Nations in
Blood, and carry Fire and Destruction wherever his Armies come, and make
himself the very Phaeton of the World. Some will object in their Excuse, that
Lewis XIV. dares not keep his Armies Idle; for, the Soldiers having been so
long trained up in War by a long Ease, would grow Luxurious, and be apt, like
the Roman Pretorian Soldiers, at every little disaster to Mutiny: or, if that
he should disband them, they for the most part being Incapable of any other
Employment than the Sword, would infallibly shake his Throne, by joining with
those his Tyranny has reduced in a manner to Despair. However, any Reasonable
Man might think, he might employ them in other matters, as fortifying his
Inland-Towns, and building Piramids to his Glory, as the Kings of Egypt did, to
keep their People from Idleness, upon the same Score, as most Historians
conjecture, whose Labor produced those Lasting Monuments, whose Aspiring Tops
are said to penetrate the Clouds. But Lewis XIV. is of another Mind; he is for
building a Structure with the untempered Mortar of Rapin and Violence, and
Cementing it with Christian Blood; wishing, no doubt, that all who oppose his
designs, had but one Neck, as Heliogabulus did by the People of Rome, that
himself, as a Lasting Monument of his Glory, might have the Honor of cutting
it off; which shows the very Spirit of Jesuit-Counsels.

Pardon, Reader, this Digression, if it may be so termed in a History of this
Nature; for, where a Man pretends Conscience, he is inclined to one side or
other, and ought to have the Awe of Religion, of what persuasion soever he be,
upon his Mind, favoring that party to which he inclines. But Lewis XIV. is of
a contrary Temper, having his Hand against all, whilst all men's Hands are more
justly against him. We will not determine, what Orders he would give in
relation to Turkish Mosques, or Mahomets Religion. But sure we are, in all the
Progress wherever his Arms have carried Destruction, the Christian Churches of
whatsoever persuasion, have felt the Marks of his Irreligion and Sacrilege.
Nay, it is affirmed upon credible testimony, that when the numerous Host of
Infidels overran Hungary, and the Success was doubtful, whether the Loss or
Relieving Vienna should hazard or save the Eastern part of the Empire; and
Prayers were put up almost every where for the Success of the Christians, Anno
1683. the Most Christian King's Intendent at St Omers, gave a severe Reprimand
to the Bishop, for having ordered public Prayers to be put up, and a Fast to
be held on that occasion. And when this Inundation of Barbarians were entered
Christendom, carrying Fire and Sword into most of the Emperor's Herediditary
Provinces, with Slaughter, Bondage and all the Outrages that can be Imagined;
insomuch that the flaming Towns and Villages seemed but one great scene of
Fire, and the cries of the miserable People rent the Skies, which blushed with
the Ascending Heat and Reflection of Blood; even then, when all good Men were
overwhelmed with Sorrow, Lewis XIV. brought down his huge Armies on the Front
of the Empire, to overawe the Little Princes, and keep their Troops for the
Defense of their own Territories, that they might have no share in the Glory,
by assisting the Emperor against the Infidels. And Monsieur Seppeville was a
Spy upon the Emperor's Affairs, giving Lewis, his Master, from time to time,
an Account of the Progress of the Turks, and of their Success; and that the
League between him and Mahomet IV. Emperor of the Turks, might be as much
shadowed as it was possible, Monsieur Fouchay persuaded him to make a Diversion
in the Spanish Netherlands, thereby to divert the Forces of the King of Spain
from Aiding the Emperor. And here, under pretense of Dependencies, and other
Matters, frivilous and groundless, in the Opinion of the Neighbour-Princes; he
swep'd away many Towns, though even the Turks themselves, had they determined
impartially, could not but have judged it not only Unchristian like, but also
unreasonable: Or else what could any unbiassed Man conjecture, but that the
Turks and the French King had combined to share the Empire between them. Yet it
would not have been so easy to have stopped an Inundation of Barbarians,
flushed with Victory, as Lewis XIV. imagined. And who can tell, but if they had
prevailed, they might have been by this time in the Heart of France, and showed
him play at his own Weapons. How unjustly this King took Luxemburgh, and other
Places in the Netherlands, few are ignorant, even when it was least suspected
any Hostilities would have happened. But that great City could not suffice the
Ambition of this Prince; for he sent his Dragoons Abroad when Spain was
altogether unprovided, and under Pretense of Dependencies, swept away whole
Provinces, compelling the miserable Villages, who had been ruined by a
lingering War, to part with the small Subsistence they had reserved for the
Preservation of Life, under pretense of Contribution; by which means many of
them perished in their Houses, and in the Fields, when they had eaten all the
Unclean Things they could find; and those that refused, had their Houses fired
about their Ears, and their persons Tortured, to make them confess where they
had hid their Treasure, or Goods; so that some of them died under the
Tormentors Hands: By which it appears, that Lewis XIV. showed his Zeal to the
Church, in Dragooning as well the Papists as the Protestants, and even those of
Flanders, which above all are accounted the most zealously Devoted to the
Romish Superstition; and this by way of Surprise, whilst the Emperor of
Germany, and the other Princes, his Confederates, as has been hinted, were
acquiring Glory at the point of their Swords. For this Monarch cares little for
engaging his Armies, it ever having been seen, that he has gained little or
nothing by the fair dint of the Sword. And indeed, if we consider how easily
many strong Towns have been delivered up to him by Garrisons that were able to
defend them, the World cannot but conclude, false underhand Dealing has been a
main Advancement to his Conquests; by which Methods his vast Treasures have
been frequently shrunk, and his Subjects Estates stretched upon the Tenters to
recruit them. Upon this a French Rhimer descants, as it was found in a Billet
laid on the King's Dressing Table, and Englished thus; Thy Grandsire Harry, the
Name of Great he bore,
Thy Father Just, but thou'art Lewis d'Ore.


A Lewis d' Ore is a piece of French Gold Coin, by which we may understand that
the Poet, such as he was, insinuated, That he gained more by his Gold than by
Valor or Virtue. The King was surprised at this, and dissembled the Affront;
seemed to praise the Author, and promise, if he would discover himself, not
only to give him a pardon, but reward him. But, it seems, he had more wit than
to trust himself in the Lyon's Paws upon such slender Security: Yet, not to
give over his Poetical Whimsey, there was soon after found in the same Place a
Distich, in English thus, Lewis, the thing cannot be known,
I writ it when I was alone.


Hitherto we have endeavored to show the World the State of Affairs relating
to France, since the coming of Lewis XIV. to the Crown, who has in all Parts
answered the Prodigy of his Birth, living, as we may term it, in a perpetual
Tempest of War, to the Scourge of Christendom. Few Kingdoms or Estates there
are, that can boast themselves exempted from the Damage received by the
Calamities that have frequently happened on that Occasion. Nay, where his own
Power has not reached so effectually, that of others has been employed; not to
mention his engaging the Northern Crowns of Denmark and Sweden, though
Protestant Kingdom, in a tedious and expensive War, but even soliciting the
Pirates of Argier and Tripoly, to Invade the Traffic of the Christians, by
hindering Navigation, and taking their Ships, offering them his Ports, lying
advantageous for the purpose, and, as it were, cajolling Nests of Thieves, and
the Offscum of Mankind, with whom it is not for the Glory of so great a
Monarch, as Lewis XIV. would be thought to be, to have any Converse withal.
But we see Ambition will stoop low, when it hopes to soar aloft.

Lewis XIV. when he committed these Outrages, and disturbed the Repose of
Christendom, had little regard to his Oath, and the Credit of his Ambassadors,
who concluded the Peace at Nimeguen, nor of the Honor of the King of England,
Charles II. who was Guarrantee of that Peace; nor were the States of the United
Provinces less abused, who had so great a hand in bringing that memorable
Treaty to pass, wherein the Ministers of all the Princes of Christendom were
concerned, and at which place most of them were in Person. But to give a
farther Light into this Matter, take the following Proclamation of Peace,
published by the States.

BE it known to all Persons, that, to the Honor and Praise of God the Lord
Almighty, to the Welfare and Furtherance of the Common Good of these United
Netherlands in General, and the good Inhabitants thereof in Particular, a good,
sure, faithful, and lasting Peace was made at Nimeguen, the Tenth Day of
August, in this present Year 1678. between the King of France on the one side,
and the States General of the United Netherlands on the other; and that the
Ratification on both sides were exchanged in due Form at Nimeguen aforesaid, on
the Twentieth of this Instant September. And that in pursuance thereof, all
Acts of Hostility and Enmity, as well at Sea, and in fresh Water, as at Land,
in all Cities and Places under their Respective Dominions, without Exceptions;
as likewise between their Subjects and Inhabitants, of what Condition soever
they be, must cease and determine after the respective Terms hereafter
mentioned; to wit, after four Weeks, to reckon from this Day the publication of
the Peace has been made in the Hague, that is, after the 26th of October next,
in the East and North Seas, from the Ness in Norway to the Lands End of the
Chanel; and after Six Weeks, that is, after the 9th of November next, from the
said Lands End in the Chanel to the Cape St. Vincent; and after Ten Weeks, that
is, after the 7th of December, from Cape St. Vincent to the Line; and lastly,
after Eight Months, that is, after the 28th of May, 1679. in all Places of the
World. Wherefore all, and every one, as well Subjects and Inhabitants of the
several Provinces of the Netherlands, as those that are under their High and
Mighty Dominion and Obedience, are expressly Charged and Commanded, inviolably
to Maintain the Peace, pursuant to the said Treaty; and not to Act in the least
contrary thereunto, on pain of being punished as Disturbers of the Public
Peace, without Favor or Connivance.

Done in the Assembly of the States General in the Hague, September 22th. 1678.
This may sufficiently demonstrate the good and honest Intentions of the States
General, who could not think, but the Word of a King, and the Most Christian
King, as Lewis the Great styles himself, would continue Sacred and Inviolable.
But alas! his Ambition and Interest weigh down his Words and Oaths; and, in
Conclusion, it appeared, that he only did it to bind up their Hands, whilst
that he might the more securely prey upon the Spanish Netherlands a Country the
most pleasant and fruitful in Europe, and for which many of his Predecessors
have heartily longed, but never undertook the Methods he has observed to bring
it under his Subjection. However, this Great Monarch has failed in his
Expectation, and has frequently been baffled, when his numerous Armies have
thought themselves most sure. Yet, by the way, we may Mark out a piece of
French Treachery, though of an Elder date; by which we may see, it is in a
Manner the very Genius of the Nation, though more superabundant in Lewis XIV.

It so happened in the Year of our Lord 1551. that the Protestants in Germany
being greatly oppressed by the Emperor Charles I. Henry II. King of France,
pretending to compassionate them, sent Monmorency the Constable, with four
thousand Horse and Foot, as it were to Relieve them, who demanded with many
Insinuations and Promises of Protection, a Passage through the City of Metz, a
City under Protestant Government. The People in hopes to be delivered from the
Ravages the Imperial Soldiers committed in their Territories, joyfully
consented; and, in Gratitude, spread Tables in the Streets ready furnished with
Provision, for the Soldiers to eat as they Marced through; bringing Barrels of
Wine, and other Liquors, to Accommodate them, the Magistrates waiting upon the
Constable with all Imaginable demonstrations of Kindness and Respect; who
seeing his time, feigned to be troubled with a sudden Fit of the Gout and other
Indispositions, and thereupon entreated the Magistrates, that he might have the
opportunity of a Place of Retirement for some time, and that he not knowing
what might befall him in the Wars, or by that Sickness, was desirous to make his
Will. The Good-meaning Magistrates were highly satisfied with the Favor he
would do them, and began to contend which of them should have the Honor of
entertaining him. But their Joy was soon turned into Mourning; for, when the
Magistrates and most of the Gentry were assembled in his Chamber, whilst the
Scrivener was making his Will, to which they were to be Witnesses, he gave
private Orders for seizing the Gates. And, as soon as he knew it was done,
rising up in a fury, he suddenly stabbed the Mayor of the City to the Heart
with his Dagger; which being the Signal to his Guards, they fell upon the rest
that were in the Chamber, and put them to the Sword. This being known, the
French Soldiers overran the Streets, crying out, The City is won; and
thereupon fell to plundering the Shops and Houses. So that this City (like the
flying-Fish in the Indian Seas) whilst it thought to Escape one Mischief, fell
into another, as great if not greater: For, of this kind of Fish, Sailors
report, that being pursued by the Dolphins, and finding it self ready to be
devoured, by help of its long Fins, that serve for Wings, it shoots into the
Air, and flies a great many paces, till the Fins grow stiff by dryness, and
then falls into the Sea; but frequently, whilst it is flying, the Cormorants,
and other Ravenous Fowl that haunt those Seas, catch them, and by them they are
devoured.

A Second Instance of Later Date, we may mention in Lewis XIII. Father to the
present King, when he designed to seize upon the Dukedom of Lorrain, he, by the
Advice of Cardinal Richlieu, sent for the old Duke to come to him at his Town
of Lions, who, dreading no such Treachery, left Nancy the Place of Security,
and went to Complement the King who was at the head of his Troops; and after he
had paid him that Homage and respect he conceived was due to him, he prepared
to return, but found himself mistaken; for he was Arrested by the Captain of
the King's Guards, upon frivolous Pretenses and Claims, and made him deliver up
Nancy into which he entered as a Conqueror, the surrender of which occasioned
the Loss of the whole Duchy. Many Instances of the Like Nature, even the French
Historians give us, who make the Actions of their Kings appear as fair and
candid as they can. But now we come to Lewis XIV.

The Peace, as we have said, being made, and all Christendom Relying on it, and
firmly keeping it, except the French King; he thought this his time to play his
Game, as thinking he had Charmed the Princes, or made them fear the Consequence
of a Rupture. He soon forgot his Word, as appears by the Emperor's early
Complaint against his Proceedings by several Letters and Memorials, That,
contrary to the Peace of Nimeguen,

1. He continued his Troops in the Empire.

2. Remaining possessed of Places they ought to Evacuate.

3. Requiring Contributions.

4. Obliging the ten Towns of Alsace to take a new Oath, thereby pretending a
Sovereignty over them, Erecting a new Court of Appeals, and forbiding any
Addresses to be made to the Imperial Chamber of Spires.

5. Requiring an Oath from the Vassals and Nobles of Alsace.

6. Setting up Pretentions upon the Vassals of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, as
likewise upon other Imperial States and Countries

7. Consiscating the Rents and Revenues of the Chapter of Strasburg.

8. Making new Fortifications at Sciestadt and Hunningen.

9. Not Restoring Monpelgard.

10. The slighting Daxburgh.

11. The Taking Hamburgh and Bitseth

And other Matters. Upon this, the Diet of Ratisbone, to whom the Complaint was
made, after some Deliberation, came to a Resolution;

That the proceedings of the French King were directly contrary to the Treaties
of Westphalia and Nimeguen; that therefore the Emperor shall be prayed, by
Letter or by Embassy, in the Name of himself and the Empire, to demand of the
Most Christian King Reparation for the same; and that in the mean time the
French Ministers residing at the Imperial Court and here, shall be made
acquainted with this Resolution of the Diet, and that it shall be represented
to them. For what concerns the two first Points, That the same are directly
contrary to the 27th of the Treaty of Nimeguen, and the First, Second, and
Fourth Articles of the Instrument, afterward signed by the Ambassadors, for
the Executing the said Treaty, that have been Religiously observed by the
Emperor. That the Third Point is contrary to the 30th Article of the said
Treaty, and the 8th Article of the said Instrument. That for what concerns
the Fourth Point, it is known, that the Third Article of the Treaty of Munster
says, that the Countries of the Upper and Lower Alsaces, and the Lordship of
Haguenaw, shall be yielded to France, with an Express Exception of the 10
Imperial Towns, and their Rights and Privileges; and that the French King shall
pretend no Superiority over them, or require any Oath or Fidelity from them;
and in pursuance of the Agreement made at Nurenburgh, in the Year 1650.
Haguenaw, Landaw, and other Places, and other of the said ten Towns, more
Actually Evacuated by the French, without pretending then, and several years
afterward, to any Sovereignty over the said Towns, or requiring any Oath of
Fidelity from them. That afterward in 1665. Complaints were made to the Diet,
of the French setting up new Pretensions; whereupon Arbitrators were chosen on
the Part of the Empire and of France, Amicably to determine the same, who were
several Years employed in that work, which was put to an end by the French
possessing themselves of the said Towns, even before the War: That the Treaty
of Nimeguen Confirms that of Westphalia, and consequently that the said Towns
ought to have restored to them the Rights and Privileges which that stipulates
for them. That for the Fifth and Sixth Points, they likewise directly contervene
the said Treaties. That as to the Seventh, they expect farther Information in
it. That for the Eighth, they cannot Imagine what Right the French have to
Fortify Sclechstadt, considering what is abovesaid of those Free Towns. For
the Ninth and Tenth, the French have acted notoriously contrary to the
Westphalian and Nimeguen-Treaties. For the Eleventh, that Hamburgh belongs to
ths Count of Nassaw, as appears by the Treaty of Osnaburgh. That concerning
Bitseth, they expect farther Information. And lastly, They hope the King will
not prejudice the City of Strasburgh in its Rights or Privileges, and
particularly in that of fortifying Kiel, so necessary for its Security.

This so Early Breach of the Peace, that had been so long labored for by the
Princes of Christendom, much displeased them, and filled many with Detestation,
observing that Lewis XIV. went beyond the Bounds of the Decree of the Council
of Constance, which says, That no Faith is to be kept with Heretics; but he
neither regards his Faith with those the Romans unchristianly term so, nor with
Roman Catholics. However, having a mind to secure what he had belonging to the
Empire, or Princes dependent, as appears by the Resolution of the Diet, in his
detaining some, and imposing on others, contrary to the Articles agreed on, he
sought to bring the States of the United Provinces into an Offensive and
Defensive Alliance, against which all the Provinces, but Groningen and
Friesland Excepted, who did not so long; and their Resolutions were published,
declaring, They intended to keep inviolably the Peace and Esteem they had for
his Majesty's Friendship, but could not enter into any such Alliance as he
required. However, he persisted to encroach upon the Empire, suffering his
Troops, that should have been withdrawn, to quarter at discretion, eating up
that little the Inhabitants had left them to subsist withal; winking at the
many Complaints that were made, and proving deaf to the Cries of the People.

This occasioned the King of England to complain by his Ambassadors; but this
prevailed little or nothing, till he found a Defensive Alliance was carrying on
against him; and then, under pretense of Winter Quarter, he drew off some of
his Troops.

Let us look a little back upon the Proceeding of Lewis le Grand, in the
Principality of Orange, a place of Sovereign Right for some Ages, belonging to
the Illustrious House of Nassaw, and the Inheritance of his present Majesty of
Great Britain. This Principality and City of Orange, is very advantageously
Situate, exceeding fruitful, and for the most part Inhabited by Protestants.
These Considerations made the French King Long to be Master of it; for he
seldom troubles himself to War on the Alps, or in cold barren Countries.
Whereupon, during the Minority of the Prince, without the least Title or just
Pretense to warrant his Actions, he sent an Army to take Possession of it, in
the Year 1660. exercising a great deal of Cruelty and Inhumanities upon the
Subjects, contrary to the Law of Arms, and of Nations, demolishing the Bastions
and strong Fortifications; thereby purposing to himself, if he should be
obliged by the Princes, who looked upon him as an Intruder and an Oppressor, to
relinquish it, he might with more Ease repossess himself of it, as he saw
occasion. Nay, so far extended his Malice, that he not only ruined the
Citadel, but caused the Magnificent Monuments of Prince Maurice's Greatness to
be laid in Ruins: And indeed, in the Year 1665. he was obliged to Relinquish
that Principality, and the Sieur Zuilychem to take Possession of it for his
Master. When in April that year, as a presage of the Prince's good Fortune, and
future Greatness, a Crown of Light darting Rays, appeared over the City of
Orange, hanging, as it were, in the Air, over the Palace, or place of State,
appointed for his Reception, to Consolate his distressed Subjects, who for five
years had groaned under the Tyranny of France. But their Tranquillity lasted no
longer than the Year 1673, for then the French King supposing to make his Arms
the Terror of Europe, that so he might at pleasure become the great Arbitre of
Peace and War; he, on a sudden, and very unexpectedly, entered it with his
Troops. And although after by an express Article of the Treaty of Nimeguen, the
Principality of Orange was restored, and the King of England was Guarrantee of
that Peace; yet the unwearied Encroachments of the French Troops of Provence,
and the Intrigues of the Popish Bishop of Orange, rendered daily the Subjects
of the Principality more uneasy, till in the Year 1682. Lewis XIV. in a time
of full Peace, as well with the States as Confederate Princes, commanded a
powerful Army to take possession of it, without any manner of color or
pretext, but the Turkish Motto, viz.

Sic Volo, sic Jubeo; stat pro Ratione Voluntas,
This I will, this I command;
My Will it does for Reason stand.
And thereby his booted Missionaries or Dragoons, acted inhumane Barbarities on
the Inhabitants, unparalled in any Reign but his own. And here for an Essay
of his insupportable Vanity, or rather of a Kindness unusual amongst Princes,
and derogatory to Majesty it self, we must not omit; That in a Breve in Favor
of the late Prince of Conde, as Administrator of the Duke of Long aville, Lewis
XIV. had the foolish Confidence to treat his present Majesty of Great Britain,
with the Title of Messire William, Count of Nassaw, living at Amsterdam in
Holland, as if thereby he had entailed upon himself the Principality of Orange,
which at that time was the Supreme Title of King William.

As for the Actings of the French King in this Principality, we shall give you
a brief Account, in the words of Monsieur ^e Chambrun, viz.

The dismal Cruelties (says he) acted upon my unhappy Country, and the City of
Orange, so famous by the Greatness of its Princes, is at this day naught but a
dismal Heap, where one cannot enter without treading upon its Ruins. She is at
this day a doleful Monument of Cruelty and Injustice. I cannot persuade my
self, that the Ruins of Troy, or Carthage were more terrible than these I have
mentioned, since to one that beholds them at a distance, they appear the
Habitations of Ostriches and Owls. If Posterity shall enquire the cause of this
horrid Desolation, as certainly it must, the Account that shall be given of
them will no doubt tend to the dishonor of France. History will not forget to
hand down to succeeding Ages, the heroic Virtues of our Prince, when she comes
to relate the Ruin of his Territories, and Desolation of his Subjects, and
when they shall understand, that the Justice, the Sincerity, the Valor, and
indefatigable Care of maintaining the Liberty of Europe, were the only Motives
that induced the French King thus to treat an Illustrious Prince; doubtless
they will say, This has been the most dismal and most corrupt of all Ages,
since that which ought to have been the Admiration of the Great Ones of the
Earth, was the Object of their Aversion and Hatred. If this great Prince would
have consented to the overturning of the Government of his Country, as he was
earnestly courted so to do; if he would have taken part with those that aim at
the enslaving Europe: In a word, If he would have betrayed his Country, and
broken his Faith to his Allies, he might have mounted a Throne then offered
him: But because he loved his Country better than his Interest, and preferred
his Honor to the richest Advantages, and the Liberty of Europe to a Crown, it
behoved his great Actions should be regarded with Hatred, and followed with the
unjustest of Treatments. But although this Conduct has been blamed in all the
Courts of Europe; yet nothing has been done to oppose it. And I am forced to
say, It Is the dishonor of all Europe, to have suffered a great Prince to
expose so often his Life with the greatest Bravery, for its Good and Liberty,
and at the same time to abandon his Interest with such an unaccountable
Neglect. England was obliged to protect and assist this Prince, not only as
being the Guarrantee of the Peace of Nimeguen, but from the Principle of Blood
and Alliance. And indeed, what Honor can Accrue to England, to see a
Sovereignty wrested by unjust violence, from a Prince that had Married the
Heiress of Three Kingdoms. As for me, I cannot think of the Desolation of my
Country without saying, amidst my Tears, with Jeremiah, How does the City sit
solitary, etc. Is it nothing to you, all you that pass by? etc. In short, is it
possible (continues he) that a man that loves his God, his Religion, and his
Prince, could behold with dry Eyes so many Ruins as I saw in the Principality
of Orange. Hic Seges est ubi Troja fuit.

For this, see the Book of this learned Man, Printed at the Hague the last
Year, Page 61, 62. Nor was it only the Buildings that suffered, but the People
also, who for the most part, as well Papists as Protestants, were plundered of
all they had, and many of them Dragooned out of their Religion, by the same
barbarous Methods as were taken with his own Subjects of the Reformed Religion.

Lewis XIV. is seldom without pretenses to quarrel with his Neighbors; for, he
has for that purpose, and to exalt himself Chief Monarch of Europe, set up a
Chamber at Metz, called the Sovereign Court, before which he causes to be Cited
Kings and Princes (well knowing they will not appear then) under pretense their
Lands are Dependences, or under the Claim of ancient Titles or Claims, for
which himself can give no Reason; he causes them to be condemned as forfeited.
And from this Court, where himself is both Judge and Jury, he will admit of no
Appeal, but proceeds to take possession, by sending his Troops to quarter
there, and Leavy great Contributions upon the Inhabitants, that, so by
Impoverishing them, as he uses his own Subjects, he may the better keep them
under. And by this means he adjudged part of the King of Sweeden's Terretories,
and seized on the Countries of the Primes of Montbelliard, Pellite Pierre, and
diverse others, swallowing up Provinces like the Great Leviathan, without making
any Account of Rights or Justice, though the time peradventure is at hand
wherein he will be obliged to disgorge them with Interest. His Eye has been
indeed a long while up Italy, soaring that way toward the Universal Monarchy,
which made him deal underhand with the Duke of Mantua for the strong Garrison
of Cassel, which serves as an Inlet over the Alps. Nor had Geneva escaped his
Bombs, had not the Swisse-Cantons, fearful of their own Safety, declared with
much warmth, to stand by that Protestant City with all their Forces.

The Peace being concluded with Spain, Lewis XIV. finding himself uneasy to be
out of Action, picks a Quarrel with that Nation about 500000 Crowns he
pretended were to be restored for damages done in the West Indias, and
thereupon sent the Duke's D' Estree and Mortemer, with a Squadron of Men of
War, to block up Cadiz, and to take and destroy all such Merchants-ships and
Galleys as they light on. And indeed, they did considerable Mischief against
that Maritime Town, by casting Bombs, and sending Fireships into the Harbor.
Nor thought they this sufficient, but they would have compelled the Dutch Men
of War, who were at Peace with Spain, to assist them, and by that Means
Involved them in an open Violation of the League. For, the latter of the Dukes
having with him Eight Sail of Men of War, and happening to meet two Ships
belonging to the States, Commanded by Capt. Ewycke, and Capt. Mevart, he
compelled them to Sail with him toward Cadiz. However, in the Night the former
stood away, and changed his Course; upon which, he was followed by the Seiur
Belle Isle, who being come up with him the next morning, ^ired several shot at
him; whereupon the Dutch Captain returned him a Broadside, and began a sharp
Engagement, which lasted four Hours; but then the Captain being killed with a
Cannon shot, as likewise a great many of the Men killed, and more French Ships
appearing in sight, they sent on board the French to let them know, they would
make no longer Resistance. This open Violation being highly resented by the
Sates General, Monsieur D' Avaux, the French Ambassador at the Hague, put in a
dissembling Memorial to excuse it, in which he complained, That Captain Ewyeke,
had given the Duke his Word to go with him to Cadiz, but changing his Course by
Night, he gave ground to suspect his Intentions; and that the Sieur Belle Isle
following him, and he finding himself alone with one of his most Christian
Majesty's Ships, put out his Cannon, and came with all the Sail he could upon
the French man, who sired three shot one after another, as a Signal that he
should not advance any farther, to which the Hollander returned a whole
Broadside of 25 pieces of Cannon, whereupon the sight began: That the Dutch
Captain being killed, the other Officers sent on board the Sieur D' Belle Isle
to let him know, that they would make good the Word of their Captain: That the
Sieur received the Messenger very kindly, and after having Lamented the Loss of
the Dutch Captain, a very brave Man, sent him back, and gave them time till the
Evening to repair their Ship (of which the French had not less need, having
fourteen Men killed and six wounded.) And so he goes on to salve up the matter,
by endeavoring to make the Dutch Captain the Aggressor.

The Damage the French King did the Spaniards at Sea and upon their Coast, were
received but trivial by the King, and therefore contrary to Oath and Promise he
caused all the Spaniards Estates and Effects in the New Conquests to be seized;
so that after some Debates, the Court of Spain found it self under a Necessity
of complying with his peremptory Demands; and thereupon the Marquess de Los
Balbaces, obliged himself to pay the 500000 Crowns at one entire Payment, so
soon as the Spanish Plate Fleet arrived; and this Agreement was taken by the
French as satisfaction, yet it proved not so; for, the Men of War being yet
Abroad, took, after a long and desperate Fight, two of their Galleys, which
Monsieur D' Avaux undertook likewise to excuse, by another Memorial to the
State, viz.

That the Sieur Forran, that had commanded a Squadron of his Most Christian
Majesty's Ships, not knowing of the Agreement and Accommodation concluded by
the French Ambassadors at Madrid, concerning the Five hundred thousand Crowns,
had met on the Coast of Biscay two Spanish Galleyoons, mounted each with Sixty
four Guns, sailing toward Cadiz, and that endeavoring to hinder them from
going thither, according to his first Orders, there ensued a very obstinate
Fight between them, which lasted a Day and an half, when two Ships of the same
Squadron coming in, and joining with the Sieur Forran, the Galleyoons yielded,
and were carried into Rochell: That his Most Christian Majesty having received
certain Advice thereof, had sent Orders for the discharging the said
Galleyoons, and had commanded him to tell the States, that this Accident should
not make any alteration in the Accommodation: That the Count Stirum, their
Admiral, being present at the end of the Fight; and having answered the Sieur
Forran (who sent to him to know, whether he would assist the Spaniards) that he
had no Orders to intermeddle with this Disserence, and retiring thereupon after
he had saluted the French Ships; his Most Christian Majesty had farther
directed him to let the States know, how well satisfied he is with the Orders
they had given the Count de Stirum, and with his prudent Conduct in pursuance
of them.

By this we may see, whilst the Dutch made a Conscience of the least Breach,
and had their hands tied from assisting their Allies by a Treaty, they would
not break with Lewis XIV. who could never find any strong enough for his
Conscience, when he saw it advantageous to break it. However, Heaven does not
wink at such Actions, nor leave them unpunished; for much about this time,
Lewis the Great fell into a raging Torture, occasioned by an ulcerous Fistula
in his Fundament, and knew in some kind, what it was to be miserable, who had
made many thousands so. All the chief Chirurgions of France were consulted
about this matter, and concluded his Life was in danger, unless his Royal Bum
was Cut and Launced. And, in fine, an Incision was made, and after that diverse
others, which kept him long in Bed, and consequently put the thoughts quite out
of his Head, of plotting a farther Disturbance in the World at that time. Yet
his Creatures were not Idle; for, to pick a new Quarrel, the Governor of
Maeubuge set up the Arms of France in diverse parts of the Spanish Netherlands,
under the old pretense of Boundaries and Limits of Dependencies; and although
Complaints were made, yet little was returned in Satisfaction but a few
Excuses, and a Promise, that it should be considered at a more convenient time,
and that Persons on either side should be appointed to adjust the Limits, And,
at the fame time they proceeded to build strong Fortresses (contrary to the
Treaty) near Huneguen, and in the Territories of the Margrave of Baden; of
which the Emperor complained by his Ambassadors, declaring how Religiously
himself and all the Princes of the Empire intended to observe the Treaty. But
this little availed; for the French went on with their Designs, and upon the
setting out the Boundaries in the Spanish Netherlands, and on the Frontiers of
the Empire, made unreasonable Exactions of Places no ways belonging to them,
nor any where assigned in the Treaty of Nimeguen. (...) which the King of Spain
was obliged to acquiesce, as having Exhausted his Treasures in a tedious War,
and not in a condition to contend alone, when the Confederates did not hold
themselves obliged to take his part, Lewis XIV. not content with Matters, and
the Extraordinary Trouble he had given his Neighbors on this side the Alps,
began to breath toward the Dominion of Italy. He remembered his Predecessors,
by making Inroads to that fruitful Country, had snatched many a pleasant
Morsel, and not only satiated their Ambition, but enriched themselves till the
Time of Charles V. Emperor and King of Spain, as likewise Philip II. King of
Spain, in whose Reigns the Spanish Monarchy was at the highest it ever was
known to be, when it was grasped from the French with a hard hand, and they
have since had little pretensions to any place beyond that vast ridge of
Mountains. But this King strikes in with the Duke of Mantua for his strong
Fortress on the Frontier, for an Inlet into Italy; and, though it was opposed
by all the Italian Princes, the French Gold out-balanced their Sollieitations,
to prevent that Duke's surre^dering a place, which would at one time or other
be the occasion of swallowing up his other Territories.

The French King having possessed himself of Cassel, delayed not to threaten an
Invasion of Italy. This made most of the Princes combine in a strict League,
and solicit the Pope to his immediate Protection, and that he would become
Head of the League. These Proceedings stop the Ambitious Monarch at that time,
but hindered him not from framing several pretensions. Nor did he defer to show
his angry Resentment, by picking a Quarrel with the City of Genoa, an Italian
City, and the Head of a famous Republic, situate advantageously on the Sea,
upon a rising Hill, there being a large Bay before it: So that he conjectured,
that getting this Inlet and Harbor, he might facilitate the large Enterprises
he had cast in his mind. The occasion or Grounds of his Quarrel was about
Ceremonies, and trivial Matters, but where the Power is, and in a hand like
that of Lewis XIV. it is easy to find occasion of Offense, or to suggest one.
Long he stood not to digest or debate the matter, before a considerable Fleet
was equipped, which put some of the neighboring Nations into doubt to what it
might tend. Discourses were given out it was designed against the Infidel
Piratical Governments of Argier, Tripoly, etc. though People of better
Understanding considering how he had favored and encouraged those Miscreants,
to make Spoil and Robbery upon the Seas, whilst himself was doing the like at
Land, and shedding Streams of Christian Blood, were of a contrary Opinion. Nor
did the wonder last, for the Fleet being ready, immediately set Sail, and stood
away for the Coast of Italy; and his Threats were sent to the Doge and Senate
of Genoua to comply with his demands of Satisfaction and Reparation which,
appeared to them so unreasonable, that they were rejected, and the City
prepared for its Defense.

The French Fleet of about Thirty Men of War, besides Fireships and Tenders,
being come to an Anchor before the Bay, drew into a Line to block up the
Harbor, and fired very furiously; which was answered from the Cannon of the
Town, those in the few Ships that lay under the Shore, and the Forts, and other
Works that lay as Curtains and Bullworks. But the Cannon from the French Fleet
doing little other damage, than beating down some Chimneys, the Tops of
Steeples, and a few of the Battlements, they drew in under the Favor of the
Night several heavy Galleys, with Gabbions and Earth on their Decks, gaurded by
Men of War and Fireships, from whence they played their Bombs, without
considering the Churches and Religious Houses, that for the most part stood
near the Sea, and had with them such Fatal Success, that a great part of that
Famous City was laid in Ruins by their beating down and blowing up. Yet the
French attempting to Land, were beaten off with considerable Loss; who finding
the Governor of Milain was preparing to come down with Forces to the
Assistence of the Genoise, and that in all likelihood the Princes of Italy
would not stand neuter, the French Admiral admitted those that were sent off to
come on board him, in order to treat of Conditions, but was so extravagant in
his Demands, that nothing was concluded at that time. But the Inhabitants
finding the City almost ruined by the Bombs, which played upon them
continually, and despairing of any Relief by Sea, began to Murmur and Mutiny,
which hastened the Agreement, very dishonorable to that State, which had
sometimes Lorded it over the Ocean, and often defended it self against the most
powerful of States and Kings. For nothing would satisfy Lewis the Great, but
that their Senators should come into France, and beg his Pardon, and humble
themselves before his Greatness. A strange sort of Acknowledgment, when
themselves had received the Injury, which four Millions could not make Good.
Yet what must be must be. Many other things were considered which mainly puffed
up Lewis the Great, who now slattered himself to be the Terror of Europe as
well by Sea as Land, not imagining but this dreadful Example, and the fear of
bombing, would make others cautious how they incurred the Fury of such a
Fire-Drake. But it seems his Terror reached not so far as the Shore of Africa.
For even the Pirates of Argiers, whom he had so much countenanced, and to whom
he had allowed his Ports as a safegaurd of Retreat, and for bringing in Prizes,
and thereby a better Opportunity to rob his Neighbors; made no Scruple to
break with him, and brave him, by taking his Ships even in the Mouth of his own
Harbors. This no doubt vexed Lewis the Great, and made him think himself
undervalued, if he should put up such Affronts. And though perhaps he was loath
to shed Infidel Blood, having so long deal'd in that of Christians, which he
had poured out in Rivolets, he found the Eyes of the Neighboring Princes were
upon him, and that his Greatness would suffer an Eclipse if he dissembled it,
and that he should become cheap to the World; notwithstanding his being in
League with the Grand Signiour, under whose protection this Government is, he
set forth a Fleet to bomb it, but had not the Success as before Genoa. For, the
obstinate Turks being strongly fortified, made a vigorous Defense; whereby his
Ships were constrained to keep off at Sea. However, having spent a great many
of his Fireballs at a Distance, without doing any extraordinary Damage, and not
daring to land any Force; when Count D'Estrees, the Admiral, sent to demand the
French Slaves, and Reparation for several Ships taken, and the breaking the
Truce, all the Answer that could be obtained was, to have his Consul that
resided there to negotiate Affairs, halled out of Prison, and Rammed into a
Cannon or Mortarpeice, and by its being fired, shot toward the Fleet. So that
this great Preparation was frustrated, and the French could only boast of some
few Slaves that escaped on boards, as they lay before the City, pretending they
were Constrained to return, by reason of the boisterousness of those Seas,
through the far Advancement of the Season; when, on the contrary, it may be
said, to the Honor of the English Nation, that a small Squadron of our Ships
has reduced those Barbarians frequently to such straits, that they have been
obliged to truckle under what Terms has been thought fit to have been imposed.

Lewis XIV. having procured Cardinal Furstemburg, his Creature, to be Coadjutor
to the Elector of Collogne, and that Elector dying in June 1688, he immediately
struck in to make a Party; and, to support the Interest of Furstemburg, and to
procure his being chosen, as knowing himself should have the Advantage, and
supposing to hector others out of their Pretentions, the Count D' Avaux, on the
10 of June presented the following Memorial to the States General, viz.

That he was commanded to let them know, that the King his Master desiring
nothing more than to preserve the Peace of Christendom, his Majesty was willing
to prevent whatever might trouble it. And seeing nothing is more capable of
preserving the public Tranquillity in the present Conjuncture, than if the
Princes, Neighbors of the Electorate of Cologne, should not leave the Chapter
in an entire Liberty to proceed Canonically to the Election of a new
Archbishop; That his Majesty in such case could not refuse the Canons and
Chapter the Assistence they might stand in need of, for the Preservation of
their Rights, and for the Security of the Peace of the Country that depended on
the Electorate; And if any one should go about to cause any Troops to march
toward the said Electorate, under what pretense soever it may be, and to force
the Canons and Chapter in any Manner whatever, or to use any force or violence
against the Places or Country of the said Archbishopric, his Majesty will send
thither, at the same time, all the Succor that is necessary, to Maintain those
that have the Administration thereof in all the Rights that belong to them. But
if the States neighboring to the Archbishopric, do leave the Chapter in an
entire Liberty to choose a sit and worthy Person, and in case there be no moving
of Troops either in the Empire, or in the Territories of this State, or in the
Spanish Netherlands, to Intimidate the said Chapter, those of his Majesty will
not likewise do any thing that may be able to trouble the public
Tranquillity, or ever give the least Apprehensions to those that are well
Intentioned for the Maintenance of the Peace.

These were the pretenses of Lewis XIV. to Amuse his Neighbors; but they were
too Apprehensive, and knew him too well to be lulled into a Security, For
indeed, he longed for this Electorate, and knew no better ways to gain it than
by placing a Person in it wholly devoted to his Interest; and, to accomplish
this, Parties were made, and vast Treasures expended: But, finding the Pope not
any way inclined to Furstemburg, insomuch as he had not approved or confirmed
his Coadjutorship, and thinking he should fail in his Expectation; he caused
his Troops, contrary to what had been proposed, to march to the Frontiers, and
a great many French came privately Armed into the Cities of Cologne and Bonne;
and the Cardinal, not like a peaceable Church man, but like a Martial Prince,
came with Armed Troops at his heels, which gave Apprehensions to some, of the
Danger that might befall them if they refused to give their Voice; and on the 19
of July they proceeded to Election, where after some Contest of the 24 Canons
that have Voices, 13 were gained for Furstemburg, 9 gave their Voices for the
Prince Clement of Bavaria, Brother to the Duke of Bavaria, and one for the
Prince of Neuburg: This puffed up the Cardinal's mind, as thinking certianly he
had carried the day, and was capable of gratifying his Master to the full. But
then there arose other Scruples; for, those that had voted against him made
their protest, alleging that the Cardinal, as being Bishop of Strasburgh,
could not, without the Pop^'s Dispensation be chosen, but by Postulation, which
required two Thirds of the Electors to be for him, and that it was sufficient
for any other to have nine, in case the Voices were divided between two; but if
they were divided amongst several, it was necessary that he that was postulated
should have double the number that any other had. So that Prince Clement having
9 Voices, and the Cardinal but 13, he was by virtue of his Holiness's
Dispensation duly elected. However, the Cardinal and his Party, went and
Proclaimed himself in the Choire of the Metropolitan Church, and the next day
the Election of Prince Clement was proclaimed. Upon this dispute, the French
Troops began to move nearer. The Cardinal took possession of the Palace, and
both parties sent to the Pope to be confirmed and approved in the Election.
However, the Election of Liege coming on, the Cardinal departed to Bonne, and
from thence to Liege, in hopes to be elected there. But the French Gold, it
seems, had not a sufficient Opperation; For here he fared worfe than before,
for the Baron of Elderen, Great Dean of the Cathedral, was chosen in the 17 of
August, Bishop and Prince of Liege, having 20 Voices, and the Cardinal but 18.
And after the Election had been proclaimed, he was accompanied by the Prince of
Neuburg, Great Master of the Tutonick Order, to his Palace, where he received
the Complements of the Chief of the Country. So that the Cardinal sinding
himself deceived, retired to Bonne, and proceeded to strengthen himself in that
Place, privately drawing in some French Troops that were advanced in order
thereto. And Lewis XIV. fretting to see his Projects prosper no better,
prepared for Hostility, ordering a new Leavy 10000 Foot and 6000 Horse to be
speedily raised; giving out Commissions for that purpose, making a great many
new General Officers as Lieutenant Genera^^^ Mareschals de Camp, and Brigadiers
of Horse and Foot, commanding the Gendarms and Light Horse to form a Camp at
Acheres, and the Marshall d'Humiers was sent to Flanders to form an Army of 25
Men near Mabeuge. How this agrees with the Memorial of his Ambassador, we make
the Reader judge. Upon notice that the Pope had declared in favor of Prince
Clement of Bavaria, the French Ministers at Cologne pressed that City to a
Neutrality, offering it if they would take no more Troops in. But they were too
wary to trust to such Pretenses, when they could expect nothing more than to be
suddenly invested. Whereupon they permitted the Marshall to advance on the 11
of September with 2600 Foot and 100 Dragoons of the Circle of Westphalia. So
that having left part of these Forces that made the Garrison 5000 strong, and
viewed the Fortifications, he returned to Wesle. About this time we had Notice
that the Dutch Fleet was about to set Sail for England, which made Monsieur
Albeville, the French Ambassador at the Hague, set forth, by a Memorial,
amongst other things, how desirous his Master was to observe the Peace of
Nimegnen, when at that time his Armies had entered the Palatinate under
pretense of securing the Right and Pretensions of the Duchess of Orleance; and
General Monclar Invested Philipshu^^, in which Count Maximilian of Staremourg
was Governor, with a Garrison of 3000 Men, and Keyserlanter after two Assaults
was taken, and Oppenheim, Altzheim and Worms, were compelled to receive French
Garrisons. They made themselves Masters likewise of Neustadt, Spires, and many
other Places, and put the Countries of Wertemburg, Franconia, and Suabia under
Contribution, and that the Dauphin might partake herein, he was sent to the
Camp before Philipsburg, which Place was defended with much Bravery; a great
number of the French, and many of note were killed in the Attacks and vigorous
Sallies of the besieged. Yet whilst the Siege went on, the French found an
opportunity to surprise and Garrison Treeves and Mayence, and put the Counties
of Hanau, Darmstadt, Solms, and the adjacent Countries under Contribution. They
likewise seized on Heidelburg; and on the 29 of October, aster all that could
be expected of a small Garrison against a powerful Army and despairing of
Relief, Philipsburg was surrendered upon very Advantageous Articles. viz. That
the Garrison which then consisted not of above 1800 Men, should march out, with
Arms and Baggage, Drums beating, and Colors flying, and four Pieces of Cannon;
the Garrison to be Conducted to Ulme. Nor had it been so easily taken, had not
the Governor been disabled from giving necessary Orders, by a dangerous
Sickness. Nor were the Articles any better observed, that what has been usual
with the French, or, as some will have it, by the Turks.

This strong Hold being in their Hands, they soon possessed themselves of
almost all the Towns and Villages upon the Rhine, relating to the Palatinate,
committing great Spoil, and many Outrages. They took Frankendale and Manheim,
entering the Elect^^ate of C^l^g^e, and demanding Two hundred thousand Crowns
of the Country of Juli^rs, to be paid in Eight Days, upon pain of Military
Execution, and the like Contributions from the Country of Liege; which put the
poor People, who had so often been ruined by the War, into the greatest
Surprise imaginable.

These Proceedings obliged the Marquess of Baden, the Emperor's
Plenepotentiary, and Principal Commissioner at the Diet of Ratisbone, to
represent to them the State of Affairs, in the following manner, viz.

That he doubts not, but that the Envoys, Counselors, and Deputies of the
Electorate Princes, and States of the Empire, are fully satisfied and informed,
in what manner the Crown of France, besides the former Acts of Hostility, has
lately, for want of Succor, taken the Fortress of Philipsburgh, and
afterward, in a Hostile manner, attacked, and besieged the remaining Places of
the Palatinate, to wit, Manheim, Fredricksburgh, Frankendale, as likewise the
Fortress of Coblets, in the Electorate of Tryger, as likewise made Incursions
into the Circles of Suabia, and Franconia. That since the said Crown does every
day carry the Fire of the War farther into the Empire, having already possessed
it self of almost the four Electorates on the Rhine, by Force, and of other
Lordships and Towns; so that the whole Empire is in danger to be entirely
Desolate. And since that the extreme Necessity, to which things are now
reduced, plainly shows, That the Deliberations of the Diet upon the Grievances
complained of, and the Assistences demanded, are no longer to be waited for; it
ought with all speed to be taken into deliberation in the Colleges of the
Empire, to declare without any delay these Irruptions to be a War against the
Empire, and to resist the Hostilities of France, with their whole and united
Force; and that accordingly his Imperial Majesty, out of the paternal Care he
has for the Empire, had commanded him to inform and assure the Diet, that he
will not be wanting on his part, to contribute thereunto all that is possible
for him to do.

Lewis XIV. having thus openly Violated the Treaty, and being no longer able to
dissemble the Matter, proceeded to thunder out his Denunciation of War against
the States General of the United Provinces; which, for the better understanding
of Matters, and to what he mainly pretends, we have thought fit to take notice
of Lewis XIV. in his Declaration of War against the States General, published
at Paris in December 1688. after he has set forth, That he has done strange
things, to give Peace to Europe, he comes to the main Point, that most of all
grieves him, viz. That the States drawing their Army together, under the
Command of Prince Waldeck, had an Influence upon hindering the Cardinal of
Furstemburgh (whom, he says, he for many Reasons was bound to Influence, and
Protect) from being Invested in the Electorate of Cologne: And for this Reason,
and no other given, he declares War against them by Sea and Land, commanding
his Subjects to fall upon them, forbidding Trade or Commerce upon pain of
Death, and Revokes all Pasports, and Safe Conduct, etc.

By this we may see, that he bore himself mightily upon the Election of that
Cardinal, whom not only a great part of the Roman Clergy, but the Pope himself,
looked upon as an Enemy to the Church. By which it may appear, That the French
King's Pretensions to Support him, tended only to sinister Ends, and hopes by
this means to annex that Electorate to the Crown of France. Upon this
Declaration, contrary to the Law of Nations, a Guard was set upon the Dutch
Ambassador, which obliged the States General to do the like upon Monsieur d'
Avaux; by which means an Exchange was made, and either of them permitted to
return. And now, though in the depth of Winter, the French were abroad,
ravaging the Country; and although this King had not declared against Spain,
yet a great Impost was laid on Goods, to be brought out of the Spanish
Netherlnads. But perceiving the Confederate Armies drawing together in great
Bodies, he caused several of the Towns he had possessed himself of in the
Palatinate to be slighted, and many Dismantled, or Demolished; the Soldiers
requiring great Sums of the Inhabitants, to save them from plundering. Yet
many, after they had paid what was demanded, had their Goods taken away, and
their Persons miserably misused.

To retaliate in some Measure these Proceedings, the Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands laid an Impost upon Wines, and Brandy; of which, when the Marshall
complained, his Excellency told him, He could not but wonder, that his Master
having done the like on the Goods of that Country, he should find any Reason to
complain. The Emperor moreover commanded the French Envoy to leave Vienna, and
the Plenepotentiary of Ratisbone. Prince Clement of Bavaria refused to see the
French Minister sent to Complement him, because he denied to give him the Style
of Elector; and those Canons of the Electorate were commanded to leave him, and
return to their Dignities, on pain of being Dispossessed, and of incurring
Excommunication. Whereupon the Cardinal, in a Pet, made a new Protestation
against the Pope's Proceedings, touching the Electorate of Cologne. Whilst
these things were doing, the French Troops quitted Heylbourn, after having
Plundered it, blown up the Gates, and part of the Walls, carrying with them
four Hostages, for the payment of Fifty thousand Crowns laid as a Tax. They
likewise flighted Offemburgh, demolished Manheim, and burnt Oberadt, with the
Villages belonging to that City, declaring they would burn and destroy all the
Places of the Palatinate, and Electorate of Mentz, except Philipsburgh. And
indeed, the whole Country at a distance seemed in the Night time for some
space, but one Fire, the Villages and Towns every where flaming; which show how
little Lewis XIV. notwithstanding his specious Pretenses, regards the Peace and
Tranquillity of Europe, this way of burning being altogether a Turkish Fashion,
which is not for his Glory to imitate.

These Proceedings made the Swisses, that were in the French Service in the
Electorate of Cologne, quit it, declaring, They could not fight against the
Empire; and thereupon the Cardinal sent to the French Court for more Assistence
to secure Bonne, the Citadel of Liege was commanded to be blown up, and
accordingly performed, except one Bastion, and its Works; and although the
Castle of Montjoy Surrendered upon good Articles, the Soldiers, contrary to
Faith given, were made Prisoners of War; and slighting Huy, they blew up the
Walls, and either destroyed, or much defaced all the Places in the Diocese,
except Chinay, which they Garrisoned.

On the 12th. of February, 1688. the States of the Empire assembled at
Ratisbone, having taken into their Consideration the Mischief the French had
done, contrary to the Truce of Twenty Years, concluded at Nimeguen, proceeded
to give their Resolutions, to stand by the Emperor, and assist him with all
their Forces, for the suppressing the Disturber of Christendom; setting forth
at large, their Resentments of his Proceedings. Upon this, and the like
Resolution, the French bethought themselves of slighting Heydelburgh, and
Frankendale, and Fortified Mentz, Bonne, and such other Places as they
conceived tenable. And now the States of Holland finding the French Men of War,
and Privateers, had taken many of their Merchants, and that open Hostilities
were begun, proceeded to proclaim War against France, and accordingly a
Declaration of War was published at the Hague, and at other Places; setting
forth, That considering the French King had openly broke the Treaties, and
Peace conluded, without any just Reason or manner of cause, and had declared
War against them on groundless Pretenses; they find themselves constrained to
make a public Declaration of War against France. And toward the Conclusion
they strictly command, viz. 1. That none of the Inhabitants of this State, or
any Foreigner residing within their Territories, shall Transport any thing to
France, that is prejudicial to the State. 2. That all Counterband Goods that
shall be taken going to France, shall be declared Prize. 3. That good Security
shall be given by all Persons carrying any Goods out of these Countries, that
they are not designed for France. 4. That all Ships laden with Counterband
Goods, that shall be found on the French Coast, shall be taken for good Prize.
5. That all Ships ought to have lawful Pasports. 6. The Men of War not to
molest any Ships, having such Pasports, and not bound with Counterband Goods to
the Ports of France. 7. That such as shall be offending herein, shall be
punished with Confiscation of Ship and Goods. 8. That the Commanders of the
Ships of War, shall punctually govern themselves in this matter, according to
the Treaties made in relation thereto with other Kings, Princes, and States. 9.
That the Admiralties shall have the Cognizances of these Offenses. 10, 11, 12.
The Money arising by such Confiscations, shall be disposed of, as has been
practiced in like Cases; and as to the Seizures, etc. Former Placates to be
observed. 13. None of the Inhabitants of this State, shall Insure any French
Ships or Goods, or others bound to France, on Penalty of forfeiting the Sum
Insurred.

The Confederates being early Abroad this Spring, the French had not so good
Success as the former. For the Brandenburgh Forces defeated a great Party of
the Garrison of Nuis, as likewise gave another Defeat to the Chevalier de
Sourdis, who came with a strong Party to the Relief of the other, killing a
great number in the Fight and pursuit, gaining a good Booty. Upon these
Defeats, the Castles of Lintz, Nuis, Zons, etc. surrendered, and the French set
Fire to, and blew up many places they despaired to keep; which so astonished
the Cardinal of Furstemburgh, that he attempted to leave Bonne, sending, in
order thereto, his best Movables to Mentz. Nor was Lewis the Great free from
Apprehensions of his own Subjects Revolting, which made him draw his Guards
near his Person, and publish an Ordinance for the hindering the meeting of the
New Converts in several Provinces of his Kingdom, and for the putting in
Execution the Edict of October 1685. and to raise the Ban and Arrear Ban of the
Isle of France; many small Skirmishes happened on the Frontiers during the
beginning of the Campaign; the French attempting to Surprise and Burn Bopert,
were beaten off, and many of them killed; and soon after some of the Troops of
the Land-grave of Hesse, Surprised the Garrison of Lintz, and cut them off. And
notwithstanding Liege had purchased a Neutratrality, at the cost of One hundred
and thirty thousand Crowns, and the suffering their Citadel to be demolished;
the French, who scorn to be Slaves to their Words or Oaths, ranged up and down
in their Country, and gathered Contributions, under a slender Pretense, that
the Citadel was not demolished so soon as it was agreed on by the Treaty of
Neutrality, and were forced to shelter their Convoys, and furnish even the
Troops that were oppressing their Country, with such Ammunition and Provision
as they could spare.

The Palatinate by this time growing somewhat too hot for the French
Complexion, they resolved to do what Mischief they could before they should be
obliged to abandon it; and, amongst others, upon quitting Fredericksburg, they
set it on fire, and ruined the Fortifications of Cassel. But now the City of
Liege finding the Misfortune of it is Neutrality, and being pressed by the
Emperor to declare either for the Confederates or France, (for he would allow
no Neutrality,) it declared for the former, and secured the French-Resident,
with diverse Officers and their Arms, as Hostages for the safety of their
Minister in France. The Count de Rabenac, the French Ambassador, was likewise
dismissed the Court of Spain, and Furstemburgh got into Mentz; and the French
Garrison of Strasburgh attempting the Siege of Oberkirk, was beaten off, a
Captain, with diverse others, killed, and some of Note wounded.

On the 19 of April. 1689 Lewis XIV. caused a Declaration of War to be
published in the City of Paris against the King of Spain, and sent orders to
break down all the Bridges on the River Sambre from Chastelet to Maubuge and so
to Landrecy; the Garrison of Luxemburgh commanding all the Country that depends
on them, to bring in their Provisions that exceed a Store for three Months, on
great Penalties, flattering them, that after the Expiration of that time they
should be other ways supplied. But, for a brief Account of the Actions of Lewis
XIV. in his late proceedings, the Emperor gives us these passages, amongst
others, in his Letter to the King of Poland, viz.

Your Serenity will have sufficiently understood by our former Letter how
unjustly and treacherously the Crown of France, violating the Treaties of
Westphaila and Nimeguen, and the 20 years Truce concluded a few Years since,
has invaded us and the Empire at a time when we expected nothing less. But the
Inormity of this Invasion is infinitely Agravated, by the horrid Cruelties and
Barbarities they continue to exercise in the Places they have possessed
themselves of, pillaging whole Towns and Countries, which, to preserve
themselves, surrendered upon Articles, and afterward paid the Contributions
imposed upon them, contrary to the Faith given them and confirmed by the King
himself or the Dauphin, and afterward destroying them with Fire, or Levelling
the Walls and Houses to the ground, and carrying away the Inhabitants bound as
Slaves, in a manner only practiced amongst Barbarians; and forcing them with
Threats of Death to follow the French Army unto other parts, not sparing the
stately Houses and Palaces of Princes, which had been preserved for Ages in the
bloodiest Wars; and not withholding their Impious hands even from the
Churches, and excercising many other Cruelties and Inhumanities, such as are
seldom Committed by the Turks themselves, and which can be hardly found in any
History to be practiced amongst Christians; Which as they most deservedly
Excite the Hatred of all Christendom against France, so they especially lay a
necessity upon us, of providing for the Safety of the Roman Empire, and of
using all means to free it from unheard of Violences, and Oppressions, etc.

Thus we have the Word of an Emperor, to confirm what we have set forth; nor
did his Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh find himself less aggrieved, and in
April 1689. caused his Declaration of War to be published against France, in
which, amongst other things, he sets forth, That desiring nothing more, than
that the public Tranquillity of Christendom might be preserved, and that his
own Subjects might, under his Government, enjoy the Benefit of Peace; but that
the French King having, against all Right and Justice, not only attacked the
Roman Empire, but having likewise possessed himself of whole Circles and
Provinces, and destroyed the same, in a most barbarous Manner, never before
heard of amongst Christians, with Fire and Murders, and other execrable
Cruelties, and threatened the Countries of Brandenburgh, and his Electoral
Highness's Subjects of Frankendale, with the same Inhumane Treatment, which he
has begun even already to put in Execution, and having committed other the like
Attempts upon his Electoral Highness, and his Allies, as well within as without
the Empire, directly contrary to the Treaty of Peace and Truce, in order to the
total Ruin of the Roman Empire; His Electoral Highness having regard to the
Resolution of the Emperor, and the Diet at Ratisbonne, is obliged to make use
of the Power which God and Nature have put into his Hands, and to take up Arms
for the Defense of his Subjects, and for the opposing with all his Force, the
perfidious Attempts of France. And so proceeds to forbid all Commerce, upon
very great Penalties.

And now the English, not to be behind-hand with other Nations, the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses assembled in Parliament, waited upon his Majesty of
Great Britain, on the 26th of April, and presented him an Address in the
Banqueting House, wherein, amongst other things, they declared, That whenever
his Majesty should think fit to enter into a War against the French King, they
would give him such Assistance, in a Parliamentary Way, as might enable him
(under the Protection that God Almighty has ever afforded him) to Support and
go through with the same. To which His Majesty was graciously pleased to return
this following Answer, viz.

I receive this Address as a Mark of the Confidence you have in me, which I
take very kindly, and shall endeavor, in all my Actions, to confirm you in it.
I assure you, That my own Ambition shall never be an Argument to incline me to
engage in a War, that may expose the Nation either to Danger or Expense; but,
in the present Case, I look upon the War so much already declared in effect by
France against England; that it is not so properly an Act of Choice, as an
inevitable Necessity in our own Defense. I shall only tell you, That as I have
ventured my Life, and all that is dear to me, to rescue this Nation from what
it suffered, I am still ready to do the same, in order to preserve it from all
its Enemies. And, as I do not doubt of such an Assistance from you, as shall be
suitable to your Advice to me, to declare War against a Powerful Enemy, so you
may rely upon me, that no part of that which you shall give for the carrying
it on with Suucce^^, shall be diverted by me to any other Use.

The Confederate Armies by this Time began to draw together, which made Lewis
XIV. hasten his Troops, and form Two Armies under the Commands of the Duke of
Duras, and Marshall d' Humiers. Whereupon the Governour-General of the Spanish
Netherlands, caused a Declaration of War to be published against France;
wherein, after he had set forth the Cruelty and Injustice of the French King,
as the others had done, he forbids all Commerce, etc. Upon which Lewis XIV.
caused his Declaration of War to be proclaimed against Spain, at Marseilles,
viz, on the 29th of April, and proceeded to fill all the Towns of the
Palatinate, that were not reduced to Ashes, with his Soldiers, as foreseeing
the Storm that threatened from so many Quarters of Europe; and, that such
Protestants as were willing to avoid his cruel Usage and Extortions, might have
Encouragement to leave the Kingdom of France, their Majesty's of Great Britain
put forth a Proclamation, bearing Date the 25th of April, for the Encouraging
the French Protestants to Transport themselves into this Kingdom, another
Prohibiting the Importation of all Sorts of Manufactures, and Commodities
whatsoever, of the Growth, Production, or Manufacture of France. And on the 7th
of May, a Declaration of War was Signed, and afterward Published, setting
forth, The perfidious Dealing of the French King, as well in Europe as in
Africa, against the Subjects of England, etc. And whilst these things were
doing, News came from the Coast of Ireland, that the English Admiral, with a
Squadron of the King of Britains Ships, had engaged and worsted Forty four Sail
of the French, being double the number of the English, as they were attempting
to land Men and Arms in that Kingdom. And, to show the French a farther Proof
of our Naval Courage, the Nonesuch, a small Fourth Rate Frigate o^ 36 Guns,
meeting off of Guernsey with two French Men of War, one of 30 Guns, and 120
Men; the other of 16 Guns, 6 Pettereroes, and 120 Men, who were bound, with
about Twenty small Merchant Ships under their Convoy, to Newfoundland, the
English Man of War engaged them, but in the beginning of the Fight the Captain
was killed, with the Master and Cook, and the Carpenter wounded; upon which,
there being no Lieutenant on Board, the Boatswain took upon him the Command of
the Ship, and continued the Fight with that Bravery, that after a sharp
Engagement of three Hours, he took both the French Men of War, and brought them
into Plymouth.

During these Transactions, Rhinburgh, that had been Garrisoned with French
Troops by Cardinal Furstemburgh, surrendered to the Confederates, and
Keyserwaert was blocked up. The French continued to fortify Mentz, pulling
dow^ Streets of Building for their better convenienc^ on that Occasion. Yet so
far either Passion o^ Fear had wrought in Lewis XIV. that he was taken on the
30th of May with an extraordinary Fi^ of an Ague, which held him for nine or
ten Hours which made him fly to his old Refuge of taking the Jesuits Powder, as
well as their Counsels, the latter having ever been fatal to Christendom And,
as if the French King had wanted Torche^ or Bonefires for Joy of his Recovery,
his Troops not satisfied with the Execrable Barbarities they had committed in
the Palatinate, and other Places proceeded in the later end of May to lay in
Ashe^ the famous Towns of Oppenheim, Worms, and Spire; in the latter whereof,
the Imperial-Chamber had a long time been kept, not leaving so much as a House
standing. But a party of the Garrison of Bonne attempting to do the like to the
Village of Hauff, the Country People took Arms, and falling upon them, killed
about sixty of their Number, putting the rest to flight; and likewise several
Parties of French Foragers, and such as were sent to make Incursions into the
Countries that neighboured on their Garrison, were frequently defeated. And now
the Most Christian King finding himself hard beset, sought to cajole the
Algerine Pirates to make a Peace with him, and fall upon the Confederates
Merchants at Sea, although they had a little before so sensibly affronted him,
as to shoot off his Consul, etc. and notwithstanding any Proposal, they would
not hearken to any Treaty, unless he would redeem the French Captives, to the
Number of 800, which he had demanded without any Ransom. And when his Agent
perceived this would not take, he proposed a Truce, but that likewise was
rejected by the Algerines.

On the Ninth of June, the Marquess Choiseul passed the Rhine at Hunningen,
with 4000 French Horse and Dragoons, and entered the Country of Durlach,
declaring, That he came only to Forage, promising not to molest any that should
remain quiet in their Houses; which the Country People relying on, thought they
had nothing to fear; but they quickly found the little regard the French have
to their Word: For no sooner had they posted themselves in the Places they
designed, but the Country was given up to the Discretion of the Soldiers, who
committed the most outrageous Insolences, and Violencies, that can be
imagined; So that many of the poor People being plundered of all they had, and
their persons abused, were driven before the Soldiers, like Sheep or Oxon,
toward Friburgh and Brisac. A few indeed escaped to the Black Forest, where
several of them perished for Want, whilst the French were cutting up their
Corn, and destroying the whole Country.

During these Proceedings, Lewis XIV. caused his Declaration of War against
England and Scotland to be published at Paris, viz. on the 28th of June,
commanding his Fleet to put again to Sea, proposing great things to his
Advantage. But as yet his Expections have been frustrated.

The Town of Keyserwaert being formally Besieged, and closely pressed by the
Brandenburgh Forces, the Duke being before it in person, on the 25th of June
Monsieur Marcognet, the Governor, Capitulated, upon Notice the German
Soldiers, in Garrison, were inclined to make Conditions for themselves without
him; and a Parley being beat, the Capitulation was Signed the next Morning; by
which it was agreed, That one of the Gates should be immediately delivered up;
that the French Officers and Soldiers should march out the Day following with
Arms and Baggage, etc. and be Conducted to Luxemburgh, but that the Germans
should be at Liberty to go where they pleased, but not any more enter into the
French Service. Whereupon most of them entered into the Duke's Pay, and a great
Number of French Soldiers deserted their Army, notwithstanding the severe
Discipline to prevent it, by hanging up some Hundreds who had been taken going
off. Nor did their Army in Flanders escape the angry Skies; for a violent
Tempest happening, accompanied with extraordinary Rains and Floods, diverse
Persons perished, a great deal of Baggage was spoiled, and carried away in by
the Rapidity of the Torrent, and the Marshall d' Humiers, who commanded in
Chief, hardly escaped drowning. And although the French King labored by many
secret Intrigues and Contrivances, to widen, or keep on foot, the Differences
between the King of Denmark, and Duke of Holstein; yet by the Mediation of the
Emperor, and Electors of Saxony and Bandenburgh, an Accommodation was made, and
Signed on the Thirtieth of June, upon sundry Articles. Upon this News, upon
what Account we are yet to learn, the Duke De la Force, and the Marquess
Vivaus, were clapped up in the Bastile at Paris, and their Papers secured. The
Duchess De la Force was likewise sent Prisoner to the Castle of Angers: And
about the same time, a French Man of War, of Thirty six Guns, and Two hundred
Men, was taken by two Dutch Ships, and carried into Amsterdam.

And the French and Irish Forces Besieging Londonderry, were beaten off with
great Slaughter; and, amongst others, many Principal Officers were killed,
which obliged them, upon the City's being Relieved with Provision, to raise the
Siege, and retire in some Confusion.

The French Forces likewise in Catalonia were beaten by the Spaniards, and upon
the Approach of the Imperial Army, quitted all, or most of the Places they yet
held in the Palatinate. And now the Storm of War threatening Montz and Bonne,
the only strong Places the Frence held in those Parts, the Marquess Vxelles,
Governor of the former, sent to the Court of France to demand speedy Aid; but
had no other Answer returned him as to that particular, than, that the King had
sent the Arrear-Ban toward the Coasts, and that by reason of some
Disappointments, he must not expect very Powerful Succors, for that there were
every where too great Occasion for their Troops, the Enemy having never had
such numerous Forces in the Field, as at present. For at that time, the Army
Commanded by the Duke of Lorrain was composed of 20000 Imperial Foot, and 8000
Horse, 10000 Saxons, 8000 Lunenburghers, and 6000 of Hesse-Cassel. The Bavarian
Army, with the Troops of Suabia 14000, with which were joined 8000 Imperialists
under Caprapra. The Forces of the Duke of Brandenburgh amounted to 32000, those
of Munster 6000, which with the 3000 Hollanders that were in that Country, and
the 8000 afterward sent by the Duke of Hanouer, amounted to 123000 Men, not
accounting the Dutch and Spanish Armies in the Netherlands. These extraordinary
Forces made Lewis the Great begin to look about him more than ever, laboring
with the King of Denmark to hold a Neutrality, to which he found him no ways
inclinable. And the Pope's Nuntio being called Home, to prevent the Clergy
flocking to him in his way, an Officer, contrary to Custom, was sent to him out
of the Kingdom, and published an Ordinance, commanding all the Subjects of
France, whose Fathers, Children, or Brothers, are in the Service of his
Enemies, and the Women, whose Husbands are in that Service, to depart the
Kingdom within the space of a Month, which was, in many Places, put rigorously
in Execution.

The French Troops under the Command of the Duke Duras, making an Attempt upon
Heidelburgh, the Regiment of Wertemburgh got opportunely into the Town, and
beat them off, with the loss of Three or Four hundred of their Men. And in
Flanders, about Forty English Horse meeting with a greater Number of French,
killed Fifteen, and took Eight Prisoners. These bad Successes, one upon the
Neck of another, made the French King cause his Orders to be published,
Commanding the Inhabitants of Sedan, Mezieres, and other Places, not to Sow
their Ground with Corn this Year, on pain of Death, promising they should be
furnished other ways.

It would be too tedious to mention all the Skirmishes that passed this
Campaign with various Success, though mostly to the Advantage of the
Confederates: Wherefore, passing many over, we come to Instance that great
Engagement between the French, under the Command of the Marshall d' Humiers;
and the English and Dutch, under the Command of Prince Waldeck, etc.

The French Troops Attacking the Village Forge, where Eight hundred Men were
Posted under the Command of Colonel Hodges, and Lieutenant-Collonel Goes, they
bravely defended it, till sending one Party after another on both sides, the
two Armies, in a manner, Engaged; where the English, more especially, behaved
themselves with such Bravery and Resolution, that after a long and obstinate
Fight, the French gave Ground, and retired in some Confusion, leaving behind
them their Cannon and Ammunition, and about Three thousand Killed and Wounded.
And the Six Battalions of Guards were for the most part cut off, which Loss may
be best guessed at by the following Account.

Monsieur de Gelais, Marshall of the Camp, was killed with a Cannon-Shot, as
likewise were Monsieur de Metz Tirecelin, Commissary of the Artillery. Killed
of the Guards the Count d' Artuagan, four Captains, five Lieutenants, a
Gentleman-Voluntier wounded. Three Captains, eleven Lieutenants, the Aid-Major,
and two Volunteers of the Regiment of Campaign, the Chavalier de Colbert,
Brigadier and Colonel, mortally wounded, the Lieutenant-Collonel wounded, the
Major mortally wounded, two Captains killed, two Lieutenants killed, five
Captains and seven Lieutenants wounded, the Liutenant of the Artillery wounded;
of the Gensd'arms, an Exempt of the Guards wounded; of Vilpians Regiment of
Horse killed one Captain, wounded a Cornet and Aid-Major; of Greders Regiment
of Foot, killed one Captain and Aid-Major, wounded two Captains, one Aid-Major,
and a Lieutenant, several of the wounded dying of their Wounds soon after the
Battle. This blow greatly allarmed the Court of France, and might have put
Lewis XIV. into another Fit of his Ague, had not cordial News come from Rome,
of the Death of Pope Innocent XI. upon which, he immediately sent away the
Count de Chaulms. his Ambassador; and the French Cardinals, such as he would
trust with his Interest, prepared to follow him, in order to make his Party in
the Election of a new Pope. But when they came to Rome, their Admission into
the Conclave was disputed, till such time the French King should relinquish his
Pretensions to the franchises, which at last was agreed to be done, during the
time of Election. But it so fell out, that neither the French Interest nor Gold
was so Powerful as heretofore; for, after some Contest amongst the Factions,
Cardinal Ottoboni, a Noble Venetian, was Elected, and Confirmed Pope by the
Name of Alexander VIII.

The City of Mentz having been violently Attacked by the Confederates, under
the Command of the Duke of Lorrain, and others; and the Duke Duras in vain
watching an Opportunity to relieve it, with an Army of between Sixteen and
Eighteen thousand Men; the Besieged beat a Parley, and on the Eighth of August
Hostages were exchanged, and on the Ninth the Capitulation was Signed; in
pursuance whereof the Place was Surrendered, and the French Garrison marched
out, viz. 4500 Foot, 400 Dragoons, 280 Horse, besides six or 700 Foot, that
went in small parties with the Baggage, being the Remainder of 10000 that were
in Garrison at the beginning of the Siege. The reduction of this strong Place,
that had cost so great a Sum in Fortifying, and in which such confidence had
been reposed, did not a little startle the Court of France; and, as is usual
upon such Emergencies, occasioned the change of a great many Ministers of
State. And what heightened the Consternation more, was a fear of a General
Revolt of the Protestants of that Kingdom, seeing many of them forced their Way
through the French Barriers of Languedock, Provence, and Dauphin, and brought
Terror upon Savoy, (the only stickling Prince for France,) joining with others
in the Valleys of Piemont, Lucern, etc. which obliged the French King to keep
strong Guards on the Frontier Places of Dauphin: And some French Troops
attempting to burn the Corn near Ghent, were so warmly received by the Cannon
of the Town, and an Ambushment laid in a hollow Way, that most of them were cut
off. And now perceiving they must quit the Electorate of Trier, they resolved
to use it with the same Civility they had done the Palatinate, burning ten
Towns, beside what they had formerly Consumed, and laying that fruitful Country
Waste like a Wilderness; and farther proceeded to burn Frankendale, Neustadt,
Lubesheim, Pettersheim, Dirminstheim, Wachenheim, with several other Places,
and a great many Villages in Housdurgh. Which Unchristian Proceedings
demonstrated their Power to be of short Durance in those Countries.

The City of Bonne, Fortified by the Care and Diligence of Cardinal
Furstemberg, at the extraordinary Charge of the French King, having been a
considerable time Besieged by the Elector of Brandenburgh, and making a stout
Resistance, despairing of Relief, was constrained on the 10th. of October to
beat a Parley, and sent out three Officers to treat about Articles of Surrender,
which were finally concluded; and Signed on the 12th. under Seventeen Heads,
considerably Honorable to the Garrison; and the same Day, Three ^undred Men of
the Troops of Brandenburgh, Holland, and Munster, took Possession of one of the
Gates of the Town, and on the Fifteenth the Garrison, which at the beginning of
the Siege consisted of 7000 Men, marched out to the number of 3500, and 1500
remained sick and wounded in the Town. The Governor Count Alsfelt, was carried
out in a Litter, and all the Stores and Cannon, etc. were delivered up to the
Elector. So that by the Loss of this Town, the French lost their footing in
those Parts, and began to think of going into Winter Quarters, after having
indamaged those Countries more than Forty millions can repair, in one Campaign.
Whereupon, to be rid of so cruel and wastful a People, the Emperor published
his Avocatoria, commanding all the French to depart out of his Dominions; when,
on the other hand, Lewis XIV. lay great Taxes to raise Money for his carrying
on the next Campaign.

We might enlarge upon many other Particulars, to display this Ambitious and
Bloodthirsty Monarch, who has been so long the Troubler of Europe, as his
League with the Empire, his soliciting them to make no Peace, and encouraging
them to stand off, by promises of the powerful Diversions he intends to make in
the Western Parts. Under the favor of which, his Ambassador at the Port
insinuates what they have lost in the East, as we find it set forth at large in
the Emperor's Declaration, etc. But we think we have said enough, to give the
World a Prospect of this great Leviathan, Who floats on Seas of Blood, with
vast desire
To out-brave Heaven, and set the World on fire.
But Heaven's Bolts hit sure, whenever they are aimed,
And often have Monsters, full as mighty, tamed.


FINIS.

